The United States is a notable exception: some states have had bans on capital punishment for decades, the earliest is Michigan, where it was abolished in 1846, while others actively use it today.
The Shah of Persia introduced throat-cutting and blowing from a gun as quick and painless alternatives to more torturous methods of executions used at that time.
In practice, it has been abolished by various Talmudic decisions, making the situations in which a death sentence could be passed effectively impossible and hypothetical.
Some abolitionists argue that retribution is simply revenge and cannot be condoned.
Latvia abolished ''de jure'' the death penalty for war crimes in 2012, becoming the last EU member to do so.
Maimonides's concern was maintaining popular respect for law, and he saw errors of commission as much more threatening than errors of omission.
The end of the Commandment is the preservation and security of human life.
During a U.N. Human Rights Council meeting concerning the abolishment of capital punishment, Archbishop Silvano Tomasi declared that "The Holy See Delegation fully supports the efforts to abolish the use of the death penalty."
In 1566, the Roman Catechism stated this teaching thus:
Thus depending on the severity of the crime a punishment of severe scourging with the thick rod or of exile to the remote Lingnan region might take the place of capital punishment.
These include apostasy (leaving Islam to become an atheist or convert to another religion such as Christianity), fasad (mischief in the land, or moral corruption against Allah, social disturbance and creating disorder within the Muslim state) and zina (consensual heterosexual or homosexual relations not allowed by Islam).
The UN Sub-Commission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights maintains that the death penalty for juveniles has become contrary to a jus cogens of customary international law.
The death penalty was overwhelmingly practised in poor and authoritarian states, which often employed the death penalty as a tool of political oppression.
However, today the church officially states that it is a "matter to be decided solely by the prescribed processes of civil law."
Executions which can be classified as public were also carried out in the U.S. states of Florida and Utah as of 1992.
The United States (the federal government and 31 of the states), Guatemala, most of the Caribbean and the majority of democracies in Asia (for example, Japan and India) and Africa (for example, Botswana and Zambia) retain it.
Settlement rules could allow for animal blood to replace human blood, or transfers of property or blood money or in some case an offer of a person for execution.
As a result, tens of thousands of women were prosecuted and executed through the witch trials of the early modern period (between the 15th and 18th centuries).
King Ashoka also extended the period before execution of those condemned to death so they could make a final appeal for their lives.
Capital punishment has been completely abolished by 102 countries, a further six have done so for all offences except under special circumstances and 32 more have abolished it in practice because they have not used it for at least 10 years and are believed to have a policy or established practice against carrying out executions.
The death penalty was removed from peacetime law by the National Assembly in August 2002, and in May 2004 Turkey amended its constitution in order to remove capital punishment in all circumstances.
Many Christians have believed that Jesus' doctrine of peace speaks only to personal ethics and is distinct from civil government's duty to punish crime.
Then there was a ''de facto'' moratorium on the death penalty in Turkey.
Shortly prior to Francis's address, the Vatican had officially given support to a 2015 United Nations campaign against the death penalty.
Since World War II there has been a trend toward abolishing capital punishment.
Improper procedure may also result in unfair executions.
They assert also that capital punishment lacks deterrent effect, discriminates against minorities and the poor, and that it encourages a "culture of violence".
A number of regional conventions prohibit the death penalty, most notably, the Sixth Protocol (abolition in time of peace) and the 13th Protocol (abolition in all circumstances) to the European Convention on Human Rights.
Considering the practical circumstances found in most States ... it appears evident nowadays that means other than the death penalty 'are sufficient to defend human lives against an aggressor and to protect public order and the safety of persons ... We should take into account that no clear positive effect of deterrence results from the application of the death penalty and that the irreversibility of this punishment does not allow for eventual corrections in the case of wrongful convictions.
The official teachings of Judaism approve the death penalty in principle but the standard of proof required for application of death penalty is extremely stringent.
A large part of execution was the summary execution of enemy combatants.
The United States suspended executions in 1972 but resumed them in 1976; there was no execution in India between 1995 and 2004; and Sri Lanka declared an end to its moratorium on the death penalty on 20 November 2004, although it has not yet performed any executions.
Many modern Church figures such as Pope John Paul II, Pope Francis, and the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops have in fact actively discouraged the death penalty or advocated for the out-right abolition of the death penalty.
In the classic doctrine of natural rights as expounded by for instance Locke and Blackstone, on the other hand, it is an important idea that the right to life can be forfeited.
Various authoritarian states—for example those with fascist or Communist governments—employed the death penalty as a potent means of political oppression.
For example, Bhutan has abolished the death penalty, but Thailand still retains it, although Buddhism is the official religion in both.
A further example comes from Ancient Greece, where the Athenian legal system was first written down by Draco in about 621 BC: the death penalty was applied for a particularly wide range of crimes, though Solon later repealed Draco's code and published new laws, retaining only Draco's homicide statutes.
Some further forms of capital punishment were practised in the Tang dynasty, of which the first two that follow at least were extralegal.
Christian positions on these passages vary.
Many stories in Buddhist scripture stress the superior power of the Buddha's teaching to rehabilitate murderers and other criminals.
This was soon followed by the fall of Communism in Europe.
Abolition occurred in Canada in 1976 (except for some military offences, with complete abolition in 1998), in France in 1981, and in Australia in 1973 (although the state of Western Australia retained the penalty until 1984).
That the assessment of the contemporary situation advanced by John Paul II is not binding on the Catholic faithful was confirmed by Cardinal Ratzinger when he wrote in 2004 that,
This argument is strongly defended by New York Law School's Professor Robert Blecker, who says that the punishment must be painful in proportion to the crime.
A majority of countries are also party to the U.N. International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (whose Article 6.5 also states that "Sentence of death shall not be imposed for crimes committed by persons below eighteen years of age...").
In 1820, there were 160, including crimes such as shoplifting, petty theft or stealing cattle.
A capital case could not be tried by a normal ''Beit Din'' of three judges, it can only be adjudicated by a ''Sanhedrin'' of a minimum of 23 judges.
Another kind of lawful slaying belongs to the civil authorities, to whom is entrusted power of life and death, by the legal and judicious exercise of which they punish the guilty and protect the innocent.
The first of these was scourging to death with the thick rod which was common throughout the Tang dynasty especially in cases of gross corruption.
Today however, as a result of steady improvements in the organization of the penal system, such cases are very rare, if not practically non-existent."
Accordingly, the systems of tribal arbitration were submerged into a more unified system of justice which formalized the relation between the different "classes" rather than "tribes".
This was in the year 747, enacted by Emperor Xuanzong of Tang (r. 712–756).
Maimonides was concerned about the need for the law to guard itself in public perceptions, to preserve its majesty and retain the people's respect.
On 30 November 1786, after having ''de facto'' blocked capital executions (the last was in 1769), Leopold promulgated the reform of the penal code that abolished the death penalty and ordered the destruction of all the instruments for capital execution in his land.
South Africa's Constitutional Court, in judgment of the case of ''State v Makwanyane and Another'', unanimously abolished the death penalty on 6 June 1995.
The same is also stated under the Second Protocol in the American Convention on Human Rights, which, however has not been ratified by all countries in the Americas, most notably Canada and the United States.
The first stand against capital punishment was taken by the church's Presiding High Council in 1995.
It states that revenge is a primary motivation for capital punishment policy and that true healing can only take place through repentance and forgiveness.
The Archbishop stated:
Some have claimed that as many as 39 executions have been carried out in the face of compelling evidence of innocence or serious doubt about guilt in the US from 1992 through 2004.
These nations were often united by common linguistic, religious or family ties.
The second was truncation, in which the convicted person was cut in two at the waist with a fodder knife and then left to bleed to death.
However, a spike in serious, violent crimes, such as murders or terrorist attacks, has prompted some countries (such as Sri Lanka and Jamaica) to effectively end the moratorium on the death penalty.
The death penalty there remains a contentious issue which is hotly debated.
Mongolia abolished the death penalty in 2012.
Despite recent Church statements, the Catholic Church still officially holds, as per the most recent 1992 Catechism of the Catholic Church, that the death penalty may be employed where public authority cannot find any other way to contain a dangerous person.
Rational choice theory, a utilitarian approach to criminology which justifies punishment as a form of deterrence as opposed to retribution, can be traced back to Cesare Beccaria, whose influential treatise ''On Crimes and Punishments'' (1764) was the first detailed analysis of capital punishment to demand the abolition of the death penalty.
A small number of countries still employ slow hanging methods and stoning.
The person offered for execution did not have to be an original perpetrator of the crime because the system was based on tribes, not individuals.
The response to crime committed by neighbouring tribes or communities included a formal apology, compensation or blood feuds.
This move was lauded by UNICEF as a welcome attempt to secure children's rights in the country.
Qisas is another category of sentencing where sharia permits capital punishment, for intentional or unintentional murder.
Also, modern military organisations employed capital punishment as a means of maintaining military discipline.
While the Church exhorts civil authorities to seek peace, not war, and to exercise discretion and mercy in imposing punishment on criminals, it may still be permissible to take up arms to repel an aggressor or to have recourse to capital punishment.
The religious, civil and criminal law of Hindus is encoded in the Dharmaśāstras and the Arthasastra.
Abolitionists believe capital punishment is the worst violation of human rights, because the right to life is the most important, and capital punishment violates it without necessity and inflicts to the condemned a psychological torture.
Usually, compensation and shunning were enough as a form of justice.
During this period, there were widespread claims that malevolent Satanic witches were operating as an organized threat to Christendom.
Death sentences for such crimes were handed down and carried out during the Nuremberg Trials in 1946 and the Tokyo Trials in 1948, but the current International Criminal Court does not use capital punishment.
In 2013, Saudi Arabia was the center of an international controversy after it executed Rizana Nafeek, a Sri Lankan domestic worker, who was believed to have been 17 years old at the time of the crime.
As John Stuart Mill explained in a speech against an amendment to abolish capital punishment for murder in 1868:
The United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, which forbids capital punishment for juveniles under article 37(a), has been signed by all countries and ratified, except for Somalia and the United States (notwithstanding the latter's Supreme Court decisions abolishing the practice).
Buddhism is incompatible with any form of violence especially warfare and capital punishment.
Between 2005 and May 2008, Iran, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Sudan and Yemen were reported to have executed child offenders, the most being from Iran.
Mao Zedong publicly stated that "800,000" people had been executed after the Communist Party's victory in 1949.
The 20th century was a violent period.
In addition to banning capital punishment for EU member states, the EU has also banned detainee transfers in cases where the receiving party may seek the death penalty.
The death penalty was banned in China between 747 and 759.
Iran, despite its ratification of the Convention on the Rights of the Child and International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, was the world's largest executioner of juvenile offenders, for which it has received international condemnation; the country's record is the focus of the Stop Child Executions Campaign.
There is disagreement among Buddhists as to whether or not Buddhism forbids the death penalty.
As in the first centuries and also in the current one, the Church suffers from the application of this penalty to her new martyrs.
Most countries including almost all First World nations have abolished capital punishment either in law or in practice.
The severity of the so-called Bloody Code was often tempered by juries who refused to convict, or judges, in the case of petty theft, who arbitrarily set the value stolen at below the statutory level for a capital crime.
In the world that humans inhabit there is a continual tension between these two modes of Dhamma.
The event is commemorated on this day by 300 cities around the world celebrating Cities for Life Day.
Capital punishment is a matter of active controversy in various countries and states, and positions can vary within a single political ideology or cultural region.
Human rights activists oppose the death penalty, calling it "cruel, inhuman, and degrading punishment".
The 12th-century Jewish legal scholar, Maimonides said:
Although many are executed in the People's Republic of China each year in the present day, there was a time in the Tang dynasty when the death penalty was abolished.
Although most nations have abolished capital punishment, over 60% of the world's population live in countries where executions take place, such as China, India, the United States and Indonesia.
Notable exceptions are the United States, China, North Korea, Japan, and most Islamic states.
In the case of death, sharia gives the murder victim's nearest relative or Wali () a right to, if the court approves, take the life of the killer.
In the new law, the age of 18 (solar year) would be for both genders considered and juvenile offenders will be sentenced on a separate law than of adults.
A blood feud or vendetta occurs when arbitration between families or tribes fails or an arbitration system is non-existent.
Decapitation was the method of execution prescribed for more serious crimes such as treason and sedition.
In China, human trafficking and serious cases of corruption are punished by the death penalty.
Japan still imposes the death penalty, although some recent justice ministers have refused to sign death warrants, citing their Buddhist beliefs as their reason.
In most countries that practise capital punishment it is reserved for murder, espionage, treason, or as part of military justice.
A further form of execution called Ling Chi (slow slicing), or death by/of a thousand cuts, was used from the close of the Tang dynasty (around 900) to its abolition in 1905.
James Pratt and John Smith were the last two Englishmen to be executed for sodomy in 1835.
One notable exception is the abolition of the death penalty by the Emperor Saga of Japan in 818.
Historically, most states where the official religion is Buddhism have imposed capital punishment for some offences.
This instead has, in common with several other treaties, an optional protocol prohibiting capital punishment and promoting its wider abolition.
St. Thomas Aquinas, a Doctor of the Church, accepted the death penalty as a deterrent and prevention method but not as a means of vengeance.
Since World War II, there has been a trend toward abolishing the death penalty.
A basis can be found in Hindu teachings both for permitting and forbidding the death penalty.
With the exception of Russia (abolitionist in practice), Kazakhstan (abolitionist for ordinary crimes only), and Belarus (retentionist), all European countries are classified as abolitionist.
Capital punishment for apostasy in Islam and stoning to death in Islam are controversial topics.
There are many organizations worldwide, such as Amnesty International, and country-specific, such as the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), that have abolition of the death penalty as a fundamental purpose.
The PRC, Pakistan, the United States, Yemen and Iran have since raised the minimum age to 18.
This refers to a situation when someone is being caught with drugs.
Some countries have resumed practising the death penalty after having suspended executions for long periods.
Communal punishment for wrongdoing generally included compensation by the wrongdoer, corporal punishment, shunning, banishment and execution.
The 1911 edition of the Catholic Encyclopedia suggested that Catholics should hold that "the infliction of capital punishment is not contrary to the teaching of the Catholic Church, and the power of the State to visit upon culprits the penalty of death derives much authority from revelation and from the writings of theologians", but that the matter of "the advisability of exercising that power is, of course, an affair to be determined upon other and various considerations."
The word draconian derives from Draco's laws.
58 countries retain the death penalty in active use, 102 countries have abolished capital punishment altogether, six have done so for all offences except under special circumstances, and 32 more have abolished it in practice because they have not used it for at least 10 years and are believed to have a policy or established practice against carrying out executions.
The Pali scholar  Steven Collins finds Dhamma in the Pali canon divided into two categories according to the attitude taken towards violence.
In these countries, the death penalty enjoys strong public support, and the matter receives little attention from the government or the media; in China there is a small but growing movement to abolish the death penalty altogether.
According to Amnesty International, in 2012 "public executions were known to have been carried out in Iran, North Korea, Saudi Arabia and Somalia".
There may be a legitimate diversity of opinion even among Catholics about waging war and applying the death penalty, but not however with regard to abortion and euthanasia.
Jeremy Bentham, regarded as the founder of modern utilitarianism, also called for the abolition of the death penalty.
Nevertheless, the prerequisites of legitimate personal defence are not applicable in the social sphere without the risk of distortion.
Several key leaders early in the Protestant Reformation, including Martin Luther and John Calvin, followed the traditional reasoning in favour of capital punishment, and the Lutheran Church's Augsburg Confession explicitly defended it.
The world's major religions have mixed opinions on the death penalty, depending on the sect, the individual believer, and the time period.
Consequently, various classes of royalty, nobility, various commoners and slave emerged.
Under Xuanzong capital punishment was relatively infrequent, with only 24 executions in the year 730 and 58 executions in the year 736.
During the 1980s, the democratisation of Latin America swelled the ranks of abolitionist countries.
This lasted until 1165, although in private manors executions continued to be conducted as a form of retaliation.
The heads of the executed were displayed on poles or spears.
in approximately 30 CE, the Sanhedrin effectively abolished capital punishment, making it a hypothetical upper limit on the severity of punishment, fitting in finality for God alone to use, not fallible people.
Most historical records and various primitive tribal practices indicate that the death penalty was a part of their justice system.
A 2010 Gallup poll shows that 64% of Americans support the death penalty for someone convicted of murder, down from 65% in 2006 and 68% in 2001.
Assuming that the guilty party's identity and responsibility have been fully determined, the traditional teaching of the Church does not exclude recourse to the death penalty if this is the only possible way of effectively defending human lives against the unjust aggressor.
One of the more modern refinements of the blood feud is the duel.
Community of Christ, the former Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (RLDS), is opposed to capital punishment.
Hinduism preaches ''ahimsa'' (or ''ahinsa'', non-violence), but also teaches that the soul cannot be killed and death is limited only to the physical body.
Abolitionists believe capital punishment is the worst violation of human rights, because the right to life is the most important, and capital punishment violates it without necessity and inflicts to the condemned a psychological torture.
The Dharmasastras describe many crimes and their punishments and call for the death penalty in several instances, including murder and righteous warfare.
In the U.S., the electric chair and the gas chamber were introduced as more humane alternatives to hanging, but have been almost entirely superseded by lethal injection.
Certain hudud crimes, for example, are considered crimes against God and require capital punishment in public.
The period saw an increase in standing police forces and permanent penitential institutions.
In the United States, 18 states and the District of Columbia ban capital punishment.
Execution of criminals and political opponents has been used by nearly all societies—both to punish crime and to suppress political dissent.
More recently, however, in the 1995 Evangelium Vitae, Pope John Paul II suggested that capital punishment should be avoided unless it is the only way to defend society from the offender in question, opining that punishment "ought not go to the extreme of executing the offender except in cases of absolute necessity: in other words, when it would not be possible otherwise to defend society.
These were mainly property offences, for example cutting down a cherry tree in an orchard.
Supporters of the death penalty retort that the over-representation of minorities among those sentenced to death only reflects their over-representation among criminals in general.
There is evidence that child executions are taking place in the parts of Somalia controlled by the Islamic Courts Union (ICU).
The two most common forms of execution in the Tang dynasty were strangulation and decapitation, which were the prescribed methods of execution for 144 and 89 offences respectively.
However, the death penalty was restored only 12 years later in 759 in response to the An Lushan Rebellion.
Poland is the most recent country to ratify the protocol, on 28 August 2013.
Amnesty International considers it to be "the ultimate, irreversible denial of Human Rights".
The sentence that someone be punished in such a manner is referred to as a '''death sentence''', whereas the act of carrying out the sentence is known as an '''execution'''.
This tension is best exhibited in the  Cakkavatti Sihanada Sutta (Digha Nikaya 26 of the Sutta Pitaka of the Pāli Canon), the story of humanity's decline from a golden age in the past.
As a move towards EU membership, Turkey made some legal changes.
Some European countries have not done this, but all of them except Belarus and Kazakhstan have now abolished the death penalty in all circumstances (''de jure'', and Russia ''de facto'').
He further stated that capital punishment is an offense "against the inviolability of life and the dignity of the human person, which contradicts God's plan for man and society" and "does not render justice to the victims, but rather fosters vengeance."
The newly created South Sudan is among the 111 UN member states that supported the resolution passed by the United Nations General Assembly that called for the removal of the death penalty, therefore affirming its opposition to the practice.
In both sermons, Christ tells his followers to turn the other cheek and to love their enemies, which these groups believe mandates nonviolence, including opposition to the death penalty.
The death penalty was declared unconstitutional between 1972 and 1976 based on the ''Furman v. Georgia'' case, but the 1976 ''Gregg v. Georgia'' case once again permitted the death penalty under certain circumstances.
The rate of these "botched executions" remained steady over the period of the study.
The  Protocol no.13 calls for the abolition of the death penalty in all circumstances (including for war crimes).
In October 2008, a girl, Aisho Ibrahim Dhuhulow was buried up to her neck at a football stadium, then stoned to death in front of more than 1,000 people.
This conflicts with the universally guaranteed right to be presumed innocent until proven guilty".
It states that it is not a totally objectionable thing, but also that its abolition can be driven by genuine Christian values, especially stressing the need for mercy.
He neither kills nor helps others to kill."
A close reading of texts in the Pali canon reveals different attitudes towards violence and capital punishment.
The death penalty is contrary to the meaning of ''humanitas'' and to divine mercy, which must be models for human justice.
Severe historical penalties include breaking wheel, boiling to death, flaying, slow slicing, disembowelment, crucifixion, impalement, crushing (including crushing by elephant), stoning, execution by burning, dismemberment, sawing, decapitation, scaphism, necklacing or blowing from a gun.
The most recent country to abolish the death penalty was Suriname in March 2015.
A poll in South Africa found that 76 percent of millennium generation South Africans support re-introduction of the death penalty, which is abolished in South Africa.
Thus, while Russia is a member of the Council of Europe, and the death penalty remains codified in its law, it has not made use of it since becoming a member of the Council – Russia has not executed anyone since 1996.
In the wake of this decision by the king, thieves take to imitating the King's actions and murder the people from whom they steal to avoid detection.
Use of capital punishment is growing in India in the 2010s due to both a growth in right wing politics and due to anger over several recent brutal cases of rape.
In 2000, Tuscany's regional authorities instituted an annual holiday on 30 November to commemorate the event.
In England in the 18th century, when there was no police force, there was a large increase in the number of capital offences to more than 200.
The earliest and most famous example is Code of Hammurabi which set the different punishment and compensation, according to the different class/group of victims and perpetrators.
Capital punishment is controversial.
Lethal stoning and beheading in public under sharia is controversial for being a perceived as a strict form of capital punishment.
In this situation, in almost any jurisdiction, the prosecution has a prima facie case.
It ratified Protocol no.
About 50 of them were executed, the last one 25 October 1984.
In certain parts of the world, nations in the form of ancient republics, monarchies or tribal oligarchies emerged.
Human justice is imperfect, and the failure to recognize its fallibility can transform it into a source of injustice.
The most recent edition of the Catechism of the Catholic Church restates this view, and further states that:
It is also argued that the punishing of a killing with another death is a relatively unique punishment for a violent act, because in general violent crimes are not punished by subjecting the perpetrator to a similar act (e.g.
In abolitionist countries, the debate is sometimes revived by particularly brutal murders though few countries have brought it back after abolishing it.
In 2015, Pope Francis stated in an address to the International Commission against the Death Penalty that: "Today the death penalty is inadmissible, no matter how serious the crime committed."
In the edicts of the great Buddhist king Ashoka (ca.
Partly as a response to such excesses, civil rights organizations have started to place increasing emphasis on the concept of human rights and an abolition of the death penalty.
rapists are not punished by corporal punishment).
