The UK location of the SU and Zenith-Stromberg companies helped these carburetors rise to a position of domination in the UK car market, though such carburetors were also very widely used on Volvos and other non-UK makes.
The fuel stored in the chamber (bowl) can be a problem in hot climates.
There seems to be some confusion with some older types of fuel vapor carburetors (see vaporizors below).
As the fuel level rises, the float rises and closes the inlet valve.
The mixture is adjusted by one or more needle valves on an automotive carburetor, or a pilot-operated lever on piston-engined aircraft (since the mixture changes with air density and therefore altitude).
A carburetor must provide the proper fuel/air mixture across a wide range of ambient temperatures, atmospheric pressures, engine speeds and loads, and centrifugal forces:
In many carbureted cars, the choke is controlled by a cable connected to a pull-knob on the dashboard operated by the driver.
This provision allows a "flooded" engine to be cleared out so that it will start.
The fuel jets are much smaller and limited mainly by viscosity, so that the fuel flow tends to be proportional to the pressure difference.
Various air bleeds (often chosen from a precisely calibrated range, similarly to the jets) allow air into various portions of the fuel passages to enhance fuel delivery and vaporization.
An interesting variation was Ford's VV (Variable Venturi) carburetor, which was essentially a fixed Venturi carburetor with one side of the Venturi hinged and movable to give a narrow throat at low rpm and a wider throat at high rpm.
This was designed to provide good mixing and airflow over a range of engine speeds, though the VV carburetor proved problematic in service.
When tuning two-strokes It is important to operate the engine at the rpm and throttle input that it will most often be operated at.
Ford's first fuel-injected car was the Ford Capri RS 2600 in 1970.
In Europe, carburetor-engined cars were being gradually phased out by the end of the 1980s in favor of fuel injection, which was already the established type of engine on more expensive vehicles including luxury and sports models.
*Mix the two finely and evenly
*Idling or slow-running
The throttle is connected, usually through a cable or a mechanical linkage of rods and joints or rarely by pneumatic link, to the accelerator pedal on a car or the equivalent control on other vehicles or equipment.
This is particularly a problem in automobiles operated for only part of the year and left to stand with full float chambers for months at a time; commercial fuel stabilizer additives are available that reduce this problem.
Most commonly this has been corrected by using multiple jets.
In the U.S. market, the last carbureted cars were:
However, their complexity compared to both non-feedback carburetors and to fuel injection made them problematic and difficult to service.
They are still common on small engines for lawn mowers, rototillers, and other equipment.
This causes the engine to idle at a higher speed.
In the 1980s, many American-market vehicles used "feedback" carburetors that dynamically adjusted the fuel/air mixture in response to signals from an exhaust gas oxygen sensor to provide a stoichiometric ratio to enable the optimal function of the catalytic converter.
A catalytic carburetor mixes fuel vapor with water and air in the presence of heated catalysts such as nickel or platinum.
For example, the original Fordson tractor and various subsequent Fordson models had vaporizers.
*1991 (Police) : Ford Crown Victoria Police Interceptor with the  V8 engine.
This circuit works exactly like the idle circuit, and when engaged it simply supplies extra fuel when the throttle is closed.
The speed of this flow, and therefore its pressure, determines the amount of fuel drawn into the airstream.
Unhappy with the performance and power, they re-built the engine the next year into a two-cylinder horizontally opposed version using his new wick carburetor design.
As the throttle is progressively opened, the manifold vacuum is lessened since there is less restriction on the airflow, reducing the flow through the idle and off-idle circuits.
This is configured much like a choke plate, and is lightly spring-loaded into the closed position.
Multi-barrel carburetors can have non-identical primary and secondary barrel(s) of different sizes and calibrated to deliver different air/fuel mixtures; they can be actuated by the linkage or by engine vacuum in "progressive" fashion, so that the secondary barrels do not begin to open until the primaries are almost completely open.
This will typically be wide-open or close to wide-open throttle.
Luxury car manufacturers including Mercedes-Benz had been producing fuel-injected cars since the early 1970s (a trend established by Triumph with the 2.5PI of 1968), while the first family car to feature fuel injection was the Volkswagen Golf GTI in 1976.
Typically used on small engines, notably motorcycles, enrichments work by opening a secondary fuel circuit below the throttle valves.
In addition, modern carburetors are required to do this while maintaining low rates of exhaust emissions.
To ensure a ready mixture, the carburetor has a "float chamber" (or "bowl") that contains a quantity of fuel at near-atmospheric pressure, ready for use.
Some carburetors do not have a choke but instead use a mixture enrichment circuit, or ''enrichment''.
In Australia, some cars continued to use carburetors well into the 1990s; these included the Honda Civic (1993), the Ford Laser (1994), the Mazda 323 and Mitsubishi Magna sedans (1996), the Daihatsu Charade (1997), and the Suzuki Swift (1999).
Oldsmobile referred the new carburetor as the “Quadri-Jet” (original spelling) while Buick called it the “Airpower”.
There are different stoichiometric ratios for other types of fuel.
The accelerator pump is also used to ''prime'' the engine with fuel prior to a cold start.
However reports are inconsistent; commonly they are included in descriptions of "200 MPG carburetors" intended for gasoline use.
This change was dictated more by the requirements of catalytic converters than by any inherent inefficiency of carburation; a catalytic converter requires much more precise control over the fuel / air mixture, to closely control the amount of oxygen in the exhaust gases.
The first four-barrel carburetors, with two primary bores and two secondary bores, were the Carter WCFB and identical Rochester 4GC simultaneously introduced on the 1952 Cadillacs, Oldsmobiles and Buick Roadmaster.
Extra refinements may be included in the carburetor/manifold combination, such as some form of heating to aid fuel vaporization such as an early fuel evaporator.
Below the Venturi is a butterfly valve called the throttle valve — a rotating disc that can be turned end-on to the airflow, so as to hardly restrict the flow at all, or can be rotated so that it (almost) completely blocks the flow of air.
Carburetors were the usual method of fuel delivery for most US-made gasoline-fueled engines up until the late 1980s, when fuel injection became the preferred method.
However, this results in the supercharger being filled with compressed fuel/air mixture, with a strong tendency to explode should the engine backfire; this type of explosion is frequently seen in drag races, which for safety reasons now incorporate pressure releasing blow-off plates on the intake manifold, breakaway bolts holding the supercharger to the manifold, and shrapnel-catching ballistic blankets made from nylon or kevlar surrounding the superchargers.
For this purpose, a '''vaporizer''' (or '''vaporiser''') is placed in the intake system.
EEC legislation required all vehicles sold and produced in member countries to have a catalytic converter after December 1992.
This heat may be transferred to the choke thermostat via simple convection, via engine coolant, or via air heated by the exhaust.
Usually, special vent tubes allow atmospheric pressure to be maintained in the float chamber as the fuel level changes; these tubes usually extend into the carburetor throat.
A balanced state is reached which creates a steady fuel reservoir level, which remains constant in any orientation.
Some 4-barrel carburetors use metering rods only on the primary two Venturis, but some use them on both primary and secondary circuits, as in the Rochester Quadrajet.
Under all engine operating conditions, the carburetor must:
The diaphragm is connected to the needle valve and as it moves inward it opens the needle valve to admit more fuel, thus replenishing the fuel as it is consumed.
Typically, the air valve is linked to metering rods which are raised as the air valve opens, thereby adjusting secondary fuel flow.
Most production carbureted engines, as opposed to fuel-injected, have a single carburetor and a matching intake manifold that divides and transports the air fuel mixture to the intake valves, though some engines (like motorcycle engines) use multiple carburetors on split heads.
When TVO became common in various countries (including the United Kingdom and Australia) in the 1940s and 1950s, the standard vaporizers on Fordson models were equally useful for TVO.
A flexible diaphragm forms one side of the fuel chamber and is arranged so that as fuel is drawn out into the engine, the diaphragm is forced inward by ambient air pressure.
*High speed / high power at full throttle
Note that this leaves the fuel at atmospheric pressure, and therefore it cannot travel into a throat which has been pressurized by a supercharger mounted upstream; in such cases, the entire carburetor must be contained in an airtight pressurized box to operate.
More recent designs use the engine heat only indirectly: A sensor detects engine heat and varies electric current to a small heating element, which acts upon the bimetallic spring to control its tension, thereby controlling the choke.
Instead, it actuates carburetor mechanisms which meter the flow of air being pulled into the engine.
Elsewhere, certain Lada cars used carburetors until 2006.
On high-performance two-stroke engines, the fuel mixture can also be judged by observing piston wash. Piston wash is the color and amount of carbon buildup on the top (dome) of the piston.
Multiple carburetors can be mounted on a single engine, often with progressive linkages; two four-barrel carburetors (often referred to as "dual-quads") were frequently seen on high performance American V8s, and multiple two barrel carburetors are often now seen on very high performance engines.
This is not necessary in installations where the carburetor is mounted upstream of the supercharger, which is for this reason the more frequent system.
Eventually falling hardware prices and tighter emissions standards caused fuel injection to supplant carburetors in new-vehicle production.
This is where the Venturi shape of the carburetor throat comes into play, due to Bernoulli's principle (i.e., as the velocity increases, pressure falls).
Poorly referenced material on the topic should be viewed with suspicion.
Similarly the idle and slow running jets of large carburetors are placed after the throttle valve where the pressure is reduced partly by viscous drag, rather than by Bernoulli's principle.
In 1896, Frederick and his brother built the first gasoline-driven car in England: a single cylinder  internal combustion engine with chain drive.
So jets sized for full power tend to starve the engine at lower speed and part throttle.
The valve itself becomes worn on its sides by its motion in its "seat" and will eventually try to close at an angle, and thus fails to shut off the fuel completely; again, this will cause excessive fuel flow and poor engine operation.
In "constant depression" carburetors, this is done by a vacuum operated piston connected to a tapered needle which slides inside the fuel jet.
Liquid gasoline, being denser than air, is slower than air to react to a force applied to it.
Eventually, the seals around the moving parts of the pump wear such that pump output is reduced; this reduction of the accelerator pump shot causes stumbling under acceleration until the seals on the pump are renewed.
Outboard motor carburetors are typically sidedraft, because they must be stacked one on top of the other in order to feed the cylinders in a vertically oriented cylinder block.
Another method, widely used in aviation, is to measure the exhaust gas temperature, which is close to maximum for an optimally adjusted mixture and drops off steeply when the mixture is either too rich or too lean.
To function correctly under all these conditions, most carburetors contain a complex set of mechanisms to support several different operating modes, called ''circuits''.
This legislation had been in the pipeline for some time, with many cars becoming available with catalytic converters or fuel injection from around 1990.
*1994 (Light truck) : Isuzu
This reservoir is constantly replenished with fuel supplied by a fuel pump.
When the step-up rod is raised out of the jet, more fuel can flow through it.
In some carbureted cars, it is automatically controlled by a thermostat employing a bimetallic spring, which is exposed to engine heat, or to an electric heating element.
This transient oversupply of air causes a lean mixture, which makes the engine misfire (or "stumble")—an effect opposite to that which was demanded by opening the throttle.
When the step-up rod is lowered into the main jet, it restricts the fuel flow.
The Carter Thermo-Quad carburetor has float chambers manufactured of insulating plastic (phenolic), said to keep the fuel 20 degrees Fahrenheit (11 degrees Celsius) cooler.
Multifuel engines, such as petrol-paraffin engines, can benefit from an initial vaporization of the fuel when they are running less volatile fuels.
To '''carburate''' or '''carburet''' (and thus '''carburation''' or '''carburetion''', respectively) is to blend the air and fuel or to equip (an engine) with a carburetor for that purpose.
For cold starting, a different principle was used in multi-jet carburetors.
The fuel and air mixture is too ''rich'' when it has an excess of fuel, and too ''lean'' when there is not enough.
General Motors launched its first fuel-injected car around the same time, when began to introduce fuel-injected engines to its Vauxhall Cavalier/Opel Ascona range.
Classic British motorcycles, with side-draft slide-throttle carburetors, used another type of "cold start device", called a "tickler".
*1991 (SUV) : Jeep Grand Wagoneer with the AMC  V8 engine.
Most accelerator pumps are adjustable for volume or duration by some means.
The most common variable Venturi (constant depression) type carburetor is the sidedraft SU carburetor and similar models from Hitachi, Zenith-Stromberg and other makers.
These are introduced for reasons such as response, fuel efficiency or automobile emissions control.
The small primaries aid low-speed fuel economy and driveability, while the large secondaries permit maximum performance when it is called for.
For open throttle operation a richer mixture will produce more power, prevent pre-ignition detonation, and keep the engine cooler.
In Europe, the sidedraft carburetors replaced downdraft as free space in the engine bay decreased and the use of the SU-type carburetor (and similar units from other manufacturers) increased.
A '''carburetor''' (American and Canadian spelling), '''carburator''', '''carburettor''', or '''carburetter''' (Commonwealth spelling) is a device that blends air and fuel for an internal combustion engine.
These advantages may not be important in high-performance applications where part throttle operation is irrelevant, and the primaries and secondaries may all open at once, for simplicity and reliability; also, V-configuration engines, with two cylinder banks fed by a single carburetor, may be configured with two identical barrels, each supplying one cylinder bank.
The carburetor works on Bernoulli's principle: the faster air moves, the lower its static pressure, and the higher its dynamic pressure.
require a great deal of complexity to compensate for exceptionally high or low engine speeds.
However, some versions of the Peugeot 106 were sold with carburettor engines from its launch in 1991, as were versions of the Renault Clio and Nissan Primera (launched in 1990) and initially all versions of Ford Fiesta range except the XR2i when it was launched in 1989.
This is a desirable characteristic which maximizes airflow through the primary barrel(s) at most engine speeds, thereby maximizing the pressure "signal" from the Venturis, but reduces the restriction in airflow at high speeds by adding cross-sectional area for greater airflow.
Floats can be made of different materials, such as sheet brass soldered into a hollow shape, or of plastic; hollow floats can spring small leaks and plastic floats can eventually become porous and lose their flotation; in either case the float will fail to float, fuel level will be too high, and the engine will not run unless the float is replaced.
Older engines used updraft carburetors, where the air enters from below the carburetor and exits through the top.
Carburetors are also still found in small engines and in older or specialized automobiles, such as those designed for stock car racing, though NASCAR's 2011 Sprint Cup season was the last one with carbureted engines; electronic fuel injection was used beginning with the 2012 race season in Cup.
When Henry Ford & Son Inc designed the original Fordson (1916), the vaporizer was used to provide for kerosene operation.
The step-up rods are tapered at the bottom end, which extends into the main metering jets.
*Measure the airflow of the engine
Multiple carburetor engines were also common enhancements for modifying engines in the USA from the 1950s to mid-1960s, as well as during the following decade of high-performance muscle cars, fueling different chambers of the engine's intake manifold.
Low-cost commercial vans and 4WDs in Australia continued with carburetors even into the 2000s, the last being the Mitsubishi Express van in 2003.
If the engine is shut off while hot, the temperature of the fuel will increase, sometimes boiling ("percolation").
''Carburer'' means to combine with carbon (compare also carburizing).
The vaporizer uses heat from the exhaust manifold to vaporize the fuel.
Later engines used an early form of fuel injection known as a pressure carburetor.
If the "tickler" is held down too long it also floods the outside of the carburetor and the crankcase below, and is therefore a fire hazard.
In SU and other movable jet carburetors, it was corrected by varying the jet size.
Carburetors have largely been supplanted in the automotive and, to a lesser extent, aviation industries by fuel injection.
Independent of air density the (stoichiometric) air to gasoline ratio is 14.7:1, meaning that for each mass unit of gasoline, 14.7 mass units of air are required.
This is often the opposite of intuition.
;Variable-Venturi: in which the fuel jet opening is varied by the slide (which simultaneously alters air flow).
When the throttle is rapidly opened, airflow through the carburetor increases immediately, faster than the fuel flow rate can increase.
The throttle (accelerator) linkage does not directly control the flow of liquid fuel.
Widespread adoption of diesel engines in tractors made the use of tractor vaporizing oil obsolete.
Bernoulli's principle, which is a function of the velocity of the fluid, is a dominant effect for large openings and large flow rates, but since fluid flow at small scales and low speeds (low Reynolds number) is dominated by viscosity, Bernoulli's principle is ineffective at idle or slow running and in the very small carburetors of the smallest model engines.
As the throttle is closed, the airflow through the Venturi drops until the lowered pressure is insufficient to maintain this fuel flow, and the idle circuit takes over again, as described above.
The Venturi raises the air velocity, and this high speed and thus low pressure sucks fuel into the airstream through a nozzle or nozzles located in the center of the Venturi.
Black, dry, sooty plugs indicate a mixture too rich; white or light gray plugs indicate a lean mixture.
This valve controls the flow of air through the carburetor throat and thus the quantity of air/fuel mixture the system will deliver, thereby regulating engine power and speed.
Heat deflectors and insulating gaskets attempt to minimize this effect.
Commonly, an ideal mixture will be somewhere in-between the two, with clean dome areas near the transfer ports but some carbon in the center of the dome.
This is simply a spring-loaded rod that, when depressed, manually pushes the float down and allows excess fuel to fill the float bowl and flood the intake tract.
Excessive priming, like an improperly adjusted choke, can cause ''flooding''.
This extra shot of fuel counteracts the transient lean condition on throttle tip-in.
Frequently, feedback carburetors were used in lower trim versions of a car (whereas higher trim versions were equipped with fuel injection).
The level of fuel maintained in the float bowl can usually be adjusted, whether by a setscrew or by something crude such as bending the arm to which the float is connected.
Such systems were originated by Carter Carburetor in the 1950s for the primary two Venturis of their four barrel carburetors, and step-up rods were widely used on most 1-, 2-, and 4-barrel Carter carburetors through the end of production in the 1980s.
*1990 (General public) : Oldsmobile Custom Cruiser, Buick Estate Wagon, Cadillac Brougham, Honda Prelude (Base Model), Subaru Justy
Small model engines have flow restrictions ahead of the jets to reduce the pressure enough to suck the fuel into the air flow.
This is usually a critical adjustment, and the proper adjustment is indicated by lines inscribed into a window on the float bowl, or a measurement of how far the float hangs below the top of the carburetor when disassembled, or similar.
Lean engines will have a piston dome covered in black carbon, and rich engines will have a clean piston dome that appears new and free of carbon buildup.
This had the advantage of never flooding the engine, as any liquid fuel droplets would fall out of the carburetor instead of into the intake manifold; it also lent itself to use of an oil bath air cleaner, where a pool of oil below a mesh element below the carburetor is sucked up into the mesh and the air is drawn through the oil-covered mesh; this was an effective system in a time when paper air filters did not exist.
For this reason, most carburetors are equipped with an ''unloader'' mechanism: The accelerator is held at wide open throttle while the engine is cranked, the unloader holds the choke open and admits extra air, and eventually the excess fuel is cleared out and the engine starts.
This is usually addressed with a spring-loaded "power valve", which is held shut by engine vacuum.
The main disadvantage of basing a carburetor's operation on Bernoulli's Principle is that, being a fluid dynamic device, the pressure reduction in a Venturi tends to be proportional to the square of the intake air speed.
A flow resisting valve called a choke, similar to the throttle valve, was placed upstream of the main jet to reduce the intake pressure and suck additional fuel out of the jets.
Instead, a diaphragm chamber is used.
The mixture can also be judged by removing and scrutinizing the spark plugs.
The pipe is in the form of a Venturi: it narrows in section and then widens again, causing the airflow to increase in speed in the narrowest part.
Other similar designs have been used on some European and a few Japanese automobiles.
The primaries in such a carburetor are quite small relative to conventional four-barrel practice, while the secondaries are quite large.
Where multiple carburetors are used the mechanical linkage of their throttles must be properly synchronized for smooth engine running and consistent fuel/air mixtures to each cylinder.
*1993 Mazda B2200 (Light Truck)
Fuel flow is adjusted by means of precisely calibrated orifices, referred to as ''jets'', in the fuel path.
Sometimes one or more additional ''booster Venturis'' are placed coaxially within the primary Venturi to increase the effect.
To provide the extra fuel, a ''choke'' is typically used; this is a device that restricts the flow of air at the entrance to the carburetor, before the Venturi.
This job would be simple if air and gasoline (petrol) were ideal fluids; in practice, however, their deviations from ideal behavior due to viscosity, fluid drag, inertia, etc.
With this restriction in place, extra vacuum is developed in the carburetor barrel, which pulls extra fuel through the main metering system to supplement the fuel being pulled from the idle and off-idle circuits.
As the throttle opens up, the vacuum decreases and the spring opens the valve to let more fuel into the main circuit.
Conversely, as the fuel evaporates from the float bowl, it leaves sediment, residue, and varnishes behind, which clog the passages and can interfere with the float operation.
A proper mixture is indicated by brownish-gray plugs.
As fuel is used up, the float drops, opening the inlet valve and admitting fuel.
Beginning in the late 1930s, downdraft carburetors were the most popular type for automotive use in the United States.
The word ''carburetor'' comes from the French ''carbure'' meaning "carbide".
Saab switched to fuel injection across its whole range from 1982.
As fuel is replenished the diaphragm moves out due to fuel pressure and a small spring, closing the needle valve.
In this manner, the amount of fuel delivered is tailored to the transient demands of the engine.
In the widely seen V8 and 4-barrel carburetor combination, there are often two primary and two secondary barrels.
The interactions between each circuit may also be affected by various mechanical or air pressure connections and also by temperature sensitive and electrical components.
This is remedied by the use of a small piston or diaphragm pump which, when actuated by the throttle linkage, forces a small amount of gasoline through a jet into the carburetor throat.
This is when too much fuel and not enough air are present to support combustion.
On two-stroke engines, the operation of the power valve is the reverse of normal — it is normally "on" and at a set rpm it is turned "off".
The air valve opens progressively in response to engine speed and throttle opening, gradually allowing more air to flow through the secondary side of the carburetor.
This provides the rich mixture required to sustain operation at low engine temperatures.
Lower RPM and idle can operate rich/lean and sway readings, due to the design of carburetors to operate well at high air-speed through the Venturi and sacrifice low air-speed performance.
A ''choke unloader'' is a linkage arrangement that forces the choke open against its spring when the vehicle's accelerator is moved to the end of its travel.
This can result in flooding and difficult or impossible restarts while the engine is still warm, a phenomenon known as "heat soak".
Feedback carburetors were mainly used because they were less expensive than fuel injection systems; they worked well enough to meet 1980s emissions requirements and were based on existing carburetor designs.
Many motorcycles still use carburetors for simplicity's sake, since a carburetor does not require an electrical system to function.
It is sometimes colloquially shortened to ''carb'' in North America or ''carby'' in Australia.
The correct fuel level in the bowl is maintained by means of a float controlling an inlet valve, in a manner very similar to that employed in a cistern (e.g.
As the throttle is opened up slightly from the fully closed position, the throttle plate uncovers additional fuel delivery holes behind the throttle plate where there is a low pressure area created by the throttle plate/Valve blocking air flow; these allow more fuel to flow as well as compensating for the reduced vacuum that occurs when the throttle is opened, thus smoothing the transition to metering fuel flow through the regular open throttle circuit.
The most common rich mixture device for starting cold engines was the choke, which works on the same principle.
A carburetor basically consists of an open pipe through which the air passes into the inlet manifold of the engine.
The tops of the rods are connected to a vacuum piston or a mechanical linkage which lifts the rods out of the main jets when the throttle is opened (mechanical linkage) or when manifold vacuum drops (vacuum piston).
*Deliver the correct amount of fuel to keep the fuel/air mixture in the proper range (adjusting for factors such as temperature)
If the engine must be operated in any orientation (for example a chain saw or a model airplane), a float chamber is not suitable.
To tailor airflow through the secondary Venturis, each of the secondary throats has an air valve at the top.
Internal combustion engines can be configured to run on many kinds of fuel, including gasoline, kerosene, tractor vaporizing oil (TVO), vegetable oil, diesel fuel, biodiesel, ethanol fuel (alcohol), and others.
Ways to check carburetor mixture adjustment include: measuring the carbon monoxide, hydrocarbon, and oxygen content of the exhaust using a gas analyzer, or directly viewing the color of the flame in the combustion chamber through a special glass-bodied spark plug sold under the name "Colortune"; the flame color of stoichiometric burning is described as a "Bunsen blue", turning to yellow if the mixture is rich and whitish-blue if too lean.
A simpler version exists, most commonly found on small motorcycles and dirt bikes, where the slide and needle is directly controlled by the throttle position.
When carburetors are used in aircraft with piston engines, special designs and features are needed to prevent fuel starvation during inverted flight.
