Cardiac dysrhythmias are treated with standard advanced cardiac life support protocols.
The traditional belief is that carbon monoxide toxicity arises from the formation of carboxyhemoglobin, which decreases the oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood and inhibits the transport, delivery, and utilization of oxygen by the body.
Unconsciousness after 2–3 breaths.
The carbon monoxide tolerance level for any person is altered by several factors, including activity level, rate of ventilation, a pre-existing cerebral or cardiovascular disease, cardiac output, anemia, sickle cell disease and other hematological disorders, barometric pressure, and metabolic rate.
The rate of dissociation between carbon monoxide and cytochrome oxidase is slow, causing a relatively prolonged impairment of oxidative metabolism.
A delayed return of symptoms have been reported.
Chronic exposure to relatively low levels of carbon monoxide may cause persistent headaches, lightheadedness, depression, confusion, memory loss, nausea and vomiting.
However, many of these devices require the user to inhale deeply and hold their breath to allow the CO in the blood to escape into the lung before the measurement can be made.
A report from Jerusalem showed 3.53 per 100,000 people were poisoned annually from 2001 through 2006.
The result of these effects is lipid peroxidation, which causes delayed reversible demyelinization of white matter in the central nervous system known as Grinker myelinopathy, which can lead to edema and necrosis within the brain.
Carbon monoxide also crosses the placenta and combines with fetal hemoglobin, causing more direct fetal tissue hypoxia.
Any perforation between the exhaust manifold and shroud can result in exhaust gases reaching the cabin.
Other conditions included in the differential diagnosis include acute respiratory distress syndrome, altitude sickness, lactic acidosis, diabetic ketoacidosis, meningitis, methemoglobinemia, or opioid or toxic alcohol poisoning.
Treatment with sodium bicarbonate is controversial as acidosis may increase tissue oxygen availability.
Hyperbaric oxygen at three times atmospheric pressure reduces the half life of carbon monoxide to 23 (~80/3 minutes) minutes, compared to 80 minutes for regular oxygen.
Treatment of poisoning largely consists of administering 100% oxygen or providing hyperbaric oxygen therapy, although the optimum treatment remains controversial.
It is unknown whether low-level chronic exposure may cause permanent neurological damage.
Death in less than three minutes.
Carbon monoxide is a product of combustion of organic matter under conditions of restricted oxygen supply, which prevents complete oxidation to carbon dioxide (CO2).
It has a high affinity for myoglobin, about 60 times greater than that of oxygen.
Under normal conditions carbon monoxide levels in the plasma are approximately 0 mmHg because it has a higher diffusion coefficient and the body easily gets rid of any CO made.
The CDC reports, "Each year, more than 500 Americans die from unintentional carbon monoxide poisoning, and more than 2,000 commit suicide by intentionally poisoning themselves."
For the 10-year period from 1979 to 1988, 56,133 deaths from carbon monoxide poisoning occurred in the United States, with 25,889 of those being suicides, leaving 30,244 unintentional deaths.
This may result in cognitive defects, especially affecting memory and learning, and movement disorders.
Oxygen hastens the dissociation of carbon monoxide from carboxyhemoglobin, thus turning it back into hemoglobin.
As part of the Holocaust during World War II, German Nazis used gas vans at Chelmno camp and elsewhere to kill an estimated over 700,000 prisoners by carbon monoxide poisoning.
The authors suggested a large, well designed, externally audited, multicentre trial to compare normal oxygen with hyperbaric oxygen.
Additionally, myoglobin and mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase are thought to be adversely affected.
It thus has no effect on photosynthesising plants.
Detectors must be on the ceiling in the same room as permanently installed fuel-burning appliances, and
In the brain this causes further mitochondrial dysfunction, capillary leakage, leukocyte sequestration, and apoptosis.
Hemoglobin is a tetramer with four oxygen binding sites.
In new homes, AC-powered detectors must have battery backup and be interconnected to ensure early warning of occupants at all levels.
Carbon monoxide poisoning contributes to the approximately 5613 smoke inhalation deaths each year in the United States.
Drugs are being developed to introduce small amounts of CO during certain kinds of surgery, these drugs are called Carbon monoxide-releasing molecules.
Carbon monoxide poisoning has also been speculated as a possible cause of apparent haunted houses; symptoms such as delirium and hallucinations may have led people suffering poisoning to think they have seen ghosts or to believe their house is haunted.
Different people and populations may have different carbon monoxide tolerance levels.
Dizziness, nausea, and convulsions within 45 min; insensible within 2 hours
It has been reported that electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) may increase the likelihood of delayed neuropsychiatric sequelae (DNS) after carbon monoxide (CO) poisoning.
Known mechanisms include carbon monoxide binding to hemoglobin, myoglobin and mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase and restricting oxygen supply, and carbon monoxide causing brain lipid peroxidation.
The initial symptoms of acute carbon monoxide poisoning include headache, nausea, malaise, and fatigue.
Chronic carbon monoxide exposure might increase the risk of developing atherosclerosis.
Slight headache within two to three hours; loss of judgment
Unlike smoke detectors, carbon monoxide detectors do not need to be placed near ceiling level.
Gas organizations will often recommend to get gas appliances serviced at least once a year.
Carbon monoxide can also have severe effects on the fetus of a pregnant woman.
Carboxyhemoglobin blood saturations may range up to 8–10% in heavy smokers or persons extensively exposed to automotive exhaust gases.
This brain damage occurs mainly during the recovery period.
Carbon monoxide exposure may lead to a significantly shorter life span due to heart damage.
The acute effects produced by carbon monoxide in relation to ambient concentration in parts per million are listed below:
There have been randomized controlled trials in which the two treatment options have been compared; of the six performed, four found hyperbaric oxygen improved outcome and two found no benefit for hyperbaric oxygen.
Carbon monoxide binds to cytochrome oxidase with less affinity than oxygen, so it is possible that it requires significant intracellular hypoxia before binding.
Long-term exposures to carbon monoxide present the greatest risk to persons with coronary heart disease and in females who are pregnant.
Extensive follow up and supportive treatment is often required for delayed neurological damage.
These disorders are typically related to damage to the cerebral white matter and basal ganglia.
In Hubei, China, 218 deaths from poisoning were reported over a 10-year period with 16.5% being from carbon monoxide exposure.
Many key personnel were recruited to murder much larger numbers of people in the gas vans and the special gas chambers used in the death camps such as Treblinka.
Depression may occur in those who did not have pre-existing depression.
These devices, which are relatively inexpensive and widely available, are either battery- or AC-powered, with or without battery backup.
Death within 30 minutes.
The binding of carbon monoxide at one of these sites increases the oxygen affinity of the remaining three sites, which causes the hemoglobin molecule to retain oxygen that would otherwise be delivered to the tissue.
This is enforced by municipal inspectors, and was inspired by the death of 7-year-old Nicole Garofalo in 2005 due to snow blocking a home heating vent.
A report from New Zealand showed that 206 people died from carbon monoxide poisoning in the years of 2001 and 2002.
Poisoning causes fetal tissue hypoxia by decreasing the release of maternal oxygen to the fetus.
Treatment of acidosis may only need to consist of oxygen therapy.
The earliest symptoms, especially from low level exposures, are often non-specific and readily confused with other illnesses, typically flu-like viral syndromes, depression, chronic fatigue syndrome, chest pain, and migraine or other headaches.
These delayed neurological sequelae may occur in up to 50% of poisoned people after 2 to 40 days.
Historically, it was also commonly used as a method to commit suicide, usually by deliberately inhaling the exhaust fumes of a running car engine.
The level of fetal morbidity and mortality in acute carbon monoxide poisoning is significant, so despite mild maternal poisoning or following maternal recovery, severe fetal poisoning or death may still occur.
This causes reduced cardiac output and hypotension, which may result in brain ischemia.
However, it is controversial whether hyperbaric oxygen actually offers any extra benefits over normal high flow oxygen, in terms of increased survival or improved long-term outcomes.
A review of all the literature on carbon monoxide poisoning treatment concluded that the role of hyperbaric oxygen is unclear and the available evidence neither confirms nor denies a medically meaningful benefit.
Poisoning is typically more common during the winter months.
This binding interferes with aerobic metabolism and efficient adenosine triphosphate synthesis.
The United States Consumer Product Safety Commission has stated, "carbon monoxide detectors are as important to home safety as smoke detectors are," and recommends each home have at least one carbon monoxide detector, and preferably one on each level of the building.
Chronic exposure may worsen cardiovascular symptoms in some people.
However, since this "cherry-red" appearance is common only in the deceased, and is unusual in living people, it is not considered a useful diagnostic sign in clinical medicine.
In coal mines incomplete combustion may occur during explosions resulting in the production of afterdamp.
The use of a regular pulse oximeter is not effective in the diagnosis of carbon monoxide poisoning as people suffering from carbon monoxide poisoning may have a normal oxygen saturation level on a pulse oximeter.
Increased muscle activity and seizures should be treated with dantrolene or diazepam; diazepam should only be given with appropriate respiratory support.
Carbon monoxide causes endothelial cell and platelet release of nitric oxide, and the formation of oxygen free radicals including peroxynitrite.
Following an explosion in a colliery adjacent, interconnected, mines may become dangerous due to the afterdamp leaking from mine to mine.
Poisoning may also occur following the use of a self-contained underwater breathing apparatus (SCUBA) due to faulty diving air compressors.
However, one case noted permanent memory loss and learning problems after a 3-year exposure to relatively low levels of carbon monoxide from a faulty furnace.
One study reported that approximately 30% of people with severe carbon monoxide poisoning will have a fatal outcome.
Headache and dizziness within six to eight hours of constant exposure
The gas is up to 3% CO and may be fatal after just a single breath.
Cells respond by switching to anaerobic metabolism, causing anoxia, lactic acidosis, and eventual cell death.
For indoor air quality 7&nbsp;mg/m3  (6 ppm) for 24 h (so as not to exceed 2% COHb for chronic exposure)
The use of carbon monoxide detectors has been standardized in many areas.
These symptoms are often mistaken for a virus such as influenza or other illnesses such as food poisoning or gastroenteritis.
Carbon monoxide has been called a "great mimicker" due to the presentation of poisoning being diverse and nonspecific.
Pulse CO-oximeters estimate carboxyhemoglobin with a non-invasive finger clip similar to a pulse oximeter.
The precise mechanisms by which the effects of carbon monoxide are induced upon bodily systems, are complex and not yet fully understood.
Hyperbaric oxygen is also used in the treatment of carbon monoxide poisoning, as it may hasten dissociation of CO from carboxyhemoglobin and cytochrome oxidase to a greater extent than normal oxygen.
Carboxyhemoglobin can revert to hemoglobin, but the recovery takes time because the HbCO complex is fairly stable.
Idling automobiles with the exhaust pipe blocked by snow has led to the poisoning of car occupants.
Outcomes are often difficult to predict following poisoning, especially people who have symptoms of cardiac arrest, coma, metabolic acidosis, or have high carboxyhemoglobin levels.
Due to the possible severe effects in the fetus, pregnant women are treated with oxygen for longer periods of time than non-pregnant people.
Symptoms of mild acute poisoning include lightheadedness, confusion, headache, vertigo, and flu-like effects; larger exposures can lead to significant toxicity of the central nervous system and heart, and death.
Despite similar deaths in vehicles with clogged exhaust pipes (for example in the Northeastern United States blizzard of 1978 and February 2013 nor'easter) and the commercial availability of the equipment, there is no legal requirement for automotive CO detectors.
Other jurisdictions may have no requirement or only mandate detectors for new construction or at time of sale.
Frontal headache within one to two hours
As of April 2006, the U.S. state of Massachusetts requires detectors to be present in all residences with potential CO sources, regardless of building age and whether they are owner-occupied or rented.
Additionally, fetal hemoglobin has a 10 to 15% higher affinity for carbon monoxide than adult hemoglobin, causing more severe poisoning in the fetus than in the adult.
Carbon monoxide may be quantitated in blood using spectrophotometric methods or chromatographic techniques in order to confirm a diagnosis of poisoning in a person or to assist in the forensic investigation of a case of fatal exposure.
In pathological (autopsy) examination the ruddy appearance of carbon monoxide poisoning is notable because unembalmed dead persons are normally bluish and pale, whereas dead carbon-monoxide poisoned persons may simply appear unusually lifelike in coloration.
In total carbon monoxide poisoning was responsible for 43.9% of deaths by poisoning in that country.
One of the major concerns following acute carbon monoxide poisoning is the severe delayed neurological manifestations that may occur.
This method was also used in the gas chambers of several death camps such as Treblinka, Sobibor and Belzec.
The main manifestations of carbon monoxide poisoning develop in the organ systems most dependent on oxygen use, the central nervous system and the heart.
95% of carbon monoxide poisoning deaths in the United States are due to gas space heaters.
'''Carbon monoxide poisoning''' occurs after too much inhalation of carbon monoxide (CO).
In buildings, carbon monoxide detectors are usually installed around heaters and other equipment.
Headache, increased heart rate, dizziness, and nausea within 20 min; death in less than 2 hours
NFPA 720-2009 is the first national carbon monoxide standard to address devices in non-residential buildings.
Modern automobiles, even with electronically controlled combustion and catalytic converters, can still produce levels of carbon monoxide which will kill if enclosed within a garage or if the tailpipe is obstructed (for example, by snow) and exhaust gas cannot escape normally.
Detectors must be located on every habitable level and in every HVAC zone of the building.
In the USA, NFPA 720-2009, the carbon monoxide detector guidelines published by the National Fire Protection Association, mandates the placement of carbon monoxide detectors/alarms on every level of the residence, including the basement, in addition to outside sleeping areas.
Brain damage is confirmed following MRI or CAT scans.
Because of the increased affinity between hemoglobin and oxygen during carbon monoxide poisoning, little oxygen will actually be released in the tissues.
Carbon monoxide is not toxic to all forms of life.
The colorant effect of carbon monoxide in such postmortem circumstances is thus analogous to its use as a red colorant in the commercial meat-packing industry.
Hemoglobin acquires a bright red color when converted into carboxyhemoglobin, so poisoned cadavers and even commercial meats treated with carbon monoxide acquire an unnatural reddish hue.
Hallmark pathological changes following poisoning are bilateral necrosis of the white matter, globus pallidus, cerebellum, hippocampus and the cerebral cortex.
In the United States, approximately 200 people die each year from carbon monoxide poisoning associated with home fuel-burning heating equipment.
Small amounts of CO are beneficial and enzymes exist that produce it at times of oxidative stress.
The mechanism that is thought to have a significant influence on delayed effects involves formed blood cells and chemical mediators, which cause brain lipid peroxidation (degradation of unsaturated fatty acids).
Administering oxygen via non-rebreather mask shortens the half life of carbon monoxide from 320 minutes to 80 minutes on normal air.
It is difficult to predict who will develop delayed sequelae; however, advanced age, loss of consciousness while poisoned, and initial neurological abnormalities may increase the chance of developing delayed symptoms.
Typically, upon removal from exposure to carbon monoxide, symptoms usually resolve themselves, unless there has been an episode of severe acute poisoning.
If severe, metabolic acidosis is treated with sodium bicarbonate.
This causes hypoxic tissue injury.
This situation is described as carbon monoxide shifting the oxygen dissociation curve to the left.
Domestic carbon monoxide poisoning can be prevented by early detection with the use of household carbon monoxide detectors.
Slight headache in two to three hours
Elimination of carbon monoxide is slower in the fetus, leading to an accumulation of the toxic chemical.
Initial treatment for carbon monoxide poisoning is to immediately remove the person from the exposure without endangering further people.
Convulsions, respiratory arrest, and death in less than 20 minutes.
Headache, dizziness and nausea in five to ten minutes.
Headache is the most common symptom of acute carbon monoxide poisoning; it is often described as dull, frontal, and continuous.
Carbon monoxide has a higher diffusion coefficient compared to oxygen and the only enzyme in the human body that produces carbon monoxide is heme oxygenase which is located in all cells and breaks down heme.
Its harmful effects are due to binding with hemoglobin so its danger to organisms that do not use this compound is doubtful.
As many symptoms of carbon monoxide poisoning also occur with many other types of poisonings and infections (such as the flu), the diagnosis is often difficult.
Exposure typically occurs when equipment is used in buildings or semi-enclosed spaces.
Exhaust fumes from tank engines for example, were used to supply the gas to the chambers.
Exposure at 100 ppm or greater can be dangerous to human health.
Carbon monoxide is a toxic gas, but, being colorless, odorless, tasteless, and initially non-irritating, it is very difficult for people to detect.
These guidelines, which now pertain to schools, healthcare centers, nursing homes and other non-residential buildings, include three main points:
It is often produced in domestic or industrial settings by motor vehicles that run on gasoline, diesel, methane, or other carbon-based fuels and from tools, gas heaters, and cooking equipment that are powered by carbon-based fuels such as propane, butane and charcoal.
The affinity between hemoglobin and carbon monoxide is approximately 230 times stronger than the affinity between hemoglobin and oxygen so hemoglobin binds to carbon monoxide in preference to oxygen.
A CO-oximeter is used to determine carboxyhemoglobin levels.
This is due to increased domestic use of gas furnaces, gas or kerosene space heaters, and kitchen stoves during the winter months, which if faulty and/or used without adequate ventilation, may produce excessive carbon monoxide.
Carbon monoxide poisoning is the most common type of fatal poisoning in many countries.
Carbon monoxide detection and poisoning also increases during power outages.
As people may continue to experience significant symptoms of CO poisoning long after their blood carboxyhemoglobin concentration has returned to normal, presenting to examination with a normal carboxyhemoglobin level (which may happen in late states of poisoning) does not rule out poisoning.
After acute poisoning, long-term sequelae often occur.
A secondary power supply (battery backup) must operate all carbon monoxide notification appliances for at least 12 hours,
Another source of poisoning is exposure to the organic solvent dichloromethane, found in some paint strippers, as the metabolism of dichloromethane produces carbon monoxide.
Hypotension requires treatment with intravenous fluids; vasopressors may be required to treat myocardial depression.
Less common symptoms of acute carbon monoxide poisoning include myocardial ischemia, atrial fibrillation, pneumonia, pulmonary edema, high blood sugar, lactic acidosis, muscle necrosis, acute kidney failure, skin lesions, and visual and auditory problems.
In many industrialized countries carbon monoxide is the cause of more than 50% of fatal poisonings.
The ratio of carboxyhemoglobin to hemoglobin molecules in an average person may be up to 5%, although cigarette smokers who smoke two packs/day may have levels up to 9%.
This results following a recurrence of increased carboxyhemoglobin levels; this effect may be due to a late release of carbon monoxide from myoglobin, which subsequently binds to hemoglobin.
This can be determined by measuring the amount of carboxyhemoglobin compared to the amount of hemoglobin in the blood.
A history of potential carbon monoxide exposure, such as being exposed to a residential fire, may suggest poisoning, but the diagnosis is confirmed by measuring the levels of carbon monoxide in the blood.
Further treatment for other complications such as seizure, hypotension, cardiac abnormalities, pulmonary edema, and acidosis may be required.
Inhaling the gas can lead to hypoxic injury, nervous system damage, and even death.
Riding in pickup trucks has led to poisoning in children.
These devices function by passing various wavelengths of light through the fingertip and measuring the light absorption of the different types of hemoglobin in the capillaries.
Carbon monoxide mainly causes adverse effects in humans by combining with hemoglobin to form carboxyhemoglobin (HbCO) in the blood.
Generators and propulsion engines on boats, especially houseboats, has resulted in fatal carbon monoxide exposures.
Chronic exposure to low levels of carbon monoxide can lead to depression, confusion, and memory loss.
This prevents hemoglobin from carrying oxygen to the tissues,  effectively reducing the oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood, leading to hypoxia.
Those who are unconscious may require CPR on site.
In symptomatic poisoned people they are often in the 10–30% range, while persons who succumb may have postmortem blood levels of 30–90%.
In South Korea, 1,950 people had been poisoned by carbon monoxide with 254 deaths from 2001 through 2003.
Carbon monoxide bound to myoglobin may impair its ability to utilize oxygen.
One classic sign of carbon monoxide poisoning is more often seen in the dead rather than the living – people have been described as looking red-cheeked and healthy (see below).
It may also enhance oxygen transport to the tissues by plasma, partially bypassing the normal transfer through hemoglobin.
Breath CO monitoring offers a viable alternative to pulse CO-oximetry.
In the United States, the OSHA limits long-term workplace exposure levels to less than 50 ppm averaged over an 8-hour period; in addition, employees are to be removed from any confined space if an upper limit ("ceiling") of 100 ppm is reached.
Carbon monoxide also binds to the hemeprotein myoglobin.
The prevention of poisoning is a significant public health issue.
Increasing exposure produces cardiac abnormalities including fast heart rate, low blood pressure, and cardiac arrhythmia; central nervous system symptoms include delirium, hallucinations, dizziness, unsteady gait, confusion, seizures, central nervous system depression, unconsciousness, respiratory arrest, and death.
There are many conditions to be considered in the differential diagnosis of carbon monoxide poisoning.
Gassing with carbon monoxide started in action T4, the euthanasia programme developed by the Nazis in Germany to murder the mentally ill and disabled people before the war started in earnest.
When CO is not ventilated it binds to hemoglobin, which is the principal oxygen-carrying compound in blood; this produces a compound known as carboxyhemoglobin.
Another mechanism involves effects on the mitochondrial respiratory enzyme chain that is responsible for effective tissue utilization of oxygen.
It is easily absorbed through the lungs.
In caves carbon monoxide can build up in enclosed chambers due to the presence of decomposing organic matter.
Oxygen works as an antidote as it increases the removal of carbon monoxide from hemoglobin, in turn providing the body with normal levels of oxygen.
The delayed development of neuropsychiatric impairment is one of the most serious complications of carbon monoxide poisoning.
Carbon monoxide is a product of incomplete combustion of organic matter due to insufficient oxygen supply to enable complete oxidation to carbon dioxide (CO2).
Sources of carbon monoxide include cigarette smoke, house fires, faulty furnaces, heaters, wood-burning stoves, internal combustion vehicle exhaust, electrical generators, propane-fueled equipment such as portable stoves, and gasoline-powered tools such as leaf blowers, lawn mowers, high-pressure washers, concrete cutting saws, power trowels, and welders.
On average, exposures at 100 ppm or greater is dangerous to human health.
This is due to the carboxyhemoglobin being misrepresented as oxyhemoglobin.
If a relatively high level of carbon monoxide is detected, the device sounds an alarm, giving people the chance to evacuate and ventilate the building.
Problems may include difficulty with higher intellectual functions, short-term memory loss, dementia, amnesia, psychosis, irritability, a strange gait, speech disturbances, Parkinson's disease-like syndromes, cortical blindness, and a depressed mood.
As this is not possible in a nonresponsive patient, these devices are not appropriate for use in on-scene emergency care detection of CO poisoning.
