In 2005, Russia produced almost one-fifth of the global diamond output, reports the British Geological Survey.
Cyanide (CN), has a similar structure, but behaves much like a halide ion (pseudohalogen).
Through catenation, carbon forms a countless number of compounds.
Carbon is a constituent (about 12% by mass) of the very large masses of carbonate rock (limestone, dolomite, marble and so on).
The ore is crushed, during which care has to be taken in order to prevent larger diamonds from being destroyed in this process and subsequently the particles are sorted by density.
Carbon's abundance, its unique diversity of organic compounds, and its unusual ability to form polymers at the temperatures commonly encountered on Earth enables this element to serve as a common element of all known life.
Flake graphite is less common and of higher quality than amorphous; it occurs as separate plates  that crystallized in metamorphic rock.
In 2004, a startling discovery of a microscopic diamond in the United States led to the January 2008 bulk-sampling of kimberlite pipes in a remote part of Montana.
The concentration of C is further increased in biological materials because biochemical reactions discriminate against C. In 1961, the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) adopted the isotope carbon-12 as the basis for atomic weights.
In 1786, the French scientists Claude Louis Berthollet, Gaspard Monge and C. A. Vandermonde confirmed that graphite was mostly carbon by oxidizing it in oxygen in much the same way Lavoisier had done with diamond.
In combination with oxygen in carbon dioxide, carbon is found in the Earth's atmosphere (approximately 810&nbsp;gigatonnes of carbon) and dissolved in all water bodies (approximately 36,000&nbsp;gigatonnes of carbon).
Carbon is also found in methane hydrates in polar regions and under the seas.
The physical properties of carbon vary widely with the allotropic form.
The isotope carbon-12 (C) forms 98.93% of the carbon on Earth, while carbon-13 (C) forms the remaining 1.07%.
Through this intermediate, though, resonance-stabilized carbonate ions are produced.
The foremost deposits are found in Austria, Brazil, Canada, China, Germany and Madagascar.
: + 4 C → 3 Fe + 4 CO
Under some conditions, carbon crystallizes as lonsdaleite, a hexagonal crystal lattice with all atoms covalently bonded and properties similar to those of diamond.
The missing (or additional) atoms warp the sheets into spheres, ellipses, or cylinders.
Due to a high activation energy barrier, the transition into graphite is so slow at normal temperature that it is unnoticeable.
At standard temperature and pressure, it resists all but the strongest oxidizers.
The raw materials for many of these synthetic substances come from crude oil.
Industrial diamonds are valued mostly for their hardness and heat conductivity, with the gemological qualities of clarity and color being mostly irrelevant.
In 1779, Carl Wilhelm Scheele showed that graphite, which had been thought of as a form of lead, was instead identical with charcoal but with a small admixture of iron, and that it gave "aerial acid" (his name for carbon dioxide) when oxidized with nitric acid.
Graphite is a conductor of electricity.
Diamond deposits have also been found in Arkansas, Canada, the Russian Arctic, Brazil, and in Northern and Western Australia.
This dust becomes component material for the formation of second or third-generation star systems with accreted planets.
Since the mass of the earth is , this would imply 4360 million gigatonnes of carbon.
Because of the delocalization of one of the outer electrons of each atom to form a π-cloud, graphite conducts electricity, but only in the plane of each covalently bonded sheet.
The properties of fullerenes (split into buckyballs, buckytubes, and nanobuds) have not yet been fully analyzed and represent an intense area of research in nanomaterials.
Carbon-rich asteroids are relatively preponderant in the outer parts of the asteroid belt in our solar system.
Charcoal is used as a drawing material in artwork, barbecue grilling, iron smelting, and in many other applications.
With an electronegativity of 2.5, carbon prefers to form covalent bonds.
Various estimates put this carbon between 500, 2500 Gt, or 3000 Gt.
The great variety of carbon compounds include such lethal poisons as tetrodotoxin, the lectin ricin from seeds of the castor oil plant ''Ricinus communis'', cyanide (CN), and carbon monoxide; and such essentials to life as glucose and protein.
With nitrogen it forms alkaloids, and with the addition of sulfur also it forms antibiotics, amino acids, and rubber products.
Carbon fiber is made by pyrolysis of extruded and stretched filaments of polyacrylonitrile (PAN) and other organic substances.
Carbon-14 is formed in upper layers of the troposphere and the stratosphere at altitudes of 9–15&nbsp;km by a reaction that is precipitated by cosmic rays.
Oil reserves are around 150&nbsp;gigatonnes.
The three relatively well-known allotropes of carbon are amorphous carbon, graphite, and diamond.
Diamonds are now also being recovered from the ocean floor off the Cape of Good Hope.
Some important minerals are carbonates, notably calcite.
It can form alloys with iron, of which the most common is carbon steel.
Amorphous carbon is completely isotropic.
Historically diamonds were known to be found only in alluvial deposits in southern India.
Carbon-carbon bonds are strong and stable.
This results in a lower bulk electrical conductivity for carbon than for most metals.
There are 15 known isotopes of carbon and the shortest-lived of these is C which decays through proton emission and alpha decay and has a half-life of 1.98739x10 s. The exotic C exhibits a nuclear halo, which means its radius is appreciably larger than would be expected if the nucleus were a sphere of constant density.
Carbon compounds make up most of the materials used in clothing, such as natural and synthetic textiles and leather, and almost all of the interior surfaces in the built environment other than glass, stone and metal.
firebreaks and heat shields), but some other forms are good thermal conductors.
Crude oil is distilled in refineries by the petrochemical industry to produce gasoline, kerosene, and other products.
Diamond is highly transparent.
Carbon is essential to all known living systems, and without it life as we know it could not exist (see alternative biochemistry).
The most prominent oxide is carbon dioxide ().
Carbon nanotubes are among the most anisotropic materials known.
Activated charcoal is used as an absorbent and adsorbent in filter material in applications as diverse as gas masks, water purification, and kitchen extractor hoods, and in medicine to absorb toxins, poisons, or gases from the digestive system.
In 2015, a team at the North Carolina State University announced the development of another allotrope they have dubbed Q-carbon, created by a high energy low duration laser pulse on amorphous carbon dust.
It bonds readily with other small atoms including other carbon atoms, and is capable of forming multiple stable covalent bonds with such atoms.
It occurs in veins along intrusive contacts in solid lumps, and it is only commercially mined in Sri Lanka.
Coal is very rich in carbon (anthracite contains 92–98%) and is the largest commercial source of mineral carbon, accounting for 4,000&nbsp;gigatonnes or 80% of fossil fuel.
Diamond production of primary deposits (kimberlites and lamproites) only started in the 1870s after the discovery of the Diamond fields in South Africa.
At normal pressures, carbon takes the form of graphite, in which each atom is bonded trigonally to three others in a plane composed of fused hexagonal rings, just like those in aromatic hydrocarbons.
When those stars die as supernova, the carbon is scattered into space as dust.
Similarly, glassy carbon contains a high proportion of closed porosity, but contrary to normal graphite, the graphitic layers are not stacked like pages in a book, but have a more random arrangement.
Amorphous is used for lower value graphite products and is the lowest priced graphite.
The most common oxidation state of carbon in inorganic compounds is +4, while +2 is found in carbon monoxide and transition metal carbonyl complexes.
The amorphous form is an assortment of carbon atoms in a non-crystalline, irregular, glassy state, which is essentially graphite but not held in a crystalline macrostructure.
According to current physical cosmology theory, carbon is formed in the interiors of stars in the horizontal branch by the collision and transformation of three helium nuclei.
Carbon black is also used as a filler in rubber products such as tyres and in plastic compounds.
Carbon forms a vast number of compounds, more than any other element, with almost ten million compounds described to date,  and yet that number is but a fraction of the number of theoretically possible compounds under standard conditions.
It is present as a powder, and is the main constituent of substances such as charcoal, lampblack (soot) and activated carbon.
Some of this biomass is eaten by animals, while some carbon is exhaled by animals as carbon dioxide.
The buckyballs are fairly large molecules formed completely of carbon bonded trigonally, forming spheroids (the best-known and simplest is the soccerball-shaped C buckminsterfullerene).
The process of separating it from graphite will require some further technological development before it is economical for industrial processes.
This gives graphite its softness and its cleaving properties (the sheets slip easily past one another).
Diamond dust used as an abrasive can harmful if ingested or inhaled.
The Solar System is one such star system with an abundance of carbon, enabling the existence of life as we know it.
Coal "reserves" (not "resources") amount to around 900&nbsp;gigatonnes with perhaps 18 000 Gt of resources.
It is found in trace amounts on Earth of up to 1 part per trillion (0.0000000001%), mostly confined to the atmosphere and superficial deposits, particularly of peat and other organic materials.
Before the use of X-rays became commonplace, the separation was done with grease belts; diamonds have a stronger tendency to stick to grease than the other minerals in the ore.
With the continuing advances in the production of synthetic diamonds, new applications are becoming feasible.
Carbon combines with some metals at high temperatures to form metallic carbides, such as the iron carbide cementite in steel, and tungsten carbide, widely used as an abrasive and for making hard tips for cutting tools.
It has been estimated that the solid earth as a whole contains 730 ppm of carbon, with 2000 ppm in the core and 120 ppm in the combined mantle and crust.
The molecules each contain a triple bond and are fairly polar, resulting in a tendency to bind permanently to hemoglobin molecules, displacing oxygen, which has a lower binding affinity.
This exothermic reaction is used in the iron and steel industry to smelt iron and to control the carbon content of steel:
When combined with oxygen and hydrogen, carbon can form many groups of important biological compounds including sugars, lignans, chitins, alcohols, fats, and aromatic esters, carotenoids and terpenes.
The largest sources of inorganic carbon are limestones, dolomites and carbon dioxide, but significant quantities occur in organic deposits of coal, peat, oil, and methane clathrates.
While carbon is understood to exclusively form four bonds, an interesting compound containing an octahedral hexacoordinated carbon atom has been reported.
In these examples, the harm may result from contaminants (e.g., organic chemicals, heavy metals) rather than from the carbon itself.
Carbon nanotubes are structurally similar to buckyballs, except that each atom is bonded trigonally in a curved sheet that forms a hollow cylinder.
A tally of unique compounds shows that more contain carbon that those that do not.
The other common oxide is carbon monoxide (CO).
The asteroids can be used in hypothetical space-based carbon mining, which may be possible in the future, but is currently technologically impossible.
Carbon generally has low toxicity to life on Earth; but carbon nanoparticles are deadly to ''Drosophila''.
Three isotopes occur naturally, C and C being stable while C is radioactive, decaying with a half-life of about 5,730&nbsp;years.
Case hardening of steel is achieved by heating finished steel components in carbon powder.
It consists of a low-density cluster-assembly of carbon atoms strung together in a loose three-dimensional web, in which the atoms are bonded trigonally in six- and seven-membered rings.
Another source puts the amount added to the atmosphere for the period since 1750 at 879 Gt, and the total going to the atmosphere, sea, and land (such as peat bogs) at almost 2000 Gt.
Because of its relatively short half-life of 5730&nbsp;years, C is virtually absent in ancient rocks.
Commonly carbon-containing compounds which are associated with minerals or which do not contain hydrogen or fluorine, are treated separately from classical organic compounds; the definition is not rigid (see reference articles above).
Natural diamonds occur in the rock kimberlite, found in ancient volcanic "necks", or "pipes".
There are also commercial deposits being actively mined in the Northwest Territories of Canada, Siberia (mostly in Yakutia territory; for example, Mir pipe and Udachnaya pipe), Brazil, and in Northern and Western Australia.
Among these are the simple oxides of carbon.
Dissolved in water, it forms carbonic acid (), but as most compounds with multiple single-bonded oxygens on a single carbon it is unstable.
The delocalization also accounts for the energetic stability of graphite over diamond at room temperature.
Production has increased over time and now an accumulated total of 4.5&nbsp;billion carats have been mined since that date.
Coke is used to reduce iron ore into iron (smelting).
Thus, processes that use carbon must obtain it from somewhere and dispose of it somewhere else.
Diamond has the same cubic structure as silicon and germanium, and because of the strength of the carbon-carbon bonds, it is the hardest naturally occurring substance measured by resistance to scratching.
Linear acetylenic carbon has the chemical structure -(C:::C)-.
These anions are also associated with methane and acetylene, both very weak acids.
Graphite is soft enough to form a streak on paper (hence its name, from the Greek verb "γράφειν" which means "to write"), while diamond is the hardest naturally-occurring material known.
At elevated temperatures, carbon reacts with oxygen to form carbon oxides, and will rob oxygen from metal oxides to leave the elemental metal.
Cellulose is used primarily for maintaining structure in plants.
Fullerenes are a synthetic crystalline formation with a graphite-like structure, but in place of hexagons, fullerenes are formed of pentagons (or even heptagons) of carbon atoms.
Hydrocarbons (such as coal, petroleum, and natural gas) contain carbon as well.
Wood, coal and oil are used as fuel for production of energy and heating.
Once considered exotic, fullerenes are nowadays commonly synthesized and used in research; they include buckyballs, carbon nanotubes, carbon nanobuds and nanofibers.
Therefore, the amount of carbon on Earth is effectively constant.
This carbyne is of considerable interest to nanotechnology as its Young's modulus is forty times that of the hardest known material&nbsp;– diamond.
Antoine Lavoisier then listed carbon as an element in his 1789 textbook.
It is among the lightest known solids, with a density of about 2&nbsp;kg/m.
Today, smaller deposits of graphite are obtained by crushing the parent rock and floating the lighter graphite out on water.
Their discoverers&nbsp;– Robert Curl, Harold Kroto and Richard Smalley&nbsp;– received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1996.
This isotope decays by 0.158 MeV β emission.
At atmospheric pressure it has no melting point as its triple point is at 10.8 ± 0.2&nbsp;MPa and 4,600 ± 300 K (~4,330&nbsp;°C or 7,820&nbsp;°F), so it sublimes at about 3,900&nbsp;K.
Carbon is abundant in the Sun, stars, comets, and in the atmospheres of most planets.
For example, it can form the nitride cyanogen molecule ((CN)), similar to diatomic halides.
Diamond is the best known naturally occurring thermal conductor
Diamond is the ultimate abrasive.
In the United States, diamonds have been found in Arkansas, Colorado and Montana.
In 2014 NASA announced a  greatly upgraded database for tracking polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) in the universe.
Annealing to at least 250&nbsp;°C can release the energy safely, although in the Windscale fire the procedure went wrong, causing other reactor materials to combust.
As for individual carbon allotropes, graphite is found in large quantities in the United States (mostly in New York and Texas), Russia, Mexico, Greenland, and India.
Carbon may burn vigorously and brightly in the presence of air at high temperatures.
A wide range of such compounds exist; major classes include simple alkyl-metal compounds (for example, tetraethyllead), η-alkene compounds (for example, Zeise's salt), and η-allyl compounds (for example, allylpalladium chloride dimer); metallocenes containing cyclopentadienyl ligands (for example, ferrocene); and transition metal carbene complexes.
With reactive metals, such as tungsten, carbon forms either carbides (C), or acetylides () to form alloys with high melting points.
Identification of carbon in nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) experiments is done with the isotope C.
These compounds figure in the PAH world hypothesis where they are hypothesized to have a role in abiogenesis and formation of life.
Vein or lump graphite is the rarest, most valuable, and highest quality type of natural graphite.
The amount of C in the atmosphere and in living organisms is almost constant, but decreases predictably in their bodies after death.
This was once the principal constituent of the paleoatmosphere, but is a minor component of the Earth's atmosphere today.
It is also used as a lubricant and a pigment, as a molding material in glass manufacture, in electrodes for dry batteries and in electroplating and electroforming, in brushes for electric motors and as a neutron moderator in nuclear reactors.
At very high pressures, carbon forms the more compact allotrope, diamond, having nearly twice the density of graphite.
Some iron again was left, which the French scientists thought was necessary to the graphite structure.
Graphite is combined with clays to form the 'lead' used in pencils used for writing and drawing.
Thermal neutrons are produced that collide with the nuclei of nitrogen-14, forming carbon-14 and a proton.
Plastics are made from fossil hydrocarbons, and carbon fiber, made by pyrolysis of synthetic polyester fibers is used to reinforce plastics to form advanced, lightweight composite materials.
A few carbides are covalent lattices, like carborundum (SiC), which resembles diamond.
Amorphous graphite is the lowest quality and most abundant.
Under normal conditions, diamond, carbon nanotubes, and graphene have the highest thermal conductivities of all known materials.
Graphite deposits are of metamorphic origin, found in association with quartz, mica and feldspars in schists, gneisses and metamorphosed sandstones and limestone as lenses or veins, sometimes of a metre or more in thickness.
Organometallic compounds by definition contain at least one carbon-metal bond.
Graphite is a very good lubricant, displaying superlubricity.
Microscopic diamonds may also be formed by the intense pressure and high temperature at the sites of meteorite impacts.
Some meteorites contain microscopic diamonds that were formed when the solar system was still a protoplanetary disk.
Only a very small fraction of the diamond ore consists of actual diamonds.
Nanobuds were first reported in 2007 and are hybrid bucky tube/buckyball materials (buckyballs are covalently bonded to the outer wall of a nanotube) that combine the properties of both in a single structure.
Carbon has two stable, naturally occurring isotopes.
Carbon fibers made from PAN have structure resembling narrow filaments of graphite, but thermal processing may re-order the structure into a continuous rolled sheet.
About 80% of mined diamonds (equal to about 100 million carats or 20&nbsp;tonnes annually) are unsuitable for use as gemstones are relegated for industrial use (known as ''bort)''.
The crystallographic structure and mechanical properties of the fiber depend on the type of starting material, and on the subsequent processing.
It does not react with sulfuric acid, hydrochloric acid, chlorine or any alkalis.
Isotopes of carbon are atomic nuclei that contain six protons plus a number of neutrons (varying from 2 to 16).
Atomic carbon is a very short-lived species and, therefore, carbon is stabilized in various multi-atomic structures with different molecular configurations called allotropes.
Most of these applications do not require large diamonds; in fact, most diamonds of gem-quality except for their small size can be used industrially.
It is the second most abundant element in the human body by mass (about 18.5%) after oxygen.
It is nonmetallic and tetravalent—making four electrons available to form covalent chemical bonds.
Large amorphous graphite deposits are found in China, Europe, Mexico and the United States.
Chain length, side chains and functional groups all affect the properties of organic molecules.
A new allotrope of carbon, fullerene, that was discovered in 1985 includes nanostructured forms such as buckyballs and nanotubes.
Carbon also has the highest sublimation point of all elements.
The dominant industrial use of diamond is in cutting, drilling, grinding, and polishing.
Carbon occurs in all known organic life and is the basis of organic chemistry.
Graphite is one of the softest materials known.
Synthetic nanocrystalline diamond is the hardest material known.
Flake graphite can be four times the price of amorphous.
Carbon sublimes in a carbon arc which has a temperature of about 5,800 K (5,530&nbsp;°C; 9,980&nbsp;°F).
Around 1,900&nbsp;gigatonnes of carbon are present in the biosphere.
These asteroids have not yet been directly sampled by scientists.
The system of carbon allotropes spans a range of extremes:
More than 20% of the carbon in the universe may be associated with PAHs, complex compounds of carbon and hydrogen without oxygen.
Several other exotic allotropes have also been discovered, such as lonsdaleite (questionable), glassy carbon, carbon nanofoam and linear acetylenic carbon (carbyne).
Microparticles of carbon are produced in diesel engine exhaust fumes, and may accumulate in the lungs.
In nuclear applications where graphite is used as a neutron moderator, accumulation of Wigner energy followed by a sudden, spontaneous release may occur.
Carbon is the fourth most abundant chemical element in the universe by mass after hydrogen, helium, and oxygen.
Thus, irrespective of its allotropic form, carbon remains solid at higher temperatures than the highest melting point metals such as tungsten or rhenium.
Carbides of silicon, tungsten, boron and titanium, are among the hardest known materials, and are used as abrasives in cutting and grinding tools.
Most diamond deposits are in Africa, notably in South Africa, Namibia, Botswana, the Republic of the Congo, and Sierra Leone.
Some forms of graphite are used for thermal insulation (i.e.
Diamond is an excellent electrical insulator, and has the highest breakdown electric field of any known material.
synthetic diamonds, invented in the 1950s, found almost immediate industrial applications; 3&nbsp;billion carats (600&nbsp;tonnes) of synthetic diamond is produced annually.
Carbon is used in chemical reduction at high temperatures.
Australia has the richest diamantiferous pipe with production reaching peak levels of  per year in the 1990s.
Graphite is a good electrical conductor while diamond has a low electrical conductivity.
Diamonds are found naturally, but about 30% of all industrial diamonds used in the U.S. are now manufactured.
Other uncommon oxides are carbon suboxide (), the unstable dicarbon monoxide (CO), carbon trioxide (CO), cyclopentanepentone (CO), cyclohexanehexone (CO), and mellitic anhydride (CO).
According to the USGS, world production of natural graphite was 1.1&nbsp;million tonnes in 2010, to which China contributed 800,000&nbsp;t, India 130,000 t, Brazil 76,000&nbsp;t, North Korea 30,000&nbsp;t and Canada 25,000 t. No natural graphite was reported mined in the United States, but 118,000 t of synthetic graphite with an estimated value of $998&nbsp;million was produced in 2009.
The cation of the compound is (PhPAu)C. This phenomenon has been attributed to the aurophilicity of the gold ligands.
As of 2009, graphene appears to be the strongest material ever tested.
