Used as the primary coolant in the British advanced gas-cooled reactor for nuclear power generation.
It is added to drinking water and carbonated beverages including beer and sparkling wine to add effervescence.
During active photosynthesis, plants can absorb more carbon dioxide from the atmosphere than they release in respiration.
At low concentrations, the gas is odorless.
Carbon dioxide is used to produce carbonated soft drinks and soda water.
Before more effective technologies were developed, miners would frequently monitor for dangerous levels of blackdamp and other gases in mine shafts by bringing a caged canary with them as they worked.
The Davy lamp could also detect high levels of blackdamp (which sinks, and collects near the floor) by burning less brightly, while methane, another suffocating gas and explosion risk, would make the lamp burn more brightly.
Traditionally, the carbonation of beer and sparkling wine came about through natural fermentation, but many manufacturers carbonate these drinks with carbon dioxide recovered from the fermentation process.
In the case of bottled and kegged beer, the most common method used is carbonation with recycled carbon dioxide.
However, because of allosteric effects on the hemoglobin molecule, the binding of CO2 decreases the amount of oxygen that is bound for a given partial pressure of oxygen.
Dry ice is also used during the cold soak phase of the wine making process to keep grapes cool.
The carbon dioxide molecule is linear and centrosymmetric.
Arterial blood carbon dioxide
Miners, who are particularly vulnerable to gas exposure due to an insufficient ventilation, referred to mixtures of carbon dioxide and nitrogen as "blackdamp," "choke damp" or "stythe."
Use in the automotive industry is common despite significant evidence that welds made in carbon dioxide are more brittle than those made in more inert atmospheres, and that such weld joints deteriorate over time because of the formation of carbonic acid.
Plants also emit CO2 during respiration, and so the majority of plants and algae, which use C3 photosynthesis, are only net absorbers during the day.
Since the Industrial Revolution, anthropogenic emissions - including the burning of carbon-based fossil fuels and land use changes (primarily deforestation) - have rapidly increased its concentration in the atmosphere, leading to global warming.
CO2 is a weak electrophile.
Carbon dioxide is an end product of cellular respiration in organisms that obtain energy by breaking down sugars, fats and amino acids with oxygen as part of their metabolism.
:''K''a1 = ; p''K''a1 = 3.6 at 25 °C.
Photoautotrophs (i.e.
Liquid carbon dioxide (industry nomenclature R744 or R-744) was used as a refrigerant prior to the discovery of R-12 and may enjoy a renaissance due to the fact that R134a contributes to climate change.
Atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide fluctuate slightly with the seasons, falling during the Northern Hemisphere spring and summer as plants consume the gas and rising during northern autumn and winter as plants go dormant or die and decay.
Children have been killed in the same way near the city of Goma by  emissions from the nearby volcano Mt.
Aluminium capsules of CO2 are also sold as supplies of compressed gas for airguns, paintball markers, inflating bicycle tires, and for making carbonated water.
The large number of reactions involved are exceedingly complex and not described easily.
Carbon dioxide has no liquid state at pressures below .
The compound has varied commercial uses but one of its greatest use as a chemical is in the production of carbonated beverages; it provides the sparkle in carbonated beverages such as soda water.
This is especially perilous for high-altitude fighter pilots.
At standard temperature and pressure, the density of carbon dioxide is around 1.98&nbsp;kg/m3, about 1.67 times that of air.
In medicine, up to 5% carbon dioxide (130 times atmospheric concentration) is added to oxygen for stimulation of breathing after apnea and to stabilize the  balance in blood.
Another form of solid carbon dioxide observed at high pressure is an amorphous glass-like solid.
Its environmental advantages (GWP of 1, non-ozone depleting, non-toxic, non-flammable) could make it the future working fluid to replace current HFCs in cars, supermarkets, and heat pump water heaters, among others.
In organisms carbonic acid production is catalysed by the enzyme, carbonic anhydrase.
CO2 is one discussed option.
Phototrophs use the products of their photosynthesis as internal food sources and as raw material for the biosynthesis of more complex organic molecules, such as polysaccharides, nucleic acids and proteins.
The reaction between hydrochloric acid and calcium carbonate (limestone or chalk) is shown below:
However, the CO2 bound to hemoglobin does not bind to the same site as oxygen.
:''K''a2 = ; p''K''a2 = 10.329
Similarly, it is also used in the maintaining reef aquaria, where it is commonly used in calcium reactors to temporarily lower the pH of water being passed over calcium carbonate in order to allow the calcium carbonate to dissolve into the water more freely where it is used by some corals to build their skeleton.
Carbon dioxide comprises about 40-45% of the gas that emanates from decomposition in landfills (termed "landfill gas").
Breathing that is too slow or shallow causes respiratory acidosis, while breathing that is too rapid leads to hyperventilation, which can cause respiratory alkalosis.
Carbon dioxide can be used to extinguish flames by flooding the environment around the flame with the gas.
It is also why flight attendants instruct passengers, in case of loss of cabin pressure, to apply the oxygen mask to themselves first before helping others; otherwise, one risks losing consciousness.
In mature oil fields, extensive pipe networks are used to carry the carbon dioxide to the injection points.
It is used by some dry cleaners for this reason (see green chemistry).
Some marine calcifying organisms (including coral reefs) have been singled out by major research agencies, including NOAA, OSPAR commission, NANOOS and the IPCC, because their most current research shows that ocean acidification should be expected to impact them negatively.
Bicarbonate ions are crucial for regulating blood pH.
Carbon dioxide is also used in several related cleaning and surface preparation techniques.
Carbon dioxide is a significant greenhouse gas.
At temperatures and pressures above the critical point, carbon dioxide behaves as a supercritical fluid known as supercritical carbon dioxide.
However, as ocean pH falls, so does the concentration of this ion, and when carbonate becomes undersaturated, structures made of calcium carbonate are vulnerable to dissolution.
In its solid state, carbon dioxide is commonly called dry ice.
Carbon dioxide is also introduced into the oceans through hydrothermal vents.
At high pH, it dissociates significantly into the carbonate ion (CO32−):
The frozen solid form of CO2, known as "dry ice" is used as a refrigerant and as an abrasive in dry-ice blasting.
Although, this may be due to atmospheric reactions occurring at the puddle site.
Although the body requires oxygen for metabolism, low oxygen levels normally do not stimulate breathing.
Plants require carbon dioxide to conduct photosynthesis.
The critical point is 7.38 MPa at 31.1&nbsp;°C.
The concentration of secondary metabolites such as phenylpropanoids and flavonoids
"The uptake of anthropogenic carbon since 1750 has led to the ocean becoming more acidic with an average decrease in pH of 0.1 units.
Not only do increasing carbon dioxide concentrations lead to increases in global surface temperature, but increasing global temperatures also cause increasing concentrations of carbon dioxide.
plants and cyanobacteria) use the energy contained in sunlight to photosynthesize simple sugars from  absorbed from the air and water:
This process causes carbon dioxide to warm the surface and lower atmosphere, while cooling the upper atmosphere.
Refer to (cellular respiration, anaerobic respiration and photosynthesis).
Gas solubility decreases as the temperature of water increases (except when both pressure exceeds 300 bar and temperature exceeds 393 K, only found near deep geothermal vents) and therefore the rate of uptake from the atmosphere decreases as ocean temperatures rise.
Five hundred million years ago the carbon dioxide concentration was 20 times greater than today, decreasing to 4–5 times during the Jurassic period and then slowly declining with a particularly swift reduction occurring 49 million years ago.
In vertebrates, the carbon dioxide travels in the blood from the body's tissues to the skin (e.g., amphibians) or the gills (e.g., fish), from where it dissolves in the water, or to the lungs from where it is exhaled.
Other nucleophiles react as well.
Most carbon dioxide from human activities is released from burning coal and other fossil fuels.
The settled carbon dioxide gas creates a hypoxic environment which helps to prevent bacteria from growing on the grapes until it is time to start the fermentation with the desired strain of yeast.
Carbon dioxide dissolves in the ocean to form carbonic acid (H2CO3), bicarbonate (HCO3−) and carbonate (CO32−).
Life jackets often contain canisters of pressured carbon dioxide for quick inflation.
As a result, breathing low-pressure air or a gas mixture with no oxygen at all (such as pure nitrogen) can lead to loss of consciousness without ever experiencing air hunger.
"The oceans have absorbed about 50% of the carbon dioxide (CO2) released from the burning of fossil fuels, resulting in chemical reactions that lower ocean pH.
Hemoglobin, the main oxygen-carrying molecule in red blood cells, carries both oxygen and carbon dioxide.
The oceans, being mildly alkaline with typical pH = 8.2–8.5, contain about 120&nbsp;mg of bicarbonate per liter.
Alveolar pulmonarygas pressures
The body produces approximately  of carbon dioxide per day per person, containing  of carbon.
In 1772, English chemist Joseph Priestley published a paper entitled ''Impregnating Water with Fixed Air'' in which he described a process of dripping sulfuric acid (or ''oil of vitriol'' as Priestley knew it) on chalk in order to produce carbon dioxide, and forcing the gas to dissolve by agitating a bowl of water in contact with the gas.
There is also a symmetric stretching mode at 1388&nbsp;cm−1 which is only observed in the Raman spectrum.
Rapid vaporization of liquid carbon dioxide is used for blasting in coal mines.
Methods to administer CO2 include placing animals directly into a closed, prefilled chamber containing CO2, or exposure to a gradually increasing concentration of CO2.
CO2 is an asphyxiant gas and not classified as toxic or harmful in accordance with Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals standards of United Nations Economic Commission for Europe by using the OECD Guidelines for the Testing of Chemicals.
He found that limestone (calcium carbonate) could be heated or treated with acids to yield a gas he called "fixed air."
Since most of the dissolved CO2 remains as CO2 molecules, ''K''a1(apparent) has a much larger denominator and a much smaller value than the true ''K''a1.
The atmospheres of greenhouses may (if of large size, must) be enriched with additional CO2 to sustain and increase the rate of plant growth.
As the concentration of carbon dioxide increases in the atmosphere, the increased uptake of carbon dioxide into the oceans is causing a measurable decrease in the pH of the oceans, which is referred to as ocean acidification.
It is also a major cause of ocean acidification because it dissolves in water to form carbonic acid.
The carbonic acid () then decomposes to water and :
Acids liberate  from most metal carbonates.
Consequently, only two vibrational bands are observed in the IR spectrum – an antisymmetric stretching mode at 2349&nbsp;cm−1 and a degenerate pair of bending modes at 667&nbsp;cm−1.
His interpretation was that the rest of the charcoal had been transmuted into an invisible substance he termed a "gas" or "wild spirit" (''spiritus sylvestre'').
Some important phototrophs, the coccolithophores synthesise hard calcium carbonate scales.
Because it is heavier than air, in locations where the gas seeps from the ground (due to sub-surface volcanic or geothermal activity) in relatively high concentrations, without the dispersing effects of wind, it can collect in sheltered/pocketed locations below average ground level, causing animals located therein to be suffocated.
The Swahili term for this phenomenon is 'mazuku'.
Concentrations of 7% to 10% (70,000 to 100,000 ppm) may cause suffocation, even in the presence of sufficient oxygen, manifesting as dizziness, headache, visual and hearing dysfunction, and unconsciousness within a few minutes to an hour.
Due to the need to operate at pressures of up to 130 bar (1880 psi), CO2 systems require highly resistant components that have already been developed for mass production in many sectors.
It is one of the most commonly used compressed gases for pneumatic (pressurized gas) systems in portable pressure tools.
Researchers have genetically modified a strain of the cyanobacterium ''Synechococcus elongatus'' to produce the fuels isobutyraldehyde and isobutanol from  using photosynthesis.
The nickel-containing enzyme carbon monoxide dehydrogenase catalyses this process.
Thus if the outdoor concentration is 400 ppm, indoor concentrations may reach 2,500 ppm with ventilation rates that meet this industry consensus standard.
With the exception of British Real Ale, draught beer is usually transferred from kegs in a cold room or cellar to dispensing taps on the bar using pressurized carbon dioxide, sometimes mixed with nitrogen.
Other human activities, including deforestation, biomass burning, and cement production also produce carbon dioxide.
Carbon dioxide was the first gas to be described as a discrete substance.
The much smaller and often-quoted value near  is an ''apparent'' value calculated on the (incorrect) assumption that all dissolved CO2 is present as carbonic acid, so that .
With intentional hyperventilation, the CO2 content of arterial blood may be lowered to 10–20&nbsp;mm Hg (the oxygen content of the blood is little affected), and the respiratory drive is diminished.
This is the ''true'' first acid dissociation constant, defined as , where the denominator includes only covalently bound H2CO3 and does not include hydrated CO2(aq).
Carbon dioxide is used in enhanced oil recovery where it is injected into or adjacent to producing oil wells, usually under supercritical conditions, when it becomes miscible with the oil.
It is used in many consumer products that require pressurized gas because it is inexpensive and nonflammable, and because it undergoes a phase transition from gas to liquid at room temperature at an attainable pressure of approximately 60 bar (870 psi, 59 atm), allowing far more carbon dioxide to fit in a given container than otherwise would.
This is usually the opposite of the desired effect when welding, as it tends to embrittle the site, but may not be a problem for general mild steel welding, where ultimate ductility is not a major concern.
Carbon dioxide () is produced by all aerobic organisms when they metabolize carbohydrate and lipids to produce energy by respiration.
For example, carbanions as provided by  Grignard reagents and organolithium compounds react with CO2 to give carboxylates:
Yet, other studies show a decrease in cognitive function even at much lower levels.
Being diprotic, carbonic acid has two acid dissociation constants, the first one for the dissociation into the bicarbonate (also called hydrogen carbonate) ion (HCO3−):
Although carbon dioxide is the greenhouse gas primarily responsible for the rise, methane, nitrous oxide, ozone, and various other long-lived greenhouse gases also contribute.
corals) and their dependent species."
Atmospheric carbon dioxide is the primary source of carbon in life on Earth and its concentration in Earth's pre-industrial atmosphere since late in the Precambrian was regulated by photosynthetic organisms and geological phenomena.
Higher CO2 concentrations are associated with occupant health, comfort and performance degradation.
Carbon dioxide extinguishers work well on small flammable liquid and electrical fires, but not on ordinary combustible fires, because although it excludes oxygen, it does not cool the burning substances significantly and when the carbon dioxide disperses they are free to catch fire upon exposure to atmospheric oxygen.
Carbon dioxide has also been widely used as an extinguishing agent in fixed fire protection systems for local application of specific hazards and total flooding of a protected space.
High concentrations of CO2 produced by disturbance of deep lake water saturated with CO2 are thought to have caused 37 fatalities at Lake Monoun, Cameroon in 1984 and 1700 casualties at Lake Nyos, Cameroon in 1986.
Some fire extinguishers, especially those designed for electrical fires, contain liquid carbon dioxide under pressure.
At the Bossoleto hot spring near Rapolano Terme in Tuscany, Italy, situated in a bowl-shaped depression about  in diameter, concentrations of CO2 rise to above 75% overnight, sufficient to kill insects and small animals.
Concentrations also vary on a regional basis, most strongly near the ground with much smaller variations aloft.
The canary is more sensitive to asphyxiant gases than humans, and as it became unconscious would stop singing and fall off its perch.
In urban areas concentrations are generally higher and indoors they can reach 10 times background levels.
Consequently, it may be obtained directly from natural carbon dioxide springs, where it is produced by the action of acidified water on limestone or dolomite.
Natural sources include volcanoes, hot springs and geysers, and it is freed from carbonate rocks by dissolution in water and acids.
When used for MIG welding, CO2 use is sometimes referred to as MAG welding, for Metal Active Gas, as CO2 can react at these high temperatures.
Carbon dioxide is colorless.
The earliest description of solid carbon dioxide was given by Adrien-Jean-Pierre Thilorier, who in 1835 opened a pressurized container of liquid carbon dioxide, only to find that the cooling produced by the rapid evaporation of the liquid yielded a "snow" of solid CO2.
The two C=O bonds are equivalent and are short (116.3 pm), consistent with double bonding.
In particular, with decreasing alkalinity, the availability of carbonates for forming shells decreases, although there's evidence of increased shell production by certain species under increased CO2 content.
This discovery confirmed the theory that carbon dioxide could exist in a glass state similar to other members of its elemental family, like silicon (silica glass) and germanium dioxide.
International Maritime Organization standards also recognize carbon dioxide systems for fire protection of ship holds and engine rooms.
While the effects of observed ocean acidification on the marine biosphere are as yet undocumented, the progressive acidification of oceans is expected to have negative impacts on marine shell-forming organisms (e.g.
There are few studies of the health effects of long-term continuous CO2 exposure on humans and animals at levels below 1% and there is potentially a significant risk to humans in the near future with rising atmospheric CO2 levels associated with climate change.
Increased atmospheric CO2 concentrations result in fewer stomata developing on plants which leads to reduced water usage and increased water-use efficiency.
It does not itself react to extinguish the flame, but starves the flame of oxygen by displacing it.
Carbon dioxide has attracted attention in the pharmaceutical and other chemical processing industries as a less toxic alternative to more traditional solvents such as organochlorides.
For this reason, other gases such as nitrogen or argon are preferred for this process by professional wine makers.
Conversely, a rise in the partial pressure of CO2 or a lower pH will cause offloading of oxygen from hemoglobin, which is known as the Bohr Effect.
Solid carbon dioxide is called "dry ice" and is used for small shipments where refrigeration equipment is not practical.
It is used in the preparation of some aerogels because of the properties of supercritical carbon dioxide.
Elevated CO2 levels cause increased growth reflected in the harvestable yield of crops, with wheat, rice and soybean all showing increases in yield of 12–14% under elevated CO2 in FACE experiments.
: ''n''  + ''n''  →  + ''n''
In humans, this carbon dioxide is carried through the venous system and is breathed out through the lungs, resulting in lower concentrations in the arteries.
This approach can increase original oil recovery by reducing residual oil saturation by between 7 per cent to 23 per cent additional to primary extraction.
Since it is centrosymmetric, the molecule has no electrical dipole.
Some of these chemical species are consumed by photosynthetic organisms that remove carbon from the cycle.
Another study observed a decline in basic activity level and information usage at 1000 ppm, when compared to 500 ppm.
Under normal conditions, calcium carbonate is stable in surface waters since the carbonate ion is at supersaturating concentrations.
Carbon dioxide was first liquefied (at elevated pressures) in 1823 by Humphry Davy and Michael Faraday.
This carries the risk that unconsciousness may result before the need to breathe becomes overwhelming, which is why hyperventilation is particularly dangerous before free diving.
Adaptation to increased concentrations of CO2 occurs in humans, including modified breathing and kidney bicarbonate production, in order to balance the effects of blood acidification (acidosis).
The global automobile industry is expected to decide on the next-generation refrigerant in car air conditioning.
Liquid carbon dioxide is a good solvent for many lipophilic organic compounds and is used to remove caffeine from coffee.
Though a growing forest will absorb many tons of CO2 each year, a mature forest will produce as much CO2 from respiration and decomposition of dead specimens (e.g., fallen branches) as is used in photosynthesis in growing plants.
Several studies suggested that 2.0 percent inspired concentrations could be used for closed air spaces (e.g.
The physiological effects of acute carbon dioxide exposure are grouped together under the term hypercapnia, a subset of asphyxiation.
This form of glass, called ''carbonia'', is produced by supercooling heated CO2 at extreme pressure (40–48 GPa or about 400,000 atmospheres) in a diamond anvil.
This reduction in pH affects biological systems in the oceans, primarily oceanic calcifying organisms.
It is a versatile industrial material, used, for example, as an inert gas in welding and fire extinguishers, as a pressurizing gas in air guns and oil recovery, as a chemical feedstock and in liquid form as a solvent in decaffeination of coffee and supercritical drying.
At this CO2 concentration, International Space Station crew experienced headaches, lethargy, mental slowness, emotional irritation, and sleep disruption.
In very alkaline water (pH > 10.4), the predominant (>50%) form is carbonate.
* The rate at which reef-building corals produce their skeletons decreases, while production of numerous varieties of jellyfish increases.
Corals, coccolithophore algae, coralline algae, foraminifera, shellfish and pteropods experience reduced calcification or enhanced dissolution when exposed to elevated .
A study of humans exposed in 2.5 hour sessions demonstrated significant effects on cognitive abilities at concentrations as low as 0.1% (1000ppm) CO2 likely due to CO2 induced increases in cerebral blood flow.
Volcanoes emit between 0.2 and 0.3 billion tons of carbon dioxide per year, while human activities emit about 29 billion tons.
Coca-Cola has fielded CO2-based beverage coolers and the U.S. Army is interested in CO2 refrigeration and heating technology.
The relative concentrations of , and the deprotonated forms  (bicarbonate) and (carbonate) depend on the pH.
Studies using FACE have shown that CO2 enrichment leads to decreased concentrations of micronutrients in crop plants.
The carbon dioxide content of the blood is often given as the partial pressure, which is the pressure which carbon dioxide would have had if it alone occupied the volume.
ASHRAE Standard 62.1–2007 ventilation rates may result in indoor levels up to 2,100 ppm above ambient outdoor conditions.
Carbon dioxide is sometimes used to top up wine bottles or other storage vessels such as barrels to prevent oxidation, though it has the problem that it can dissolve into the wine, making a previously still wine slightly fizzy.
The equation for the respiration of glucose and other monosaccharides is:
A review of CO2 systems identified 51 incidents between 1975 and the date of the report, causing 72 deaths and 145 injuries.
Most of the remaining 50-55% is methane.
Concentrations in poorly ventilated spaces can be found even higher than this (range of 3,000 or 4,000).
A person's breathing rate influences the level of CO2 in their blood.
Carbon dioxide is produced during the processes of decay of organic materials and the fermentation of sugars in bread, beer and winemaking.
Carbon dioxide is a greenhouse gas, absorbing and emitting infrared radiation at its two infrared-active vibrational frequencies (see Structure and bonding above).
(see Sustainable automotive air conditioning)
This has caused an increase in hydrogen ion (acidity) of about 30% since the start of the industrial age through a process known as "ocean acidification."
Carbon dioxide is a by-product of the fermentation of sugar in the brewing of beer, whisky and other alcoholic beverages and in the production of bioethanol.
As part of the carbon cycle, plants, algae, and cyanobacteria use light energy to photosynthesize carbohydrate from carbon dioxide and water, with oxygen produced as a waste product.
On November 12, 2015, NASA scientists reported that human-made carbon dioxide (CO2) continues to increase above levels not seen in hundreds of thousands of years: currently, about half of the carbon dioxide released from the burning of fossil fuels remains in the atmosphere and is not absorbed by vegetation and the oceans.
Carbon dioxide is also used as an atmosphere for welding, although in the welding arc, it reacts to oxidize most metals.
This naturally occurring chemical compound is composed of a carbon atom covalently double bonded to two oxygen atoms.
It is produced by combustion of wood, carbohydrates and fossil fuels such as coal, peat, petroleum and natural gas.
Most of the CO2 taken up by the ocean, which is about 30% of the total released into the atmosphere, forms carbonic acid in equilibrium with bicarbonate.
The reduction of CO2 to CO is ordinarily a difficult and slow reaction:
Carbon dioxide induction is commonly used for the euthanasia of laboratory research animals.
As shown in a Bjerrum plot, in neutral or slightly alkaline water (pH > 6.5), the bicarbonate form predominates (>50%) becoming the most prevalent (>95%) at the pH of seawater.
They have widespread uses in industry because they can be used to neutralize waste acid streams.
'''Carbon dioxide''' (chemical formula '''CO2''') is a colorless and odorless gas vital to life on Earth.
It is present in deposits of petroleum and natural gas.
In addition to conventional processes using CO2 for chemical production, electrochemical methods are also being explored at a research level.
