If a person is in a rhythm not convertible by a defibrillator, then cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) or more advanced care should be started.
:; Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy : Increased pressure results in hypertrophy of the myocardium, particularly left ventricular hypertrophy.
::; Aortic valve repair: Repair, instead of replacement, of the aortic valve.
::; Pulmonary regurgitation / pulmonary insufficiency : Deficiency of the pulmonary valve that permits regurgitation from the pulmonary artery into the right ventricle.
To be a cardiologist in the United States, a three-year residency in internal medicine is followed by a three-year fellowship in cardiology.
This can exist in isolation or as a part of situs inversus in which the entire body is mirrored not just the heart.
To classify a ventricular rhythm as vtach, at least 3 beats in a row must originate from the ventricles and have a rate over 100.
AED's have increased in popularity and dispersal so that people with cardiac arrest in public can be cardioverted to a safer rhythm before help can arrive.
Stenosis commonly occurs from calcification of the valve, which happens prematurely in those with a bicuspid aortic valve.
Causes include infections (tuberculosis, fungus, parasites) and surgery.
::; Aortic stenosis: Narrowing of the aortic valve opening that reduces blood flow through the valve.
; Transposition of the great vessels (TGV) : Abnormal spatial arrangement of the great vessels (superior vena cava, inferior vena cava, pulmonary arteries, pulmonary veins, and aorta).
Stable angina results if the angina resolves with rest or nitroglycerin, but can progress to unstable angina which is a form of acute coronary syndrome.
; Carotid artery: Diseases of the carotid arteries:
Rhythmic contraction is necessary for efficient movement of blood, and fibrillation disrupts this rhythm sufficiently to cause cardiac arrest.
Unlike the systemic organs the heart receives perfusion in the phase of diastole rather than systole.
::; Mitral regurgitation / mitral insufficiency : Deficiency of the mitral valve that permits regurgitation from the left ventricle into the left atrium.
The first two are myocardial infarctions which are more commonly known as "heart attacks."
::; Mitral valve repair: Repair, instead of replacement, of the mitral valve.
Modern stethoscopes can have a diaphragm and a bell, and be sized for adults or children.
There are numerous causes of asystole that may be reversible if determined quickly enough, however, survival is very unlikely (~2% if not in a hospital).
Stenosis of the aortic valve produces a harsh systolic murmur that classically radiates in the carotid arteries as well as ''pulsus parvus et tardus''.
; Hypoplastic left heart syndrome: Defect in the development of the left heart such that it is hypoplastic (under developed).
:; Optical coherence tomography (OCT): Testing through the use of optical scattering for coronary artery disease.
Like PACs, they can be found in healthy hearts but are more likely to be found in bigeminy than PACs.
Performed by cardiothoracic surgeons, a sternotomy is performed to open the chest and then grafts are performed.
One additional example is the use of high potassium in lethal injection that results in asystole, cardiac arrest, and then death.
; Stenting: Enlarging the lumen of an artery by forcibly expanding it with a metal wire tube by means of catheterization.
; Enhanced external counterpulsation (EECP): Pneumatically assisting the heart to move blood using inflatable cuffs on the legs.
:; Fractional flow reserve (FFRmyo): Testing the blood flow through a stenosis of a coronary artery to determine the perfusion of the heart.
; Vasculitis: Inflammation of blood vessels (veins & arteries) with a long list of causes.
Treatment of heart failure, like most secondary disorders, depends upon treatment of the primary cause which includes CAD & MI but also valvular problems like aortic stenosis and hypertension.
Currently, the only definitive treatment is delivery of the fetus.
It is a benign tumor most commonly found in the left atrium and can be associated with Carney syndrome.
:; Transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE): Echocardiogram of the heart through the esophagus.
Rupture of the aorta can occur at the sites of aneurysm, but is also due to trauma and results in a traumatic aortic rupture.
It is the most common form of non-ischemic cardiomyopathy and the dilitation of the heart results in larger chamber volumes & thinner myocardial walls, both of which decrease the ability to pump.
In comparison to DCM, RCM is often secondarily caused by other diseases such as amyloidosis, scleroderma, hemachromatosis (iron overload) and eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis.
:; Constrictive pericarditis: Pericarditis that constricts the expansion of the heart and inhibits heart function.
Recognized sub-specialties in the United States by the ACGME are:
Pulmonary hypertension — which is separate from "hypertension" described above — can result in right ventricular hypertrophy.
If not significant enough, the wall can develop into a ventricular aneurysm.
:; Infective endocarditis : Commonly affects the valves due to absence of blood supply to the heart valve, which results in a decreased immune response to the valve leaflets.
; Coronary artery disease (CAD): Coronary artery disease is a general term for any reduction in coronary circulation.
One very common cause is diabetes mellitus in which microangiopathy results in diabetic nephropathy, diabetic retinopathy, and diabetic neuropathy.
; Premature atrial contractions (PACs or APCs) : Normal beats originate in the SA node and extra beats originating from the atria are called PACs.
Perhaps confusingly, heart failure can be caused by coronary artery disease (CAD) and myocardial infarction (MI) that result in a deficiency in pumping that then leads to heart failure.
A cardioplegic solution is used to stop the heart from beating and combination with hypothermia reduces oxygen demand of the heart significantly (>97%) such that surgery is possible without causing damage.
:; Essential hypertension : Hypertension with no known cause, which is about 90-95% of people with hypertension.
; Patent foramen ovale (PFO) : An atrial septal defect in that the foramen ovale fails to close at birth.
Some obvious exceptions that affect the function of the heart would be blood tests (electrolyte disturbances, troponins), decreased oxygen carrying capacity (anemia, hypovolemic shock), and coagulopathies.
However, there is a concern
The grafts are used to provide an alternate path for blood flow around a stenosis.
; Holter monitor: Portable ECG device for continuous monitoring.
Thickening of the myocardium (i.e., hypertrophy) can be physiological (a normal response) or pathological.
As such, the treatment for RCM is to treat the disease causing the RCM.
Definitive diagnosis requires a biopsy.
::; Mitral valve prolapse: Prolapse of the mitral valve into the left atrium during ventricular systole.
:; Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA; aka Wegener's granulomatosis) : Affects small- & medium-sized vessels that often affects the lung & kidneys (RPGN) with classic saddle nose and c-ANCA antibodies.
; Supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) : A collection of tachycardia rhythms that originate before the ventricles and include the SA node, atria, and AV node.
::; Restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM) : Cardiomyopathy caused by excessive rigidity of the heart that prevents effective contraction and pumping.
However the insertion of stents and pacemakers are performed by cardiologists.
Other causes include pulmonary hypertension and COPD as well as several congenital heart defects like ventricular septal defect, tetralogy of Fallot and hypoplastic left heart syndrome.
Treatment of CAD includes angioplasty, stenting, and coronary artery bypass surgery (CABG).
; Heart cancer: Cancer of the heart is very rare and those cancers tend to be benign.
:; Carotid artery stenosis / carotid artery disease : Narrowing of the carotid artery, typically due to atherosclerosis.
Specifically, types I, III, & IV manipulate ion channels while the others are not.
Combined, the RCA, LCx, and LAD comprise the three main coronary arteries (e.g., "three vessel disease").
Due to the widespread nature of hypertension, cardiologists will end up managing or recommending treatments for essential hypertension.
:; Cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) / heart-lung machine: External pump to take over the function of both the heart and lungs.
Agitated saline can be used as contrast for blood flow and microbubbles for capillary blood flow contrast.
Commonly a result of myocardial infarction that weakens the wall sufficiently to result in frank rupture and is typically seen 7–10 days after infarction.
Typically, the artery is expanded first through angioplasty (see PTCA above).
* Interventional cardiology: The use of catheters for the treatment of structural and ischemic diseases of the heart.
; Uhl anomaly : Partial or total loss of the right ventricular wall.
This is important in those predisposed to blood clots (e.g., Factor V Leiden) but also for thrombus formation when an atherosclerotic plaque rupture that would, otherwise, lead to myocardial infarction.
The third is manipulation of enzymes.
; Ebstein's anomaly : Malformation of the tricuspid valve (see above).
The aortic valve is the most common valve affected (followed by mitral, tricuspid, & then pulmonary).
It is a very rare disorder.
Deflation during systole decreases afterload (vacuum effect), thus decreasing myocardial oxygen demand, and inflates during diastole to increase diastolic pressure which increases coronary artery perfusion of the endocardium (the heart perfuses itself during diastole, not systole).
Commonly used in cardiothoracic surgery when the heart is being operated on for such surgeries like open valve replacement or CABG on the posterior side of the heart.
:; Defibrillator: Electrical devices to alter the heart's rhythm with electrical energy.
; Great artery defects : There are several conditions that affect the great arteries (e.g., double aortic arch, aberrant subclavian artery) that often result in problems with the trachea and breathing.
; Electrocardiography (ECG or EKG): Measurement of the electrical activity of the heart, typically with 4 or 10 electrodes on the skin.
Surgical repair of a AAA is advised after it is larger than 5.0-5.5 cm because of concern for rupture that leads to death from internal bleeding.
It can be used to cardiovert atrial fibrillation if certain conditions are met, but is mainly used to cardiovert ventricular fibrillation which is life-threatening.
; Electrophysiology study: Studying the electrical activity of the heart through the use of catheters placed in the heart via veins or arteries.
* Cardiac electrophysiology: Study of the electrical properties and conduction diseases of the heart.
; Coronary catheterization: Catheterization of the coronary arteries.
:; Secondary hypertension : Most causes of secondary hypertension are from kidney and endocrine disorders.
Heart failure is one condition in which the mechanical properties of the heart have failed or are failing, which means insufficient blood is being circulated.
The field includes medical diagnosis and treatment of congenital heart defects, coronary artery disease, heart failure, valvular heart disease and electrophysiology.
PACs, like PVCs, can pair up with normal beats in a pattern called bigeminy.
:; Aortitis : Inflammation of the aorta that can be seen in giant cell arteritis, polymyalgia rheumatica, rheumatoid arthritis, syphilis and Takayasu's arteritis.
; Endarterectomy : Enlarging the lumen of an artery by removal of atherosclerotic plaque by means of open surgery.
Progression to eclampsia involves seizures.
Cardiovascular causes of hypertension include coarctation of aorta, atherosclerosis, and aortic stenosis.
::; Tricuspid regurgitation / tricuspid insufficiency : Deficiency of the tricuspid valve that permits regurgitation from the right ventricle into the right atrium.
; Asystole ("flatline") : Asystole refers to the absence of electrical activity of the heart and is sometimes referred to as a "flatline" because the electrocardiogram shows a solid line due to the absence of electrical activity.
::; Mitral stenosis: Narrowing of the mitral valve opening that reduces blood flow through the valve.
Electronic stethoscopes can amplify and record sounds.
This is primarily done on the carotid arteries (Carotid endarterectomy or CEA) but was first performed on the superficial femoral artery.
:; Hypertensive crisis : Generally considered to be a systolic blood pressure over 180.
; Ventricular fibrillation: Ventricular fibrillation is fibrillation of the ventricles of the heart.
; Myocarditis : Infection and inflammation of the myocardium is myocarditis.
In cardiology, it is primarily used to listen to heart sounds it can also be used to listen for bruits (carotid & renal for renal artery stenosis), bowel sounds, and lung sounds.
Disorders of the coronary circulation can have devastating effects to the heart that results in a downward spiral of worse circulation leading to worse heart function leading to worse circulation and so on.
It is a broad, encomparsing term that includes other rhythms in this list (e.g., afib with RVR) and others.
; Devices used to maintain normal electrical rhythm:
; Uhl anomaly : A congenital heart defect in which the right ventricular myocardium is too thin or absent.
It presents as sudden heart failure with ECG changes similarly found in myocardial infarction and typically is found in post-menopausal women.
Typically, "vtach" implies monomorphology but it can be an umbrella term for both monomorphic and polymorphic (i.e., torsade de pointes).
There are numerous other drugs (e.g., dobutamine, ephedrine, isoproterenol) that manipulate the adrenergic receptors and have variable specificity for the receptors and are, thus, used for various reasons.
The hallmark signs of heart failure include shortness of breath (especially on exertion, at night, or while lying down) and leg swelling.
; Torsades de pointes : A polymorphic arrhythmia that can be syptomatic and tends to resolve to a normal sinus rhythm.
It can be an inherited disorder or be acquired.
:; Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (EGPA; aka Churg-Strauss syndrome) : Affects small- & medium-sized vessels that often affects lungs, kidneys, & heart in those with a history of airway allergic hypersensitivity and p-ANCA antibodies.
; Cardiac stress test: Testing of the cardiovascular system through controlled exercise or drugs.
; Complications of hypertension
; Atherectomy : Enlarging the lumen of an artery by removal of atherosclerotic plaque by means of catheterization.
; Aortic rupture : Frank rupture of the aorta is often fatal from internal bleeding.
Physicians who specialize in cardiac surgery are called '''cardiothoracic surgeons''' or '''cardiac surgeons''', a specialty of general surgery.
Specifically, it can lead to torsades de pointes than can then lead to ventricular fibrillation.
Pediatric cardiology is a specialty of pediatrics.
:; Nonbacterial thrombotic endocarditis (NBTE) : Growths on the valves that are not from an infectious source and are composed of fibrin and platelets, and is associated with a history of rheumatic fever.
:; Mitral valve: Disorders and treatments of the mitral valve that separates the left atrium and left ventricle.
:; Myxoma: Most common tumor of the heart.
A simple chest xray is sufficient to diagnose dextrocardia, provided care is taken in marking the correct side of the radiograph.
This is in contrast to angioplasty that does not remove the plaque but merely pushes it out of the way to increase the lumen size.
It is a form of PCI and generally what is implied when referring to "PCI."
* Clinical cardiac electrophysiology
The internal mammary artery or saphenous vein can be used as grafts.
Cardiology is a specialty of internal medicine.
There are several causes of sudden cardiac death and it is distinct from cardiac arrest.
This method is primarily used in peripheral disease, but has been used for coronary disease as well.
Certain medications are associated with lengthening of the QT interval — drug-induced QT prolongation — and an EKG may be warranted before starting the medication to ensure a normal QT interval, but this practice is debated.
Occlusion of the ophthalmic artery results in blindness.
; Tetralogy of Fallot (ToF) : Set of four anatomical abnormalities: pulmonary stenosis, overriding aorta, ventricular septal defect, and right ventricular hypertrophy.
::; Tricuspid stenosis : Narrowing of the tricuspid valve opening that reduces blood flow through the valve.
The list of causes is lengthy but includes pericarditis, rheumatic diseases (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus), trauma, and blood from myocardial rupture.
For example, coronary artery bypass surgery (CABG) and cardiopulmonary bypass are both surgical procedures performed by surgeons, not cardiologists.
:; Carotid artery dissection: Dissection along the length of the carotid artery between the layers of the carotid wall and filled with blood.
Dissection of the ascending aorta is an emergency because dissection may interrupt coronary blood flow and blood flow to the brain, neither of which tolerate ischemia particularly well.
Regurgitation produces a systolic murmur that radiates into the axilla.
; Ventricular fibrillation (vfib) : Fibrillation of the ventricles is a life-threatening arrhythmia and should be treated by defibrillation and is a medical emergency.
If there is no organ dysfunction it is called a hypertensive urgency, but if there is (e.g., confusion, breathlessness) then it is called hypertensive emergency.
; Ventricular tachycardia (vtach) : Tachycardia that originates from within the ventricles.
; Premature ventricular contractions (PVCs) : Normal beats are conducted through the AV node to the ventricles resulting in a narrow QRS complex.
They can also cause tachycardia and hypotension.
; Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) : Procedures to treat stenotic coronary arteries by accessing through a blood vessel.
This tends to affect the left atrium more than the right atrium.
; Deep vein thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism (PE) : Formation of a thrombus in a deep vein, commonly in the legs that may break loose, travel to the lungs, and occlude blood flow (pulmonary embolism) sufficient to interrupt oxygenation to the body.
Angiotensin II receptor antagonists (ARBs) block the angiotensin II receptors that are linked to hypertension and heart failure, mainly through vasodilation & heart remodeling inhibition.
While not performed on coronary arteries, it is mentioned here for completeness.
The surgical aspects are not included in cardiology and are in the domain of cardiothoracic surgery.
:; Aortic aneurysm: Aneurysm of the aorta, typically of the abdominal aorta (abdominal aortic aneurysm or AAA).
Can be referred to RVAD or LVAD depending on if it's attached to the right or left ventricle.
Suspicion of GCA necessitates immediate treatment with glucocorticoids and temporal artery biopsy.
:; Giant-cell arteritis (GCA) / Temporal arteritis : Affects medium- & large-sized vessels of the head, typically branches of the external carotid artery and namely the temporal artery.
:; Libman–Sacks endocarditis : A form of nonbacterial endocarditis specific to systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and tends to affect the mitral valve (unlike NBTE which affects the aortic valve).
* Nuclear cardiology: The use of nuclear medicine to visualize the uptake of an isotope by the heart using radioactive sources.
; Varicose veins: Veins that have become enlarged and tortuous with failed valves, commonly in the legs.
; Dextrocardia : Dextrocardia is a condition in which the apex of the heart is on the right side of the body, instead of the left.
All cardiologists study the disorders of the heart, but the study of adult and child heart disorders are through different training pathways.
Situs inversus can be a part of primary ciliary dyskinesia (aka Kartagener syndrome) that has recurrent respiratory infections and male infertility.
:; IgA vasculitis (IgAV; aka Henoch-Schönlein purpura) : Affects small-sized vessels and produces palpable purpura and proteinuria from immunocomplex (IgA) deposition.
Myocardial infarction from coronary thrombosis is the most common cause of death from Kawasaki disease.
If an effusion worsens then the fluid can inhibit heart function and symptoms of cardiac tamponade appear.
Physicians who specialize in this field of medicine are called '''cardiologists''', a specialty of internal medicine.
; Long QT syndrome : Lengthening of the QT interval can result in arrhythmias and sudden cardiac death.
:::; Mitral valvuloplasty: Repair of the valve by using a balloon catheter to force it open.
The right atrium becomes hypertrophied and can result in conduction defects (e.g., Wolff–Parkinson–White syndrome).
; Cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging (CMR): Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the heart that utilizes the ECG for gating and to look at specific mechanical functions of the heart.
Special rulers can be used to measure the intervals as well.
Definitive surgery is a pericardiectomy.
:; Intravascular ultrasound (IVUS): Ultrasonography of a coronary artery.
:; Pre-eclampsia (PreE) / Eclampsia : PreE is a disease of pregnancy that results in hypertension and proteinuria.
; Aortic dissection: Dissection along the length of the aorta between the layers of the aortic wall.
PreE has negative consequences for both the mother and fetus/baby.
There are several classes of pharmaceutical drugs used in cardiology to manage various diseases and a lot of drugs have cardiovascular side effects.
:; Artificial heart: An internal pump that wholly replaces the pumping action of the heart.
Pain, diminished pulses, gangrene and eventual amputation of affected hands and feet.
Pericarditis is commonly seen with Behçet's.
; Microangiopathy : Disease of capillaries in which the walls become thick and weak, and result in bleeding and decreased blood flow.
Often utilizes the Doppler effect to determine blood flow through valves (stenosis & regurgitation) and through the septum (ASD & VSD).
; Restenosis: Recurrence of stenosis after being treated (e.g., stenting).
Management is through medications and blood pressure that does not respond is a red flag that it may be secondary hypertension.
:::; Tachycardia induced cardiomyopathy: A type of dilated cardiomyopathy caused by chronic tachycardia.
; Sphygmomanometer: Blood pressure cuff used to measure arterial blood pressure.
; Pulseless ventricular tachycardia: Pulseless ventricular tachycardia (VT) Is one classification of VT such that no pulse is felt because of an ineffective cardiac output which causes cardiac arrest, which also results in insufficient oxygen delivery to the body.
Endocarditis commonly affects the heart valves.
Treatment includes pericardiocentesis to drain the fluid, if necessary, and treatment of the underlying cause.
; Cardiac marker: Testing for biomarkers in the blood that may indicate various conditions.
; Heart failure: Heart failure is failure of the heart to produce sufficient blood flow to meet metabolic demands of the body, or to do so at higher filling pressures.
:::; Alcoholic cardiomyopathy: A type of dilated cardiomyopathy caused by chronic abuse of alcohol and results from direct toxicity of ethanol on the myocardium.
Catecholamines are a set of drugs and hormones that manipulate the adrenergic receptors.
:; Cor pulmonale: Untreated cor pulmonale can cause right heart failure from chronic pulmonary hypertrophy.
The classic finding is pulsus paradoxus as well as Beck's triad (low arterial blood pressure, distended neck veins, & soft heart sounds).
'''Cardiology''' (from Greek  ''kardiā'', "heart" and  ''-logia'', "study") is a branch of medicine dealing with disorders of the heart as well as parts of the circulatory system.
