Until the Roman conquest of Britain, Cardiff was part of the territory of the Silures – a Celtic British tribe that flourished in the Iron Age – whose territory included the areas that would become known as Breconshire, Monmouthshire and Glamorgan.
However, the Victorian castle stands on the footings of a much older medieval castle possibly built by Ifor Bach, a regional baron with links to Cardiff Castle also.
All hospitals in Cardiff are administered by the Cardiff and Vale University Health Board, with the exception of the Velindre site which is run by a separate trust.
Since 1916 Cardiff has been the seat of a Catholic archbishop, but there appears to have been a fall in the estimated Catholic population, with estimated numbers in 2006 being around 25,000 less than in 1980.
During this period the Cardiff Bay Development Corporation was promoting the redevelopment of south Cardiff; an evaluation of the regeneration of Cardiff Bay published in 2004 concluded that the project had "reinforced the competitive position of Cardiff" and "contributed to a massive improvement in the quality of the built environment", although it had failed "to attract the major inward investors originally anticipated".
The battle, between a Royalist rebellion and a New Model Army detachment, was a decisive victory for the Parliamentarians and allowed Oliver Cromwell to conquer Wales.
It was the centre of the Norman Marcher Lordship of Glamorgan and by the end of the 13th century, Cardiff was the only town in Wales with a population exceeding 2,000, although it remained relatively small compared with most notable towns in the Kingdom of England, and continued to be very much contained by its walls, which has begun as a wooden palisade in the early 12th century.
The local authority area had a population of 346,100 at the 2011 census, compared to a 2001 Census figure of 305,353.
The castle was substantially altered and extended during the Victorian period by John Crichton-Stuart, 3rd Marquess of Bute, and the architect William Burges.
Cardiff is one of the top ten retail destinations in the UK, with two main shopping streets (Queen Street and St. Mary Street), and three main shopping arcades; St. David's Centre, Queens Arcade and the Capitol Centre.
For local government purposes, Cardiff is divided into communities.
Today, there are over 2000 Hindus in Cardiff, worshiping at three temples across the city.
Cardiff's only American flag football team are the Hurricanes.
When complete, the ISV complex will provide Olympic standard facilities for sports including boxing and fencing, gymnastics, judo, white water events (including canoeing and kayaking) and wrestling as well as a snow dome with real snow for skiing and snowboarding, an Arena for public ice skating and ice hockey and an hotel.
Bomb damage during the Cardiff Blitz in World War II included the devastation of Llandaff Cathedral, and in the immediate postwar years the city's link with the Bute family came to an end.
Tall buildings have been built in the city centre and Cardiff Bay, and more are planned.
The main local newspaper, the South Wales Echo and the national paper the Western Mail are based in Park Street in the city centre.
Sporting venues in the city include the Millennium Stadium (the national stadium for the Wales national rugby union team), SWALEC Stadium (the home of Glamorgan County Cricket Club), Cardiff City Stadium (the home of Cardiff City football team), Cardiff International Sports Stadium (the home of Cardiff Amateur Athletic Club) and Cardiff Arms Park (the home of Cardiff Blues and Cardiff RFC rugby union teams).
The centre was named the international shopping centre of the year in 2010 by Retail Leisure International (RLI).
In 2010, Cardiff was named the UK's second 'most musical' city by PRS for Music.
There are seven NHS hospitals in the city, the largest of which is the University Hospital of Wales.
"Inner Cardiff" consists of the following wards: Plasnewydd, Gabalfa, Roath, Cathays, Adamsdown and Splott ward on the north and east of the city centre, and Butetown, Grangetown, Riverside and Canton to the south and west.
The northern part of the county, being higher and inland—for example, The Garth (), about  north west of Cardiff city centre, (elevation )—tends to be cooler and wetter than the city centre.
According to the Welsh Rugby Union, the Millennium Stadium has contributed £1 billion to the Welsh economy in the ten years since it opened (1999), with around 85% of that amount staying in the Cardiff area.
Further local government restructuring in 1996 resulted in Cardiff city's district council becoming a unitary authority, the City and County of Cardiff, with the addition of Creigiau and Pentyrch.
Google Street View is available throughout Cardiff.
Cardiff is bordered to the west by the rural district of the Vale of Glamorgan—also known as The Garden of Cardiff— to the east by the city of Newport, to the north by the South Wales Valleys and to the south by the Severn Estuary and Bristol Channel.
Cardiff has a comprehensive bus network, with municipal bus company Cardiff Bus providing the vast majority of routes in the city and to Newport, Barry and Cardiff International Airport, its hub is Cardiff Central Bus Station.
The highest percentage of Welsh speakers in the city-centre is in Canton, where 19.1% of the population speak the language.
In 1766, John Stuart, 1st Marquess of Bute married into the Herbert family and was later created Baron Cardiff, and in 1778 he began renovations on Cardiff Castle.
Current developments include the continuation of the redevelopment of the Cardiff Bay and city centre areas with projects such as the Cardiff International Sports Village, a BBC drama village, and a new business district in the city centre.
Also, performers such as the Automatic, Manic Street Preachers, Lostprophets, Super Furry Animals, Catatonia and Bullet for My Valentine have links with the city and are associated with the Cardiff music scene.
The town grew rapidly from the 1830s onwards, when the Marquess of Bute built a dock, which eventually linked to the Taff Vale Railway.
Cardiff has many cultural sites varying from the historical Cardiff Castle and out of town Castell Coch to the more modern Wales Millennium Centre and Cardiff Bay.
In particular, there is a large independent TV production industry sector of over 600 companies, employing around 6000 employees and with a turnover estimated at £350 m. Just to the north west of the city, in Rhondda Cynon Taff, the first completely new film studios in the UK for 30 years are being built, named Valleywood.
This means that almost 53,000 people from a non-white ethnic group reside in the city.
The National History Museum at St Fagans in Cardiff is a large open-air museum housing dozens of buildings from throughout Welsh history that have been moved to the site in Cardiff.
Most clubs and bars are situated in the city centre, especially St. Mary Street, and more recently Cardiff Bay has built up a strong night scene, with many modern bars & restaurants.
Industry has played a major part in Cardiff's development for many centuries.
Cardiff Story, a museum documenting the city's history, has been open to the public since Spring 2011.
It is possible to cycle the entire distance of the Trail almost completely off-road, as it largely follows the River Taff and many of the old disused railways of the Glamorganshire valleys.
While the track—a temporary, purpose built, shale oval—is not universally loved, the venue is considered the best of the World Championship's 11 rounds.
* Radyr and Morganstown
The Cardiff Urban Area covers a slightly larger area outside the county boundary, and includes the towns of Dinas Powys and Penarth.
The Cardiff Larger Urban Zone (a Eurostat definition including the Vale of Glamorgan and a number of local authorities in the Valleys) has 841,600 people, the 10th largest LUZ in the UK.
Founded in 1986, and one of the most successful British teams during the nineties.
Prior to the Big Number Change on 22 April 2000 the area had shorter, six-digit local numbers with an area code of 01222 (with 0222 preceding this, prior to May 1995).
The River Taff winds through the centre of the city and together with the River Ely flows into the freshwater lake of Cardiff Bay.
Cardiff Metropolitan University (formerly UWIC) has campuses in the Llandaff, Cyncoed and city centre areas, and is part of the confederal University of Wales.
The proportion of Cardiff residents declaring themselves to be Hindu, Sikh and Jewish were all considerably higher than the Welsh averages, but less than the UK figures.
The GBP32m Cardiff International Pool in Cardiff Bay, opened to the public on 12 January 2008—part of the GBP1bn International Sports Village (ISV)—is the only Olympic-standard swimming pool in Wales.
At its peak, Cardiff's port area, known as Tiger Bay, became the busiest port in the world and—for some time—the world's most important coal port.
Cardiff is built on reclaimed marshland on a bed of Triassic stones; this reclaimed marshland stretches from Chepstow to the Ely Estuary, which is the natural boundary of Cardiff and the Vale of Glamorgan.
On Sundays in summer the Beacons Bike Bus enables cyclists to take their bikes into the Beacons and then ride back to Cardiff along the Trail.
According to Census 2001 data, Cardiff was the 21st largest urban area.
However, by this time a civilian settlement, or ''vicus'', was established.
Cardiff has one of the longest-established Muslim populations in the UK, started by Yemeni sailors who settled in the city during the 19th century.
The New Theatre was founded in 1906 and completely refurbished in the 1980s.
The area passed through his family until the advent of the Normans in the 11th century.
In Westminster, Cardiff is represented by Jo Stevens (Labour) in Cardiff Central, Craig Williams (Conservative) in Cardiff North, Stephen Doughty (Labour) in Cardiff South and Penarth and Kevin Brennan (Labour) in Cardiff West.
The city is the country's chief commercial centre, the base for most national cultural and sporting institutions, the Welsh national media, and the seat of the National Assembly for Wales.
''Caerdydd'' (the Welsh name of the city) derives from the earlier Welsh form ''Caerdyf''.
The city's indoor track and field athletics sports venue is the National Indoor Athletics Centre, an international athletics and multi sports centre at the University of Wales Institute, Cardiff Campus, Cyncoed.
Heath, Birchgrove, Gabalfa, Mynachdy, Llandaff North, Llandaff,  Llanishen, Radyr, Whitchurch & Tongwynlais, Rhiwbina, Thornhill, Lisvane and Cyncoed lie in an arc from the north west to the north east of the centre.
The University Hospital of Wales is the third largest hospital in the UK and deals with most accidents and emergencies.
The concentration of these castles is indicative of the moveable nature of the border between the Norman lordship of Glamorgan, centred at Cardiff, and its Welsh neighbours to the north.
The  fort established by the Romans near the mouth of the River Taff in 75 AD, in what would become the north western boundary of the centre of Cardiff, was built over an extensive settlement that had been established by the Silures in the 50s AD.
who all play in the Welsh football league system.
The main catalyst for its transformation from a small town into a big city was the demand for coal required in making iron and later steel, brought to the sea by packhorse from Merthyr Tydfil.
Little is known about the fort and civilian settlement in the period between the Roman departure from Britain and the Norman Conquest.
Cardiff Castle has been at the heart of the city ever since.
A large number of concerts are held within the city, the larger ones being performed in St David's Hall, the Motorpoint Arena (previously known as the Cardiff International Arena) and occasionally the Millennium Stadium.
Despite these improvements, Cardiff's position in the Welsh urban hierarchy had declined over the 18th century.
* The vowel of ''start'' may be realised as  or even , so that ''Cardiff'' is pronounced .
Charles Street is also a popular part of the city.
Cardiff Royal Infirmary is located on Newport Road, near the city centre.
Pontprennau is the newest 'suburb' of Cardiff, whilst Old St Mellons has a history going back to the Norman Conquest in the 11th century.
A disastrous flood of the Bristol Channel on 30 January 1607 (now believed to be a tsunami) led to a change in the course of the River Taff and the ruining of St Mary's Parish Church, which was replaced by its chapel of ease, St John the Baptist.
Similar to the shore forts, the fortress was built to protect Britannia from raiders.
Domestic and international air links to Cardiff and South & West Wales are provided from Cardiff Airport (CWL), the only international airport in Wales.
Between mid-2007 and mid-2008, Cardiff was the fastest-growing local authority in Wales with population growth rate of 1.2%.
Cardiff was a finalist in the European Capital of Culture 2008.
St David's Hall (which hosts the Singer of the World competition) has regular performances of classical music and ballet as well as music of other genres.
In addition to Cardiff Castle, Castell Coch (''Red Castle'') is located in Tongwynlais, in the north of the city.
Educational options for Jewish adults are expanding in Cardiff via courses offered by Rabbi Michoel Rose and The Rohr Jewish Learning Institute.
The modern Cardiff accent is distinct from that of the nearby South Wales Valleys.
Between March and October boats depart from Cardiff Bay to take visitors to Flat Holm Island.
The oldest of the non-Christian communities in Wales is Judaism.
Saint Teilo (c. 500 – 9 February c. 560), is the Patron Saint of Cardiff.
This office is home to the organisation's curriculum and assessment centre, which is responsible for overseeing the creation and grading of various IBDP assessments.
The National Assembly for Wales has been based in Cardiff Bay since its formation in 1999.
Cardiff's maximum and minimum monthly temperatures average  (July) and  (February).For Wales, the temperatures average  (July) and  (February).
After a period of decline, Cardiff's port has started to grow again – over 3&nbsp;million tonnes of cargo passed through the docks in 2007.
In the 2001 census 18.8% of the city's population stated they had no religion, while 8.6% did not state a religion.
The Glamorgan coast is the only part of the Celtic Sea that has exposed Jurassic (blue lias) geology.
It is located at the eastern end of the city centre, and also provides services to Cardiff Bay.
The antiquarian William Camden (1551–1623) suggested that the name Cardiff may derive from "Caer-Didi" ("the Fort of Didius"), a name supposedly given in honour of Aulus Didius Gallus, governor of a nearby province at the time when the Roman fort was established.
In no small part due to the historic Anglicisation of the town, in 1404 Owain Glyndŵr burned Cardiff and took possession of the Castle.
The Millennium Stadium hosted 11 football matches as part of the 2012 Summer Olympics, including the games' opening event and the men's bronze medal match.
Penylan, which lies to the north east side of Roath Park, is an affluent area popular with those with older children and the retired.
One result of this is that one in five employees in Cardiff are based in the distribution, hotels and restaurants sector, highlighting the growing retail and tourism industries in the city.
Cardiff claims to have the largest concentration of castles of any city in the world.
The club's new home is the Cardiff City Stadium, which until 2012, they rented to the Cardiff Blues the cities professional rugby union team, the Blues returning to the Arms Park.
Cardiff is sunniest during July, with an average 203.4&nbsp;hours during the month (Wales 183.3&nbsp;hours), and least sunny during December with 44.6&nbsp;hours (Wales 38.5&nbsp;hours).
One of the venues for those Games—The Wales Empire Swimming Pool—was demolished in 1998 to make way for the Millennium Stadium.
The classic Triassic marl, sand and conglomerate rocks are used predominantly throughout Cardiff as building materials.
Cardiff has a suburban rail system known as Valley Lines, which is operated by Arriva Trains Wales.
St. Fagans, home to the Museum of Welsh Life, is protected from further development.
In addition Spire Healthcare has a private hospital in the city which is located in Pentwyn.
The city council has published two articles that argue the 2001 census seriously under reports the population of Cardiff and, in particular, the ethnic minority population of some inner city areas.
Cardiff has over 1,000 listed buildings, ranging from the more prominent buildings such as the castles, to smaller buildings, houses and structures.
In the 1790s a racecourse, printing press, bank and coffee house all opened, and Cardiff gained a stagecoach service to London.
Much of the growth was due to migration from within and outside Wales: in 1841, a quarter of Cardiff's population were English-born and more than 10% had been born in Ireland.
Cardiff is the major transport hub in Wales and is the focus for many arterial road and rail routes that connect the city with the rest of Wales, and with England.
Several out-of-town retail parks exist, such as Newport Road, Culverhouse Cross, Cardiff Gate and Cardiff Bay.
The Cardiff and South Wales Valleys metropolitan area has a population of nearly 1.1&nbsp;million people.
Many of these nations, such as Germany, Italy, Switzerland, Denmark, Canada, Thailand and the Czech Republic are represented by honorary consulates.
By the 1881 census, Cardiff had overtaken both Merthyr and Swansea to become the largest town in Wales.
The original circle stands in Gorsedd Gardens in front of the National Museum while its 1978 replacement is situated in Bute Park.
Cardiff is home to the Welsh media and a large media sector with BBC Wales, S4C and ITV Wales all having studios in the city.
However, the town was soon rebuilt on the same street plan and began to flourish once again.
Ironically given the treatment of Cardiff by Glyndwr, a statue of him was erected in Cardiff Town Hall in the early twentieth century, reflecting the complex and often conflicting cultural identity Cardiff has as the capital of Wales.
A widely used building stone in Cardiff is the yellow-grey Liassic limestone rock of the Vale of Glamorgan, including the very rare "Sutton Stone", a conglomerate of lias limestone and carboniferous limestone.
Likewise, the Jewish population of the city also appears to have fallen—there are two synagogues in Cardiff, one in Cyncoed and one in Moira Terrace, as opposed to seven at the turn of the 20th century.
Annual events in Cardiff that have become regular appearances in Cardiff's calendar include Sparks in the Park, The Great British Cheese Festival, Cardiff Mardi Gras, Cardiff Winter Wonderland, Cardiff Festival and Made in Roath.
Cardiff is also well known for its musicians, such as Ivor Novello, after whom the Ivor Novello Awards are named.
Organised sports have been held in the city since the early 19th century.
His Saint's Day is ninth of February.
In 1907, Cardiff's Coal Exchange was the first host to a business deal for a million pounds Sterling.
Cardiff's driest months are from April to July, with average monthly rainfall fairly consistent, at between .
Cardiff elects four constituency Assembly Members (AMs) to the Assembly, with the individual constituencies for the Assembly being the same as for the UK Parliament.
The inner-city areas to the south of the A4161 road (known as the "Southern Arc") are, with the exception of Cardiff Bay, some of the poorest districts of Wales with low levels of economic activity.
The first mosque in the UK (on the site of what is now known as the Al-Manar Islamic Centre) opened in 1860 in the Cathays district of Cardiff.
In the absence of Roman rule, Wales was divided into small kingdoms; early on, Meurig ap Tewdrig emerged as the local king in Glywysing (which later became Glamorgan).
Coins from the reign of Gratian indicate that Cardiff was inhabited until at least the 4th century; the fort was abandoned towards the end of the 4th century, as the last Roman legions left the province of Britannia with Magnus Maximus.
It also became part of Kibbor hundred.
Since 2000, there has been a significant change of scale and building height in Cardiff, with the development of the city centre's first purpose-built high-rise apartments.
By 1936, their trade was less than half its value in 1913, reflecting the slump in demand for Welsh coal.
Cardiff University was founded by Royal Charter in 1883 as the University College of South Wales and Monmouthshire, is a member of the Russell Group of leading research led universities, having most of its campus in Cathays and the city centre.
As late as 1850, five of the 12 Anglican churches within the current city boundaries conducted their services exclusively in the Welsh language, while only two worshipped exclusively in English.
Cardiff Castle is a major tourist attraction in the city and is situated in the heart of the city centre.
The Welsh language became grouped around a small cluster of chapels and churches, the most notable of which is Tabernacl in the city centre, one of four UK churches chosen to hold official services to commemorate the new millennium.
Barry docks had the advantage of being accessible in all tides, and David Davies claimed that his venture would cause "grass to grow in the streets of Cardiff".
Cardiff became the main port for exports of coal from the Cynon, Rhondda, and Rhymney valleys, and grew at a rate of nearly 80% per decade between 1840 and 1870.
Cardiff has a long association with boxing, from 'Peerless' Jim Driscoll—born in Cardiff in 1880—to more recent, high-profile fights staged in the city.
Cardiff Council says that work to create the Castle Quarter as a pedestrian friendly environment for High Street and St Mary Street is designed to enhance the city centre.
In the 2001 census Cardiff's Muslim population stood at 3.7%, above the UK average (2.7%) and significantly above the Welsh average.
The Welsh Government has its headquarters in Cardiff's Cathays Park where most of its civil servants are based, with smaller numbers in other locations in the city centre, Cathays, Canton, and Cardiff Bay.
A total of 28 countries have a diplomatic presence in Cardiff.
The BBC has announced it is to build new studios in Cardiff Bay to film dramas such as Casualty and Doctor Who, with the BBC intending to double media output from the city by 2016.
The exterior has become a popular location for film and television productions.
This diversity, and especially that of the city's long-established African and Arab communities, has been celebrated in a number of cultural exhibitions and events, along with a number of books which have been published on this subject.
File:Castell Coch frontside January midday.jpg|Castell Coch
Cardiff is unique in Wales in having two permanent stone circles used by the Gorsedd of Bards during Eisteddfodau.
Archaeological evidence from sites in and around Cardiff – the St Lythans burial chamber, near Wenvoe (about four miles (6.4&nbsp;km) west, south west of Cardiff city centre), the Tinkinswood burial chamber, near St Nicholas (about six miles (10&nbsp;km) west of Cardiff city centre), the Cae'rarfau Chambered Tomb, Creigiau (about six miles (10&nbsp;km) north west of Cardiff city centre) and the Gwern y Cleppa Long Barrow, near Coedkernew, Newport (about eight and a quarter miles (13.5&nbsp;km) north east of Cardiff city centre) – shows that people had settled in the area by at least around 6,000 years before present (BP), during the early Neolithic; about 1,500 years before either Stonehenge or the Great Pyramid of Giza was completed.
The A470 is another major road within the city that provides an important link to the north with the Heads of the Valleys road, mid and north Wales.
A town grew up in the shadow of the castle, made up primarily of settlers from England.
Rain falls in Cardiff on 146&nbsp;days during an average year, with total annual rainfall of .
It was likely made up of traders who made a living from the fort, ex-soldiers and their families.
Consequently, smuggling, deliberate shipwrecking and attacks on ships were common.
There are a significant number of nonconformist chapels, an early-20th century Greek Orthodox church and 11 mosques.
An exhibition of the winners and other entries is held in June / July each year.
Further education is also offered at most high schools in the city.
It provides direct services to nearby Bridgend and Newport, long distance 'Cross-Wales' services to Wrexham and Holyhead, and cities such as Bristol, Birmingham, London, Manchester, Edinburgh and Glasgow.
Contemporary with the Saxon Shore Forts of the 3rd and 4th centuries, a stone fortress was established at Cardiff.
Many of these Triassic rocks have a purple complexion, especially the coastal marl found near Penarth.
During the 1990s, London based football club Wimbledon F.C.
After the Napoleonic Wars Cardiff entered a period of social and industrial unrest, starting with the trial and hanging of Dic Penderyn in 1831.
There are also a number of magazines based in the city including Buzz magazine, Primary Times and a monthly ''papur bro'', or Welsh-language community newsletter, called ''Y Dinesydd'' (The Citizen).
The East Moors Steelworks closed in 1978 and Cardiff lost population during the 1980s, consistent with a wider pattern of counter urbanisation in Britain.
Jews were not permitted to live in England and Wales between the 1290 Edict of Expulsion—given by Edward I of England—and the 17th century.
The city was recently placed seventh overall in the top 50 European cities in the fDI 2008 Cities of the Future list published by the fDi magazine, and also ranked seventh in terms of attracting foreign investment.
Original Roman work can, however, still be distinguished in the wall facings.
A Roman villa has been discovered at Ely.
In 2008/09, 61% of Cardiff residents regularly participated in sport and active recreation, the highest percentage out of all 22 local authorities in Wales.
A small town until the early 19th century, its prominence as a major port for the transport of coal following the arrival of industry in the region contributed to its rise as a major city.
Cardiff has held a photomarathon in the city each year since 2004, in which photographers compete to take the best 12 pictures of 12 previously unknown topics in 12 hours.
Cardiff has 3 state nursery schools (one bilingual), 98 state primary schools (two bilingual, fifteen Welsh medium), and 20 state secondary schools (three Welsh medium).
The Castle Quarter is a commercial area in the north of the city centre which includes some of Cardiff's Victorian and Edwardian arcades: Castle Arcade, High Street Arcade and Duke Street Arcade, and principal shopping streets: St Mary Street, High Street, Castle Street and Duke Street.
In 1573, it was made a head port for collection of customs duties.
In 1081 William I, King of England, began work on the castle keep within the walls of the old Roman fort.
Cardiff Cricket Club shared the ground with Cardiff Rugby Football Club (founded 1876) —forming Cardiff Athletic Club between them—until 1966, when the cricket section moved to Sophia Gardens.
File:Bishops palace llandaff.jpg|Bishop's Palace
The building, known as the ''Senedd'' (which translates into English as Legislature, Parliament or Senate) was opened on 1 March 2006, by The Queen.
The city has been home to a sizable Hindu community since Indian immigrants settled there during the 1950s and 1960s.
", and the town gained a second Royal Charter in 1608.
All Wales' multi-sports agencies and many of the country's sports governing bodies have their headquarters in Cardiff and the city's many top quality venues have attracted world-famous sports events, sometimes unrelated to Cardiff or to Wales.
Its geographic features were influential in its development as the world's largest coal port, most notably its proximity and easy access to the coal fields of the south Wales valleys.
Iolo Morgannwg called it "an obscure and inconsiderable place", and the 1801 census found the population to be only 1,870, making Cardiff only the 25th largest town in Wales, well behind Merthyr and Swansea.
Acts who hail from Cardiff include Charlotte Church, Shirley Bassey, Iwan Rheon, the Oppressed, Kids In Glass Houses, Los Campesinos, the Hot Puppies, the School, We're No Heroes, Budgie and Shakin' Stevens.
The Brewery Quarter on St. Mary Street is a recently developed venue for bars and restaurant with a central courtyard.
Other popular parks include Roath Park in the north, donated to the city by the 3rd Marquess of Bute in 1887 and which includes a very popular boating lake; Victoria Park, Cardiff's first official park; and Thompson's Park, formerly home to an aviary removed in the 1970s.
The University Dental Hospital, which provides emergency dental treatment, is also located on this site.
The Liberal Democrats held the largest number of seats and Cllr Rodney Berman was Leader of the Council.
Official estimates derived from the census regarding the city's total population have been disputed.
Some of the sports facilities at the ISV will be used as training venues for the London 2012 Olympics.
Notable schools include Whitchurch High School (the largest in Wales), Fitzalan High School (which is one of the most multi-cultural state schools in the UK), and Ysgol Gyfun Gymraeg Glantaf, which is the largest Welsh medium secondary in Wales.
This was first achieved by the construction of a  long canal from Merthyr (510 feet above sea-level) to the Taff Estuary at Cardiff.
The studios are set to be the biggest in the UK.
Cardiff City have played in the English Football League since the 1920–21 season, climbing to Division 1 after one season.
