When the Palais-Cardinal was complete, he donated it to the Crown, in 1636.
Then, the following year, he schemed with leading nobles (including the King's brother, the duc d'Orléans) to raise a rebellion; he also signed a secret agreement with the King of Spain, who promised to aid the rebels.
As a result, Richelieu was hated by most of the nobility.
An author of various religious and political works (most notably his ''Political Testament''), he sent his agents abroad in search of books and manuscripts for his unrivaled library, which he specified in his will, leaving it to his great-nephew fully funded, should serve, not merely his family but to be open at fixed hours to scholars; the manuscripts alone numbered some 900, bound as codices in red Morocco with the cardinal's arms.
There, Richelieu spent most of his time writing; he composed a catechism entitled ''L'Instruction du chrétien''.
On 11 November 1630, Marie de Médicis and the King's brother, Gaston, duc d'Orléans, secured the King's agreement for the dismissal.
As he felt his death approaching, he named Mazarin, one of his most faithful followers, to succeed him as chief minister to the King.
The palace, renamed the Palais Royal after Richelieu's death, now houses the French Constitutional Council, the Ministry of Culture, and the Conseil d'État.
* Michael Praed in the television series ''The Secret Adventures of Jules Verne'' (2000)
Thus, it became necessary that the younger Richelieu join the clergy.
By restraining the power of the nobility, he transformed France into a strong, centralized state.
The 1666 census of New France, conducted some 20 years after the death of Cardinal Richelieu, showed a population of 3,215 ''habitants'' in New France, many more than there had been only a few decades earlier, but also a great difference in the number of men (2,034) and women (1,181).
Now his right arm was suppurating with tubercular osteitis, and he coughed blood (after his death, his lungs were found to have extensive cavities and caseous necrosis).
The year after, the King nominated Richelieu for a cardinalate, which Pope Gregory XV accordingly granted on 19 April 1622.
Richelieu's spy service, however, discovered the plot, and the Cardinal received a copy of the treaty.
An investigation of subsidence of the church floor enabled the head to be photographed in 1895.
* Appears in the ''Dinosaur King'' anime second season for a few episodes as an antagonist.
The 1935 ''Cardinal Richelieu'', a semi-fictional film treatment of incidents in his career with George Arliss in the role, was based on the play.
Neither side, however, could obtain a decisive advantage, and the conflict lingered on after Richelieu's death.
Born in Paris, Armand du Plessis was the fourth of five children and the last of three sons: he was delicate from childhood, and suffered frequent bouts of ill-health throughout his life.
There, he was a vigorous advocate of the Church, arguing that it should be exempt from taxes and that bishops should have more political power.
Richelieu encouraged Louis XIII to colonize the Americas by the foundation of the ''Compagnie de la Nouvelle France'' in imitation of the Dutch West India Company.
Local and even religious interests were subordinated to those of the whole nation, and of the embodiment of the nation — the King.
Richelieu's motives are the focus of much debate among historians: some see him as a patriotic supporter of the monarchy, while others view him as a power-hungry cynic.
Military action, at first, was disastrous for the French, with many victories going to Spain and the Empire.
His taste also ran to massive silver, small bronzes and works of ''vertu'', enamels and rock crystal mounted in gold, Chinese porcelains, tapestries and Persian carpets, cabinets from Italy and Antwerp and the heart-shaped diamond bought from Alphonse Lopez that he willed to the king.
Among the individuals he patronized was the famous playwright Pierre Corneille.
Richelieu advanced politically by faithfully serving the Queen-Mother's favourite, Concino Concini, the most powerful minister in the kingdom.
In 1619, Marie de Médicis escaped from her confinement in the Château de Blois, becoming the titular leader of an aristocratic rebellion.
To protect the important source of revenue, Richelieu's mother proposed to make her second son, Alphonse, the bishop of Luçon.
The notions of national sovereignty and international law can be traced, at least in part, to Richelieu's policies and theories, especially as enunciated in the Treaty of Westphalia that ended the Thirty Years' War.
When Richelieu came to power, New France, where the French had a foothold since Jacques Cartier, had no more than 100 permanent inhabitants.
Luckily for him, Richelieu was a bon français, just like the king, who had already decided to subsidize the Dutch to fight against the Spanish via the Treaty of Compiègne in June 1624, prior to Richelieu's appointment to Prime minister in August.
At the age of nine, young Richelieu was sent to the College of Navarre in Paris to study philosophy.
His family, although belonging only to the lesser nobility of Poitou, was somewhat prominent: his father, François du Plessis, seigneur de Richelieu, was a soldier and courtier who served as the Grand Provost of France; his mother, Susanne de La Porte, was the daughter of a famous jurist.
At about this time, Richelieu became a friend of François Leclerc du Tremblay (better known as "''Père Joseph''" or "Father Joseph"), a Capuchin friar, who would later become a close confidant.
The clergy, nobility, and high bourgeoisie were either exempt or could easily avoid payment, so the burden fell on the poorest segment of the nation.
Charlton Heston, Tcheky Karyo, Stephen Rea, Tim Curry and Vincent Price are just a few of the actors to have portrayed Cardinal Richelieu on film and television.
Cinq-Mars had become the royal favourite by 1639, but, contrary to Cardinal Richelieu's belief, he was not easy to control.
In 1627, Richelieu ordered the army to besiege the Huguenot stronghold of La Rochelle; the Cardinal personally commanded the besieging troops.
As an advocate for Samuel de Champlain and of the retention of New France, he founded the Compagnie des Cent-Associés and saw the Treaty of Saint-Germain-en-Laye return Quebec City to French rule under Champlain, after the settlement had been taken by the Kirkes in 1629.
He is depicted as cruel and scheming, the true power behind the throne, and also as wheelchair-bound, although at the time of the events depicted, Richelieu was not bed-ridden, as he later became.
Because of his closeness to Richelieu, and the grey colour of his robes, Father Joseph was also nicknamed ''l'Éminence grise'' ("the Grey Eminence").
In 1641, he participated in the comte de Soissons' failed conspiracy against Richelieu, but was not discovered.
He considered the Dutch Republic as one of France's most important allies, for it bordered directly with the Spanish Netherlands and was right in the middle of the Eighty Years War with Spain at that time.
During the French Revolution, the corpse was removed from its tomb, and the mummified front of his head, having been removed and replaced during the original embalming process, was stolen.
Protestant forces, however, were defeated in 1629; Rohan submitted to the terms of the Peace of Alais.
His legacy is also important for the world at large; his ideas of a strong nation-state and aggressive foreign policy helped create the modern system of international politics.
This in part allowed the colony to eventually develop into the heartland of Francophone culture in North America.
He funded the literary careers of many writers.
The architect of the Palais-Cardinal, Jacques Lemercier, also received a commission to build a château and a surrounding town in Indre-et-Loire; the project culminated in the construction of the Château Richelieu and the town of Richelieu.
The agreement would have prohibited French interference in Germany.
Towards the end of his life, Richelieu alienated many people, including Pope Urban VIII.
After he was appointed to the royal council of ministers on 29 April 1624, he intrigued against the chief minister, Charles, duc de La Vieuville.
He sought to consolidate royal power and crush domestic factions.
The retention and promotion of Canada under Richelieu allowed it&nbsp;— and through the settlement's strategic location, the St. Lawrence – Great Lakes gateway into the North American interior&nbsp;— to develop into a French empire in North America—parts of which eventually became modern Canada and Louisiana.
To further consolidate power in France, Richelieu sought to suppress the influence of the feudal nobility.
Richelieu is also known by the sobriquet ''l'Éminence rouge'' ("the Red Eminence"), from the red shade of a cardinal's clerical dress and the style "eminence" as a cardinal.
Richelieu's early decision to support a Protestant canton against the Pope was a foretaste of the purely diplomatic power politics he would espouse in his foreign policy.
The 1839 play ''Richelieu; Or the Conspiracy'', by Edward Bulwer-Lytton, portrayed Richelieu uttering the now famous line, "The pen is mightier than the sword."
Earlier, the nation's political structure was largely feudal, with powerful nobles and a wide variety of laws in different regions.
Alphonse, who had no desire to become a bishop, became instead a Carthusian monk.
Moreover, the King of England, Charles I, declared war on France in an attempt to aid the Huguenot faction.
His body was embalmed, and interred at the church of the Sorbonne.
Indeed, in the subsequent years it would be France, under the leadership of Louis XIV, who would attempt to fill the vacuum left by the Habsburgs in the Spanish Netherlands, and supplant Spain as the dominant European power.
Cardinal de Richelieu was often known by the title of the king's "Chief Minister" or "First Minister".
He is also a leading character in ''The Three Musketeers'' by Alexandre Dumas and its numerous film adaptations.
Moreover, Louis took advantage of his nation's success during the Thirty Years' War to establish French hegemony in continental Europe.
Samuel de Champlain, governor of New France at the time of Richelieu, saw intermarriage between French and Indians as a solution to increase population in its colony.
Michelangelo's two ''Slaves'' were among the rich appointments of the château Richelieu, where there were the Nativity triptych by Dürer and paintings by Mantegna, Lorenzo Costa and Perugino, lifted from the Gonzaga collection at Mantua by French military forces in 1630, as well as numerous antiquities.
The young marquis realized that Richelieu would not permit him to gain political power.
However, the conflict ended in 1648, with France emerging in a far better position than any other power, and the Holy Roman Empire entering a period of decline.
In a later episode, the cardinal—again played by Michael Palin – is shortly seen doing an impersonation of Petula Clark singing "Don't Sleep in the Subway".
The Queen-Mother was also restored to the royal council.
Louis XIII was not, at first, averse to such a course of action, as he personally disliked Richelieu.
He has given his name to a battleship and a battleship class.
Richelieu, however, was aware of the plan, and quickly convinced the King to repent.
The only important rising was that of Henri, duc de Montmorency in 1632; Richelieu, ruthless in suppressing opposition, ordered the duke's execution.
Like Concini, the Bishop was one of the closest advisors of Louis XIII's mother, Marie de Médicis.
Thus, Richelieu's policies were the requisite prelude to Louis XIV becoming the most powerful monarch, and France the most powerful nation, in all of Europe during the late seventeenth century.
The Canadian historian and philosopher John Ralston Saul has referred to Richelieu as the "father of the modern nation-state, modern centralised power and the modern secret service."
As a result, religious toleration for Protestants, which had first been granted by the Edict of Nantes in 1598, was permitted to continue, but the Cardinal abolished their political rights and protections.
Later, Richelieu often used him as an agent during diplomatic negotiations.
As he neared death, Richelieu faced a plot that threatened to remove him from power.
In 1622, Richelieu was elected the ''proviseur'' or principal of the Sorbonne.
In 1618, the King, still suspicious of the Bishop of Luçon, banished him to Avignon.
Another series of portraits of authors complemented the library.
With the Queen in residence, the paintings of the ''Grand Cabinet'' were transferred to Fontainebleau and replaced by copies, and the interiors were subjected to much rearrangement.
Richelieu crushed the revolts violently, and dealt with the rebels harshly.
'''Armand Jean du Plessis, Cardinal-Duke of Richelieu and of Fronsac''' (; 9 September 1585 – 4 December 1642), commonly referred to as '''Cardinal Richelieu''' ( ), was a French clergyman, nobleman, and statesman.
Richelieu was displeased by the Pope's refusal to name him the papal legate in France; in turn, the Pope did not approve of the administration of the French church, or of French foreign policy.
Raymond Massey played Richelieu in ''Under the Red Robe'' (1937), based on Stanley J. Weyman's swashbuckling novel of the same title.
Another obstacle to the centralization of power was religious division in France.
Among his 300 paintings by moderns, most notably, he owned Leonardo's ''Virgin and Child with Saint Anne'', ''The Family of the Virgin'' by Andrea del Sarto, the two famous ''Bacchanales'' of Nicolas Poussin, as well as paintings by Veronese and Titian, and ''Diana at the Bath'' by Rubens, for which he was so glad to pay the artist's heirs 3,000 ''écus'', that he made a gift to Rubens' widow of a diamond-encrusted watch.
Richelieu oversaw the construction of his own palace in Paris, the Palais-Cardinal.
As he was Bishop of Luçon, his statue stands outside the Luçon cathedral.
Richelieu was also the founder and patron of the Académie française, the pre-eminent French literary society.
He was a lover of the theatre, which was not considered a respectable art form during that era; a private theatre was a feature of the Palais-Cardinal.
The family appropriated most of the revenues of the bishopric for private use; they were, however, challenged by clergymen, who desired the funds for ecclesiastical purposes.
His private life seems to have been typical of a young officer of the era: in 1605, aged twenty, he was treated by Théodore de Mayerne for gonorrhea.
He became the first bishop in France to implement the institutional reforms prescribed by the Council of Trent between 1545 and 1563.
In 1631, he allied France to Sweden, who had just invaded the empire, in the Treaty of Bärwalde.
Richelieu's financial scheme, however, caused unrest among the peasants; there were several uprisings in 1636 to 1639.
Habsburg Spain exploited the French conflict with the Huguenots to extend its influence in northern Italy.
Meanwhile, Marie de Médicis was exiled to Compiègne.
For many years he had suffered from recurrent fevers (possibly malaria), strangury, intestinal tuberculosis with fistula, and migraine.
The ''taille'' was enforced to provide funds to raise armies and wage war.
A less renowned aspect of his legacy is his involvement with Samuel de Champlain and the fledgling colony along the St. Lawrence River.
While a powerful political figure, events like the Day of the Dupes show that in fact he very much depended on the king's confidence to keep this power.
Richelieu was also famous for his patronage of the arts; most notably, he founded the Académie Française, the learned society responsible for matters pertaining to the French language.
Military expenses placed a considerable strain on the King's revenues.
since 1672, that role has been fulfilled by the French head of state.
In 1606 King Henry IV nominated Richelieu to become Bishop of Luçon.
He also ensured his political security by establishing a large network of spies in France as well as in other European countries.
Because he openly aligned France with Protestant powers, Richelieu was denounced by many as a traitor to the Roman Catholic Church.
Soon after the dissolution of the Estates-General, Richelieu entered the service of King Louis XIII's wife, Anne of Austria, as her almoner.
The Cardinal had been a friend of Cinq-Mars' father.
Richelieu did not survive to the end of the Thirty Years' War.
However, in May 1626, when war costs had almost ruined France, king and cardinal made peace with Spain via the Treaty of Monçon.
To counter Spanish designs on the territory, Richelieu supported the Protestant Swiss canton of Grisons, which also claimed the strategically important valley.
Parts of the nobility periodically conspired against the King, raised private armies, and allied themselves with foreign powers.
The ''Galerie de l'avant-cour'' had ceiling paintings by the Cardinal's chief portraitist, Philippe de Champaigne, celebrating the major events of the Cardinal's career; the ''Galerie des hommes illustres'' had twenty-six historicizing portraits of great men, larger than life, from Abbot Suger to Louis XIII; some were by Simon Vouet others were careful copies by Philippe de Champaigne  from known portraits; with them were busts of Roman emperors.
To the château, he added one of the largest art collections in Europe and the largest collection of ancient Roman sculpture in France.
He had strong academic interests, and threw himself into studying for his new post.
More importantly, Richelieu hoped that Cinq-Mars would become Louis' favourite, so that he could indirectly exercise greater influence over the monarch's decisions.
Thereafter, the King was unwavering in his political support for him.
The nobility also remained powerless.
Although he was a cardinal, he did not hesitate to make alliances with Protestant rulers in attempting to achieve his goals.
To collect taxes more efficiently, and to keep corruption to a minimum, Richelieu bypassed local tax officials, replacing them with ''intendants'' (officials in the direct service of the Crown).
The latter image gained further currency due to Alexandre Dumas' ''The Three Musketeers'', which depicts Richelieu as a self-serving and ruthless de facto ruler of France.
Complex negotiations bore fruit when the Treaty of Angoulême was ratified; Marie de Médicis was given complete freedom, but would remain at peace with the King.
His nephew, Louis-Philippe Armez, inherited it and also occasionally exhibited it and lent it out for study.
However, the conflict was largely healed when the Pope granted a cardinalate to Jules Mazarin, one of Richelieu's foremost political allies, in 1641.
He was the most prominent clergyman to support the adoption of the decrees of the Council of Trent throughout France; the Third Estate (commoners) was his chief opponent in this endeavour.
He was consecrated as a bishop in 1607 and was appointed Foreign Secretary in 1616.
The King and the duc de Luynes recalled Richelieu, believing that he would be able to reason with the Queen.
The city, however, remained firm for over a year before capitulating in 1628.
The persuasive statesman convinced his master of the wisdom in his plans, however.
At the end of the assembly, the First Estate (the clergy) chose him to deliver the address enumerating its petitions and decisions.
The library was transferred to the Sorbonne in 1660.
Likewise an earlier 1923 silent film was produced ''Under the Red Robe'' directed by Alan Crosland.
It ended up in the possession of Nicholas Armez of Brittany by 1796, and he occasionally exhibited the well-preserved face.
Although the Huguenots suffered a major defeat at La Rochelle, they continued to fight, led by Henri, duc de Rohan.
Richelieu was a famous patron of the arts.
He is usually portrayed as a sinister character, but the 1950 ''Cyrano de Bergerac'' shows Richelieu (played by Edgar Barrier in a scene not from Rostand's original verse drama), as compassionate to Cyrano's financial plight, and  playfully having enjoyed the duel at the theatre.
As a result, both Marie and Concini became the targets of intrigues at court; their most powerful enemy was Charles de Luynes.
English troops under the Duke of Buckingham led an expedition to help the citizens of La Rochelle, but failed abysmally.
On 26 November 1629, he was created duc de Richelieu and a Peer of France.
When, in 1630, French diplomats in Regensburg agreed to make peace with Spain, Richelieu refused to support them.
Despite troubled relations with the Roman Catholic Church, Richelieu did not support the complete repudiation of papal authority in France, as was advocated by the Gallicanists.
Richelieu, however, responded aggressively; after La Rochelle capitulated, he personally led the French army to northern Italy to restrain Spain.
Both Marie and the duc d'Orléans continued to conspire against Richelieu, but their schemes came to nothing.
As Richelieu had not yet reached the official minimum age, it was necessary that he journey to Rome for a special dispensation from the Pope.
This day, known as the Day of the Dupes, was the only one on which Louis XIII took a step toward dismissing his minister.
Crises in France, including a rebellion of the Huguenots, rendered Richelieu a nearly indispensable advisor to the King.
In 1625 Richelieu also sent money to Ernst von Mansfeld, a famous mercenary general operating in Germany in English service.
Thereafter, he began to train for a military career.
Spain was meanwhile seeking papal approval for a universal monarchy.
Despite such arguments, Richelieu remains an honoured personality in France.
In the next year, Richelieu's position was seriously threatened by his former patron, Marie de Médicis.
As of April 2013, the Internet Movie Database lists ninety-four films and television programs in which Cardinal Richelieu is a character.
Rohan was not executed (as were leaders of rebellions later in Richelieu's tenure); in fact, he later became a commanding officer in the French army.
Thus, he stripped the princes, dukes, and lesser aristocrats of important defences that could have been used against the King's armies during rebellions.
Cinq-Mars was promptly arrested and executed; although Louis approved the use of capital punishment, he grew more distant from Richelieu as a result.
In 1866, Napoleon III persuaded Armez to return the face to the government for re-interment with the rest of Richelieu's body.
This secured, Richelieu was consecrated bishop in April 1607.
He censored the press, established a large network of internal spies, forbade the discussion of political matters in public assemblies such as the Parlement de Paris (a court of justice), and had those who dared to conspire against him prosecuted and executed.
However, Richelieu was now dying.
This peace quickly broke down after tensions due to the War of Mantuan Succession.
Richelieu was instrumental in redirecting the 30 Years' War from the conflict of Protestantism versus Catholicism to that of nationalism versus Habsburg hegemony.
Other portrayals include:
The defeat of Habsburg forces at the Battle of Lens, and their failure to prevent French invasion of Catalonia effectively spelled the end for Habsburg domination of the continent, and Olivares' personal career.
The fittings of his chapel in the Palais-Cardinal, for which Simon Vouet executed the paintings, were of solid gold—crucifix, chalice, paten, ciborium, candelsticks—set with 180 rubies and 9,000 diamonds.
This system gave way to centralized power under Richelieu.
* Peter Capaldi in the television series ''The Musketeers'' (2014)
That same year, a military expedition, secretly financed by France and commanded by Marquis de Coeuvres, started an action with the intention of liberating the Valtelline from Spanish occupation.
Richelieu died on 4 December 1642, aged 57.
In 1629, the Emperor Ferdinand II subjugated many of his Protestant opponents in Germany.
At that time northern Italy was a major strategic item in Europe's balance of powers, serving as a link between the Habsburgs in the Empire and in Spain.
Richelieu soon rose in both the Catholic Church and the French government, becoming a cardinal in 1622, and King Louis XIII's chief minister in 1624.
Richelieu was successful in this endeavour, mediating between her and her son.
Richelieu is also notable for the authoritarian measures he employed to maintain power.
In 1614, the clergymen of Poitou asked  Richelieu to be one of their representatives to the States-General.
The Académie française includes forty members, promotes French literature, and remains the official authority on the French language.
Had the imperial armies dominated this region, France's very existence would have been threatened by Habsburg encirclement.
His marble portrait bust by Bernini was not considered a good likeness and was banished to a passageway.
On 12 August of the same year, La Vieuville was arrested on charges of corruption, and Cardinal Richelieu took his place as the King's principal minister the following day, although Cardinal de la Rochefoucauld nominally remained president of the council (Richelieu was officially appointed president in November 1629).
The opening of the first series also featured the painting ''Portrait of Cardinal Richelieu'' by Philippe de Champaigne, with the Cardinal Richelieu cut-out riding a unicycle chasing a woman.
The heavily resurfaced and restored ''Richelieu Bacchus'' continued to be admired by neoclassical artists.
The cardinal had introduced a young man named Henri Coiffier de Ruzé, marquis de Cinq-Mars to Louis XIII's court.
* In the first series of ''Monty Python's Flying Circus'', a surrealist-comic courtroom scene featured Michael Palin playing Cardinal Richelieu as a character witness for the defendant; the character was subsequently shown to be a Cardinal Richelieu impersonator.
In this conflict France effectively drained the already overstretched resources of the Habsburg empire and drove it inexorably towards bankruptcy.
He presided over the renovation of the college's buildings, and over the construction of its famous chapel, where he is now entombed.
King Henry III had rewarded Richelieu's father for his participation in the Wars of Religion by granting his family the bishopric of Luçon.
Unlike the other colonial powers, France encouraged a peaceful coexistence in New France between Natives and Colonists and sought the integration of Indians into colonial society.
* Umberto Eco's novel ''The Island of the Day Before'' (1995) (''L'isola del giorno prima'', 1994), a story about a 17th-century nobleman marooned across the international date line
In response, Richelieu raised the ''gabelle'' (salt tax) and the ''taille'' (land tax).
In the meantime, France and Spain remained hostile due to Spain's ambitions in northern Italy.
He remained in office until his death in 1642; he was succeeded by Cardinal Mazarin, whose career he had fostered.
Richelieu's successes were extremely important to Louis XIII's successor, King Louis XIV.
