When the antler growth is fully grown and hardened, the velvet is shed or rubbed off.
''Rangifer tarandus'' hunting by humans has a very long history, and they "may well be the species of single greatest importance in the entire anthropological literature on hunting."
Young caribou can already outrun an Olympic sprinter when only a day old.
The number of points on male caribou increased from birth to five-years of age and remained relatively constant from then on.
In 2002 the Atlantic-Gaspésie population of the woodland caribou was designated as endangered by COSEWIC.
Each ecotype eats a diet based on the surrounding ecology.
Antlers begin to grow on male caribou in March and on female caribou in May or June.
They are much bigger than the Porcupine caribou "half between a caribou and a moose."
Caribou are an integral part of First Nations and Inuit oral histories and legends including the Gwich'in creation story of how Gwich’in people and the caribou separated from a single entity.
This herd is also traditional food for the Inupiat, Inuvialuit, Hän, and Northern Tutchone.
On Baffin Island, the largest Arctic island, the population of Peary caribou peaked in the early 1990s to approximately 60 000 to 180 000.
In the traditional lifestyle of the Inuit people, in particular the Caribou Inuit, Northern First Nations people, Alaska Natives, the caribou is an important source of food, clothing, shelter, and tools.
Shoulder height typically measure from , and the tail is  long.
Through human activities in northeastern Alberta for example, there have been dramatic changes in forest composition.
The coat is a rich dark brown in summer and dark grey in winter.
There is currently controversy over whether possible future oil drilling on the coastal plains of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, encompassing much of the Porcupine caribou calving grounds, will have a severe negative impact on the caribou population or whether the caribou population will grow.
His father, Joe Highway, was a caribou hunter.
Caribou increased 10-fold in the diet of wolves in northeast Alberta and caribou population trends in the region changed from stable to declining."
However, in North America subspecies ''R.
The calving grounds of the Beverly caribou herd are located around Queen Maud Gulf but the herd shifted its traditional birthing area.
Wolves (''canis lupus'') are the natural and primary predators of caribou.
They are endemic to Canada.
In 1939, they were living the traditional life style at one of their hunting camps in Koyukuk near the location of what is now the Koyukuk National Wildlife Refuge.
Barren-ground caribou have large distinguishing white patches of fur that extend beyond the neck onto the back, a white muzzle and a face that is darker than the rest of the body.
In late August the caribou migrated from the Alaska Range up north to Huslia, Koyukuk, and the Tanana area.
As females select the habitat for the birth of their calves, they are more wary than males.
In the largest caribou—''R.
Caribou are classified by ecotype depending on several behavioural factors - predominant habitat use (northern, tundra, mountain, forest, boreal forest, forest-dwelling), spacing (dispersed or aggregated) and migration (sedentary or migratory).
Woodland caribou was designated as threatened in 2002.
In North America, because of its vast range in a wide diversity of ecosystems, the subspecies ''Rangifer tarandus caribou'' is further distinguished by a number of ecotypes, including boreal woodland caribou, mountain woodland caribou and migratory woodland caribou).
"They ran out of wood for the steamboats, and had to go back down 40 miles to the wood pile to pick up some more wood.
For example, habitat is restored more rapidly with narrow (1.5-2.5) meandering seismic lines than traditional wide (8-m) straight lines.
The "Beverly herd may have declined (similar to other Northwest Territories herds), and cows switched to the neighbouring Ahiak herd to maintain the advantages of gregarious calving."
Although there are remnant populations of ''R.
Geist (2007) argued that the "true woodland caribou, the uniformly dark, small-manned type with the frontally emphasized, flat-beamed antlers", which is "scattered thinly along the southern rim of North American caribou distribution" has been incorrectly classified.
There are many factors contributing to the decline in numbers.
A 2011 survey confirms a continuing decline of the George River migratory caribou herd population.
Bears prey on caribou but are most likely to attack weaker animals, such as calves and sick deer.
Females in good nutritional condition, for example, during a mild winter with good winter range quality, may grow new antlers earlier as antler growth requires high intake.
(Environment Canada, 2011b).
By spring, groups leave their winter grounds to go to the calving grounds.
An adult reindeer will lose perhaps about  of blood to biting insects for every week it spends in the tundra.
Quebec-Labrador bull caribou antlers can be significantly larger and wider than other woodland caribou.
''Rangifer tarandus'' are ruminants, having a four-chambered stomach.
While antlers of bull woodland caribou are typically smaller than barren-ground caribou, they can be over one metre across.
In 1996 the population of the Ahiak herd was approximately 250 000 animals.
Caribou numbers have fluctuated historically, but many herds are in decline across their range.
The Dolphin-Union Caribou herd locally known as '''Island Caribou''', are a migratory population of barren-ground caribou, ''Rangifer tarandus groenlandicus'', that occupy Victoria Island in Canada's High Arctic and the nearby mainland.
In 2011 there were approximately 34 000 boreal caribou in 51 ranges remaining in Canada.
The young protagonists of ''Caribou Song'', like Tomson himself, followed the caribou herd with their families.
According to traditional knowledge woodland caribou are easily distinguishable from Porcupine caribou.
The Western Arctic herd reached a low of 75,000 in the mid-1970s.
Known human dependence on caribou/wild reindeer has a long history, beginning in the Middle Pleistocene and continuing to the present....
The caribou is the official provincial animal of Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada, and appears on the coat of arms of Nunavut.
The caribou ''vadzaih'' is the cultural symbol and a keystone subsistence species of the Gwich'in, just as the buffalo is to the Plains Indians.
t. caribou'' likely survived the Wisconsin glaciation in separate refugia located south of the continental ice sheet, while other ''Rangifer tarandus'' subspecies"—''R.
In 2008, the Teshekpuk Lake herd had 64,107 animals and the Central Arctic herd had 67,000.
Some recent authorities have considered them all valid, even suggesting that they are quite distinct.
t. groenlandicus'' are not designated as threatened, many individual herds—including some of the largest—are declining and there is much concern at the local level.
Adults have a brown to dark-brown coat in summer, becoming grayer in winter.
It is unusual for North American caribou to seasonally cross sea ice and the only other caribou to do so are the Peary caribou who are smaller in size and population.
The woodland caribou have a wider more compact body and wider antlers.
The migrations of porcupine caribou herds are among the longest of any terrestrial mammal.
He affirms that "true woodland caribou is very rare, in very great difficulties and requires the most urgent of attention."
"According to Geist, the "woodland caribou is highly endangered throughout its distribution right into Ontario."
t. caboti'' (Labrador caribou), ''R.
Caribou depend on the cover of the forest for protection from wolf predation but the seismic lines destroy the places they usually hide.
By 2014 the herd was estimated to be about to 14 200 down from 27,600 in 2012, 74 131 in 2010 and 385 000 in 2001.
Blood moving into the legs is cooled by blood returning to the body in a countercurrent heat exchange (CCHE), a highly efficient means of minimizing heat loss through the skin's surface.
It is now possible to reduce or eliminate roads by using remote monitoring techniques for some types of oil and gas well sites.
"Across the range of a species, individuals may display considerable morphological, genetic, and behavioural variability reflective of both plasticity and adaptation to local environments."
"In male caribou, antler mass (but not the number of tines) varies in concert with body mass."
in long, thick hairs that almost uniformly dark brown in summer and nearly gray in winter.
The velvet that covers growing antlers is a highly vascularized skin.
In spite of voluntary hunting quotas—for example in Sachs Harbour—This caribou is a Canadian endemic subspecies.
However, recent DNA analysis from mitochondrial DNA of the remains from those reindeer suggest that the animals from the Queen Charlotte Islands were not genetically distinct from the Canadian mainland reindeer subspecies.
''Rangifer tarandus'' is endangered in the United States in Idaho and Washington.
The Alaskan and barren-ground caribou are greyer than the woodland caribou.
The historic range of the boreal woodland caribou covered over half of present-day Canada, stretching from Alaska to Newfoundland and Labrador and as far south as New England, Idaho, and Washington.
As the density of white-tailed deer increased in the post-industrial period (2005–2009), so did the population of wolves (''Canis lupus''), the primary and natural predator of caribou.
The Bluenose East caribou herd began a recovery with a population of approximately 122 000 in 2010. which is being credited to the establishment of Tuktut Nogait National Park.
While the antler is developing, it is covered in velvet which is rubbed off when the antler bone hardens.
The reindeer, part of the Reindeer Project herds brought north from Siberia via Alaska, joined the WACH on their summer migration and disappeared.
The woodland caribou is the largest of the North American caribou subspecies.
The males (or "bulls") are typically larger (although the extent to which varies in the different subspecies), measuring  in length and usually weighing , though exceptionally large males have weighed as much as .
They start mating when large lakes were frozen over.
The George River caribou herd (GRCH), in the Ungava Peninsula of Quebec and Labrador in eastern Canada was once the world's largest herd with 800,000–900,000 animals.
"During the rut, males engage in frequent and furious sparring battles with their antlers.
Alaska has several herds of ''R t granti''.
Since the mid-1990s, the herd declined sharply and by 2010, it was reduced to 74,131—a drop of up to 92%.
Female caribou keep their antlers until they calve.
The environmental variations play a large part in caribou nutrition, as winter nutrition is crucial to adult and neonatal survival rates.
The meta-population of the more-sedentary subspecies ''R.
Current classifications of ''Rangifer tarandus'', either with prevailing taxonomy on subspecies, designations based on ecotypes, and natural population groupings, fail to capture "the variability of caribou across their range in Canada" needed for effective species conservation and management.
CCHE is present in animals like caribou, fox and moose living in extreme conditions of cold or hot weather as a mechanism for retaining the heat in (or out of) the body.
According to IUCN ''Rangifer tarandus'' as a species is not endangered because of its overall large population and the widespread range.
(Boreal Caribou ATK Reports, 2010-2011) The antler's main beam begins at the brow "extending posterior over the shoulders and bowing so that the tips point forwards.
average male caribou all subspecies
Woodland caribou have disappeared from most of their original southern range.
Ongoing human development of caribou habitat has caused populations of woodland caribou to disappear from their original southern range.
The boreal woodland was designated as threatened in 2002.
The body composition of caribou varies highly with the seasons.
Female caribou can live up to 17 years, and male caribou live about 13 years.
They have been known to eat their own fallen antlers, probably for calcium.
The term "caribou" derives from the Mi'kmaw word "''qalipu''" (pronounced /kah-li-bu/), literally meaning "the shoveller".
In their book entitled ''Mammal Species of the World'', American zoologist Don E. Wilson and DeeAnn Reeder agree with Valerius Geist, specialist on large North American mammals, that this range actually includes several subspecies.
The barren-ground caribou subspecies ''R.
Temperature gradient along the nasal mucosa is under physiological control.
Qamanirjuaq caribou herd which is relatively stable had declined from 496,000 in 1994 to 345,000 in 2008.
Though numbers fluctuate, the herd comprises approximately 169 000 animals (based on a July 2010 photocensus).
1991) Newfoundland caribou are most closely related to other woodland caribou (''R.
The colour of the fur varies considerably, both individually and depending on season and subspecies.
A caribou statue was erected at the center of the Beaumont-Hamel Newfoundland Memorial, marking the spot in France where hundreds of soldiers from Newfoundland were killed and wounded in the First World War and there is a replica in Bowring Park, in St. John's, Newfoundland's capital city.
There is considerable subspecific variation in the size of the antlers (e.g., rather small and spindly in ''R.
These cows are healthier than those without antlers.
According to the then-Canadian Wildlife Service Chief Mammalogist, Frank Banfield, in his often-cited ''A Revision of the Reindeer and Caribou, Genus Rangifer'' (1961), ''R.
Males live 4 years less than the females whose maximum longevity is about 17 years.
The boreal woodland caribou is well-adapted to cold environments with a compact body covered with a thick and long coat (thicker in winter than in summer).
Central barren-ground bull caribou are perhaps the most diverse in configuration and can grow to be very high and wide.
Dugmore, who in 1913 spent considerable time in the field studying Newfoundland woodland caribou at close range, considered this curious clicking sound, made when a caribou was walking or running, which he thought was made by some internal mechanism of the foot, to be one of the caribou's strangest characteristics.
Calves whose mothers do not have antlers are more prone to disease and have significantly higher mortality.
By 2011 there were approximately 124,000 caribou in the combined Beverly/Ahiak herd which represents a "50% or a 75% decline from the 1994 population estimate for the Beverly Herd."
According to thirty-year veteran, David Shackleton, University of British Columbia emeritus professor, who has published widely on ungulates and other large mammals, the clicking sound made by caribou as they walk is caused by small tendons slipping over bone protuberances (sesamoid bones) in their feet.
The barren-ground caribou population on Southampton Island, Nunavut declined by almost 75%, from about 30 000 caribou in 1997 to 7,800 caribou in 2011.
The caribou is a specialist that is well adapted to cooler climates, with hollow-hair fur that covers almost all of its body including its nose, and provides insulation in winter and flotation for swimming.
Innovative language revitalization projects are underway to document the language, and to enhance the writing and translation skills of younger Gwich'in speakers.
These are countercurrent exchange systems with the same fluid, usually blood, in a circuit, used for both directions of flow.
During autumn migrations groups become smaller and they begin to mate.
They mainly eat lichens in winter, especially reindeer moss—the "only large mammal able to metabolize lichen owing to specialized bacteria and protozoa in their gut."
The WACH reached a peak of 490,000 in 2003 and then declined to 325,000 in 2011.
The extinct Queen Charlotte Islands caribou (''R.
The Low Arctic population of Peary caribou was designated as threatened.
They are flattened, compact, and relatively dense.
It became extinct at the beginning of the 20th century.
Biologists call this activity "cratering" because of the crater-like cavity the caribou’s hooves leave in the snow."
t. pearyi'' is endangered, ''R.
Male caribou used their antlers to compete with other males during the mating season.
This study has already shown that the height of vegetation on the seismic trails may be one of the most contributing factors.
Environment Canada reported in 2011 that there were approximately 34 000 boreal caribou in 51 ranges remaining in Canada.
The amount of lichen in a diet decreases in latitude that results in nutritional stress being higher in areas with low lichen abundance.
This increase in infection is a concern for wildlife managers.
According to research based on mitochondrial DNA, "ancestral populations of ''R.
Some populations of the North American caribou, for example, many herds in the subspecies, the barren-ground caribou, and some woodland caribou in Ungava and Labrador, migrate the farthest of any terrestrial mammal, travelling up to  a year, and covering .
However, by 2010, there was a recovery and an increase to 169,000 animals.
The smaller Central Arctic herd (32 000 in 2002).
Caribou across North America range in size.
As temperatures on the tundra rose, the number of black and oestrid flies in the Bathurst barren-ground caribou herd study area in Northwest Territories increased.
Caribou can reach a speed of .
Below the tree line they shift to the forest for winter feeding.
In the woodland caribou, the velvet is brown.
According to the Canadian Wildlife Federation in Canada, "Despite its vast range, the boreal population of woodland caribou boreal ecotype of forest-dwelling woodland caribou has been listed as threatened by the Committee on the Status of Endangered Wildlife in Canada (COSEWIC) since 2002 and endangered in British Columbia.
It was suggested the Ahiak and Beverly herds switched calving grounds and the Beverly may have moved "near the western Queen Maud Gulf coast to the north of the herd’s "traditional" calving ground in the Gary Lakes area north of Baker Lake."
In 1997 the 90,000 WACH changed their migration and wintered on Seward Peninsula where Alaskan reindeer normally wintered.
From November to December, non-breeding females have more body mass than breeding females as non-breeding females were able to focus their energies towards storage during colder months rather than lactation and reproduction.
t. caribou'' are designated as threatened and some individual populations are endangered.
The BEL caribou "spread south from the Beringean refugium in present-day western Yukon, north into the Arctic islands and eastward."
In particular, the caribou was extirpated in many areas of eastern North America in the beginning of the 20th century.
Healthy caribou are faster than their predators including wolves.
In numerous instances, populations of the same subspecies have evolved different demographic and behavioural adaptations, while populations from separate subspecies have evolved similar demographic and behavioural patterns... "Understanding ecotype in relation to existing ecological constraints and releases may be more important than the taxonomic relationships between populations."
So a warmer Arctic climate will produce better vegetation for foraging caribou, this will be offset by increased harassment by insects.
The main cause is predation.
"They tied up for seven days waiting for the caribou to cross.
Caribou have developed adaptions for optimal metabolic efficiency during warm months as well as for during cold months.
According to an international study on caribou populations, the George River and Leaf River herds, and other herds that migrate from Nunavik, Quebec and insular Newfoundland, could be threatened with extinction by 2080.
+ Size male caribou
The ''Porcupine caribou'' or ''Grant's caribou''(''Rangifer tarandus granti'') is a subspecies with a vast range that includes northeastern Alaska and the Yukon, and is therefore cooperatively managed by government agencies and aboriginal peoples from both countries.
Peary caribou and the Dolphin-Union Caribou herd have light slate-grey antler velvet.
They are shy animals whose main food source is arboreal lichens of the mature forests and mainly live in marshes, bogs, lakes, and river regions.
Caribou have been referred to as reindeer or wild reindeer depending on context, specifically in Alaska where attempts were made at importing domesticated reindeer from Siberia.
Professor Marco Musiani of the University of Calgary, said in a statement that "The woodland caribou is already an endangered species in southern Canada and the United States....The warming of the planet means the disappearance of their critical habitat in these regions.
The coat has two layers of fur: a dense woolly undercoat and longer-haired overcoat consisting of hollow, air-filled hairs.
Predation by wolves, bears, coyotes, cougar, and lynx and over-hunting by people in some areas, contribute to the decline of the populations of woodland caribou.
Seventy percent of the diet of woodland caribou consists of arboreal lichen which take hundreds of years to grow and are therefore only found in mature forests.
Incoming cold air is warmed by body heat before entering the lungs, and water is condensed from the expired air and captured before the deer's breath is exhaled, used to moisten dry incoming air and possibly absorbed into the blood through the mucous membranes.
The North American range of caribou extends from Alaska, through the Yukon, the Northwest Territories, Nunavut, into the boreal forest and south through the Canadian Rockies and the Columbia and Selkirk Mountains.
t. dawsoni'' is extinct.
While the subspecies ''R.
In 1980, Slate Island, located in northern Lake Superior, 10&nbsp;km (6.2&nbsp;mi) south of the town of Terrace Bay, where there are no wolves or other predators, had the highest density of woodland caribou in the world with a population peaking at 660.
Wolverines—who are themselves a threatened species in some parts of Canada— can kill adult caribou.
Phylogenetic analyses of caribou reveal that caribou were isolated by the ice sheet into two glacial refugia, a northern Beringia European Lineage (BEL) and North American Lineage (NAL) diverging about 300,000 years ago When the ice sheet melted, the NAL caribou "spread west across the boreal region, and north into the Rocky Mountains."
Porcupine, the barren-ground Bluenose caribou herd, and woodland caribou all occupy Gwich'in land.
Human activities, such as "clear-cutting forestry practices, forest fires, and the clearing for agriculture, roadways, railways, and power lines," favour the conversion of habitats into the preferred habitat of the white-tailed deer-"open forest interspersed with meadows, clearings, grasslands, and riparian flatlands."
The caribou/wild reindeer is thus an animal that has been a major resource for humans throughout a tremendous geographic area and across a time span of tens of thousands of years."
Barren-ground, porcupine caribou and Peary caribou live in the tundra, while the shy woodland caribou, prefers the boreal forest.
Federal and provincial governments concerned about sustainable development and restoration, are waiting for the conclusion of the three-year study (2014-2017) undertaken by the Foothills Research Institute in Hinton, Alberta on human and animal land use in this area.
The "glacial-interglacial cycles of the upper Pleistocene had a major influence on the evolution" of ''Rangifer tarandus'' and other Arctic and sub-Arctic species.
The population of caribou in Pukaskwa National Park has "declined from approximately 30 caribou in the 1970s to an estimated four currently, largely due to predation by wolves and possibly black bears."
One year the steamboat was unable to continue they ran into a caribou herd numbering estimated at a million animals, migrating across the Yukon.
Of particular interest is the body composition and diet of breeding and non-breeding females between seasons.
Just prior to mating, the males of both caribou are in prime condition, fat and ready to battle for mates.
The amount of lichen in a diet is found more in non-pregnant adult diets than pregnant individuals due to the lack of nutritional value.
Males have larger, more-extravagant antlers, but most females have antlers too during part of the year, although some females may have only one antler or no antlers at all.
According to the Grubb, ''Rangifer tarandus'' is "circumboreal in the tundra and taiga" from "Alaska (USA) and Canada including most Arctic islands, and USA (Northern Idaho and the Great Lakes region).
Antler size measured in number of points reflects the nutritional status of the caribou and climate variation of its environment.
Without wolves, caribou can overgraze and out feed their range.
Mosquitoes (''Culicidae''), black flies (''Simuliidae''), and oestrid flies (warble flies) ''Hypoderma tarandi'' and nose bot flies (''Cephenemyia trompe'') harass caribou herds particularly during the prime foraging period which is the post-calving and summer period.
On average the male weighs  and measures  in shoulder height.
They continued their nomadic lifestyle until the 1870s.
through the snow to their favorite food, a lichen known as reindeer moss.
White-tailed deer (''Odocoileus virginianus'') expanded further north and west to Prince George as the land adjacent to the northern Rockies was converted by industry or agriculture into a habitat that is favourable to deer, widespread deciduous vegetation.
