He remained at home for the next six months until he overheard his father speaking hurriedly to a visitor about the boy's future ability to support himself.
His travels were soon interrupted by the war, but his ideas continued to receive attention in England primarily through the efforts of Constance Long.
He returned home to the United States and joined a First-Century Christian evangelical movement known as the Oxford Group (later known as Moral Re-Armament).
They suspected he had epilepsy.
He believed it contributed to his sometimes patriarchal views of women, but these were common in his society.
In 1934, Jung wrote in a Swiss publication, the ''Neue Zürcher Zeitung'', that he experienced "great surprise and disappointment" when the ''Zentralblatt'' associated his name with the pro-Nazi statement.
In 1963 ''Mysterium Coniunctionis'' first appeared in English as part of ''The Collected Works of C. G. Jung''.
Jung described his book as "... an attempt, only partially successful, to create a wider setting for medical psychology and to bring the whole of the psychic phenomena within its purview."
He returned in 1937 to deliver the Terry Lectures, later published as ''Psychology and Religion'', at Yale University.
In 1912 these tensions came to a peak because Jung felt severely slighted after Freud visited his colleague Ludwig Binswanger in Kreuzlingen without paying him a visit in nearby Zurich, an incident Jung referred to as "the Kreuzlingen gesture".
Another primary disagreement with Freud stemmed from their differing concepts of the unconscious.
Thoughtful and insightful, the introvert can sometimes be uninterested in joining the activities of others.
Jung saw Freud's theory of the unconscious as incomplete and unnecessarily negative.
This marked the beginning of an intense correspondence and collaboration that lasted six years and ended in May 1913.
Jung's interest in European mythology and folk psychology has led to accusations of Nazi sympathies, since they shared the same interest.
In October 1925, Jung embarked on his most ambitious expedition, the "Bugishu Psychological Expedition" to East Africa.
Later he concluded that the major insights he had gleaned had to do with himself and the European psychology in which he had been raised.
The relocation brought Emilie Jung in closer contact to her family and lifted her melancholy.
He later reflected that this ceremonial act brought him a feeling of inner peace and security.
He also admits that his field of psychology is not competent in understanding the eastern insight of the Atman ‘the self’.
Six months later, the then 50-year-old Freud sent a collection of his latest published essays to Jung in Zurich.
By 1903, Jung had completed his degree, and was a professor in Vienna, working as a doctor under the psychiatrist Eugen Bleuler in Burghölzli.
There are writings showing that Jung's sympathies were against, rather than for, Nazism.
Ulrich Hoerni, Jung's grandson who manages the Jung archives, decided to publish it to raise the additional funds needed when the Philemon Foundation was founded.
He saw that the state was treated as "a quasi-animate personality from whom everything is expected" but that this personality was "only camouflage for those individuals who know how to manipulate it", and referred to the state as a form of slavery.
Jung stressed the importance of individual rights in a person's relation to the state and society.
Burghölzli was a renowned psychiatric clinic in Zurich and Jung's research had already gained him international recognition.
He recalled that they talked almost unceasingly for thirteen hours.
Another seminar was held in 1923, this one organized by Helton Godwin Baynes (known as Peter), and another in 1925.
They had five children: Agathe, Gret, Franz, Marianne, and Helene.
Jung's mother left Laufen for several months of hospitalization near Basel for an unknown physical ailment.
This event, Jung later recalled, "was when I learned what a neurosis is."
Jung's dissertation, published in 1903, was titled ''On the Psychology and Pathology of So-Called Occult Phenomena.''
He described Ramana as being absorbed in ‘the self’, but admits to not understanding Ramana’s self-realisation or what he actually did do.
The extravert is focused on the outside world of objects, sensory perception and action.
Besides achieving physical and mental health, people who have advanced towards individuation tend to be harmonious, mature and responsible.
Jung began to transcribe his notes into a large red leather-bound book, on which he worked intermittently for sixteen years.
According to them, "During the period in which he worked on this book Jung developed his principal theories of archetypes, collective unconscious, and the process of individuation."
'''Carl Gustav Jung''' (; Swiss ; 26 July 1875&nbsp;– 6 June 1961) was a Swiss psychiatrist and psychotherapist who founded analytical psychology.
His family eventually moved it into a bank vault in 1984.
He did not end his relationship with the ''Zentralblatt'' at this time, but he did arrange the appointment of a new managing editor, Carl Alfred Meier of Switzerland.
Jung had become interested in psychiatry as a student by reading ''Psychopathia Sexualis'' by Richard von Krafft-Ebing.
Falk stated of Jung "In 1934 he published an article that included the following astounding statement, 'The Aryan unconscious has a greater potential than the Jewish unconscious'".
Energetic and lively, the extrovert may lose their sense of self in the intoxication of Dionysian pursuits.
Jung's interest in philosophy and the occult led many to view him as a mystic, although his ambition was to be seen as a man of science.
For six years they cooperated in their work.
Jung went on to say "the main point is to get a young and insecure science into a place of safety during an earthquake".
(The book was later revised and retitled, ''Symbols of Transformation'', in 1922).
Jung would later say that:
Jung left no posthumous instructions about the final disposition of what he called the ''Red Book''.
"Personality Number 1," as he termed it, was a typical schoolboy living in the era of the time.
Constance Long arranged for him to deliver a seminar in Cornwall in 1920.
This was the collective unconscious, where the archetypes themselves resided, usually represented in mythology by a lake or other body of water, and in some cases a jug or other container.
A number of childhood memories made lifelong impressions on him.
The ''persona'', he argues, is a mask for the "collective psyche", a mask that 'pretends' individuality, so that both self and others believe in that identity, even if it is really no more than a well-played ''role'' through which the collective psyche is expressed.
He saw visions and heard voices.
Jung and Freud personally met for the last time in September 1913 for the Fourth International Psychoanalytical Congress in Munich.
One of the alcoholics he brought into the Oxford Group was Ebby Thacher, a long-time friend and drinking buddy of Bill Wilson, later co-founder of Alcoholics Anonymous (AA).
Although the detail of this story is disputed by some historians, Jung himself discussed an Oxford Group member, who may have been the same person, in talks given around 1940.
He also thought that the state "swallowed up people's religious forces", and therefore that the state had "taken the place of God"—making it comparable to a religion in which "state slavery is a form of worship".
During World War I Jung was drafted as an army doctor and soon made commandant of an internment camp for British officers and soldiers (Swiss neutrality obliged the Swiss to intern personnel from either side of the conflict who crossed their frontier to evade capture).
He became, however, aware of the negative impact of these similarities:
Henri Ellenberger called Jung's intense experience a "creative illness" and compared it favorably to Freud's own period of what he called neurasthenia and hysteria.
A thought then came to him—"now you won't have to go to school anymore."
From childhood, he believed that, like his mother, he had two personalities—a modern Swiss citizen and a personality more suited to the eighteenth century.
Though it is widely taken for granted that Jung's relationship with Spielrein included a sexual relationship, this assumption has been disputed, in particular by Henry Zvi Lothane.
The Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI), a popular psychometric instrument, and the concepts of socionics were developed from Jung's theory of psychological types.
He worried at times that he was "menaced by a psychosis" or was "doing a schizophrenia".
This forged welcome links between Jung and influential Americans.
Jung created some of the best known psychological concepts, including Jungian archetypes, the collective unconscious, the psychological complex, and extraversion and introversion.
In 1908, Jung became an editor of the newly founded ''Yearbook for Psychoanalytical and Psychopathological Research.''
The senior Preiswerk was a wealthy professional man, who taught Paul Achilles Jung as his professor of Hebrew.
Falk also stated that Jung edited an Anti-Jewish German Nationalist publication called ''Zentralblatt fur Psychotherapie'', a book Falk states suggested Hitler's ''My Struggle'' should be mandatory reading for psychotherapists.
Based on his study of Christianity, Hinduism, Buddhism, Gnosticism, Taoism, and other traditions, Jung believed that this journey of transformation, which he called individuation, is at the mystical heart of all religions.
Confronted with the reality of his family's poverty, he realized the need for academic excellence.
He fainted three more times but eventually overcame the urge and did not faint again.
Jung goes on to state that he has seen similar cures among Roman Catholics).
The extravert is associated with Dionysus, interested in joining the activities of the world.
After 1938, his travels were confined to Europe.
Letters they exchanged show Freud's refusal to consider Jung's ideas.
Sonu Shamdasani, a historian from London, for three years tried to persuade Jung's heirs to have it published, to which they declined every hint of inquiry.
There followed a decade of active publication, interspersed with overseas travels.
Jung was one of the first people to define introversion and extraversion in a psychological context.
Although she was normal during the day, Jung said that, at night, his mother became strange and mysterious.
He also told other alcoholics what Jung had told him about the importance of a spiritual experience.
Jung became seriously ill on this trip and endured two weeks of delirium in a Calcutta hospital.
In India, he felt himself "under the direct influence of a foreign culture" for the first time.
In 1903, Jung married Emma Rauschenbach, who was a daughter of a wealthy family in Switzerland.
It represented a watershed in the acceptance of psychoanalysis in North America.
Jung also wrote anti-Jewish articles where he made racist statements against Jews such as "The Jew, who is something of a nomad, has never yet created a cultural form of his own and as far as we can see never will".
Jung said that one night he saw a faintly luminous and indefinite figure coming from her room with a head detached from the neck and floating in the air in front of the body.
Jung agreed with Freud's model of the unconscious, what Jung called the "personal unconscious", but he also proposed the existence of a second, deeper form of the unconscious underlying the personal one.
In 1933, this journal published a statement endorsing Nazi positions and Hitler's book ''Mein Kampf''.
Jung returned to the United States the next year for a brief visit.
The therapist then aims to assist the individuation process through which the client (re)gains his "own self" – by liberating the self, both from the deceptive cover of the ''persona'', and from the power of unconscious impulses.
In 2007, two technicians for DigitalFusion, working with the publisher, W. W. Norton & Company, scanned the manuscript with a 10,200-pixel scanner.
Jungian introversion and extraversion is quite different to the modern idea of introversion and extroversion.
Jung influenced quantum mechanics with the idea of synchronicity as a mode of relationship that is not causal, an idea that has influenced Wolfgang Pauli (with whom he developed the notion of ''unus mundus'' in connection with the notion of nonlocality) and some other physicists.
At that time Jung resigned as the chairman of the International Psychoanalytical Association, a position to which he had been elected with Freud's support.
While they contain some remarks on Jung's dissenting view on the libido, they represent largely a "psychoanalytical Jung" and not the theory of analytical psychology, for which he became famous in the following decades.
This rejection caused what Jung described in his 1962 autobiography ''Memories, Dreams, Reflections,'' as a "resounding censure."
His conclusions about symbols, psychological archetypes, and the collective unconscious were inspired, in part, by these experiences.
According to Jung, Freud conceived the unconscious solely as a repository of repressed emotions and desires.
Evidence contrary to Jung’s denials has been adduced with reference to his writings, correspondence and public utterances of the 1930s.
Our main task, he believed, is to discover and fulfill our deep innate potential.
Jung has been accused of Anti-Judaism.
The introvert is focused on the internal world of reflection, dreaming and vision.
He translated and published the first English volume of his collected writings.
During his marriage, Jung engaged in extramarital relationships.
I can't do it better than Jesus.'"
He was a prolific writer, though many of his works were not published until after his death.
Jung proposed that art can be used to alleviate or contain feelings of trauma, fear, or anxiety and also to repair, restore and heal.
"Personality Number 2" was a dignified, authoritative and influential man from the past.
It was published on 7 October 2009, in German with "separate English translation along with Shamdasani's introduction and footnotes" at the back of the book, according to Sara Corbett for ''The New York Times''.
Jung argued that the stages of the alchemists, the blackening, the whitening, the reddening and the yellowing, could be taken as symbolic of individuation&nbsp;— his favourite term for personal growth (75).
Jung noted that occasionally such experiences had been known to reform alcoholics where all else had failed.
Jung was a solitary and introverted child.
In an interview with Carol Baumann in 1948, Jung denied rumors regarding any sympathy for the Nazi movement, saying:
Jung made another trip to America in 1936, giving lectures in New York and New England for his growing group of American followers.
The introvert is likened with Apollo, who shines light on understanding.
In his 1936 essay "Wotan", Jung described the influence of Hitler on Germany as "one man who is obviously 'possessed' has infected a whole nation to such an extent that everything is set in motion and has started rolling on its course towards perdition."
But, studying a psychiatric textbook, he became very excited when he discovered that psychoses are personality diseases.
His father took the boy to be cared for by Emilie Jung's unmarried sister in Basel, but he was later brought back to his father's residence.
His affairs with Sabina Spielrein and Toni Wolff were the most widely known.
The conference at Clark University was planned by the psychologist G. Stanley Hall and included twenty-seven distinguished psychiatrists, neurologists and psychologists.
The two men met for the first time the following year and Jung recalled the discussion between himself and Freud as interminable.
Jung and Freud influenced each other during the intellectually formative years of Jung's life.
in 1909, Jung traveled with Freud and the Hungarian psychoanalyst Sándor Ferenczi to the United States;  they took part in a conference at Clark University in Worcester, Massachusetts.
The Rubin Museum of Art in New York City displayed the original ''Red Book'' journal, as well as some of Jung's original small journals, from 7 October 2009, to 15 February 2010.
After working with the patient for some time and achieving no significant progress, Jung told the man that his alcoholic condition was near to hopeless, save only the possibility of a spiritual experience.
Shortly thereafter, Jung again traveled to the United States and gave the Fordham University lectures, a six-week series, which were published as ''The Theory of Psychoanalysis'' (1912).
It was the publication of Jung's book ''Psychology of the Unconscious'' in 1912, that led to the break with Freud.
He often drew, painted, or made objects and constructions at times of emotional distress, which he recognized as more than recreational.
Unlike Freud's objectivist worldview, Jung's pantheism may have led him to believe that spiritual experience was essential to our well-being, as he specifically identifies individual human life with the universe as a whole.
From Jung's perspective, this replacement of God with the state in a mass society led to the dislocation of the religious drive and resulted in the same fanaticism of the church-states of the Dark Ages—wherein the more the state is 'worshipped', the more freedom and morality are suppressed; this ultimately leaves the individual psychically undeveloped with extreme feelings of marginalization.
Carl Gustav Jung was born in Kesswil, in the Swiss canton of Thurgau, on 26 July 1875 as the second, and first surviving, child of Paul Achilles Jung and Emilie Preiswerk.
At a talk about a new psychoanalytic essay on Amenhotep IV, Jung expressed his views on how it related to actual conflicts in the psychoanalytic movement.
Consequently, their personal and professional relationship fractured—each stating that the other was unable to admit he could possibly be wrong.
In 1912, however, Jung published ''Wandlungen und Symbole der Libido'' (known in English as ''Psychology of the Unconscious''), which made manifest the developing theoretical divergence between the two.
Jung's father was a poor rural pastor in the Swiss Reformed Church; his mother had grown up in a wealthy Swiss family.
Bleuler was already in communication with the Austrian neurologist Sigmund Freud.
Periodically, he would return to the mannequin, often bringing tiny sheets of paper with messages inscribed on them in his own secret language.
When Jung was six months old, his father was appointed to a more prosperous parish in Laufen, but the tension between his parents was growing.
In Jung’s ''Psychological Types'', he theorizes that each person falls into one of two categories, the introvert and the extravert.
Hindu philosophy became an important element in his understanding of the role of symbolism and the life of the unconscious, though he avoided a meeting with Ramana Maharshi.
Jung de-emphasized the importance of sexual development and focused on the collective unconscious: the part of unconscious that contains memories and ideas that Jung believed were inherited from ancestors.
At the age of twelve, shortly before the end of his first year at the Humanistisches Gymnasium in Basel, Jung was pushed to the ground by another boy so hard that he momentarily lost consciousness.
Emilie was the youngest child of Samuel Preiswerk and his wife.
whereas Jungian introversion and extraversion is expressed as a perspective: introverts interpret the world ''subjectively'', whereas extraverts interpret the world ''objectively''.
From then on, whenever he walked to school or began homework, he fainted.
He became familiar with Freud's idea of the unconscious through reading Freud's ''The Interpretation of Dreams'' (1899).
Thacher told Wilson about the Oxford Group, and through them Wilson became aware of Hazard's experience with Jung.
While Jung spoke, Freud suddenly fainted and Jung carried him to a couch.
Jung died on 6 June 1961 at Küsnacht, after a short illness.
The influence of Jung thus indirectly found its way into the formation of Alcoholics Anonymous, the original twelve-step program, and from there into the whole twelve-step recovery movement, although AA as a whole is not Jungian and Jung had no role in the formation of that approach or the twelve steps.
His work has been influential not only in psychiatry but also in philosophy, anthropology, archaeology, literature, and religious studies.
(Jung later recognized that the incident was his fault, indirectly.)
Jung's ideas on religion gave a counterbalance to the Freudian scepticism of religion.
In Africa, his conversations had been strictly limited by the language barrier, but in India he was able to converse extensively.
Emilie Jung's continuing bouts of absence and often depressed mood influenced her son's attitude towards women&nbsp;— one of "innate unreliability".
After the culminating break in 1913, Jung went through a difficult and pivotal psychological transformation, exacerbated by the outbreak of the First World War.
Jung worked to improve the conditions of soldiers stranded in neutral territory and encouraged them to attend university courses.
''Mysterium Coniunctionis'' was Jung's last book and focused on the "''Mysterium Coniunctionis''" archetype, known as the sacred marriage between sun and moon.
Jung emerged from his period of isolation in the late nineteen-teens with the publication of several journal articles, followed in 1921 with ''Psychological Types'', one of his most influential books.
In November 1912, Jung and Freud met in Munich for a meeting among prominent colleagues to discuss psychoanalytical journals.
The central concept of analytical psychology is individuation—the psychological process of integrating the opposites, including the conscious with the unconscious, while still maintaining their relative autonomy.
The marriage lasted until Emma's death in 1955.
But he also makes it quite explicit that it is, in substance, a ''character mask'' in the classical sense known to theatre, with its double function: both intended to make a certain impression to others, and to hide (part of) the true nature of the individual.
They embody humane values such as freedom and justice and have a good understanding about the workings of human nature and the universe.
Jung's work on himself and his patients convinced him that life has a spiritual purpose beyond material goals.
Jung did not plan to study psychiatry since it was not considered prestigious at the time.
This constituted the introduction of some of the key concepts which came to distinguish Jung's work from Freud's in the next half century.
Although Jung was close to both parents, he was disappointed by his father's academic approach to faith.
In 1906 he published ''Studies in Word Association,'' and later sent a copy of this book to Freud.
After three years of living in Laufen, Paul Jung requested a transfer; he was called to Kleinhüningen, next to Basel in 1879.
He went into his father's study and began poring over Latin grammar.
In December 1937, Jung left Zurich again for an extensive tour of India with Fowler McCormick.
The above claims are documented in the letters of Jung and Bill Wilson, excerpts of which can be found in ''Pass It On'', published by Alcoholics Anonymous.
While he did think that libido was an important source for personal growth, unlike Freud, Jung did not believe that libido alone was responsible for the formation of the core personality.
Jung was thirty when he sent his ''Studies in Word Association'' to Sigmund Freud in Vienna in 1906.
In 1910, Jung became Chairman for Life of the International Psychoanalytical Association with Freud's support.
It is a journey to meet the self and at the same time to meet the Divine.
As leader of the international body, Jung assumed overall responsibility for its publication, the ''Zentralblatt für Psychotherapie''.
Freud had actually mentioned a collective level of psychic functioning but saw it primarily as an appendix to the rest of the psyche.
Jung observed that "stage acts of the state" are comparable to religious displays: "Brass bands, flags, banners, parades and monster demonstrations are no different in principle from ecclesiastical processions, cannonades and fire to scare off demons".
Jung considered individuation to be the central process of human development.
Jung was president of the International General Society for Psychotherapy, which was Nazi dominated, and worked for the Goring Institute of Psychotherapy, which was created by Nazis.
Jung had a better relationship with his father.
In his work with patients and in his own personal explorations, Jung wrote that art expression and images found in dreams could be helpful in recovering from trauma and emotional distress.
He added a stone, which he had painted into upper and lower halves, and hid the case in the attic.
These two psychological types Jung compares to ancient archetypes, Apollo and Dionysus.
Hazard took Jung's advice seriously and set about seeking a personal spiritual experience.
At the time, Freud needed collaborators and pupils to validate and spread his ideas.
Emilie Jung was an eccentric and depressed woman; she spent considerable time in her bedroom, where she said that spirits visited her at night.
She wrote, "The book is bombastic, baroque and like so much else about Carl Jung, a willful oddity, synched with an antediluvian and mystical reality."
As of mid-September 2009, fewer than two dozen people had seen it.
While Jung worked on his ''Wandlungen und Symbole der Libido (Psychology of the Unconscious)'', tensions grew between him and Freud because of their disagreements over the nature of libido and religion.
For the next few years, the ''Zentralblatt'' under Jung and Meier maintained a position distinct from that of the Nazis, in that it continued to acknowledge contributions of Jewish doctors to psychotherapy.
Modern theories often stay true to behaviourist means of describing such a trait (sociability, talkativeness, assertiveness etc.)
Jung believed his personal development was influenced by key factors he felt were unrelated to sexuality.
