Between graduation and attaining this position, he made a modest income from private violin lessons while enjoying the continuing support of his patrons, not only Jens Georg Nielsen but also Albert Sachs (born 1846) and Hans Demant (1827–1897) who both ran factories in Odense.
Anthony Tommasini of  ''The New York Times'' qualified the CD of Symphonies Nos.
Nielsen's philosophy of music style is perhaps summed up in his advice in a 1907 letter to the Norwegian composer Knut Harder: "You have&nbsp;... fluency, so far, so good; but I advise you again and again, my dear Mr.
Flute and clarinet competitions were later added, but these have now been discontinued.
13 (1889, revised 1900) contains a "Résumé" section in the finale, bringing together themes from the first, third and fourth movements.
''At the Bier of a Young Artist'' ('''') for string orchestra was written for the funeral of the Danish painter Oluf Hartmann in January 1910 and was also played at Nielsen's own funeral.
The younger daughter Anne Marie, who graduated from the Copenhagen Academy of Arts, married the Hungarian violinist Emil Telmányi (1892–1988) in 1918; he contributed to the promotion of Nielsen's music, both as a violinist and a conductor.
Nielsen studied Renaissance polyphony closely, which accounts for some of the melodic and harmonic content of his music.
He learned the violin and piano as a child and wrote his earliest compositions at the age of eight or nine: a lullaby, now lost, and a polka which the composer mentioned in his autobiography.
Nielsen's centenary in 1965 was widely celebrated, both in terms of performances and publications, and Bernstein was awarded the Sonning Prize for his recording of the Third Symphony.
Nielsen stretches the capacities of instrument and player to the utmost; the concerto has just one continuous movement and contains a struggle between the soloist and the orchestra and between the two principal competing keys, F major and E major.
The affair was to last for the next three years.
These tones in praise of love are nothing compared to the real thing."
12 (1897) after studying early polyphonic choral style.
He left the Academy at the end of 1886, after graduating with good but not outstanding marks in all subjects.
The Second Sonata, Op.&nbsp;35 of 1912 was written for the violinist Peder Møller who earlier that year had premiered the composer's Violin Concerto.
In the last movement two sets of timpani are placed on opposite sides of the stage undertaking a kind of musical duel.
Nielsen wrote four string quartets.
They toured Italy together and married in St Mark's English Church, Florence, on 10 May 1891 before returning to Denmark.
27, 1910–11), is understood by the English composer Robert Simpson to refer to the "outward growth of the mind's scope".
Nielsen did not give up the violin during his time with the battalion, continuing to play it when he went home to perform at dances with his father.
Reviewing the 1969 recording of works by the pianist John Ogdon, John Horton commented on the early pieces: "Nielsen's technical resources hardly measure up to the grandeur of his designs", whilst characterising the later pieces as "major works which can stand comparison with his symphonic music".
Writing in ''The New Yorker'' in 2008, the American music critic Alex Ross compares the "brute strength" of Nielsen's symphonies to Beethoven's ''Eroica'' and Fifth Symphony but explains that only now were the Americans slowly beginning to appreciate the Danish composer.
At the end of the 1940s two major biographies of Nielsen appeared in Danish, dominating opinion of the composer's life and work for several decades.
For his son-in-law, Emil Telmányi, Nielsen wrote his Violin Concerto, Op.
After suffering a serious heart attack in 1925, Nielsen was forced to curtail much of his activity, although he continued to compose until his death.
Among Nielsen's orchestral works for the stage are ''Aladdin'' (1919) and '''' (The Mother), Op.
Nielsen maintained the reputation of an outsider during his lifetime, both in his own country and internationally.
18, Nielsen's second major choral work, sets to music the various phases of sleep including the terror of a nightmare in its central movement which, with its unusual discords, came as a shock to the reviewers at its premiere in March 1905. ''''
Thus while outside Denmark Nielsen is largely thought of as the composer of orchestral music and the opera ''Maskarade'', in his own country he is more of a national symbol.
In 1912, an illegitimate daughter was born&nbsp;– Rachel Siegmann, about whom Anne Marie never learned.
Nielsen did not record any of his works.
No, it is no enviable fate to be an artist.
It is intervals which surprise and delight us anew every time we hear the cuckoo in spring.
Several special events were scheduled on or around 9 June 2015 to commemorate the 150th anniversary of Nielsen's birth.
48 (1923) was written for Telmányi, and, like Nielsen's ''Chaconne'' for piano, Op.
''Aladdin'' was written to accompany a production of Adam Oehlenschläger's fairy tale at The Royal Theatre in Copenhagen.
During his final years, Nielsen produced a short book of essays entitled ''Living Music'' (1925), followed in 1927 by his memoir ''Min Fynske Barndom''.
Schytte thought Nielsen had been pretentious presenting the lyrics in Latin rather than Danish. ''''
He died near Kolding in 1956.
He had received the instrument from his mother when he was six.
Between 1994 and 2009 a complete new edition of Nielsen's works, the ''Carl Nielsen Edition'', was commissioned by the Danish Government (at a cost of over 40 million kroner).
Three fully-fledged cantatas for soloists, orchestra and choir have, however, entered the repertoire.
With his wife Nielsen had two daughters and a son.
8 (1894) was described by a later critic as "nothing less than a clenched fist straight in the face of all established musical convention".
He premiered his Op.
The departures from standard procedures in the First Sonata, Op.
Nielsen's songs retain an important place in Danish culture and education.
After less than a year at the Royal Theatre, Nielsen won a scholarship of 1,800 kroner, giving him the means to spend several months travelling in Europe.
In Denmark, his opera ''Maskarade'' and many of his songs have become an integral part of the national heritage.
The period was one of creative crisis for Nielsen which, coinciding with World War I, would strongly influence his Fourth (1914–16) and Fifth symphonies (1921–22), arguably his greatest works according to Fanning.
The book contained about 600 melodies, of which about 200 were composed by the editors, and was intended to provide a repertoire for communal singing, an integral part of Danish folk culture.
(''Saga Dream''), Op.
In addition to many performances in Denmark, concerts were programmed in cities across Europe, including London, Leipzig, Kraków, Gothenburg, Helsinki and Vienna, and even further afield in Japan, Egypt and New York.
An international Organ Competition, originally founded by the city of Odense, became associated with the Nielsen competition in 2009, but from 2015 will be organized separately, based in Odense Cathedral.
2 and 3 as "terrific" in the newspaper's list of the best classical music recordings of 2012.
While there, he fell in love with their 14-year-old daughter Emilie Demant.
accessdate=23 April 2015}} His image was selected in recognition of his contribution to Danish music compositions such as his opera ''Maskarade'', his ''Espansiva'' symphony and his many songs including "Danmark, nu blunder den lyse nat".
Nielsen was born the seventh of twelve children to a poor peasant family in 1865 at Nørre Lyndelse near Sortelung, south of Odense on the island of Funen.
Brought up by poor but musically talented parents on the island of Funen, he demonstrated his musical abilities at an early age.
The scores are now all available for download free of charge at the website of the Danish Royal Library (which also owns most of Nielsen's music manuscripts).
In particular, he compliments Alan Gilbert on his understanding and interpretations of the Nielsen symphonies.
The following year, Nielsen began a 16-year stint as a second violinist in the prestigious Royal Danish Orchestra under the conductor Johan Svendsen, during which he played in Giuseppe Verdi's ''Falstaff'' and ''Otello'' at their Danish premieres.
Nielsen sublimated his anger and frustration over his marriage in a number of musical works, most notably between 1897 and 1904, a period which he sometimes called his "psychological" period.
Nielsen wrote a considerable number of choral works but most of them were composed for special occasions and were seldom reprised.
Nielsen was admitted to Copenhagen's National Hospital (Rigshospitalet) on 1 October 1931 following a series of heart attacks.
During the German occupation of Denmark in World War II, mass song gatherings, using these melodies, were part of Denmark's "spiritual re-armament", and after the war in 1945 Nielsen's contributions were characterised by one writer as "shining jewels in our treasure-chest of patriotic songs".
5 appeared in 1890 and the Third String Quartet in E-flat major, Op.
''Pan and Syrinx'' (''''), a vigorous nine-minute symphonic poem inspired by Ovid's ''Metamorphoses'', was premiered in 1911.
Typically, Nielsen's music might end in a different key from that of its commencement, sometimes as the outcome of a struggle as in his symphonies.
For many of the works, including the operas ''Maskarade'' and ''Saul and David'', and the complete ''Aladdin'' music, this was their first printed publication, copies of manuscripts having previously been used in performances.
He then went to stay with the retired Odense merchant Jens Georg Nielsen (1820–1901) and his wife at their apartment on Slagelsegade as he was not yet in a position to pay his own way.
Although he revered the music of Bach and Mozart, he remained ambivalent about much 19th-century music.
Writing in ''The New York Times'' on the occasion of Nielsen's 125th anniversary in 1990, the music critic Andrew Pincus recalled that 25 years earlier Bernstein had believed the world was ready to accept the Dane as the equal of Jean Sibelius, speaking of "his rough charm, his swing, his drive, his rhythmic surprises, his strange power of harmonic and tonal relationships&nbsp;– and especially his constant unpredictability" (which Pincus believed was still a challenge for audiences).
Work carried out by the recently published complete ''Carl Nielsen Edition'' has revealed that the scores used in these recordings often differ from the composer's original intentions and thus the supposed authenticity of these recordings is now debatable.
Biographies and studies in English in the 1990s helped to establish Nielsen's status world-wide, to the point at which his music has become a regular feature of concert programming in Western countries.
Nielsen wrote three concertos: the Violin Concerto, Op.
Carl suggested divorce in March 1905 and had considered moving to Germany for a fresh start, but despite several extended periods of separation the Nielsens remained married for the remainder of the composer's life.
The critic Emilius Bangert wrote of the premiere (which was given by Axel Gade), "The overall impression was of a beautiful, unbroken line&nbsp;– a flow of notes&nbsp;– where in particular a wonderful second subject in the first part and the pure, high sphere of the last part were captivating".
This was not to be.
The musicologist Niels Krabbe describes the popular image of Nielsen in Denmark as being like "the ugly duckling syndrome" – a reference to the tale of the Danish writer Hans Christian Andersen –  whereby "a poor boy&nbsp;... passing through adversity and frugality&nbsp;... marches into Copenhagen and&nbsp;... comes to conquer the position as the uncrowned King".
It is not only inspired by the work of Bach, especially the chaconne for solo violin, but also by the virtuoso piano arrangements of Bach's music by composers such as Robert Schumann, Johannes Brahms and Ferruccio Busoni.
He also had private students in his earlier days in order to supplement his income.
The Carl Nielsen International Competition commenced in the 1970s under the auspices of the Odense Symphony Orchestra.
During 2015, the Danish Quartet scheduled performances of Nielsen's string quartets in Denmark, Israel, Germany, Norway and the UK (at the Cheltenham Music Festival).
9 (1895), including its often sudden modulations and its terse thematic material, disconcerted Danish critics at its first performance.
Although this employment sometimes caused Nielsen considerable frustration, he continued to play there until 1905.
But, in the opinion of the musicologist David Fanning, it also left him "with a highly personal, common man's point of view on those subjects".
In 1906, Nielsen had explained the significance of such songs to his countrymen:With certain melodic inflections we Danes unavoidably think of the poems of, for example, Ingemann, Christian Winther or Drachmann, and we often seem to perceive the smell of Danish landscapes and rural images in our songs and music.
Also on a large scale, and from the same year, is the ''Theme and Variations'', Op.
He was to sit there between the rushing wings blowing a reed pipe out over Copenhagen."
Nielsen gave an account of his introduction to music: "I had heard music before, heard father play the violin and cornet, heard mother singing, and, when in bed with the measles, I had tried myself out on the little violin".
It was only in 1897 after the first performance of ''Hymnus amoris'' that he received support from the critics, to be substantially reinforced in 1906 by their enthusiastic reception of ''Masquerade''.
The composer, however, was in a dour mood; in an article in ''Politiken'' on 9 November 1925 he wrote: If I could live my life again, I would chase any thoughts of Art out of my head and be apprenticed to a merchant or pursue some other useful trade the results of which could be visible in the end&nbsp;... What use is it to me that the whole world acknowledges me, but hurries away and leaves me alone with my wares until everything breaks down and I discover to my disgrace that I have lived as a foolish dreamer and believed that the more I worked and exerted myself in my art, the better position I would achieve.
As a result of his teaching, Nielsen has exerted considerable influence on classical music in Denmark.
By contrast, in November 1906 ''Masquerade'' was a resounding success with an exceptional run of 25 performances over its first four months.
In the UK, the BBC Philharmonic prepared a concert series on Nielsen beginning on 9 June in Manchester.
17 (1903) stems from Nielsen's stay in Athens which inspired him to compose a work depicting the sun rising and setting over the Aegean Sea.
Unlike that of his contemporary, the Finn Jean Sibelius, Nielsen's reputation abroad did not start to evolve until after World War II.
Nielsen's sixth and final symphony, ''Sinfonia semplice'', was written in 1924–25.
In 1926 he wrote in his diary "My home soil pulls me more and more like a long sucking kiss.
The army paid him three kroner and 45 øre and a loaf of bread every five days for two and a half years, after which his salary was raised slightly, enabling him to buy the civilian clothes he needed to perform at barn dances.
But the '''' reviewer H.W.
In contrast to the rather traditional style of the Violin Concerto, it reflects the modernistic trends of the period.
Nielsen's cantata ''Hymnus amoris'' for soloists, chorus and orchestra was first performed at Copenhagen's Musikforeningen (The Music Society) on 27 April 1897.
In Denmark, Nielsen's reputation was sealed in 2006 when three of his compositions were listed by the Ministry of Culture amongst the twelve greatest pieces of Danish music.
She wrote: "I wanted to take the winged horse, eternal symbol of poetry, and place a musician on its back.
Two other works are for violin solo.
Other works caused some uncertainty, even in Denmark.
However, three younger contemporary conductors who had worked with him, Thomas Jensen, Launy Grøndahl, and Erik Tuxen, did record his symphonies and other orchestral works with the Danish Radio Symphony Orchestra between 1946 and 1952.
Within two months of its successful premiere at the Odd Fellows Concert Hall in Copenhagen on 28 February 1912, the Third Symphony (''Espansiva)'' was in the repertoire of the Amsterdam Concertgebouw, and by 1913 it had seen performances in Stuttgart, Stockholm and Helsinki.
An international breakthrough came in 1962 when Leonard Bernstein recorded the Fifth Symphony with the New York Philharmonic Orchestra for CBS.
For 9 June, Nielsen's birthday, the Danish National Symphony Orchestra presented a programme in Copenhagen's DR Concert Hall featuring ''Hymnus amoris'', the ''Clarinet Concerto'' and ''Symphony No.
Another, however, described it as a "bloody, clenched fist in the face of an unsuspecting snob audience", also qualifying it as "filthy music from trenches".
The composer was particularly upset in the 1920s when his long-standing Danish publisher Wilhelm Hansen was unable to undertake publication of many of his major works, including ''Aladdin'' and ''Pan and Syrinx''.
Nielsen revised it several times, the final version in 1919 being listed as his Op.
It was finally unveiled in 1939.
Nielsen described the symphony as "the life force, the unquenchable will to live".
In Nielsen's words, the ''Chaconne'', Op.
Also frequently performed is the Fifth Symphony (Op.
Shortly afterwards, on 25 January 1888, his String Quartet in F major was played at one of the private performances of the '''' (Private Chamber Music Society).
This determination would strain the Nielsens' marriage, as Anne Marie would spend months away from home during the 1890s and 1900s, leaving Carl, who was susceptible to opportunities with other ladies, to raise their three young children in addition to composing and fulfilling his duties at the Royal Theatre.
In the period 1916–22, Nielsen often lived on Funen retreating to the Damgaard and Fuglsang estates, or worked as a conductor in Gothenburg.
From 1914 to 1926, he conducted the Musikforeningen orchestra.
His father, Niels Jørgensen, was a house painter and traditional musician who, with his abilities as a fiddler and cornet player, was in strong demand for local celebrations.
They are regarded as "the most representative part of the country's most representative composer's output".
''Saul and David'' received a negative press when it was premiered in November 1902 and did no better when it was revived in 1904.
Over 50 recordings have been made of Nielsen's Wind Quintet.
29, 1914–16) written during World War I is among the most frequently performed of the symphonies.
To non-Danish critics, Nielsen's music initially had a neo-classical sound but became increasingly modern as he developed his own approach to what the writer and composer Robert Simpson called progressive tonality, moving from one key to another.
Of great significance was Nielsen's contribution to the 1922 publication, '' Folkehøjskolens Melodibog (The Folk High School Songbook)'', of which he was one of the editors together with Thomas Laub, Oluf Ring and Thorvald Aagaard.
Though not an outstanding student and composing little, Nielsen progressed well in violin under Valdemar Tofte (1832–1907), and received a solid grounding in music theory from Orla Rosenhoff (1844–1905), who would remain a valued adviser during his early years as a professional composer.
The Flute Concerto, in two movements, was written for the flautist Holger Gilbert-Jespersen, a member of the Copenhagen Wind Quintet which had premiered Nielsen's Wind Quintet (1922).
58, a 22-minute piece for organ&nbsp;– was composed between June 1930 and February 1931, only a few months before his death.
Contacts with fellow students and cultured families in Copenhagen, some of whom would become lifelong friends, became equally important.
For many years, he appeared on the Danish hundred-kroner banknote.
42, completed in 1922, has been cited as the most Danish of all Nielsen's compositions as it extols the beauty of Funen's countryside.
Shortly after arriving in Paris in early March 1891 Nielsen met the Danish sculptor Anne Marie Brodersen, who was also travelling on a scholarship.
52 (1928) was written as a tribute for the sixtieth birthday of the composer Fini Henriques.
A snare drummer is given the task of interrupting the orchestra, playing ad libitum and out of time, as if to destroy the music.
In 1881, Nielsen began to take his violin playing more seriously, studying privately under Carl Larsen, the sexton at Odense Cathedral.
His mother, whom he recalls singing folk songs during his childhood, came from a well-to-do family of sea captains while one of his half-uncles, Hans Andersen (1837–1881), was a talented musician.
The violin was Nielsen's own instrument and he composed four large-scale chamber works for it.
The title of the Third, ''Sinfonia Espansiva'' (Op.
He initially played in a military band before attending the Royal Danish Academy of Music in Copenhagen from 1884 until December 1886.
There are now numerous recordings of all Nielsen's major works, including complete cycles of the symphonies conducted by, amongst others, Sir Colin Davis, Herbert Blomstedt and Sakari Oramo.
During the concert which saw the premiere of his First Symphony on 14 March 1894 conducted by Svendsen, Nielsen played in the second violin section.
In the Sixth Symphony (without opus number), written 1924–25, and subtitled ''Sinfonia Semplice (Simple Symphony)'', the tonal language seems similar to that in Nielsen's other symphonies, but the symphony develops into a sequence of cameos, some sad, some grotesque, some humorous.
Nielsen is especially noted for his six symphonies, his Wind Quintet and his concertos for violin, flute and clarinet.
It was inspired by Titian's painting ''Miracle of the Jealous Husband'' which Nielsen had seen on his honeymoon in Italy in 1891.
39 (1907–08) is a tone poem for orchestra based on the Icelandic Njal's Saga.
Nielsen's last musical composition, the organ work ''Commotio'', was premiered posthumously in 1931.
Among his other students were the musicologist Knud Jeppesen, the pianist Herman Koppel, the academy professor and symphony composer Poul Schierbeck, the organist Emilius Bangert who played at Roskilde Cathedral, and Nancy Dalberg, one of Nielsen's private students who helped with the orchestration of ''Aladdin''.
The Clarinet Concerto was also written for a member of the Copenhagen Wind Quintet, Aage Oxenvad.
The Danish organist Finn Viderø suggests that his interest was prompted by the '''' (Organ reform movement), and the renewal of the front pipes of the Schnitger organ in the St. Jacobi Church, Hamburg, from 1928 to 1930.
The anti-romantic tone of the ''Symphonic Suite'', Op.
His early music was inspired by composers such as Brahms and Grieg, but he soon developed his own style, first experimenting with progressive tonality and later diverging even more radically from the standards of composition still common at the time.
The strain of dual careers and constant separation from his wife led to an extended breach in his marriage.
The ''Helios Overture'', Op.
After his death, his wife was commissioned to sculpt a monument to him, to be erected in central Copenhagen.
On one of the copies, he wrote: "To my own Marie!
Robert Simpson's book ''Carl Nielsen, Symphonist'' (first edition 1952) was the earliest large-scale study in English.
From 1903, he also had an annual retainer from his principal publisher, .
32, was inspired by the music of Johann Sebastian Bach.
Nielsen's two operas are very different in style.
By this term he meant giving instrumentalists freedom of interpretation and performance within the bounds set out by the score.
Nielsen also instructed the conductor and choirmaster Mogens Wöldike, remembered for his interpretations of Baroque music, and Rudolph Simonsen, the pianist and composer who became director of the Academy after Nielsen's death.
He died from a heart attack six years later, and is buried in Vestre Cemetery, Copenhagen.
4'' for a broadcast extending across Europe and the United States.
We must go back&nbsp;... to the pure and the clear."
Nielsen's works are sometimes referred to by CNW numbers, based on the ''Catalogue of Carl Nielsen's Works'' (CNW) published online by the Danish Royal Library in 2015.
He died there at ten minutes past midnight on 3 October, surrounded by his family.
Following an introduction to Niels W. Gade, the director of the Royal Academy in Copenhagen, by whom he was well received, Nielsen obtained his release from the military band at short notice, and studied at the Academy from the beginning of 1884.
The First String Quartet No.
The music historian Jan Smaczny suggests that in this work "the handling of texture is confident and far less derivative than in earlier works ... the quartet prompts the most regret that Nielsen did not pursue the genre further ... to parallel his later symphonic development".
After learning to play brass instruments, on 1 November 1879 he became a bugler and alto trombonist in the band of the army's 16th Battalion at nearby Odense.
After the premiere of the Fifth Symphony (1922) one critic wrote: "The treasure of Danish symphonies and Carl Nielsen's own output have been enriched by a strange and highly original work."
Performed by the Danish Radio Symphony Orchestra conducted by Erik Tuxen at the 1950 Edinburgh International Festival, it caused a sensation, sparking interest in Nielsen's music outside Scandinavia.
His sixtieth birthday in 1925 brought many congratulations, a decoration from the Swedish government, and a gala concert and reception in Copenhagen.
The works he composed between 1897 and 1904 are sometimes ascribed to his "psychological" period, resulting mainly from a turbulent marriage with the sculptor Anne Marie Brodersen.
They are just like four streams of thought, each going its own way&nbsp;– differently and randomly for each performance&nbsp;– until they meet in a point of rest, as if flowing into a lock where they are united.
Does it mean that I shall finally return and rest in the earth of Funen?
It is not known how much Nielsen composed during this period, but from his autobiography, it can be deduced that he wrote some trios and quartets for brass instruments, and that he had difficulty in coming to terms with the fact that brass instruments were tuned in different keys.
As his parents did not believe he had any future as a musician, they apprenticed him to a shopkeeper from a nearby village when he was fourteen; the shopkeeper went bankrupt by midsummer and Nielsen had to return home.
He wrote to the Dutch composer Julius Röntgen in 1909 "I am surprised by the technical skills of the Germans nowadays, and I cannot help thinking that all this delight in complication must exhaust itself.
Its sonorities are sparse and monochrome, its air rarefied and bracing."
The four-act '''' (Saul and David), written in 1902 to a libretto by Einar Christiansen, tells the Biblical story of Saul's jealousy of the young David while '''' (Masquerade) is a comic opera in three acts written in 1906 to a Danish libretto by Vilhelm Andersen, based on the comedy by Ludvig Holberg.
He also studied composition under Gade, whom he liked as a friend but not for his music.
Fanning writes, "At this time his interest in the driving forces behind human personality crystallized in the opera ''Saul and David'' and the Second Symphony (''The Four Temperaments'') and the cantatas '''' and ''''".
The Carl Nielsen Society maintains a listing of performances of Nielsen's works, classified by region (Denmark, Scandinavia, Europe apart from Scandinavia and outside Europe) which demonstrates that his music is regularly performed throughout the world.
The recording helped Nielsen's music to achieve appreciation beyond his home country and is considered one of the finest recorded accounts of the symphony.
Over the years, Nielsen wrote the music for over 290 songs and hymns, most of them for verses and poems by well-known Danish authors such as N. F. S. Grundtvig, Ingemann, Poul Martin Møller, Adam Oehlenschläger and Jeppe Aakjær.
The Danish Royal Opera has programmed ''Maskarade'' and a new production (directed by David Pountney) of ''Saul og David''.
57 which followed in 1928 are late works, influenced by the modernism of the 1920s and, according to the Danish musicologist Herbert Rosenberg, the product of "an extremely experienced composer who knows how to avoid inessentials."
In January 2015, the New York Philharmonic conducted by Alan Gilbert completed recordings of Nielsen's six symphonies and three concertos.
Jensen also made the first LP recording of the Fifth Symphony in 1954.
It was only later that his works firmly entered the international repertoire, accelerating in popularity from the 1960s through Leonard Bernstein and others.
I foresee a completely new art of pure archaic virtue.
Nielsen's last major work&nbsp;– '''', Op.
The work is an example of the composer's progressive tonality since, although it is stated to be in the key of G minor, the first and final movements end in different keys.
