At the Games in Barcelona, Lewis jumped  in the first round of the long jump, beating Powell who did a final-round .
"Don't worry," he told his mother.
In the 100&nbsp;m final, Lewis faced the two men who ranked number one in the world the past two years: Burrell and Jamaican Raymond Stewart.
So, when Lewis decided not to make any more attempts to try to break the record, he was roundly booed.
The final decision was to exclude Lewis from the team.
Injuries kept Lewis largely sidelined for the next few years, then he made a comeback for the 1996 season.
He repeated his number one ranking in the 100&nbsp;m and long jump, and ranked number six in the 200&nbsp;m. Additionally, he was named Athlete of the Year by ''Track and Field News''.
Lewis' reaction to what was one of the greatest competitions ever in the sport was to offer acknowledgment of the achievement of Powell.
Lewis appealed her decision to the Third Circuit Court of Appeals; the court initially granted his appeal but a few days later the court reversed itself and Lewis withdrew his name.
He has claimed it is better suited to him because he can eat a larger quantity without affecting his athleticism and he believes that switching to a vegan diet can lead to improved athletic performance.
Powell's  and Lewis's final two jumps still stand as of August 2016 as the top three low altitude jumps ever.
Lewis jumped , a wind-aided leap, in the third round, a mark which would have won every long jump competition in history except two.
Lewis was up against his main rival of the last few years, Mike Powell, the silver medalist in the event from the 1988 Olympics and the top-ranked long jumper of 1990.
"The best race of my life," Lewis said.
"Carl did nothing wrong.
Finally, he won his fourth gold when the 4 × 100&nbsp;m relay team he anchored finished in a time of 37.83&nbsp;s, a new world record.
He risked injury in the cool conditions of the day if he over-extended himself, and his ultimate goal to win four golds might be at risk.
Lewis still had two jumps left, though he was now no longer chasing Beamon, but Powell.
Many colleges tried to recruit Lewis, and he chose to enroll at the University of Houston where Tom Tellez was coach.
Neal Benowitz, a professor of medicine at UC San Francisco who is an expert on ephedrine and other stimulants, agreed that "These levels are what you'd see from someone taking cold or allergy medicines and are unlikely to have any effect on performance."
Lewis was again named Athlete of the Year by the magazine.
"A little humility is in order.
Lewis did, however, qualify for the long jump, finishing second behind Powell, and was eligible for the 4 × 100&nbsp;m relay team.
And when the next guy comes along and beats me, I won't complain about that either".
Lewis's best subsequent results were two wind-aided leaps at , and an  under legal conditions while in the qualifying rounds at the Barcelona Olympics.
Lewis retained his number one rank that year; Johnson would place second.
At year's end, Lewis was again awarded the top rankings in the 100&nbsp;m and the long jump and was additionally ranked number one in the 200&nbsp;m. And for the third year in a row, he was awarded the Athlete of the Year title by ''Track & Field News''.
Lewis defended himself claiming he accidentally consumed the banned substances.
He took one more jump, a foul, then passed his remaining four allotted jumps.
His third gold medal came in the 200&nbsp;m, where he won in a time of 19.80&nbsp;s, a new Olympic record and the third fastest time in history.
Powell had been unable to defeat Lewis, despite sometimes putting in jumps near world-record territory, only to see them ruled fouls.
Following Exum's revelations the IAAF acknowledged that at the 1988 Olympic Trials the USOC indeed followed the correct procedures in dealing with eight positive findings for ephedrine and ephedrine-related compounds in low concentration.
He grew up in a family of athletes.
"Madison Avenue perceives him as homosexual."
In 2016, Lewis was Inducted into the Texas Track and Field Coaches Association Hall of Fame.
It was revealed that he tested positive three times at the 1988 Olympics Trials for minimum amounts of pseudoephedrine, ephedrine, and phenylpropanolamine, banned stimulants and bronchodilators also found in cold medication and due to the rules his case could lead to disqualification from the Seoul Olympics and from competition for six months.
After the heights reached in 1991, Lewis started to lose his dominance in both the sprints and the long jump.
Ron Weiss, the head west coast scout of the Bulls, and Ken Passon, the assistant West Coast scout, recommended Lewis because he was the best athlete available.
The American relay team finished second behind Canada.
"It was that close, and it was the best of his life."
When he gained prominence in the early 1980s, all the extant men's 100&nbsp;m and 200&nbsp;m records and the long jump record had been set at the high altitude of Mexico City.
Comparisons were beginning to be made with Jesse Owens, who dominated sprint and long jump events in the 1930s.
Any member of the American Olympic men's track and field team could be used, even if they had not qualified for the relay event.
In 1982, Lewis continued his dominance, and for the first time it seemed someone might challenge Bob Beamon's world record of  in the long jump set at the 1968 Olympics, a mark often described as one of the greatest athletic achievements ever.
Lewis qualified for the American team for the 1980 Olympics in the long jump and as a member of the 4 × 100&nbsp;m relay team.
The 100&nbsp;m final at the 1988 Summer Olympics was one of the most sensational sports stories of the year and its dramatic outcome would rank as one of the most infamous sports stories of the century.
At the 1987 World Championships in Athletics in Rome, Lewis skipped the 200&nbsp;m to focus on his strongest event, the long jump, and made sure to take all his attempts.
During 1982, Lewis cleared  five times outdoors, twice more indoors, going as far as  at Indianapolis on July 24.
He won his first national titles in the 100&nbsp;m and long jump.
Lewis' chief rival in the long jump was predicted to be the man who last beat him: Larry Myricks.
was the greatest leap ever under any condition.
The Olympic boycott meant that Lewis did not compete in Moscow but instead at the Liberty Bell Classic in July 1980, an alternate meet for boycotting nations.
Additionally, he played Stu in the made-for-TV movie ''Atomic Twister''.
Lewis additionally anchored the 4 × 100&nbsp;m relay team to another world record, 37.50 s, the third time that year he had anchored a 4 × 100&nbsp;m squad to a world record.
He is one of 3 Olympic athletes who won 4 gold medals in a single event (the others being Al Oerter and Michael Phelps).
"The only thing I can say is I think it's unfortunate what Wade Exum is trying to do," said Lewis.
The long jump controversy was one reason and his self-congratulatory conduct did not impress several other track stars: "He rubs it in too much," said Edwin Moses, twice Olympic gold medalist in the 400&nbsp;m hurdles.
Lewis was deemed to be the world record holder for his 1988 Olympic performance and declared the 1987 100&nbsp;m World Champion.
Observers here noted that Lewis probably could have broken the world record if he did not ease off in the final meters to raise his arms in celebration.
Johnson would beat Lewis once in 1985, but Lewis also lost to others, while winning most of his races.
In the final, however, Johnson won with a time which stunned observers: 9.83 s, a new world record.
Controversy struck when, as ''Track and Field News'' put it, "Lewis' attitude in the whole relay hoo-hah a few days later served only to take the luster off his final gold."
The International Association of Athletics Federations (IAAF), the governing body of track and field, organized the first World Championships in 1983.
"A lot happened to me last year, especially the death of my father.
Tokyo was the venue for the 1991 World Championships.
Before Lewis,  had been exceeded on two occasions by two people: Beamon and 1980 Olympic champion Lutz Dombrowski.
Days after graduating from high school in 1979, Lewis broke the high school long jump record with a leap of .
The IAAF subsequently stripped Johnson of his record and gold medal from the World Championships.
Powell had not only jumped 4&nbsp;cm further than Lewis, he had eclipsed the 23-year-old mark set by Bob Beamon and done so at low altitude.
Lewis leapt , a low-altitude Olympic best, and none of his competitors could match it.
While marks set at the thinner air of high altitude are eligible for world records, Lewis was determined to set his records at sea level.
In the next round, Powell responded.
In the long jump, Robert Emmiyan withdrew from the competition citing an injury, and Lewis' main challengers were rising American long jump star Mike Powell and long-time rival Larry Myricks.
Finally, Lewis ran the anchor in the 4 × 100&nbsp;m relay, winning in 37.86&nbsp;s, a new world record and the first in Lewis' career.
He achieved his 10.00&nbsp;s clocking the same weekend he leapt  twice, and the day he recorded his new low-altitude record  at Indianapolis, he had three fouls with his toe barely over the board, two of which seemed to exceed Beamon's record, the third which several observers said reached .
His case was shortly dismissed by the Denver federal Court for lack of evidence.
''Track and Field News'' was prepared to go even further than that, suggesting that after these Championships, "It had become hard to argue that he is not the greatest athlete ever to set foot on track or field."
Fellow Santa Monica Track Club teammates Joe DeLoach and Floyd Heard were also found to have the same banned stimulants in their systems, and were cleared to compete for the same reason.
I don't want that '(A)' for altitude after the mark."
There, Calvin Smith who had earlier that year set a new world record in the 100&nbsp;m at altitude with a 9.93&nbsp;s performance, was soundly beaten by Lewis 10.07&nbsp;s to 10.21&nbsp;s. Smith won the 200&nbsp;m title, an event which Lewis had not entered, but even there he was partly in Lewis' shadow as Lewis had set an American record in that event earlier that year.
Douglas said he was inaccurately quoted, but the impression that Lewis was aloof and egotistical was firmly planted in the public's perception by the end of the 1984 Olympic Games.
Though he anchored a world record 1:19.11 in the rarely run 4 × 200&nbsp;m relay with the Santa Monica Track Club early in 1992, he failed to qualify for the Olympic team in the 100&nbsp;m or 200&nbsp;m. In the latter race, he finished fourth at the Olympic trials behind rising star Michael Johnson who set a personal best of 19.79 s. It was the first time the two had ever met on the track.
In reference to his efforts at the 1991 World Championships, Lewis said, "This has been the greatest meet that I've ever had."
That caused me to re-educate myself to being the very best I possibly can be this season," he said, after defeating Johnson in Zürich on August 17.
"Everyone there was so scared and so cynical they did not know what to do."
After retiring from his athletics career, Lewis became an actor and has appeared in a number of films.
The wind gauge indicated the jump was wind-aided, so it could not be considered a record, but it would still count in the competition.
Johnson won in 9.79 s, a new world record, while Lewis set a new American record with 9.92 s. Three days later, Johnson tested positive for steroids, his medal was taken away and Lewis was awarded gold and credited with a new Olympic record.
Lewis made an appearance on ''The Weakest Link''.
Though he did not match past performances, his third-round leap of  won gold by  over second-place James Beckford of Jamaica.
Lewis credits his outstanding 1991 results in part to the vegan diet he adopted in 1990, when he was in his late twenties.
He thus lost his first long jump competition in a decade.
That medal would prove to be his final Olympic or World Championship medal in a running event.
His mother (née Lawler) was a hurdler on the 1951 Pan-Am team.
Lewis'  jump was also officially declared tied with Larry Myricks for the masters record for the 35–39 age group.
"They started looking for ways to get rid of me," Lewis said.
"The best technique, the fastest.
Lewis' year-best performances in the 100&nbsp;m and long jump were not at the World Championships, but at other meets.
However, those times were never ratified as records.
He was never told 'you violated the rules'" said Martin D. Singer, Lewis' lawyer, who also said that Lewis had inadvertently taken the banned stimulants in an over-the-counter herbal remedy.
Lewis also permanently lost his ranking as number one for the 200&nbsp;m in 1988 and for the 100&nbsp;m in 1989.
But Lewis looked strong in the heats of the 100&nbsp;m, setting a Championship record in the semi-final while running into a wind with a 10.03 s effort.
But though Myricks had joined Lewis in surpassing  the year before, he failed to qualify for the American team, and Lewis won at Helsinki with relative ease.
After the Games and faced with Lewis' new negative image, Nike dropped him.
The Americans swept the medals in the event for the first time in 84 years.
Coca-Cola had offered a lucrative deal to Lewis before the Olympics, but Lewis and Douglas turned it down, confident that Lewis would be worth more after the Olympics.
He also won the 100&nbsp;m with relative ease.
His dominance in the long jump was even greater, as he topped the rankings nine times during the same period, and ranked second in the other years.
His 65 consecutive victories in the long jump achieved over a span of 10 years is one of the sport's longest undefeated streaks.
The acceptable level has been raised to ten parts per million for ephedrine and twenty-five parts per million for other substances.
After Lewis' unexpected long jump gold, it was noted that he could become the athlete with the most Olympic gold medals if he entered the 4 × 100&nbsp;m relay team.
The event which was most talked about and which caused the most drama was the 100&nbsp;m final.
The highest level of the stimulants Lewis recorded was 6 ppm, which was regarded as a positive test in 1988 but is now regarded as negative test.
He covered the final leg in 8.85 seconds, the fastest officially recorded anchor leg.
He set world records in the 100&nbsp;m, 4 × 100&nbsp;m and 4 × 200&nbsp;m relays, while his world record in the indoor long jump has stood since 1984.
He also lost the top ranking for the long jump in 1990 but was to regain it in 1992.
Lewis' look at the Games, with a flattop haircut and flamboyant clothing, added fuel to the reports.
Two weeks later he was disqualified by Lieutenant Governor Kim Guadagno, a Republican acting in her role as the secretary of state, who decided he did not meet the state's requirement that Senate candidates live in New Jersey for four years.
Lewis cleared  four times.
Lewis himself had often stated it was a goal of his to surpass the mark.
Nike had Lewis under contract for several years already, despite questions about how it affected his amateur status, and he was appearing in Nike television advertisements, in print, and on billboards.
Lewis was a dominant sprinter and long jumper who topped the world rankings in the 100&nbsp;m, 200&nbsp;m and long jump events frequently from 1981 to the early 1990s.
Lewis was initially coached by his father, who also coached other local athletes to elite status.
His low-altitude record had been surpassed by fellow American Mel Lattany with a time of 9.96&nbsp;s shortly before the 1984 Olympics, but his biggest challenger would prove to be Canadian Ben Johnson, the bronze medalist behind Lewis at the 1984 Olympics.
Cynics noted that the problem had been in the sport for many years, and it only became a cause for Lewis once he was actually defeated.
There was never intent.
He added, "I could run 9.8 or faster in the 100 if I could jump into drugs right away."
Lewis owns a marketing and branding company named C.L.E.G., which markets and brands products and services including his own.
And I did it at thirty."
The IAAF also declared that Lewis had also, therefore, twice tied the "true" world record (9.93 s) for his 1987 World Championship performance, and again at the 1988 Zürich meet where he defeated Johnson.
Lewis said he should have been credited with that jump, claiming the track officials misinterpreted the rules on fouls.
'''Frederick Carlton''' "'''Carl'''" '''Lewis''' (born July 1, 1961) is an American former track and field athlete, who won 10 Olympic medals, including nine gold, and 10 World Championships medals, including eight gold.
He also ran 10.00&nbsp;s in the 100&nbsp;m, the world's fastest time, matching his low-altitude record from 1981.
This was not to answer critics from the 1984 long jump controversy; this was because history's second 29&nbsp;ft long-jumper was in the field: Robert Emmiyan had leaped  at altitude in May, just 4&nbsp;cm short of Bob Beamon's record.
That's what Carl lacks."
His accomplishments have led to numerous accolades, including being voted "World Athlete of the Century" by the International Association of Athletics Federations and "Sportsman of the Century" by the International Olympic Committee., "Olympian of the Century" by ''Sports Illustrated'' and "Athlete of the Year" by ''Track & Field News'' in 1982, 1983, and 1984.
The levels of the combined stimulants registered in the separate tests were 2 ppm, 4 ppm and 6 ppm.
Lewis had at that point not lost a long jump competition in a decade, winning the 65 consecutive meets in which he competed.
His career spanned from 1979 to 1996 when he last won an Olympic title and subsequently retired.
The Chicago Bulls drafted Lewis in the 1984 NBA Draft as the 208th overall pick, although he had played neither high school nor college basketball.
His parents ran a local athletics club that provided a crucial influence on both Carl and his sister, Carol.
Although Lewis had achieved what he had set out to do, matching Jesse Owens' feat of winning four gold medals at a single Olympic Games, he did not win the lucrative endorsement deals which he had expected.
The farthest anyone has jumped since under legal conditions is .
He did, however, earn his first World Championship medal in the 200&nbsp;m, a bronze with his 19.99 s performance.
Though his focus was on the long jump, he was now starting to emerge as a sprint talent.
Lewis qualified for the American Olympic team for the fifth time in the long jump, the first time an American man has done so.
He became the first person to run a sub-10 second 100&nbsp;m at low-altitude with a 9.97&nbsp;s clocking at Modesto on May 14.
Lewis repeatedly referred to his father as a motivating factor for the 1988 season.
He achieved the ranking of fourth on the all-time World Junior list of long jumpers.
Lewis not only lost the most publicized showdown in track and field in 1987, he also lost his father.
Additionally, he won the James E. Sullivan Award as the top amateur athlete in the United States.
At the TAC Championships on June 19, he set a new low-altitude record in the long jump,  and earned the world number one ranking in that event.
His gold at the World Championships and his other fast times earned him the number one ranking in the world that year, despite Calvin Smith's world record.
Johnson had run under 10.00 s three times that year before Rome, while Lewis had not managed to get under the 10.00 s barrier at all.
But his approach to winning this event stoked controversy, even as knowledgeable observers agreed his approach was the correct one.
Lewis ended up ranked second behind Soviet Robert Emmiyan, who had the longest legal jump of the year at .
However, in the fallout to the steroid scandal, an inquiry was called in Canada wherein Johnson admitted under oath to long-time steroid use.
In response to the accusations, Johnson replied "When Carl Lewis was winning everything, I never said a word against him.
In 2003, Wade Exum, the United States Olympic Committee's director of drug control administration from 1991 to 2000, gave copies of documents to ''Sports Illustrated'' which revealed that some 100 American athletes failed drug tests from 1988 to 2000, arguing that they should have been prevented from competing in the Olympics but were nevertheless cleared to compete.
But Emmiyan's best was an  leap that day, second to Lewis's .
In the 4 × 100&nbsp;m relay, Lewis anchored the gold-medal team to a time of 37.90&nbsp;s, the third-fastest of all time.
I guess that's flattering."
His first jump at  was, he knew, sufficient to win the event.
''Track and Field News'' ranked him number two in the 200&nbsp;m, despite his low-altitude record of 19.75&nbsp;s, behind Smith, who had won gold at Helsinki.
Over the course of his athletics career, Lewis broke ten seconds for the 100&nbsp;meters 15 times and 20 seconds for the 200&nbsp;meters 10 times.
(Lewis and Nike eventually did split, and Lewis signed an endorsement deal with Mizuno.)
From January 1, 1990, Lewis was the world record holder in the 100&nbsp;m. The record did not last long, as fellow American and University of Houston teammate Leroy Burrell ran 9.90 s on June 14, 1991, to break Lewis's mark.
Though Ben Johnson's 9.79 s time was never ratified as a world record, the 9.83 s he ran the year before was.
He won gold, as silver medalist Gary Honey of Australia's best jump was .
He jumped  there for a Bronze medal, and the American 4 × 100&nbsp;m relay team won Gold with a time of 38.61&nbsp;s. At year's end, Lewis was ranked 6th in the world in the long jump and 7th in the 100&nbsp;m.
Lewis retired from track and field in 1997.
In response to a question about his skipping a 1982 long jump competition at altitude, he said, "I want the record and I plan to get it, but not at altitude.
After the Los Angeles Olympics, Lewis continued to dominate track and field, especially in the long jump, in which he would remain undefeated for the next seven years, but others started to challenge his dominance in the 100&nbsp;m sprint.
He first claimed that Johnson had false-started, then he alluded to a stomach virus which had weakened him, and finally, without naming names, said "There are a lot of people coming out of nowhere.
Lewis, on the other hand, was in good form.
"I'll get another one."
Additionally, Lewis' nine gold medals tie him for second on the list of multiple Olympic gold medalists with Paavo Nurmi, Larisa Latynina, Mark Spitz, and Usain Bolt behind Phelps.
When William McKinley Lewis Jr. died, Lewis placed the gold medal he won for the 100&nbsp;m in 1984 in his hand to be buried with him.
A subsequent honor would follow: Lewis eventually was credited with the 100&nbsp;m world record for the 9.92 s he ran in Seoul.
Before showing the documents to ''Sports Illustrated'' Exum tried to use them in a lawsuit against USOC, accusing the organization of racial discrimination and wrongful termination against him and cover-up over the failed tests.
Lewis, second with 9.93 s, had tied the existing world record, but that was insufficient.
In the 4 × 100&nbsp;m relay, Lewis anchored another world record, in 37.40 s, a time which stood for 16 years.
However, working with Tellez, Lewis adapted his technique so that he was able to jump without pain and he went on to win the 1980 National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) title with a wind-assisted jump of .
Similarly, though he did not play football in college, Lewis was drafted as a wide receiver in the 12th round of the 1984 NFL Draft by the Dallas Cowboys.
After the supplements he was taking had been analyzed to prove his claims the USOC accepted his claim of inadvertent use, since a dietary supplement he ingested was found to contain "Ma huang", the Chinese name for Ephedra (ephedrine is known to help weight loss).
In an interview dating back April 2003 Carl Lewis agreed that he tested positive three times in 1988 but he was let off as that was the normal practice in those times.
Further, Lewis' agent Joe Douglas compared him to pop star Michael Jackson, a comparison which did not go over well.
When asked about those boos, Lewis said, "I was shocked at first.
I don't think they are doing it without drugs."
"He just did it," Lewis said of Powell's winning jump.
In 2011 he attempted to run for a seat as a Democrat in the New Jersey Senate, but was removed from the ballot due to the state's residency requirement.
She was also to become an elite long jumper, finishing 9th at the 1984 Olympics and taking bronze at the 1983 World Championships.
Lewis appeared in the movie ''The Last Adam'' (2006).
Lewis had skipped the mandatory relay training camp and demanded to run the anchor leg, which added to the debate.
Among the names of the athletes was Lewis.
He could be seen with tears in his eyes afterwards.
Powell responded with a long foul, estimated to be around .
He never played in the NFL.
In what would be the deepest 100&nbsp;meters race ever to that time, with six men finishing in under ten seconds, Lewis not only defeated his opponents, he reclaimed the world record with a clocking of 9.86 s. Though previously a world-record holder in this event, this was the first time he had crossed the line with "WR" beside his name on the giant television screens, and the first time he could savor his achievement at the moment it occurred.
A poll on the NBA's website ranked Lewis second to Lusia Harris, the only woman to be drafted by the NBA, as the most unusual pick in the history of the NBA Draft.
