''Nepenthes'' and ''Pinguicula'' will do better out of full sun, but most other species are happy in direct sunlight.
It is owned and operated by horticulturalist, Peter D'Amato.
Hence, a carnivorous plant will have both decreased photosynthesis and increased respiration, making the potential for growth small and the cost of carnivory high.
Carnivores are to nutrients what cacti are to water.
However, the habitat is warm, sunny, constantly moist, and the plant experiences relatively little competition from low growing ''Sphagnum'' moss.
Inward-pointing hairs force the prey to move in a particular direction.
Bladderworts lack roots, but terrestrial species have anchoring stems that resemble roots.
Numerous species of mosquitoes lay their eggs in the liquid, where their larvae play various roles, depending on species; some eat microbes and detritus, as is common among mosquito larvae, whereas some species of ''Toxorhynchites'' also breed in pitchers, and their larvae are predators of other species of mosquito larvae.
A plant can grow at zero investment in carnivory; this is also the ''optimum'' investment for a plant, as any investment in traps reduces net photosynthesis (growth) to less than the net photosynthesis of a plant that obtains its nutrients from soil alone.
Venus flytraps live in a very specialised habitat, whereas less carnivorous plants (''Byblis'', ''Pinguicula'') are found in less unusual habitats (i.e., those typical for non-carnivores).
This means when there is a shortage of nutrients and enough light and water, prey capture and digestion has the greatest impact on photosynthetic gains, favoring the evolution of plant adaptations which allowed for more effective and efficient carnivory.
The net uptake of carbon dioxide, and therefore, the plant's potential for growth, must be positive for the plant to survive.
A ''Y''-shaped modified leaf allows prey to enter but not exit.
The potential for plant growth is net photosynthesis, the total gross gain of biomass by photosynthesis, minus the biomass lost by respiration.
These likely serve to lure insects into a precarious position over the pitcher mouth, where they may lose their footing and fall into the fluid within.
Aquatic invertebrates such as ''Daphnia'' touch these hairs and deform the door by lever action, releasing the vacuum.
Their trapping mechanism has also been described as a "mouse trap", "bear trap" or "man trap", based on their shape and rapid movement.
Carnivores mostly live in bogs, and those that do not are generally tropical.
The plant also has to expend extra energy on non-photosynthetic structures like glands, hairs, glue and digestive enzymes.
In ''Brocchinia'', the urn is a specialised insect trap, with a loose, waxy lining and a population of digestive bacteria.
Some botanists argue that there is a spectrum of carnivory found in plants: from completely non-carnivorous plants like cabbages, to borderline carnivores, to unspecialised and simple traps, like ''Heliamphora'', to extremely specialised and complex traps, like that of the Venus flytrap.
If this fails, a fungicide is in order.
The second requirement also differentiates carnivory from defensive plant characteristics that may kill or incapacitate insects without the advantage of nutrient absorption.
However, these plants have not been shown conclusively to be carnivorous.
Accordingly, some of them rely on fire ecology for their continued survival.
Part-time carnivory in ''Triphyophyllum peltatum'' may be due to an unusually high need for potassium at a certain point in the life cycle, just before flowering.
These plants will be at a selective disadvantage.
Cost-benefit models are given under the assumption that there is a set amount of energy potentially available for an organism, which leads to trade-offs when energy is allocated to certain functions to maximize competitive ability and fitness.
For a plant to grow, it must photosynthesise more than it respires.
Bromeliads seem very well preadapted to carnivory, but only one or two species can be classified as truly carnivorous.
The sundew genus (''Drosera'') consists of over 100 species of active flypapers whose mucilage glands are borne at the end of long tentacles, which frequently grow fast enough in response to prey (thigmotropism) to aid the trapping process.
Ammonium can be used as a source of nitrogen by plants, but its high toxicity means that concentrations high enough to fertilise are also high enough to cause damage.
The balsams (such as ''Impatiens''), which are closely related to the Sarraceniaceae and ''Roridula'', similarly possess stalked glands.
To the plant the excreta are more readily assimilable than intact insects would be.
Leaves also respire, in a similar way to animals, by burning their biomass to generate chemical energy.
Later, this may have become active by the evolution of a partial vacuum inside the bladder, tripped by prey brushing against trigger hairs on the door of the bladder.
Because these families do not share a common ancestor who also had pitfall trap morphology, carnivorous pitchers are an example of convergent evolution.
This particular adaptation is found within the families Sarraceniaceae ''(Darlingtonia, Heliamphora, Sarracenia''),  Nepenthaceae (''Nepenthes''), Cephalotaceae (''Cephalotus''), and Eriocaulaceae (''Paepalanthus).''
Rainwater can be retained by cupping the leaf, and pitfall traps may have evolved simply by selection pressure for the production of more deeply cupped leaves, followed by "zipping up" of the margins and subsequent loss of most of the hairs.
High light environments allowed for the trade off between photosynthetic leaves and prey capturing traps that are photosynthetically inefficient.
''Drosophyllum lusitanicum'' is found around desert edges and ''Pinguicula valisneriifolia'' on limestone (calcium-rich) cliffs.
Pitfall traps are derived from rolled leaves, which evolved several independent times through convergent evolution.
The evolution of carnivorous plants is obscured by the paucity of their fossil record.
The most obvious evidence for this model is that carnivorous plants tend to grow in habitats where water and light are abundant and where competition is relatively low: the typical bog.
In at least one species, ''Sarracenia flava'', the nectar bribe is laced with coniine, a toxic alkaloid also found in hemlock, which probably increases the efficiency of the traps by intoxicating prey.
''Pinguicula valisneriifolia'' grows in soils with high levels of calcium but requires strong illumination and lower competition than many butterworts.
A number of species in the Martyniaceae (previously Pedaliaceae), such as ''Ibicella lutea'', have sticky leaves that trap insects.
For carnivory, the trait could only evolve if the increase in nutrients from prey capture exceeded the cost of investment in carnivorous adaptations.
This thigmotropic growth may involve rolling of the leaf blade (to prevent rain from splashing the prey off the leaf surface) or dishing of the surface under the prey to form a shallow digestive pit.
Hence, most require high humidity.
The earliest known depiction of carnivorous plants in popular culture was a case wherein a large man-eating tree was reported to have consumed a young woman in Madagascar in 1878.
''Drosophyllum lusitanicum'' grows where there is little water, but it is even more extreme in its requirement for bright light and low disturbance than most other carnivores.
the production of lures, digestive enzymes, modified leaf structures, and the decreased rate of photosynthesis over total leaf area, some authors argue that carnivory is an evolutionary last resort when nitrogen and phosphorus are limited in an ecosystem.
Venus flytraps filter their prey using the teeth around the trap's edge, so as not to waste energy on hard-to-digest prey.
It is intuitively clear that the Venus flytrap is more carnivorous than ''Triphyophyllum peltatum''.
''Drosophyllum'' is unusual in that it grows under near-desert conditions; almost all other carnivores are either bog plants or grow in moist tropical areas.
The bladder has a small opening, sealed by a hinged door.
Many carnivores are native to cold temperate regions and can be grown outside in a bog garden year-round.
Meanwhile, sundews are active flypaper traps whose leaves undergo rapid acid growth, which is an expansion of individual cells as opposed to cell division.
Plants need nitrogen for protein synthesis, calcium for cell wall stiffening, phosphate for nucleic acid synthesis, and iron for chlorophyll synthesis.
Alternatively, insects can be retained by making the leaf stickier by the production of mucilage, leading to flypaper traps.
''purpurea'' (the northern pitcher plant) can be found as far north as Canada.
Many species of ''Utricularia'' (such as ''U.
Since most of these plants are found in bogs, almost all are very intolerant of drying.
Certain crab spiders such as ''Misumenops nepenthicola'' live largely on the prey of ''Nepenthes'', and other, less specialised, spiders may build webs where they trap insects attracted by the smell or appearance of the traps; some scavengers, detritivores, and also organisms that harvest or exploit those in turn, such as the mosquito ''Wyeomyia smithii'' are largely or totally dependent on particular carnivorous plants.
The energy "wasted" by the plant in building and fuelling its trap is a suitable measure of the carnivory of the trap.
''Camponotus schmitzi'', the diving ant, has an intimate degree of mutualism with the pitcher plant ''Nepenthes bicalcarata''; it not only retrieves prey and detritus from beneath the surface of the liquid in the pitchers, but repels herbivores, and cleans the pitcher peristome, maintaining its slippery nature.
The stalked glands that once made glue became teeth and trigger hairs in ''Drosera'' —an example of natural selection hijacking preexisting structures for new functions.
The Byblidaceae, Cephalotaceae, and Roridulaceae were placed in the Saxifragales; and the Lentibulariaceae in the Scrophulariales (now subsumed into the Lamiales).
Carnivorous plants are generally herbs, and their traps are produced by primary growth.
Carnivorous plants require appropriate nutrient-poor soil.
The second major group of pitcher plants are the monkey cups or tropical pitcher plants of the genus ''Nepenthes''.
Most carnivorous plants require bright light, and most will look better under such conditions, as this encourages them to synthesise red and purple anthocyanin pigments.
The rapid acid growth allows the sundew tentacles to bend, aiding in the retention and digestion of prey.
In aquatic species, the door has a pair of long trigger hairs.
''Heliamphora'' is a member of the Sarraceniaceae, a New World family in the order Ericales (heathers and allies).
tuberous sundews require a dry (summer) dormancy period, and ''Drosophyllum'' requires much drier conditions than most.
Two of the most famous examples of fictional carnivorous plants in popular culture are the 1960s black comedy ''The Little Shop of Horrors'' and the triffids of John Wyndham's ''The Day of the Triffids''.
Plants use their leaves to intercept sunlight.
Interestingly, the tamarisks possess specialised salt-excreting glands on their leaves, as do several of the Plumbaginaceae (such as the sea lavender, ''Limonium''), which may have been co-opted for the excretion of other chemicals, such as proteases and mucilage.
They may have developed from bifurcated pitchers that later specialized on ground-dwelling prey; or, perhaps, the prey-guiding protrusions of bladder traps became more substantial than the net-like funnel found in most aquatic bladderworts.
For example, ''Triphyophyllum'' is a passive flypaper that secretes mucilage, but whose leaves do not grow or move in response to prey capture.
Insects may be fed to the plants by hand to supplement their diet; however, carnivorous plants are generally unable to digest large non-insect food items; bits of hamburger, for example, will simply rot, and this may cause the trap, or even the whole plant, to die.
This is because most carnivorous plants have evolved in nutrient-poor, acidic soils and are consequently extreme calcifuges.
Whatever their origin, the helical shape of the lobster pot is an adaptation that displays as much trapping surface as possible in all directions when buried in moss.
Likewise, the seeds of Shepherd's Purse, urns of ''Paepalanthus bromelioides'', bracts of ''Passiflora foetida'', and flower stalks and sepals of triggerplants (''Stylidium'') appear to trap and kill insects, but their classification as carnivores is contentious.
To produce such structures, the plant requires ATP and respires more of its biomass.
They are therefore very sensitive to excessive soil-borne nutrients.
Apart from the crab spiders on pitchers, an actual small, red crab ''Geosesarma malayanum'' will enter the fluid, robbing and scavenging, though reputedly it does so at some risk of being captured and digested itself.
The bat's excretions that land in the pitcher pay for the shelter, as it were.
This balloon-like chamber is pitted with areolae, chlorophyll-free patches through which light can penetrate.
Most carnivorous plants live in habitats with high light, water logged soils, and extremely low soil nitrogen and phosphorus, producing the ecological impetus to derive nitrogen from an alternate source.
Many plants occasionally benefit from animal protein rotting on their leaves, but carnivory that is obvious enough for the casual observer to notice is rare.
The vascular tissues of ''Sarracenia'' is a case in point.
The lack of insects in winter exacerbates the problem.
Its leaves are incapable of rapid movement or growth.
This classification includes at least 583 species that attract, trap  and kill prey, absorbing the resulting available nutrients.
* ''Drosera capensis'', the Cape sundew: attractive strap-leaved sundew, pink flowers, very tolerant of maltreatment.
In a habitat with abundant soil nutrients but little light (as shown above), the gross photosynthesis curve will be lower and flatter, because light will be more limiting than nutrients.
''Nepenthes rajah'' has a remarkable mutualism with two unrelated small mammals, the mountain treeshrew (''Tupaia montana'') and the summit rat (''Rattus baluensis'').
Carnivory rarely pays, so even carnivorous plants avoid it when there is too little light or an easier source of nutrients, and they use as few carnivorous features as are required at a given time or for a given prey item.
''Utricularia macrorhiza'' varies the number of bladders it produces based on the expected density of prey.
'''Carnivorous plants''' are plants that derive some or most of their nutrients (but not energy) from trapping and consuming animals or protozoans, typically insects and other arthropods.
There is a broad span of investment where this is the case, and there is also a non-zero optimum.
''Darlingtonia californica'', the cobra plant, possesses an adaptation also found in ''Sarracenia psittacina'' and, to a lesser extent, in ''Sarracenia minor'': the operculum is balloon-like and almost seals the opening to the tube.
Some of the Plumbaginaceae (''e.g.''
In the genus ''Sarracenia'', the problem of pitcher overflow is solved by an operculum, which is essentially a flared leaflet that covers the opening of the rolled-leaf tube and protects it from rain.
''Byblis'' and ''Drosophyllum'' both come from relatively arid regions and are both passive flypapers, arguably the lowest maintenance form of trap.
There are very few habitats stressful enough to make investing biomass and energy in trigger hairs and enzymes worthwhile.
They generally do not form readily fossilisable structures such as thick bark or wood.
The former is a full-time moving snap-trap; the latter is a part-time, non-moving flypaper.
Further stimulation of the lobe's internal surfaces by the struggling insects causes the lobes to close even tighter (thigmotropism), sealing the lobes hermetically and forming a stomach in which digestion occurs over a period of one to two weeks.
''Aldrovanda'' is aquatic and specialised in catching small invertebrates; ''Dionaea'' is terrestrial and catches a variety of arthropods, including spiders.
For the most part carnivorous plant populations are not dominant enough to be dramatically significant, ecologically speaking, but there is an impressive variety of organisms that interact with various carnivorous plants in sundry relationships of kleptoparasitism, commensalism, and mutualism.
Water follows by osmosis, generating a partial vacuum inside the bladder.
Insects land on the leaf, become mired by the surface tension of the water, and suffocate.
A carnivorous plant that catches no insects at all will rarely die, although its growth may be impaired.
sandersonii'') are terrestrial, growing in waterlogged soil, and their trapping mechanism is triggered in a slightly different manner.
Venus flytraps are still the most commonly grown, usually available at garden centers and hardware stores, sometimes offered alongside other easy to grow varieties.
Possibly because of this improved waterproofing, ''Sarracenia'' species secrete enzymes such as proteases and phosphatases into the digestive fluid at the bottom of the pitcher; ''Heliamphora'' relies on bacterial digestion alone.
''Sarracenia'' spp.
To be defined as carnivorous, a plant must first exhibit an adaptation of some trait specifically for the attraction, capture, or digestion of prey.
This thrives under warm, humid conditions and can be a real problem in winter.
At zero investment the growth is zero, because a non-carnivorous plant cannot survive in a habitat with absolutely no soil-borne nutrients.
They succeed only where other plants fail.
European bladderworts seem to use both sources equally well.
The active glue traps use rapid plant movements to trap their prey.
However, plants that may opportunistically utilize nutrients from dead animals without specifically seeking and capturing fauna are excluded from the carnivorous definition.
The ants have been reported to attack struggling prey, hindering their escape, so there might be an element of myrmecotrophy to the relationship.
pygmaea'' and to a number of tuberous sundews such as ''D.
Sundews are extremely cosmopolitan and are found on all the continents except the Antarctic mainland.
The mechanism is still debated, but in any case, changes in the shape of cells in the midrib allow the lobes, held under tension, to snap shut, flipping rapidly from convex to concave and interring the prey.
In general, these plants are best left to their own devices: after underwatering with tap-water, the most common cause of Venus flytrap death is prodding the traps to watch them close and feeding them inappropriate items.
In this sense, bromeliads are probably carnivorous, but their habitats are too dark for more extreme, recognisable carnivory to evolve.
In the Venus flytrap, closure in response to raindrops and blown-in debris is prevented by the leaves having a simple memory: for the lobes to shut, two stimuli are required, 0.5 to 30 seconds apart.
Malathion and Acephate (Orthene) have also been reported as tolerable by carnivorous plants.
Fictional plants have been featured in a number of books, movies, television series, and video games.
Most species catch insects, although the larger ones, such as ''Nepenthes rajah'', also occasionally take small mammals and reptiles.
Typically, these fictional depictions include exaggerated characteristics, such as enormous size or possession of abilities beyond the realm of reality, and can be viewed as a kind of artistic license.
When a trigger hair is bent, stretch-gated ion channels in the membranes of cells at the base of the trigger hair open, generating an action potential that propagates to cells in the midrib.
For example, small insectivores such as tree frogs often exploit the supply of prey to be found in pitcher plants, and the frog ''Microhyla nepenthicola'' actually specialises in such habitats.
In evolution, laziness pays, because energy can be used for reproduction, and short-term benefits in reproduction will outweigh long-term benefits in anything else.
Light levels are lower than in summer, so light is more limiting than nutrients, and carnivory does not pay.
The rim of its pitcher's opening (the peristome) is particularly pronounced (both secrete nectar) and provides a thorny overhang to the opening, preventing trapped insects from climbing out.
The tentacles of ''D.
Although small infestations can be removed by hand, larger infestations necessitate use of an insecticide.
In the hundred or so species of this genus, the pitcher is borne at the end of a tendril, which grows as an extension to the midrib of the leaf.
Only under such extreme conditions is carnivory favored to an extent that makes the adaptations advantageous.
On a small scale, this can be achieved by placing the plant in a wide saucer containing pebbles that are kept permanently wet.
California Carnivores is a notable example of such a nursery that specializes in the cultivation of carnivorous plants.
These traps may be active or passive, depending on whether movement aids the capture of prey.
A passive trap, pitfall traps attract prey with nectar bribes secreted by the peristome and bright flower-like anthocyanin patterning within the pitcher.
The second requirement is the ability to absorb nutrients from dead prey and gain a fitness advantage from the integration of these derived nutrients (mostly amino acids and ammonium ions)  either through increased growth or pollen and/or seed production.
They are almost entirely restricted to habitats such as bogs, where soil nutrients are extremely limiting, but where sunlight and water are readily available.
This type of 'water body' is called a Phytotelma.
Outdoor-grown carnivorous plants generally catch more than enough insects to keep themselves properly fed.
''Nepenthes bicalcarata'' possesses two sharp thorns that project from the base of the operculum over the entrance to the pitcher.
Such habitats do not exist, so for example, ''Sphagnum'' absorbs the tiny amounts of nitrates and phosphates in rain very efficiently and also forms symbioses with diazotrophic cyanobacteria.
Most carnivorous plants require rainwater, or water that has been distilled, deionised by reverse osmosis, or acidified to around pH 6.5 using sulfuric acid.
In carnivorous plants, the leaf is not just used to photosynthesise, but also as a trap.
Due to the observation that many currently classified carnivores lack digestive enzymes for breaking down nutrients and instead rely upon mutualistic and symbiotic relationships with bacteria, ants, or insect, this adaptation has been added to the carnivorous definition.
Bacteria jumpstart decay, releasing from the corpse nutrients that the plant can absorb through its leaves.
The tree shrews and the rats defecate into the plant's traps while visiting them to feed on sweet, fruity secretions from glands on the pitcher lids.
Changing the leaf shape to make it a better trap generally makes it less efficient at photosynthesis.
Once within the pitcher structure, digestive enzymes or mutualistic species break down the prey into an absorbable form for the plant.
In particular, an increased supply of nitrogen and phosphorus makes photosynthesis more efficient, because photosynthesis depends on the plant being able to synthesise very large amounts of the nitrogen-rich enzyme RuBisCO (ribulose-1,5-''bis''-phosphate carboxylase/oxygenase), the most abundant protein on Earth.
For example, pitchers have to be held upright, so that only their opercula directly intercept light.
* ''Pinguicula moranensis'', the Mexican butterwort: pink flowers, non-carnivorous leaves in winter.
It is widely believed that carnivory evolved as a method to increase nutrients in extremely nutrient poor conditions, leading to a cost-benefit model for botanical carnivory.
It was accompanied by an illustration of the tree consuming the woman, said to be a member from the "little known but cruel tribe" called the Mkodos.
This foliar feeding can be observed in most non-carnivorous plants.
Like most relatives of the pineapple, the tightly packed, waxy leaf bases of the strap-like leaves of this species form an urn.
Slow-moving flypapers like ''Pinguicula'' exploit growth, while the Venus flytrap uses such rapid turgor changes which make glue unnecessary.
In more modern classification, such as that of the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group, the families have been retained, but they have been redistributed amongst several disparate orders.
More subtly, Hardwicke's woolly bat (''Kerivoula hardwickii''), a small species, roosts beneath the operculum (lid) of ''Nepenthes hemsleyana''.
The more carnivorous a plant is, the less conventional its habitat is likely to be.
As a waste product, respiration produces carbon dioxide.
The plant benefits from the nutrients in the bugs' faeces.
The current recommendations are shown below (only carnivorous genera are listed):
Most bromeliads are epiphytes, and most epiphytes grow in partial shade on tree branches.
Small ''Nepenthes'' species grow well in large terraria.
''Sarracenia'' is the pitcher plant genus most commonly encountered in cultivation, because it is relatively hardy and easy to grow.
peltata'', which form tubers that aestivate during the dry summer months.
However, there is a spectrum of dependency on animal prey.
''Ceratostigma'') also have stalked, vascularised glands that secrete mucilage on their calyces and aid in seed dispersal and possibly in protecting the flowers from crawling parasitic insects.
Although different species of carnivorous plants have different cultivation requirements in terms of sunlight, humidity, soil moisture, etc., there are commonalities.
Plants investing more or less than this optimum will take up less carbon dioxide than an optimal plant, and hence growing less well.
''Heliamphora'' is limited to South America, but the family contains two other genera, ''Sarracenia'' and ''Darlingtonia'', which are endemic to the Southeastern United States (with the exception of one species) and California respectively.
Within the family Bromeliaceae'','' pitcher morphology and carnivory evolved twice ''(Brocchinia'' and ''Catopsis).''
Very few fossils have been found, and then usually only as seed or pollen.
Carnivorous plants are widespread but rather rare.
Bladder traps are exclusive to the genus ''Utricularia'', or bladderworts.
Temperate aquatic bladderworts generally die back to a resting turion during the winter months, and ''U.
Still, carnivores are also found in very atypical habitats.
In horticulture, carnivorous plants are considered a curiosity or a rarity, but are becoming more common in cultivation with the advent of mass-production tissue-culture propagation techniques.
These cells respond by pumping out ions, which may either cause water to follow by osmosis (collapsing the cells in the midrib) or cause rapid acid growth.
Carnivorous plants have adapted to grow in places with high light where the soil is thin or poor in nutrients, especially nitrogen, such as acidic bogs and rock outcroppings.
The archetypal carnivore, the Venus flytrap, grows in soils with almost immeasurable nitrate and calcium levels.
Botanical carnivory has evolved in several independent families peppered throughout the angiosperm phylogeny, showing that carnivorous traits underwent convergent evolution multiple times to create similar morphologies across disparate families.
When these conditions are not met, some plants give up carnivory temporarily.
