Other important states with local traditions include Morelos, Oaxaca, Tlaxcala, and Chiapas.
* ''Soussouris'' (the bat)'' −'' a character dressed in a winged leotard from head to foot, usually black in colour.
Samba schools are large, social entities with thousands of members and a theme for their song and parade each year.
Mythical characters appear regularly in the parades:
Throughout the country, celebrations are held involving traditional rhythms and water parties.
Some Belgian cities hold Carnivals during Lent.
The towns of Cres, Pag, Novi Vinodolski, and Fužine also organise Summer Carnivals.
The first is the Stréimännchen, which is the burning of a male effigy from the Remich Bridge that crosses the Moselle River separating the Grand Duchy from Germany.
These usually involve huge, complex, beautiful well-crafted costumes, that includes 'wire-bending'.
Some cities are more famous for celebrations such as parades and costume balls.
Comparsas are held throughout the week, consisting of large groups "of dancers dancing and traveling on the streets, followed by a Carrosa (carriage) where the musicians play.
Grand balls are held in the evenings.
The Carnival in Uruguay covers more than 40 days, generally beginning towards the end of January and running through mid March.
Due to National Independence Day on 27th of February and the birthday of its founding father on the 26th of January, the Carnival celebrations fill February regardless of the Lenten calendar.
By tradition, if such a woman gets up to dance, the orchestra stops playing.
Its Carnival parade features troupes with themed costumes and music, ranging from the traditional to pop culture.
Calypso music, originating in Trinidad, uses syncopated rhythm and topical lyrics.
Besides Christian anti-Judaism, the commonalities between church and Carnival rituals and imagery suggest a common root.
* Sunday'' −'' The Grand Parade, in which the groups compete.
Locally made wooden masks are worn.
Normal daily life comes to a stop for about a week in the southern part of the Netherlands during the carnival, with roads temporary blocked and many local businesses closed for the week as a result of employees who are en masse taking the days off during and the day after the carnival.
In the mid twentieth century, West Indians moved the event from the beginning of Lent to the Labor Day weekend.
It is held in the capital city of Victoria and takes place over 3 days.
“Before they were to run, the Jews were richly fed, so as to make the race more difficult for them and at the same time more amusing for spectators.
It is known for its creative designs, displayed in the Carnival Parade.
In Lisbon, Carnival offers parades, dances and festivities featuring stars from Portugal and Brazil.
Masked figures and people wearing large sculpted heads walk through the town.
One of the best-known is Stavelot, where the ''Carnival de la Laetare'' takes place on Laetare Sunday, the fourth Sunday of Lent.
Carnival finishes on Ash Wednesday, followed by rara, another parading musical tradition known mainly in Haiti and in the Dominican Republic.
This festival can also be called Poklade.
The Panamanian Carnival is also popular because of the concerts in the most visited areas.
and kompa bands (such as T-Vice, Djakout No.
Köln or Cologne Carnival, as well as Mainz and Düsseldorf are the largest and most famous.
* Tuesday'' −'' Red Devil Day in which everyone wears red or black.
The main Carnival street parade takes place on Saturday evening with thousands of samba dancers filling the streets.
Carnival is celebrated in New York City in Brooklyn.
The Port-au-Prince Carnival is one of the largest in North America.
Undisguised women are not welcomed.
In Cádiz, the costumes worn are often related to recent news, such as the bird flu epidemic in 2006, during which many people were disguised as chickens.
On Friday and Saturday nights of Carnival, touloulou balls are held in so-called ''universities''; in reality, large dance halls that open only at Carnival time.
The participants include the ''Blancs-Moussis'', who dress in white, carry long red noses and parade through town attacking bystanders with confetti and dried pig bladders.
Over 50 parade groups dance, sing, and play music over a five kilometre-long course.
Shrove Monday, the last day of the carnival season, took place in Baklahorani.
An annual song competition takes place.
It adopts an ancient style in which satire, the grotesque body (particularly cross-dressing and displays of exaggerated bellies, noses, and phalli) and above all, active participation are valued over glamorous, media-friendly spectacles that Vilanovins mock as "''thighs and feathers''".
Usually, the celebrations begin with the election of ''Taita Carnival'' (Father Carnival) who heads the festivities and leads the parades in each city.
in Bern, Olten, or in the eastern part (Zurich, St. Gallen, Appenzell).
The whole Carnaval event was set before the fasting, to set a clear division between the pagan and the Christian custom.
Other common features of carnival include mock battles such as food fights; social satire and mockery of authorities; the grotesque body displaying exaggerated features especially large noses, bellies, mouths, and phalli or elements of animal bodies; abusive language and degrading acts; depictions of disease and gleeful death; and a general reversal of everyday rules and norms.
The King and Queen of the bands are crowned, where each band parades costumes for two days and submits a king and queen, from which an overall winner is chosen.
This continued for weeks before Lent.
The Comparsa is a development of African processions where groups of devotees follow a given saint or deity during a particular religious celebration".
The tradition is most common in Moravia but also occurs in Bohemia.
Arguably the most famous Carnivals in Spain are Santa Cruz, Las Palmas, Sitges, Vilanova i la Geltrú, Tarragona, Águilas, Solsona, Cádiz, Badajoz, Bielsa (an ancestral Carnival celebration), Plan, San Juan de Plan, Laza, Verín, Viana, and Xinzo de Limia.
It includes a raucous procession of floats and dancers lampooning current events or public figures and a bitingly satiric sermon (''el sermo'') delivered by the King himself.
All the food that had survived the winter had to be eaten to assure that everyone was fed enough to survive until the coming spring would provide new food sources.
The King presides over a period of misrule in which conventional social rules may be broken and reckless behavior is encouraged.
Dressed to follow the year's agreed theme, they march with Carnival floats, drums, and brass bands.
The Huarangas Indians (from the Chimbos nation) used to celebrate the second moon of the year with a festival at which they threw flour, flowers, and perfumed water.
Carnival celebrations have been in decline throughout Cuba since then.
At the midnight marking the end of fašiangy, a symbolic burial ceremony for the contrabass is performed, because music ceases for Lent.
North of Lisbon is the famous Torres Vedras Carnival, described as the "most Portuguese in Portugal."
As early as the year 325, the council of Nicaea attempted to end these pagan festivals.
Tarragona has one of the region's most complete ritual sequences.
The Carnival season also includes Fastelavens søndag (with cream buns) and fastelavensris with decorated branches.
In many Christian sermons and texts, the example of a vessel used to explain Christian doctrine: "the nave of the church of baptism", "the ship of Mary", etc.
Some parties are for all, some for women only and some for children.
Rara is also performed in Prospect and Central Parks in summertime New York.
Carnival typically involves a public celebration and/or parade combining some elements of a circus, masks, and a public street party.
Revelers wear their festival clothing.
The essential element is bliny, Russian pancakes, popularly taken to symbolize the sun.
In the Netherlands itself, the first documentation is found in 1383 in Den Bosch, the oldest-known images of Dutch Carnaval festivities date from 1485, also in 's-Hertogenbosch.
Every February, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, the capital of the largest of the Canary Islands, hosts the event, attracting around a million people.
Other places in Haiti that celebrate carnival, including Jacmel and Aux Cayes.
A ''correfoc'' (fire run) or Devil's dance (Ball de diables, features dancing youth amid the sparks and explosions of the ritual crew of devils.
As with many other Christian festivals such as Christmas, which was originally a pagan midwinter festival, the Christian church has found it easier to turn the pagan Carnaval in a catholic tradition than to eliminate it.
Touloulous get in free, and are even given condoms in the interest of the sexual health of the community.
One of the most famous is the Senj Summer Carnival – first celebrated in 1968.
The celebration highlight is a parade of creatively decorated streetcars that satirize society and politics.
Carnival in the Netherlands is called ''Carnaval'', ''Vastenavond'' or ''Vastelaovend(j)'', and is most celebrated in traditionally Catholic regions, mainly the southern provinces North Brabant and Limburg.
* ''Les makoumés'' −'' ''Cross-dressing men  (out of the Carnival context, ''makoumé'' is a pejorative term for a homosexual).
The ''Cwarmê'' Sunday is the most important and insteresting to see.
In the Christian tradition, the fasting is to commemorate the 40 days that Jesus fasted in the desert according to the New Testament and also to reflect on Christian values.
It was already violent during the 19th century, but the government limited the practice.
The word ''masopust'' translates literally from old Czech to mean "meat fast", and the festival often includes a pork feast.
The month-long Carnival of Viareggio is characterized mainly by its parade of floats and masks caricaturing popular figures.
The origin of the name itself is obscure.
The masks are effigies of men and women with horns, but both roles are performed by men.
The celebration originally involved dressing in costumes and holding masked balls or visiting friends.
The grand parade of masked troupes and floats is held at noon on ''Tyrine'' Sunday, and culminates in the ceremonial burning of the effigy of King Carnival at the Patras harbour.
Street parades continue in various districts throughout the month, with brass band, steel drum and roadmarch tunes.
The costumes used on the parades are satires of the Devil and are called "Diablos Cojuelos".
The comparsas are the serious counterpart of the chirigota in Cádiz, and the poetic lyrics and the criticism are their main ingredients.
It is the largest Carnival celebration in Central America.
It takes place from 6 to 8 January with mass participation serenaded by brass bands, pipises, Macedonian and grand casa drums.
The Cerknica Carnival is heralded by a figure called "Poganjič" carrying a whip.
The crepes are filled with freshly grated coconut and heat condensed coconut sap that sequentially converts it into a brown sweet molasses and additional heat concentration solidifies it to jaggery.
Parties feature self-made and more fanciful costumes and occasional masks.
Devils, witches, goats, the grim reaper, and other joyful and frightening characters appear in costumes during the celebrations.
Carnival has been celebrated for centuries.
Germania 40: mox vehiculum et vestis et, si credere velis, numen ipsum secreto lacu abluitur – "Afterwards the car, the vestments, and, if you like to believe it, the divinity herself, are purified in a secret lake."''
As of 2000, the Festival of Caricatures and Aphorisms has been held as part of Strumica's Carnival celebrations.
In more modern times, Guyanais men have attempted to turn the tables by staging ''soirées tololo'', in which it's the men who, in disguise, seek partners from undisguised women bystanders.
* ''Les Nèg'marrons'' −'' g''roups of men dressed in red loincloths, bearing ripe tomatoes in their mouths while their bodies are smeared with grease or molasses.
However, the ''Basler Fasnacht'' begins on the Monday ''after'' Ash Wednesday.
The town of Halle also celebrates on Laetare Sunday.
The most famous groups are the chirigotas, choirs, and comparsas.
Tobago's celebration culminates on Monday and Tuesday on a much smaller scale in Scarborough.
The Carnival in Brazil is a major part of Brazilian culture.
Three main parades take place during Carnival.
In Trinidad & Tobago, Carnival lasts months and culminates in large celebrations in Port of Spain on the three days before Ash Wednesday with Dimanche Gras, J'ouvert, and Mas (masquerade).
The Barranquilla Carnival includes several parades on Friday and Saturday nights beginning on 11 January and ending with a six-day non-stop festival, beginning the Wednesday prior to Ash Wednesday and ending Tuesday midnight.
In the Central Portugal towns of Nelas and Canas de Senhorim, Carnival is an important tourist event.
Christ's passion is itself grotesque: Since early Christianity Christ is figured as the victim of summary judgement, is tortured and executed by Romans before a Jewish mob ("His blood is on us and on our children!"
Carnival is known as Crop Over and is Barbados's biggest festival.
They ran… amid Rome’s taunting shrieks and peals of laughter, while the Holy Father stood upon a richly ornamented balcony and laughed heartily”, an eyewitness reports.
Usually "Mas Boots" that complement the costumes are worn.
Costumed children sometimes go from house to house asking for treats.
Carnival combines costumes, dance, music, competitions, rum, and partying (fete-ing).
Its special feature are the Kurents themselves, magical creatures from another world, who visit major events throughout the country, trying to banish the winter and announce spring's arrival, fertility, and new life with noise and dancing.
This festival emphasises religion.
Throughout the Carnival season, people disguise themselves as ''maskarádes'' ("masqueraders") and engage in pranks and revelry.
It is one of the oldest carnivals of the Western Hemisphere, dating to 1858.
In Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croat-majority city of Ljubuški holds a traditional Carnival ().
Gualeguaychú in the east of Entre Ríos province is the most important Carnival city and has one of the largest parades.
The Carnival in Venice was first recorded in 1268.
The one held in La Vega, which is one of the biggest in the country, and the National parade in Santo Domingo was where the first Carnival of the Americas was held.
The Saturnalia, in turn, may be based on the Greek Dionysia and Oriental festivals.
More than 440 ''blocos'' operate in Rio.
Both the masqueraders and spectators enjoy dancing parade to soca, reggae, and dancehall music.
In Ambato, the festivities are called Fiesta de las Flores y las Frutas (Festival of the Flowers and Fruits).
Although Portugal introduced Christianity and the customs related to Catholic practice in India and Brazil, the celebrations in Goa like Portugal has begun to adopt some aspects of Brazilian-style Carnival celebrations, in particular those of Rio de Janeiro with sumptuous parades, samba and other musical elements.
The most popular are Maracas Beach and Manzanilla Beach, where huge beach parties take place on Ash Wednesday.
On Tuesday preceding Ash Wednesday, the European Tradition of Fat Tuesday is celebrated with the partaking of eating of crepes also called as "AleBelle."
Again, weather pushes this to the last days of January and first days of February.
1, Sweet Micky, KreyòlLa, D.P.
Carnival in Dominica is held in the capital City of Roseau, and takes elements of Carnival that can be seen in the neighbouring French islands of Martinique and Guadeloupe, as well as Trinidad.
After Fidel Castro's Communist Revolution, Carnival's religious overtones were suppressed.
In the United Kingdom, West Indian immigrants brought with them the traditions of Caribbean Carnival; however, the Carnivals now celebrated at Notting Hill, Leeds, Yorkshire, and other places became divorced from their religious origin and became secular events that take place in the summer months.
Other scholars argue for the origin from the Roman name for the festival of the ''Navigium Isidis'' (''ship of Isis''), where the image of Isis was carried to the seashore to bless the start of sailing season.
In those two months, several Catholic holidays were seized by the Catholic population as an outlet for their daily frustrations.
The main attractions of Uruguayan Carnival include two colorful parades called ''Desfile de Carnaval'' (Carnival Parade) and ''Desfile de Llamadas'' (Calls Parade, a candombe-summoning parade).
The locals feast on meats, above all pork.
The festival includes several events, culminating on the final Sunday in a masked procession.
Carnivals also take place in summer.
While practices vary, masks and costumes are present everywhere.
The Quebec Winter Carnival is the biggest winter-themed Carnival in the world.
The celebration in SãoNicolau is more traditional, where established groups parade through the Ribeira Brava, gathering in the town square, although it has adopted drums, floats and costumes from Brazil.
About 30 schools in Rio gather hundreds of thousands of participants.
'''Carnival''' (see other spellings and names) is a Western Christian festive season that occurs before the liturgical season of Lent.
The timing of the festivals has grown apart from its original religious synchronization with the period of Lent.
Events include fashion and music shows.
The Carnival of Vilanova i la Geltrú has documented history from 1790 and is one of the richest in the variety of its acts and rituals.
In Mindelo, São Vicente groups challenge each other for a yearly prize.
"On the last day of Carnival painters flood the street to paint each other.
The Loures Carnival celebrates the country's folk traditions, including the "enterro do bacalhau" or burial of the cod, which marks the end of Carnival and the festivities.
It consisted basically of water battles in a traditional way, while in later years, it included playing with dirty water, mud, oil, and colorants -and also including fighting and sometimes looting private property and sexual assaults on women.
It involves locals dressing in woolly costumes, with scary masks and noise-makers.
While forming an integral part of the Christian calendar, particularly in Catholic regions, many Carnival traditions resemble those antedating Christianity.
While Christian festivals such as Corpus Christi were church-sanctioned celebrations, Carnival was also a manifestation of European folk culture.
Traditionally, Peruvian Andean festivities were held on this period every year because it is the rainy season.
Dominican Carnival is celebrated in most cities and towns in the main streets during February.
A children's parade fills the streets of Ponta Delgada with children from each school district in costume.
The Choirs (''coros'') are wider groups that go on open carts through the streets singing with an orchestra of guitars and lutes.
The latter two parades are open to anyone who wishes to participate.
Brazilian groups are appreciated for their elaborate feathered and sequined costumes.
Alcohol is served at bars – the disguised women whisper to the men "touloulou thirsty", at which a round of drinks is expected, to be drunk through a straw protect their anonymity.
A central figure was possibly the fertility goddess Nerthus.
The costumes worn by the bands are vibrant and colorful, decorated with jewels and feathers.
The Zvončari, or bell-ringers, wear bells and large head regalia representing their areas of origin (for example, those from Halubje wear regalia in the shape of animal heads).
In the twentieth century, it became an organized event held during the 10 days preceding Lent (according to the Greek Orthodox calendar).
During the early 20th century, it consisted of partying and parading, while in the second half of the 20th century it acquired violent characteristics that continued.
Carnival in the town Ovar near Porto began in 1952, it is the region's largest festivity.
In 2003, the Carnival of Binche was recognised as one of the Masterpieces of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity.
In the case of Jesus, the gift is eternal life in heaven and in the case of King Carnival, the acknowledgement that death is a necessary part of the cycle of life.
Other popular activities include body painting and flour fighting.
Locals wear disguises with colorful masks and dance.
No complete accounts of Saturnalia survive and the shared features of feasting, role reversals, temporary social equality, masks, and permitted rule-breaking do not necessarily constitute a coherent festival or link these festivals.
Round and golden, they are made from the rich foods allowed that week by the Orthodox traditions: butter, eggs, and milk (in the tradition of Orthodox lent, the consumption of meat ceases one week before that of milk and eggs).
Attendance at the parade typically exceeds one million.
In Rio Carnival, samba schools parade in the Sambadrome ("sambódromo" in Portuguese).
The largest is in Mazatlán and the city of Veracruz with others in Baja California and Yucatán.
Carnival is one of the largest parades and street festivals in New York, with over one million attending.
Campo Grande is the longest and most traditional.
The climax is a street party featuring costumes and music.
(A similar procession for children takes place on the previous day.)
European archetypes (Pierrot, Harlequin, and Columbina) merge with African ancestral elements (the Old Mother or ''Mama Vieja'', the Medicine Man or ''Gramillero'' and the Magician or ''Escobero'') in the festival.
In these towns, everyone dresses up as if it were Halloween.
It is a staged battle between Lašininis ("porky") personifying winter and Kanapinis ("hempen man") personifying spring.
The annual Carnival steel pan competition known as the National Panorama competition holds the finals on the Saturday before the main event.
Children and teachers are commonly allowed to wear masks to school for a day, and also wear masks at school dances or while trick-or-treating.
* Monday'' −'' Marriage burlesque, with men dressed as brides and women as grooms.
They deliberately try to come in contact with spectators, soiling their clothes.
Festivities continue with concerts and shows in the Praça do Município for five consecutive days.
Pan players compete in categories such as "Conventional Steel Band" or "Single Pan Band" by performing renditions of the year's calypsos.
The traditional way to celebrate Carnival is the ''kulig'', a horse-drawn sleigh ride through the snow-covered countryside.
The largest celebration takes place in and around the capital city of Valletta and Floriana; several more "spontaneous" Carnivals take place in more remote areas.
Festivities end on Ash Wednesday, when locals sit down for the "Batatada" or potato feast, in which the main dish is salted cod with potatoes, eggs, mint, bread and wine.
The Cohobblopot Festival blends dance, drama, and music with the crowning of the King and Queen of costume bands.
Carnival is an important cultural event in the Dutch Antilles.
