In 2008, Carnegie Mellon professor Randy Pausch's "Last Lecture" became a pop culture phenomenon.
The '''Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center''' (PSC) is a joint effort between Carnegie Mellon University, University of Pittsburgh, and Westinghouse Electric Company.
Carnegie Mellon is bordered to the west by the campus of the University of Pittsburgh.
File:James_Gosling_2008.jpg|Inventor of Java, James Gosling
The SEI publishes books on software engineering for industry, government and military applications and practices.
It consists of the School of Information Systems & Management and the School of Public Policy & Management.
First-year students are assigned to the dedicated first-year residence halls on campus including: Morewood E-Tower, Residence on Fifth, Shirley Apartments, as well as Boss, Donner, Hamerschlag, McGill, Mudge, Scobell, and Stever houses.
The University Libraries host a number of full text special collections for public access, including the Andrew Carnegie Collection, Herbert A. Simon Collection, Allen Newell Collection, the H. John Heinz III Collection, the  Pittsburgh Jewish Newspapers Project, and the  Posner Memorial Collection.
CMU cricket club are regular participants in American College Cricket national championships.
Additionally, the Libraries' Million Book Project (2001-) sparked development of the Universal Digital Library.
Named in ''Time Magazine''s "Time 100" list of influential people, he died in July 2008 from pancreatic cancer.
Carnegie Mellon's primary athletic rivals are fellow UAA schools Case Western Reserve University and Washington University in St. Louis; the Tartans have an especially intense rivalry with the latter's football team.
Additionally, the Carnegie Mellon Institute for Talented Elementary and Secondary Students program (C-MITES) is hosted on CMU campus.
Carnegie Mellon also established the Integrative Media Program at Steiner Studios in Brooklyn, New York.
This complex will connect to the Tepper Quadrangle, the Heinz College, the Tata Consultancy Services Building, and the Gates-Hillman Center to create an innovation corridor on the university campus.
Alongside the Tepper Quad and Hamburg Hall, Carnegie Mellon will construct an innovation center with a $35 million gift from Tata Consultancy Services which will partner with Carnegie Mellon to develop technology and business solutions.
Carnegie Mellon owns 81 buildings in the Oakland and Squirrel Hill neighborhoods of Pittsburgh.
Prior to World War II Carnegie Mellon (as Carnegie Tech) played with NCAA Division I teams.
Carnegie Mellon students and faculty have access to the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh and some University of Pittsburgh libraries through consortial agreements with those institutions.
The University also runs Pre-College, a 6-week residential program for rising juniors and seniors in high school, with programs in Drama, Music, Art & Design, Architecture, Game Design & Development, Humanities & Sciences, Mathematics, and Computer Science.
Carnegie Mellon has seven colleges and independent schools: the College of Engineering, College of Fine Arts, Dietrich College of Humanities and Social Sciences, Mellon College of Science, Tepper School of Business, H. John Heinz III College and the School of Computer Science.
The Gates Hillman Complex was made possible by a $20 million lead gift from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and an additional $10 million grant from the Henry L. Hillman Foundation.
The '''Language Technologies Institute''' (LTI) is another unit of the School of Computer Science and is famous for being one of the leading research centers in the area of language technologies.
In September 2012, Carnegie Mellon announced the construction of the Sherman and Joyce Bowie Scott Hall on the Pittsburgh campus.
Washington Duke at Duke University, Ezra Cornell at Cornell University, Johns Hopkins at Johns Hopkins University, Leland Stanford at Stanford University, John D. Rockefeller at the University of Chicago, and Cornelius Vanderbilt at Vanderbilt University are several notable examples of Andrew Carnegie's gospel of wealth mentality and Carnegie Mellon University is one such result.
Carnegie Mellon graduates 62% of its undergraduate students in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics fields, the 13th highest percentage in the United States amongst national research universities.
For decades the center of student life on campus was "''Skibo Hall''", the University's student union.
The primary recipients of this funding were the School of Computer Science ($100.3 million), the Software Engineering Institute ($71.7 million), the College of Engineering ($48.5 million), and the Mellon College of Science ($47.7 million).
Carnegie Mellon's Information Networking Institute offers graduate programs in Athens, Greece and Kobe, Japan, in collaboration with Athens Information Technology and the Hyogo Institute of Information Education Foundation, respectively.
On November 28, 1926, the 6–2 Carnegie Tech football team shut out Knute Rockne's undefeated Notre Dame Fighting Irish 19–0 at Forbes Field.
One example of this approach was the introduction of the university's "Andrew" computing network in the mid-1980s.
The campus finally expanded to Forbes Avenue from its original land along Schenley Park.
The Tepper School also offers doctoral degrees in several areas and presents a number of executive education programs.
Undergraduate tuition is $49,610 and room and board is $12,830 plus additional costs.
In response to this gift, Carnegie Mellon renamed the College of Humanities of Social Sciences as the Marianna Brown Dietrich College of Humanities and Social Sciences after William Dietrich's mother.
The research budget grew from roughly US$12 million annually in the early 1970s to more than US$110 million in the late 1980s.
Baker Hall was renovated in the early 2000s (decade), and new chemistry labs were established in Doherty Hall soon after.
Upperclassmen have additional options for housing which include town houses and a larger variety of one or two bedroom apartments.
The undergraduate business program is ranked 2nd for management information systems, 2nd for production/operations and quantitative analysis, 8th for supply chain management, and tied for 6th as an undergraduate business program overall.
The period starting with the construction of the Graduate School of Industrial Administration building (1952) and ending with Wean Hall (1971) saw the institutional change from Carnegie Institute of Technology to Carnegie Mellon University.
There are more than 100,000 Carnegie Mellon alumni worldwide with the graduating class of 2015.
Carnegie Mellon's  main campus is  from downtown Pittsburgh, between Schenley Park and the Squirrel Hill, Shadyside, and Oakland neighborhoods.
It was also referenced on an episode of ''The Simpsons'', ''Weeds'', and in the television film ''Mean Girls 2''.
Carnegie Mellon also maintains the Carnegie Mellon Los Angeles Center in North Hollywood, California where students in the Master of Entertainment Industry Management program are required to relocate to Los Angeles in their second year and attend classes at this facility.
In 2003, Carnegie Mellon established the Robot Hall of Fame in partnership with the Carnegie Science Center.
Each year, the organizations vote on a cause to support and raise money through ticket sales, ad sales, corporate sponsorships and donations.
The buildings of this era reflect current attitudes toward architectural style.
Carnegie Mellon Athletics runs a comprehensive and popular intramural system, maintains facilities (primarily Skibo Gymnasium, Cohon University Center, and Gesling Stadium), and offers courses to students in fitness and sports.
The Carnegie Mellon University campus in Pittsburgh has served as the locale for many motion pictures.
* '''The Tepper School of Business''' offers undergraduate programs in Business Administration and Economics (the latter jointly with the Dietrich College), master's degrees in Business Administration (MBA) and joint degrees in Computational Finance (MSCF) with the Dietrich College of Humanities and Social Sciences, the Mellon College of Science, the Heinz College, and the School of Computer Science.
That same year, Robert Doherty, university president at the time, banned the football team from competing in postseason bowl games.
Carnegie Mellon's student life includes over 225 student organizations, art galleries, and various unique traditions.
The Entertainment Technology Center offers graduate programs in Portugal, Japan, and Singapore.
Famous alumni include Stephanie Kwolek, inventor of Kevlar; James Gosling, creator of the Java programming language; Andy Bechtolsheim, co-founder of Sun Microsystems; pop artists Andy Warhol and Burton Morris; John-Michael Tebelak, co-author of ''Godspell''; former General Motors CEO and Secretary of Defense, Charles Erwin Wilson; billionaire hedge fund investor David Tepper; Mountaineer and Author Aron Ralston; Charles Geschke, Chairman of Adobe Systems; and astronauts Edgar Mitchell (of Apollo 14) and Judith Resnik, who perished in the Space Shuttle Challenger disaster.
The men's cross country team has finished in the top 15 in the nation each of the last three years, and has boasted several individual All-Americans.
In 2014, The Hollywood Reporter ranked the School of Drama number three in the world among undergraduate drama schools.
Each organization performs a 13-minute-long original show or a rendition of a popular show.
In addition, club teams exist in ultimate frisbee, rowing, rugby, lacrosse, hockey, baseball, softball, skiing & snowboarding, soccer, volleyball, water polo, and cycling.
The Mellon Institute of Industrial Research was founded in 1913 by brothers Andrew Mellon and Richard B. Mellon in honor of their father, Thomas Mellon, the patriarch of the Mellon family.
Students can choose from a variety of housing options.
During Cohon's presidency, Carnegie Mellon continued its trajectory of innovation and growth.
Each building was a unique architectural statement that may have acknowledged the existing campus in its placement, but not in its form or materials.
The university has a strong Scottish motif inspired by Andrew Carnegie's Scottish heritage, as well as the Mellon family's Scots-Irish ancestry.
The Robotics Institute has partnered with a spinoff company, Astrobotic Technology, to land a CMU robot on the moon by 2016 in pursuit of the Google Lunar XPrize.
The Cyert Center for Early Education is a child care center for Carnegie Mellon faculty and staff, as well as an observational setting for students in child development courses.
Carnegie Mellon University ranks ninth among "Best Engineering Colleges By Salary Potential (Bachelor's Only)" in the United States according to ''PayScale'''s 2014-15 study.
By the 1960s, it was seen as a way to accomplish the needed expansion and at the same time give the campus a new image.
Much of the on-campus scenes in the 2000 film ''Wonder Boys'', starring Michael Douglas and Tobey Maguire, were filmed in Carnegie Mellon's campus.
The three options for first-year students are standard, prime, and apartment-style living.
File:Andy_Warhol_1975.jpg|Pop art sensation Andy Warhol
The college also offers undergraduate degree programs in Information Systems and Economics (the latter jointly with the Tepper School of Business).
The pair continued performing the characters in live comedy routines before joining the cast of the TV series ''Laverne and Shirley''.
Known as ''University Center'', the building was dedicated in 1996.
Carnegie was inspired for the design of his school by the Pratt Institute in Brooklyn, New York founded by industrialist Charles Pratt in 1887.
In 1927, the Mellon Institute incorporated as an independent nonprofit.
File:Steven_Bochco_and_Barbara_Bosson_3849.jpg|Ten-time Emmy award recipient Steven Bochco
IDeAte will also offer graduate master's degrees in Emerging Media, Game Design, Integrative Innovation for Products and Services, Computational Data Science, Urban Design, and Production Technology and Management.
In collaboration with Intel, Carnegie Mellon has pioneered research into claytronics.
PSC was founded in 1986 by its two scientific directors, Dr. Ralph Roskies of the University of Pittsburgh and Dr. Michael Levine of Carnegie Mellon University.
The federal agencies that invest the most money are the National Science Foundation and the Department of Defense, which contribute 26% and 23.4% of the total university research budget respectively.
Each master's degree program will have an option to study in the CMU Integrative Media Program (IMP) at Steiner Studios in New York City.
The men's track team has also boasted several individual All-Americans spanning sprinting, distance, and field disciplines.
Carnegie Mellon offers conventional housing for its students through single-gender, coeducational, and special interest options.
Alumni and current/former faculty include 19 Nobel laureates, 14 Members of NAS, 50 Members of NAE, 114 Emmy Award Recipients, 7 Academy Award Recipients, 43 Tony Award Recipients, and 12 Turing Award Recipients.
In 1939 the Tartan football team earned a trip to the NCAA National Championship at the Sugar Bowl.
The undergraduate engineering program at colleges that offer doctorates as the highest degree was ranked tied for 8th overall, 5th for computer engineering, 9th for environmental engineering, and 11th for mechanical, electrical, and civil engineering in 2017.
IDeATe also manages the Entertainment Technology Center (ETC) in conjunction with the School of Computer Science and the College of Fine Arts.
The original Skibo was razed in the summer of 1994 and replaced by a new student union that is fully wi-fi enabled.
Alan Perlis, a 1943 graduate, was a pioneer in programming languages and recipient of the first ever Turing award.
The Tepper School of Business maintains a satellite center in downtown Manhattan and the Heinz College maintains one in Adelaide, Australia.
Further, in November 2013, Carnegie Mellon announced a $67 million gift from David Tepper, who previously donated $56 million, to develop the Tepper Quadrangle on the north campus.
File:Andreas_bechtolsheim.jpg|Co-founder of Sun Microsystems Andreas Bechtolsheim
The organization is known for its Capability Maturity Model (CMM) and Capability Maturity Model Integration (CMMI), which identify essential elements of effective system and software engineering processes and can be used to rate the level of an organization's capability for producing quality systems.
Primary research focus of the institute is on machine translation, speech recognition, speech synthesis, information retrieval, parsing and information extraction.
* '''The H. John Heinz III College''' offers top-ranked master's degrees in Public Policy and Management, Health Care Policy and Management, Biotechnology and Management, Medical Management, Public Management, Arts Management, Entertainment Industry Management, Information Systems and Management, Information Technology, and Information Security Policy and Management.
Departments include English, History, Modern Languages, Philosophy, Psychology, Social and Decision Sciences and Statistics as well as an Institute for Politics and Strategy.
Apartment-style living is available through the Residence on Fifth and Shirley apartments.
There is one Asian American interest sorority – alpha Kappa Delta Phi (colony), and one Asian American interest fraternity - Lambda Phi Epsilon.
Carnegie Mellon also runs the Integrative Design, Arts, and Technology (IDeATe) Network to provide university-wide arts and technology education to students from every college.
The campaign brought in a total of $1.19 billion, with $578.5 million going toward Carnegie Mellon's endowment.
Past and present faculty and alumni include 19 Nobel Prize Laureates, 19 Members of the American Academy of Arts & Sciences, 72 Members of the National Academies, 114 Emmy Award Winners, 43 Tony Award laureates, 7 Academy Award Winners, one Chief Scientist of the U.S. Air Force and 12 Turing Award winners.
File:David_Tepper_01.jpg|Billionaire hedge fund investor David Tepper
In Spring 2010, Greek Sing raised over $42,000 for St. Jude Children's Research
The university is also featured prominently in the films ''Smart People'', ''Monkey Shines'', and in the anime ''Summer Wars''.
In April 2015, Carnegie Mellon University, in collaboration with Jones Lang LaSalle, announced the planning of a second office space structure, alongside the Robert Mehrabian Collaborative Innovation Center, an upscale and full-service hotel, and retail and dining development along Forbes Avenue.
* '''The Mellon College of Science''' includes four departments: Biological Sciences, Chemistry, Mathematical Sciences and Physics.
The International Style, with its rejection of historical tradition and its emphases on functionalism and expression of structure, had been in vogue in urban settings since the 1930s.
File:Charles_Wilson_official_DoD_photo.jpg|Former US Secretary of Defense Charles Wilson
Half of the campaign goal is intended for the endowment to provide long-lasting support for faculty, students and breakthrough innovations.
Carnegie's vision was to open a vocational training school for the sons and daughters of working-class Pittsburghers (many of whom worked in his mills).
In 2010, the ''Wall Street Journal'' ranked Carnegie Mellon 1st in computer science, 4th in finance, 7th in economics, 10th overall, and 21st in engineering according to job recruiters.
In recent years, the varsity track and cross country programs have seen outstanding success on the Division III national level.
A 1938 master plan by Githens and Keally suggested acquisition of new land along Forbes Avenue, but the plan was not fully implemented.
The School of Computer Science is recognized internationally as one of the top schools for computer science.
In 2006, following negotiations between President Cohon and South Australian Premier Mike Rann, CMU opened a campus of the Heinz College in the historic Torrens Building in Adelaide, Australia.
Carnegie Mellon University neighbors the campus of the University of Pittsburgh, and in some cases, buildings of the two universities are intermingled.
Recent All-Americans from the track team are Tommy Vandenberg (2014-2015), Brian Harvey (2007–2009), Davey Quinn (2007), Nik Bonaddio (2004, 2005), Mark Davis (2004, 2005), Russel Verbofsky (2004, 2005) and Kiley Williams (2005).
From 1996 onwards, it started awarding graduate degrees and the name was changed to Language Technologies Institute.
Carnegie Mellon University is accredited by the Middle States Commission on Higher Education.
Options for upperclassmen include: Morewood Gardens, West Wing, Doherty, Fairfax, Margaret Morrison, Neville, Shady Oak, Shirley, and Woodlawn Apartments as well as Henderson, Resnik, Roselawn, Spirit, Tech, Webster, and Welch houses.
This helps to facilitate myriad academic and research collaborations between the two schools, including such projects as the Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center, the Pittsburgh Life Sciences Greenhouse, the Immune Modeling Center, the Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition, the University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, as well as the National Science Foundation-supported Pittsburgh Science of Learning Center.
It also has graduate-level extension campuses in Mountain View, California in the heart of Silicon Valley (offering masters programs in Software Engineering and Software Management).
The College of Engineering has an international location in Kigali, Rwanda offering the Master of Science in Information Technology and the Master of Science in Electrical and Computer Engineering.
New York's Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, and New York University's President John Sexton on April 23, 2012, announced a historic agreement between New York City, New York's MTA, and a consortium of world-class academic institutions, and private technology companies, that will lead to the creation in New York of a Center for Urban Science and Progress (CUSP).
The university spent over $703 million on research in 2015.
For the 2006 fiscal year, the University spent $315 million on research.
Further, the universities also offer multiple dual and joint degree programs such as the Medical Scientist Training Program, the Molecular Biophysics and Structural Biology Graduate Program, the  Joint CMU-Pitt Ph.D.
On April 15, 1997, Jared L. Cohon, former dean of the Yale School of Forestry & Environmental Studies, was elected president by Carnegie Mellon's Board of Trustees.
The Carnegie Mellon School of Music, Carnegie Mellon School of Drama and the student-run theatrical organization Scotch'n'Soda provides campus with a variety of world-class performance arts events.
The effort is intended to continue to attract major corporate partnerships to create opportunities in research, teaching, and employment with students and faculty.
The SEI is also the home of CERT/CC, the federally funded computer security organization.
Carnegie Mellon was identified as the university "Rat" went to in the science fiction film ''The Core'', as well as the university that one of the astronauts attended in the film ''Deep Impact.''
Several computer science buildings, such as Newell Simon Hall, also were established, renovated or renamed in the early 2000s (decade).
The Human-Computer Interaction Institute offers a master's degree in conjunction with the University of Madeira, in Portugal.
The musical ''Pippin'' was originally conceived by Stephen Schwartz as a student musical performed by the Scotch'n'Soda student theatre troupe.
The university has most recently completed building the Gates Hillman Complex and continues renovating historic academic and residence halls.
CMU students and faculty also have access to the University of Pittsburgh library system, as well as the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh.
Student organizations provide social, service, media, academic, spiritual, recreational, sport, religious, political, cultural, and governance opportunities.
On February 5, 2013 Carnegie Mellon announced the selection of Subra Suresh, Director of the National Science Foundation and Dean of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology School of Engineering, as its ninth president effective July 1, 2013
The game was ranked the fourth-greatest upset in college football history by ESPN.
It is home to the world’s first degree-granting Robotics and Drama programs, as well as one of the first Computer Science departments.
The largest college, in terms of enrollment, is the College of Engineering with 400 students in the class of 2017, followed by the Dietrich College of Humanities & Social Sciences with 265, and the College of Fine Arts with 260.
The recognition of Carnegie Mellon as one of the best research facilities in the nation has a long history, as early as the 1987 Federal budget CMU was ranked as third in the amount of research dollars with $41.5 million with only MIT and Johns Hopkins receiving more research funds from the Department of Defense.
In the 1990s and into the 2000s, Carnegie Mellon solidified its status among American universities, consistently ranking in the top 25 in the national ''U.S.
It also enabled the university to establish 31 endowed professorships, 97 endowed fellowships and 250 endowed scholarships.
File:Stephanie_Kwolek_at_Spinning_Elements_by_Harry_Kalish.TIF|Inventor of Kevlar Stephanie Kwolek
His strategic plan aimed to leverage the University's strengths to benefit society in the areas of biotechnology and life sciences, information and security technology, environmental science and practices, the fine arts and humanities, and business and public policy.
File:John_Forbes_Nash,_Jr._by_Peter_Badge.jpg|Winner of the 1994 Nobel Prize in Economics John Forbes Nash
In 2015, the same publication ranked the MFA program at the School of Drama number five in the world.
Carnegie Mellon consistently ranks in the top 25 in the national U.S. News & World Report rankings.
In addition to its Pittsburgh campus, Carnegie Mellon has a branch campus in the Middle East, Carnegie Mellon University in Qatar, which offers a full undergraduate curriculum with degree programs in computer science, business administration, biology, computational biology, and information systems.
To date, these have included the Cylab Security and Privacy Institute, the  Wilton E. Scott Institute for Energy Innovation, the  BrainHub, the  Simon Initiative, and the  Disruptive Healthcare Technology Institute.
The sculpture was controversial for its placement, the general lack of input that the campus community had, and its aesthetic appeal.
Currently, Carnegie Mellon University has thirteen active fraternities: Alpha Epsilon Pi, Alpha Sigma Phi, Delta Tau Delta, Kappa Sigma, Pi Kappa Alpha, Sigma Alpha Epsilon, Sigma Chi, Sigma Nu, Sigma Phi Epsilon, Sigma Tau Gamma, Delta Upsilon (colony), Phi Delta Theta, and Lambda Phi Epsilon.
During this time, CIT consisted of four constituent schools: the School of Fine and Applied Arts, the School of Apprentices and Journeymen, the School of Science and Technology, and the Margaret Morrison Carnegie School for Women.
The Pennsylvania Governor's School for the Sciences, a state-funded summer program that aims to foster interest in science amongst gifted high school students is run on campus every summer.
Schwartz also collaborated with drama student John-Michael Tebelak to expand his master's thesis project titled ''Godspell'', created under the direction of Lawrence Carra, into a musical.
With participation from the College of Fine Arts, the School of Computer Science, the College of Engineering, the Dietrich College of Humanities and Social Sciences, and, the Heinz College, IDeATe will allow students to take minors or concentrations in Animation and Special Effects, Entrepreneurship for Creative Industries, Game Design, Intelligent Environments, Learning Media, Media Design, Physical Computing, and Sound Design.
President Cohon's term ended on June 30, 2013, after which he returned to the faculty at Carnegie Mellon.
Carnegie Mellon enrolls students from all 50 states and the District of Columbia, and 15.6% of the students are citizens of countries other than the United States, representing more than 40 countries.
In 2014, the undergraduate school of business, the Tepper School of Business, placed 17th in an annual ranking of U.S. undergraduate business schools by ''Bloomberg Businessweek''.
In 2013, the school was given a peer-assessed academic reputation score of 4.2, tying it with UCLA and University of North Carolina at 19th nationally.
The Gates Hillman Complex and the Purnell Center for the Arts are connected by the Randy Pausch Memorial Footbridge.
A ravine long known as "The Cut" was gradually filled in to campus level, joining "the Mall" as a major campus open space.
The college shares research projects, interdisciplinary centers and educational programs with other units across the university.
Such interdisciplinary collaboration is the hallmark of research done throughout the university.
Carnegie Mellon also manages the Naval Reserve Officer Training Corps in Pittsburgh on which students throughout Pittsburgh's universities rely.
With much of the team's support, Lauren Schmidt received the NCAA Pennsylvania Woman of the Year award (2003), was a two-time All-American (2001 and 2002), a four-time All-University Athletic Association selection (1999–2002), and the conference's Player of the Year (2001).
The Field Robotics Center (FRC) has developed a number of significant robots, including Sandstorm and H1ghlander, which finished second and third in the DARPA Grand Challenge, and Boss, which won the DARPA Urban Challenge.
File:RandyPausch_Wiki_2.jpg|Author of "The Last Lecture" Randy Pausch
In 2015, Carnegie Mellon University has been ranked The Best Information Technology School in the United States.
In addition to participating in campus traditions such as Buggy and Booth, the fraternities and sororities hold an annual fundraiser called Greek Sing, one of the largest Greek events of the year.
About 96.3% of first-year students enrolled in 2009 returned for their second year, and 72.7% of students in the class of 2010 graduated within four years.
In 2015, the most selective undergraduate college was the School of Computer Science, which admitted only 5% of total applicants.
The Carnegie Mellon Cricket Club represents Carnegie Mellon in inter-collegiate competitions.
There are 20 residential buildings on campus and five off campus in the Oakland area of Pittsburgh.
In addition, joint degrees are offered with Civil and Environmental Engineering and the Heinz College.
Carnegie Mellon is also home to the '''Carnegie School''' of management and economics.
Standard is a typical college dormitory setting, a long hallway with a series of double (two people to a room).
The Cut was formed by filling in a ravine (hence the name) with soil from a nearby hill that was leveled to build the College of Fine Arts building.
The 68th Tony Awards in 2014 announced Carnegie Mellon University as its first educational partner in jointly awarding the "Tony Honor for Excellence in Theatre Education", which will "honor kindergarten through high school (K-12) theatre educators."
In 1936 the Carnegie Tech riflery team won the national intercollegiate championship.
This pioneering project, which linked all computers and workstations on campus, set the standard for educational computing and established Carnegie Mellon as a leader in the use of technology in education and research.
Following a $67 million donation from David A. Tepper in 2013, the university sought to expand the undergraduate business program.
Some professors hold joint professorships between the two schools, and students at each university may take classes at the other (with appropriate approvals).
In the fall of 2007, the cities of Aveiro and Lisbon, Portugal were added to the Information Networking Institute's remote locations.
The robot, known as Andy, is designed to explore lunar pits, which might include entrances to caves.
The research money comes largely from federal sources, with federal investment of $277.6 million.
A memorial to Judith Resnik can be found at the base of Hammerschlag Hall and is maintained by members of Tau Beta Pi, the National Engineering Honor Society.
On September 7, 2011, William S. Dietrich II, the former chairman of Dietrich Industries, Inc., a subsidiary of Worthington Industries, Inc., pledged a gift of $265 million, effective on October 6, 2011, upon his death.
In addition, an expanding student population resulted in a need for improved facilities for student life, athletics and libraries.
The Carnegie Mellon Tartans were a founding member of the University Athletic Association of NCAA Division III.
The two universities also co-host academic conferences, such as the 2012 Second Language Research Forum.
New facilities were needed to respond to the University's growing national reputation in artificial intelligence, business, robotics and the arts.
In addition, the college is expanding efforts in green chemistry, bioinformatics, computational biology, nanotechnology, computational finance,  cosmology, sensor research and biological physics.
The Tepper Quad will include a new Tepper School of Business facility across Forbes Avenue from a renovated and expanded Heinz College as well as other university-wide buildings and a welcome center which will serve as a public gateway to the university.
The Institute for Software Research International (ISRI) offers graduate programs in Coimbra, Portugal.
The '''Human-Computer Interaction Institute''' (HCII) is a division of the School of Computer Science and is considered one of the leading centers of human-computer interaction research, integrating computer science, design, social science, and learning science.
It contains 318 offices as well as labs, computer clusters, lecture halls, classrooms and a 255-seat auditorium.
Prime offers more privacy through suite-style rooms.
