Carpet production in small, privately owned workshops in the town of Aubusson began in 1743.
the methods of manufacture, including the principles of designing, preparatory processes, and weaving , are the same in most respects for both Brussels and Wilton qualities.
Carpet is commonly made in widths of  and  in the USA, 4&nbsp;m and 5&nbsp;m in Europe.
The warp in woven carpet is usually cotton and the weft is jute.
Another category of Indian rugs which, though quite popular in most of the western countries, have not received much press, is hand-woven rugs of Khairabad (Citapore rugs).
The term "carpet" is often used interchangeably with the term "rug".
Documentary evidence shows production beginning in Spain as early as the 10th century AD.
Flat weave is the basic weaving technique of Citapore rugs and generally cotton is the main weaving material here but jute, rayon and chenille are also popular.
16th century designs usually involve scrolling vines and regional flowers (for example, the Bradford carpet).
Azerbaijan was one of the most important centers of carpet weaving and as a result of that, several different schools have evolved.
The local carpets have been prized at exhibitions in London, Paris, Liège and Brussels.
The carpet industry in India has been successful in establishing social business models that help underprivileged sections of the society.
Nylon can be printed easily and has excellent wear characteristics.
These carpets are usually the most expensive due to the relatively slow speed of the manufacturing process.
after this development the loom became known as the Wilton loom, and in modern usage the designation wilton applies to both cut-pile and loop-pile carpets made in this loom.
The Brussels Loom was introduced into England towards the middle of the eighteenth century marked the beginning of a new era in carpet-weaving.
The carpet is produced on a loom quite similar to woven fabric.
These 105 masterpieces, made under the artistic direction of Charles Le Brun, were never installed, as Louis XIV moved the court to Versailles in 1688.
"wrapped up tight, warm, and comfortable".
As opposed to most antique rug manufactory practices, Chinese carpets were woven almost exclusively for internal consumption.
Knotting by hand is most prevalent in oriental rugs and carpets.
After the first World War the carpets started to be produced for the general market using popular designs and colourways but they always remained at the luxury end of the general market.
Pirot is located on the historical main highway which linked central Europe with Constantinople.Pirot was also known as Şarköy in Turkish.
The Gultapin excavations discovered carpet several weaving tools which date back to the 4th-3rd millennium BC, mostly of Armenian origin.
The slang expression "laugh at the carpet" means to vomit on the floor (especially a carpeted floor).
The term "carpet" is often used interchangeably with the term "rug", although the term "carpet" can be applied to a floor covering that covers an entire house, whereas a "rug" is generally no bigger than a single room, and traditionally does not even span from one wall to another, and is typically not even attached as part of the floor.
Despite the impact of industrialization, the areas where Brussels Wilton carpets were produced remained centred mainly in the Midlands around the towns of Wilton and Kidderminster and in West Yorkshire where the firm of John Crossley and Sons in Halifax became synonymous with carpet manufacture.
In fact, Şarköys have been established from the 17th century in the region of the Western Balkan or Stara Planina mountains in the towns of Pirot, Berkowiza, Lom, Chiprovtsi and Samokow.
Sangla Hill is now a focal point in Carpet Industry in Pakistan.
Carpets woven in the Punjab made use of motifs and decorative styles found in Mughal architecture.
These carpet fibers have resiliency comparable to nylon.
Berber carpets with smaller loops tend to be more resilient and retain their new appearance longer than large looped berber styles.
Both nylon 6 and nylon 6-6 are used.
The expression "on the carpet" refers to a matter which is under discussion or consideration.
They are one of the most important traditional handicrafts in Serbia.
Carpet can be formulated from many single or blended natural and synthetic fibres.
DuPont subsequently commercialized a biological process for making 1,3-propanediol from corn syrup, imparting significant renewable content on the corresponding Sorona polyester carpet fibers.
This square tufted carpet, almost perfectly intact, is considered by many experts to be of Caucasian, specifically Armenian, origin.
The pile usually consists of twisted tufts which are typically heat-treated to maintain their structure.
If a stain does set, it can be difficult to clean.
Later they have been also produced in Knjaževac and Caribrod.
These works are either adaptations of Anatolian or Indo-Persian designs or employ Elizabethan-Jacobean scrolling vines and blossoms.
A number of weavers may work together on the same carpet.
Loop pile carpets are renowned for being hard wearing and lend carpets great texture.
Carpets of completely different French based designs began to be woven in a royal workshop, the Royal Tapestry Factory ''(Real Fábrica de Tapices de Santa Bárbara)'' in Madrid in the 18th century.
The excavations to date (only 3% of the town) not only found carbonized fabric but also fragments of kilims painted on the walls of some of the dwellings.
In modern usage in the U.S., the term is sometimes used derisively to refer to a politician who runs for public office in an area where he or she does not have deep community ties, or has lived only for a short time.
The term carpet bag, which literally refers to a suitcase made from a piece of carpet, is used in several figurative contexts.
These dye sites need to be filled in order to give nylon carpet any type of stain resistance.
The carpets are always hand made of wool or sometimes cotton, with occasional additions of silk.
As of the late 1990s, hand-knotted carpets were among Pakistan's leading export products and their manufacture is the second largest cottage and small industry.
Because many of these weavers settled in South-eastern England in Norwich the 14 extant 16th and 17th century carpets are sometimes referred to as "Norwich carpets."
The Pirot carpet varieties are also found in Bulgaria and Turkey, and in many other international collections.
Historically: religious, cultural, environmental, sociopolitical and socioeconomic conditions created widespread utilitarian need and have provided artistic inspiration among the many tribal peoples and ethnic groups in Central Asia and Turkey.
There were smaller areas of manufacture in Scotland and Durham.
the carpet (''kilim'') industry remains dominant in the town.
Mary, Queen of Scots, is known to have been an avid embroiderer.
The original Turkmen rugs were produced by the Turkmen tribes who are the main ethnic group in Turkmenistan and are also found in Afghanistan and Iran.
'''Pirot carpet''' (Serbian: Пиротски ћилим, Pirotski ćilim) to a variety of flat tapestry-woven carpets or rugs traditionally produced in Pirot, a town in southeastern Serbia.
This richly coloured carpet is 200 x 183&nbsp;cm (6'6" x 6'0") and framed by a border of griffins.
In 1820s British servant slang, to "carpet" someone means to call them for a reprimand.
Even now a large percentage of the 55,000 population town still seek employment in this industry.
He is considered founder of this industry in Pakistan.
Their design combines rich acanthus leaves, architectural  framing, and mythological scenes (inspired by Cesare Ripa's Iconologie) with emblems of Louis XIV's royal power.
''Cutting the rug'' is a slang term for dancing which originated in 1942.
Carpet tiles are also available, typically  square.
published 1966 Chap 7 Wilton Carpets page 72.)
Closeness of pile rather than height contributes to their neat appearance and hard wearing properties, although they do not simulate the luxury of cut-pile carpets.
Gantzhorn concurs with this thesis.
Gradually it blended with Indian art.
In the past, acrylic carpet used to fuzz or "pill" easily.
Afghan carpets are also quite commonly known as Afghan rugs - are a distinguished and well recognised handmade material design that originates from Afghanistan.
Women learn their weaving skills at an early age, taking months or even years to complete the beautiful pile rugs and flat woven kilims that were created for their use in every aspect of daily life.
Over the years, new types of acrylics have been developed to alleviate some of these problems, although the issues have not been completely removed.
Axminster Rococo designs often have a brown ground and include birds copied from popular, contemporary engravings.
Starting in the 13th century oriental carpets begin to appear in paintings (notably from Italy, Flanders, England, France, and the Netherlands).
Armenian carpets were renowned by foreigners who travelled to Artsakh; the Arab geographer and historian Al-Masudi noted that, among other works of art, he had never seen such carpets elsewhere in his life.
Carpet production after the Christian reconquest continued in Alcaraz while Cuenca, first recorded as a weaving centre in the 12th century, became increasingly important, and was dominant in the 17th and early 18th century.
A "rugrat" or "rug-rat" is a slang term for a baby or child, first attested in 1968.
Kashmir carpets are also hand-knotted.
With a long history of adaptation and evolution, the tradition of Scandinavian rug-making is among the most storied of all European rug-making traditions.
Carpets are used for a variety of purposes, including insulating a person's feet from a cold tile or concrete floor, making a room more comfortable as a place to sit on the floor (e.g., when playing with children or as a prayer rug), reducing sound from walking (particularly in apartment buildings) and adding decoration or colour to a room.
The art of weaving developed in South Asia at a time when few other civilizations employed it.
During the Moorish (Muslim) period production took place in Alcaraz in the province of Murcia, as well as being recorded in other towns.
While most antique carpets are classified according to a specific region or manufactory, scholars attribute the age of any specific Chinese rug to the ruling emperor of the time.
A '''carpet''' is a textile floor covering typically consisting of an upper layer of pile attached to a backing.
The eminent authority of ancient carpets, Ulrich Schurmann, says of it, "From all the evidence available I am convinced that the Pazyryk rug was a funeral accessory and most likely a masterpiece of Armenian workmanship".
The carpets are made in Afghanistan, as well as by Afghan refugees who reside in Pakistan and Iran.
Under Shah Jahan's reign, Mughal carpet weaving took on a new aesthetic and entered its classical phase.
According to Iranica Online "''The main weaving zone was in the eastern Transcaucasus south of the mountains that bisect the region diagonally , the area now comprised in the Azerbaijan SSR; it is the homeland of a Turkic population known today as Azeri.
''Rolling out the red carpet'' is an expression which means to welcome a guest lavishly and handsomely.
The earliest group of Hispano-Moresque carpets, Admiral carpets (also known as armorial carpets), has an all-over geometric, repeat pattern punctuated by blazons of noble, Christian Spanish families.
Carpets have been crafted according to traditional designs, but in recent years it is up to the customers to decide the pattern of the carpet they have ordered.
Although claimed by many cultures, this square tufted carpet, almost perfectly intact, is considered by many experts to be of Caucasian, specifically Armenian, origin.
On a '''knotted pile''' carpet (formally, a "supplementary weft cut-loop pile" carpet), the structural weft threads alternate with a supplementary weft that rises at right angles to the surface of the weave.
This is because Islam, the dominant religion in that part of the world, forbids their depiction.
As a result, the town and the municipality have been experiencing a demographic crisis.
16th-century Renaissance Spanish carpet design is a derivative of silk textile design.
The carpet weaving industry played a key role in the revival of Chiprovtsi in the 1720s after the devastation of the failed 1688 Chiprovtsi Uprising against Ottoman rule.
When made with polypropylene, commercial grade styles wear very well, making them very suitable for areas with heavy foot traffic such as offices.
The rug mentioned in the Kaptavan inscriptions is composed of three arches, "covered with vegatative ornaments", and bears an artistic resemblance to the illuminated manuscripts produced in Artsakh.
Plush carpet is a cut pile and Berber carpet is a loop pile.
This production was soon moved to the Savonnerie factory in Chaillot just west of Paris.
As is true in most weaving cultures, traditionally and nearly exclusively, it is women and girls who are both artisan and weaver.
The meaning of "rug" "...evolved to "coverlet, wrap" (1590s), then "mat for the floor" (1808)".
Khairabad small town in Citapore (now spelled as "Sitapur") district of India had been ruled by Raja Mehmoodabad.
In the United Kingdom, the term was adopted to refer informally to those who join a mutual organization, such as a building society, in order to force it to demutualize, that is, to convert into a joint stock company, solely for personal financial gain.
In the late 19th century and up to the Second World War, Pirot kilims have been frequently used as insignia of Serbian and Yugoslav royalty.
It was the first loom on which a pile carpet could be woven mechanically, the pile consisting of rows of loops, formed over wires inserted weftwise during weaving and subsequently withdrawn.
Acrylic is fairly difficult to dye but is colourfast, washable, and has the feel and appearance of wool, making it a good rug fabric.
These carpets are more technologically advanced.
The GoodWeave labelling scheme used throughout Europe and North America assures that child labour has not been used: importers pay for the labels, and the revenue collected is used to monitor centres of production and educate previously exploited children.
Six of Axminster carpets are known as the "Lansdowne" group.
Carpetbaggers allegedly politically manipulated and controlled former Confederate states for financial and power gains.
Another polyester, "PTT" (Polytrimethylene terephthalate), also called Sorona or 3GT (Dupont)or Corterra (Shell), is a variant of PET.
In the UK, some carpets are still manufactured for pubs and clubs in a narrow width of  and then sewn to size.
Carpet bombing is a type of bombing from airplanes which developed in the 20th century in which an entire city is bombed (rather than precise strikes on military targets).
Historically, the term "carpet" was also applied to table and wall coverings, as carpets were not commonly used on the floor in European interiors until the 15th century.
There are several styles of knotting, but the two main types of knot are the '''symmetrical''' (also called Turkish or Ghiordes) and '''asymmetrical''' (also called Persian or Senna).
There are new styles of carpet combining the two styles called cut and loop carpeting.
Blended wool yarns are extensively used in production of modern carpet, with the most common blend being 80% wool to 20% synthetic fibre, giving rise to the term "80/20".
Other ethnic groups also practiced weaving, some of them in other parts of the Caucasus, but they were of lesser importance''."
Carpets of Indo-Persian design were introduced to Europe via the Dutch, British, and French East India Companies of the 17th and 18th century.
Wall-to-wall carpet is distinguished from rugs or mats, which are loose-laid floor coverings, as wall-to-wall carpet is fixed to the floor and covers a much larger area.
The ''Online Etymology Dictionary'' states that the term comes "...from Old French carpite "heavy decorated cloth, carpet," from Medieval Latin or Old Italian carpita "thick woolen cloth," probably from Latin carpere "to card, pluck," probably so called because it was made from unraveled, shredded, "plucked" fabric".
The earliest surviving corpus of Persian carpets come from the Safavid dynasty (1501–1736) in the 16th century.
A related figurative expression used centuries earlier was "cut the grass under (one's) feet", which is attested to in the 1580s.
Commercial grade level-loop carpets have very small loops, and commercial grade cut-pile styles are well constructed.
Polypropylene is used to produce carpet yarns because it is inexpensive.
A third common definition is that a carpet is permanently fixed in place while a rug is simply laid out on the floor.
Brussels carpet have a smooth slightly ribbed surface and their patterning is well defined, a characteristic feature of the cloth.
Also in the rug selling industry, Şarköy are mostly labeled as being of oriental or Turkish origin as to easier sell them to non familiar customers as they prefer rug with putative oriental origin.
It is useful to distinguish between the original Turkmen tribal rugs and the rugs produced in large numbers for export in the 2000s, mainly in Pakistan and Iran.
Embroidered carpets were traditionally made by royal and aristocratic women in the home, but there has been some commercial manufacture since steel needles were introduced (earlier needles were made of bone) and linen weaving improved in the 16th century.
It was the first loom on which a pile carpet could be woven mechanically, the pile consisting of rows of loops, formed over wires inserted weftwise during weaving and subsequently withdrawn.
Hand-knotted carpets are a speciality and widely in demand in the West.
These are very famous in India, Pakistan and Arabia.
Carpeting is more than just a single item; it is, in fact, a system comprising the carpet itself, the carpet backing (often made of latex), the cushioning underlay, and a method of installation.
Stemming from the homonym to the today's Turkish settlement of Şarköy in Thracia, which had no established rug making tradition, Şarköys are often falsely ascribed to originate from Turkey.
Hotels and leisure venues almost always choose these types and many homes use woven Axminsters as design statements.
The knots are secured with (usually one to four) rows of weft.
This happened when the fibres degraded over time and short strands broke away with contact or friction.
In 1608 Henry IV initiated the French production of "Turkish style" carpets under the direction of Pierre DuPont.
Since the 20th century, nylon is one of the most common materials for the construction of carpets.
Pakistani craftsmen have the capacity to produce any type of carpet using all the popular motifs of gulls, medallions, paisleys, traceries, and geometric designs in various combinations.
The earliest surviving examples of the craft were produced during the time of Ch'ung Chen, the last emperor of the Chen Dynasty.
Excavations at Harappa and Mohenjo-Daro– ancient cities of the Indus Valley Civilization– have established that the inhabitants used spindles and spun a wide variety of weaving materials.
All but one are dated or bear a coat of arms.
Initially, the carpets woven showed the classic Persian style of fine knotting.
The Chiprovtsi carpet (Чипровци килим) is a type of handmade carpet with two absolutely identical sides, part of Bulgarian national heritage, traditions, arts and crafts.
Exeter and Moorfields were both staffed with renegade weavers from the French Savonnerie and, therefore, employ the weaving structure of that factory and Perrot-inspired designs.
Khairabad (Mehmoodabad Estate) was part of Oudh province which had been ruled by shi'i Muslims having Persian linkages.
Chaudary Mukhtar Ahmad Member son of Maher Janda introduced and taught this art to locals and immigrants.
The hand-made rugs come in many patterns and colours, but the traditional and most common example of an Afghan carpet is the octagon-shaped elephant-foot (Bukhara) - The rugs with this print are commonly red in colour.
Carpets can be produced on a loom quite similar to woven fabric, made using needle felts, knotted by hand (in oriental rugs), made with their pile injected into a backing material (called tufting), flatwoven, made by hooking wool or cotton through the meshes of a sturdy fabric or embroidered.
Types of European flatwoven carpets include Venetian, Dutch, damask, list, haircloth, and ingrain (aka double cloth, two-ply, triple cloth, or three-ply).
Oriental carpets began to appear in Europe after the Crusades in the 11th century, due to contact by Crusaders with Eastern traders.
There are many stories about magic carpets, legendary flying carpets that can be used to transport people who are on it instantaneously or quickly to their destination.
''IKEA'' and ''Agocha'' have been major buyers of rugs from this area.
Thus the carpets produced became typical of the Indian origin and gradually the industry began to diversify and spread all over the subcontinent.
Traditional rugs often feature a deliberate ‘mistake’ on behalf of the weaver to guarantee their authenticity.
Turks; nomadic or pastoral, agrarian or town dwellers, living in tents or in sumptuous houses in large cities, have protected themselves from the extremes of the cold weather by covering the floors, and sometimes walls and doorways, with carpets and rugs.
Unlike woven carpets, '''embroidery carpets'''' are not formed on a loom.
There are documented and surviving examples of carpets from three 18th-century manufactories:  Exeter (1756–1761, owned by Claude Passavant, 3 extant carpets), Moorfields (1752–1806, owned by Thomas Moore, 5 extant carpets), and Axminster (1755–1835, owned by Thomas Whitty, numerous extant carpets).
These carpets are natural barriers against the cold.
Famous Afghan rugs include the ''Shindand'' or ''Adraskan'' (named after local Afghan villages), woven in the Herat area, in western Afghanistan.
There has recently been a surge in demand for Afghan carpets, although many Afghan carpet manufacturers market their products under the name of a different country.
The meaning of the term "carpet" shifted in the 15th century to refer to floor coverings.
The historian Herodotus writing in the 5th century BC also informs us that the inhabitants of the Caucasus wove beautiful rugs with brilliant colors which would never fade.23 Various rug fragments have been excavated in Armenia dating back to the 7th century BC or earlier.
One of the oldest settlements ever to have been discovered, Çatalhöyük is located south east of Konya in the middle of the Anatolian region.
Common themes and patterns found on Armenian carpets were the depiction of dragons and eagles.
The term "rug" was first used in English in the 1550s, with the meaning "coarse fabric".
The knotted rug is believed to have reached Asia Minor and the Middle East with the expansion of various nomadic tribes peoples during the latter period of the great Turkic migration of the 8th and 9th centuries.
The term gained a popular usage after the American Civil War to refer to carpetbaggers, Northerners who moved to the South after the war, especially during the Reconstruction era (1865–1877).
The traditional domain of rugs from far away continents, hand knotted squares and rugs use the expertise of weavers to produce work of the finest quality.
The earliest extant Spanish carpet, the so-called Synagogue carpet in the Museum of Islamic Art, Berlin, is a unique survival dated to the 14th century.
Brussels Wilton Carpets were initially produced on 27inch(3/4)  looms and were sewn together by hand.
'''Brussels Wilton'''
This is the most common method of manufacturing of domestic carpets for floor covering purposes in the world.
At the time of independence, manufacturing of carpets was set up in Sangla Hill, a small town of District Sheikhupura.
Like the French, English weavers used the symmetrical knot.
A '''flatweave''' carpet is created by interlocking warp (vertical) and weft (horizontal) threads.
To be ''called on the carpet'' means to be summoned for a serious reason, typically a scolding reprimand; this usage dates from 1900.
Normally many colored yarns are used and this process is capable of producing intricate patterns from predetermined designs (although some limitations apply to certain weaving methods with regard to accuracy of pattern within the carpet).
Knotted pile carpet weaving technology probably came to England in the early 16th century with Flemish Calvinists fleeing religious persecution.
Brussels carpet have a smooth slightly ribbed surface and their patterning is well defined, a characteristic feature of the carpet.
The Whitty factory closed in 1835 with the advent of machine-made carpeting.
One derivation of the term states that the French term came from the Old Italian ''carpita'', from the verb "carpire" meaning ''to pluck''.
The term is of "...Scandinavian origin; compare Norwegian dialectal rugga "coarse coverlet," from Old Norse rogg "shaggy tuft," from Proto-Germanic *rawwa-, perhaps related to rag (n.) and rough (adj.)."
The warp threads are set up on the frame of the loom before weaving begins.
These options are almost always at a premium cost.
It was excavated by Sergei Ivanovich Rudenko in 1949 from a Pazyryk burial mound in the Altai Mountains in Siberia.
Carpets can be made in any colour by using differently dyed fibers.
Still, some show figures engaged either in the hunt or feasting scenes.
the methods of manufacture, including the principles of designing, preparatory processes, and weaving , are the same in most respects for both Brussels and Wilton qualities.
The latter now variously described as Brussels-Wilton, round wire Wilton, loop-pile Wilton, and round wired jacquard.
This type of rug is now generally made as a handicraft.
Due to the additional costs in labour these carpets were normally only produced for the bespoke market.
Wool is relatively expensive and consequently it only comprises a small portion of the market.
However, painted depictions prove a longer history of production.
