The Roman city was again occupied by the Muslim conquest of the Maghreb, in 698.
Regarding ''Phoenician'' writings, few remain and these seldom refer to Carthage.
It had the advantageous position of being situated on the outlet of the Medjerda River, Tunisia's only river that flowed all year long.
The merchant harbour at Carthage was developed, after settlement of the nearby Punic town of Utica.
Thus, of their ancient writings we have little of major interest left to us by Carthage, or by Phoenicia the country of origin of the city founders.
Audollent divides the area of Roman Carthage into four quarters, ''Cartagenna'', ''Dermèche'', ''Byrsa'' and ''La Malga''.
Under Roman rule, however, grain production (wheat and barley) for export increased dramatically in 'Africa'; yet these later fell with the rise in Roman Egypt's grain exports.
The ''Chora'' (farm lands of Carthage) encompassed a limited area: the north coastal ''tell'', the lower Bagradas river valley (inland from Utica), Cape Bon, and the adjacent ''sahel'' on the east coast.
The Roman poet Virgil (70–19 BC) imagined early Carthage, when his legendary character Aeneas had arrived there:
Here one may remember that the city-state of Carthage, who citizens were mainly ''Libyphoenicians'' (of Phoenician ancestry born in Africa), dominated and exploited an agricultural countryside composed mainly of native Berber sharecroppers and farmworkers, whose affiliations to Carthage were open to divergent possibilities.
The ''urban landscape'' of Carthage is known in part from ancient authors, augmented by modern digs and surveys conducted by archeologists.
1600–1185, from ancient Ugarit, located to the north of Phoenicia on the Syrian coast; it was a Canaanite city politically affiliated with the Hittites.
Nonetheless, only a "meager picture" of the cultural life of the earliest pioneers in the city can be conjectured, and not much about housing, monuments or defenses.
Larger anchorages existed to the north and south of the city.
Punic culture here achieved the introduction of agricultural sciences first developed for lands of the eastern Mediterranean, and their adaptation to local African conditions.
Yet within the Punic domain that surrounded the city-state of Carthage, there were ethnic divisions in addition to the usual quasi feudal distinctions between lord and peasant, or master and serf.
"It was divided into market gardens and orchards of all sorts of fruit trees, with many streams of water flowing in channels irrigating every part.
In some places, the ground is covered with mosaics called punica pavement, sometimes using a characteristic red mortar.
On top of Byrsa hill, the location of the Roman Forum, a residential area from the last century of existence (early second century BC.)
In each of the two letters, Pope Leo declares that, after the Bishop of Rome, the first archbishop and chief metropolitan of the whole of Africa is the bishop of Carthage.
By 1076, Cyriacus was set free, but there was only one other bishop in the province.
Carthage was one of the largest cities of the Hellenistic period and was among the largest cities in preindustrial history.
Their political arrangements and periodic crises, their economic and work life, the cultural ties and social relations established and nourished (infrequently as kin), are not known to us directly from ancient Punic authors in written accounts.
Excavations were performed in the second half of the 19th century by
We cannot therefore access directly the line of thought or the contour of their worldview as expressed in their own words, in their own voice.
Yet it was not until the aristocrats of Carthage became wealthy owners of agricultural lands in Africa that a council of elders was institutionalized at Carthage.
*(3) suppression of piracy, and promotion of Carthage's ability to freely navigate the seas.
Cartagenna and Dermèche correspond with the lower city, including the site of Punic Carthage; Byrsa is associated with the upper city, which in Punic times was a walled citadel above the harbour; and ''La Malga'' is linked with the more remote parts of the upper city in Roman times.
magistrates and a sacred senate chosen.
The superiority of their constitution is proved by the fact that the common people remain loyal to the constitution; the Carthaginians have never had any rebellion worth speaking of, and have never been under the rule of a tyrant."
Rather, the likely reader of Mago was "the master of a relatively modest estate, from which, by great personal exertion, he extracted the maximum yield."
It may have been Juba II who 'discovered' the five-centuries-old 'log book' of Hanno the Navigator, called the ''Periplus'', among library documents saved from fallen Carthage.
Anyone who prefers to live in a town has no need of an estate in the country."
The walls altogether ran for about 33 km to encircle the city.
"Many of the Carthaginian institutions are excellent.
According to the not always reliable history of Herodian, Carthage rivaled Alexandria for second place in the Roman empire.
Carthage also became a center of early Christianity (see Carthage (episcopal see)).
"One who has bought land should sell his town house, so that he will have no desire to worship the household gods of the city rather than those of the country; the man who takes greater delight in his city residence will have no need of a country estate."
The many amphorae with Punic markings subsequently found about ancient Mediterranean coastal settlements testify to Carthaginian trade in locally made olive oil and wine.
The ''agora'' was also an area of public squares and plazas, where the people might formally assemble, or gather for festivals.
The medina of Tunis, originally a Berber settlement, was established as the new regional center under the Umayyad Caliphate in the early 8th century.
Laws were being enacted,
Excavations performed by French archaeologists in the 1920s attracted an extraordinary amount of attention because of the evidence for child sacrifice they produced, in Greco-Roman and Biblical tradition associated with the Canaanite god Moloch (Baal Hammon).
The ''libri punici'' inherited from his grandfather surely became useful to him when composing his ''Libyka'', a work on North Africa written in Greek.
"Thanks to this burial archaeology we know more about archaic Carthage than about any other contemporary city in the western Mediterranean."
Ancillary would be the growth of reciprocity between different family firms, foreign and domestic.
He proposed a one-year term for the 104, as part of a major civic overhaul.
Aristotle disapproves, mentionting the flute-player and the shoemaker.
Aristotle (384–322) discusses Carthage in his work, ''Politica''; he begins: "The Carthaginians are also considered to have an excellent form of government."
When deadlocked the Suffets and the quasi-senatorial institution of elders might request the assembly to vote; also, assembly votes were requested in very crucial matters in order to achieve political consensus and popular coherence.
... Part of the land was planted with vines, part with olives and other productive trees.
The Greeks were favourably impressed by the constitution of Carthage; Aristotle had a separate study of it made which unfortunately is lost.
In Punic farming society, according to Mago, the small estate owners were the chief producers.
*fragments quoted from Mago's fourth/third century 28-volume treatise on agriculture (Latin translations);
The hired workers might be considered 'rural proletariat', drawn from the local Berbers.
Early residential districts wrapped around the Byrsa from the south to the north east.
When his reforms were blocked by a financial official about to become a judge for life, Hannibal rallied the populace against the 104 judges.
Here men were dredging harbors, there they laid
Business activity was accordingly both stimulated and challenged.
Unfortunately, only fragments of ''Libyka'' survive, mostly from quotations made by other ancient authors.
We do not have a Punic name for this body.
There were country homes everywhere, lavishly built and covered with stucco.
After this ill-fated attempt, a new city of Carthage was built on the same land by Julius Caesar in the period from 49 to 44 BC, and by the first century, it had grown to be the second-largest city in the western half of the Roman Empire, with a peak population of 500,000.
Once "the City Archives, the Annals, and the scribal lists of ''suffets''" existed, but evidently these were destroyed in the horrific fires during the Roman capture of the city in 146 BC.
To the west, three parallel walls were built.
After the fall of Carthage, Rome annexed the majority of the Carthaginian colonies, including other North African locations such as Volubilis, Lixus, Chellah, and Mogador.
The open-air Carthage Paleo-Christian Museum has exhibits excavated under the auspices of UNESCO from 1975 to 1984.
These two exarchates were the western bulwarks of the Byzantine Empire, all that remained of its power in the West.
The assembly members had no ''legal'' wealth or birth qualification.
He wrote for the Mediterranean-wide audience then enjoying classical literature.
Several architecutural floorplans of homes have been revealed by recent excavations, as well as the general layout of several city blocks.
After Tunisian independence in 1956, the Tunis conurbation gradually extended around the airport, and Carthage (قرطاج '' Qarṭāj'') is now a suburb of Tunis, covering the area between Sidi Bou Said and Le Kram.
Among its major monuments was an amphitheater.
1st century BCE), who enjoyed access to ancient writings later lost, and on which he based most of his writings, described agricultural land near the city of Carthage circa 310 BC:
Carthage was very stable; there were few openings for tyrants.
The issues involved in rural land management also reveal underlying features of Punic society, its structure and stratification.
*several pages of Hanno the Navigator's log-book concerning his fifth century maritime exploration of the Atlantic coast of west Africa (Greek translation);
*the Roman playwright Plautus (c. 250 – 184) in his ''Poenulus'' incorporates a few fictional speeches delivered in Punic, whose written lines are transcribed into Latin letters phonetically;
Most ancient literature concerning Carthage comes from Greek and Roman sources as Carthage's own documents were destroyed by the Romans.
The purpose was to obtain arable lands for impoverished farmers.
while others picked out building sites and plowed
Later Polybius of Megalopolis (c.204–122, Greek) in his ''Istoria'' would describe the Roman Republic in more detail as a mixed constitution in which the Consuls were the monarchy, the Senate the aristocracy, and the Assemblies the democracy.
René Dussaud identified a 4th-century BC stela found in Carthage as depicting a child sacrifice.
In the first of a string of rather poorly reported councils at Carthage a few years later, no fewer than 70 bishops attended.
The city's location made it master of the Mediterranean's maritime trade.
Probably some of Hiempsal II's ''libri punici'', that had escaped the fires that consumed Carthage in 146 BC, wound up later in the large royal library of his grandson Juba II (r.25 BC-AD 24).
Carthage, which had previously disarmed, then was made to face the fatal Roman siege.
Stone stairs were set in the streets, and drainage was planned, e.g., in the form of soakways leaching into the sandy soil.
The  of wall on the isthmus to the west were truly massive and were never penetrated.
Furthermore, Carthage although surrounded by the Romans built one hundred and twenty decked ships in two months... for old timber had been stored away in readiness, and a large number of skilled workmen, maintained at public expense."
All ships crossing the sea had to pass between Sicily and the coast of Tunisia, where Carthage was built, affording it great power and influence.
This inherent instability in the countryside drew the unwanted attention of potential invaders.
Hallward's chapter in ''Cambridge Ancient History'', published in 1930.
How its members were selected is unknown, e.g., whether by festival group or urban ward or another method.
In line with the declaration of Pope Leo IX in 1053, Pope Leo XIII acknowledged the revived Archdiocese of Carthage as the primatial see of Africa and Lavigerie as primate.
In the following year, Lavigerie became a cardinal.
By way of Berber informants and Punic translators, Sallust had used these surviving books to write his brief sketch of Berber affairs.
The suburb has six train stations of the TGM line between Le Kram and Sidi Bou Said:
Carthage's agricultural production was held in high regard by the ancients, and rivaled that of Rome—they were once competitors, e.g., over their olive harvests.
Earthenware often used Greek models.
The Carthaginian republic was one of the longest-lived and largest states in the ancient Mediterranean.
Direct management over cultivation of neighbouring lands by Punic owners followed.
An imperial fleet arrived and retook Carthage, but in 698, Hasan ibn al-Nu'man returned and defeated Emperor Tiberios III at the 698 Battle of Carthage.
Carthage Salammbo (named for Salambo, the fictional daughter of Hamilcar), Carthage Byrsa (named for Byrsa hill), Carthage Dermech (''Dermèche''), Carthage Hannibal (named for Hannibal), Carthage Présidence (named for the Presidential Palace) and Carthage Amilcar (named for Hamilcar).
Both the Phoenicians and the Cathaginians were well known in antiquity for their secrecy in general, and especially pertaining to commercial contacts and trade routes.
However, no ancient sources exist documenting the salting itself.
It may seem that Mago anticipated such an opinion, and instead issued this contrary advice (as quoted by the Roman writer Columella):
For, whenever the chiefs of the state deem anything honorable, the other citizens are sure to follow their example; and, where virtue has not the first place, their aristocracy cannot be firmly established."
Here beat the heart of civic life.
Being a commercial republic fielding a mercenary army, the people were not conscripted for military service, an experience which can foster the feel for popular political action.
If Carthage is not the capital, it tends to be the political pole, a « place of emblematic power » according to Sophie Bessis, leaving to Tunis the economic and administrative roles.
Although the Roman Scipio Africanus resisted such manoeuvre, eventually intervention by Rome forced Hannibal to leave Carthage.
Later the 104 would come to evaluate not only army generals but other office holders as well.
Also, both Phoenicians and Carthaginians were well known for their secrecy.
Under these circumstance, the office of king began to be transformed.
A more systematic survey of both Punic and Roman-era remains is due to Alfred Louis Delattre, who was sent to Tunis by cardinal Charles Lavigerie in 1875 on both an apostolic and an archaeological mission.
Yet some Punic books (Latin: ''libri punici'') from the libraries of Carthage reportedly did survive the fires.
Ironically, it was the Phoenicians who "invented or at least perfected and transmitted a form of writing the alphabet that has influenced dozens of cultures including our own."
The law which allows this abuse makes wealth of more account than virtue, and the whole state becomes avaricious.
Thus, corrupt city officials efficiently blocked Hannibal Barca in his efforts to reform the government of Carthage.
The heights of the Byrsa were additionally fortified; this area being the last to succumb to the Romans in 146 BC.
Although Greek-made merchandise was generally considered superior in design, Carthage also produced trade goods in abundance.
Members also formed permanent committees.
Whereas by AD 14, Rome had at least 750,000 inhabitants and in the following century may have reached 1 million, the cities of Alexandria and Antioch numbered only a few hundred thousand or less.
Despite initial devastating Roman naval losses and Rome's recovery from the brink of defeat after the terror of a 15-year occupation of much of Italy by Hannibal, the end of the series of wars resulted in the end of Carthaginian power and the complete destruction of the city by Scipio Aemilianus.
*the thousands of inscriptions made in ''Punic script'', thousands, but many extremely short, e.g., a dedication to a deity with the personal name(s) of the devotee(s).
"Aeneas found, where lately huts had been,
About 50,000 Carthaginians were sold into slavery.
Yet elsewhere these writers suggest that rural land ownership provided also a new power base among the city's nobility, for those resident in their country villas.
Its prominent heights were the scene of fierce combat during the fiery destruction of the city in 146 BC.
A 28-volume work on agriculture written in Punic by Mago, a retired army general (c. 300), was translated into Latin and later into Greek.
"Bronze engraving and stone-carving reached their zenith."
"Of the various Phoenician and Punic compositions alluded to by the ancient classical authors, not a single work or even fragment has survived in its original idiom."
An explanation proffered for why so few Phoenician works endured: early on (11th century) archives and records began to be kept on papyrus, which does not long survive in a moist coastal climate.
A walled tower overlooked both harbors.
Ridley contended that Hallward's claim may have gained traction due to historical evidence of other salted-earth instances such as Abimelech's salting of Shechem in Judges 9:45.
Neither side has left us their stories about life in Punic-era Carthage.
*(2) the reservation of markets exclusively for the merchants of Carthage, or where competition could not be eliminated, to regulate trade by state-sponsored agreements with its commercial rivals;
Tertullian later broke with the mainstream that was increasingly represented in the West by the primacy of the Bishop of Rome, but a more serious rift among Christians was the Donatist controversy, which Augustine of Hippo spent much time and parchment arguing against.
Here the ''Salammbô'' was located, the ''Sanctuary of Tanit'', not a temple but an enclosure for placing stone stelae.
Roman Carthage was destroyed—its walls torn down, its water supply cut off, and its harbors made unusable.
Surrounding Carthage were walls "of great strength" said in places to rise above 13 m, being nearly 10 m thick, according to ancient authors.
His family was considered to possess a sacred quality.
Aristotle regarded the 104 as most important; he compared it to the ephorate of Sparta with regard to control over security.
He "saw himself as the reviver of the ancient Christian Church of Africa, the Church of Cyprian of Carthage", and, on 10 November 1884, was successful in his great ambition of having the metropolitan see of Carthage restored, with himself as its first archbishop.
They were, two modern historians write, not absent landlords.
Visitors to the several growing regions that surrounded the city wrote admiringly of the lush green gardens, orchards, fields, irrigation channels, hedgerows (as boundaries), as well as the many prosperous farming towns located across the rural landscape.
Originally the Romans had landed their army on the strip of land extending southward from the city.
Thus it was the royal authority stemming from this traditional source of power that the King of Carthage possessed.
Charles Ernest Beulé and by Alfred Louis Delattre.
But perhaps this misunderstands the society; perhaps the people, whose values were based on small-group loyalty, felt themselves sufficiently connected to their city's leadership by the very integrity of the person-to-person linkage within their social fabric.
Aristotle remarked also:
State protection was extended to its sea traders by the Phoenician city of Tyre and later likewise by the daughter city-state of Carthage.
A brief catalogue would include:
Stéphane Gsell, the well-regarded French historian of ancient North Africa, summarized the major principles guiding the civic rulers of Carthage with regard to its policies for trade and commerce:
Warmington similarly admitted fault in repeating Hallward's error, but posited that the legend precedes 1930 and inspired repetitions of the practice.
Popular influence over government appears not to have been an issue at Carthage.
They spoke Canaanite, a Semitic language, and followed a local variety of the ancient Canaanite religion.
Few Punic texts survive, however."
Both cultures excelled in commercial dealings.
These are the last of whom there is mention in that period of the history of the see.
The Modern Standard Arabic form  ('''') is an adoption of French ''Carthage'', replacing an older local toponym reported as ''Cartagenna'' that directly continued the Latin name.
When Carthage fell, its nearby rival Utica, a Roman ally, was made capital of the region and replaced Carthage as the leading center of Punic trade and leadership.
Eventually the surrounding countryside was brought into the orbit of the Punic urban centres, first commercially, then politically.
The housing blocks are separated by a grid of straight streets about  wide, with a roadway consisting of clay; ''in situ'' stairs compensate for the slope of the hill.
The political fallout from the deep disaffection of African Christians is supposedly a crucial factor in the ease with which Carthage and the other centers were captured in the fifth century by Genseric, king of the Vandals, who defeated the Roman general Bonifacius and made the city the capital of the Vandal Kingdom.
Most of the walls were located on the shore, thus could be less impressive, as Carthaginian control of the sea made attack from that direction difficult.
Yet for long periods Carthage was able to manage these social difficulties.
Slaves acquired for farm work were often prisoners of war.
Pope Gregory VII wrote him a letter of consolation, repeating the hopeful assurances of the primacy of the Church of Carthage, "whether the Church of Carthage should still lie desolate or rise again in glory".
The Romans pulled the Phoenician warships out into the harbor and burned them before the city, and went from house to house, capturing and enslaving the people.
The merchants of Carthage were in part heirs of the Mediterranean trade developed by Phoenicia, and so also heirs of the rivalry with Greek merchants.
Roman imperial forces withdrew from all of Africa except Ceuta.
In 1961 it was given to the Tunisian government as part of the Independence of Tunisia, so the nearby Collège Maurice Cailloux in La Marsa, previously an annex of the Lycée Français de Carthage, was renamed to the Lycée Français de La Marsa and began serving the ''lycée'' level.
The elevation of the land at the promontory on the seashore to the north-east (now called Sidi Bou Saïd), was twice as high above sea level as that at the Byrsa (100 m and 50 m).
Carthaginian generals marshalled mercenary armies and were separately elected.
Evidence from here may indicate the occurrence of child sacrifice.
Genseric was considered a heretic, too, an Arian, and though Arians commonly despised Catholic Christians, a mere promise of toleration might have caused the city's population to accept him.
In 695, Hasan ibn al-Nu'man captured Carthage and advanced into the Atlas Mountains.
and quarried massive pillars...
Also, that "magistrates should be chosen not only for their merit but for their wealth."
By many, farming was viewed as an alternative endeavour to an urban business.
In the end, however, most Punic writings that survived the destruction of Carthage "did not escape the immense wreckage in which so many of Antiquity's literary works perished."
The Greek historian Polybius (c.203–120) referred to Carthage as "the wealthiest city in the world".
The legend that the city was sown with salt remains widely accepted despite lacking evidence among ancient historical accounts; R.T. Ridley found that the earliest such claim is attributed to B.L.
Roughly in the middle of the city stood a high citadel called the Byrsa.
Also situated on the Byrsa were luxury homes.
Over generations, such activity might result in the creation of a wide-ranging network of trading operations.
South of the citadel, near the ''cothon'' (the inner harbours) was the ''tophet'', a special and very old cemetery, which when begun lay outside the city's boundaries.
The street was often used as a storefront/shopfront; cisterns were installed in basements to collect water for domestic use, and a long corridor on the right side of each residence led to a courtyard containing a sump, around which various other elements may be found.
However, grain cultivation in the Tunisian mountains caused large amounts of silt to erode into the river.
The neighborhood, with its houses, shops, and private spaces, is significant for what it reveals about daily life there over 2100 years ago.
Many historians have since issued retractions acknowledging Ridley.
As noted, the celebrated ancient books on agriculture written by Mago of Carthage survives only via quotations in Latin from several later Roman works.
As confirmed by archaeological excavations, Carthage was a "creation ''ex nihilo''," built on 'virgin' land, and situated at the end of a peninsula (per the ancient coastline).
French-led excavations at Carthage began in 1921, and from 1923 reported finds of a large quantity of urns containing a mixture of animal and children's bones.
The city had massive walls,  in length, longer than the walls of comparable cities.
A temple of Tanit (the city's queen goddess) was likely situated on the slope of the 'lesser Byrsa' immediately to the east, which runs down toward the sea.
The two inner harbours called in Punic ''cothon'' were located in the southeast; one being commercial, and the other for war.
The institution had several hundred members drawn from the wealthiest class who held office for life.
