He accepted a position on the board of directors at Fabergé.
He also gave goods valued at $150,000 to beloved employees, $50,000 to the Motion Picture Relief Fund, $25,000 to Variety Clubs International, $20,000 to the John Tracy Clinic for deafness, $10,000 to LSD doctor Mortimer Hartman, and his clothes and personal belongings to Frank Sinatra, Roderick Mann, Stanley Donen, Kirk Kerkorian and others.
He was an amalgam of tradition and modernity, wealth and virtue, elite and mass, high and low, great and good".
Grant disliked his role and threatened to leave Hollywood, but to his surprise a critic from ''Variety'' praised his performance, and thought that he looked like a "potential femme rave".
The sexual tension between the two was so great during the making of ''Houseboat'' that the producers found it almost impossible to make.
In 1960 Grant appeared opposite Robert Mitchum, Jean Simmons and Deborah Kerr in ''The Grass Is Greener'', which was shot in England at Osterley Park and Shepperton Studios.
Grant later admitted that "taking LSD was an utterly foolish thing to do but I was a self-opinionated boor, hiding all kinds of layers and defences, hypocrisy and vanity.
He played a British army sergeant opposite Douglas Fairbanks, Jr. in the George Stevens-directed adventure film ''Gunga Din'', set at a military station in India.
A number of critics have argued that Grant had the rare star ability to turn a mediocre picture into a good one.
Philip T. Hartung of ''The Commonweal'' in his review for ''Mr.
He wasn't a narcissist, he acted as though he were just an ordinary young man.
He formed a group that summer, "The Walking Stanleys", with several of the former members of the Pender Troupe, and starred in a variety show named "Better Times" at the Hippodrome towards the end of the year.
Grant lived with actor Randolph Scott off and on for 12 years, which several authors have claimed was a gay or bisexual relationship.
The film, well received by the critics, is often called "the best Hitchcock film Hitchcock never made".
The film was praised by the critics, who admired the picture's slapstick qualities and chemistry between Grant and Loy; it became one of the biggest-selling films at the box office that year.
Without school to attend, Grant rejoined the Pender Troupe, and accepted a salary of 10 shillings a week from Pender.
The film was a box office hit, earning more than $2 million in the United States, and has since won much acclaim.
Producers Albert R. Broccoli and Harry Saltzman originally sought Grant for the role of James Bond in ''Dr.
In the 1970s, MGM was keen on remaking ''Grand Hotel'' (1932), and hoped to lure Grant into coming out of retirement to star.
McCann notes that Grant took great relish in "mocking his aristocratic character's over-refined tastes and mannerisms", though the film was panned and was seen as his worst since ''Dream Wife''.
Despite losing over $350,000 for RKO, the film earned rave reviews from critics.
Film critic Bosley Crowther of ''The New York Times'' considered that Grant was "provokingly irresponsible, boyishly gay and also oddly mysterious, as the role properly demands".
Producer Pandro Berman agreed to take him on in the face of failure because "I'd seen him do things which were excellent, and Katharine Hepburn|Katharine Hepburn wanted him too."
His ability to play off against his own image as the strong and handsome romantic hero-figure is, as a matter of fact, probably unique among superstars.
In ''Every Girl Should Be Married'', an "airy comedy", he appeared with Betsy Drake and Franchot Tone, playing a bachelor who is trapped into marriage by Drake's conniving character.
In 1975, Grant was an appointed director of MGM.
Though McCarey reportedly disliked Grant, who had mocked the director by enacting his mannerisms in the film, he recognized Grant's comic talents and encouraged him to improvize his lines and draw upon his skills developed in vaudeville.
But he wouldn't let us".
Grant befriended a troupe of acrobatic dancers, known as "The Penders" or the "Bob Pender Stage Troupe".
He remarks that Grant was "refreshingly able to play the near-fool, the fey idiot, without compromising his masculinity or surrendering to camp for its own sake.
George Cukor once stated: "You see, he didn't depend on his looks.
In 1982 he was honored with the "Man of the Year" award by the New York Friars Club at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel.
He finished the year as the fourth most popular film star at the box office.
No'' (1962) but discarded the idea as Grant would be committed to only one feature film; therefore, the producers decided to go after someone who could be part of a franchise.
Grant was nominated for two Academy Awards, for ''Penny Serenade'' (1941) and ''None But the Lonely Heart'' (1944), but never won a competitive Oscar; he received a special Academy Award for Lifetime Achievement in 1970.
She would occasionally take him to the cinema where he enjoyed the performances of Charlie Chaplin, Chester Conklin, Fatty Arbuckle, Ford Sterling, Mack Swain and Broncho Billy Anderson.
Three years later, a theatre on the MGM lot was renamed the "Cary Grant Theatre".
It premiered at the Majestic Theatre on October 31, 1929, two days after the Wall Street Crash, and lasted for 125 shows until February 1930.
At the Straw Hat Awards in New York in May 1975, Grant was awarded a special plaque which recognized the city's appreciation of him as a "star and superstar in entertainment".
He remained health conscious, staying very trim and athletic even into his late career, though Grant admitted he "never crooked a finger to keep fit".
Grant's biographer Graham McCann mentions that Maureen Donaldson, a lover of Grant in the 1970s, claimed in her book that his mother "did not know how to give affection and did not know how to receive it either."
He had expressed an interest in playing William Holden's character in ''The Bridge on the River Kwai'' at the time, but found that it was not possible because of his commitment to ''The Pride and the Passion''.
For McCann Hollywood had "found its ideal gentleman, a gentleman for a democratic culture.
Morecambe and Stirling claim that Grant had also expressed an interest in appearing in ''A Touch of Class'' (1973), ''The Verdict'' (1982) and a film adaptation of William Goldman's 1983 novel ''Adventures in the Screen Trade''.
He was later invited to attend a royal charity gala at the London Palladium in 1978.
In the 1940s, Grant and Barbara Hutton invested heavily in real estate development in Acapulco at a time when it was little more than a fishing village, and teamed with Richard Widmark, Roy Rogers, and Red Skelton to buy a hotel there.
McCann attests his "almost obsessive maintenance" with tanning, which deepened the older he got, to Douglas Fairbanks, who also had a major influence on his refined sense of dress.
The production proved to be problematic, with scenes often requiring multiple takes, frustrating the cast and crew.
Despite his strong comedic qualities, Alfred Hitchcock thought that Grant was also very effective in playing darker roles, with a mysterious, dangerous quality, remarking that "there is a frightening side to Cary that no one can quite put their finger on".
In the last few years of his life, he undertook tours of the United States in a one-man show, ''A Conversation with Cary Grant'', in which he would show clips from his films and answer audience questions.
Grant was married five times; three of his marriages were elopements with actresses—Virginia Cherrill (1934–35), Betsy Drake (1949–62) and Dyan Cannon (1965–68).
The contract stipulated Grant's weekly salary along with room and board, as well as dancing lessons and other training for his profession until the age of 18.
In November 2005, Grant again came first in ''Premiere'' magazine's list of "The 50 Greatest Movie Stars of All Time".
''Life'' magazine called it "intelligently written and competently acted".
After a string of financially unsuccessful films, which included roles as a president of a company who is sued for knocking down a boy in an accident in ''Born to Be Bad'' (1934) for 20th Century Fox, a cosmetic surgeon in ''Kiss and Make-Up'' (1934), and a blinded pilot opposite Myrna Loy in ''Wings in the Dark'' (1935), successive poor box office takings and press reports of his fledging marriage to Cherrill, led Paramount to form the conclusion that Grant was now expendable.
He subsequently trained as a stilt walker and began touring with them.
Grant wore one of his most iconic suits in the film which became very popular, a fourteen-gauge, mid-gray, worsted wool one custom-made on Savile Row.
Grant and Kelly worked well together during the production, and marked one of the most enjoyable experiences of Grant's career.
The film was a major commercial and critical success, and was nominated for five Academy Awards.
He remembered becoming fond of the performances of the Marx Brothers during this period and Zeppo Marx was an early role model for him.
In the 1940s and 1950s, Grant forged a working relationship with the director Alfred Hitchcock, appearing in films such as ''Suspicion'' (1941), ''Notorious'' (1946), ''To Catch a Thief'' (1955) and ''North by Northwest'' (1959).
His unemployment was short lived; impresario William B. Friedlander offered him the lead romantic part in his new musical, ''Nikki'', in which Grant starred opposite Fay Wray as a soldier in post-World War I France.
He did, however, briefly appear in the video documentary for Elvis's 1970 Las Vegas concert ''Elvis: That's the Way It Is'', in the audience.
He found Hitchcock and Kelly to be very professional, and later stated that Kelly was "possibly the finest actress I've ever worked with".
Grant found that he conflicted with the director during the filming and the two often argued in German.
Wansell wrote: "To millions of movie-goers around the world, Cary Grant will forever epitomize the glamour, and the style, of Hollywood in its golden years.
When he was gifted with the negatives from a number of his films in the 1970s, Grant sold them to television for a sum of over two million dollars in 1975.
Unless you have a cynical ending it makes the story too simple".
Grant visited Monaco three or four times each year during his retirement, and showed his support for Kelly by joining the board of the Princess Grace Foundation.
Except making love".
Grant later acknowledged that his negative experiences with his fiercely independent mother affected his relationships with women later in life.
In 1979, Grant hosted the American Film Institute's tribute to Alfred Hitchcock, and presented Laurence Olivier with his honorary Oscar.
And that made it all the more appealing, that a handsome young man was funny; that was especially unexpected and good because we think, 'Well, if he's a Beau Brummel, he can't be either funny or intelligent', but he proved otherwise".
He believes that Grant was always at his "physical and verbal best in situations that bordered on farce".
I've come to think that the reason we're put on this earth is to procreate.
Grant's father later placed his mother in Glenside Hospital (a mental institution) and told the 9-year-old that she had gone away on a "long holiday", later declaring that she had died.
He wed Virginia Cherrill on February 9, 1934 at Caxton Hall registry office in London.
Significant influences on his acting in this period were Sir Gerald du Maurier, A. E. Matthews, Jack Buchanan and Ronald Squire.
West would later claim that she had discovered Cary Grant.
Grant's role is described by William Rothman as projecting the "distinctive kind of nonmacho masculinity that was to enable him to incarnate a man capable of being a romantic hero".
He appeared in several routines of his own during these shows and often played the straight-man opposite Bert Lahr.
Though he was considered for the leading part in ''A Star is Born'', Grant believed that his film career was over, and briefly left the industry.
On December 7, 2001, a statue of Grant was unveiled in Millennium Square, a regenerated area next to Bristol Harbour, Bristol, in the city where he was born.
His comic timing and delivery made Grant what ''Premiere'' considers to have been  "quite simply, the funniest actor cinema has ever produced".
Hitchcock later stated that he thought the ending of the film in which Grant is sent to jail instead of committing suicide "a complete mistake because of making that story with Cary Grant.
After dating Betty Hensel for a period, on December 25, 1949, Grant married Betsy Drake, the co-star of two of his films.
Though critical reception to the overall film was mixed, Grant received high praise for his performance, with critics commenting on his suave, handsome appearance in the film.
Towards the end of their marriage they lived in a white mansion at 10615 Bellagio Road in Bel Air.
Grant was taken back to the Blackhawk Hotel where he and his wife Barbara had checked in, and a doctor was called and discovered that Grant was having a massive stroke, with a blood pressure reading of 210 over 130.
McCann notes that one of reasons that Grant was so successful with his film career is that he was not conscious of how handsome he was on screen, acting in a fashion which was most unexpected and unusual from a Hollywood star of that period.
Their daughter, Jennifer, was born on February 26, 1966.
Schulberg demanded that he change his name to "something that sounded more all-American like Gary Cooper", and they eventually agreed on Cary Grant.
In 1981, Grant was accorded the Kennedy Center Honors.
Although the show was not well received, it lasted for 184 performances, and several critics started to notice the "pleasant new juvenile" or "competent young newcomer".
Vermilye described the film's success as "a logical springboard" for Grant to star in ''The Awful Truth'' that year, his first film made with Irene Dunne and Ralph Bellamy.
The film was even more successful than ''She Done Him Wrong'', and saved Paramount from bankruptcy; Vermilye cites it as one of the best comedy films of the 1930s.
Grant often poked fun at himself with statements such as, "Everyone wants to be Cary Grant—even I want to be Cary Grant", and in ad-lib lines—such as in the film ''His Girl Friday'' (1940), saying, "Listen, the last man who said that to me was Archie Leach, just a week before he cut his throat."
The following year, Grant played neurotic Jim Blandings, the title-sake in the comedy ''Mr.
Despite a series of commercial failures, Grant was now more popular than ever and in high demand.
Stirling refers to Grant as "one of the shrewdest businessmen ever to operate in Hollywood".
Grant's appeal was unusually broad, among both men and women; Kael remarked that men wanted to be him and women dreamed of dating him.
Like ''Indiscreet'', it was warmly received by the critics and was a major commercial success,
The play ran for 72 shows, and Grant earned $350 a week before moving to Detroit, then Chicago.
On July 21, 1920, at the age of 16, Grant travelled with the group on the  to conduct a tour of the United States, arriving a week later.
Wansell notes that the pressure of a failing production began to make him fret, and he was eventually dropped from the run after six weeks of poor reviews.
Weiler, writing in ''The New York Times'', praised Grant's performance, remarking that the actor "was never more at home than in this role of the advertising-man-on-the-lam" and handled the role "with professional aplomb and grace".
In 1927 he was cast as an Australian in Reggie Hammerstein's musical, ''Golden Dawn'', for which he earned $75 a week.
I'm going to lie in bed...I shall just close all doors, turn off the telephone, and enjoy my life".
The picture was praised by critics, and it received three Academy Award nominations, and won the Golden Globe Award for Best Comedy Picture, in addition to another Golden Globe Award for Best Actor nomination.
Elias, the son of a potter, worked as a tailor's presser at a clothes factory, while Elsie, who was from a family of shipwrights, worked as a seamstress.
Perhaps the inference to be taken is that a man in his 50s or 60s has no place in romantic comedy except as a catalyst.
In 1942 Grant participated in a three-week tour of the United States as part of a group to help the war effort and was photographed visiting wounded marines in hospital.
In 1949 Grant starred alongside Ann Sheridan in the comedy ''I Was a Male War Bride'' in which he appeared in scenes dressed as a woman, wearing a skirt and a wig.
In 1962, Grant starred in the romantic comedy ''That Touch of Mink'', playing suave, wealthy businessman Philip Shayne romantically involved with an office worker, played by Doris Day.
He made some 36 public appearances in his last four years, from New Jersey to Texas, and found his audiences changed from elderly film buffs to enthusiastic college students discovering his films for the first time.
She noticed that Grant treated his female co-stars differently to most of the leading players at the time, regarding them as subjects with multiple qualities rather than "treating them as sex objects".
Grant's daughter, Jennifer, denied the claims.
In 1944, Grant starred alongside Priscilla Lane, Raymond Massey and Peter Lorre, in Frank Capra's dark comedy ''Arsenic and Old Lace'', playing the manic Mortimer Brewster, who belongs to a bizarre family which includes two murderous aunts and an uncle claiming to be President Roosevelt.
He turned 80 in 1984; Peter Bogdanovich noticed that a "serenity" had come over the actor.
In 1930, Grant toured for nine months in a production of the musical, ''The Street Singer''.
Later that year he starred opposite David Niven and Loretta Young in the comedy ''The Bishop's Wife'', playing an angel who is sent down from heaven to straighten out the relationship between the bishop (Niven) and his wife (Loretta Young).
After arriving in New York, the group performed at the New York Hippodrome—the largest theatre in the world at the time with a capacity of 5,697—for nine months, putting on twelve shows a week; their production of ''Good Times'' was successful.
For ''I'm No Angel'', Grant's salary was increased from $450 to $750 a week.
The following year he joined the William Morris Agency and was offered another juvenile part by Hammerstein, in his play ''Polly'', an unsuccessful production.
He has one daughter with Cannon, Jennifer Grant (born 1966).
Though he began to gain recognition, Grant still found it difficult forming relationships with women, remarking that "In all those years in the theatre, on the road and in New York, surrounded by all sorts of attractive girls, I never seemed able to fully communicate with them."
After a commercial failure in his first RKO venture ''The Toast of New York'', Grant was loaned to Hal Roach's studio for ''Topper'', a screwball comedy film distributed by MGM, which became his first major comedy success.
It is his reaction, blank, startled, etc., always underplayed, that creates or releases the humor".
That's what's important."
Grant did not learn that his mother was still alive until he was 31, when his father confessed to the lie, shortly before his own death.
Grant had become tired of being Cary Grant after twenty years, being successful, wealthy and popular, and remarked: "To play yourself, your ''true'' self, is the hardest thing in the world".
Pauline Kael noted that Grant did not appear confident in his role as a Salvation Army director in ''She Done Him Wrong'', which made it all the more charming.
Upon learning that his son was once again with the Pender troupe, Elias co-signed a three-year contract between his son and Pender.
Lucky'', playing a gambler in a casino aboard a ship.
Towards the end of his film career, Grant was praised by critics as a romantic leading man, and received five Golden Globe Award for Best Actor nominations, including ''Indiscreet'' (1958) with Ingrid Bergman, ''That Touch of Mink'' (1962) with Doris Day, and ''Charade'' (1963) with Audrey Hepburn.
In 1952, Grant starred in the comedy ''Room for One More'', playing an engineer husband who with his wife (Betsy Drake) adopt two children from an orphanage.
After playing a Virginian backwoodsman in the American Revolution-set ''The Howards of Virginia'', which McCann considers to have been Grant's worst film and performance, his last film of the year was in the critically lauded romantic comedy ''The Philadelphia Story'', in which he played the ex-husband of Hepburn's character.
Williams recalls that Grant rehearsed for half an hour before "something seemed wrong" all of a sudden, and he disappeared backstage.
It was terrible watching him die and not being able to help.
''Topper'' became one of the most popular movies of the year, with a critic from ''Variety'' noting that both Grant and Bennett "do their assignments with great skill".
In May 1944, the ten-minute propaganda short ''Road to Victory'' was released, in which he appeared alongside Bing Crosby, Frank Sinatra and Charles Ruggles.
Grant received his first of five Golden Globe Award for Best Actor&nbsp;– Motion Picture Musical or Comedy nominations for his performance and finished the year as the most popular film star at the box office.
A former classmate referred to him as a "scruffy little boy", while an old teacher remembered "the naughty little boy who was always making a noise in the back row and would never do his homework".
Wansell notes how Grant's performance "underlined how far his unique qualities as a screen actor had matured in the years since ''The Awful Truth''".
Scott's biographer Robert Nott states that there is no evidence that Grant and Scott were homosexual, and blames rumors on material written about them in other books, which was assumed true by historians.
Hitchcock admired Grant and considered him to have been the only actor that he had ever loved working with.
Grant rejoined Pender's troupe three days after being expelled from Fairfield.
He was presented with an Honorary Oscar by his friend Frank Sinatra at the 42nd Academy Awards in 1970, and in 1981, he was accorded the Kennedy Center Honors.
He later admitted that he was drawn to acting because of a "great need to be liked and admired".
Schickel stated that he thought the film was possibly the finest romantic comedy film of the era, and that Grant himself had professed that it was one of his personal favorites.
One critic wrote that Grant "has a strong masculine manner, but unfortunately fails to bring out the beauty of the score."
The film was major box office success, and in 1973 Deschner ranked the film as the highest earning film of Grant's career at the US box office, with takings of $9.5 million.
Grant was one of the first actors to go independent by not renewing his studio contract, effectively leaving the studio system, which almost completely controlled all aspects of an actor's life.
In the late 1970s and early 1980s Grant became troubled by the deaths of so many of his close friends, including Howard Hughes in 1976, Howard Hawks in 1977, Lord Mountbatten and Barbara Hutton in 1979, Alfred Hitchcock in 1980, Grace Kelly and Ingrid Bergman in 1982 and David Niven in 1983.
He again appeared with Hepburn in the romantic comedy ''Holiday'' later that year, which did not fare well commercially, to the point that Hepburn was considered to be "box office poison" at the time.
In 1940, Grant played a callous newspaper editor who learns that his ex-wife and former journalist, played by Rosalind Russell, is to marry an insurance officer in the comedy ''His Girl Friday'', which was praised for its strong chemistry and "great verbal athleticism" between Grant and Russell.
After the production came to end in the spring of 1931, the Shuberts invited him to spend the summer performing on the stage at The Muny in St. Louis, Missouri; he appeared in twelve different productions, putting on 87 shows.
Grant claimed to be the first freelance actor in Hollywood and the lack of central contract helped increase his salary to $300,000 per picture.
Grant admitted that he thought the appearances were "ego-fodder", remarking that "I know who I am inside and outside, but it's nice to have the outside, at least, substantiated".
Grant's elder brother, John William Elias Leach (1899&nbsp;–1900), died of tuberculous meningitis.
To console himself, Grant bought a 1927 Packard sport phaeton.
The film was shot on location in Spain and was problematic, with co-star Frank Sinatra irritating his colleagues and leaving the production after just a few weeks.
In 1933, Grant gained attention for appearing in the pre-Code films ''She Done Him Wrong''  and ''I'm No Angel'' opposite Mae West.
Grant was in good health until suffering a mild stroke in October that year.
That year, Grant also appeared opposite Sophia Loren in ''The Pride and the Passion''.
Biographers Morecambe and Stirling state that Hughes played a major role in the development of Grant's business interests, so that by 1939, he was "already an astute operator with various commercial interests".
That year he married Barbara Hutton, one of the wealthiest women in the world following a $50 million inheritance from her grandfather, Frank Winfield Woolworth.
''The Awful Truth'' began what film critic Benjamin Schwarz of ''The Atlantic'' later called "the most spectacular run ever for an actor in American pictures" for Grant.
He visited his half-brother, Eric, in England, and upon returning to New York later in the year, he played the role of Max Grunewald in a Shubert production of ''A Wonderful Night''.
With his good looks and acrobatic talents Grant became a popular figure among both girls and boys.
Grant began experimenting with the drug LSD in the late 1950s, before it became popular.
At the funeral of Mountbatten he was quoted as remarking to a friend: "I'm absolutely pooped, and I'm so goddamned old...I'm going to quit all next year.
Through Robinson, Grant met with Jesse L. Lasky and B. P. Schulberg, the co-founder and general manager of Paramount Pictures respectively.
Wanting the best for her son, Elsie taught Grant song and dance when he was four, and was keen on him having piano lessons.
The two were involved in a bitter divorce case which was widely reported in the press, with Cherrill demanding $1000 a week from her husband in benefits from his Paramount earnings.
'''Cary Grant''' (born '''Archibald Alexander Leach'''; January 18, 1904&nbsp;– November 29, 1986) was a British-American actor, known as one of classic Hollywood's definitive leading men.
Jennifer is Grant's only child.
Friends of Grant considered her to have had an extremely positive impact on Grant, and Prince Rainier of Monaco remarked that he had "never been happier" than he was in his last years with her.
He received praise from local newspapers for these performances, gaining a reputation as a romantic leading man.
Grant found the experience of working with Hepburn "wonderful" and believed that their close relationship was clear on camera, though according to Hepburn, he was particularly worried during the filming that he would be criticized for being far too old for her and seen as a "cradle snatcher".
His evenings were spent working backstage in Bristol theatres, and in 1917, at the age of 13, he was responsible for the lighting for the magician David Devant at the Hippodrome.
Grant was born Archibald Leach on January 18, 1904 at 15 Hughenden Road in the northern Bristol suburb of Horfield.
After meeting George C. Tilyou, the owner of the Steeplechase Park racecourse on Coney Island at a party, Grant was hired to appear there on stilts and attracted large crowds, wearing a bright-great coat and a sandwich board which advertised the race-track.
Grant delivers his lines "without any conviction" according to McCann.
He became a star whose characters were good looking, quick witted, funny and athletic, a star whose characters seemed to win the hearts of women without even trying".
The experience was a particularly demanding one, but gave Grant the opportunity to improve his comic technique and develop skills which would benefit him later in Hollywood.
In 1995, when over a hundred leading film directors were asked to reveal their favorite actor of all time in a ''Time Out'' poll, Grant came second only to Marlon Brando.
Grant was hospitalized for 17 days with three broken ribs and bruising.
She divorced him on March 26, 1935, following charges that Grant had hit her.
He decided which films he was going to appear in, often had personal choice of directors and co-stars, and at times negotiated a share of the gross revenue, something uncommon at the time.
Grant made arrangements for his mother to leave the institution in June 1935, shortly after he learned of her whereabouts.
I had to get rid of them and wipe the slate clean".
In 1957 Grant starred opposite Kerr in the romance ''An Affair to Remember'', playing an international playboy who becomes the object of her affections.
His image was meticulously crafted from the early days in Hollywood, where he would frequently sunbathe and avoid being photographed smoking, despite smoking two packs a day at the time.
Crowther praised the script, and noted that Grant played Dilg with a "casualness which is slightly disturbing".
When Chevy Chase joked on television in 1980 that Grant was a "homo.
According to a famous story now believed to be fictional, after seeing a telegram from a magazine editor to his agent asking, "How old Cary Grant?
Though the critic from ''Motion Picture Herald'' wrote gushingly that Grant had given a career's best with an "extraordinary and agile performance", which was matched by Rogers, it received a mixed reception overall.
Grant did not warm to co-star Joan Fontaine, finding her to be temperamental and unprofessional.
Grant entered education when he was four-and-a-half and was sent to the Bishop Road Primary School, Bristol.
