After getting all the information from the videotapes, he was able to produce clone cards which not only allowed him to withdraw the full daily limit for each account, but also allowed him to sidestep withdrawal limits by using multiple copied cards.
The idea of a PIN stored on the card was developed by a British engineer working on the MD2 named James Goodfellow in 1965 (patent GB1197183 filed on 2 May 1966 with Anthony Davies).
I hit upon the idea of a chocolate bar dispenser, but replacing chocolate with cash."
Chubb, De La Rue) and Swedish (i.e.
Most cash machines will also display on-screen safety warnings and may also be fitted with convex mirrors above the display allowing the user to see what is happening behind them.
An ATM looting is a type of bank robbery in which a series of cash machines are robbed of cash.
Little is known of the Japanese device other than it was called "Computer Loan Machine" and supplied cash as a three-month loan at 5% p.a.
An experimental Bankograph was installed in New York City in 1961 by the City Bank of New York, but removed after six months due to the lack of customer acceptance.
These lobbies have extensive security camera coverage, a courtesy telephone for consulting with the bank staff, and a security guard on the premises.
In March of the same year an ad with the instructions to use the Bancomat was published in the same newspaper.
Message Authentication Code (MAC) or Partial MAC may also be used to ensure messages have not been tampered with while in transit between the cash machine and the financial network.
In Canada, cash machines are called ''guichets automatiques'' in French and sometimes "bank machines" in English.
ATMs can also act as an advertising channel for other companies.
Sensitive data in cash machine transactions are usually encrypted with DES, but transaction processors now usually require the use of Triple DES.
This type of fraud has spread globally.
Early cash machine security focused on making the terminals invulnerable to physical attack; they were effectively safes with dispenser mechanisms.
Banking customers also have come to expect high reliability in their ATMs, which provides incentives to ATM providers to minimise machine and network failures.
Most major cash machine manufacturers provide software packages that implement these protocols.
Cheaper mass-produced equipment has been developed and is being installed in machines globally that detect the presence of foreign objects on the front of ATMs, current tests have shown 99% detection success for all types of skimming devices.
NCR's AANDC v3.x.y, where x.y are subversions).
In the wake of a homicide in Sharon Hill, Pennsylvania, the city council passed a cash machine security bill as well.
Bank lobbies that are not guarded 24 hours a day may also have secure doors that can only be opened from outside by swiping the bank card against a wall-mounted scanner, allowing the bank to identify which card enters the building.
A common method is to simply rob the staff filling the machine with money.
The online version of the Swedish machine is listed to have been operational on 6 May 1968, while claiming to be the first online cash machine in the world (ahead of a similar claim by IBM and Lloyds Bank in 1971).
Legislative efforts to require an emergency PIN system have appeared in Illinois, Kansas and Georgia, but none have succeeded yet.
The Barclays-De La Rue machine (called De La Rue Automatic Cash System or DACS) beat the Swedish saving banks' and a company called Metior's machine (a device called Bankomat) by a mere nine days and Westminster Bank’s-Smith Industries-Chubb system (called Chubb MD2) by a month.
The world's most southerly installed cash machine is located at McMurdo Station, located in New Zealand's Ross Dependency, in Antarctica since 1997.
The result of receiving too much money may be influenced by the card holder agreement in place between the customer and the bank.
The IBM 2984 was designed at the request of Lloyds Bank.
Factors influencing vault grade selection include cost, weight, regulatory requirements, cash machine type, operator risk avoidance practices and internal volume requirements.
The essence of this system was that it enabled the verification of the customer with the debited account without human intervention.
The idea of out-of-hours cash distribution developed from bankers' needs in Asia (Japan), Europe (Sweden and the United Kingdom) and North America (the United States).
Several attacks in the UK (at least one of which was successful) have involved digging a concealed tunnel under the cash machine and cutting through the reinforced base to remove the money.
These types of attacks can be prevented by a number of gas explosion prevention devices also known as gas suppression system.
Common lower-level layer communication protocols used by cash machines to communicate back to the bank include SNA over SDLC, TC500 over Async, X.25, and TCP/IP over Ethernet.
Financial consequences of incorrect machine operation also provide high degrees of incentive to minimise malfunctions.
A later variant of this approach is to trap the card inside of the cash machine's card reader with a device often referred to as a Lebanese loop.
In addition to methods employed for transaction security and secrecy, all communications traffic between the cash machine and the Transaction Processor may also be encrypted using methods such as SSL.
Some ATMs may be stocked and wholly owned by outside companies, which can further complicate this problem.
The first modern cash machine was an IBM 2984 and came into use at Lloyds Bank, Brentwood High Street, Essex, England in December 1972.
The money is often kept in cassettes, which will dye the money if incorrectly opened.
The result of these differences in interpretation means that cash machine applications typically use a middleware to even out the differences among various platforms.
A talking ATM is a type of cash machine that provides audible instructions so that people who cannot read a screen can independently use the machine, therefore effectively eliminating the need for assistance from an external, potentially malevolent source.
Industry standard vault configurations include Underwriters Laboratories UL-291 "Business Hours" and Level 1 Safes, RAL TL-30 derivatives, and CEN EN 1143-1 - CEN III and CEN IV.
A small number of 2984s were supplied to a US bank.
* Videoconferencing with human tellers, known as video tellers
CIBC machines in Canada, are able to top-up the minutes on certain pay as you go phones.
The Interac-shared cash network does not allow for the selling of goods from cash machines, due to specific security requirements for PIN entry when buying goods.
By contrast, a newer high-tech method of operating, sometimes called '''card skimming''' or '''card cloning''', involves the installation of a magnetic card reader over the real cash machine's card slot and the use of a wireless surveillance camera or a modified digital camera or a false PIN keypad to observe the user's PIN.
The collaboration of a small start-up called Speytec and Midland Bank developed a fourth machine which was marketed after 1969 in Europe and the US by the Burroughs Corporation.
They used principles including Carbon-14 and low-coercivity magnetism in order to make fraud more difficult.
Instead, the customer requests a withdrawal transaction from the machine, which prints a receipt.
After looking first hand at the experiences in Europe, in 1968 the cash machine was pioneered in the US by Donald Wetzel, who was a department head at a company called Docutel.
This said, not all errors are to the detriment of customers; there have been cases of machines giving out money without debiting the account, or giving out higher value notes as a result of incorrect denomination of banknote being loaded in the money cassettes.
Asea Metior's Bankomat was the first cash machine installed in Spain on January 9, 1969 in downtown Madrid by Banesto.
Cash machines typically connect directly to their host or ATM Controller on either ADSL or dial-up modem over a telephone line or directly on a leased line.
Although somewhat replaced in terms of volume by skimming incidents, a re-emergence of card trapping has been noticed in regions such as Europe, where EMV chip and PIN cards have increased in circulation.
Notable cash machine software that operates on XFS platforms include Triton PRISM, Diebold Agilis EmPower, NCR APTRA Edge, Absolute Systems AbsoluteINTERACT, KAL Kalignite Software Platform, Phoenix Interactive VISTAatm, Wincor Nixdorf ProTopas, Euronet EFTS and Intertech inter-ATM.
* Dispensing additional media (such as phone cards)
This was the first cash machine installed in Australia.
Cash machines are placed not only near or inside the premises of banks, but also in locations such as shopping centers/malls, airports, grocery stores, petrol/gas stations, restaurants, or anywhere frequented by large numbers of people.
The newest cash machine at Royal Bank of Scotland allows customers to withdraw cash up to £100 without a card by inputting a six-digit code requested through their smartphones.
The most actively developed form of smart card security in the industry today is known as EMV 2000 or EMV 4.x.
This has created a new breed of cash machine applications commonly referred to as programmable applications.
All the usual cash machine functions are available, except for withdrawing cash.
Specifically his 132nd patent (US3079603), which was first filed on 30 June 1960 (and granted 26 February 1963).
To avoid this, the schedule for filling them is kept secret, varying and random.
On September 2, 1969, Chemical Bank installed the first cash machine in the US at its branch in Rockville Centre, New York.
This machine was inaugurated by English comedy actor Reg Varney.
Linux is also finding some reception in the cash machine marketplace.
* On-demand printing of "items of value" (such as movie tickets, traveler's cheques, etc.)
A Web ATM is an online interface for ATM card banking that uses a smart card reader.
With the move to a more standardised software base, financial institutions have been increasingly interested in the ability to pick and choose the application programs that drive their equipment.
In some cases, transactions are posted to an electronic journal to remove the cost of supplying journal paper to the ATM and for more convenient searching of data.
In 1998, three towns outside Cleveland, Ohio, in response to a cash machine crime wave, adopted legislation requiring that an emergency telephone number switch be installed at all outdoor cash machines within their jurisdiction.
If cash machine networks do go out of service, customers could be left without the ability to make transactions until the beginning of their bank's next time of opening hours.
Before a cash machine is placed in a public place, it typically has undergone extensive testing with both test money and the backend computer systems that allow it to perform transactions.
Card cloning and skimming can be detected by the implementation of magnetic card reader heads and firmware that can read a signature embedded in all magnetic stripes during the card production process.
As of 2013, the only claim available about the extent of cash machine-connected homicides is that they range from 500 to 1,000 per year in the US, covering only cases where the victim had an ATM card and the card was used by the killer after the known time of death.
These have then been used to record customers' PINs and bank card information in order to gain unauthorised access to their accounts.
Older chip-card security systems include the French Carte Bleue, Visa Cash, Mondex, Blue from American Express and EMV '96 or EMV 3.11.
* Cheque/cash Acceptance, where the machine accepts and recognises cheques and/or currency without using envelopes Expected to grow in importance in the US through Check 21 legislation.
With the move of cash machines to industry-standard computing environments, concern has risen about the integrity of the cash machine's software stack.
However the US patent record cites at least three previous applications from Docutel, all relevant to the development of the cash machine and where Wetzel does not figure, namely  US Patent # 3,662,343,   US Patent # 3651976 and  US Patent # 3,68,569.
Card data is then cloned into a duplicate card and the criminal attempts a standard cash withdrawal.
The first switching system to enable shared automated teller machines between banks went into production operation on February 3, 1979 in Denver, Colorado, in an effort by Colorado National Bank of Denver and Kranzley and Company of Cherry Hill, New Jersey.
In 1995, the Smithsonian National Museum of American History recognised Docutel and Wetzel as the inventors of the networked cash machine.
Chemical's cash machine, initially known as a Docuteller was designed by Donald Wetzel and his company Docutel.
Cash machines can also be found in railway stations and metro stations.
* Biometrics, where authorisation of transactions is based on the scanning of a customer's fingerprint, iris, face, etc.
The first cash machines were designed to dispense a fixed amount of cash when a user inserted a specially coded card.
A scrip cash dispenser may have many components in common with a cash machine, but it lacks the ability to dispense physical cash and consequently requires no vault.
In the US patent record, Luther George Simjian has been credited with developing a "prior art device".
In the US, Canada and some Gulf countries, banks often have drive-thru lanes providing access to cash machines using an automobile.
Using a cash machine, customers can access their bank deposit or credit accounts in order to make a variety of transactions such as cash withdrawals, check balances, or credit mobile phones.
EMV is widely used in the UK (Chip and PIN) and other parts of Europe, but when it is not available in a specific area, cash machines must fall back to using the easy–to–copy magnetic stripe to perform transactions.
The 2984 Cash Issuing Terminal was the first true ATM, similar in function to today's machines and named by Lloyds Bank: Cashpoint;  Cashpoint is still a registered trademark of Lloyds TSB in the UK.
To aid in reliability, some cash machines print each transaction to a roll-paper journal that is stored inside the cash machine, which allows its users and the related financial institutions to settle things based on the records in the journal in case there is a dispute.
For instance, given its link with Barclays,  Bank of Scotland deployed a DACS in 1968 under the   'Scotcash' brand.
after inserting a credit card.
Chemical executives were initially hesitant about the electronic banking transition given the high cost of the early machines.
With the onset of Windows operating systems and XFS on cash machines, the software applications have the ability to become more intelligent.
A postal interactive kiosk may share many components of a cash machine (including a vault), but it only dispenses items related to postage.
It is widely accepted  that the first cash machine was put into use by Barclays Bank in its Enfield Town branch in north London, United Kingdom, on 27 June 1967.
The customer then takes this receipt to a nearby sales clerk, who then exchanges it for cash from the till.
In an attempt to stop these practices, countermeasures against card cloning have been developed by the banking industry, in particular by the use of smart cards which cannot easily be copied or spoofed by unauthenticated devices, and by attempting to make the outside of their cash machines tamper evident.
Docutel was a subsidiary of Recognition Equipment Inc of Dallas, Texas, which was producing optical scanning equipment and had instructed Docutel to explore automated baggage handling and automated gasoline pumps.
The Bankograph was an automated envelope deposit machine (accepting coins, cash and cheques) and did not have cash dispensing features.
Another simple form of fraud involves attempting to get the customer's bank to issue a new card and its PIN and stealing them from their mail.
These types of applications allows for an entirely new host of applications in which the cash machine terminal can do more than only communicate with the cash machine switch.
This device dispensed 1,000 peseta bills (1 to 5 max).
Asea Meteor) quickly spread out.
There are two types of cash machine installations: on- and off-premises.
Indian-based Vortex Engineering is manufacturing cash machines which operate only with Linux.
For a low-tech form of fraud, the easiest is to simply steal a customer's card along with its PIN.
* Co-ordination of cash machines with mobile phones
Thus, cash machines often provide the best possible exchange rates for foreign travellers, and are widely used for this purpose.
This signature, known as a "MagnePrint" or "BluPrint", can be used in conjunction with common two-factor authentication schemes used in cash machine, debit/retail point-of-sale and prepaid card applications.
Cash machine manufacturers recommend that a vault be attached to the floor to prevent theft, though there is a record of a theft conducted by tunnelling into a cash machine floor.
The thieves do the looting by using identity fraud to create debit cards containing other people's banking information, then they withdraw money from other peoples' bank accounts.
Common application layer transaction protocols, such as Diebold 91x (911 or 912) and NCR NDC or NDC+ provide emulation of older generations of hardware on newer platforms with incremental extensions made over time to address new capabilities, although companies like NCR continuously improve these protocols issuing newer versions (e.g.
However, several different cash machine technologies have not yet reached worldwide acceptance, such as:
A Chubb made machine appeared in Sydney in 1969.
This instance of the invention is credited to the engineering team led by John Shepherd-Barron of printing firm De La Rue, who was awarded an OBE in the 2005 New Year Honours.
Information is delivered to the customer either through pre-recorded sound files or via text-to-speech speech synthesis.
Cash machine vaults are supplied by manufacturers in several grades.
Cash machines also provide a practical demonstration of a number of security systems and concepts operating together and how various security concerns are addressed.
These patents are all credited to Kenneth S. Goldstein, MR Karecki, TR Barnes, GR Chastian and John D. White.
WOSA/XFS, now known as CEN XFS (or simply XFS), provides a common API for accessing and manipulating the various devices of a cash machine.
Modern cash machine physical security, per other modern money-handling security, concentrates on denying the use of the money inside the machine to a thief, by using different types of Intelligent Banknote Neutralisation Systems.
In Canada, ATMs (also known there as ABMs) not operated by a financial institution are known as "white-label ABMs".
All audible information is delivered privately through a standard headphone jack on the face of the machine.
J/XFS is a Java implementation of the CEN XFS API.
* Integration with non-banking equipment
In recent times, countries like India and some countries in Africa are installing cash machines in rural areas, which are solar powered and do not require air conditioning.
Since late 1990s, criminal groups operating in Japan improved ram-raiding by stealing and using a truck loaded with heavy construction machinery to effectively demolish or uproot an entire cash machine and any housing to steal its cash.
Leased lines are preferable to plain old telephone service (POTS) lines because they require less time to establish a connection.
Witzel's idea was recognised by the United States Patent Office for having invented the cash machine under  US Patent # 3,761,682, filled in October 1971 and granted in 1973.
Each user had to introduce a security personal key using a combination of the ten numeric buttons.
Security, as it relates to cash machines, has several dimensions.
An example of this is Banrisul, the largest bank in the south of Brazil, which has replaced the MS-DOS operating systems in its cash machines with Linux.
This patent was filed on 5 March 1968 in the US (US 3543904) and granted on 1 December 1970.
* Bar code scanning
Devices designed by British (i.e.
On-premises cash machines are typically more advanced, multi-function machines that complement a bank branch's capabilities, and are thus more expensive.
On-premises cash machines are often located inside the bank's lobby, which may be accessible 24 hours a day.
At least as far back as July 30, 1986, consultants of the industry have advised for the adoption of an emergency PIN system for cash machines, where the user is able to send a silent alarm in response to a threat.
In January 2009, Senate Bill 1355 was proposed in the Illinois Senate that revisits the issue of the reverse emergency PIN system.
Errors that can occur may be mechanical (such as card transport mechanisms; keypads; hard disk failures; envelope deposit mechanisms); software (such as operating system; device driver; application); communications; or purely down to operator error.
* CRM at thecash machine
Various cash machine manufacturers have put in place countermeasures to protect the equipment they manufacture from these threats.
Cash machines have yet to reach high numbers in the Near East and Africa.
Encryption of personal information, required by law in many jurisdictions, is used to prevent fraud.
A Chemical Bank advertisement boasted "On Sept. 2 our bank will open at 9:00 and never close again."
While bank personnel are generally trained better at spotting and removing counterfeit cash, the resulting ATM money supplies used by banks provide no guarantee for proper banknotes, as the Federal Criminal Police Office of Germany has confirmed that there are regularly incidents of false banknotes having been dispensed through cash machines.
Less-trafficked machines will usually rely on a dial-up modem on a POTS line rather than using a leased line, since a leased line may be comparatively more expensive to operate compared to a POTS line.
Cash machine and the supporting electronic financial networks are generally very reliable, with industry benchmarks typically producing 98.25% customer availability for ATMs and up to 99.999% availability for host systems that manage the networks of cash machines.
In China and elsewhere, many efforts to promote security have been made.
Shepherd-Barron stated; "It struck me there must be a way I could get my own money, anywhere in the world or the UK.
Rules are usually set by the government or cash machine operating body that dictate what happens when integrity systems fail.
It is now empowered to connected to other content servers and video banking systems.
Alternative methods to verify cardholder identities have been tested and deployed in some countries, such as finger and palm vein patterns, iris, and facial recognition technologies.
To simplify the analysis of cash machine usage around the world, financial institutions generally divide the world into seven regions, due to the penetration rates, usage statistics, and features deployed.
A couple of well known historical models of ATMs include the IBM 3614, IBM 3624 and 473x series, Diebold 10xx and TABS 9000 series, NCR 1780 and earlier NCR 770 series.
Many cash machines have a sign above them,  indicating the name of the bank or organisation owning the terminal and possibly including the list of networks to which it is connected.
Cash machine behaviour can change during what is called "stand-in" time, where the bank's cash dispensing network is unable to access databases that contain account information (possibly for database maintenance).
They were also supplied with £10 vouchers.
By 1974, Docutel had acquired 70 percent of the US market but following the worldwide recession and its reliance on a single product line, Docutel lost its independence and merged with the US
The patent for this device (GB1329964) was filed on September 1969 (and granted in 1973) by John David Edwards, Leonard Perkins, John Henry Donald, Peter Lee Chappell, Sean Benjamin Newcombe & Malcom David Roe.
Another attack method, ''plofkraak'', is to seal all openings of the cash machine with silicone and fill the vault with a combustible gas or to place an explosive inside, attached, or near the machine.
In order to give customers access to cash, customers may be allowed to withdraw cash up to a certain amount that may be less than their usual daily withdrawal limit, but may still exceed the amount of available money in their accounts, which could result in fraud if the customers intentionally withdraw more money than what they had in their accounts.
Most banks in Taiwan provide these online services.
The machine only dispensed $25 at a time and the bank card itself would be mailed to the user after the bank had processed the withdrawal.
There have also been a number of incidents of fraud by Man-in-the-middle attacks, where criminals have attached fake keypads or card readers to existing machines.
The concept and various methods of copying the contents of an ATM card's magnetic stripe onto a duplicate card to access other people's financial information was well known in the hacking communities by late 1990.
subsidiary of Olivetti.
Despite the large number of cash machines, there is additional demand for machines in the Asia/Pacific area as well as in Latin America.
Customers often commented that it is difficult to recover money lost in this way, but this is often complicated by the policies regarding suspicious activities typical of the criminal element.
The availability of low-cost commodity wireless cameras, keypads, card readers, and card writers has made it a relatively simple form of fraud, with comparatively low risk to the fraudsters.
Newer protocols such as IFX have yet to find wide acceptance by transaction processors.
These systems use explosive gas detection sensor to detect explosive gas and to neutralise it by releasing a special explosion suppression chemical which changes the composition of the explosive gas and renders it ineffective.
This patent is also the earliest instance of a complete "currency dispenser system" in the patent record.
Depending on the jurisdiction, a bank may or may not be liable when an attempt is made to dispense a customer's money from a cash machine and the money either gets outside of the cash machine's vault, or was exposed in a non-secure fashion, or they are unable to determine the state of the money after a failed transaction.
Not only did future entrants into the cash dispenser market such as NCR Corporation and IBM licence Goodfellow’s PIN system, but a number of later patents reference this patent as "Prior Art Device".
This fallback behaviour can be exploited.
Banco do Brasil is also migrating cash machines to Linux.
Remote Key Loading techniques may be used to ensure the secrecy of the initialisation of the encryption keys in the cash machine.
This gas or explosive is ignited and the vault is opened or distorted by the force of the resulting explosion and the criminals can break in.
A number of attacks resulted, with thieves attempting to steal entire machines by ram-raiding.
Four regions (USA, Canada, Europe, and Japan) have high numbers of cash machines per million people.
While the perceived benefit of XFS is similar to the Java's "Write once, run anywhere" mantra, often different cash machine hardware vendors have different interpretations of the XFS standard.
Additionally, executives were concerned that customers would resist having machines handling their money.
Bill validation technology can be used by cash machine providers to help ensure the authenticity of the cash before it is stocked in the machine; those with cash recycling capabilities include this capability.
There are two cash machines at McMurdo, but only one active at any time, that are owned by Wells Fargo and serviced once every two years by NCR.
The bill is again supported by the police and denied by the banking lobby.
All were online and issued a variable amount which was immediately deducted from the account.
As of July 2009, cash machine security legislation is pending in New York, New Jersey, and Washington D.C.
In court, it was shown that he could withdraw as much as £10,000 per hour by using this method.
One of the world's most northerly installed cash machines is located at Longyearbyen, Svalbard, Norway.
When the customer gets frustrated by not getting the card back and walks away from the machine, the criminal is able to remove the card and withdraw cash from the customer's account, using the card and its PIN.
