The narrow slits were intended to protect the defender by providing a very small target, but the size of the opening could also impede the defender if it was too small.
By the end of the 12th&nbsp;century or the early 13th&nbsp;century, a newly constructed castle could be expected to be polygonal in shape, with towers at the corners to provide enfilading fire for the walls.
An exceptionally expensive motte and bailey was that of Clones in Ireland, built in 1211 for £20.
Across Europe&nbsp;– particularly the Baltic, Germany, and Scotland&nbsp;– castles were built well into the 16th&nbsp;century.
It was usual for the latrines to empty down the external walls of a castle and into the surrounding ditch.
A mine leading to the wall would be dug and once the target had been reached, the wooden supports preventing the tunnel from collapsing would be burned.
Around 1500, the innovation of the angled bastion was developed in Italy.
Though sometimes expressed through chivalric events such as tournaments, where knights would fight wearing a token from their lady, it could also be private and conducted in secret.
This was because to be faithful to medieval design would have left the houses cold and dark by contemporary standards.
Often, castles constructed before the age of gunpowder were incapable of using guns as their wall-walks were too narrow.
Hoardings were wooden constructs that projected beyond the wall, allowing defenders to shoot at, or drop objects on, attackers at the base of the wall without having to lean perilously over the crenellations, thereby exposing themselves to retaliatory fire.
Switzerland is an extreme case of there being no state control over who built castles, and as a result there were 4,000 in the country.
The site of the 13th-century Caerphilly Castle in Wales covers over  and the water defences, created by flooding the valley to the south of the castle, are some of the largest in Western Europe.
These nobles built castles to control the area immediately surrounding them, and were both offensive and defensive structures; they provided a base from which raids could be launched as well as protection from enemies.
He relied on the support of those below him, as without the support of his more powerful tenants a lord could expect his power to be undermined.
The gun ports developed in this period show a unique feature, that of a horizontal timber across the opening.
The keep of these Crusader castles would have had a square plan and generally be undecorated.
It was usual for a stone castle to take the best part of a decade to finish.
They were used to force open the castle gates, although they were sometimes used against walls with less effect.
In earth and timber castles, the gateway was usually the first feature to be rebuilt in stone.
Builders took the opportunity to draw on symbolism, through the use of motifs, to evoke a sense of chivalry that was aspired to in the Middle Ages amongst the elite.
When the 13th-century Safad Castle was founded in Galilee in the Holy Land, the 260&nbsp;villages benefitted from the inhabitants' newfound ability to move freely.
In the early 11th&nbsp;century, the motte and keep&nbsp;– an artificial mound surmounted by a palisade and tower&nbsp;– was the most common form of castle in Europe, everywhere except Scandinavia.
Some true castles were built in the Americas by the Spanish and French colonies.
In the middle were castles such as Orford, which was built in the late 12th&nbsp;century for £1,400, and at the upper end were those such as Dover, which cost about £7,000 between 1181 and 1191.
This is perhaps the earliest reference to castles, though military historian R. Allen Brown points out that the word ''castella'' may have applied to any fortification at the time.
To protect against this, and keep other threats at bay, there were several courses of action available: create encircling earthworks to keep an enemy at a distance; build the hall in stone; or raise it up on an artificial mound, known as a motte, to present an obstacle to attackers.
The benefits of large guns over trebuchets&nbsp;– the most effective siege engine of the Middle Ages before the advent of gunpowder&nbsp;– were those of a greater range and power.
The larger towers provided space for habitation to make up for the loss of the donjon.
"Motte" refers to the mound alone, but it was often surmounted by a fortified structure, such as a keep, and the flat top would be surrounded by a palisade.
Building a castle on a rock outcrop or surrounding it with a wide, deep moat helped prevent this.
They were usually located near any existing town defences, such as Roman walls, although this sometimes resulted in the demolition of structures occupying the desired site.
In some countries the monarch had little control over lords, or required the construction of new castles to aid in securing the land so was unconcerned about granting permission&nbsp;– as was the case in England in the aftermath of the Norman Conquest and the Holy Land during the Crusades.
While castles continued to be built well into the 16th&nbsp;century, new techniques to deal with improved cannon fire made them uncomfortable and undesirable places to live.
The tower is estimated to have taken 83,000&nbsp;average working days to complete, most of which was unskilled labour.
The high cost, relative to other castles of its type, was because labourers had to be imported.
Although sometimes the construction of a castle led to the destruction of a village, such as at Eaton Socon in England, it was more common for the villages nearby to have grown as a result of the presence of a castle.
It seemed that the Crusaders had learned much about fortification from their conflicts with the Saracens and exposure to Byzantine architecture.
Machicolations were used in the East long before the arrival of the Crusaders, and perhaps as early as the first half of the 8th&nbsp;century in Syria.
These weapons were vulnerable to fire from the castle as they had a short range and were large machines.
The Crusades also led to the introduction of machicolations into Western architecture.
The excavation of earth to make the mound left a ditch around the motte, called a moat (which could be either wet or dry).
Artificial ruins, built to resemble remnants of historic edifices, were also a hallmark of the period.
Arrowslits in the walls did not become common in Europe until the 13th&nbsp;century, for fear that they might compromise the wall's strength.
"Motte" and "moat" derive from the same Old French word, indicating that the features were originally associated and depended on each other for their construction.
In its simplest terms, the definition of a castle accepted amongst academics is "a private fortified residence".
The design emphasis of donjons changed to reflect a shift from functional to decorative requirements, imposing a symbol of lordly power upon the landscape.
Conversely, weapons such as trebuchets could be fired from within the castle due to the high trajectory of its projectile, and would be protected from direct fire by the curtain walls.
Urban castles were particularly important in controlling centres of population and production, especially with an invading force, for instance in the aftermath of the Norman Conquest of England in the 11th&nbsp;century the majority of royal castles were built in or near towns.
Arrowslits, also commonly called loopholes, were narrow vertical openings in defensive walls which allowed arrows or crossbow bolts to be fired on attackers.
When the Normans invaded Ireland, Scotland, and Wales in the 11th&nbsp;and 12th&nbsp;centuries, settlement in those countries was predominantly non-urban, and the foundation of towns was often linked with the creation of a castle.
They contained a lot of timber, which was often unseasoned and as a result needed careful upkeep.
Bigger guns were developed, and in the 15th&nbsp;century became an alternative to siege engines such as the trebuchet.
Remains of Roman structures in Western Europe were still standing in many places, some of which had flanking round-towers and entrances between two flanking towers.
Conflict and interaction between the two groups led to an exchange of architectural ideas, and Spanish Christians adopted the use of detached towers.
Typically, there were one or more portcullises&nbsp;– a wooden grille reinforced with metal to block a passage&nbsp;– and arrowslits to allow defenders to harry the enemy.
The Old English ''castel'', Old French ''castel'' or ''chastel'', French ''château'', Spanish ''castillo'', Italian ''castello'', and a number of words in other languages also derive from ''castellum''.
For instance, it was common in Crusader castles to have the main gate in the side of a tower and for there to be two turns in the passageway, lengthening the time it took for someone to reach the outer enclosure.
Although there were no scientific elements to its design, it was almost impregnable, and in 1187 Saladin chose to lay siege to the castle and starve out its garrison rather than risk an assault.
Once the site of a castle had been selected&nbsp;– whether a strategic position or one intended to dominate the landscape as a mark of power&nbsp;– the building material had to be selected.
Building a castle sometimes required the permission of the king or other high authority.
Castles were adapted to allow small artillery pieces&nbsp;– averaging between &nbsp;– to fire from towers.
Like ''shiro'', the Indian forts, ''durga'' or ''durg'' in Sanskrit, shared features with castles in Europe such as acting as a domicile for a lord as well as being fortifications.
Despite this, by the beginning of the 15th&nbsp;century, the rate of castle construction in England and Wales went into decline.
Gateways were more strongly defended, with the entrance to the castle usually between two half-round towers which were connected by a passage above the gateway&nbsp;– although there was great variety in the styles of gateway and entrances&nbsp;– and one or more portcullis.
Over time the aesthetics of the design became more important, as the castle's appearance and size began to reflect the prestige and power of its occupant.
The donjon was at the centre of this change in castle architecture in the 12th&nbsp;century.
Curtain walls were defensive walls enclosing a bailey.
As the military importance of urban castles waned from their early origins, they became more important as centres of administration, and their financial and judicial roles.
This is distinct from a palace, which is not fortified; from a fortress, which was not always a residence for nobility; and from a fortified settlement, which was a public defence&nbsp;– though there are many similarities among these types of construction.
They too developed differently from the structures known as castles that had their origins in Europe.
Historians have interpreted this as evidence of a sudden increase in the number of castles in Europe around this time; this has been supported by archaeological investigation which has dated the construction of castle sites through the examination of ceramics.
The introduction of castles to Denmark was a reaction to attacks from Wendish pirates, and they were usually intended as coastal defences.
Defences against guns were not developed until a later stage.
As social centres castles were important places for display.
Especially common in Ireland and Scotland, they could be up to five storeys high and succeeded common enclosure castles and were built by a greater social range of people.
While the concept of ditches, ramparts, and stone walls as defensive measures is ancient, raising a motte is a medieval innovation.
Not all the features of the Crusader castles from the 13th&nbsp;century were emulated in Europe.
As well as offering some protection for those inside, a siege tower could overlook the interior of a castle, giving bowmen an advantageous position from which to unleash missiles.
The water features of Kenilworth Castle in England&nbsp;– comprising a moat and several satellite ponds&nbsp;– forced anyone approaching a water castle entrance to take a very indirect route, walking around the defences before the final approach towards the gateway.
It would cave in and bring down the structure above.
The right to crenellate, when granted by a monarch&nbsp;– though it was not always necessary&nbsp;– was important not just as it allowed a lord to defend his property but because crenellations and other accoutrements associated with castles were prestigious through their use by the elite.
The entrance was often the weakest part in a circuit of defences.
For example, ''shiro'' in Japan, described as castles by historian Stephen Turnbull, underwent "a completely different developmental history, were built in a completely different way and were designed to withstand attacks of a completely different nature".
"Dungeon" is a corrupted form of "donjon" and means a dark, unwelcoming prison.
The positioning of castles was influenced by the available terrain.
It was common for castles in the East to have arrowslits in the curtain wall at multiple levels; contemporary builders in Europe were wary of this as they believed it weakened the wall.
Their immediate area of influence was about  and their weapons had a short range even early in the age of artillery.
A safer option for those assaulting a castle was to use a siege tower, sometimes called a belfry.
A more popular alternative defence, which avoided damaging the castle, was to establish bulwarks beyond the castle's defences.
Castles have been compared with cathedrals as objects of architectural pride, and some castles incorporated gardens as ornamental features.
While castles were used to hold a site and control movement of armies, in the Holy Land some key strategic positions were left unfortified.
Although "castle" has not become a generic term for a manor house (like château in French and Schloss in German), many manor houses contain "castle" in their name while having few if any of the architectural characteristics, usually as their owners liked to maintain a link to the past and felt the term "castle" was a masculine expression of their power.
Battering rams were also used, usually in the form of a tree trunk given an iron cap.
Starting with Fortaleza Ozama, "these castles were essentially European medieval castles transposed to America".
Central towers proliferated, and typically had a square plan, with walls  thick.
A bailey, also called a ward, was a fortified enclosure.
These were the men who built all the most typical twelfth-century fortified castles remaining to-day".
There is a popular conception that women played a peripheral role in the medieval castle household, and that it was dominated by the lord himself.
Spending on the scale of the vast castles such as Château Gaillard (an estimated £15,000 to £20,000 between 1196 and 1198) was easily supported by The Crown, but for lords of smaller areas, castle building was a very serious and costly undertaking.
Mining was so effective that during the siege of Margat in 1285 when the garrison were informed a sap was being dug they surrendered.
For wooden structures, such as early motte-and-baileys, fire was a real threat and attempts would be made to set them alight as can be seen in the Bayeux Tapestry.
Gunports were keyhole shaped, with a circular hole at the bottom for the weapon and a narrow slit on top to allow the gunner to aim.
The design of castles was not uniform, but these were features that could be found in a typical castle in the mid-12th&nbsp;century.
As an alternative to the time-consuming task of creating a breach, an escalade could be attempted to capture the walls with fighting along the walkways behind the battlements.
This coherent group shared a common origin, dealt with a particular mode of warfare, and exchanged influences.
A typical wall could be  thick and  tall, although sizes varied greatly between castles.
There would be multiple rings of defensive walls, one inside the other, with the inner ring rising above the outer so that its field of fire was not completely obscured.
During the 13th and 14th centuries the barbican was developed.
Castles served a range of purposes, the most important of which were military, administrative, and domestic.
The towers would have protruded from the walls and featured arrowslits on each level to allow archers to target anyone nearing or at the curtain wall.
Artillery powered by gunpowder was introduced to Europe in the 1320s and spread quickly.
If the innovations in fortification had derived from the East, it would have been expected for their influence to be seen from 1100 onwards, immediately after the Christians were victorious in the First Crusade (1096–1099), rather than nearly 100&nbsp;years later.
Where keeps did exist, they were no longer square but polygonal or cylindrical.
At first this was usual only in England, when after the Norman Conquest of 1066 the "conquerors lived for a long time in a constant state of alert"; elsewhere the lord's wife presided over a separate residence (''domus'', ''aula'' or ''mansio'' in Latin) close to the keep, and the donjon was a barracks and headquarters.
If assailants made it past the first line of defence they would be caught in the killing ground between the inner and outer walls and have to assault the second wall.
Placed by a frequently-used road or river, the toll castle ensured that a lord would get his due toll money from merchants.
As William the Conqueror advanced through England, he fortified key positions to secure the land he had taken.
For example, when Tattershall Castle was built between 1430 and 1450, there was plenty of stone available nearby, but the owner, Lord Cromwell, chose to use brick.
Below them were archers and bowmen, whose role was to prevent the enemy reaching the walls as can be seen by the positioning of arrowslits.
Although gunpowder was introduced to Europe in the 14th&nbsp;century, it did not significantly affect castle building until the 15th&nbsp;century, when artillery became powerful enough to break through stone walls.
It was more efficient to starve the garrison out than to assault it, particularly for the most heavily defended sites.
Historian Smail in ''Crusading warfare'' argued that the case for the influence of Eastern fortification on the West has been overstated, and that Crusaders of the 12th&nbsp;century in fact learned very little about scientific design from Byzantine and Saracen defences.
Other types of port, though less common, were horizontal slits&nbsp;– allowing only lateral movement&nbsp;– and large square openings, which allowed greater movement.
The motte and bailey remained the dominant form of castle in England, Wales, and Ireland well into the 12th&nbsp;century.
Feudalism was the link between a lord and his vassal where, in return for military service and the expectation of loyalty, the lord would grant the vassal land.
The breakdown of the Carolingian Empire led to the privatisation of government, and local lords assumed responsibility for the economy and justice.
The front of the gateway was a blind spot and to overcome this, projecting towers were added on each side of the gate in a style similar to that developed by the Romans.
Over time the focus of high status accommodation shifted from the keep to the bailey; this resulted in the creation of another bailey that separated the high status buildings&nbsp;– such as the lord's chambers and the chapel&nbsp;– from the everyday structures such as the workshops and barracks.
Licences to crenellate were also proof of a relationship with or favour from the monarch, who was the one responsible for granting permission.
About 700,000&nbsp;bricks were used to build the castle, which has been described as "the finest piece of medieval brick-work in England".
A keep was a great tower and usually the most strongly defended point of a castle before the introduction of concentric defence.
Although castles still provided protection from low levels of violence in later periods, eventually they were succeeded by country houses as high status residences.
Design varied not just between orders, but between individual castles, though it was common for those founded in this period to have concentric defences.
Also often found near a castle, sometimes within its defences, was the parish church.
The second choice proved to be more popular as it became apparent that there was little point in trying to make the site genuinely defensible in the face of cannon.
For a variety of reasons, not least of which is that many castles have no recorded history, there is no firm number of castles built in the medieval period.
During the First Crusade (1096–1099), the Frankish armies encountered walled settlements and forts that they indiscriminately referred to as castles, but which would not be considered as such under the modern definition.
To allow the lord to concentrate on his duties regarding administration, he had a household of servants to take care of chores such as providing food.
Emphasis was placed on restraint between lovers.
Among other defensive structures (including forts and citadels), castles were also built in New France towards the end of the 17th&nbsp;century.
While unlikely to provide as much protection as a more complex castle, they offered security against raiders and other small threats.
The Spanish Reconquista, driving the Muslims out of the Iberian Peninsula, was complete in 1492.
In Montreal the artillery was not as developed as on the battle-fields of Europe, some of the region's outlying forts were built like the fortified manor houses of France.
Walkways along the tops of the curtain walls allowed defenders to rain missiles on enemies below, and battlements gave them further protection.
Although stone construction would later become common elsewhere, from the 11th&nbsp;century onwards it was the primary building material for Christian castles in Spain, while at the same time timber was still the dominant building material in north-west Europe.
The approach was long and took the viewer around the castle, ensuring they got a good look before entering.
A well-sited castle that made use of natural defences and had strong ditches and walls had no need for a scientific design.
In the mid-20th&nbsp;century this view was cast into doubt.
While this sufficed for new castles, pre-existing structures had to find a way to cope with being battered by cannon.
Donjons, which were the residence of the lord of the castle, evolved to become more spacious.
Arrowslits did not compromise the wall's strength, but it was not until Edward I's programme of castle building that they were widely adopted in Europe.
When seeking to explain this change in the complexity and style of castles, antiquarians found their answer in the Crusades.
The benefits of castle building on settlements was not confined to Europe.
At the same time, castle architecture in mainland Europe became more sophisticated.
With developments such as these, Italy pioneered permanent artillery fortifications, which took over from the defensive role of castles.
Their design was very similar to that of a Roman fort or Byzantine ''tetrapyrgia'' which were square in plan and had square towers at each corner that did not project much beyond the curtain wall.
The manor house and stables were within a fortified bailey, with a tall round turret in each corner.
It is certain that stone castles cost a great deal more than those built from earth and timber.
Under him would have been knights who by benefit of their military training would have acted as a type of officer class.
The earliest fortifications originated in the Fertile Crescent, the Indus Valley, Egypt, and China where settlements were protected by large walls.
Castles were not just defensive sites but also enhanced a lord's control over his lands.
The purpose of marriage between the medieval elites was to secure land.
Edward I's campaign of castle-building in Wales cost £80,000 between 1277 and 1304, and £95,000 between 1277 and 1329.
This led to the elevation of windows to the first floor&nbsp;– to make it harder to throw objects in&nbsp;– and to change the entrance from ground floor to first floor.
Such an approach was not confined to castles, but was also applied to the fortified towns of the day.
According to historian Charles Coulson the accumulation of wealth and resources, such as food, led to the need for defensive structures.
The use of guns for defence gave rise to artillery castles, such as that of Château de Ham in France.
Even in war, garrisons were not necessarily large as too many people in a defending force would strain supplies and impair the castle's ability to withstand a long siege.
Sieges could last weeks, months, and in rare cases years if the supplies of food and water were plentiful.
When building in stone a prominent concern of medieval builders was to have quarries close at hand.
Once ditches around a castle were partially filled in, these wooden, movable towers could be pushed against the curtain wall.
Between 1066 and 1087, he established 36&nbsp;castles such as Warwick Castle, which he used to guard against rebellion in the English Midlands.
Fish ponds were a luxury of the lordly elite, and many were found next to castles.
If it was necessary to seize control of a castle an army could either launch an assault or lay siege.
Though there was a trend for the elite to move from castles into country houses in the 17th&nbsp;century, castles were not completely useless.
Castles were established by Norman invaders of England for both defensive purposes and to pacify the country's inhabitants.
Due to the lord's presence in a castle, it was a centre of administration from where he controlled his lands.
The "most substantial castle-like fort" near Montréal was Fort Senneville, built in 1692 with square towers connected by thick stone walls, as well as a fortified windmill.
A castle with earthen ramparts, a motte, and timber defences and buildings could have been constructed by an unskilled workforce.
In other cases they still had a role in defence.
Rural castles were often associated with mills and field systems due to their role in managing the lord's estate, which gave them greater influence over resources.
The barracks for the garrison, stables, workshops, and storage facilities were often found in the bailey.
At the same time, French castle architecture came to the fore and led the way in the field of medieval fortifications.
Castles were introduced into England shortly before the Norman Conquest in 1066.
In motte-and-bailey castles, the keep was on top of the motte.
Others were adjacent to or in royal forests or deer parks and were important in their upkeep.
This is evidenced by the continual maintenance of timber castles over long periods, sometimes several centuries; Owain Glyndŵr's 11th-century timber castle at Sycharth was still in use by the start of the 15th&nbsp;century, its structure having been maintained for four centuries.
Not all the elements of castle architecture were military in nature, so that devices such as moats evolved from their original purpose of defence into symbols of power.
There are examples of some castles where stone was quarried on site, such as Chinon, Château de Coucy and Château Gaillard.
While churches and cathedrals in a Gothic style could faithfully imitate medieval examples, new country houses built in a "castle style" differed internally from their medieval predecessors.
This contrasts with earlier fortifications, such as Anglo Saxon burhs and walled cities such as Constantinople and Antioch in the Middle East; castles were not communal defences but were built and owned by the local feudal lords, either for themselves or for their monarch.
In later conflicts, such as the English Civil War (1641–1651), many castles were refortified, although subsequently slighted to prevent them from being used again.
In this instance, attackers would be vulnerable to arrowfire.
A moat was a defensive ditch with steep sides, and could be either dry or filled with water.
An earthen bank could be piled behind a castle's curtain wall to absorb some of the shock of impact.
The subject of the emergence of castles is a complex matter which has led to considerable debate.
By the 1450s guns were the preferred siege weapon, and their effectiveness was demonstrated by Mehmed II at the Fall of Constantinople.
They were most likely used to drop objects on attackers, or to allow water to be poured on fires to extinguish them.
The elite responsible for castle construction had to choose between the new type that could withstand cannon fire and the earlier, more elaborate style.
