An example would be the belief that a black cat "crossing one's path" leads to bad luck, or that cats are witches' familiars used to augment a witch's powers and skills.
Most breeds of cat have a noted fondness for settling in high places, or perching.
Free-fed feral cats and house cats tend to consume many small meals in a single day, although the frequency and size of meals varies between individuals.
File:Cats from Unai no tomo by Shimizu Seifu.
This may be explained, at least in part, by an abundance of food, from sources including feeding by pet owners and scavenging.
The myth is attributed to the natural suppleness and swiftness cats exhibit to escape life-threatening situations.
General estimates for the global population of domestic cats range widely from anywhere between 200 million to 600 million.
The presence of larger carnivores such as coyotes which prey on cats and other small predators reduces the effect of predation by cats and other small predators such as opossums and raccoons on bird numbers and variety.
The cat specimen is large and closely resembles the African wildcat, rather than present-day domestic cats.
Cats have an acute sense of smell, due in part to their well-developed olfactory bulb and a large surface of olfactory mucosa, about  in area, which is about twice that of humans.
There are several important issues related to using a laser with a cat; first most, lasers can cause blindness in cats, even lasers which are sold as "eye safe" can actually be of much higher power of that proclaimed and can cause damages to the eyes.
Cats have been known to extirpate a bird species within specific regions and may have contributed to the extinction of isolated island populations.
They can also develop odd eating habits.
Although wildcats are solitary, the social behavior of domestic cats is much more variable and ranges from widely dispersed individuals to feral cat colonies that form around a food source, based on groups of co-operating females.
The gestation period for cats is between 64 and 67 days, with an average of 66 days.
catus'', following a convention for domesticated animals of using the earliest (the senior) synonym proposed.
In the wild, the introduction of feral cats during human settlement can threaten native species with extinction.
These contain keratin which makes them rigid so the papillae act like a hairbrush.
Cats, despite being solitary hunters, are a social species and cat communication includes the use of a variety of vocalizations (mewing, purring, trilling, hissing, growling, and grunting), as well as cat pheromones and types of cat-specific body language.
The daily duration of sleep varies, usually between 12 and 16 hours, with 13 and 14 being the average.
These traits severely limit the cat's ability to digest and use plant-derived nutrients, as well as certain fatty acids.
The South Island piopio, Chatham Islands rail, the Auckland Islands merganser, and the common diving petrel are a few from a long list, with the most extreme case being the flightless Stephens Island wren, which was driven to extinction only a few years after its discovery.
More proximally is a protrusion which appears to be a sixth "finger".
The tail and ears are particularly important social signal mechanisms in cats; for example, a raised tail acts as a friendly greeting, and flattened ears indicates hostility.
These territories are marked by urine spraying, by rubbing objects at head height with secretions from facial glands, and by defecation.
Under controlled breeding, they can be bred and shown as registered pedigree pets, a hobby known as cat fancy.
catus'', but in 2003, the International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature fixed the name for wildcats as ''F.
In the Boston area, the average feral adult male will weigh  and average feral female .
Another poorly understood element of cat hunting behavior is the presentation of prey to human guardians.
These provide information on the width of gaps and on the location of objects in the dark, both by touching objects directly and by sensing air currents; they also trigger protective blink reflexes to protect the eyes from damage.
An individual cat always rights itself in the same way, provided it has the time to do so, during a fall.
Traditionally, historians tended to think ancient Egypt was the site of cat domestication, owing to the clear depictions of house cats in Egyptian paintings about 3,600 years old.
The world record for the largest cat is .
Their types of body language, including position of ears and tail, relaxation of the whole body, and kneading of the paws, are all indicators of mood.
These clumps of fur are usually sausage-shaped and about  long.
They are unfamiliar with and wary of humans and roam freely in urban and rural areas.
Feral cats are associated with human habitation areas and may be fed by people or forage for food, but are typically wary of human interaction.
Cats' feces are comparatively dry and their urine is highly concentrated, both of which are adaptations to allow cats to retain as much water as possible.
Their kidneys are so efficient, they can survive on a diet consisting only of meat, with no additional water, and can even rehydrate by drinking seawater.
Within this family, domestic cats (''Felis catus'') are part of the genus ''Felis'', which is a group of small cats containing about seven species (depending upon classification scheme).
Attached to the spine are 13 ribs, the shoulder, and the pelvis.
A 2016 study found that leopard cats were undergoing domestication independently in China around 5,500 BC, though this line of partially domesticated cats leaves no trace in the domesticated populations of today.
The domesticated cat and its closest wild ancestor are both diploid organisms that possess 38 chromosomes and roughly 20,000 genes.
However, in 2004, a Neolithic grave excavated in Shillourokambos, Cyprus, contained the skeletons, laid close to one another, of both a human and a cat.
This has contributed, along with habitat destruction and other factors, to the extinction of many bird species.
This behavior is due to an instinctive imperative to ensure that the prey is weak enough to be killed without endangering the cat.
Outside these neutral areas, territory holders usually chase away stranger cats, at first by staring, hissing, and growling, and if that does not work, by short but noisy and violent attacks.
Some Western writers have stated Muhammad had a favorite cat, Muezza.
Cats have either a mutualistic or commensal relationship with humans.
As well as being kept as pets, cats are also used in the international fur and leather industries for making coats, hats, blankets and stuffed toys; and shoes, gloves and musical instruments respectively (about 24 cats are needed to make a cat fur coat).
Cats are ready to go to new homes at about 12 weeks of age, when they are ready to leave their mother.
Because ovulation is not always triggered by a single mating, females may not be impregnated by the first male with which they mate.
This act also occurs to clear the vagina of other sperm in the context of a second (or more) mating, thus giving the later males a larger chance of conception.
However, they do not communicate using ultrasound like rodents do.
After mating, the female washes her vulva thoroughly.
In ancient Egypt, cats were sacred animals, with the goddess Bastet often depicted in cat form, sometimes taking on the war-like aspect of a lioness.
There are more than 70 cat breeds; different associations proclaim different numbers according to their standards.
In Japan, the ''maneki neko'' cat is a symbol of good fortune.
For instance, research in Britain suggests that a high proportion of cats hunt only "recreationally".
They may also vocalize loudly and bare their teeth in an effort to further intimidate their opponent.
They can hear higher-pitched sounds than either dogs or humans, detecting frequencies from 55&nbsp;Hz to 79,000&nbsp;Hz, a range of 10.5&nbsp;octaves, while humans and dogs both have ranges of about 9&nbsp;octaves.
Morris's hypothesis is inconsistent with the fact that male cats also bring home prey, despite males having no involvement with raising kittens.
A genetic study in 2007 concluded that domestic cats are descended from Near Eastern wildcats, having diverged around 8,000 BC in West Asia.
Feral cats can live in forests, grasslands, tundra, coastal areas, agricultural land, scrublands, urban areas, and wetlands.
Although they spend the majority of their time in the vicinity of their home, housecats can range many hundreds of meters from this central point, and are known to establish territories that vary considerably in size, in one study ranging from .
Many pedigreed and especially purebred cats are exhibited as show cats.
Another unusual feature is that the cat cannot produce taurine, with taurine deficiency causing macular degeneration, wherein the cat's retina slowly degenerates, causing irreversible blindness.
File:Kitten reading a book.jpg|Cat illustration by the German artist Fedor Flinzer, called Raphael of Cats.
A few attempts to build a cat census have been made over the years, both through associations or national and international organizations (such as the Canadian Federation of Humane Societies's one) and over the net, but such a task does not seem simple to achieve.
Conversely, very small cats, less than , have been reported.
The susceptibility of many island birds is undoubtedly due to evolution in the absence of mainland predators, competitors, diseases, and parasites, in addition to lower reproductive rates and extended incubation periods.
A cat's body temperature does not vary throughout the day; this is part of cats' general lack of circadian rhythms and may reflect their tendency to be active both during the day and at night.
Unlike human arms, cat forelimbs are attached to the shoulder by free-floating clavicle bones which allow them to pass their body through any space into which they can fit their head.
Even in places with ancient and numerous cat populations, such as Western Europe, cats appear to be growing in number and independently of their environments' carrying capacity (such as the numbers of prey available).
The exact relationships within the Felidae are close but still uncertain, e.g.
Wildcats have also been referred to as various subspecies of ''F.
As of a 2007 study, cats are the second most popular pet in the United States by number of pets owned, behind freshwater fish.
This surgery also prevents undesirable sex-related behavior, such as aggression, territory marking (spraying urine) in males and yowling (calling) in females.
Some cats like to eat or chew on other things, most commonly wool, but also plastic, cables, paper, string, aluminum foil, or even coal.
Their habitats even include small oceanic islands with no human inhabitants.
s. lybica''), the Chinese mountain cat (''F.
Cats are unusually dependent on a constant supply of the amino acid arginine, and a diet lacking arginine causes marked weight loss and can be rapidly fatal.
Domestic cats are similar in size to the other members of the genus ''Felis'', typically weighing between .
These biological aspects have increased vulnerability to extinction in the presence of introduced species, such as the domestic cat.
A cat's gastrointestinal tract is adapted to meat eating, being much shorter than that of omnivores and having low levels of several of the digestive enzymes needed to digest carbohydrates.
In the case of free-ranging pets, equipping cats with bells and not letting them out at night will reduce wildlife predation.
These slit pupils can focus bright light without chromatic aberration, and are needed since the domestic cat's pupils are much larger, relative to their eyes, than the pupils of the big cats.
These are particularly common along the northeast coast of North America.
The story has no origin in early Muslim writers, and seems to confuse a story of a later Sufi saint, Ahmed ar-Rifa'i, centuries after Muhammad.
Neutering will decrease or eliminate this behavior in many cases, suggesting that the behavior is linked to sex hormones.
Hairballs can be prevented with remedies that ease elimination of the hair through the gut, as well as regular grooming of the coat with a comb or stiff brush.
For example, cats can control the numbers of rats, which also prey on birds' eggs and young, so a cat population can protect an endangered bird species by suppressing mesopredators.
And in South Sweden, where research in 1982 found that the population density of cats was as high as .
Cats hunt small prey, primarily birds and rodents, and are often used as a form of pest control.
Often, the ears are pointed down and back to avoid damage to the inner ear and potentially listen for any changes behind them while focused forward.
Cats can voluntarily extend their claws on one or more paws.
Unlike some big cats, such as tigers, domestic cats have slit pupils.
According to a myth in many cultures, cats have multiple lives.
During a fall from a high place, a cat can reflexively twist its body and right itself using its acute sense of balance and flexibility.
One common approach to reducing the feral cat population is termed 'trap-neuter-return', where the cats are trapped, neutered, immunized against rabies and the feline leukemia virus, and then released.
1100-1400.jpg|Jar with Small Looped Handles and Feline Design, Chimú c. 1100-1400.
The domestic cat was first classified as ''Felis catus'' by Carl Linnaeus in the 10th edition of his ''Systema Naturae'' published in 1758.
Further, the close relatives of domestic cats, the African wildcat (''Felis silvestris lybica'') and the Arabian sand cat (''Felis margarita'') both inhabit desert environments, and domestic cats still show similar adaptations and behaviors.
Feral cats may live alone, but most are found in large colonies, which occupy a specific territory and are usually associated with a source of food.
The killing of cats in Medieval Ypres, Belgium, is commemorated in the innocuous present-day Kattenstoet (cat parade).
Cats are sensitive to pheromones such as 3-mercapto-3-methylbutan-1-ol, which they use to communicate through urine spraying and marking with scent glands.
catus'' populations.
Cats can suffer from a wide range of health problems, including infectious diseases, parasites, injuries, and chronic disease.
UK assessments indicate they may be accountable for an estimated 64.8&nbsp;million bird deaths each year.
Some of the most common causes of poisoning in cats are antifreeze and rodent baits.
Most adult cats are lactose intolerant; the sugars in milk are not easily digested and may cause soft stools or diarrhea.
Many human medicines should never be given to cats.
It was, until recent times, believed that only the cats of the ''Felis'' genus could purr.
In the recovery of ringed robins (''Erithacus rubecula'') and dunnocks (''Prunella modularis''), 31% of deaths were a result of cat predation.
As a walk speeds up into a trot, a cat's gait changes to be a "diagonal" gait, similar to that of most other mammals (and many other land animals, such as lizards): the diagonally opposite hind and fore legs move simultaneously.
This also provides sure footing for their hind paws when they navigate rough terrain.
The cats are believed to have been attracted to the village by rodents, which in turn were attracted by grain cultivated and stored by humans.
Though cats usually prey on animals less than half their size, a feral cat in Australia has been photographed killing an adult pademelon weighing around the cat's size at .
This keeps the claws sharp by preventing wear from contact with the ground and allows the silent stalking of prey.
This has been criticized as implausible, because the reward for such an effort may have been too little; cats generally do not carry out commands and although they do eat rodents, other species such as ferrets or terriers may be better at controlling these pests.
In many cases, controlling or eliminating the populations of non-native cats can produce a rapid recovery in native animals.
A 1993 paper reported a response to middle wavelengths from a system other than the rods which might be due to a third type of cone.
The Romans are often credited with introducing the domestic cat from Egypt to Europe; in Roman Aquitaine, a first- or second-century engraving of a young girl holding a cat is one of two earliest depictions of the Roman domesticated cat.
They are extremely adaptable and are now present on all continents except Antarctica, and on 118 of the 131 main groups of islands—even on isolated islands such as the Kerguelen Islands.
Between these territories are neutral areas where cats watch and greet one another without territorial conflicts.
Domestic cats are a major predator of wildlife in the United States, killing an estimated 1.4–3.7 billion birds and 6.9–20.7 billion mammals annually.
The cat has no unique anatomical feature that is clearly responsible for the sound.
Phenol-based products (e.g.
Cats also engage in play fighting, with each other and with humans.
Effective measures to reduce this population are elusive, meeting opposition from cat enthusiasts.
On islands, birds can contribute as much as 60% of a cat's diet.
It has no function in normal walking, but is thought to be an antiskidding device used while jumping.
Like almost all members of the Felidae, cats have protractable and retractable claws.
In addition to obvious dangers such as rodenticides, insecticides, and herbicides, cats may be poisoned by many chemicals usually considered safe by their human guardians, because their livers are less effective at some forms of detoxification than those of many other animals, including humans and dogs.
The cat's tongue has backwards-facing spines about 500&nbsp;μm long, which are called papillae.
margarita''), among others.
Direct evidence for the domestication of cats 5,300 years ago in Quanhucun, China has been published by archaeologists and paleontologists from the University of Washington and Chinese Academy of Sciences.
The numbers of feral cats is not known, but estimates of the US feral population range from 25 to 60&nbsp;million.
Ethologically, the human keeper of a cat may function as a sort of surrogate for the cat's mother, and adult housecats live their lives in a kind of extended kittenhood, a form of behavioral neoteny.
At first, the female rejects the male, but eventually the female allows the male to mate.
Also lending credence to this myth is the fact that falling cats often land on their feet, using an instinctive righting reflex to twist their bodies around.
Normally, serious injuries from fighting are limited to infections of scratches and bites, though these can occasionally kill cats if untreated.
However, felids of the ''Panthera'' genus (tiger, lion, jaguar, and leopard) also produce sounds similar to purring, but only when exhaling.
Anthropologist and zoologist Desmond Morris, in his 1986 book ''Catwatching'', suggests, when cats bring home mice or birds, they are attempting to teach their human to hunt, or trying to help their human as if feeding "an elderly cat, or an inept kitten".
Equally, behavioral traits exhibited by island species, such as "predatory naivety" and ground-nesting, have also contributed to their susceptibility.
The English word 'cat' (Old English ''catt'') is in origin a loanword, introduced to many languages of Europe from Latin ''cattus'' and Byzantine Greek , including Portuguese and Spanish ''gato'', French ''chat'', German ''Katze'', Lithuanian ''katė'', and Old Church Slavonic ''kotka'', among others.
If a male attempts to mate with her at this point, the female will attack him.
In nearly all cases, however, the cat cannot be identified as the sole cause for reducing the numbers of island birds, and in some instances, eradication of cats has caused a 'mesopredator release' effect; where the suppression of top carnivores creates an abundance of smaller predators that cause a severe decline in their shared prey.
Cats have minimal ability to sweat, with glands located primarily in their paw pads, and pant for heat relief only at very high temperatures (but may also pant when stressed).
In Early Modern English, the word 'kitten' was interchangeable with the now-obsolete word 'catling'.
Volunteers continue to feed and give care to these cats throughout their lives.
File:Figure of a Cat made by Meissen Porcelain Factory, Germany ca.
A group of cats is referred to as a "clowder" or a "glaring", a male cat is called a "tom" or "tomcat" (or a "gib", if neutered), an unaltered female is called a "queen", and a juvenile cat is referred to as a "kitten".
The extra lumbar and thoracic vertebrae account for the cat's spinal mobility and flexibility.
Since cats were venerated in ancient Egypt, they were commonly believed to have been domesticated there, but there may have been instances of domestication as early as the Neolithic from around 9,500 years ago (7,500 BC).
For example, the painkiller paracetamol (or acetaminophen, sold as Tylenol and Panadol) is extremely toxic to cats: even very small doses need immediate treatment and can be fatal.
Cats are known for spending considerable amounts of time licking their coat to keep it clean.
Lapping at a rate of four times a second, the cat touches the smooth tip of its tongue to the surface of the water, and quickly retracts it, drawing water upwards.
Certain species appear more susceptible than others; for example, 30% of house sparrow mortality is linked to the domestic cat.
The female utters a loud yowl as the male pulls out of her because a male cat's penis has a band of about 120–150 backwards-pointing penile spines, which are about 1&nbsp;mm long; upon withdrawal of the penis, the spines rake the walls of the female's vagina, which is a trigger for ovulation.
Many houseplants are also dangerous, such as ''Philodendron'' species and the leaves of the Easter lily (''Lilium longiflorum''), which can cause permanent and life-threatening kidney damage.
bieti''), and the Arabian sand cat (''F.
The cat's ability to thrive in almost any terrestrial habitat has led to its designation as one of the world's worst invasive species.
This special feature of the front paws, on the inside of the wrists, is the carpal pad, also found on the paws of big cats and dogs.
Another possible explanation is that height gives the cat a better observation point, allowing it to survey its territory.
However, a new study suggests cats are a much greater menace than previously thought and feral cats kill several billion birds each year in the United States.
The bulk of predation in the United States is done by 80 million feral and stray cats.
Cat senses fit a crepuscular and predatory ecological niche.
Hunting by domestic cats may be contributing to the decline in the numbers of birds in urban areas, although the importance of this effect remains controversial.
Another adaptation to dim light is the large pupils of cats' eyes.
Members of the genus are found worldwide and include the jungle cat (''Felis chaus'') of southeast Asia, European wildcat (''F.
They can live on the highest mountains and in the hottest deserts."
Cats may reject novel flavors (a response termed neophobia) and learn quickly to avoid foods that have tasted unpleasant in the past.
File:Ancient_Egyptian_bronze_statue_of_a_reclining_cat_and_kitten.jpg|An Ancient Egyptian bronze statue featuring a cat and a kitten.
File:Chimú Jar with Small Looped Handles and Feline Design ca.
Fights usually consist of grappling and delivering powerful slaps to the face and body with the forepaws as well as bites.
Since cats lack lips to create suction, they use a lapping method with the tongue to draw liquid upwards into their mouths.
Some breeds, however, such as the Maine Coon, can occasionally exceed .
Many cultures have negative superstitions about cats.
When it overpowers its prey, a cat delivers a lethal neck bite with its two long canine teeth, inserting them between two of the prey's vertebrae and severing its spinal cord, causing irreversible paralysis and death.
the Chinese mountain cat is sometimes classified (under the name ''Felis silvestris bieti'') as a subspecies of the wildcat, like the North African variety ''F.
At 148 hours, early blastocysts form.
Some of the same factors that have promoted adaptive radiation of island avifauna over evolutionary time appear to promote vulnerability to non-native species in modern time.
Cats of unrecorded, mixed ancestry are referred to as domestic short-haired or domestic long-haired cats, by coat type, or commonly as random-bred, moggies (chiefly British), or (using terms borrowed from dog breeding) mongrels or mutt-cats.
This response is also produced by other plants, such as silver vine (''Actinidia polygama'') and the herb valerian; it may be caused by the smell of these plants mimicking a pheromone and stimulating cats' social or sexual behaviors.
Cats can hear ultrasound, which is important in hunting because many species of rodents make ultrasonic calls.
Furthermore, cats are superfecund; that is, a female may mate with more than one male when she is in heat, with the result that different kittens in a litter may have different fathers.
Similar forms exist in Lithuanian ''puižė'' and Irish ''puiscín''.
This behavior may be a way for cats to practice the skills needed for real combat, and might also reduce any fear they associate with launching attacks on other animals.
Cats conserve heat by reducing the flow of blood to their skin and lose heat by evaporation through their mouths.
In the Western intellectual tradition, the idea of cats as everyday objects have served to illustrate problems of quantum mechanics in the Schrödinger's cat thought experiment.
At 10–12 days, implantation occurs.
The term "cat nap" for a short rest refers to the cat's tendency to fall asleep (lightly) for a brief period.
The grave is estimated to be 9,500 years old, pushing back the earliest known feline–human association significantly.
Among feral cats, the most common reason for cat fighting is competition between two males to mate with a female.
The felids are a rapidly evolving family of mammals that share a common ancestor only 10–15&nbsp;million years ago and include lions, tigers, cougars and many others.
A pedigreed cat is one whose ancestry is recorded by a cat fancier organization.
The premolar and first molar together compose the carnassial pair on each side of the mouth, which efficiently shears meat into small pieces, like a pair of scissors.
Like most other mammals, cats have poorer color vision and a better sense of smell than humans.
In such cases, most fights are won by the heavier male.
