The most relevant mountains of this area are Montserrat and the Montseny.
Franco's regime banned the use of Catalan in government-run institutions and during public events, and also the Catalan institutions of self-government were abolished.
It has five channels: TV3, Canal 33, 324, Esport3 and Canal Super3.
There are some examples of Renaissance architecture, Baroque and Neoclassical.
The world-renowned Catalan architects of this style are Antoni Gaudí, Lluís Domènech i Montaner and Josep Puig i Cadafalch.
Nights are cooler there than at the coast, with the temperature of around .
In the period of 1164–1410, new territories, the Kingdom of Valencia, the Kingdom of Majorca, Sardinia, the Kingdom of Sicily, Corsica, and (briefly) the Duchies of Athens and Neopatras, were incorporated into the dynastic domains of the House of Aragon.
This period was marked by political unrest and the preeminence of Revolutionary Catalonia during the Spanish Civil War (1936–39).
The new Statute of Autonomy of Catalonia, approved after a referendum in 2006, was contested by important sectors of the Spanish society, specially by the conservative Popular Party, which sent the law to the Constitutional Court of Spain.
That increase was due to the demographic boom in Spain during the 60s and early 70s and also to the large-scale internal migration from the rural interior of Spain to its industrial cities.
Since 2011 when the question started to be regularly surveyed by the governmental Center for Public Opinion Studies (CEO), support for Catalan independence has been on the rise.
On 1 November 2012, Catalonia started charging a tourist tax.
The 2006 Statute of Autonomy of Catalonia establishes the administrative organisation of three local authorities: vegueries, comarques, and municipalities.
Other smaller television audience, with remarkable presence are 8TV, television broadcast of the private Grup Godó, Canal Català TV, Barça TV and the local televisions, the greatest exponent of which is Barcelona TV, that also broadcast in Catalan.
The city has both suburban and inter-city services.
The activity consists in constructing human towers by competing ''colles castelleres'' (teams).
As all the cuisines of the Mediterranean, makes abundant use of fish, seafood, olive oil, bread and vegetables.
This list includes Europe's premier savings bank, La Caixa.
In pre-Roman times, the area that is now called Catalonia in the north-east of Iberian Peninsula, like the rest of the Mediterranean side of the peninsula, was populated by the Iberians.
Moreover, in Catalonia there is a relative wealth of groundwaters, although there is inequality between ''comarques'', given the complex geological structure of the territory.
Catalonia is also internationally recognized for its high cuisine, including restaurants like El Bulli or Can Roca, who regularly dominate international rankings.
In Catalonia that wave of internal migration arrived from several regions of Spain, especially Andalusia, Murcia and Extremadura.
Today, Catalonia is one of the most economically dynamic communities of Spain.
The tradition of els Castells i els Castellers was declared Masterpiece of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity by UNESCO in 2010.
The difference is due to the big contribution of the Ebre river, from which the Segre is an important tributary.
Catalonia's long-term credit rating is BB (Non-Investment Grade) according to Standard & Poor's, Ba2 (Non-Investment Grade) according to Moody's, and BBB- (Low Investment Grade) according to Fitch Ratings.
In the field of architectural rationalism, highlighting Josep Lluís Sert and Torres Clavé.
Catalonia is organised territorially into provinces, further subdivided into comarques and municipalities.
TV3 compete in audience with the State televisions that broadcast in Catalonia in Spanish language: Televisión Española (with few emissions in Catalan), Tele 5, Antena 3, Cuatro i La Sexta.
Between 2003 and 2010, a leftist coalition, composed by the Catalan Socialists' Party, the pro-independence Republican Left of Catalonia and the leftist-environmentalist Initiative for Catalonia-Greens, implemented policies that widened Catalan autonomy.
It snows frequently in the Pyrenees, and it occasionally snows at lower altitudes, even by the coastline.
The other languages with official status are Spanish, which has official status throughout Spain, and Aranese Occitan, which enjoys co-official status with Catalan and Spanish in the Val d'Aran.
On 11 September 2012, a pro-independence march pulled in a crowd of between 600,000 (according to the Spanish Government), 1.5 million (according to the Guàrdia Urbana de Barcelona), and 2 million (according to its promoters); whereas poll results revealed that half the population of Catalonia supported secession from Spain.
This policy, known as the "linguistic normalisation" (''normalització lingüística'' in Catalan, ''normalización lingüística'' in Spanish) has been supported by the vast majority of Catalan political parties through the last thirty years.
The objections are based on various issues such as disputed cultural heritage but, especially, on the Statute's alleged breaches of the principle of "solidarity between regions" in fiscal and educational matters enshrined by the Constitution.
Under the Compromise of Caspe, Ferdinand from the Castilian House of Trastámara received the Crown of Aragon as Ferdinand I of Aragon.
This practice originated in the southern part of Catalonia, mainly on the regions of Penedès and the Camp de Tarragona, during the 18th century, and later it was extended along the next two centuries to the rest of the territory.
This decision was severely contested by large sectors of Catalan society, which increased the demands of self-determinaton.
Debates in the Catalan Parliament take place almost exclusively in Catalan and the Catalan public television broadcasts programs only in Catalan.
This treaty transformed the principality's ''de facto'' union with Aragon into a ''de jure'' one and was the origin of the definitive separation between both geographical areas Catalonia and Languedoc.
These counties formed part of the Gothic and Hispanic marches, a buffer zone in the south of the Frankish empire in the former province of Septimania and in the northeast of the Iberian Peninsula, to act as a defensive barrier for the Frankish empire against further Muslim invasions from Al-Andalus.
Winter is cool or slightly cold depending on the location.
Between 1347 and 1497 Catalonia lost 37 percent of its population.
The court approved 73 of the 114 articles that the People's Party had contested, while declaring 14 articles unconstitutional in whole or in part and imposing a restrictive interpretation on 27 others.
The area is of great ecological diversity and a remarkable wealth of landscapes, habitats and species.
Comarques are entities composed by the municipalities to manage their responsibilities and services.
The last Catalan election was held in 27 September 2015, and its current president is Carme Forcadell, incumbent since that year.
Tarraco (modern Tarragona) was one of the most important Roman cities in Hispania and the capital of the province of Tarraconensis.
* The Pyrenees: mountainous formation that connects the Iberian Peninsula with the European continental territory, and located in the north of Catalonia;
The two main Catalan newspapers of general information are ''El Periódico de Catalunya'' and ''La Vanguardia'', both with editions in Catalan and Spanish.
There are two publicly owned railway companies operating in Catalonia: the Catalan FGC that operates commuter and regional services, and the Spanish national RENFE that operates long-distance and high-speed rail services (AVE and Avant) and the main commuter and regional service ''Rodalies de Catalunya'', administered by the Catalan government since 2010.
Recovery from the war damage was slow and made more difficult by the international trade embargo against Franco's dictatorial regime.
* Tertiary sector: 60% (compared to Spain's 67%)
Although never completely banned, Catalan language publishing was severely restricted during the early 1940s, with only religious texts and small-run self-published texts being released.
Due to the intense immigration which Spain in general and Catalonia in particular experienced in the first decade of the 21st century, many foreign languages are spoken in various cultural communities in Catalonia, of which Rif-Berber, Moroccan Arabic, Romanian and Urdu are the most common ones.
The main economic cost for the Catalan families is the purchase of a home.
The plains and the water that descend from the Pyrenees have made it fertile territory for agriculture and there are built numerous irrigation canals.
The eastern counties of these marches were united under the rule of the Frankish vassal the Count of Barcelona, and were later called Catalonia.
In all, some analysts argue that formally the current system grants Catalonia with "more self-government than almost any other corner in Europe".
The first slope provides an average of  per year, while the second only provides an average of /year.
The ban, which went into effect on 1 January 2012, had originated in a popular petition supported by over 180,000 signatures.
38% of the total debt of the 17 autonomous communities, but in recent years its economy recovered a positive evolution and the GDP grew a  3.3% in 2015.
In 1992, Barcelona hosted the Summer Olympic Games.
In the context of the 2008 financial crisis, Catalonia was expected to suffer a recession amounting to almost a 2% contraction of its regional GDP in 2009.
By the late 1950s the country had recovered its pre-war economic levels and in the 1960s was the second fastest growing economy in the world in what became known as the Spanish miracle.
Most of Catalonia belongs to the Mediterranean Basin.
Parties supporting independence from the rest of Spain obtained 49.12% of the votes and a majority of 74 seats.
Navarre, the Basque Country and Catalonia are the Spanish communities with the highest degree of autonomy in terms of law enforcement.
The Preamble of the 2006 Statute of Autonomy of Catalonia states that the Parliament of Catalonia has defined Catalonia as a nation, but that "the Spanish Constitution recognizes Catalonia's national reality as a nationality".
In Catalonia, any kind of public activities associated with Catalan nationalism, republicanism, anarchism, socialism, liberalism, democracy or communism, including the publication of books on those subjects or simply discussion of them in open meetings, was banned.
Central Catalan Depression is a plain located between the Pyrenees and Pre-Coastal Mountains.
After the Spanish Civil War, the Francoist dictatorship enacted repressive measures, abolishing Catalan institutions and banning the official use of the Catalan language again.
The official opening between Barcelona and Madrid took place 20 February 2008.
Since 2006, the liberal Citizens - Party of the Citizenry, currently the main opposition party, has been one of the most consistent critics of the Catalan language policy within Catalonia.
File:Girona des de l aire.jpg|The city of Girona
The Catalan capital and largest city, Barcelona, is a major international cultural centre and a major tourist destination.
In 1137, Catalonia and the Kingdom of Aragon were united by marriage under the Crown of Aragon, and the Principality of Catalonia became the base for the Crown of Aragon's naval power and expansionism in the Mediterranean.
The defeat of the Second Spanish Republic in the Spanish Civil War brought fascist Francisco Franco to power as dictator.
To this day it remains one of the most industrialised parts of Spain.
In 1258, by means of the Treaty of Corbeil, the Count of Barcelona and King of Aragon, of Mallorca and of Valencia, James I of Aragon renounced his family rights and dominions in Occitania and recognised the king of France as heir of the Carolingian Dynasty.
In retaliation for the betrayal, the first Bourbon king introduced the Nueva Planta decrees that incorporated the territories of the Crown of Aragon, including Catalonia, as provinces under the Crown of Castile in 1716, terminating their separate institutions, laws and rights, within a united kingdom of Spain.
Other music styles born during the 20th century are Catalan rumba, Catalan rock and Nova Cançó.
For example, following the passage of a March 2010 law on Catalan cinema, which establishes that half of the movies shown in Catalan cinemas must be in Catalan, a general strike of 75% of the cinemas took place.
The Catalan Pyrenees represent almost half in length of the Pyrenees, as it extends more than 200&nbsp;km.
Most of Catalonia was reconquered by the Spanish monarchy but Catalan rights were recognised.
Since 1980 they have been under the command of the Generalitat, and since 1994 they have expanded in number in order to replace the national Civil Guard and National Police Corps, which report directly to the Homeland Department of Spain.
Catalan Sign Language is also officially recognised.
In 987 Borrell II, Count of Barcelona, did not recognise Hugh Capet as his king, making his successors (from Ramon Borrell I to Ramon Berenguer IV) de facto independent of the Carolingian crown.
It involves well-pondered perception of situations, level-headedness, awareness, integrity, and right action.
In these elections, Convergència and Esquerra Republicana decided to join, and they presented themselves under the coalition named "Junts pel Sí" (in Catalan, "Together for Yes").
Other polls have shown lower support for independence, ranging from 40 to 49%.
The final local referendum was held in Barcelona, in April 2011.
The distribution of sectors is as follows:
"Junts pel Sí" won 62 seats and was the most voted party, and CUP (Candidatura d'Unitat Popular, far-left and independentist party) won another 10, so the sum of all the independentist forces was 72 seats, reaching an absolute majority of seats for the independentist forces, but not in number of individual votes that was 47,74% of the total.
Despite the fact that the most popular sports are represented outside by the Spanish national teams, Catalonia can officially play as itself in some others.
Modernism (Art Nouveau) in the late nineteenth century appears as the national art.
''Seny'' is a form of ancestral Catalan wisdom or sensibleness.
In the nineteenth century, Catalonia was severely affected by the Napoleonic and Carlist Wars.
The highest mountain of Catalonia, located north of the comarca of Pallars Sobirà is the Pica d'Estats (3,143 m), followed by the Puigpedrós (2,914 m).
After the end of Franco's dictatorship, the newly established self-governing democratic institutions in Catalonia embarked on a long-term language policy to increase the use of Catalan and has, since 1983, enforced laws which attempt to protect and extend the use of Catalan.
In 1900, the population of Catalonia was 1,984,115 people and in 1970 it was 5,107,606.
The Catalan hydrographic network consists of two important basins, the one of the Ebro and the one that comprises the internal basins of Catalonia (respectively covering 46.84% and 51.43% of the territory), all of them flow to the Mediterranean.
Catalan cultural activity increased in the 1960s and Catalan classes began thanks to the initiative of associations such as Òmnium Cultural.
This autonomous community has gradually achieved more autonomy since the approval of the Spanish Constitution of 1978.
The United Nations Human Rights Committee ruled in 1993 against similar policies in Quebec stating that "A State may choose one or more official languages but it may not exclude outside the spheres of public life, the freedom to express oneself in a certain language".
Basic public education is given in Catalan, except for two hours per week of Spanish medium instruction.
The populated areas lying by the coast in Tarragona, Barcelona and Girona provinces feature a Mediterranean climate (Köppen ''Csa'').
The ''Havaneres'' are characteristic in some marine localities of the Costa Brava, especially during the summer months when these songs are sung outdoors accompanied by a ''cremat'' of burned rum.
As a coastal territory, Catalonia became the base of the Aragonese Crown's maritime forces, which spread the power of the Aragonese Crown in the Mediterranean, and made Barcelona into a powerful and wealthy city.
Immigrants from other countries settled in Catalonia in the 1990s and 2000s; a large percentage came from Africa and Latin America, and smaller numbers from Asia and Eastern Europe, often settling in urban centers such as Barcelona and industrial areas.
The capital and largest city is Barcelona, the second-largest city in Spain and the seventh-most populous urban area in the European Union.
The Anarchists had been active throughout the early 20th century, achieving the first eight-hour workday in Europe in 1919.
Televisió de Catalunya, which broadcasts entirely in Catalan language, is the main Catalan public TV.
According to data from the Society of Appraisal on 31 December 2005 Catalonia is, after Madrid, the second most expensive region in Spain for housing: 3,397 €/m² on average (see Spanish property bubble).
The first survey following the Constitutional Court ruling that cut back elements of the 2006 Statute of Autonomy, published by ''La Vanguardia'' on 18 July 2010, found that 46% of the voters would support independence in a referendum.
After the transition to democracy (1975–1978) and the restoration of the Generalitat (1980), literary life and the editorial market have returned to normality and literary production in Catalan is being bolstered with a number of language policies intended to protect Catalan culture.
Public-own roads in Catalonia are either managed by the autonomous government of Catalonia (e.g.,  roads) or the Spanish government (e.g., , ,  roads).
In Catalonia, the Catalan language policy has been challenged by some Catalan intellectuals like Albert Boadella.
The plan was suspended by the Spanish Constitutional Court.
The criminal justice system is uniform throughout Spain, while civil law is administered separately within Catalonia.
The Generalitat uses Catalan in its communications and notifications addressed to the general population, but citizens can also receive information from the Generalitat in Spanish if they so desire.
The sardana is considered the most characteristic Catalan popular dance, other groups also practice ''Ball de bastons'', ''moixiganga'', galops or ''jota'' in the southern part.
In order to collect general taxes, the Courts of 1359 established a permanent representative of deputies position, called the Deputation of the General (and later usually known as Generalitat), which gained political power over the next centuries.
In 1410, King Martin I died without surviving descendants.
During this period there was a spectacular growth of industry and tourism in Catalonia that drew large numbers of workers to the region from across Spain and made the area around Barcelona into one of Europe's largest industrial metropolitan areas.
In the Pyrenees there are many small lakes, remnants of the ice age.
In the later Middle Ages Catalan literature flourished.
During the 9th century, the Count Wifred the Hairy made its title hereditary and founded the dynasty of the House of Barcelona, which ruled Catalonia until 1410.
The geography is conditioned by the Mediterranean coast, with  of coastline, and large relief units of the Pyrenees to the north.
The use of fines was introduced in a 1997 linguistic law that aims to increase the public use of Catalan and defend the rights of Catalan speakers.
The comarca of Val d'Aran (Aran Valley) has a special status and its autonomous government is named ''Conselh Generau d'Aran''.
A connection to the French high-speed TGV network has been completed, but is awaiting the completion of stations along the route to begin passenger service in April 2013.
The public Catalunya Ràdio and the private RAC 1 (belonging to Grup Godó) are the two main radios of Catalonia, both in Catalan.
The main sports are football, basketball, handball, rink hockey, tennis and motorsport.
Lately, a similar sociolinguistic phenomenon has occurred with foreign immigration.
Within the ranges are a series of plains, the entities over which form the Coastal and the Pre-Coastal Depressions.
There is a direct train from Barcelona Estació de França to Paris Austerlitz along the older railway tracks.
'''Catalonia''' (, , )  is an autonomous community of the Kingdom of Spain, located on the northeastern extremity of the Iberian Peninsula.
Sport has an important incidence in Catalan life and culture since the beginning of the 20th century and, as a result, it has a well developed sport infraestructure.
There are two historical moments of splendor of Catalan literature.
The second moment of splendor began in the nineteenth century with the cultural and political ''Renaixença'' (Renaissance) represented by writers and poets such as Jacint Verdaguer, Narcís Oller, Joan Maragall and Àngel Guimerà.
Catalan painters internationally known are Salvador Dalí, Joan Miró and Antoni Tàpies.
The revenue is used to promote tourism, and to maintain and upgrade tourism-related infrastructure.
In the first third of the 20th century, Catalonia gained and lost varying degrees of autonomy several times.
Under the Franco dictatorship, Catalan was excluded from the public education system and all other official use, so that for example families were not allowed to officially register children with Catalan names.
Both Greeks and Carthaginians briefly ruled the territory in the course of the Second Punic War and traded with the surrounding Iberian population.
Catalonia's rating is tied for worst with between 1 and 5 other autonomous communities of Spain, depending on the rating agency.
Closely linked with the Catalan pictorial atmosphere, Pablo Picasso lived in Barcelona during his youth, training them as an artist and creating the movement of cubism.
The main tourist destinations in Catalonia are the city of Barcelona, the beaches of the Costa Brava in Girona, the beaches of the Costa del Maresme and Costa del Garraf from Malgrat de Mar to Vilanova i la Geltrú and the Costa Daurada in Tarragona.
Catalonia has a marked geographical diversity, if we consider the relatively small size of its territory.
As wealth from the industrial expansion grew, Catalonia saw a cultural renaissance coupled with incipient nationalism while several workers movements appeared.
By virtue of descent from his maternal grandparents, Ferdinand II of Aragon and Isabella I of Castile, in 1516 Charles I of Spain became the first king to rule Castile and Aragon simultaneously by his own right.
The Courts were composed of the three Estates, were presided over by the king of Aragon, and approved the constitutions, which created a compilation of rights for the citizenship of the Principality.
The Parliament of Catalonia (Catalan: ''Parlament de Catalunya'') is the legislative body of the Generalitat and represents the citizens of Catalonia.
From the conquest of Roussillon in 760, to the conquest of Barcelona in 801, the Frankish empire took control of the area between Septimania and the Llobregat river from the Muslims and created heavily militarised, self-governing counties.
It is bordered by France and Andorra to the north, the Mediterranean Sea to the east, and the Spanish autonomous communities of Aragon to the west and Valencia to the south.
The biggest is the one of Banyoles.
The court accepted the specific provision that described Catalonia as a "nation", however ruled that it was a historical and cultural term with no legal weight, and that Spain remained the only nation recognised by the constitution.
Catalonia, like other territories that formed the Crown of Aragon, rose up in support of the Austrian Habsburg pretender Charles VI, Holy Roman Emperor in his claim for the Spanish throne as Charles III of Spain.
File:Borago officinalis (flower).jpg|''Borago officinalis'' near Font de Tita, El Perelló
* Secondary sector: 37% (compared to Spain's 29%)
The principal rivers in Catalonia are the Ter, Llobregat, and the Ebre, all of which run into the Mediterranean.
In the Mediterranean area, summers are dry and hot with sea breezes, and the maximum temperature is around .
Since the restoration of the Generalitat on the return of democracy in Spain, the presidents of Catalonia have been Jordi Pujol (1980–2003), Pasqual Maragall (2003–2006), José Montilla (2006–2010), Artur Mas (2010-2016) and Carles Puigdemont, incumbent .
During the Franco-Spanish War (1635–59), Catalonia revolted (1640–52) against a large and burdensome presence of the Royal army in its territory, becoming a republic under French protection.
In everyday use, 11.95% of the population claim to use both languages equally, whereas 45.92% mainly use Spanish and 35.54% mainly use Catalan.
The domains of the Aragonese Crown were severely affected by the Black Death pandemic and by later outbreaks of the plague.
The Coastal Depression is located on the East of the Coastal Range towards the coast.
In the November 25, 2012 Catalan parliamentary election, sovereigntist parties supporting a secession referendum gathered 59.01% of the votes and hold 87 of the 135 seats in the Catalan Parliament.
Catalonia is a showcase of European landscapes on a small scale.
During the Civil War and the Francoist period the most prominent authors were Josep Pla, Mercè Rodoreda and Salvador Espriu.
* The Catalan Coastal mountain ranges or the Catalan Mediterranean System: an alternating delevacions and planes parallel to the Mediterranean coast;
These two mountain ranges are the Coastal and the Pre-Coastal.
At present there are 41.
Following the death of his paternal (House of Habsburg) grandfather, Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor, he was also elected Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor, in 1519.
The Pyrenean peaks have a mountain (Köppen ''H'') or even Alpine climate (Köppen ''ET'') at the highest summits, while the valleys have a maritime or oceanic climate sub-type (Köppen ''Cfb'').
Rural–urban migration originating in other parts of Spain also reduced the social use of Catalan in urban areas and increased the use of Spanish.
During the twentieth century were developed the avant-garde movements represented by Josep Carner, Carles Riba, J.V.
Then, on 9 August 2006, when the new Statute came into force, Occitan became official throughout Catalonia.
Within a brief period France took full control of Catalonia, at a high economic costs for Catalonia, until it was largely reconquered by the Spanish army.
Under the terms of the Treaty of the Pyrenees in 1659, which ended the wider Franco-Spanish War, the Spanish Crown ceded the northern parts of Catalonia, mostly incorporated in the county of Roussillon, to France.
It is designated as a ''nationality'' by its Statute of Autonomy.
Others are the ''calçotada'', ''escudella i carn d'olla'', ''suquet de peix'' (fish stew) and, as dessert, the Catalan cream.
Charles II had chosen Philip V of Spain from the French House of Bourbon.
According to the linguistic census held by the Government of Catalonia in 2013, Spanish is the most spoken language in Catalonia (46.53% claim Spanish as "their own language"), followed by Catalan (37.26% claim Catalan as "their own language").
According to the CEO opinion poll from July 2016, 47,7% of Catalans would vote for independence and 42,4% against it while, about the question of preferences, according to the CEO opinion poll from March 2016, a 57.2 claim to be "absolutely" or "fairly" in favour of independence.
Parties that consider themselves either Catalan nationalist or independentist have been present in all Catalan governments since 1980.
In English, ''Catalonia'' is pronounced .
In 1137, Ramon Berenguer IV, Count of Barcelona decided to accept King Ramiro II of Aragon's proposal to marry Queen Petronila, establishing the dynastic union of the County of Barcelona with the Kingdom of Aragon, joining the Crown of Aragon and making the Catalan counties that were united under the county of Barcelona into a principality of the Aragonese Crown.
Catalonia has given the world many important figures in the area of the art.
In the last years there has been a negative net relocation rate of companies based in Catalonia moving to other autonomous communities of Spain.
Since the Statute of Autonomy of 1979, Aranese (a dialect of Gascon Occitan) has also been official and subject to special protection in Val d'Aran.
Spring and autumn are typically the rainiest seasons, except for the Pyrenean valleys, where summer is typically stormy.
During the second half of 18th century Catalonia started a successful process of proto-industrialization.
Catalonia, like many other parts of Spain, had been devastated by the war.
His regime imposed linguistic, political and cultural restrictions across Spain.
These counties came under the rule of the counts of Barcelona, who were Frankish vassals nominated by the emperor of the Franks, to whom they were feudatories (801–987).
The hydrographic network can be divided in two sectors, an occidental slope or Ebre river slope and one oriental slope constituted by minor rivers that flow to the Mediterranean along the Catalan coast.
The judgment granted clear passage to 182 articles of the 223 that make up the fundamental text.
Catalonia belongs to the organisation Four Motors for Europe.
