From the 17th century onward, the Enlightenment questioned the power and influence of the Catholic Church over Western society.
It is as head of the Holy See, not as head of Vatican City State, that the pope receives ambassadors of states and sends them his own diplomatic representatives.
In addition, the Canon Laws for both the Latin Church and the Eastern Catholic Church govern who may licitly celebrate certain sacraments, as well as strict rules about who may receive the sacraments.
automatically), citing canon 1378 of canon law and other church laws.
Traditionalist Catholics, such as Archbishop Marcel Lefebvre, however, strongly criticised the council, arguing that its liturgical reforms led "to the destruction of the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass and the sacraments", among other issues.
Mary is held in special regard, declared the Mother of God (), and believed as dogma to have remained a virgin throughout her life.
The resulting religious discord between Germanic rulers and Catholic subjects was avoided when, in 497, Clovis I, the Frankish ruler, converted to orthodox Catholicism, allying himself with the papacy and the monasteries.
Even in romantic relationships, particularly engagement to marriage, partners are called to practise continence, in order to test mutual respect and fidelity.
These include churches that historically developed in Russia, Caucasus, the Balkans, North Eastern Africa, India and the Middle East.
Efforts in support of the ordination of women led to several rulings by the Roman Curia or Popes against the proposal, as in ''Declaration on the Question of the Admission of Women to the Ministerial Priesthood'' (1976), ''Mulieris Dignitatem'' (1988) and ''Ordinatio Sacerdotalis'' (1994).
The new government also created the Patriotic Church whose unilaterally appointed bishops were initially rejected by Rome before many of them were accepted.
In 2014, the Third Extraordinary General Assembly of the Synod of Bishops addressed the church's ministry towards families and marriages and to Catholics in "irregular" relationships, such as those who divorced and remarried outside of the church without a declaration of nullity.
The liturgies of the Eucharist and the other sacraments vary from rite to rite based on differing theological emphasis.
Many Western Catholics have voiced significant disagreement with the Church's teaching on contraception.
Elsewhere, Portuguese missionaries under the Spanish Jesuit Francis Xavier evangelised in India, China, and Japan.
The sacrament is also referred to as ''Unction'', and in the past as ''Extreme Unction'', and it is one of the three sacraments that constitute the last rites, together with Penance and Viaticum (Eucharist).
The recent introduction of hormonal contraception (including "the pill"), which were believed by some to be morally different than previous methods, prompted John XXIII to form a committee to advise him of the moral and theological issues with the new method.
In the West confirmation of children is delayed until they are old enough to understand or at the bishop's discretion.
Historically, boys and men have only been permitted to serve as altar servers; however, since the 1990s, girls and women have also been permitted.
In parallel to the diocesan structure are a variety of religious institutes that function autonomously, often subject only to the authority of the pope, though sometimes subject to the local bishop.
In defiance of these rulings, opposition groups such as Roman Catholic Womenpriests have performed ceremonies they affirm as sacramental ordinations (with, reputedly, an ordaining male Catholic bishop in the first few instances) which, according to canon law, are both illicit and invalid and considered mere ''simulations'' of the sacrament of ordination.
These are in turn interpreted by the Magisterium (from ''magister'', Latin for "teacher"), the Church's teaching authority, which is exercised by the pope and the College of Bishops in union with the pope, the bishop of Rome.
During this period, monastic Ireland became a centre of learning and early Irish missionaries such as St Columbanus and St Columba spread Christianity and established monasteries across continental Europe.
No one is predestined to hell and no one can determine with absolute certainty who has been condemned to hell.
In the 20th century, anti-clerical governments around the world, including Mexico and Spain, persecuted or executed thousands of clerics and laypersons.
When Chinese churches eventually reopened, they remained under the control of the Patriotic Church.
Canon law concerns the Catholic Church's life and organisation and is distinct from civil law.
The Catholic Church teaches that the college of bishops, led by the Bishop of Rome are the successors to the Apostles.
He was known for upholding traditional Christian values against secularisation, and for liberalising use of the Tridentine Mass as found in the Roman Missal of 1962.
In addition to changes in the liturgy, it led to changes to the Church's approach to ecumenism, and a call to improved relations with non-Christian religions, especially Judaism, in its document ''Nostra aetate''.
While the Catholic Church teaches that it alone possesses the full means of salvation, it also acknowledges that the Holy Spirit can make use of Christian communities separated from itself to "impel towards Catholic unity"  and "tend and lead toward the Catholic Church", and thus bring people to salvation, because these separated communities contain some elements of proper doctrine, albeit admixed with errors.
In the past some of the rites used by the Eastern Catholic Churches were subject to a degree of liturgical Latinisation.
The Catholic Church teaches that it was entrusted with seven sacraments that were instituted by Christ.
Those who receive confirmation must be in a state of grace, which for those who have reached the age of reason means that they should first be cleansed spiritually by the sacrament of Penance; they should also have the intention of receiving the sacrament, and be prepared to show in their lives that they are Christians.
When Alexander II died, Hildebrand was elected to succeed him, as Pope Gregory VII.
A large negative response to this document followed its release.
The empire's network of roads and waterways facilitated travel, and the ''Pax Romana'' made travelling safe.
For advice and assistance in governing, the pope may turn to the College of Cardinals.
(The Philippines does, however, allow divorce for Muslims.)
Benedict resigned due to advanced age in 2013, the first pope to do so in nearly six hundred years.
In particular, the Bishop of Rome (the pope) is considered the successor to the apostle Simon Peter, a position from which he derives his supremacy over the Church.
Each church has its own liturgical calendar.
However, a few Eastern Churches remained in communion with Rome, and portions of some others established communion in the 15th century and later, forming what are called the Eastern Catholic Churches.
In 1870, the First Vatican Council declared the dogma of papal infallibility and the Kingdom of Italy annexed the city of Rome, the last portion of the Papal States to be incorporated into the new nation.
It makes a person a member of the Church.
The Latin Church, the Eastern Catholic Churches, as well as institutes such as mendicant orders and enclosed monastic orders, reflect a variety of theological and spiritual emphases in the Church.
The first known use of the phrase "the catholic church" (''he katholike ekklesia'') occurred in the letter from Saint Ignatius of Antioch to the Smyrnaeans, written about 110 AD.
When adults are baptised, confirmation is normally given immediately afterwards, a practice followed even with newly baptised infants in the Eastern Catholic Churches.
The Church has also addressed stewardship of the natural environment, and its relationship to other social and theological teachings.
By reconciling with God and following Christ's words and deeds, an individual can enter the Kingdom of God.
In 1949, Communist victory in the Chinese Civil War led to the expulsion of all foreign missionaries.
In 451 the Council of Chalcedon, in a canon of disputed validity, elevated the see of Constantinople to a position "second in eminence and power to the bishop of Rome".
The pope is also Sovereign of Vatican City State, a small city-state entirely enclaved within the city of Rome, which is an entity distinct from the Holy See.
A growing sense of church-state conflicts marked the 14th century.
Because of the prominent role the strongly Catholic nations of Spain and Portugal played in Western Colonialism, Catholicism was spread to the Americas, Asia and Oceania by explorers, conquistadors, and missionaries, as well as by the transformation of societies through the socio-political mechanisms of colonial rule.
His ecclesiastical jurisdiction is called the "Holy See" (''Sancta Sedes'' in Latin), or the "Apostolic See" (meaning the see of the apostle Peter).
The Reformation led to clashes between the Protestant Schmalkaldic League and the Catholic Emperor Charles V and his allies.
From c. 350 to c. 500, the bishops, or popes, of Rome, steadily increased in authority through their consistent intervening in support of orthodox leaders in theological disputes, which encouraged appeals to them.
However, a declaration of nullity may be granted when proof is produced that essential conditions for contracting a valid marriage were absent from the beginning — in other words, that the marriage was not valid due to some impediment.
The pope rejected the Italian Law of Guarantees, which granted him special privileges, and to avoid placing himself in visible subjection to the Italian authorities remained a "prisoner in the Vatican".
Remarriage following a divorce is not permitted unless the prior marriage was declared invalid.
Catholics who have committed to religious or consecrated life instead of marriage or single celibacy, as a state of life or relational vocation, include 54,559 male religious, 705,529 women religious.
The Eastern Catholic Churches follow the traditions and spirituality of Eastern Christianity and are composed of Eastern Christians who have always remained in full communion with the Catholic Church or who have chosen to reenter full communion in the centuries following the East–West Schism and earlier divisions.
The Church has defined rules on who may be ordained into the clergy.
With these Apostles He will abide for ever (John 14:16).
Eastern Catholic Churches have their own rites.
Church teachings about sexuality have become an issue of increasing controversy, especially after the close of the Second Vatican Council, due to changing cultural attitudes in the Western world described as the sexual revolution.
* Purgatory is a temporary condition for the purification of souls who, although destined for Heaven, are not fully detached from sin and thus cannot enter Heaven immediately.
Catholic teaching regarding sexuality calls for a practice of chastity, with a focus on maintaining the spiritual and bodily integrity of the human person.
The New Testament, in particular the Gospels, records Jesus' activities and teaching, his appointment of the twelve Apostles and his Great Commission of the Apostles, instructing them to continue his work.
The Church recognises certain conditions, such as freedom of consent, as required for any marriage to be valid; In addition, the Church sets specific rules and norms, known as canonical form, that Catholics must follow.
These are collectively known as the Four Marks of the Church.
Catholicism teaches that through God's mercy a person can repent at any point before death, be illuminated with the truth of the Catholic faith, and thus obtain salvation.
Conflicts involving authority in the church, particularly the authority of the Bishop of Rome finally culminated in the East–West Schism in the 11th century, splitting the Church into the Catholic and Orthodox Churches.
The Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith responded by issuing a statement clarifying that any Catholic bishops involved in ordination ceremonies for women, as well as the women themselves if they were Catholic, would automatically receive the penalty of excommunication (''latae sententiae'', literally "with the sentence already applied", i.e.
The growth in annulments has been substantial; in the United States, 27,000 marriages were annulled in 2006, compared to 338 in 1968.
According to the ''Catechism'':
Italy (1970), Portugal (1975), Brazil (1977), Spain (1981), Ireland (1996), Chile (2004) and Malta (2011), while the Philippines and the Vatican City have no procedure for divorce.
The 1962 edition of the Roman Missal, published a few months before the Second Vatican Council opened, was the last that presented the Mass as standardised in 1570 by Pope Pius V at the request of the Council of Trent and that is therefore known as the Tridentine Mass.
Likewise, even in grave and pressing need, Catholic ministers may not administer these sacraments to those who do not manifest Catholic faith in the sacrament.
In response to the scandal, formal procedures have been established to help prevent abuse, encourage the reporting of any abuse that occurs and to handle such reports promptly, although groups representing victims have disputed their effectiveness.
But after becoming a Roman Catholic priest, a man may not marry (see Clerical celibacy) unless he is formally laicised.
It must likewise always bring a couple together in love; the church calls this the unitive significance.
In the church's teaching, sexual activity is reserved to married couples, whether in a sacramental marriage among Christians, or in a natural marriage where one or both spouses are unbaptised.
Men receive the holy orders to feed the Church by the word and grace.
Dioceses are divided into parishes, each with one or more priests, deacons or lay ecclesial ministers.
''Catholic'' was first used to describe the church in the early 2nd century.
The Age of Discovery beginning in the 15th century saw the expansion of Western Europe's political and cultural influence worldwide.
It teaches that anyone who is saved is saved through the Catholic Church but that people can be saved outside of the ordinary means ("''ex opere operato''") known as baptism of desire, and by pre-baptismal martyrdom, known as baptism of blood, as well as when conditions of invincible ignorance are present, although invincible ignorance in itself is not a means of salvation.
Eastern Catholic Churches have the autonomy to set the particulars of their liturgical forms and worship, within certain limits to protect the "accurate observance" of their liturgical tradition.
Serious sins (mortal sins) should be confessed at least once a year and always before receiving Holy Communion, while confession of venial sins also is recommended.
Chastity includes temperance, self-mastery, personal and cultural growth, and divine grace.
Raymond E. Brown also says that it is anachronistic to speak of Peter in terms of local bishop of Rome, but that Christians of that period would have looked on Peter as having "roles that would contribute in an essential way to the development of the role of the papacy in the subsequent church".
As Catholic health providers are among the largest providers of services to patients with HIV/AIDS worldwide, there is significant controversy within and outside the church regarding the use of condoms as a means of limiting new infections, as condom use ordinarily constitutes prohibited contraceptive use.
Sexual activity must always be open to the possibility of life; the church calls this the procreative significance.
In the Latin Church, Catholic men may serve as deacons or priests by receiving sacramental ordination.
The '''Catholic Church''', also known as the '''Roman Catholic Church''', is the largest Christian church, with more than 1.27&nbsp;billion members worldwide.
It was the primary sponsor of Romanesque, Gothic, Renaissance, Mannerist and Baroque styles in art, architecture and music.
It developed in southern Europe and North Africa, and spread throughout Western, Central and Northern Europe, before expanding to the rest of the world.
The Catholic Church considers the Bishop of Rome, the pope, to be the successor to Saint Peter.
In 1854, Pope Pius IX, with the support of the overwhelming majority of Roman Catholic bishops, whom he had consulted from 1851 to 1853, proclaimed the Immaculate Conception as a dogma.
The Catholic Church recognises as valid baptisms conferred even by people who are not Catholics or Christians, provided that they intend to baptise ("to do what the Church does when she baptises") and that they use the Trinitarian baptismal formula.
Pope Francis succeeded Benedict in 2013.
The bishops in a particular country are members of a national or regional episcopal conference.
The ''studia conventualia'' and ''studia generalia'' of the mendicant orders played a large role in the transformation of Church sponsored cathedral schools and palace schools, such as that of Charlemagne at Aachen, into the prominent universities of Europe.
As viewed by the Catholic Church, Baptism is the first of three sacraments of initiation as a Christian.
In the Archdiocese of Milan, with around five million Catholics the largest in Europe, Mass is celebrated according to the Ambrosian Rite.
Doctrinally, it reaffirmed central Catholic teachings such as transubstantiation and the requirement for love and hope as well as faith to attain salvation.
In subsequent centuries, Catholicism spread widely across the world despite experiencing a reduction in its hold on European populations due to the growth of religious scepticism during and after the Enlightenment.
Several teachings of the Catholic Church came under increased scrutiny both concurrent with and following the council; among those teachings was the church's teaching regarding the immorality of contraception.
It is an eternal life, in which the soul contemplates God in ceaseless beatitude.
In 1095, Byzantine emperor Alexius I appealed to Pope Urban II for help against renewed Muslim invasions in the Byzantine–Seljuk Wars, which caused Urban to launch the First Crusade aimed at aiding the Byzantine Empire and returning the Holy Land to Christian control.
Ultimately leading the entire Catholic Church is the Bishop of Rome, commonly called the pope, whose jurisdiction is called the Holy See.
The Avignon Papacy ended in 1376 when the pope returned to Rome, but was followed in 1378 by the 38-year-long Western schism with claimants to the papacy in Rome, Avignon and (after 1409) Pisa.
The church teaches that all duly consecrated bishops have a lineal succession from the apostles of Christ, known as apostolic succession.
In the 1960s, the Cultural Revolution saw the closure of all religious establishments.
Many Catholic pastors and priests continued to be sent to prison for refusing to renounce allegiance to Rome.
Pope Paul VI called her Mother of the Church because, by giving birth to Christ, she is considered to be the spiritual mother to each member of the Body of Christ.
Though the schism was reconciled, unresolved issues would lead to further division.
Sacred Scripture consists of the 73 books of the Catholic Bible, consisting of 46 Old Testament and 27 New Testament writings.
Although some priests and religious collaborated with Communist regimes, many were imprisoned, deported or executed and the Church was an important player in the fall of Communism in Europe.
The leadership of the Catholic Church is hierarchical, led by clergy who have received the sacrament of Holy Orders who are given formal jurisdictions of governance within the church.
The French Revolution of 1789 brought about a shifting of powers from the Church to the State, destruction of churches and the establishment of a Cult of Reason.
The Church condemned the 1939 invasion of Poland that started World War II and other subsequent wartime Nazi invasions.
The Latin Church is part of Western Christianity, a heritage of certain beliefs and customs originating in various European countries, some of which are inherited by many Christian denominations that trace their origins to the Protestant Reformation.
Further teachings include the doctrines of the Immaculate Conception (her own conception without the stain of original sin) and the Assumption of Mary (that her body was assumed directly into heaven at the end of her life).
In the Second World War, the Church condemned Nazism, and protected hundreds of thousands of Jews from the Holocaust; its efforts, however, have been criticised as inadequate.
Emperor Constantine legalised the practice of Christianity in 313, and it became the state religion in 380.
Divorce is increasing in some predominantly Catholic countries in Europe.
In the document ''Laudato si''', dated 24 May 2015, Pope Francis critiques consumerism and irresponsible development, and laments environmental degradation and global warming.
In 313, Emperor Constantine I's Edict of Milan legalised Christianity, and in 330 Constantine moved the imperial capital to Constantinople, modern Istanbul, Turkey.
Pope Alexander VI had awarded colonial rights over most of the newly discovered lands to Spain and Portugal and the ensuing ''patronato'' system allowed state authorities, not the Vatican, to control all clerical appointments in the new colonies.
If a new-born child is in a danger of death, anyone—be it a doctor, a nurse, or a parent—may baptise the child.
The Catholic Church practises closed communion, with only baptised members in a state of grace ordinarily permitted to receive the Eucharist.
"Religious institutes" is a modern term encompassing both "religious orders" and "religious congregations" which were once distinguished in canon law.
Napoleon later re-established the Catholic Church in France through the Concordat of 1801.
The Catholic Church sees the sacrament of confirmation as required to complete the grace given in baptism.
The Roman Rite is the most common rite of worship used by the Catholic Church.
Western Christianity, particularly through its monasteries, was a major factor in preserving classical civilisation, with its art (see Illuminated manuscript) and literacy.
In 2007, Pope Benedict XVI affirmed the continued use of the 1962 Roman Missal as an extraordinary form of the Roman Rite ("a ''Forma extraordinaria''"), speaking of it also as an ''usus antiquior'' (older use), and issued new permissive norms for its employment.
Examples of institutes of consecrated life are the Benedictines, the Carmelites, the Dominicans, the Franciscans, the Missionaries of Charity, the Legionaries of Christ and the Sisters of Mercy.
It holds that the Father, as the "principle without principle", is the first origin of the Spirit, but also that he, as Father of the only Son, is with the Son the single principle from which the Spirit proceeds.
This remark and others made in the same interview were seen as a change in the tone, but not in the substance of the teaching of the Church, which includes opposition to same-sex marriage.
In general, each ''sui iuris'' church is headed by a patriarch or high-ranking bishop, and has a degree of self-governance over the particulars of its internal organisation, liturgical rites, liturgical calendar and other aspects of its spirituality.
In 1438, the Council of Florence convened, which featured a strong dialogue focussed on understanding the theological differences between the East and West, with the hope of reuniting the Catholic and Orthodox churches.
The Eastern Catholic Churches share common patrimony and liturgical rites as their counterparts, including Eastern Orthodox and other Eastern Christian churches who are no longer in communion with the Holy See.
The Catholic Church has defined four Marian dogmas: the Immaculate Conception, the dogma that Mary was conceived without original sin; her status, as the mother of Jesus, of Mother of God; her perpetual virginity; and her bodily assumption into Heaven at the end of her earthly life.
The bishops at the Second Vatican Council reminded Catholics that "devotions should be so drawn up that they harmonize with the liturgical seasons, accord with the sacred liturgy, are in some fashion derived from it, and lead the people to it, since, in fact, the liturgy by its very nature far surpasses any of them."
Parishes are responsible for the day to day celebration of the sacraments and pastoral care of the laity.
It is also the name which Pope Paul VI used when signing documents of the Second Vatican Council.
The Catholic Church is notable within Western Christianity for its sacred tradition and seven sacraments.
Thousands of Catholic priests, nuns and brothers were imprisoned and murdered throughout the countries occupied by the Nazis, including Saints Maximilian Kolbe and Edith Stein.
This is because it is considered the propitiatory sacrifice of Christ himself.
The most widely used is the Roman Rite, usually in its ordinary form promulgated by Paul VI in 1969, but also in its authorised extraordinary form, the Tridentine Mass as in the 1962 edition of the Roman Missal.
The Catholic Church maintains that the doctrine on faith and morals that it declares as definitive is infallible.
In Western Christianity, particularly Catholicism, the sacrament is called ''confirmation'', because it confirms and strengthens the grace of baptism; in the Eastern Churches, it is called ''chrismation'', because the essential rite is the anointing of the person with chrism, a mixture of olive oil and some perfumed substance, usually balsam, blessed by a bishop.
Essential to this sacrament are acts both by the sinner (examination of conscience, contrition with a determination not to sin again, confession to a priest, and performance of some act to repair the damage caused by sin) and by the priest (determination of the act of reparation to be performed and absolution).
The Catholic Church teaches that it is the "one true church", "the universal sacrament of salvation for the human race", and "the one true religion".
In the 7th and 8th centuries, expanding Muslim conquests following the advent of Islam led to an Arab domination of the Mediterranean that severed political connections between that area and northern Europe, and weakened cultural connections between Rome and the Byzantine Empire.
The 16th century, however, began to see challenges to the Church, in particular to its religious authority, by figures in the Protestant Reformation, as well as in the 17th century by secular intellectuals in the Enlightenment.
Since the East–West Schism of 1054, the Eastern Church has taken the adjective "Orthodox" as its distinctive epithet (however, its official name continues to be the "Orthodox Catholic Church") and the Western Church in communion with the Holy See has similarly taken "Catholic", keeping that description also after the Protestant Reformation of the 16th century, when those who ceased to be in communion became known as "Protestants".
Others say that the institution of the papacy is not dependent on the idea that Peter was Bishop of Rome or even on his ever having been in Rome.
Both of these doctrines were defined as infallible dogma, by Pope Pius IX in 1854 and Pope Pius XII in 1950 respectively, but only after consulting with the Catholic bishops throughout the world to ascertain that this is a Catholic belief.
The Second Vatican Council in the 1960s introduced the most significant changes to Catholic practices since the Council of Trent four centuries before.
The church teaches that sexual intercourse should only take place between a married man and woman, and should be without the use of birth control or contraception.
According to the Catechism, there are two sacraments of communion directed towards the salvation of others: priesthood and marriage.
Men and women may serve as extraordinary ministers of Holy Communion, as readers (lectors); or as altar servers.
Catholic doctrine is authoritatively summarised in the ''Catechism of the Catholic Church'', published by the Holy See.
Several eastern churches reunited, forming the Eastern Catholic Churches.
Non-Catholics such are ordinarily prohibited from receiving the Eucharist as well.
Unlike most religions in the Roman Empire, however, Christianity required its adherents to renounce all other gods, a practice adopted from Judaism (see Idolatry).
The Roman Curia has a specific department, the Congregation for the Oriental Churches, to maintain relations with them.
* Heaven is a state of unending union with the divine nature of God, not ontologically, but by grace.
Since 2014, clergy in the small personal ordinariates set up for groups of former Anglicans under the terms of the 2009 document ''Anglicanorum Coetibus'' are permitted to use a variation of the Roman Rite called "Divine Worship" or, less formally, "Ordinariate Use", which incorporates elements of the Anglican liturgy and traditions.
Following the 1917 Bolshevik Revolution, persecution of the Church and Catholics in the Soviet Union continued into the 1930s with the execution and exiling of clerics, monks and laymen, the confiscation of religious implements and closure of churches.
Pope Pius V's Roman Missal was subjected to minor revisions by Pope Clement VIII in 1604, Pope Urban VIII in 1634, Pope Pius X in 1911, Pope Pius XII in 1955, and Pope John XXIII in 1962.
This belief is expressed in the ''Filioque'' clause which was added to the Latin version of the Nicene Creed of 381 but not included in the Greek versions of the creed used in Eastern Christianity.
The two sacraments of healing are the Sacrament of Penance and Anointing of the Sick.
In the Latin Church, the priesthood is generally restricted to celibate men, and the episcopate is always restricted to celibate men.
However, documents produced both by the Holy See and by certain national episcopal conferences occasionally refer to the Church as the Roman Catholic Church.
Initiated by Pope John XXIII, this ecumenical council modernised the practices of the Catholic Church, allowing the Mass to be said in the vernacular (local language) and encouraging "fully conscious, and active participation in liturgical celebrations".
Each diocese is united with one of the worldwide ''sui iuris'' particular churches such as the Latin Church or one of the Eastern Catholic churches.
While Holy Orders are reserved for men, Catholic women have played diverse roles in the life of the church, with religious institutes providing a formal space for their participation and convents providing spaces for their self-government, prayer and influence through many centuries.
In the 1960s, the Second Vatican Council led to several controversial reforms of the church liturgy and practices, an effort described as "opening the windows" by defenders, but leading to harsh criticism in several conservative circles.
Jesus is believed to have remained sinless while on earth, and to have allowed himself to be unjustly executed by crucifixion, as sacrifice of himself to reconcile humanity to God; this reconciliation is known as the Paschal Mystery.
As a result of Islamic domination of the Mediterranean, the Frankish state, centred away from that sea, was able to evolve as the dominant power that shaped the Western Europe of the Middle Ages.
Souls in purgatory may be aided in reaching heaven by the prayers of the faithful on earth and by the intercession of saints.
Catholics, even if they were in danger of death and unable to approach a Catholic minister, may not ask for the sacraments of the Eucharist, penance or anointing of the sick from someone, such as a Protestant minister, who is not known to be validly ordained in line with Catholic teaching on ordination.
He instituted World Youth Day as a "worldwide encounter with the pope" for young people which is now held every two to three years.
This ended under Pope Clement VIII, who hesitantly accepted King Henry IV's 1598 Edict of Nantes, which granted civil and religious toleration to French Protestants.
The Church is also actively engaged in international aid and development through organisations such as Catholic Relief Services, Caritas International, Aid to the Church in Need, refugee advocacy groups such as the Jesuit Refugee Service and community aid groups such as the Saint Vincent de Paul Society.
The terms "religious order" and "religious institute" tend to be used as synonyms colloquially.
The present ordinary form of Mass in the Roman Rite, found in the post-1969 editions of the Roman Missal, is usually celebrated in the local vernacular language, using an officially approved translation from the original text in Latin.
In France, a series of conflicts termed the French Wars of Religion was fought from 1562 to 1598 between the Huguenots (French Calvinists) and the forces of the French Catholic League.
Many scholars hold that a church structure of plural presbyters/bishops persisted in Rome until the mid-2nd century, when the structure of a single bishop and plural presbyters was adopted, and that later writers retrospectively applied the term "bishop of Rome" to the most prominent members of the clergy in the earlier period and also to Peter himself.
In 2005, following the death of John Paul II, Pope Benedict XVI, head of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith under John Paul, was elected.
In the 1936–39 Spanish Civil War, the Catholic hierarchy allied itself with Franco's Nationalists against the Popular Front government, citing Republican violence against the Church.
* Final Damnation: Finally, those who persist in living in a state of mortal sin and do not repent before death subject themselves to hell, an everlasting separation from God.
At Pentecost, the Apostles are believed to have received the Holy Spirit, preparing them for their mission in leading the church.
Catholic belief holds that the Church "is the continuing presence of Jesus on earth" and that it alone possesses the full means of salvation.
