She had no intention of marrying him, having already given birth to Orlov's child and to the Grand Duke Paul by then.
Very few members of the nobility entered the Church, which became even less important than before.
By mid-June, Zubov's troops overran without any resistance most of the territory of modern-day Azerbaijan, including three principal cities — Baku, Shemakha, and Ganja.
Grigory Orlov, the grandson of a rebel in the Streltsy Uprising (1698) against Peter the Great, distinguished himself in the Battle of Zorndorf (25 August 1758), receiving three wounds.
She bore him a daughter named Anna Petrovna in December 1757 (not to be confused with Grand Duchess Anna Petrovna of Russia, the daughter of Peter I's second marriage).
Her genius seemed to rest on her forehead, which was both high and wide.
Catherine first met Peter III at the age of 10.
One popular way to prevent recognition was to claim their right to royalty far from their home as both Emal'Ian Ivanovich Pugachev and the pretender Artem'ev did.
Even more importantly the odnodvortsy and cossacks were vital support for pretenders because of their military experience.
Catherine also received Elisabeth Vigée Le Brun (formerly court painter to Marie Antoinette) at her Tsarskoselo residence in St Petersburg, by whom she was painted shortly before her death.
He also placed great emphasis on the "proper and effectual education of the female sex"; two years prior, Catherine had commissioned Ivan Betskoy to draw up the General Programme for the Education of Young People of Both Sexes.
The newlyweds settled in the palace of Oranienbaum, which remained the residence of the "young court" for many years to come.
Catherine was buried at the Peter and Paul Cathedral in Saint Petersburg.
By November, they were stationed at the confluence of the Araks and Kura Rivers, poised to attack mainland Iran.
In accordance with the custom then prevailing in the ruling dynasties of Germany, she received her education chiefly from a French governess and from tutors.
While claiming religious tolerance, she intended to recall the Believers into the official church.
The diplomatic intrigue failed, largely due to the intervention of Sophia's mother, Johanna Elisabeth of Holstein-Gottorp.
Shuvalov under Elizabeth and under Peter III.
She addressed me immediately in a voice full of sweetness, if a little throaty: "I am delighted to welcome you here, Madame, your reputation runs before you.
This was another attempt to organise and passively control the outer fringes of her country.
Historically, when the serfs faced problems they could not solve on their own (such as abusive masters), they often appealed to the autocrat, and continued doing so during Catherine’s reign, though she signed legislation prohibiting it.
She acquired his collection of books from his heirs, and placed them in the National Library of Russia.
Prussia (through the agency of Prince Henry), Russia (under Catherine), and Austria (under Maria Theresa) began preparing the ground for the partitions of Poland.
However, peasants owned by the state generally had more freedoms than those owned by a noble.
Taxes doubled again for those of Jewish descent in 1794, and Catherine officially declared that Jews bore no relation to Russians.
The peasants were discontented because of many other factors, as well, including crop failure, and epidemics, especially a major epidemic in 1771.
A shrewd statesman, Panin dedicated much effort and millions of rubles to setting up a "Northern Accord" between Russia, Prussia, Poland, and Sweden, to counter the power of the Bourbon–Habsburg League.
Her eyes were soft and sensitive, her nose quite Greek, her colour high and her features expressive.
He received a palace in Saint Petersburg when Catherine became Empress.
Assisted by highly successful generals such as Alexander Suvorov and Pyotr Rumyantsev, and admirals such as Fyodor Ushakov, she governed at a time when the Russian Empire was expanding rapidly by conquest and diplomacy.
During 1768–1774, no progress was made in setting up a national school system.
From 19 April 1764, any bureaucrat holding the same rank for seven years or more got instantly promoted.
Not long after the Moscow Foundling Home, Catherine established the Smolny Institute for Noble Girls to educate females.
File:Levitzky Portrait Catherine II 1782.jpg|Portrait of Catherine II by Dmitry Levitsky, by 1782
Converted Jews could gain permission to enter the merchant class and farm as free peasants under Russian rule.
For example, she took action to limit the number of new serfs; she eliminated many ways for people to become serfs, culminating in the manifesto of 17 March 1775, which prohibited a serf who had once been freed from becoming a serf again.
The treaty also removed restrictions on Russian naval or commercial traffic in the Azov Sea, granted to Russia the position of protector of Orthodox Christians in the Ottoman Empire, and made the Crimea a protectorate of Russia.
This allowed the Russian government to control more people, especially those who previously had not fallen under the jurisdiction of Russian law.
He succeeded as Emperor of Russia in 1796 and was murdered at Saint Michael's Castle in 1801.
Her mother, being opposed to this practice, fell into the Empress' disfavour.
Many Russians believed that tsars and tsarevichs bore special marks on their bodies symbolising their royal status, which became known as royal marks.
By the end of her reign, 50 provinces and nearly 500 districts were created, more than double the government officials were appointed, and they were spending six times as much as previously on local government.
Catherine became a great patron of Russian opera.
She applied herself to learning the Russian language with such zeal, she rose at night and walked about her bedroom barefoot, repeating her lessons (even though she mastered the language, she retained an accent).
In the second partition, in 1793, Russia received the most land, from west of Minsk almost to Kiev and down the river Dnieper, leaving some spaces of steppe down south in front of Ochakov, on the Black Sea.
Potemkin fell very ill in August 1783.
Poniatowski refused.
She appointed General Aleksandr Bibikov to put down the uprising, but she needed Potemkin's advice on military strategy.
In July 1762, barely six months after becoming emperor, Peter took a holiday with his Holstein-born courtiers and relatives to Oranienbaum, leaving his wife in Saint Petersburg.
Created Count Bobrinsky in 1796, he died in 1813.
Catherine longed for recognition as an enlightened sovereign.
Within the walls of the Institute, they were taught impeccable French, musicianship, dancing, and complete awe of the Monarch.
Later uprisings in Poland led to the third partition in 1795, one year before Catherine's death.
Her face appeared purplish, her pulse was weak, and her breathing was shallow and laboured.
Awaking from her delirium, however, Catherine said: "I don't want any Lutheran; I want my orthodox father."
When Catherine agreed to the First Partition of Poland, the large new Jewish element was treated as a separate people, defined by their religion.
All the ladies, some of whom took turn to watch by the body, would go and kiss this hand, or at least appear to."
Catherine chose to assimilate Islam into the state rather than eliminate it when public outcry against equality got too disruptive.
This is why some serfs were able to do things such as accumulate wealth.
The positions on the Assembly were appointed and paid for by Catherine and her government, as a way of regulating the religious affairs of her nation.
Peter III was also popular among Russians because of his benevolent rule.
She believed a 'new kind of person' could be created by inculcating Russian children with European education.
In 1764, she sent for Dumaresq to come to Russia and then appointed him to the educational commission.
The percentage of state money spent on the court increased from 10.4% in 1767 to 11.4% in 1781 to 13.5% in 1795.
Pugachev claimed the scars on his chest were caused from the coup against him and that the scars on his forehead were from smallpox.
Some serfs did apply for freedom and were, surprisingly, successful.
Catherine enlisted Voltaire to her cause, and corresponded with him for 15 years, from her accession to his death in 1778.
She was crowned in Moscow on the 22 September 1762.
By separating the public interests from those of the church, Catherine began a secularisation of the day-to-day workings of Russia.
From 1788 to 1790, Russia fought a war against Sweden, a conflict instigated by Catherine's cousin, King Gustav III of Sweden, who expected to simply overtake the Russian armies still engaged in war against the Ottoman Turks, and hoped to strike Saint Petersburg directly.
She sent the Russian army into Poland to avoid possible disputes.
In 1773 Pugachev staged a revealing of his royal identity to a cossack, Eremina Kuritsa, leading other cossacks to challenge Pugachev at dinner, which resulted in him showing scars on his chest and head to the cossacks.
In her memoirs, Catherine makes no mention of Anna's death on 8 March 1759, though she was inconsolable and entered a state of shock.
The odnodvortsy were angered even more in some regions of Russia as land lords expanded their property claiming odnodvortsy and peasants as serfs.
Within a few months of her accession in 1762, having heard the French government threatened to stop the publication of the famous French ''Encyclopédie'' on account of its irreligious spirit, Catherine proposed to Diderot that he should complete his great work in Russia under her protection.
In 1785, Catherine conferred on the nobility the Charter to the Nobility, increasing further the power of the landed oligarchs.
In many ways, the Orthodox Church fared no better than its foreign counterparts during the reign of Catherine.
She had her husband arrested and forced him to sign a document of abdication, leaving no one to dispute her accession to the throne.
While this presented some benefits for Jews—they received recognition as equals to any Orthodox citizen—many people attempted to take advantage of this equality.
Catherine's foreign minister, Nikita Panin (in office 1763–81), exercised considerable influence from the beginning of her reign.
Although she could see the benefits of Britain's friendship, she was wary of Britain's increased power following its victory in the Seven Years War, which threatened the European balance of power.
Orthodox Russians disliked the inclusion of Judaism, mainly for economic reasons; many Jews were bankers and merchants.
Catherine later wrote that she stayed at one end of the castle and Peter on the other.
The decline of pretenders illustrates the correlation between the conditions of serfs and the appearance of pretenders in the last third of Catherine's reign because she improved legal and economic conditions for the serfs to deter future pretenders.
It was widely expected that a 13,000-strong Russian corps would be led by a seasoned general (Gudovich)—but the Empress followed the advice of her lover, Prince Zubov, and entrusted the command to his youthful brother, Count Valerian Zubov.
She had Peter arrested and forced him to sign an act of abdication.
According to the official report of the Mosiakin he had made the cross marks himself to convince people that he was Peter III and he actually had some success as he managed to gain followers from various villages as he went from house to house.
Catherine’s decree also denied Jews the rights of an Orthodox or naturalised citizen of Russia.
'''Alexei Grigorievich Bobrinsky'''Count Bobrinsky
While the majority of serfs were farmers bound to the land, a noble could also have his serfs sent away to learn a trade or be educated at a school, in addition to employing them at businesses that paid wages.
In 1762, to help mend the rift between the Orthodox church and a sect that called themselves the Old Believers, Catherine passed an act that allowed Old Believers to practise their faith openly without interference.
The serfs were not the only social group that suffered from worsening economic conditions.
Despite his objection, on 28 June 1744 the Russian Orthodox Church received Princess Sophia as a member with the new name Catherine (Yekaterina or Ekaterina) and the (artificial) patronymic Алексеевна (Alekseyevna, daughter of Aleksey).
In addition to the textbooks translated by the commission, teachers were provided with the "Guide to Teachers".
The nobles were also imposing a stricter rule than ever, reducing the land of each serf and restricting their freedoms further beginning around 1767.
She recovered well enough to begin to plan a ceremony where a favourite grandson would supersede her difficult son on the throne, but she died of a stroke before the announcement could be made, just over two months after the engagement ball.
Although she did not want to communicate directly with the serfs, she did create some measures to improve their conditions as a class and reduce the size of the institution of serfdom.
However, the Legislative Commission of 1767 offered several seats to people professing the Islamic faith.
On 25 November, the coffin, richly decorated in gold fabric, was placed atop an elevated platform at the Grand Gallery's chamber of mourning, designed and decorated by Antonio Rinaldi.
The third Peter III with royal marks was the most famous of the four and the most successful pretender of the time, Pugachev.
Catherine, throughout her long reign, took many lovers, often elevating them to high positions for as long as they held her interest, and then pensioning them off with gifts of serfs and large estates.
Catherine was given the last rites and died the following evening around 9:45.
Johanna's hunger for fame centred on her daughter's prospects of becoming empress of Russia, but she infuriated Empress Elizabeth, who eventually banned her from the country for spying for King Frederick of Prussia.
For example, Pugachev claimed that he spent the eleven years since Peter III's reported death wandering abroad as far as Egypt or Constantinople.
The remodelling of the Cadet Corps 1766 initiated many educational reforms.
Catherine then left with the regiment to go to the Semenovsky Barracks where the clergy was waiting to ordain her as the sole occupant of the Russian throne.
Sophia had turned 16; her father did not travel to Russia for the wedding.
By 1759, Catherine and he had become lovers; no one told Catherine's husband, the Grand Duke Peter.
Catherine tried to keep the Jews away from certain economic spheres, even with a ruse of equality; in 1790, she banned Jewish citizens from Moscow’s middle class.
After the uprising broke down due to internal politics in the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth, she established in the ''Rzeczpospolita'', a system of government fully controlled by the Russian Empire through a Permanent Council, under the supervision of her ambassadors and envoys.
News of Catherine's plan spread and Frederick II (others say the Ottoman sultan) warned her that if she tried to conquer Poland by marrying Poniatowski, all of Europe would oppose her.
Russia was revitalised under her reign, growing larger and stronger than ever and becoming recognised as one of the great powers of Europe.
She levied additional taxes on the followers of Judaism; if a family converted to the Orthodox faith, that additional tax was lifted.
Judgment of the 19th century was generally critical, claiming that Catherine failed to supply enough money to support her educational programme.
Russia often treated Judaism as a separate entity, where Jews were maintained with a separate legal and bureaucratic system.
This re-established the separate identity that Judaism maintained in Russia throughout the Jewish Haskalah.
On a date already set for a week before she died, Catherine had intended to formally announce that Paul would be excluded from the succession, and that the crown would go to her eldest grandson, Alexander (whom she greatly favoured, and who subsequently became the emperor Alexander I in 1801).
Peter also still played with toy soldiers.
By 1782, Catherine arranged another advisory commission to study the information gathered about the educational systems of many different countries.
The leading economists of her day, such as Arthur Young and Jacques Necker, became foreign members of the Free Economic Society, established on her suggestion in Saint Petersburg in 1765.
Endowments from the government replaced income from privately held lands.
Catherine was so irritated at this, her health was affected.
They were also pressured into Orthodoxy through monetary incentives.
The bonnet which held her white hair was not decorated with ribbons, but with the most beautiful diamonds."
Four years later, in 1766, she endeavoured to embody in legislation the principles of Enlightenment she learned from studying the French philosophers.
By building new settlements with mosques placed in them, Catherine attempted to ground many of the nomadic people who wandered through southern Russia.
In 1757, Poniatowski served in the British forces during the Seven Years' War, thus severing close relationships with Catherine.
When her situation looked desperate, her mother wanted her confessed by a Lutheran priest.
Catherine held western European philosophies and culture close to her heart, and she wanted to surround herself with like-minded people within Russia.
A landowner could punish his serfs at his discretion, and under Catherine the Great gained the ability to sentence his serfs to hard labour in Siberia, a punishment normally reserved for convicted criminals.
'''Catherine II of Russia''' ( ''Yekaterina Alekseyevna''), also known as '''Catherine the Great''' (, ''Yekaterina Velikaya'';  – ), was the most renowned and the longest-ruling female leader of Russia, reigning from 1762 until her death in 1796 at the age of 67.
Mosiakin entered a peasant hut claiming to be Peter III and then showed the peasants crosses on his arms, claiming they represented royal inheritance.
In that month, the Empress of Russia died and her successor Paul, who detested the Zubovs and had other plans for the army, ordered the troops to retreat to Russia.
I am no connoisseur, but I am a great art lover."
Unlike the first two pretenders to show royal marks, Pugachev's efforts cost him his life since his punishment was execution.
The last of her lovers, Prince Zubov, was 40 years her junior.
In 1786, Catherine conducted a triumphal procession in the Crimea, which helped provoke the next Russo–Turkish War.
Born Sophia Augusta Fredericka (, nicknamed "''Figchen''") in Stettin, Pomerania, two of her first cousins became Kings of Sweden: Gustav III and Charles XIII.
At least seventeen of the twenty-six pretenders during Catherine's reign appeared in one of three clusters; six from 1764–1765, six from 1772–1774, and five from 1782–1786.
In 1780, the son of Holy Roman Empress Maria Theresa, Emperor Joseph II, toyed with the idea of determining whether or not to enter an alliance with Russia, and asked to meet Catherine.
In the first partition, 1772, the three powers split  between them.
He had only a few days to live, though, as shortly after his arrest, he was strangled to death by Catherine's supporters; though, no one knows what part Catherine had in Peter's death.
In the east, Russia started to colonise Alaska, establishing Russian America.
The servants lifted Catherine from the floor and brought her to the bedroom.
The choice of Sophia as wife of her second cousin, the prospective tsar Peter of Holstein-Gottorp, resulted from some amount of diplomatic management in which Count Lestocq, Peter's aunt (the ruling Russian Empress Elizabeth), and Frederick II of Prussia took part.
Her harshness towards Paul probably stemmed as much from political distrust as from what she saw of his character.
Far away from the capital, they were also confused as to the circumstances of her accession to the throne.
In the Far East, Russians became active in fur trapping in Kamchatka and the Kuril Islands.
The endowments were often much less than the original intended amount.
She did this because she did not want to be bothered by the peasantry, but did not want to give them reason to revolt, either.
The event was glorified by the court poet Derzhavin in his famous ode; he later commented bitterly on Zubov's inglorious return from the expedition in another remarkable poem.
The government branded Kazin-Bogomolov despite his markings.
But usually, if the serfs did not like the policies of the tsar, they saw the nobles as corrupt and evil, preventing the people of Russia from communicating with the well-intentioned tsar and misinterpreting his decrees.
However, the Moscow Foundling Home was unsuccessful, mainly due to extremely high mortality rates, which prevented many of the children from living long enough to develop into the enlightened subjects the state desired.
Gavrila Derzhavin, Denis Fonvizin, and Ippolit Bogdanovich laid the groundwork for the great writers of the 19th century, especially for Alexander Pushkin.
Catherine reformed the administration of Russian guberniyas, and many new cities and towns were founded on her orders.
Her sexual independence led to many of the legends about her.
In the same year, Catherine issued the Charter of the Towns, which distributed all people into six groups as a way to limit the power of nobles and create a middle estate.
9 December 1757&nbsp;– 8 March 1759
She called together at Moscow a Grand Commission—almost a consultative parliament—composed of 652 members of all classes (officials, nobles, burghers, and peasants) and of various nationalities.
Russian local authorities helped his party, and the Russian government decided to use him as a trade envoy.
She pioneered for Russia the role that Britain later played through most of the 19th and early 20th centuries as an international mediator in disputes that could, or did, lead to war.
At first, she simply attempted to revise clerical studies, proposing a reform of religious schools.
If there tended to be any form of famine during a pretender's rise it was during their claim to power and not inspired by it.
They submitted recommendations for the establishment of a general system of education for all Russian orthodox subjects from the age of 5 to 18, excluding serfs.
Elizabeth took Anna and raised the baby herself, as she had done with Paul.
11 April 1762&nbsp;– 20 June 1813
Historians find no evidence for Catherine's complicity in the supposed assassination.
Catherine gave them this new right, but in exchange they could no longer appeal directly to her.
During Catherine's reign, Russians imported and studied the classical and European influences that inspired the Russian Enlightenment.
Despite all attempts to revive the Empress, she fell into a coma from which she never recovered.
She made many educational reforms despite the lack of a national school system.
The serfs probably followed someone who was pretending to be the true tsar because of their feelings of disconnection to Catherine and her policies empowering the nobles, but this was not the first time they followed a pretender under Catherine’s reign.
Catherine promised more serfs of all religions, as well as amnesty for convicts, if Muslims chose to convert to Orthodoxy.
If a noble did not live up to his side of the deal, then the serfs could file complaints against him by following the proper channels of law.
:I used to say to myself that happiness and misery depend on ourselves.
Between 1762 and 1773, Muslims were actively prohibited from owning any Orthodox serfs.
After defeating Polish loyalist forces in the Polish–Russian War of 1792 and in the Kościuszko Uprising (1794), Russia completed the partitioning of Poland, dividing all of the remaining Commonwealth territory with Prussia and Austria (1795).
Poniatowski, through his mother's side, came from the Czartoryski family, prominent members of the pro-Russian faction in Poland.
This led to a severe attack of pneumonia in March 1744.
Based on her writings, she found Peter detestable upon meeting him.
They refused to comply, and in 1764, she deported over 20,000 Old Believers to Siberia on the grounds of their faith.
The plan was another attempt to force nomadic people to settle.
The condition of serfs worsened at the start of Catherine's reign because there was a sharp increase, 47%, in the number of peasants on state land and an establishment of a poll tax.
But Russia's Baltic Fleet checked the Royal Swedish navy in a tied battle of Hogland (July 1788), and the Swedish army failed to advance.
She became friends with Princess Ekaterina Vorontsova-Dashkova, the sister of her husband's mistress, who introduced her to several powerful political groups that opposed her husband.
Catherine was to come to power based on her mother's relations to wealthy members of royalty.
She followed the precedent established when Catherine I (born in the lower classes in the Swedish East Baltic territories) succeeded her husband Peter the Great in 1725.
The crown was produced in a record two months and weighed only 2.3&nbsp;kg.
She provided support to a Polish antireform group known as the Targowica Confederation.
Afraid the May Constitution of Poland (1791) might lead to a resurgence in the power of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth and the growing democratic movements inside the Commonwealth might become a threat to the European monarchies, Catherine decided to intervene in Poland.
He lauded her accomplishments, calling her "The Star of the North" and the "Semiramis of Russia" (in reference to the legendary Queen of Babylon, a subject on which he published a tragedy in 1768).
This work, divided into four parts, dealt with teaching methods, the subjects taught, the behaviour of the teacher, and the running of a school.
Catherine annexed the Crimea in 1783, nine years after the Crimean Khanate had gained nominal independence—which had been guaranteed by Russia—from the Ottoman Empire as a result of her first war against the Turks.
He later became the de facto absolute ruler of New Russia, governing its colonisation.
Under Catherine’s rule, though, despite her enlightened ideals, the serfs were generally unhappy and discontent.
Ivan VI was a potential threat to Catherine since he was exiled as an infant and could lay claim to the throne.
Sir Charles Hanbury Williams, the British ambassador to Russia, offered Stanisław Poniatowski a place in the embassy in return for gaining Catherine as an ally.
The serfs had very limited rights, but they were not exactly slaves.
After the decisive defeat of the Russian fleet at the Battle of Svensksund in 1790, the parties signed the Treaty of Värälä (14 August 1790), returning all conquered territories to their respective owners and confirming the Treaty of Åbo.
