The heritability of fear varies markedly in cattle from low (0.1) to high (0.53); such high variation is also found in pigs and sheep,  probably due to differences in the methods used.
An ox is a mature bovine which has learned to respond appropriately to a teamster's signals.
Visual individual recognition is a more complex mental process than visual discrimination.
Cattle sometimes consume metal objects which are deposited in the reticulum and irritation from the metal objects causes hardware disease.
Bull-leaping, a central ritual in Bronze Age Minoan culture (see Bull (mythology)), still exists in southwestern France.
EPA enforcement highlights for fiscal year 2010 indicated enforcement actions against 12 cattle CAFOs for violations that included failures to obtain a permit, failures to meet the terms of a permit, and discharges of contaminated water.
Also, some cultural differences occur in working with cattle; the cattle husbandry of Fulani men rests on behavioural techniques, whereas in Europe, cattle are controlled primarily by physical means, such as fences.
When the heifers made clear improvements in learning, they had higher heart rates and tended to move more vigorously along the race.
Such designation of cattle CAFOs is according to cattle type (mature dairy cows, veal calves or other) and cattle numbers, but medium CAFOs are so designated only if they meet certain discharge criteria, and small CAFOs are designated only on a case-by-case basis.
Beef-calves reared on the range suckle an average of 5.0 times every 24&nbsp;hours with an average total time of 46&nbsp;min spent suckling.
Aleutian wild cattles can be found on Aleutian Islands.
A similar study showed that after hot-iron disbudding (dehorning), calves had a similar negative bias indicating that post-operative pain following this routine procedure results in a negative change in emotional state.
Mounting is a playful behaviour shown by calves of both sexes and by bulls but not by cows, however, this is not a dominance related behaviour as has been found in other species.
However, in the case of social and reproductive behaviours, olfaction is a key source of information.
It is difficult to generalize or average out the weight of all cattle because different kinds have different averages of weights.
Behavioral traits of cattle can be as heritable as some production traits, and often, the two can be related.
Depending on the breed, cattle can survive on hill grazing, heaths, marshes, moors and semidesert.
The veterinary discipline dealing with cattle and cattle diseases (bovine veterinary) is called buiatrics.
This is the origin of the now archaic English plural, "kine".
Cattle feedlots in this size category correspond to the regulatory definition of "large" concentrated animal feeding operations (CAFOs) for cattle other than mature dairy cows or veal calves.
There are a number of other sounds made by cattle, including calves ''bawling'', and bulls ''bellowing''.
Other animal parts are also used as food products, including blood, liver, kidney, heart and oxtail.
Cattle can recognize familiar individuals.
Nonetheless, cattle and other forms of domesticated animals can sometimes help to use plant resources in areas not easily amenable to other forms of agriculture.
Modern cattle are more commercial than older breeds and, having become more specialized, are less versatile.
In laboratory studies, young cattle are able to memorize the locations of several food sources and retain this memory for at least 8&nbsp;hours, although this declined after 12&nbsp;hours.
Certain breeds of cattle, such as the Holstein-Friesian, are used to produce milk, which can be processed into dairy products such as milk, cheese or yogurt.
Some consider cattle the oldest form of wealth, and cattle raiding consequently one of the earliest forms of theft.
As with many animal dominance hierarchies, dominance-associated aggressiveness does not correlate with rank position, but is closely related to rank distance between individuals.
* "Gee": turn right
Significant numbers of dairy, as well as beef cattle, are confined in CAFOs, defined as "new and existing operations which stable or confine and feed or maintain for a total of 45 days or more in any 12-month period more than the number of animals specified" where "crops, vegetation, forage growth, or post-harvest residues are not sustained in the normal growing season over any portion of the lot or facility."
Smaller kinds, such as Dexter and Jersey adults, range between .
The weight of adult cattle always depends on the breed.
Cattle are known for regurgitating and re-chewing their food, known as cud chewing, like most ruminants.
Cattle are farmed for beef, veal, dairy, and leather, and they are less commonly used for conservation grazing, simply to maintain grassland for wildlife – for example, in Epping Forest, England.
tongue and jaw movements, depending on characteristics of the plant they are eating.
Bite area decreases with the density of the plants but increases with their height.
Cattle and other livestock emit about 80 to 93 Tg of methane per year, accounting for an estimated 37% of anthropogenic methane emissions, and additional methane is produced by anaerobic fermentation of manure in manure lagoons and other manure storage structures.
Breeding stock may be allowed a longer lifespan, occasionally living as long as 25 years.
By adjusting their behaviour, cattle obtain heavier bites in swards that are tall and sparse compared with short, dense swards of equal mass/area.
The analysis took into account not only practices in feedlots, but also feed production (with less feed needed in more intensive production systems), forage-based cow-calf operations and backgrounding before cattle enter a feedlot (with more beef produced per head of cattle from those sources, in more intensive systems), and beef from animals derived from the dairy industry.
They possess around 20,000 taste buds.
Dairy cattle are usually kept on specialized dairy farms designed for milk production.
Cattle remain broadly used as draft animals in many developing countries, such as India.
Cattle are large quadrupedal ungulate mammals with cloven hooves.
Merriam-Webster, a US dictionary, recognizes the sex-nonspecific use of "cow" as an alternate definition, whereas Collins, a UK dictionary, does not.
organic contaminants and pathogens, will be retained, inactivated or degraded on the land with application at such rates; however, additional evidence is needed to test reliability of such assumptions
Oxen are most often used in teams of two, paired, for light work such as carting, with additional pairs added when more power is required, sometimes up to a total of 20 or more.
In general, cattle use their sense of smell to “expand” on information detected by other sensory modalities.
Calves can also discriminate between humans based on previous experience, as shown by approaching those who handled them positively and avoiding those who handled them aversively.
Modern mitochondrial DNA variation indicates the taurine line may have arisen from as few as 80 aurochs tamed in the upper reaches of Mesopotamia near the villages of Çayönü Tepesi in southeastern Turkey and Dja'de el-Mughara in northern Iraq.
In 2001, the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) tallied 5,990 cattle CAFOs then regulated, consisting of beef (2,200), dairy (3,150), heifer (620) and veal operations (20).
Cattle have one stomach with four compartments, the rumen, reticulum, omasum, and abomasum, with the rumen being the largest compartment.
Cattle have two kinds of color receptors in the cone cells of their retinas.
The aurochs originally ranged throughout Europe, North Africa, and much of Asia.
The average sleep time of a domestic cow is about four hours a day.
The deity Krishna was brought up in a family of cowherders, and given the name Govinda (protector of the cows).
Generally, cattle temperament is assumed to be multidimensional.
Raising cattle in this manner allows the use of land that might be unsuitable for growing crops.
British breeds, such as Hereford, Angus, and Shorthorn, mature between , occasionally higher, particularly with Angus and Hereford.
Australian, New Zealand and British farmers use the term "beast" or "cattle beast".
The horns of cattle are "honest signals" used in mate selection.
Finishing steers in the feedlot average about ; cows about , and bulls about .
Using this bovine "HapMap", researchers can track the differences between the breeds that affect the quality of meat and milk yields.
The heaviest steer was eight-year-old ‘Old Ben’, a Shorthorn/Hereford cross weighing in at  in 1910.
bovis'' infection susceptibility by selective breeding and maintaining herd health to avoid concurrent disease.
In later times they gradually acquired their present status.
In bullfighting, it is the movement of the red flag or cape that irritates the bull and incites it to charge.
Mirrors have been used to reduce stress in isolated cattle.
The most common interactions with cattle involve daily feeding, cleaning and milking.
Breeders use cattle husbandry to reduce ''M.
Slaughter of cows (including oxen, bulls and calves) is forbidden by law in several states of the Indian Union.
However, in adult cattle, the number of agonistic encounters increases as the group size increases.
There were two major areas of domestication: one in the area that is now Turkey, giving rise to the taurine line, and a second in the area that is now Pakistan, resulting in the indicine line.
One of the cited changes suggested to reduce greenhouse gas emissions is intensification of the livestock industry, since intensification leads to less land for a given level of production.
There are two to three rods per cone in the fovea centralis but five to six near the optic papilla.
Populations of feral cattle are known to come from and exist in: Australia, United States of America, Colombia, Argentina, Spain, France and many islands, including New Guinea, Hawaii, Galapagos, Juan Fernández Islands, Hispaniola (Dominican Republic and Haiti), Tristan da Cunha and Île Amsterdam,  two islands of Kuchinoshima and Kazura Island next to Naru Island in Japan.
Cattle are a prey animal and to assist predator detection, their eyes are located on the sides of their head rather than the front.
They will continue to produce milk until three weeks before birth.
These are used most frequently when cattle explore their environment.
Colloquially, more general nonspecific terms may denote cattle when a singular form is needed.
However, manure also is a valuable source of nutrients and organic matter when used as a fertilizer.
Both the primary olfactory system using the olfactory bulbs, and the secondary olfactory system using the vomeronasal organ are used.
According to the Mahabharata they are to be treated with the same respect 'as one's mother'.
In the laboratory, cattle can be trained to recognise conspecific individuals using olfaction only.
The omasum's main function is to absorb water and nutrients from the digestible feed.
Some microbes in the cattle gut carry out anaerobic process known as methanogenesis, which produces methane.
Other activities such as bull riding are seen as part of a rodeo, especially in North America.
In older English sources such as the King James Version of the Bible, "cattle" refers to livestock, as opposed to "deer" which refers to wildlife.
Cattle hearing ranges from 23 Hz to 35&nbsp;kHz.
The scientists found cattle have about 22,000 genes, and 80% of their genes are shared with humans, and they share about 1000 genes with dogs and rodents, but are not found in humans.
Although the phrase "that cow is a bull" is absurd from a lexicographic standpoint, the word "cow" is easy to use when a singular is needed and the sex is unknown or irrelevant – when "there is a cow in the road", for example.
The aurochs is ancestral to both zebu and taurine cattle.
The omasum is known as the "many plies".
Cattle might catch and develop various other diseases, like blackleg, bluetongue, foot rot too.
Now, these have been reclassified as one species, ''Bos taurus'', with three subspecies: ''Bos taurus primigenius'', ''Bos taurus indicus'', and ''Bos taurus taurus''.
threatening and spontaneous withdrawing).
Commonly, CAFO wastewater and manure nutrients are applied to land at agronomic rates for use by forages or crops, and it is often assumed that various constituents of wastewater and manure, e.g.
It has been bred selectively to produce the highest yields of milk of any cow.
An estimated 935,000 cattle operations were operating in the USA in 2010.
Hybrid individuals and even breeds exist, not only between taurine cattle and zebu (such as the sanga cattle, ''Bos taurus africanus''), but also between one or both of these and some other members of the genus ''Bos''yaks (the dzo or yattle), banteng, and gaur.
In the United States, the average weight of beef cattle has steadily increased, especially since the 1970s, requiring the building of new slaughterhouses able to handle larger carcasses.
Oxen are used for plowing, transport, hauling cargo, grain-grinding by trampling or by powering machines, irrigation by powering pumps, and wagon drawing.
They avoid bitter-tasting foods (potentially toxic) and have a marked preference for sweet (high calorific value) and salty foods (electrolyte balance).
* "Back up": go backwards
Breeders have attempted to recreate cattle of similar appearance to aurochs by crossing traditional types of domesticated cattle, creating the Heck cattle breed.
However, said rules change frequently and are often debated.
Though not as fast as horses, they are less prone to injury because they are more sure-footed.
Although they initially learn to avoid low-quality food, this memory diminishes over the same duration.
In India, the number of draft cattle in 1998 was estimated at 65.7 million head.
These signals are given by verbal commands or by noise (whip cracks).
In Portugal, Spain, southern France and some Latin American countries, bulls are used in the activity of bullfighting;  ''Jallikattu'' in India is a bull taming sport radically different from European bullfighting, humans are unarmed and bulls are not killed.
Cow urine is commonly used in India for internal medical purposes.
Feral cattle are defined as being 'cattle that are not domesticated or cultivated'.
Negative emotional states are associated with a bias toward negative (pessimistic) responses towards ambiguous cues in judgement tasks – as encapsulated in the question of "is the glass half empty or half full?".
Cattle tested in a radial arm maze are able to remember the locations of high-quality food for at least 30 days.
There is a diurnal rhythm in suckling activity with peaks between 05:00–07:00, 10:00–13:00 and 17:00–21:00.
The term replaced earlier Old English  'cattle, property', which survives today as ''fee'' (cf.
Because cattle have a broad foveal fields of view covering almost the entire horizon, they may not need very accurate locus information from their auditory systems to direct their gaze to a sound source.
Manure was used as a fertilizer on about 15.8 million acres of US cropland in 2006, with manure from cattle accounting for nearly 70% of manure applications to soybeans and about 80% or more of manure applications to corn, wheat, barley, oats and sorghum.
Bulls have a fibro-elastic penis.
Furthermore, they are able to categorize images as familiar and unfamiliar individuals.
Plants have low levels of sodium and cattle have developed the capacity of seeking salt by taste and smell.
About 11.3 million draft oxen are used in sub-Saharan Africa.
When cattle are stressed, this can be recognised by other cattle as it is communicated by alarm substances in the urine.
Since that time, the EPA has established CAFOs as an enforcement priority.
In the middle of the first millennium, the consumption of beef began to be disfavoured by lawgivers.
The reticulum, the smallest compartment, is known as the "honeycomb".
Bite area is determined by the sweep of the tongue; in one study observing  steers, bite area reached a maximum of approximately .
Previously, the number had increased; it was 12.453 million in 1985.
In a study on Holstein–Friesian heifers learning to press a panel to open a gate for access to a food reward, the researchers also recorded the heart rate and behavior of the heifers when moving along the race towards the food.
Rangeland assessments show that the heritability of aggressiveness in cattle is around 0.36.
It was borrowed from Anglo-Norman , itself from medieval Latin  'principal sum of money, capital', itself derived in turn from Latin  'head'.
For example, the United States has just reviewed its beef import rules according to the "mad cow standards"; while Mexico forbids the entry of cattle who are older than 30 months.
Bawling is most common for cows after weaning of a calf.
Furthermore, almost all the heifers recognized unknown individuals from different breeds, although this was achieved with greater difficulty.
Cattle have tactile sensations detected mainly by mechanoreceptors, thermoreceptors and nociceptors in the skin and muzzle.
Although there has never been any cow-goddesses or temples dedicated to them, cows appear in numerous stories from the Vedas and Puranas.
Cattle today are the basis of a multibillion-dollar industry worldwide.
Cattle use visual/brain lateralisation in their visual scanning of novel and familiar stimuli.
It requires the recollection of the learned idiosyncratic identity of an individual that has been previously encountered and the formation of a mental representation.
The production of milk, which is also made into cheese, butter, yogurt, and other dairy products, is comparable in economic size to beef production, and provides an important part of the food supply for many of the world's people.
When Aubrac and Fresian heifers are isolated, they increase their vocalizations and experience increased heart rate and plasma cortisol concentrations.
In most states, as cattle health is not only a veterinarian issue, but also a public health issue, public health and food safety standards and farming regulations directly affect the daily work of farmers who keep cattle.
Veterinarians and professionals working on cattle health issues are pooled in the World Association for Buiatrics, founded in 1960.
Adult size and weight vary significantly among breeds and sex.
Primiparous dams show a higher incidence of abnormal maternal behaviour.
Thus one may refer to "three cattle" or "some cattle", but not "one cattle".
Cattle also produce milk, and dairy cattle are specifically bred to produce the large quantities of milk processed and sold for human consumption.
They are a prominent modern member of the subfamily Bovinae, are the most widespread species of the genus ''Bos'', and are most commonly classified collectively as '''''Bos taurus'''''.
The 100-year global warming potential of methane, including effects on ozone and stratospheric water vapor, is 25 times as great as that of carbon dioxide.
Cattle diseases were in the center of attention in the 1980s and 1990s when the Bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), also known as mad cow disease, was of concern.
Internal food safety regulations might affect a country's trade policy as well.
About half the world's crop production is thought to depend on land preparation (such as plowing) made possible by animal traction.
In the Vedic period they were a symbol of plenty  and were frequently slaughtered.
In the 24 April 2009, edition of the journal ''Science'', a team of researchers led by the National Institutes of Health and the US Department of Agriculture reported having mapped the bovine genome.
Whilst having good color sensitivity, it is not as good as humans or sheep.
The "Kinmen cattle" which is dominantly found on Kinmen Island, Taiwan is mostly domesticated while smaller portion of the population is believed to live in the wild due to accidental releases.
Cattle on feed (for slaughter) numbered about 14.121 million on 1 January 2012, i.e.
No universally used singular form in modern English of "cattle" exists, other than the sex- and age-specific terms such as cow, bull, steer and heifer.
When grazing, cattle vary several aspects of their bite, i.e.
Substitution of manure for synthetic fertilizers in crop production can be environmentally significant, as between 43 and 88 megajoules of fossil fuel energy would be used per kg of nitrogen in manufacture of synthetic nitrogenous fertilizers.
While cattle fed forage actually produce more methane than grain-fed cattle, the increase may be offset by the increased carbon recapture of pastures, which recapture three times the CO2 of cropland used for grain.
From as few as 80 progenitors domesticated in southeast Turkey about 10,500 years ago, according to an estimate from 2011, there are 1.4 billion cattle in the world.
"Cow" is in general use as a singular for the collective "cattle", despite the objections by those who insist it to be a female-specific term.
Proper management of pastures, notably managed intensive rotational grazing and grazing at low intensities can lead to less use of fossil fuel energy, increased recapture of carbon dioxide, fewer ammonia emissions into the atmosphere, reduced soil erosion, better air quality, and less water pollution.
However, cattle cannot successfully be hybridized with more distantly related bovines such as water buffalo or African buffalo.
''Cattle'' originally meant movable personal property, especially livestock of any kind, as opposed to real property (the land, which also included wild or small free-roaming animals such as chickens — they were sold as part of the land).
The word is a variant of ''chattel'' (a unit of personal property) and closely related to ''capital'' in the economic sense.
*exploration-avoidance
Verbal commands vary according to dialect and local tradition.
From 1 January 2002 through 1 January 2012, there was no significant overall upward or downward trend in the number of US cattle on feed for slaughter, which averaged about 14.046 million head over that period.
Calves are capable of discrimination learning and adult cattle compare favourably with small mammals in their learning ability in the Closed-field Test.
It differs from foot rot and can appear under unsanitary conditions such as poor hygiene or inadequate hoof trimming, among other causes.
McDonalds outlets in India do not serve any beef burgers.
The report concludes, unless changes are made, the damage thought to be linked to livestock may more than double by 2050, as demand for meat increases.
Other obsolete terms for cattle include "neat" (this use survives in "neatsfoot oil", extracted from the feet and legs of cattle), and "beefing" (young animal fit for slaughter).
Cattle avoid grazing areas contaminated by the faeces of other cattle more strongly than they avoid areas contaminated by sheep, but they do not avoid pasture contaminated by rabbit faeces.
Individual recognition was most difficult when the visual features of the breed being tested were quite different from the breed in the image, for example, the breed being tested had no spots whereas the image was of a spotted breed.
using the left hemisphere, for viewing familiar stimuli.
However, an Indian medicine containing cow urine has already obtained U.S. patents.
Chianina bulls can weigh up to  ; British bulls, such as Angus and Hereford, can weigh as little as  to as much as .
Studies on the natural weaning of zebu cattle (''Bos indicus'') have shown that the cow weans her calves over a 2-week period, but after that, she continues to show strong affiliatory behaviour with her offspring and preferentially chooses them for grooming and as grazing partners for at least 4–5 years.
Often they are adult, castrated males of larger breeds, although females and bulls are also used in some areas.
about 15.5% of the estimated inventory of 90.8 million US cattle (including calves) on that date.
In terms of food intake by humans, consumption of cattle is less efficient than of grain or vegetables with regard to land use, and hence cattle grazing consumes more area than such other agricultural production when raised on grains.
In calves, the frequency of agonistic behavior decreases as space allowance increases, but this does not occur for changes in group size.
They are also able to discriminate between familiar individuals, and among humans.
In 2009, cattle became one of the first livestock animals to have a fully mapped genome.
Grazing by cattle at low intensities can create a favourable environment for native herbs and forbs; in many world regions, though, cattle are reducing biodiversity due to overgrazing.
Under natural conditions, calves stay with their mother until weaning at 8 to 11 months.
This leads to more stable social relationships.
A cow's udder contains two pairs of mammary glands, (commonly referred to as ''teats'') creating four "quarters".
The plural ''cȳ'' became ''ki'' or ''kie'' in Middle English, and an additional plural ending was often added, giving ''kine'', ''kien'', but also ''kies'', ''kuin'' and others.
There is evidence that when cattle are stressed, this can be recognised by other cattle and this is communicated by alarm substances in the urine.
Bulls will be a bit larger than cows of the same breed by a few hundred kilograms.
"Wild cattle" may refer to feral cattle or to undomesticated species of the genus ''Bos''.
These physiological changes are greater in Aubracs.
Cattle can only be used in the plural and not in the singular: it is a plurale tantum.
Quantitative trait loci (QTLs) have been found for a range of production and behavioral characteristics for both dairy and beef cattle.
