He was the fifth son of the Reverend Francis William Rhodes and his wife Louisa Peacock Rhodes.
Due to his university career, Rhodes admired the Oxford "system".
Rhodes wanted to expand the British Empire because he believed that the Anglo-Saxon race was destined to greatness.
The diseased vineyards were dug up and replanted, and farmers were looking for alternatives to wine.
His burial was attended by Ndebele chiefs, who asked that the firing party should not discharge their rifles as this would disturb the spirits.
In 1880, Rhodes prepared to enter public life at the Cape.
Rhodes also introduced educational reform to the area.
Historian Richard A. McFarlane has called Rhodes "as integral a participant in southern African and British imperial history as George Washington or Abraham Lincoln are in their respective eras in United States history.
Rhodes included American students as eligible for the Rhodes scholarships.
It was named after Johannes Nicolaas de Beer and his brother, Diederik Arnoldus, who occupied the farm.
On domestic politics within the United Kingdom, Rhodes was a supporter of the Liberal Party.
The shortcomings of the Freemasons, in his opinion, later caused him to envisage his own secret society with the goal of bringing the entire world under British rule.
He had to go to trial and testify against her accusation.
Rhodes prevailed because he would pay the cost of administering the territories to the north of South Africa against his future mining profits.
Although Rhodes remained a leading figure in the politics of southern Africa, especially during the Second Boer War, he was dogged by ill health throughout his relatively short life.
Furthermore, it stated that the mining companies could do anything necessary to their operations.
Among his Oxford associates were James Rochfort Maguire, later a fellow of All Souls College and a director of the British South Africa Company, and Charles Metcalfe .
Rhodes's view was that black people needed to be driven off their land to "stimulate them to labour" and to change their habits.
This put him on a collision course with many in Britain, as well as with British missionaries, who favoured what they saw as the more ethical direct rule from London.
His associate Charles Rudd, together with Francis Thompson and Rochfort Maguire, assured Lobengula that no more than ten white men would mine in Matabeleland.
In reaction, she accused him of loan fraud.
An ardent believer in British imperialism, Rhodes and his British South Africa Company founded the southern African territory of Rhodesia (now Zimbabwe and Zambia), which the company named after him in 1895.
Financed by N M Rothschild & Sons, Rhodes succeeded over the next 17 years in buying up all the smaller diamond mining operations in the Kimberley area.
Rhodes never married, pleading, "I have too much work on my hands" and saying that he would not be a dutiful husband.
In 1873, Rhodes left his farm field in the care of his business partner, Rudd, and sailed for England to complete his studies.
Then, for the first time, they gave a white man the Matabele royal salute, ''Bayete''.
'''Cecil John Rhodes''' PC (5 July 1853 – 26 March 1902) was a British businessman, mining magnate and politician in South Africa, who served as Prime Minister of the Cape Colony from 1890 to 1896.
The Government arranged an epic journey by train from the Cape to Rhodesia, with the funeral train stopping at every station to allow mourners to pay their respects.
Rhodes entered the Сape Parliament in 1880, and a decade later became Prime Minister.
After his death in the Cape in 1902, his body was transported by train to Bulawayo.
In his first will, written in 1877 before he had accumulated his wealth, Rhodes wanted to create a secret society that would bring the whole world under British rule.
She wrote a biography of Rhodes called ''Cecil Rhodes: Man and Empire Maker''.
But three Tswana kings, including Khama III, travelled to Britain and won over British public opinion for it to remain governed by the British Colonial Office in London.
During this time, the technical problem of clearing out the water that was flooding the mines became serious.
Local Chief Masuku and Godfrey Mahachi, one of the country's foremost archaeologists, strongly expressed their opposition to the grave being removed due to its historical significance to Zimbabwe.
Rhodes was named the chairman of De Beers at the company's founding in 1888.
Rhodes's views on race have led critics to label him as an "architect of apartheid" and a "white supremacist", particularly since 2015.
Rudd had moved from the Kimberley Mine to invest in the more costly claims of what was known as old De Beers (''Vooruitzicht'').
On 13 March 1888, Rhodes and Rudd launched De Beers Consolidated Mines after the amalgamation of a number of individual claims.
The region extended from the Modder River via the Vet River up to the Vaal River.
Today, his grave site is part of Matobo National Park, Zimbabwe.
As Rhodes also respected and admired the Germans and their Kaiser, he allowed German students to be included in the Rhodes scholarships.
Shortly after learning of the assassination of the Ndebele spiritual leader, ''Mlimo'', by the American scout Frederick Russell Burnham, Rhodes walked unarmed into the Ndebele stronghold in Matobo Hills.
Rhodes' companies and agents cemented these advantages by obtaining many mining concessions, as exemplified by the Rudd and Lochner Concessions.
Brown comments: "there is still the simpler but major problem of the extraordinarily thin evidence on which the conclusions about Rhodes are reached.
His family's hope was that the climate would improve his health.
He was admitted to Oriel College, Oxford, but stayed for only one term in 1873.
He supported teaching Dutch as well as English in public schools in the Cape Colony and lent money to support this cause.
During the Second Boer War Rhodes went to Kimberley at the onset of the siege, in a calculated move to raise the political stakes on the government to dedicate resources to the defence of the city.
He was sent to South Africa by his family when he was 17 years old in the hope that the climate might improve his health.
He and others felt the best way to "unify the possessions, facilitate governance, enable the military to move quickly to hot spots or conduct war, help settlement, and foster trade" would be to build the "Cape to Cairo Railway".
Rhodes had been instrumental in securing southern African states for the Empire.
With the earlier incorporation of Griqualand West into the Cape Colony under the Molteno Ministry in 1877, the area had obtained six seats in the Cape House of Assembly.
"It must be brought home to them", Rhodes said, "that in future nine-tenths of them will have to spend their lives in manual labour, and the sooner that is brought home to them the better."
Armed with the Rudd Concession, in 1889 Rhodes obtained a charter from the British Government for his British South Africa Company (BSAC) to rule, police, and make new treaties and concessions from the Limpopo River to the great lakes of Central Africa.
In 1892, Rhodes financed The Pioneer Fruit Growing Company at Nooitgedacht, a venture created by Harry Pickstone, an Englishman who had experience with fruit-growing in California.
This enterprise was not without its problems.
The shipping magnate Percy Molteno had just undertaken the first successful refrigerated export to Europe and in 1896, after consulting with Molteno, Rhodes began to pay more attention to export fruit farming and bought farms in Groot Drakenstein, Wellington and Stellenbosch.
He returned to South Africa and did not return for his second term at Oxford until 1876.
When Lobengula discovered later the true effects of the concession, he tried to renounce it, but the British Government ignored him.
Ambitions such as these, juxtaposed with his policies regarding indigenous Africans in the Cape Colony—describing the country's black population as largely "in a state of barbarism", he advocated their governance as a "subject race" and was at the centre of moves to marginalise them politically—have led recent critics to characterise him as a white supremacist and "an architect of apartheid."
The ministry of Sir Gordon Sprigg was trying to restore order after the 1880 rebellion known as the Gun War.
Rhodes used his wealth and that of his business partner Alfred Beit and other investors to pursue his dream of creating a British Empire in new territories to the north by obtaining mineral concessions from the most powerful indigenous chiefs.
Before his departure for Oxford, he and C.D.
Part of this estate became the upper campus of the University of Cape Town, another part became the Kirstenbosch National Botanical Garden, while much was spared from development and is now an important conservation area.
On learning that his house had burnt down he commented, "Thank goodness.
An official statement by the University of Cape Town stated that "the behaviour by RMF members is criminal and has exceeded all possible limits of lawful protest action.
In October 1871, 18-year-old Rhodes and his brother Herbert left the colony for the diamond fields of Kimberley.
According to Carroll Quigley, he set up the Round Table movement to this end.
He was a friend of Jan Hofmeyr, leader of the Afrikaner Bond, and it was largely because of Afrikaner support that he became Prime Minister of the Cape Colony.
In 1895, believing he could use his influence to overthrow the Boer government, Rhodes supported the infamous Jameson Raid, an attack on the Transvaal with the tacit approval of Secretary of State for the Colonies Joseph Chamberlain.
Indeed, Rhodes is a singularly difficult subject... since there exists little intimate material – no diaries and few personal letters."
When the Ndebele and the Shona—the two main, but rival, peoples—separately rebelled against the coming of the European settlers, the BSAC defeated them in the First Matabele War and Second Matabele War.
In addition, Rhodes was an early architect of the Natives Land Act, 1913, which would limit the areas of the country that black Africans were allowed to less than 10%.
Her accusations were eventually proven to be false.
He believed that eventually the United Kingdom (including Ireland), the US, and Germany together would dominate the world and ensure perpetual peace.
Rhodes supervised the working of his brother's claim and speculated on his behalf.
Some writers and academics have suggested that Rhodes may have been homosexual.
He sent John Moffat, son of the missionary Robert Moffat, who was trusted by Lobengula, to persuade the latter to sign a treaty of friendship with Britain, and to look favourably on Rhodes' proposals.
Contrary to what the British government and the public had been allowed to think, the Rudd Concession was not vested in the British South Africa Company, but in a short-lived ancillary concern of Rhodes, Rudd and a few others called the ''Central Search Association'', which was quietly formed in London in 1889.
The son of a vicar, Rhodes grew up in Bishop's Stortford, Hertfordshire, and was a sickly child.
Despite the differences, Rhodes' company was instrumental in the defence of the city, providing water, refrigeration facilities, constructing fortifications, manufacturing an armoured train, shells and a one-off gun named Long Cecil.
In his last will and testament, Rhodes said of the British, "I contend that we are the first race in the world, and that the more of the world we inhabit the better it is for the human race.
Rhodes also sent Sharpe to get a concession over mineral-rich Katanga, but met his match in ruthlessness: when Sharpe was rebuffed by its ruler ''Msiri'', King Leopold II of Belgium obtained a concession over Msiri's dead body for his Congo Free State.
At the time, Rhodes would argue that "the native is to be treated as a child and denied the franchise.
It forced Cecil Rhodes to resign as Prime Minister of the Cape Colony, sent his oldest brother Col. Frank Rhodes to jail in Transvaal convicted of high treason and nearly sentenced to death, and contributed to the outbreak of the Second Boer War.
Rhodes is buried alongside Leander Starr Jameson and 34 British soldiers killed in the Shangani Patrol.
President Robert Mugabe has also opposed the move.
Rhodes advocated the governance of indigenous Africans living in the Cape Colony "in a state of barbarism and communal tenure" as "a subject race.
His father was a Church of England clergyman who was proud of never having preached a sermon longer than 10 minutes.
His monopoly of the world's diamond supply was sealed in 1890 through a strategic partnership with the London-based Diamond Syndicate.
After overseeing the formation of Rhodesia during the early 1890s, he was forced to resign as Prime Minister in 1896 after the disastrous Jameson Raid, an unauthorised attack on Paul Kruger's South African Republic (or Transvaal).
Rhodes used his position and influence to lobby the British government to relieve the siege of Kimberley, claiming in the press that the situation in the city was desperate.
In his last will and testament, he provided for the establishment of the famous Rhodes Scholarship, the world's first international study programme.
During the Company's early days, Rhodes and his associates set themselves up to make millions (hundreds of millions in current pounds) over the coming years through what has been described as a "''suppressio veri''&nbsp;... which must be regarded as one of Rhodes's least creditable actions".
The scholarship enabled students from territories under British rule or formerly under British rule and from Germany to study at Rhodes' alma mater, the University of Oxford.
In particular, Lieutenant Colonel Robert Kekewich disliked Rhodes because of Rhodes' inability to co-operate with the military; Rhodes insisted that the military should adopt his plans and ideas instead of following their orders.
His father therefore determined to send him abroad to try the effect of a sea voyage and a better climate.
The successful operation soon expanded into Rhodes Fruit Farms, and formed a cornerstone of the modern-day Cape fruit industry.
He wanted British settlers and local politicians and governors to run it.
He befriended its local representatives, the British Commissioners, and through them organised British protectorates over the mineral concession areas via separate but related treaties.
Rhodes commented: "It is humiliating to be utterly beaten by these niggers."
Imperial expansion and capital investment went hand in hand.
When he first came to Africa, Rhodes lived on money lent by his aunt Sophia.
He was sent to Natal aged 16 because it was believed the climate might help problems with his heart.
Rhodes was more tolerant of the Dutch-speaking whites in the Cape Colony than were the other English-speaking whites in the Cape Colony.
Rhodes paid much of the cost so that the British Central Africa Commissioner Sir Harry Johnston, and his successor Alfred Sharpe, would assist with security for Rhodes in the BSAC's north-eastern territories.
He contributed a great deal of money to the Irish nationalists, although Rhodes made his support conditional upon an autonomous Ireland's still being represented in the British Parliament.
Pickering died in Rhodes's arms, and at his funeral, Rhodes was said to have wept with fervour.
Rhodes himself left few details...
Jameson nursed Rhodes during his final illness, was a trustee of his estate and residuary beneficiary of his will, which allowed him to continue living in Rhodes' mansion after his death.
He often disagreed with the Transvaal government's policies, which he considered unsupportive of mine-owners' interests.
Rhodes also remained close to Leander Starr Jameson after the two had met in Kimberley, where they shared a bungalow.
The Colonial Office did not have enough funding for this.
He was greatly influenced by John Ruskin's inaugural lecture at Oxford, which reinforced his own attachment to the cause of British imperialism.
I contend that every acre added to our territory means the birth of more of the English race who otherwise would not be brought into existence."
Rhodes chose the rural and predominately Boer constituency of Barkly West, which would remain faithful to Rhodes until his death.
The military wanted to assemble a large force to take the Boer cities of Bloemfontein and Pretoria, but they were compelled to change their plans and send three separate smaller forces to relieve the sieges of Kimberley, Mafeking and Ladysmith.
When Rhodes became a member of the Cape Parliament, the chief goal of the assembly was to help decide the future of Basutoland.
His birthplace was established in 1938 as the Rhodes Memorial Museum, now known as Bishops Stortford Museum.
The protest also had the broader goal of highlighting what the activists considered the lack of systemic post-apartheid racial transformation in South African institutions.
He died shortly after the trial in 1902.
After purchasing the land in 1839 from David Danser, a ''Koranna'' chief in the area, David Stephanus Fourie, Claudine Fourie-Grosvenor's forebearer, had allowed the de Beers and various other Afrikaner families to cultivate the land.
On that occasion, Rhodes drew up a new will leaving his estate to Pickering.
The 72-ton bronze statue depicts Rhodes on his horse, looking north with map in hand, and dressed as he was when met the Ndebele after their rebellion.
If Dr Jim had died, I should never have got over it."
Johnston shared Rhodes' expansionist views, but he and his successors were not as pro-settler as Rhodes, and disagreed on dealings with Africans.
They agreed to control world supply to maintain high prices.
He entered the diamond trade at Kimberley in 1871, when he was 18, and over the next two decades gained near-complete domination of the world diamond market.
Ultimately, Belgium and Germany proved to be the main obstacles to the British dream until the United Kingdom seized Tanganyika from the Germans as a League of Nations mandate.
After Rhodes returned from his first term at Oxford he lived with Robert Dundas Graham, who later became a mining partner with Rudd and Rhodes.
At his death he was considered one of the wealthiest men in the world.
The Sprigg ministry had precipitated the revolt by applying its policy of disarming all native Africans to those of the Basotho nation.
He was finally laid to rest at World's View, a hilltop located approximately  south of Bulawayo, in what was then Rhodesia.
Pickering's successor was Henry Latham Currey, the son of an old friend, who had become Rhodes's private secretary in 1884.
Rhodes and Rudd obtained the contract for pumping water out of the three main mines.
The British Colonial Office also decided to administer British Central Africa (Nyasaland, today's Malawi) owing to the activism of Scots missionaries trying to end the slave trade.
With £200,000 of capital, the company, of which Rhodes was secretary, owned the largest interest in the mine (£200,000 in 1880 = £12.9m in 2004 = $22.5m USD).
While attending Oriel College, Rhodes became a Freemason in the Apollo University Lodge.
He obtained further concessions and treaties north of the Zambezi, such as those in Barotseland (the Lochner Concession with King ''Lewanika'' in 1890, which was similar to the Rudd Concession); and in the Lake Mweru area (Alfred Sharpe's 1890 Kazembe concession).
Rhodes wanted to make the British Empire a superpower in which all of the British-dominated countries in the empire, including Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and Cape Colony, would be represented in the British Parliament.
The BSAC had its own police force, the British South Africa Police, which was used to control Matabeleland and Mashonaland, in present-day Zimbabwe.
Rhodes was such a strong supporter of Parnell that, after the Liberals and the Irish nationalists disowned Parnell because of his affair with the wife of another Irish nationalist, Rhodes continued his support.
He persuaded the ''Impi'' to lay down their arms, thus ending the Second Matabele War.
This entity renamed itself the ''United Concessions Company'' in 1890, and soon after sold the Rudd Concession to the Chartered Company for 1,000,000 shares.
Among his associates in the early days were John X. Merriman and Charles Rudd, who later became his partner in the De Beers Mining Company and the Niger Oil Company.
This was considered a nationalist political stunt in the run up to an election, rather than representing any genuine national desire to remove the grave.
Rhodes' final will left a large area of land on the slopes of Table Mountain to the South African nation.
The military felt he was more of a liability than an asset and found him intolerable.
We must adopt a system of despotism, such as works in India, in our relations with the barbarism of South Africa."
One of Rhodes' dreams (and the dream of many other members of the British Empire) was for a "red line" on the map from the Cape to Cairo (on geo-political maps, British dominions were always denoted in red or pink).
One of Rhodes's primary motivators in politics and business was his professed belief that the English-speaking peoples were destined to greatness as, to quote his will, "the first race in the world".
Although initially he did not approve of the organisation, he continued to be a Freemason until his death in 1902.
The designation Southern Rhodesia was officially adopted in 1898 for the part south of the Zambezi, which later became Zimbabwe; and the designations North-Western and North-Eastern Rhodesia were used from 1895 for the territory which later became Northern Rhodesia, then Zambia.
He joined his brother Herbert on his cotton farm in the Umkomazi valley in Natal.
In 1888 he tried again.
Because the gold deposits were on a much smaller scale, many of the white settlers who accompanied the BSAC to Mashonaland became farmers rather than miners.
Rhodes' only major impact on domestic politics within the United Kingdom was his support of the Irish nationalist party, led by Charles Stewart Parnell (1846–1891).
I do not go so far as the member for Victoria West, who would not give the black man a vote.&nbsp;...
His siblings included Francis William Rhodes, who became an army officer.
On returning to England in 1872 his health again deteriorated with heart and lung problems, to the extent that his doctor, Sir Morell Mackenzie, believed he would only survive six months.
Despite occasional efforts to return his body to the United Kingdom, his grave remains there still, "part and parcel of the history of Zimbabwe" and attracts thousands of visitors each year.
Rhodes decreed in his will that he was to be buried in Matobo Hills.
He could then attract more investors.
According to McFarlane, the aforementioned historiography "may be divided into two broad categories: chauvinistic approval or utter vilification".
Following a series of discords and vandalism at the University of Cape Town, various allied movements both in South Africa and other countries have been launched in opposition to the very existence of Cecil Rhodes memorials.
The residents of Kimberley elected to build a memorial in Rhodes' honour in their city, which was unveiled in 1907.
Rhodes did not, however, have direct political power over the independent Boer Republic of the Transvaal.
In 1896 Earl Grey came to give Rhodes bad news.
According to Magubane, Rhodes was "unhappy that in many Cape Constituencies, Africans could be decisive if more of them exercised this right to vote under current law referring to the Cape Qualified Franchise," with Rhodes arguing that "the native is to be treated as a child and denied the franchise.
They expected he would help his older brother Herbert who operated a cotton farm.
The imperial factor was a double-edged sword: Rhodes did not want the bureaucrats of the Colonial Office in London to interfere in the Empire in Africa.
Rhodes's secretary, Jourdan, who was present shortly after Rhodes's death said, "Jameson was fighting against his own grief ... No mother could have displayed more tenderness towards the remains of a loved son".
Rhodes' competitive advantage over other mineral prospecting companies was his combination of wealth and astute political instincts, also called the 'imperial factor', as he often collaborated with the British Government.
In this way he obtained both legality and security for mining operations.
Rhodes was born in 1853 in Bishop's Stortford, Hertfordshire, England.
The voyage to Durban took him seventy days, and on 1 September 1870 he first set foot on African soil, a tall, lanky, anaemic, fair-haired boy, shy and reserved in bearing."
Eventually he was inspired to develop his scholarship scheme: "Wherever you turn your eye—except in science—an Oxford man is at the top of the tree".
In 1890, Rhodes became Prime Minister of the Cape Colony.
The scholar Richard Brown observed: "On the issue of Rhodes' sexuality... there is, once again, simply not enough reliable evidence to reach firm, irrefutable conclusions.
By simultaneously limiting the amount of land black Africans were legally allowed to hold while tripling the property qualifications required to vote, Rhodes succeeded in disenfranchising the black population, as, to quote Richard Dowden, most would now "find it almost impossible to get back on the list because of the legal limit on the amount of land they could hold".
After a brief stay with the Surveyor-General of Natal, Dr. P.C.
Rhodes University College, now Rhodes University, in Grahamstown, was established in his name by his trustees and founded by Act of Parliament on 31 May 1904.
France had a rival strategy in the late 1890s to link its colonies from west to east across the continent and the Portuguese produced the "Pink Map", representing their claims to sovereignty in Africa.
In 1874 and 1875, the diamond fields were in the grip of depression, but Rhodes and Rudd were among those who stayed to consolidate their interests.
The raid was a catastrophic failure.
Rhodes was close to Pickering; he returned from negotiations for Pickering's 25th birthday in 1882.
During the 1880s, Cape vineyards had been devastated by a phylloxera epidemic.
Rhodes' aims were to promote leadership marked by public spirit and good character, and to "render war impossible" by promoting friendship between the great powers.
This limitation was left out of the document, known as the Rudd Concession, which Lobengula signed.
In December 2010 Cain Mathema, the governor of Bulawayo, branded Rhodes' grave outside the country's second city of Bulawayo an "insult to the African ancestors" and said he believed its presence had brought bad luck and poor weather to the region.
Under the reasoning that "the more of the world we inhabit the better it is for the human race", he advocated vigorous settler colonialism and ultimately a reformation of the British Empire so that each component would be self-governing and represented in a single parliament in London.
These include a campaign to change the name of Rhodes University and to remove a statue of Rhodes from Oriel College, Oxford.
The land was unsuitable for cotton, and the venture failed.
He returned to Kimberley where his health improved.
By the end of 1894, the territories over which the BSAC had concessions or treaties, collectively called "Zambesia" after the Zambezi River flowing through the middle, comprised an area of 1,143,000&nbsp;km² between the Limpopo River and Lake Tanganyika.
The growing number of enfranchised black people in the Cape led him to raise the franchise requirements in 1892 to counter this preponderance, with drastic effects on the traditional Cape Qualified Franchise.
The cottage in Muizenberg where he died is a provincial heritage site in the Western Cape Province of South Africa.
Two years later, Pickering suffered a riding accident.
South Africa's Rhodes University is also named after him.
