Beethoven's Triple Concerto for Cello, Violin and Piano and Brahms' Double Concerto for Cello and Violin are also part of the concertante repertoire although in both cases the cello shares solo duties with at least one other instrument.
Some cellists increase their employ-ability by learning several different styles, such as folk or pop.
Different designs of the instrument produces variations in the instrument’s vibrational patterns and thus changes the character of the sound produced.
Careers in cello vary widely by genre and by region or country.
Among these, Prokofiev's ''Symphony-Concerto'', Britten's ''Cello Symphony'', the concertos of Shostakovich and Lutosławski as well as Dutilleux's ''Tout un monde lointain...'' have already become part of the standard repertoire.
The indie rock band The Stiletto Formal are known for using a cello as a major staple of their sound, similarly, the indie rock band Canada employs two cello players in their lineup.
From the Classical era, the two concertos by Joseph Haydn in C major and D major stand out, as do the five sonatas for cello and pianoforte of Ludwig van Beethoven, which span the important three periods of his compositional evolution.
The cello bow has also been used to play guitars.
About the closest that a cellist can come to this is in the case of those who win an audition at a professional orchestra.
The pegs are used to tune the cello by either tightening or loosening the string.
Shortening the string also reduces its mass,  but does not alter the mass per unit length,  and it is the latter ratio rather than the total mass which governs the frequency.
Back length excluding half-round where neck joins
A string’s fundamental pitch can be adjusted by changing its stiffness, which depends on tension and length.
The tailpiece is traditionally made of ebony or another hard wood, but can also be made of plastic or steel.
This wolf tone must be eliminated or significantly reduced for the cello to play the nearby notes with a pleasant tone.
There are numerous cello concertos - where a solo cello is accompanied by an orchestra - notably 25 by Vivaldi, 12 by Boccherini, at least 3 by Haydn, 3 by C.P.E.
Pernambuco is a heavy, resinous wood with great elasticity, which makes it an ideal wood for instrument bows.
In Indian Classical music Saskia Rao-de Haas is a well established soloist as well as playing duets with her sitarist husband Pt.
Bolognese makers exploited this new technology to create the cello, a somewhat smaller instrument suitable for solo repertoire due to both the timbre of the instrument and the fact that the smaller size made it easier to play virtuosic passages.
Bach, 2 by Saint-Saëns, 2 by Dvořák, and one each by Schumann, Lalo, and Elgar.
Most cellists earn their living from a mixture of performance and teaching jobs.
The most highly prized instruments are now collector's items, and are priced beyond the reach of most musicians.
In the 20th century, the cello repertoire grew immensely.
In acoustic stringed instruments such as the cello, this lack of volume is solved by mounting the vibrating string on a larger hollow wooden body.
Bass guitarist Jack Bruce, who had  originally studied music on a performance scholarship for cello, played a prominent cello part in "As You Said" on Cream's ''Wheels of Fire'' studio album (1968).
Bach's six Suites for Cello (arguably the most important cello pieces), Kodály's Sonata for Solo Cello and Britten's three Cello Suites.
The fingerboard is glued to the neck and extends over the body of the instrument.
In the 1970s, the Electric Light Orchestra enjoyed great commercial success taking inspiration from so-called "Beatlesque" arrangements, adding the cello (and violin) to the standard rock combo line-up and in 1978 the UK based rock band, Colosseum II, collaborated with cellist Julian Lloyd Webber on the recording ''Variations''.
The bass bar, found under the bass foot of the bridge, serves to support the cello's top and distribute the vibrations.
Around 1680, changes in string-making technology made it possible to play lower-pitched notes on shorter strings.
A played note of E or F# has a frequency which is often very close to the natural resonating frequency of the body of the instrument,  and if the problem is not addressed this can set the body into near resonance.
Modern strings normally have a metal core, although some use a synthetic core; Baroque strings are made of gut, with the G and C strings wire-wound.
The inward arch of a modern cello bow produces greater tension, which in turn gives off a louder sound.
Many cello players find extra work by substituting ("subbing") for cellists who are double-booked or ill.
Standard-sized cellos are referred to as "full-size" or "4/4" but are also made in smaller (fractional) sizes (e.g.
Principal players always sit closest to the audience.
Those written by Beethoven, Mendelssohn, Chopin, Brahms, Grieg, Rachmaninoff, Debussy, Fauré, Shostakovich, Prokofiev, Poulenc, Carter, and Britten are particularly well known.
at the Disco uses a cello in their song, "Build God, Then We'll Talk".
Due to the limited number of full-time orchestral jobs, many classical cellists are not able to find full-time work with a single orchestra.
The scroll is a traditional part of the cello and a feature of all other members of the violin family.
Each sound has a particular recipe of frequencies that combine to make the total sound.
Few educational works specifically devoted to the cello existed before the 18th century, and those that do exist contain little value to the performer beyond simple accounts of instrumental technique.
Thus, the name "violoncello" contained both the augmentative ''"-one"'' ("big") and the diminutive ''"-cello"'' ("little").
Pfretzschner produced an unknown number of aluminum cellos (in addition to aluminum double basses and violins).
Despite similarities to the viola da gamba, the cello is actually part of the viola da braccio family, meaning "viol of the arm", which includes, among others, the violin and viola.
Because of this effect, you can raise and change the pitch of a string by pressing it against the fingerboard in the cello’s neck and effectively shortening it.
As a self-sufficient ensemble, its most famous repertoire is Villa-Lobos' first of his Bachianas Brasileiras for cello ensemble (the fifth is for soprano and 8 cellos).
Often, the cello section plays the melody for a brief period, before returning to the harmony.
When a string is bowed or plucked, it vibrates and moves the air around it, producing sound waves.
The cello is typically made from wood, although other materials such as carbon fiber or aluminum may be used.
Baroque style (1600–1750) cello bows were much thicker and were formed with a larger outward arch when compared to modern cello bows.
Like the bridge, the sound post is not glued, but is kept in place by the tensions of the bridge and strings.
*the "King", by Andrea Amati, is one of the oldest known cellos, built between 1538 and 1560—it is in the collection of the National Music Museum in South Dakota
(For example, the Davidov Stradivarius, which is currently in the possession of one of the most widely known living cellists, Yo-Yo Ma, is actually owned by the Vuitton Foundation.)
Shortening a string stiffens it by increasing its curvature during a distortion and subjecting it to larger net forces.
A large number of concertos and sonatas have been written for the cello.
The post-rock Icelandic band Sigur Rós' lead singer often plays a guitar using a cello bow.
Heavy metal band System of a Down has also made use of the cello's rich sound.
In the 1960s, artists such as the Beatles and Cher used the cello in popular music, in songs such as The Beatles' "Yesterday", "Eleanor Rigby" and "Strawberry Fields Forever", and Cher's" Bang Bang (My Baby Shot Me Down)".
Much of the time, cellos provide part of the harmony for the orchestra.
The pegbox houses four tapered tuning pegs, one for each string.
Instruments that share features with both the bass violin and the ''viola da gamba'' appear in Italian art of the early 16th century.
The size was not standardized until around 1750.
Ebonised parts such as tuning pegs may crack or split, and the black surface of the fingerboard will eventually wear down to reveal the lighter wood underneath.
The frog of a cello bow typically has a rounded corner like that of a viola bow, but is wider.
Most modern strings used today are wound with metallic materials like aluminum, titanium and chromium.
The cello is less common in popular music than in classical music.
Since the frequency of any wave is equal to the speed divided by the wavelength,  we have frequency = 1/2''l'' x √(''T''/''m'').
It is a member of the violin family of musical instruments, which also includes the violin and viola.
This curved bow (''BACH.Bow'') is a convex curved bow which, unlike the ordinary bow, renders possible polyphonic playing on the various strings of the instrument.
Cellos are constructed and repaired using hide glue, which is strong but reversible, allowing for disassembly when needed.
This may cause an unpleasant sudden amplification of this pitch,  and additionally a loud beating sound results from the interference produced between these nearby frequencies; this is known as the “wolf tone” because it is an unpleasant growling sound.
Historically, cello strings had cores made out of gut (sheep or goat).
Lindsay Mac is becoming well known for playing the cello like a guitar, with her cover of The Beatles' "Blackbird" a big hit on ''The Bob & Tom Show''.
When a string is bowed or plucked to produce a note, the fundamental note is accompanied by higher frequency overtones.
''Viol'' is derived from the root ''viola'', which was derived from Medieval Latin ''vitula'', meaning stringed instrument.
There are pieces for cello solo, J.S.
These groups are examples of a style that has become known as cello rock.
By the turn of the 20th century, it had become common to shorten the name to 'cello, with the apostrophe indicating the missing stem.
The most promising candidates are invited to return for a second or third round of auditions, which allows the conductor and the panel to compare the best candidates.
The f-holes also act as access points to the interior of the cello for repairs or maintenance.
Modern endpins are retractable and adjustable; older ones were removed when not in use.
There are also many sonatas for cello and piano.
The smaller cellos are identical to standard cellos in construction, range, and usage, but are simply scaled-down for the benefit of children and shorter adults.
Several bands feature a cello in their standard line-up, e.g.
Some notable cellos:
Unlike the violin or viola but similar to the double bass, the cello has an endpin that rests on the floor to support the instrument's weight.
Bows are also made from other materials, such as carbon-fibre—stronger than wood—and fiberglass (often used to make inexpensive, low-quality student bows).
It attaches the strings to the lower end of the cello, and can have one or more fine tuners.
Rib depth at shoulders including edges of front and back
Performers may be asked to sight read orchestral music.
The more common use in pop and rock is to bring the instrument in for a particular song.
An average cello bow is 73&nbsp;cm long (shorter than a violin or viola bow) 3&nbsp;cm high (from the frog to the stick) and 1.5&nbsp;cm wide.
Cellos made before approximately 1700 tended to be considerably larger than those made and commonly played today.
Traditionally, bows are made from pernambuco or brazilwood.
Joe Kwon of The Avett Brothers.
There are also cello concertos, which are orchestral pieces that feature a solo cellist accompanied by an entire orchestra.
"Good Vibrations" by the Beach Boys includes the cello in its instrumental ensemble, which includes a number of instruments unusual for this sort of music.
While purfling is attractive, it is also functional: if the instrument is struck, the purfling can prevent cracking of the wood.
The top and back of the cello has decorative border inlay known as purfling.
The sharp tip of the cello's endpin is sometimes capped with a rubber tip that protects the tip from dulling and prevents the cello from slipping on the floor.
The sound post, found under the treble side of the bridge, connects the back and front of the cello.
*Davidov Stradivarius, played by Jacqueline du Pré, currently played by Yo-Yo Ma
These two periodic resonances beat with each other.
A person who plays the cello is called a ''cellist'' or ''violoncellist''.
Cello parts are generally written in the bass clef, but both tenor and treble clefs are used for higher-range parts.
Today it is still sometimes featured in pop and rock recordings, examples of which are noted later in this article.
Without purfling, cracks can spread up or down the top or back.
Sometimes a small hose containing a water-soaked sponge, called a Dampit, is inserted through the f-holes, and serves as a humidifier.
More recent bands using the cello are Aerosmith, The Auteurs, Nirvana, Oasis, Murder by Death, Cursive, A Genuine Freakshow, Ra Ra Riot, Smashing Pumpkins, James, Talk Talk, Phillip Phillips, OneRepublic, and the baroque rock band Arcade Fire.
The final stage of the audition process in some orchestras is a ''test week'', in which the performer plays with the orchestra for a week or two, which allows the conductor and principal players to see if the individual can function well in an actual performance setting.
It is tuned in the same intervals as the viola, but an octave lower.
The instrument in this form was able to contribute to more pieces musically and offered the possibility of greater physical dexterity for the player to develop technique.
The name ''cello'' is a contraction of the Italian ''violoncello'', which means "little violone".
Other examples are Offenbach's cello duets, quartet, and sextet, Pärt's Fratres for 8 cellos and Boulez' ''Messagesquisse'' for 7 cellos, or even Villa-Lobos' rarely played ''Fantasia Concertante'' (1958) for 32 cellos.
In classical music, cellists audition for playing jobs in orchestras and for admission into university or Conservatory programs or degrees.
Less expensive cellos frequently have tops and backs made of laminated wood.
Less expensive instruments typically have painted purfling.
The bass violin was actually often referred to as a "''violone''", or "large viola", as were the viols of the same period.
The top and back are traditionally hand-carved, though less expensive cellos are often machine-produced.
The vibrations are transmitted to the larger body, which can move more air and produce a louder sound.
The cello is increasingly common in traditional fiddle music, especially Scottish fiddle music.
At a classical cello audition, the performer typically plays a movement from a Bach suite or a movement from a concerto and a variety of excerpts from the orchestral literature.
Specific instruments are famous (or become famous) for a variety of reasons.
The f-holes, named for their shape, are located on either side of the bridge, and allow air to move in and out of the instrument as part of the sound-production process.
(Note that some writers,  including Muncaster (cited below) use the Greek letter "''mu''" in place of ''m''.)
Although the first bass violin, possibly invented as early as 1538, was most likely inspired by the viol, it was created to be used in consort with the violin.
The crossover string quartet bond also includes a cellist.
Approximate width horizontally from A peg to C peg ends
Cello manufacturer Luis & Clark constructs cellos from carbon fibre.
Most notably, Pink Floyd included a cello solo in their 1970 epic instrumental "Atom Heart Mother".
The first step to getting most performance jobs is by playing at an audition.
Tops may be glued on with diluted glue, since some repairs call for the removal of the top.
Rosin is applied by the player to make the hairs sticky.
The invention of wire-wound strings (fine wire around a thin gut core), around 1660 in Bologna, allowed for a finer bass sound than was possible with purely gut strings on such a short body.
Other notable examples include Hindemith's and Ysaÿe's Sonatas for Solo Cello, Dutilleux's ''Trois Strophes sur le Nom de Sacher'', Berio's ''Les Mots Sont Allés'', Cassadó's Suite for Solo Cello, Ligeti's Solo Sonata, Carter's two ''Figment''s and Xenakis' ''Nomos Alpha'' and ''Kottos''.
For a list of notable cellists, see the list of cellists and :Category:Cellists.
One of the earliest cello manuals is Michel Corrette's ''Méthode, thèorique et pratique pour apprendre en peu de temps le violoncelle dans sa perfection'' (Paris, 1741).
Upper bouts (shoulders)
The bridge holds the strings above the cello and transfers their vibrations to the top of the instrument and the soundpost inside (see below).
In 1989, the German cellist Michael Bach began developing a curved bow, encouraged by John Cage, Dieter Schnebel, Mstislav Rostropovich and Luigi Colani: and since then many pieces have been composed especially for it.
Tightening a string stiffens it by increasing both the outward forces along its length and the net forces it experiences during a distortion.
The instrument is a part of the standard orchestra and is the bass voice of the string quartet, as well as being part of many other chamber groups.
The sides, or ribs, are made by heating the wood and bending it around forms.
The orch-rock group, The Polyphonic Spree, which has pioneered the use of stringed and symphonic instruments, employs the cello in very creative ways for many of their "psychedelic-esque" melodies.
A cello bow is roughly 10&nbsp;grams heavier than a viola bow, which in turn is roughly 10&nbsp;grams heavier than a violin bow.
There were also some cellists who, while not otherwise composers, did write cello-specific repertoire, such as Nikolaus Kraft who wrote six cello concertos.
The pitches of the open strings are C, G, D, and A (black note heads in the playing range figure above), unless alternative tuning (scordatura) is specified by the composer.
When the orchestra stops playing (which is often in the summer), orchestral cellists have to find other work, either as a teacher or coach, or in another group.
Cellos are tuned in fifths, starting with C2  (two octaves below middle C), followed by G2, D3, and then A3.
Moreover, several composers wrote large-scale pieces for cello and orchestra, which are concertos in all but name.
The instrument has also been modified for Indian classical music by Nancy Lesh and Saskia Rao-de Haas.
Though paintings like Bruegel's "The Rustic Wedding", and Jambe de Fer in his ''Epitome Musical'' suggest that the bass violin had alternate playing positions, these were short-lived and the more practical and ergonomic ''a gamba'' position eventually replaced them entirely.
End pin unit and spike
This instrument had disadvantages as well, however.
Likewise strings with less mass per unit length,  if under the same tension,  will have a higher frequency and thus higher pitch than more massive strings.
Today the instrument is less common in popular music, but was commonly used in 1970s pop and disco music.
An instrument's notability may arise from its age, the fame of its maker, its physical appearance, its acoustic properties, and its use by notable performers.
The violone ("big viol") was the lowest-pitched instrument of the viol family, the group of stringed instruments that went out of fashion around the end of the 17th century in most countries except France, where they survived another half-century before the louder violin family came into greater favour in that country as well.
The strings from low to high are generally tuned to C2, G2, D3 and A3, an octave lower than the viola.
Other cellists performing Indian classical music are: Nancy Lesh ( Dhrupad) and Anup Biswas.
An Atlanta-based trio, King Richard's Sunday Best, also uses a cellist in their lineup.
The ''Prelude'' from the ''First Suite'' is particularly famous.
In jazz, bassists Oscar Pettiford and Harry Babasin were among the first to use the cello as a solo instrument; both tuned their instrument in fourths, an octave above the double bass.
The endpin was "introduced by Adrien Servais c. 1845 to give the instrument greater stability".
The string vibrates in a standing wave whose speed of propagation is given by √(''T''/''m''),  where ''T'' is the tension and ''m'' is the mass per unit length;    there is a node at either end of the vibrating length,  and thus the vibrating length ''l'' is half a wavelength.
The 12 cellists of the Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra (or "the Twelve" as they have since taken to being called) specialize in this repertoire and have commissioned many works, including arrangements of well-known popular songs.
In the Baroque period the cello was held between the calves, as there was no endpin at that time.
Bass guitarist Mike Rutherford of Genesis was originally a cellist and included some cello parts in their ''Foxtrot'' album.
In some styles of music, cellists may be asked to sight read printed music or perform standard repertoire with an ensemble.
The most famous instruments are generally known for all of these things.
Bridge to back total depth
Carbon fibre instruments are particularly suitable for outdoor playing because of the strength of the material and its resistance to humidity and temperature fluctuations.
A traditional cello has a spruce top, with maple for the back, sides, and neck.
It is the second-largest bowed string instrument in the modern symphony orchestra, the double bass being the largest.
Silenzium and Cellissimo Quartet are Russian (Novosibirsk) groups playing rock and metal and having more and more popularity in Siberia.
*Bonjour Stradivarius, played by Soo Bae
The endpin or spike is made of wood, metal or rigid carbon fibre and supports the cello in playing position.
Many existing bass violins were literally cut down in size to convert them into cellos according to the smaller pattern developed by Stradivarius, who also made a number of old pattern large cellos (the 'Servais').
The cello body has a wide top bout, narrow middle formed by two C-bouts, and wide bottom bout, with the bridge and F holes just below the middle.
Playing, traveling and the weather all affect the cello and can increase a crack if purfling is not in place.
7/8, 3/4, 1/2, 1/4, 1/8, 1/10, 1/16).
Overall height excluding end pin
The bridge is not glued, but rather held in place by the tension of the strings.
The nut is a raised piece of wood, fitted where the fingerboard meets the pegbox, in which the strings rest in shallow slots to keep them the correct distance apart.
The scale length of 4/4 cello is about .
The sizes, names, and tunings of the cello varied widely by geography and time.
Cellos were derived from other mid- to large-sized bowed instruments in the 16th century, such as the viola da gamba, and the generally smaller and squarer viola da braccio, and such instruments made by members of the Amati family of luthiers.
The cello section, in standard orchestral seating, is located on stage left (the audience's right) in the front, opposite the first violin section.
Monteverdi referred to the instrument as "basso de viola da braccio" in ''Orfeo'' (1607).
Baroque era cellos differed from the modern instrument in several ways.
Overall, the modern instrument has much higher string tension than the Baroque cello, resulting in a louder, more projecting tone, with fewer overtones.
This can be accomplished by modifying the cello front plate, attaching a wolf eliminator, or moving the sound post.
Jimmy Page pioneered its application on tracks such as "Dazed and Confused".
Modern cellos have an endpin at the bottom to support the instrument (and transmit some of the sound through the floor), while Baroque cellos are held only by the calves of the player.
This is a prime reason why the different strings on all string instruments have different fundamental pitches,  with the lightest strings having the highest pitches.
Well known players include Natalie Haas, Mike Block and Liz Davis Maxfield.
The lead vocalist of the band, Brendon Urie, also did the recording of the cello solo.
Internally, the cello has two important features: a bass bar, which is glued to the underside of the top of the instrument, and a round wooden sound post, which is wedged between the top and bottom plates.
The cello can also be used in bluegrass and folk music, with notable players including Ben Sollee of the Sparrow Quartet and the "Cajun cellist" Sean Grissom, as well as Vyvienne Long who, in addition to her own projects, has played for those of Damien Rice.
