The Old Irish and Welsh words for ‘slave’, ''cacht'' and  ''caeth'' respectively, are cognate with Latin ''captus'' ‘captive’ suggesting that the slave trade was an early means of contact between Latin and Celtic societies.
Celtiberian inscriptions, using their own Iberian script, appear later, after about 200 BC.
Caesar wrote extensively about his Gallic Wars in 58–51 BC.
The Ogham script, an Early Medieval alphabet, was mostly used in early Christian times in Ireland and Scotland (but also in Wales and England), and was only used for ceremonial purposes such as inscriptions on gravestones.
The first recorded use of the name of Celts&nbsp;– as &nbsp;– to refer to an ethnic group was by Hecataeus of Miletus, the Greek geographer, in 517 BC, when writing about a people living near Massilia (modern Marseille).
The first historical account of the islands of Britain and Ireland was by Pytheas, a Greek from the city of Massalia, who around 310-306 BC, sailed around what he called the "Pretannikai nesoi", which can be translated as the "Pretannic Isles".
The Boii tribe gave their name to Bohemia, Bologna and possibly Bavaria, and Celtic artefacts and cemeteries have been discovered further east in what is now Poland and Slovakia.
Thus, at one moment they would raise their swords aloft and smite after the manner of wild boars, throwing the whole weight of their bodies into the blow like hewers of wood or men digging with mattocks, and again they would deliver crosswise blows aimed at no target, as if they intended to cut to pieces the entire bodies of their adversaries, protective armour and all".
According to this model, by about the 6th century (Sub-Roman Britain), most of the inhabitants of the Isles were speaking Celtic languages of either the Goidelic or the Brythonic branch.
Gradually Roman control extended, and the Roman Province of Gallia Transalpina developed along the Mediterranean coast.
These are the regions where four Celtic languages are still spoken to some extent as mother tongues.
However, since according to the definition of the Iron Age in the 19th century Celtic populations were supposedly rare in Iberia and did not provide a cultural scenario that could easily be linked to that of Central Europe, the presence of Celtic culture in that region was generally not fully recognised.
Other early inscriptions, appearing from the early La Tène period in the area of Massilia, are in Gaulish, which was written in the Greek alphabet until the Roman conquest.
Some elements of Celtic Christianity developed, or retained, features that made them distinct from the rest of Western Christianity, most famously their conservative method of calculating the date of Easter.
They were made up of the Proto / Para-Celtic Lusitanians (in Portugal) and the Celtic region that Strabo called Celtica in the southwestern Iberian peninsula, including the Algarve, which was inhabited by the Celtici, the Vettones and Vacceani peoples (of central-western Spain and Portugal), and the Gallaecian, Astures and Cantabrian peoples of the Castro culture of northern and northwestern Spain and Portugal.
In the 19th and 20th centuries, scholars commonly dated the "arrival" of Celtic culture in Britain (via an invasion model) to the 6th century BC, corresponding to archaeological evidence of Hallstatt influence and the appearance of chariot burials in what is now England.
Proto-Germanic ''*walha'' is derived ultimately from the name of the Volcae, a Celtic tribe who lived first in the South of Germany and emigrated then to Gaul.
Romano-Celtic deities also began to appear: these deities often had both Roman and Celtic attributes, combined the names of Roman and Celtic deities, and/or included couples with one Roman and one Celtic deity.
Julius Caesar in his ''Gallic Wars'' described the 1st-century BC descendants of those Gauls.
H. D. Rankin in ''Celts and the Classical World'' notes that "Athenaeus echoes this comment (603a) and so does Ammianus (30.9).
Modern scholarship, however, has clearly proven that Celtic presence and influences were most substantial in what is today Spain and Portugal (with perhaps the highest settlement saturation in Western Europe), particularly in the central, western and northern regions.
Other classes of druids performed ceremonial sacrifices of crops and animals for the perceived benefit of the community.
The link between language and artefact is aided by the presence of inscriptions.
The earliest records of a Celtic language are the Lepontic inscriptions of Cisalpine Gaul (Northern Italy), the oldest of which still predate the  La Tène period.
The spread of iron-working led to the development of the Hallstatt culture directly from the Urnfield (c. 700 to 500 BC).
The Po Valley and the rest of northern Italy (known to the Romans as Cisalpine Gaul) was inhabited by Celtic-speakers who founded cities such as Milan.
(See ''Celtic (disambiguation)'' for other applications of the term.)
This claim has been questioned by some archaeologists, who note that Noric steel, steel produced in Celtic Noricum, was famous in the Roman Empire period and was used to equip the Roman military.
Similar patterns are also seen with the continental Celtic horse goddess Epona and what may well be her Irish and Welsh counterparts, Macha and Rhiannon, respectively.
Cloaks were worn in the winter.
In book XIII of his ''Deipnosophists'', the Roman Greek rhetorician and grammarian Athenaeus, repeating assertions made by Diodorus Siculus in the 1st century BC (Bibliotheca historica  5:32), wrote that Celtic women were beautiful but that the men preferred to sleep together.
In the Middle Ages, slavery was especially prevalent in the Celtic countries.
St Jerome, who visited Ancyra (modern-day Ankara) in 373 AD, likened their language to that of the Treveri of northern Gaul.
Thus, while the La Tène culture is certainly associated with the Gauls, the presence of La Tène artefacts may be due to cultural contact and does not imply the permanent presence of Celtic speakers.
It has also been proposed that a more ancient proto-Celtic presence can be traced back to the beginning of the Middle Bronze Age, when North Westwern Italy appears closely linked regarding the production of bronze artifacts, including ornaments, to the western groups of the Tumulus culture.
in the Hallstatt region) is in the Histories of Herodotus.
The Canegrate culture represented the first migratory wave of the proto-Celtic population from the northwest part of the Alps that, through the Alpine passes, had already penetrated and settled in the western Po valley between Lake Maggiore and Lake Como (Scamozzina culture).
Slavery was hereditary, though manumission was possible.
It seems to be the general opinion of antiquity."
Martín Almagro Gorbea proposed the origins of the Celts could be traced back to the 3rd millennium BC, seeking the initial roots in the Bell Beaker culture, thus offering the wide dispersion of the Celts throughout western Europe, as well as the variability of the different Celtic peoples, and the existence of ancestral traditions an ancient perspective.
Despite their geographical isolation from the rest of the Celtic world, the Galatians maintained their Celtic language for at least 700 years.
Most descriptions of Celtic societies portray them as being divided into three groups: a warrior aristocracy; an intellectual class including professions such as druid, poet, and jurist; and everyone else.
The sexual freedom of women in Britain was noted by Cassius Dio:
Arguments for a Celtic cult of the severed head include the many sculptured representations of severed heads in La Tène carvings, and the surviving Celtic mythology, which is full of stories of the severed heads of heroes and the saints who carry their own severed heads, right down to ''Sir Gawain and the Green Knight'', where the Green Knight picks up his own severed head after Gawain has struck it off, just as St. Denis carried his head to the top of Montmartre.
The Romans knew the remainder of Gaul as Gallia Comata – "Hairy Gaul".
Roman influence led to many changes in Celtic religion, the most noticeable of which was the weakening of the druid class, especially religiously; the druids were to eventually disappear altogether.
It is considered equally difficult to maintain that the origin of the Peninsular Celts can be linked to the preceding Urnfield culture.
Very few reliable sources exist regarding Celtic views on gender divisions and societal status, though some archaeological evidence does suggest that their views of gender roles may differ from contemporary and less egalitarian classical counterparts of the Roman era.
Diodorus Siculus wrote about the Celts of Gaul and Britain in his 1st-century history.
Celtic art also produced a great deal of intricate and beautiful metalwork, examples of which have been preserved by their distinctive burial rites.
The western La Tène culture corresponds to historical Celtic Gaul.
This view has been challenged by the hypothesis that the Celtic languages of the British Isles form a phylogenetic Insular Celtic dialect group.
The Celts in Iberia were divided into two main archaeological and cultural groups, even though that division is not very clear:
The Coligny calendar, which was found in 1897 in Coligny, Ain, was engraved on a bronze tablet, preserved in 73 fragments, that originally was 1.48 m wide and 0.9 m high (Lambert p.&nbsp;111).
John T. Koch of Aberystwyth University suggested that Tartessian inscriptions of the 8th century BC might be classified as Celtic.
The defeat of the combined Samnite, Celtic and Etruscan alliance by the Romans in the Third Samnite War sounded the beginning of the end of the Celtic domination in mainland Europe, but it was not until 192 BC that the Roman armies conquered the last remaining independent Celtic kingdoms in Italy.
The myth that the Celtic monetary system consisted of wholly barter is a common one, but is in part false.
In addition to commentary by Tacitus about Boudica, there are indications from later period histories that also suggest a more substantial role for "women as warriors", in symbolic if not actual roles.
The Iron Age Hallstatt (c. 800–475 BC) and La Tène (c. 500–50 BC) cultures are typically associated with Proto-Celtic and Celtic culture.
The Celts of Brittany derive their language from migrating insular Celts, mainly from Wales and Cornwall, and so are grouped accordingly.
The English form '''Gaul''' (first recorded in the 17th century) and '''''Gaulish''''' come from the French ''Gaule'' and ''Gaulois'', a borrowing from Frankish ''*Walholant'', "Land of foreigners or Romans" (see Gaul: Name), the root of which is Proto-Germanic ''*walha-'', “foreigner”', or “Celt”, whence the English word '''Welsh''' (Anglo-Saxon ''wælisċ'' < *''walhiska-''), South German ''welsch'', meaning “Celtic speaker”, “French speaker” or “Italian speaker” in different contexts, and Old Norse ''valskr'', pl.
La Tène cultural material appeared over a large area of mainland Italy, the southernmost example being the Celtic helmet from Canosa di Puglia.
According to one theory, the common root of the Celtic languages, a language known as Proto-Celtic, arose in the Late Bronze Age Urnfield culture of Central Europe, which flourished from around 1200 BC.
Celtic regions of Continental Europe are those whose residents claim a Celtic heritage, but where no Celtic language has survived; these areas include the western Iberian Peninsula, i.e.
Further south, Celts settled in Thrace (Bulgaria), which they ruled for over a century, and Anatolia, where they settled as the Galatians ''(see also: Gallic Invasion of Greece)''.
The Celts were described by classical writers such as Strabo, Livy, Pausanias, and Florus as fighting like "wild beasts", and as hordes.
Rites and sacrifices were carried out by priests known as druids.
The available evidence is of a strong oral tradition, such as that preserved by bards in Ireland, and eventually recorded by monasteries.
In addition, according to a theory proposed in the 19th century, the first people to adopt cultural characteristics regarded as Celtic were the people of the Iron Age Hallstatt culture in central Europe (c. 800–450 BC), named for the rich grave finds in Hallstatt, Austria.
Manumissions were discouraged by law and the word for "female slave", ''cumal'', was used as a general unit of value in Ireland.
The suffix ''-atai'' might be an Ancient Greek inflection.
''Galli'') might stem from a Celtic ethnic or tribal name originally, perhaps one borrowed into Latin during the Celtic expansions into Italy during the early 5th century BC.
Recent investigations about the Callaici and Bracari in northwestern Portugal are providing new approaches to understanding Celtic culture (language, art and religion) in western Iberia.
Rome wanted land communications with its Iberian provinces and fought a major battle with the Saluvii at Entremont in 124–123 BC.
Examples of individuals buried with both female jewellery and weaponry have been identified, such as the Vix Grave, and there are questions about the gender of some skeletons that were buried with warrior assemblages.
In the late Iron Age.
Texts with Greek characters from southern Gaul have survived from the 2nd century BC.
The Romans  adopted the Celtic cavalry sword, the spatha, and Epona, the Celtic horse goddess.
Proto-Celtic, the latest common ancestor of all known Celtic languages, is considered by this school of thought to have been spoken at the time of the late Urnfield or early Hallstatt cultures, in the early 1st millennium BC.
In general, Celtic gods were deities of particular skills, such as the many-skilled Lugh and Dagda, while goddesses were associated with natural features, particularly rivers (such as Boann, goddess of the River Boyne).
The Celts had only created wooden idols (including monuments carved into trees, which were known as sacred poles) previously to Roman conquest.
A Celtic coin (Biatec) from Bratislava's mint was displayed on the old Slovak 5-crown coin.
Several archaeological cultures are considered Celtic in nature, based on unique sets of artefacts.
Early Irish literature casts light on the flavour and tradition of the heroic warrior elites who dominated Celtic societies.
Jubainville based his arguments on a phrase of Herodotus' that placed the Celts at the source of the Danube, and argued that Herodotus had meant to place the Celtic homeland in southern Germany.
For Venceslas Kruta, Galatia in central Turkey was an area of dense Celtic settlement.
As the  20th century progressed, the racial ethnic interpretation of La Tène culture became much more strongly rooted, and any findings of La Tène culture and flat inhumation cemeteries were directly associated with the Celts and the Celtic language.
According to Diodorus Siculus:
Among the insular Celts, there is a greater amount of historic documentation to suggest warrior roles for women.
Besides epigraphical evidence, an important source of information on early Celtic is toponymy.
Roman culture had a profound effect on the Celtic tribes which came under the empire's control.
Frey notes  that in the 5th century, "burial customs in the Celtic world were not uniform; rather, localised groups had their own beliefs, which, in consequence, also gave rise to distinct artistic expressions".
'''Celt''' is a modern English word, first attested in 1707, in the writing of Edward Lhuyd, whose work, along with that of other late 17th-century scholars, brought academic attention to the languages and history of the early Celtic inhabitants of Great Britain.
There are records of Celtic mercenaries in Egypt serving the Ptolemies.
While the regions under Roman rule adopted Christianity along with the rest of the Roman empire, unconquered areas of Ireland and Scotland began to move from Celtic polytheism to Christianity in the 5th century.
Continental Celtic languages are attested almost exclusively through inscriptions and place-names.
Gold coinage was much more common than silver coinage, despite being worth substantially more, as while there were around 100 mines in Southern Britain and Central France, silver was more rarely mined.
However, Radomir Pleiner, in ''The Celtic Sword'' (1993) argues that "the metallographic evidence shows that Polybius was right up to a point", as around one third of surviving swords from the period might well have behaved as he describes.
Celtic art is generally used by art historians to refer to art of the La Tène period across Europe, while the Early Medieval art of Britain and Ireland, that is what "Celtic art" evokes for much of the general public, is called Insular art in art history.
For instance, the Irish god Lugh, associated with storms, lightning, and culture, is seen in similar forms as Lugos in Gaul and Lleu in Wales.
A modern "Celtic identity" was constructed as part of the Romanticist Celtic Revival in Great Britain, Ireland, and other European territories, such as Portugal and Spanish Galicia.
The territory of these peoples probably included the Low Countries, the Alps and present-day northern Italy.
Druids fulfilled a variety of roles in Celtic religion, serving as priests and religious officiants, but also as judges, sacrificers, teachers, and lore-keepers.
Greek traders founded Massalia about 600 BC, with some objects (mostly drinking ceramics) being traded up the Rhone valley.
These are mostly inscriptions in the Roman and sometimes Greek alphabets.
Due to the large number of these present in some burials, it is thought they had a relatively high monetary value, and could be used for "day to day" purchases.
In ''Gods and Fighting Men'', Lady Gregory's Celtic Revival translation of Irish mythology, heads of men killed in battle are described in the beginning of the story ''The Fight with the Fir Bolgs'' as pleasing to Macha, one aspect of the war goddess Morrigu.
This included bronze items made from the early La Tène period and onwards, which were often in the shape of axeheads, rings, or bells.
The Celts had literally hundreds of deities, some of which were unknown outside a single family or tribe, while others were popular enough to have a following that crossed lingual and cultural barriers.
The Celts also expanded down the Danube river and its tributaries.
However, the general form of the calendar suggests the public peg calendars (or ''parapegmata'') found throughout the Greek and Roman world.
Plutarch reports that Celtic women acted as ambassadors to avoid a war among Celts chiefdoms in the Po valley during the 4th century BC.
Linguists have been arguing for many years whether a Celtic language came to Britain and Ireland and then split or whether there were two separate "invasions".
Today, Irish, Scottish Gaelic, Welsh, and Breton are still spoken in parts of their historical territories, and Cornish and Manx are undergoing a revival.
In some regards the Atlantic Celts were conservative: for example, they still used chariots in combat long after they had been reduced to ceremonial roles by the Greeks and Romans.
The older view of prehistorians was that the Celtic influence in the British Isles was the result of successive invasions from the European continent by diverse Celtic-speaking peoples over the course of several centuries, accounting for the P-Celtic vs. Q-Celtic isogloss.
The Romans knew the Celts then living in what became present-day France as Gauls.
Diodorus went further, stating that "the young men will offer themselves to strangers and are insulted if the offer is refused".
At the battle of Telamon in 225 BC a large Celtic army was trapped between two Roman forces and crushed.
Archaeological evidence suggests that the pre-Roman Celtic societies were linked to the network of overland trade routes that spanned Eurasia.
In 58 BC the Helvetii planned to migrate westward but Julius Caesar forced them back.
Myles Dillon and Nora Kershaw Chadwick accepted that "the Celtic settlement of the British Isles" might have to be  dated to the Beaker period concluding that "There is no reason why so early a date for the coming of the Celts should be impossible".
Following the Gallic Wars of 58–51 BC, Caesar's ''Celtica'' formed the main part of Roman Gaul, becoming the province of Gallia Lugdunensis.
Eastern Gaul became the centre of the western La Tène culture.
Celtic literary tradition begins with Old Irish texts around the 8th century.
Expansion into Romania was however blocked by the Dacians.
Linguist Patrizia De Bernardo Stempel falls in the latter group, and suggests the meaning "the tall ones".
The four are Irish Gaelic, Scottish Gaelic, Welsh, and Breton; plus two recent revivals, Cornish (one of the Brythonic languages) and Manx (one of the Goidelic languages).
From the 3rd century BC the Gauls adopted coinage.
This was due partly to the relative sparsity of mines and the amount of effort needed for extraction compared to the profit gained.
There are only very limited records from pre-Christian times written in Celtic languages.
The style was taken up with great skill and enthusiasm by Celtic artists in metalwork and illuminated manuscripts.
It is written in Latin inscriptional capitals, and is in the Gallic language.
In various academic disciplines the Celts were considered a Central European Iron Age phenomenon, through the cultures of Hallstatt and La Tène.
Other writers, such as Ammianus Marcellinus and Tacitus, mentioned Celtic women inciting, participating in, and leading battles.
The Proto-Celtic language is usually dated to the Late Bronze Age.
Classical writers did not apply the terms  or "Celtae" to the inhabitants of Britain or Ireland, which has led to some scholars preferring not to use the term for the Iron Age inhabitants of those islands.
According to Livy, this was also true of the Celts of Asia Minor.
The monetary system was complex and is still not understood (much like the late Roman coinages), and due to the absence of large numbers of coin items, it is assumed that "proto-money" was used.
In the first century BC Julius Caesar reported that the people known to the Romans as Gauls (''Galli'') called themselves Celts, which suggests that even if the name ''Keltoi'' was bestowed by the Greeks, it had been adopted to some extent as a collective name by the tribes of Gaul.
Other changes included the adaptation of the Jupiter Column, a sacred column set up in many Celtic regions of the empire, primarily in northern and eastern Gaul.
Yet he reports Celtic peoples in Iberia, and also uses the ethnic names Celtiberi and Celtici for peoples there, as distinct from Lusitani and Iberi.
There are instances recorded where women participated both in warfare and in kingship, although they were in the minority in these areas.
At the beginning of the 20th century the belief that these "Culture Groups" could be thought of in racial or ethnic terms was strongly held by Gordon Childe whose theory was  influenced by the writings of Gustaf Kossinna.
Today, the term Celtic generally refers to the languages and respective cultures of Ireland, Scotland, Wales, Cornwall, the Isle of Man, and Brittany, also known as the Celtic nations.
In 391 BC Celts "who had their homes beyond the Alps streamed through the passes in great strength and seized the territory that lay between the Apennine mountains and the Alps" according to Diodorus Siculus.
Over the centuries the language(s) developed into the separate Celtiberian, Goidelic and Brythonic languages.
The Roman invasion of Gaul brought a great deal of Celtic peoples into the Roman Empire.
According to Paul Jacobsthal, "Amongst the Celts the human head was venerated above all else, since the head was to the Celt the soul, centre of the emotions as well as of life itself, a symbol of divinity and of the powers of the other-world."
A shift of settlement centres took place in the 4th century.
The restored tablet contains 16 vertical columns, with 62 months distributed over 5 years.
The relatively modern  idea of an identifiable Celtic cultural identity or "Celticity" generally focuses on similarities among languages, works of art, and classical texts, and sometimes also among material artefacts, social organisation, homeland and mythology.
The finding of the prehistoric cemetery of Hallstat in 1846 by Johan Ramsauer and the finding of the archaeological site of La Tène by Hansli Kopp in 1857 drew attention to this area.
Druids organised and ran religious ceremonies, and they memorised and taught the calendar.
The Celts worshipped both gods and goddesses.
Archaeologists have discovered large prehistoric trackways crossing bogs in Ireland and Germany.
The history of pre-Celtic Europe remains very uncertain.
Insular Celtic culture diversified into that of the Gaels (Irish, Scottish and Manx) and the Brythonic Celts (Welsh, Cornish, and Bretons) of the medieval and modern periods.
Higher-value coinages, suitable for use in trade, were minted in gold, silver, and high-quality bronze.
The tribal names of '''Gallaeci''' and the Greek '''Γαλάται''' (''Galatai'', Latinized ''Galatae''; see the region Galatia in Anatolia) most probably have the same origin.
The etymology of the term ''Keltoi'' is unclear.
Before the discoveries at Hallstatt and La Tène, it was generally considered that the Celtic heartland was southern France, see Encyclopædia Britannica for 1813.
Based on the style of lettering and the accompanying objects, it probably dates to the end of the 2nd century.
By the 6th century, however, the Continental Celtic languages were no longer in wide use.
Thousands were employed in 283–246 BC and they were also in service around 186 BC.
Diodorus Siculus, in his 1st-century ''History'' had this to say about Celtic head-hunting:
This artistic style incorporated elements of La Tène, Late Roman, and, most importantly, animal Style II of Germanic Migration Period art.
Until the end of the 19th century, traditional scholarship dealing with the Celts did acknowledge their presence in the Iberian Peninsula as a material culture relatable to the Hallstatt and La Tène cultures.
Thus this area is sometimes called the 'Celtic homeland'.
As there is no archaeological evidence for large-scale invasions in some of the other areas, one current school of thought holds that Celtic language and culture spread to those areas by contact rather than invasion.
The interlace patterns that are often regarded as typical of "Celtic art" were characteristic of the whole of the British Isles, a style referred to as Insular art, or Hiberno-Saxon art.
The Greek historian Ephoros of Cyme in Asia Minor, writing in the 4th century BC, believed that the Celts came from the islands off the mouth of the Rhine and were "driven from their homes by the frequency of wars and the violent rising of the sea".
Though his original work is lost it was used by later writers such as Strabo.
There was also considerable cultural influence exerted by Gaul on Rome, particularly in military matters and horsemanship, as the Gauls often served  in the Roman cavalry.
Rankin argues that the ultimate source of these assertions is likely to be Poseidonius and speculates that these authors may be recording male "bonding rituals".
Its root may be the Common Celtic ''*galno'', meaning “power, strength”, hence Old Irish ''gal'' “boldness, ferocity” and Welsh ''gallu'' “to be able, power”.
During the later Iron Age the Gauls generally wore long-sleeved shirts or tunics and long trousers (called ''braccae'' by the Romans).
Place- and personal-name analysis and inscriptions suggest that the Gaulish Celtic language was spoken over most of what is now France.
The geographer Strabo, writing about Gaul towards the end of the first century BC, refers to the "race which is now called both Gallic and Galatic," though he also uses the term Celtica as a synonym for Gaul, which is separated from Iberia by the Pyrenees.
Pausanias in the 2nd century AD says that the Gauls "originally called Celts", "live on the remotest region of Europe on the coast of an enormous tidal sea".
''valir'', “Gaulish, French”).
In historical times, the offices of high and low kings in Ireland and Scotland were filled by election under the system of tanistry, which eventually came into conflict with the feudal principle of primogeniture in which succession goes to the first-born son.
Due to their substantial nature, these are believed to have been created for wheeled transport as part of an extensive roadway system that facilitated trade.
Low-value coinages of potin, a bronze alloy with high tin content, were minted in most Celtic areas of the continent and in South-East Britain prior to the Roman conquest of these lands.
Pliny the Elder cited the use of Celtici in Lusitania as a tribal surname, which epigraphic findings have confirmed.
Posidonius described the southern Gauls about 100 BC.
Latin '''''Gallus''''' (pl.
By or during the later La Tène period (c. 450 BC up to the Roman conquest), this Celtic culture was supposed to have expanded by diffusion or migration to the British Isles (Insular Celts), France and The Low Countries (Gauls), Bohemia, Poland and much of Central Europe, the Iberian Peninsula (Celtiberians, Celtici, Lusitanians and Gallaeci) and northern Italy (Golaseccans and Cisalpine Gauls) and, following the Gallic invasion of the Balkans in 279 BC, as far east as central Anatolia (Galatians) in modern-day Turkey.
* One group was spread out along Galicia and the Iberian Atlantic shores.
Strabo, writing in the Roman era, clearly distinguished between the Celts and Britons.
Equally, the forms used for the finest Insular art were all adopted from the Roman world: Gospel books like the Book of Kells and Book of Lindisfarne, chalices like the Ardagh Chalice and Derrynaflan Chalice, and penannular brooches like the Tara Brooch.
Stephen Oppenheimer points out that the only written evidence that locates the Keltoi near the source of the Danube (i.e.
La Tène Celts built temples of varying size and shape, though they also maintained shrines at sacred trees and votive pools.
Much of the surviving material is in precious metal, which no doubt gives a very unrepresentative picture, but apart from Pictish stones and the Insular high crosses, large monumental sculpture, even with decorative carving, is very rare; possibly it was originally common in wood.
Three divisions of the Celts of the Iberian Peninsula were assumed to have existed: the Celtiberians in the mountains near the centre of the peninsula, the Celtici in the southwest, and the Celts in the northwest (in Gallaecia and Asturias).
It developed out of the  Hallstatt culture without any definite cultural break, under the impetus of considerable Mediterranean influence from Greek, and later Etruscan civilisations.
* The Celtiberian group of central Spain and the upper Ebro valley.
'''Continental Celts''' are the Celtic-speaking people of mainland Europe and '''Insular Celts''' are the Celtic-speaking peoples of the British and Irish islands and their descendants.
By the mid 1st millennium AD, with the expansion of the Roman Empire and the Great Migrations (Migration Period) of Germanic peoples, Celtic culture and Insular Celtic had become restricted to Ireland, the western and northern parts of Great Britain (Wales, Scotland, and Cornwall), the Isle of Man, and Brittany.
Brooches and armlets were used, but the most famous item of jewellery was the torc, a neck collar of metal, sometimes gold.
