The CIA's surprise at India's detonation of an atom bomb was a failure at almost every level.
Project Socrates was designed to utilize open source intelligence gathering almost exclusively.
In 1997 the House would pen another report, which said that CIA officers know little about the language or politics of the people they spy on, the conclusion was that the CIA lacked the "depth, breadth, and expertise to monitor political, military, and economic developments worldwide."
Chairman of the House Intelligence Committee Representative Silvestre Reyes announced that he is considering an investigation into alleged CIA violations of the National Security Act, which requires with limited exception that Congress be informed of covert activities.
Other changes which were announced include the formation of a Talent Development Center of Excellence, the enhancement and expansion of the CIA University and the creation of the office of the Chancellor to head the CIA University in order to consolidate and unify recruitment and training efforts.
The CIA instigated the transfer of the well-respected Ambassador Allison, who had a strong background in Asia, to Czechoslovakia.
At the same time, his men were working on a parallel plan, recruiting a Cuban exile to assassinate him.
During Operation Allied Force, the CIA had incorrectly provided the coordinates of the Chinese Embassy as a Yugoslav military target resulting in its bombing.
On September 25, 1957, Eisenhower ordered the CIA to start a revolution in Indonesia with the goal of regime change.
Eisenhower wanted to use the U-2 to disprove the Missile Gap, but he had banned U-2 overflights of the USSR after meeting Secretary Khrushchev at Camp David.
After Sukarno hosted Bandung Conference, promoting the Non-Aligned Movement, the Eisenhower White House responded with NSC 5518 authorizing "all feasible covert means" to move Indonesia into the Western sphere.
Previously, the Director of Central Intelligence (DCI) oversaw the Intelligence Community, serving as the president's principal intelligence advisor, additionally serving as head of the CIA.
Half a million people had starved in Somalia when President George H. W. Bush ordered U.S. troops to enter the country on a humanitarian mission.
He was particularly worried that U-2 flights could be seen as preparations for first strike attacks.
In addition, towards the end of World War II the U.S. government felt the need for a group to coordinate intelligence efforts.
Seven CIA officers, including the chief of the base, were killed and six others seriously wounded in the attack.
Six months later, they had 12 American hostages.
Following the 11 September 2001 attacks the United States, in particular the CIA, has been accused of rendering hundreds of people suspected by the government of being terrorists—or of aiding and abetting terrorist organisations—to third-party states such as Egypt, Jordan, Morocco, and Uzbekistan.
During this "photo gap" the CIA received a report from a source from Operation Mongoose, a road watcher describing covered tractor trailers moving that were shaped like large telephone poles.
Ike ordered that Lumumba be "eliminated".
The charismatic leader of Indonesia was President Sukarno.
The intelligence community as a whole, and especially the CIA, were involved in presidential planning immediately after the 9/11 attacks.
After several days of surveillance of Awlaki by the Central Intelligence Agency, armed drones took off from a new, secret American base in the Arabian Peninsula, crossed into northern Yemen, and fired a number of Hellfire missiles at al-Awlaki's vehicle.
The new DCI, Walters, another Nixon hack, called the acting director of the FBI and told him to drop the investigation as ordered.
On 18 June 1954, Carlos Castillo Armas led 480 CIA-trained men across the border from Honduras into Guatemala.
In March, 1981, Reagan told Congress that the CIA would protect El Salvador by preventing the shipment of Nicaraguan arms into the country to arm Communist rebels.
Air Force Colonel James Kallis stated that CIA director Allen Dulles continued to praise the CIA's Korean force, despite knowing that they were under enemy control.
The CIA established its first training facility, the Office of Training and Education, in 1950.
He also considered that the CIA's efforts had put the Agency in a position to respond rapidly and effectively to the attacks, both in the "Afghan sanctuary" and in "ninety-two countries around the world".
DCI Colby leaked the papers to the press, later he stated that he believed that providing Congress with this information was the correct thing to do, and ultimately in the CIA's own interests.
The CIA would reuse the tactic of dropping plant agents behind enemy lines by parachute again on China, and North Korea.
The Bay of Pigs Invasion was a failed military invasion of Cuba undertaken by the CIA-sponsored paramilitary group Brigade 2506 on 17 April 1961.
The '''Directorate of Operations''' is responsible for collecting foreign intelligence, mainly from clandestine HUMINT sources, and covert action.
A CIA analyst's assessment of Vietnam was that the US was "becoming progressively divorced from reality... and proceeding with far more courage than wisdom".
The 9/11 Commission Report identifies failures in the IC as a whole.
The House is expected to support the 2010 Intelligence Authorization Bill including a provision that would require the President to inform more than 40 members of Congress about covert operations.
The CIA also mined the port of Corinto, an act of war that resulted in a public trial in the International Court of Justice.
Their estimates were the highest that could be justified, and they painted a picture of a growing Soviet military when the Soviet military was actually shrinking.
Through Salameh, the CIA gained a foothold in the world of Muslim extremism, and had entered a bargain where Americans would be safe, and the PLO and CIA would share information on mutual enemies.
Jim McCord's lawyer contacted the CIA informing them that McCord had been offered a Presidential pardon if he fingered the CIA, testifying that the break-in had been an operation of the CIA.
His declaration of neutrality in the Cold War put the suspicions of the CIA on him.
Acting Attorney General Laurence Silberman learned of the existence of the family jewels, he issued a subpoena for them, prompting eight congressional investigations on the domestic spying activities of the CIA.
After the war, internal reviews by the CIA would corroborate Hart's findings.
He became the first American to die in combat in the war in Afghanistan.
In the investigation that ensued, the CIA discovered that many of the sources for its most important analyses of the USSR were based on Soviet disinformation fed to the CIA by controlled agents.
Subsequently, NPIC was transferred to the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA).
Many CIA officers fell under career-ending suspicion; the details of the relative truths and untruths from Nosenko and Golitsyn may never be released, or, in fact, may not be fully understood.
$850,000 of the transaction went to Contras.
Árbenz handed over power to Colonel Carlos Enrique Diaz.
This left the Agency bloated with middle management, and anemic in younger officers.
As Watergate threw the spotlight on the CIA, Schlesinger, who had been kept in the dark about the CIA's involvement, decided he needed to know what skeletons were in the closet.
While the CIA insists that those who conducted the attacks on 9/11 were not aware that the agency was operating at 7 World Trade Center under the guise of another (unidentified) federal agency, this center was the headquarters for many notable criminal terrorism investigations.
involvement in the downing of a missionary plane mistaken for a narcotics flight in Peru in 2001, and two "''matters that remain classified''", as well as the rumored-assassinations question.
In the recording, Ambassador McAfee verbally entreated "Murphy".
Al-Fadl, who defected to the CIA in spring 1996, began to provide the Station with a new image of the Al Qaeda leader: he was not only a terrorist financier, but a terrorist organizer, too.
There is a special communications marking that signals that intelligence-related messages can be shared with these four countries.
Ireland's Directorate of Military Intelligence liaises with the CIA, although it is not a member of the ''Five Eyes''.
At the time, the DOD had control of 80% of the intelligence budget.
DI McCone had statutory control over all intelligence committees, but in reality, the military had near total control of the DIA, the NRO, the NSA, and many other aspects.
The facility was established in 1951 and has been used by the CIA since at least 1955.
Something reflected in the intelligence failure in Indonesia.
Arlington Hall, the nerve center of CIA cryptanalysisl was compromised by Bill Weisband, a Russian translator and Soviet spy.
While the Directorate heads will still retain ultimate authority over their respective Directorate, the Missions Centers will be led by an Assistant Director who will work with the capabilities and talents of all five Directorates on mission specific goals for the parts of the world which they are given responsibility for.
This too would be fruitless.
Seoul station chief Albert Haney would openly celebrate the capabilities of those agents, and the information they sent.
As mandated by Title 50 of the United States Code Chapter 15, Subchapter III, when it becomes necessary to limit access to covert operations findings that could affect vital interests of the U.S., as soon as possible the President must report at a minimum to the Gang of Eight (the leaders of each of the two parties from both the Senate and House of Representatives, and the chairs and ranking members of both the Senate Committee and House Committee for intelligence).
The US had been hunting Bin Laden since '96 and had had several opportunities, but neither Clinton, nor Bush had wanted to risk their skin taking an active role in a murky assassination plot, and the perfect opportunity had never materialized for a trigger shy DI that would have given him the reassurances he needed to take the plunge.
In addition, it obtains information from other U.S. government intelligence agencies, commercial information sources, and foreign intelligence services.
The attacks cost the lives of 2,996 people (including the 19 hijackers), caused the destruction of the Twin Towers, and damaged the western side of the Pentagon.
President Gerald Ford created the Rockefeller Commission, and issued an executive order prohibiting the assassination of foreign leaders.
McCone believed that as long as the ho chi minh trail was active the US would struggle.
An attack on his house would force Mossadegh to flee.
After Indonesia, Eisenhower displayed mistrust of both the CIA and its Director, Allen Dulles.
Despite transferring some of its powers to the DNI, the CIA has grown in size as a result of the September 11 terrorist attacks.
McCord wrote "If DI Helms goes (takes the fall) and the Watergate operation is laid at the CIA's feet, where it does not belong, every tree in the forest will fall.
The Counterterrorist Center, its new chief Cofer Black and the center's Bin Laden unit were the Plan's developers and executors.
Israel invaded Lebanon, and, along with the CIA, propped up Gemayel.
On October 5, 1986, an American C-123 full of weapons was shot down by a Nicaraguan soldier.
The CIA seized the opportunity to arm and finance Chad's Prime Minister, Hissène Habré after he created a breakaway government in Western Sudan, even giving him Stinger missiles.
This led to the creation of the Office of Strategic Services (OSS).
It will be a scorched desert."
The CIA was the only part of the government that had the power to make off the book payments, but it could only be done on the orders of the CI, or, if he was out of the country, the DCI.
The delivery drew a crowd of spectators, and, little thought was given to plausible deniability.
During the Bosnian War, the CIA ignored signs within and without of the Srebrenica massacre.
As a result, it was revealed that CIA's annual budget in Fiscal Year 1963 was US $550 million (inflation-adjusted US$  billion in ), and the overall intelligence budget in FY 1997 was US $26.6 billion (inflation-adjusted US$  billion in ).
In 2001, of the 17,000 employees in the CIA, there were 1,000 in the Clandestine Service.
Initially, the US focus in Southeast Asia was on Laos, not Vietnam.
Research by Dr. Alfred W. McCoy, Gary Webb, and others has pointed to CIA involvement in narcotics trafficking across the globe, although the CIA officially denies such allegations.
The Cuban Missile Crisis formally started the next day when American photo analysts identified R-12 1 Megaton MRBMs which could target parts of the east coast with its 2,000&nbsp;km range.
Part of the contracting problem comes from Congressional restrictions on the number of employees in the IC.
Oliver North and John Poindexter had been shredding documents for weeks, but a memo about suspicions that Secord was taking more than his agreed cut surfaced.
On July 16, 2008 the fiscal 2009 Intelligence Authorization Bill was approved by House majority containing stipulations that 75% of money sought for covert actions would be held until all members of the House Intelligence panel were briefed on sensitive covert actions.
On 18 June 1948, the National Security Council issued Directive 10/2 calling for covert action against the USSR, and granting the authority to carry out covert operations against "hostile foreign states or groups" that could, if needed, be denied by the U.S. government.
DDCI John E. McLaughlin was part of a long discussion in the CIA about equivocation.
Cofer Black and others became advocates of arming the Predator with missiles to try to assassinate Bin Laden and other al-Qaeda leaders.
Clinton would enter the ranks of Presidents unhappy with the results of the CIA, Clinton's inattention to the CIA did not help the matter.
On December 11, 1959, a memo reached the DI's desk recommending Castro's "elimination".
McLaughlin, who would make, among others, the "slam dunk" presentation to the President, "felt that they had to dare to be wrong to be clearer in their judgements".
Lord George Robertson, British defence secretary and later NATO's secretary-general, will later explain NATO members agree to provide "blanket overflight clearances for the United States and other allies' aircraft for military flights related to operations against terrorism."
R-14s which could target most of the continental US, as well as 9M21 tactical nukes had also been deployed.
By December 2002 the CIA had close to a dozen good networks in Iraq and would advance so far that they would penetrate Iraq's SSO, and even tap the encrypted communications of the Deputy Prime Minister, even the bodyguard of Hussein's son became an agent.
On February 2, Nixon broke that promise, carrying through with his intention to "remove the deadwood" from the CIA.
Control of U-2 flights was moved to the Air Force, and October 14 U-2 flights resumed.
After the Cabinet-level Principals Committee meeting on terrorism of September 4, 2001, the CIA resumed reconnaissance flights, the drones now being weapons-capable.
The CIA's budget for hiring clandestine officers had been squeezed out by the paramilitary operations in south-east Asia, and hiring was further strained by the government's poor popularity.
He had high hopes for an upcoming meeting with Khrushchev in Paris.
Mosaddegh quickly replaced military leaders loyal to the Shah with those loyal to him, giving him personal control over the military.
The occupation of Iraq would be a low point in the history of the CIA.
Tenet rejected the criticism, citing the Agency's planning efforts especially over the preceding two years.
The CIA then orchestrated a series of power transfers that ended with the confirmation of Castillo Armas as president in July 1954.
In the aftermath, Robert Kennedy wrote that the CIA had succeeded where it had failed many times in the past, but in the face of that success, it was caught flatfooted, having failed to plan what to do next.
Counter to CIA predictions, the Indonesian military, with some planning assistance from their colleagues in the US military, the only people the CIA had successfully kept their involvement a secret from, reacted swiftly and effectively.
CIA officers were barred from meeting Solidarity leaders, and the CIA's contacts with Solidarnosc activists were weaker than those of the AFL-CIO, which raised 300 thousand dollars from its members, which were used to provide material and cash directly to Soldarity, with no control of Solidarity's use of it.
They would later be joined by small special operations forces teams which would call in precision airstrikes on Taliban and Al Qaeda fighters.
Lawrence Houston, head counsel of the SSU, CIG, and, later CIA, was principal draftsman of the National Security Act of 1947, which dissolved the NIA and the CIG, and established both the National Security Council and the Central Intelligence Agency.
The name reflects its role as the coordinator of human intelligence activities among other elements of the wider U.S. intelligence community with their own HUMINT operations.
The CIA's best source of information there was Hassan Salameh, the PLO's Chief of Intelligence, until Israel assassinated him.
Between 1985 and 1986 the CIA lost every spy it had in Eastern Europe.
Over 1,400 paramilitaries set out for Cuba by boat on April 13.
On 21 August 1950, shortly after the invasion of South Korea, Truman announced Walter Bedell Smith as the new Director of the CIA to correct what was seen as a grave failure of Intelligence.
In 1991, Bin Laden returned to his native Saudi Arabia protesting the presence of troops, and Operation Desert Storm.
The CIA was blinded by the uprising against the Maronite minority.
For later stage training of student operations officers, there is at least one classified training area at Camp Peary, near Williamsburg, Virginia.
When that expired, his powers were extended for another year.
On October 23, 1983, two bombs were Beirut in Beirut, including a 10 ton bomb at a US military barracks that killed 242 people.
As was typical of CIA operations, CIA interventions were preceded by radio announcements on July 7, 1953 made by the CIA's intended victim by way of operational leaks.
Reagan negotiated a trade of prisoners for hostages.
The facility works in partnership with the National Intelligence University, and includes the Sherman Kent School for Intelligence Analysis, the Directorate of Analysis' component of the university.
On 6 March 2015, the office of the D/CIA issued an unclassified edition a statement by the Director, titled 'Our Agency's Blueprint for the Future', as a press release for public consumption.
Fictional depictions of the CIA exist in many books, films and video games.
In the months immediately following 9/11, there was a huge increase in the amount of applications for CIA positions.
One problem, for example, was the FBI failing to "connect the dots" by sharing information among its decentralized field offices.
Sukarno confounded the CIA's Jakarta station, which had few speakers of native languages, and Al Ulmer, the new head of the CIA's Far East division, knew little about the country.
The CIA transferred around $2 million yearly in cash to Solidarity, which suggests that $10 million total is a reasonable estimate for the 5-year total.
Some congressmen believe that these "lies" to Congress are similar to CIA lies to Congress from earlier periods.
On December 21, 1982, Congress passed a law restricting the CIA to its stated mission, restricting the flow of arms from Nicaragua to El Salvador, prohibiting the use of funds to oust the Sandinistas.
In the face of the failure of Project Tiger, the Pentagon wanted CIA paramilitary forces to participate in their Op Plan 64A, this resulted in the CIA's foreign paramilitaries being put under the command of the DOD, a move seen as a slippery slope inside the CIA, a slide from covert action towards militarization.
The government began an ambitious agrarian reform program attempting to grant land to millions of landless peasants.
Among the principal changes disclosed include the establishment of a new directorate, the Directorate of Digital Innovation, which is responsible for designing and crafting the digital technology to be used by the Agency, to keep the CIA always ahead of its enemies.
On October 4, 2001, a secret arrangement is made in Brussels, by all members of NATO.
He demanded the CIA produce a signed document attesting to the national security threat of the investigation.
Agency files show that it is believed Osama Bin Laden was funding the Afghan rebels against the USSR in the 1980s.
At the largest CIA station in the world agents would rotate through 1-3 month tours.
Unlike the Carter Administration, the Reagan Administration supported the Solidarity movement in Poland, and—based on CIA intelligence—waged a public relations campaign to deter what the Carter administration felt was "an imminent move by large Soviet military forces into Poland."
There was no affair.
It can, for example, exert foreign political influence through its tactical divisions, such as the Special Activities Division.
The public revelation of the coup helped popularize the political science term "Banana republic", coined by the American writer O. Henry in his 1904 book Cabbages and Kings.
The technology-focused Socrates system supported such programs as the Strategic Defense Initiative in addition to private sector projects.
'''September 11 attacks and its aftermath'''
On June 26, Nixon's counsel John Dean ordered DCI Walters to pay the plumbers untraceable hush money.
Too often the CIA relied on people inexperienced with that which they were supposed to be the expert.
This prompted Senator Feinstein and Senator Patrick Leahy, chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee to insist that no one should go outside the law.
While it was not confirmed whether the agency was able to retrieve the classified information, it is known that all agents present that day fled the building safely.
The end result would be a 60/40 oil profit split in favor of Iran (possibly similar to agreements with Saudi Arabia and Venezuela).
The President had asked the CIA if Al Qaeda could plan attacks in the US.
In 1999, CIA chief George Tenet launched a grand "Plan" to deal with al-Qaeda.
Nationalization of the British funded Iranian oil industry, including the largest oil refinery in the world, was disastrous for Mossadeq.
Reagan testified before Congress, assuring them that the CIA was not trying to topple the Nicaraguan government.
Two planes crashed into the Twin Towers of the World Trade Center in New York City, the third into the Pentagon in Arlington County, Virginia, and the fourth inadvertently into a field near Shanksville, Pennsylvania.
Chad's neighbor Libya was a major source of weaponry to communist rebel forces.
Most CIA stations had two station chiefs, one working for the OSO, and one working for the OPC.
Before Helms would leave office, he would destroy every tape he had secretly made of meetings in his office, and many of the papers on Project MKUltra.
It would later be determined that the transmission took place before the weapon discharges that night which leads to the conclusion that the transmission refers to the events of the attack the day before, and that, although Destroyers Maddox, and Turner Joy fired hundreds of shells at intermittent radar contacts, they were firing at false returns.
The Al Qaeda connection, for instance, was from a single source, extracted through torture, and was later denied.
This also required an authorizing chain of command, including an official, presidential finding report and the informing of the House and Senate Intelligence Committees, which, in emergencies, requires only "timely notification."
Kennedy's Cabinet was dubious about the coup, and JFK would come to regret it.
In 1949 Houston helped to draft the Central Intelligence Agency Act (Public law 81-110), which authorized the agency to use confidential fiscal and administrative procedures, and exempted it from most limitations on the use of Federal funds.
CIA's HUMINT budget is $2.3 billion, the SIGINT budget is $1.7 billion, and spending for security and logistics of CIA missions is $2.5 billion.
The CIA would see another setback as communists would take Angola.
US President Dwight D. Eisenhower was concerned at the direction Castro's government was taking, and in March 1960, Eisenhower allocated $13.1 million to the CIA to plan Castro's overthrow.
During the Reagan administration, Michael Sekora (assigned to the DIA), worked with agencies across the intelligence community, including the CIA, to develop and deploy a technology-based competitive strategy system called Project Socrates.
Students are selected, and their progress evaluated, in ways derived from the OSS, published as the book ''Assessment of Men, Selection of Personnel for the Office of Strategic Services''.
These included a team of young CIA officers airdropped into to China who were ambushed, and CIA funds being used to set up a global heroin empire in Burma's Golden Triangle following a betrayal by another double agent.
Currently, the CIA reports to the Director of National Intelligence.
US army general Hoyt Vandenberg, the CIG's second director, created the Office of Special Operations (OSO), as well as the Office of Reports and Estimates (ORE).
William J. Casey, a member of Ford's Intelligence Advisory Board, would press Bush to allow a team from outside the CIA to produce Soviet military estimates as a "Team B".
The CIA had dispersed three rifles, and three .38 revolvers, but things paused as Kennedy assumed office.
13 days later he was assassinated.
According to unnamed CIA sources, while first responders, military personnel and volunteers were conducting rescue efforts at the World Trade Center site, a special CIA team was searching the rubble for both digital and paper copies of classified documents.
In 1997 the CIA's new director George Tenet would promise a new working agency by 2002.
"We're looking at chat rooms and things that didn't exist five years ago, and trying to stay ahead."
Nixon had told Helms that he was on the way out, and promised that Helms could stay on until his 60th birthday, the mandatory retirement age.
The CIA was involved in anti-Communist activities in Burma, Guatemala, and Laos.
The Embassy bombing had taken the life of the CIA's Beirut Station Chief, Ken Haas.
It triggered the CIA to make "substantial and sweeping changes" to prevent "a catastrophic systemic intelligence failure."
These weapons have been reportedly falling into hands of extremists, such as al-Nusra Front and ISIL.
Two weeks after news reports of the slaughter, the CIA sent a U-2 to photograph it, a week later the CIA completed its report on the matter.
On 25 June, a CIA plane bombed Guatemala City, destroying the government's main oil reserves.
This shortly became public.
Hart reported to Washington that Seoul station was hopeless, and could not be salvaged.
Curveball was a known liar, and the sole source for the mobile chemical weapons factories.
Several investigations (e.g., the Church Committee, Rockefeller Commission, Pike Committee, etc.)
These two public incidents triggered Congress to clamp down on CIA funding even more, banning them from soliciting funds from third parties to fund the Contras.
The Inspector General of the CIA investigated the Bay of Pigs.
CIA operatives and U.S. special operations troops have trained and armed nearly 10,000 rebel fighters at a cost of $1&nbsp;billion a year.
This became the Family Jewels.
Thus the two areas of responsibility for the CIA were covert action and covert intelligence.
The primary training facility for the Office of Communications is Warrenton Training Center, located near Warrenton, Virginia.
The rollup would happen as predicted, 37 CIA sources recognized by their Thuraya satellite telephones provided for them by the CIA.
Syrian forces surrounded the embassy and rousted Agent Stone, who confessed and subsequently made history as the first American diplomat expelled from an Arab nation.
