The restoration was accompanied by a crucial restructuring of management, whereby the park was subdivided into zones, to each of which a supervisor was designated, responsible for maintaining restored areas.
It is also one of the most filmed locations in the world.
The two most renowned spots for boulderers are at Rock and Cat Rock; others include Dog Rock, Duck Rock, Rock N' Roll Rock, and Beaver Rock, near the south end of the park.
On December 31, 2009, the restaurant closed its doors in what was expected to be a permanent closure, but it reopened on April 24, 2014 after a major renovation.
Supporters of the trade say it needs to be reformed, not shut down, and that carriage drivers deserve a raise, which the city has not authorized since 1989.
Frederick Law Olmsted and Calvert Vaux developed what came to be known as the "Greensward Plan", which was selected as the winning design.
Since the 1960s, there has been a grassroots campaign to restore the park's loop drives to their original car-free state.
The park contains several natural-looking lakes and ponds that have been created artificially, extensive walking tracks, bridle paths, two ice-skating rinks (one of which is a swimming pool in July and August), the Central Park Zoo, the Central Park Conservatory Garden, a wildlife sanctuary, a large area of natural woods, a  billion-gallon reservoir with an encircling running track, and an outdoor amphitheater, the Delacorte Theater, which hosts the "Shakespeare in the Park" summer festivals.
According to Olmsted, the park was "of great importance as the first real Park made in this country—a democratic development of the highest significance…", a view probably inspired by his stay and various trips in Europe during 1850 (he had visited several parks during these trips and was particularly impressed by Birkenhead Park and Derby Arboretum in England).
While planting and land form in much of the park appear natural, it is in fact almost entirely landscaped.
City Parks Foundation has offered Central Park Summerstage since 1985, a series of free performances including music, dance, spoken word, and film presentations around this time of year as well, often featuring famous performers; the Summerstage facility also has non-free concerts that are branded under different names.
Major redesigning and construction also was carried out: for instance, the Croton Lower Reservoir was filled in so the Great Lawn could be created.
During the late 1960s the park became the venue for rallies and cultural events such as the "Love-ins" and "Be-Ins" of the period.
The Ramble and Lake south of the Great Lawn covers nearly .
The Central Park Zoo is part of a system of four zoos and one aquarium that is managed by the Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS), and is accredited by the Association of Zoos and Aquariums (AZA).
In 1996, the Conservancy embarked on its single most ambitious landscape restoration: the overhaul of the 55 acres including and surrounding the Great Lawn and Turtle Pond (formerly the Great Lawn and the Belvedere Lake).
The attractions along this street include the Victorian Gardens Amusement Park, the Central Park Carousel and the Central Park Mall.
During the same time, Bank Rock Bridge, also called Cabinet Bridge, across the mouth of the cove was recreated in carved oak with cast-iron panels and pine decking, its original materials, following Vaux's original design of 1859–60.
A famous painting by Gifford Beal shows a picture of West Drive depicted with a horse and buggy.
In 1979, Parks Commissioner Gordon Davis established the Office of Central Park Administrator, appointing to the position the executive director of another citizen organization, the Central Park Task Force.
It is the oldest rock in the Canadian Shield, the most ancient part of the North American tectonic plate.
The majority of entrances did not receive an inscription, however, until a park restoration effort in 1999.
Located at the Loeb Boathouse on The Lake, it was designed in 1874, destroyed in 1950, and rebuilt in 1954 on the East Side between 74th and 75th Streets.
Replacements for the carriage horses may include electric vintage cars.
The work was extensively documented with technical drawings and photographs.
* ''Duke Ellington Memorial'' (dedicated in 1997), by sculptor Robert Graham, near Fifth Avenue and 110th Street, in the Duke Ellington Circle
The Central Park Conservancy was founded the following year, to support the office and initiatives of the administrator, and to provide consistent leadership through a self-perpetuating, citizen-based board that also would include as ex-officio trustees, the Parks Commissioner, the Central Park Administrator, and mayoral appointees.
The drive passes by the Central Park Zoo around 63rd Street and the Metropolitan Museum of Art around the 80th to 84th Street area.
The park is considerably safer in the 21st century, though during prior periods it was the site of numerous muggings and rapes.
No longer were parks to be used only for walks and picnics in an idyllic environment but now also for sports and similar recreation.
The Delacorte Theater is the summer performing venue of the New York Shakespeare Festival, where most, although not all, of the plays presented are by William Shakespeare, and the performances are generally regarded as being of high quality since its founding by Joseph Papp in 1962.
In 2015, Mayor Bill de Blasio announced the permanent closure of West and East Drives north of 72nd Street to vehicular traffic as it was proven that closing the roads did not adversely impact traffic.
For those recreations, the Conservancy decided to commission Maw and Company, Minton's successor in Stoke-on-Trent, England.
Central Park has twenty-one playgrounds for children located throughout the park; the largest, at , is Heckscher Playground named for August Heckscher.
The CRCA is a USA Cycling sanctioned amateur cycling club.
Made of native pine and cedar, it was disassembled and rebuilt in the U.S. as Sweden's exhibit for the 1876 Centennial Exposition in Philadelphia.
The carousel originally was installed in Coney Island in Brooklyn.
In 1858, Frederick Law Olmsted and Calvert Vaux, a landscape architect and an architect, respectively, won a design competition to improve and expand the park with a plan they titled the "Greensward Plan".
The ''Greensward Plan''s purpose of creating an idyllic landscape was combined with Moses' vision of a park to be used for recreational purposes: 19 playgrounds, 12 ball fields, and handball courts were constructed.
Protests from People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals, and celebrities including Alec Baldwin, Alecia Beth Moore and Cheryl Hines have raised the issue's profile.
Under the leadership of the Central Park Conservancy, the park's reclamation began with modest, but highly significant first steps, addressing needs that could not be met within the existing structure and resources of the parks department.
Execution of the Greensward Plan was the responsibility of a number of individuals, including Jacob Wrey Mould (architect), Ignaz Anton Pilat (master gardener), George E. Waring, Jr. (engineer), and Andrew Haswell Green (politician), in addition to Olmsted and Vaux.
All of this changed in 1934, when Republican Fiorello La Guardia was elected mayor of New York City and unified the five park-related departments then in existence.
Central Park's glaciated rock outcroppings attract climbers, especially boulderers; Manhattan's bedrock, a glaciated schist, protrudes from the ground frequently and considerably in some parts of Central Park.
Several volunteer citizen groups emerged, intent upon reclaiming the park by fundraising and organizing volunteer initiatives.
From there the line curves southwest under the park, and heads west under 104th Street, and the BMT Broadway Line has a station at Fifth Avenue and 59th Street.
a pick-up game of softball or soccer, which commandeered open space and excluded others), and illicit activities were taking place in the park.
Much of the first statuary placed was of authors and poets, in an area now known as Literary Walk.
As such, they have become a symbolic institution of the city.
Such vehicles have more recently offered visitors a more dynamic way in which to view the park; covering three to ten times the distance of a typical Central Park horse carriage ride, pedicabs have become very popular with visitors and New Yorkers alike in the last five years; also, they are being eyed as another replacement for the carriage horses.
As crime has declined in the park and in the rest of New York City, many of the negative perceptions have begun to wane.
The building was originally a model schoolhouse built in Sweden.
It operates a rapid-response bicycle patrol, particularly during major events such as the New York City Marathon, the 1998 Goodwill Games, and concerts in the park.
Between 1860 and 1873, most of the major hurdles to construction were overcome and the park was substantially completed.
The carriages have appeared in many films, and the first female horse and carriage driver, Maggie Cogan, appeared in a Universal newsreel in 1967.
More gunpowder was used to clear the area than was used at the Battle of Gettysburg during the American Civil War.
The park is maintained by the Central Park Conservancy, a private, not-for-profit organization that manages the park under a contract with the New York City Department of Parks and Recreation, in which the president of the Conservancy is ''ex officio'' Administrator of Central Park.
The Conservancy is a non-profit organization that contributes 75 percent of Central Park's $65 million annual budget and is responsible for all basic care of the 843-acre park.
The completed Bethesda Terrace Arcade was unveiled to much fanfare in March 2007.
Safety measures hold the number of crimes in the park to fewer than one hundred per year, down from approximately 1,000 in the early 1980s.
Several arrests were made shortly after the attacks, but it was not until 2006 that a civil suit against the city for failing to provide police protection was finally settled.
Paris, London, Beijing, and several U.S. cities have banned carriage horses.
The city was experiencing economic and social changes, with some residents leaving the city and moving to the suburbs in the wake of increased crime.
Many other professional races are run in the park, including the recent, (2008), USA Men's 8k Championships.
In 2005, safety measures held the number of crimes in the park to fewer than one hundred per year (down from approximately 1,000 in the early 1980s).
Covering an area of  between 86th and 96th Streets, the reservoir reaches a depth of more than  in places and contains about  of water.
Increasingly through the 1970s, the park became a venue for events of unprecedented scale, including rallies, demonstrations, festivals, and concerts.
The Park was established in 1857 on  of city-owned land.
The system was functioning so well that in 2006 the conservancy created the Historic Harlem Parks initiative, providing horticultural and maintenance support and mentoring in Morningside Park, St. Nicholas Park, Jackie Robinson Park, and Marcus Garvey Park.
Moses also managed to secure funds from the New Deal program, as well as donations from the public.
Another dramatic change was Moses's removal of the "Hoover Valley" shantytown, whose site was transformed into the  Great Lawn.
The state appointed a Central Park Commission to oversee the development of the park, and in 1857 the commission held a landscape design contest.
Only Fifth Avenue along the park's eastern border retains its name; the other streets bordering the park (110th Street, 59th Street, and Eighth Avenue, respectively) change names while they are adjacent to the park.
A team of seven conservation technicians cleaned and repaired more than 14,000 original tiles by hand.
Fordham gneiss, which consists of metamorphosed igneous rocks, was formed a billion years ago, during what is known as the Grenville orogeny that occurred during the creation of an ancient super-continent.
Resodding, and fifty new trees, 3,500 shrubs and 3,000 ground cover plants specified by Philip Winslow followed in 1986, most of which, having matured into dense blocks, were removed in 2008, to make way for plants native to the United States; meanwhile, the Minton encaustic tiles of the ceiling of the arcade between the flanking stairs, designed by Mould, were removed in 1987, cleaned, restored, completed with additional new tiles and reinstalled in 2007.
By 1988, Conservancy volunteers logged more than 13,000 hours in the Park, with the organization's volunteer program winning a citation for excellence from the White House.
During some 2004 protests, the organization United for Peace and Justice wanted to hold a rally on the Great Lawn during the Republican National Convention.
The names were chosen to represent the broad diversity of New York City's trades; for example, "Mariner's Gate" for the entrance at 85th Street and Central Park West.
One of these groups, the Central Park Community Fund, commissioned a study of the park's management.
Permission to hold issue-centered rallies in Central Park, similar to the be-ins of the 1960s, has been met with increasingly stiff resistance from the city.
Made by Minton and Company, a leading 19th Century ceramic manufacturer in England, the ceiling tiles are divided into 49 panels, each containing 324 tiles.
The main lake is the Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis Reservoir, so named since 1994.
* ''Balto'' (1925), a statue of Balto, the sled dog who became famous during the 1925 serum run to Nome
It is also one of the most filmed locations in the world.
Central Park was once a very dangerous place, especially after dark, as measured by crime statistics.
* ''Alice in Wonderland Margaret Delacorte Memorial'' (1959), a sculpture of Alice by sculptor José de Creeft, landscape architect Hideo Sasaki, and designer Ferando Texidor at the Central Park Conservatory Pond (40.77504°N, 73.966543°W)
Another ambitious restoration effort began in 2004, when Conservancy staff and contractors worked together to refurbish the 15,876 Minton tiles that hang on the ceiling of the Bethesda Arcade.
The cascade, where the Gill empties into the lake, was reconstructed to approximate its dramatic original form, inspired by paintings of Asher B. Durand.
However, the drive is also dangerous; in 2014, a  stretch of West Drive was considered to be "the most dangerous section of Central Park" for pedestrians, with bike crashes along the drive leaving 15 people injured.
Indoor attractions include Belvedere Castle with its nature center, the Swedish Cottage Marionette Theatre, and the historic Carousel.
Some of the sculptures are:
A total of 29 sculptures by sculptors such as Augustus Saint-Gaudens, Emma Stebbins, and John Quincy Adams Ward have been erected over the years, most donated by individuals or organizations.
Since Central Park was not part of the original Commissioners' Plan of 1811, John Randel, Jr., surveyed the grounds.
It is bordered on the north by Central Park North, on the south by Central Park South, on the west by Central Park West, and on the east by Fifth Avenue.
By the following year, the Chess & Checkers House and Frisbee Hill had been restored; thousands of shrubs and flowers asserted the Park as a horticultural showpiece.
It was feared they would be used for food by impoverished Depression-era New Yorkers.
It generally straddles the east side of the park along Fifth Avenue.
There is also an all-volunteer ambulance service, the Central Park Medical Unit, that provides free emergency medical service to patrons of Central Park and the surrounding streets.
Central Park also constitutes its own United States census tract, number 143.
The Public Theater's annual Shakespeare in the Park festival was settled in the Delacorte Theater (1961), and summer performances were instituted on the Sheep Meadow, and then on the Great Lawn by the New York Philharmonic Orchestra and the Metropolitan Opera.
Efforts culminated in the restoration of the Mall and Concert Ground, Harlem Meer, and the Ravine in the North Woods.
The Reservoir is best known to New Yorkers for the jogging track around it.
Restoration of further sections of the Lake's shoreline landscapes was undertaken, and the first renovated sections were opened to visitors in April 2008.
Construction combined the modern with the ageless: up-to-date steam-powered equipment and custom-designed wheeled tree moving machines augmented massive numbers of unskilled laborers wielding shovels.
In Central Park, Manhattan schist and Hartland schist, which are both metamorphosed sedimentary rock, are exposed in various outcroppings.
Some of these events nevertheless became milestones in the social history of the park and in the cultural history of the city.
"Years of poor management and inadequate maintenance had turned a masterpiece of landscape architecture into a virtual dustbowl by day and a danger zone by night", in the opinion of Douglas Blonsky, a president of the Central Park Conservancy.
At the northern end of the park, at 110th Street, the Harlem Meer, named in honor of one of the first communities in the region, covers nearly .
That year, the Dairy (which was originally designed as a refreshment stand and rest spot) was transformed into the Park's first visitors center, with the Conservancy using it to revitalize public interest in the Park through exhibits, music series and children's programs.
Harlem Meer also allows visitors to fish, provided that they release the fish later.
Rowboats and kayaks are rented on an hourly basis at the Loeb Boathouse, which also houses a restaurant overlooking the Lake.
According to Census 2000, the park's population is eighteen people, twelve male and six female, with a median age of 38.5 years, and a household size of 2.33, over 3 households.
The Park drives are used as the home course for the Century Road Club Association's racing series.
The tiles sat in storage for more than 20 years until the Conservancy received a generous private donation for their restoration.
The Parks Department, suffering from budget cuts, responded by opening the park to any and all activities that would bring people into it, without adequate oversight and maintenance follow-up.
(also known as the "Central Park Lower Loop") connects northbound traffic from Midtown at West Drive and Sixth Avenue near the 65th Street Transverse.
The New York City Subway's IND Eighth Avenue Line runs along the western edge of the park, with a transfer station to the IRT Broadway – Seventh Avenue Line at Columbus Circle.
A wooded area surrounded by oak, cypress, and beech trees, it was built after the completion of the southern portion of the park.
The project was the centerpiece of the Conservancy's three-year ''Wonder of New York Campaign'', which raised $71.5 million and also helped restore southern and westside landscapes, as well as the North Meadow.
The next few years would see the restoration of Bethesda Terrace and Fountain, Belvedere Castle, the East Green, and Cherry Hill plaza.
In 1850, the land was occupied by free blacks and Irish immigrants who had purchased land, where they raised livestock, including goats and pigs, built churches and cemeteries, and had lived as a community for close to 50 years.
The first landscape to be restored was the Sheep Meadow, primarily with funds provided by New York State.
The New York City Marathon finishes in Central Park outside Tavern on the Green.
Renovations continued through the early 2000s.
The Conservatory Water opened after a six-month restoration effort, with a $4 million project beginning on the 59th Street Pond, one of the Park's most visible and heavily used landscapes.
They also designed Brooklyn's Prospect Park.
Well-publicized incidents of sexual and confiscatory violence, such as the notorious 1989 "Central Park jogger" case, dissuaded many from visiting one of Manhattan's most scenic areas.
When the park was officially completed in 1873, more than 10 million cartloads of material had been transported out of the park, including soil and rocks, and more than four million trees, shrubs, and plants representing approximately 1,500 species were transplanted to the park.
In the earliest stages, invasive non-native plants like Japanese knotweed were eradicated, the slopes were regraded with added humus and protected with landscaping burlap to stabilize the slopes while root systems became established and leaf litter developed.
First, Bethesda Fountain, which had been dry for decades, was restored in 1980–81 and the Terrace was restored a year later, its stonework disassembled, cleaned, deteriorated surfaces removed, restored and patched and reset.
After the September 11 attacks, in a much-publicized event, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani went to the stables himself to ask the drivers to go back to work to help return a sense of normality.
Sheep grazed on the Sheep Meadow from the 1860s until 1934, when they were moved to Prospect Park in Brooklyn, and soon thereafter moved to a farm near Otisville, New York in the Catskill Mountains.
Originally designed by Calvert Vaux and Jacob Wrey Mould, the ceiling of the Arcade is lined by 15,876 elaborately patterned encaustic tiles.
Approximately 1,600 residents were evicted under the rule of eminent domain during 1857.
Built on a former swamp, it was designed by Olmsted and Vaux to accommodate boats in the summer and ice skaters in winter.
Central Park, which has been a National Historic Landmark since 1962, was designed by landscape architect and writer Frederick Law Olmsted and the English architect Calvert Vaux in 1858 after winning a design competition.
The famed New York City restaurant Tavern on the Green is located on the park's grounds at Central Park West and West 67th Street.
Cars were becoming commonplace, bringing with them their burden of pollution, and people's attitudes were beginning to change.
New York City has had carriage horses since they were revived in 1935.
In 2007, there were 3,000 volunteers compared to just under 250 paid workers in the park.
Central Park is the most visited urban park in the United States, with 40 million visitors in 2013.
According to a Municipal Art Society report, such buildings will cast shadows over the southern end of the park.
Around the turn of the 20th century, the park faced several new challenges.
By 1980, the Conservancy was also engaged in design efforts and long-term restoration planning, using both its own staff and external consultants.
In the warm months of mid-1966, two-term mayor of New York (1966–73) John V. Lindsay, himself an avid cyclist, initiated a weekend ban on automobiles in Central Park for the enjoyment of cyclists and public alike – a policy that continues.
The New York City Parks Enforcement Patrol also patrols Central Park.
In addition there are seven major lawns, the "meadows", and many minor grassy areas; some of them are used for informal or team sports and some set aside as quiet areas; there are a number of enclosed playgrounds for children.
Only three panels of replica tiles were needed to replace those that had been damaged beyond repair.
Located near the southwest corner of the park, the outcrop is roughly circular, about  wide and  tall with different east, west, and north faces.
Seneca Village and parts of the other communities were razed to make room for the park.
The Greensward Plan called for some 36 bridges, all designed by Vaux, ranging from rugged spans of Manhattan schist or granite, to lacy Neo-Gothic cast iron; no two are alike.
* ''Angel of the Waters'' at Bethesda Terrace by Emma Stebbins (1873), the first large public sculpture commission for an American woman
The park, which receives approximately 35 million visitors annually, is the most visited urban park in the United States.
Consequently, every zone of the park has a specific individual accountable for its day-to-day maintenance.
There are also four transverse roadways: 65th–66th Streets, 79th–81st Streets, 86th Street, and 96th Street.
Vandalism, territorial use (e.g.
The park is home to several competitive running clubs, including Central Park Track Club.
In addition, when the commission finally deposited its report for public examination on October 4, 1855, taxpayers learned that they would be paying $5 million just for the park land, more than three times what they had been told the completed park as a whole would cost.
One such outcrop is Rat Rock at , named after the rats that used to swarm there at night but also known as 'Umpire Rock'.
The zoo is home to an indoor rainforest, a leafcutter ant colony, a chilled penguin house, and a polar bear pool.
Evidence of past glaciers are visible throughout the park in the form of ''glacial erratics'' (large boulders dropped by the receding glacier) and north-south glacial striations visible on stone outcroppings.
The Great Lawn project was completed in 1997, featuring new amenities to encourage both passive and active recreation and nature appreciation.
It was originally the sheepfold that housed the sheep that grazed Sheep Meadow, built to a design by Calvert Vaux in 1870.
There are four plazas on each corner of the park: Frederick Douglass Circle on the northwest, Duke Ellington Circle on the northeast, Columbus Circle at the southwest, and Grand Army Plaza at the southeast.
It is known as the "Elite Carriage Parade", because at the time of the park's opening, only 5 percent of the city was able to afford the carriage; of this, Walt Whitman said that the carriage parade was an "...an impressive, rich, interminable circus on a grand scale, full of action and color", a quote written by Roy Rosenzweig and Elizabeth Blackmar in ''The Park and the People''.
According to historian Robert Caro:
As the city expanded northward up Manhattan, people were drawn to the few existing open spaces, mainly cemeteries, to get away from the noise and chaotic life in the city.
Courts upheld the refusal.
Central Park is home to seven bodies of water, all artificial.
Central Park is one of the most famous sightseeing spots in New York.
The current Central Park Carousel, installed in 1951, is one of the largest merry-go-rounds in the United States.
Before the construction of the park could start, the area had to be cleared of its inhabitants.
It effectively oversees the work of both the private and public employees under the authority of the Central Park administrator (publicly appointed), who reports to the parks commissioner, conservancy's president.
Cherry Hill, however, did not get fully restored until 1998.
In 2006, the Conservancy completed a nine-month renovation of the Mall in a project that returned the landscape to its original character and ensured the protection of its great American Elms.
The only remaining surveying bolt from his survey is still visible; it is embedded in a rock just north of the present Dairy and the 65th Street Transverse, and south of Center Drive.
In the summer of 2007 the first phase of a restoration of the Lake and its shoreline plantings commenced, with replanting using native shrubs and understory trees around the northern end of the Lake, from Bank Rock Bay— a narrow cove in the northwest corner that had become a silted-up algae-covered stand of aggressively invasive ''Phragmites'' reeds— to Bow Bridge, which received replicas of its four original Italianate cast-iron vases, overspilling with annuals.
The street is renowned for its country scenery and free concerts.
To tend to those plants, more than 1,900 volunteers contributed more than 4,000 hours of work in the Park.
Central Park is surrounded by four roadways: Central Park North, Central Park South, Central Park West, and Fifth Avenue.
On June 11, 2000, following the Puerto Rican Day Parade, gangs of drunken men sexually assaulted women in the park.
The street generally goes east and then north forming the bottom part of the Central Park loop.
It became a restaurant as part of a 1934 renovation of the park under Robert Moses, New York City's Commissioner of Parks.
The fifty-eight hand-carved horses and two chariots were made by Solomon Stein and Harry Goldstein in 1908.
It is 2.5 miles (4&nbsp;km) long between 59th Street (Central Park South) and 110th Street (Central Park North), and is 0.5 miles (0.8&nbsp;km) wide between Fifth Avenue and Central Park West.
During this period, more than  of topsoil had been transported in from New Jersey, because the original soil was neither fertile nor sufficiently substantial to sustain the various trees, shrubs, and plants called for by the ''Greensward Plan''.
The bridge, built in 1860 of white oak with decorative openwork panels of cast iron, has been recreated in steel clad in ornamental cast iron facings, with a wooden deck.
The "crosstown" commercial traffic was entirely concealed in sunken roadways (today called "transverses"), screened with densely planted shrub belts so as to maintain a rustic ambiance.
* ''King Jagiello'', a bronze monument on the east end of Turtle Pond
Landscaped cemeteries, such as Mount Auburn (Cambridge, Massachusetts) and Green-Wood (Brooklyn, New York) had set examples of idyllic, naturalistic landscapes.
Pedicabs operate mostly in the southern part of the park, the same part as horse carriages.
Legislation was proposed in October 2014 to conduct a study to make the park car-free in summer 2015.
There are four different types of bedrock in Manhattan.
The Lake was the last of Central Park's bodies of water to be renovated by the Central Park Conservancy, in a project to enhance both its ecological and scenic aspects.
Construction began the same year and the park's first area was opened to the public in the winter of 1858.
In the southeast corner is the Pond, with an area of .
Robert Moses was given the task of cleaning up the park.
Moses, about to become one of the most powerful men in New York City, took over what was essentially a relic, a leftover from a bygone era.
One of the main reasons for this was the lack of interest from the Tammany Hall political machine, which was the largest political force in New York at the time.
