''Nautilus'', unusually, possesses four nephridia, none of which are connected to the pericardial cavities.
The size of the tentacle is related to the size of the buccal cavity; larger, stronger tentacles can hold prey as small bites are taken from it; with more numerous, smaller tentacles, prey is swallowed whole, so the mouth cavity must be larger.
(Endogastric mean the shell is curved so as the ventral or lower side is longitudinally concave (belly in); exogastric means the shell is curved so as the ventral side is longitudinally convex (belly out) allowing the funnel to be pointed backwards beneath the shell.)
**** Family † Trachyteuthididae
Competitive pressure from fish is thought to have forced the shelled forms into deeper water, which provided an evolutionary pressure towards shell loss and gave rise to the modern coleoids, a change which led to greater metabolic costs associated with the loss of buoyancy, but which allowed them to recolonise shallow waters.
During mate competition males also participate in a technique called flushing.
Cephalopods occupy most of the depth of the ocean, from the abyssal plain to the sea surface.
* Subclass Coleoidea (410.0 Ma-Rec)
''Nautilus'' tends to be considered an outgroup, with ''Vampyroteuthis'' forming an outgroup to other squid; however in one analysis the nautiloids, octopus and teuthids plot as a polytomy.
** Order † Plectronocerida: the ancestral cephalopods from the Cambrian Period
They have a mixture of toxic digestive juices, some of which are manufactured by symbiotic algae, which they eject from their salivary glands onto their captured prey held in their mouth.
Another recent system divides all cephalopods into two clades.
** Order † Pseudorthocerida ()
*** Superorder Decapodiformes (also known as Decabrachia or Decembranchiata)
** Order Nautilida (extant; 410.5 Ma to present)
Like most molluscs, cephalopods use hemocyanin, a copper-containing protein, rather than hemoglobin, to transport oxygen.
Nautiluses are the only extant cephalopods with a true external shell.
The size difference between the posterior and anterior ends of this organ control the speed of the jet the organism can produce.
As a result, their blood is colorless when deoxygenated and turns blue when exposed to air.
and they can out-accelerate most fish.
An indication of sexual maturity of females is the development of brachial photophores to attract mates.
A '''cephalopod''' (pronounced ) is any member of the molluscan class '''Cephalopoda''' (Greek plural , ''kephalópoda''; "head-feet").
Though not all species use a hectocotylus; for example Nautilus releases a spadix.
Molecular estimates for clade divergence vary.
About 800 living species of cephalopods have been identified.
*** Order † Phragmoteuthida ()
The development of a cephalopod embryo can be greatly affected by temperature, oxygen saturation, pollution, light intensity, and salinity.
Octopods only have four pairs of sucker-coated arms, as the name suggests, though developmental abnormalities can modify the number of arms expressed.
:: Order † Ascocerida
Cephalopods have advanced vision, can detect gravity with statocysts, and have a variety of chemical sense organs.
After the transfer of genetic material to the following generation, the adult cephalopods then die.
In coleoids they number eight or ten.
:: Order † Ellesmerocerida   Plectronocerida subsequently split off as separate order.
Other cephalopods use ammonium in a similar way, storing the ions (as ammonium chloride) to reduce their overall density and increase buoyancy.
The canal delivers the excreta to a bladder-like renal sac, and also resorbs excess water from the filtrate.
The ejected cloud of melanin is usually mixed, upon expulsion, with mucus, produced elsewhere in the mantle, and therefore forms a thick cloud, resulting in visual (and possibly chemosensory) impairment of the predator, like a smokescreen.
In the Coleoidea, the molluscan shell has been internalized or is absent, whereas in the Nautiloidea, the external shell remains.
Mate choice is seen in cuttlefish species, where females prefer some males over others, though characteristics of the preferred males are unknown.
The inking behaviour of cephalopods has led to a common name of "inkfish", primarily used in fisheries science and the fishing industry, paralleling the terms white fish, oily fish, and shellfish.
To accommodate the rapid changes in water intake and expulsion, the orifices are highly flexible and can change their size by a factor of twenty; the funnel radius, conversely, changes only by a factor of around 1.5.
These juices separate the flesh of their prey from the bone or shell.
There is a trade-off with gill size regarding lifestyle.
The same is true of the chitinous gladius of squid and octopuses.
*** Genus † ''Jeletzkya''
Most cephalopods possess a single pair of large nephridia.
They are usually preserved within the cephalopod's body chamber, commonly in conjunction with the mandibles; but this need not always be the case; many radulae are preserved in a range of settings in the Mason Creek.
Jet thrust in cephalopods is controlled primarily by the maximum diameter of the funnel orifice (or, perhaps, the average diameter of the funnel) and the diameter of the mantle cavity.
Subsequently, the organs shrink again; at this point the organism may start to break up into fragments.
:: Order † Oncocerida
Interestingly, the shelled coleoids do not form a clade or even a paraphyletic group.
Cephalopods often mate several times, which influences males to mate longer with females that have previously, nearly tripling the amount of contractions of the mantle.
The rate of release is lowest in the shelled cephalopods ''Nautilus'' and ''Sepia'' as a result of their using nitrogen to fill their shells with gas to increase buoyancy.
Cephalopods are found in all the oceans of Earth.
In ''Sepia'', which has an internal shell, the ectoderm forms an invagination whose pore is sealed off before this organic framework is deposited.
The Bactritida, a Silurian&ndash;Triassic group of orthocones, are widely held to be paraphyletic to the coleoids and ammonoids, that is, the latter groups arose from within the Bactritida.
However, a more sophisticated behaviour has been observed, in which the cephalopod releases a cloud, with a greater mucus content, that approximately resembles the cephalopod that released it (this decoy is referred to as a Pseudomorph).
Growth in juveniles is usually allometric, whilst adult growth is isometric.
The jet velocity in ''Nautilus'' is much slower than in coleoids, but less musculature and energy is involved in its production.
Numerical modeling shows that chromatic aberration can yield useful chromatic information through the dependence of image acuity on accommodation.
The Incirrina have either a pair of rod-shaped stylets or no vestige of an internal shell, and some squid also lack a gladius.
** Order † Ascocerida ()
Cephalopods, as the name implies, have muscular appendages extending from their heads and surrounding their mouths.
Some of the most notable uses of cephalopods in popular culture include Cthulhu, Squidward Tentacles, and the cephalopod-like robotic arms of Doctor Octopus.
:: Suborder † Goniatitina
**** † Belemnoidea: Belemnites and kin
It is not certain whether bioluminescence is actually of epithelial origin or if it is a bacterial production.
Radulae are usually difficult to detect, even when they are preserved in fossils, as the rock must weather and crack in exactly the right fashion to expose them; for instance, radulae have only been found in nine of the 43 ammonite genera, and they are rarer still in non-ammonoid forms: only three pre-Mesozoic species possess one.
To ensure the fertilization of the eggs, female cephalopods release a sperm-attracting peptide through the gelatinous layers of the egg to direct the spermatozoa.
: Subclass † Nautiloidea     Nautiloidea in the restricted sense.
When the mantle contracts, water is forced through the gills, which lie between the mantle cavity and the funnel.
** Order † Ceratitida ()
After a couple of months, these are only recognisable as flattened dark stains — although in some cases the eye lenses can remain intact for up to a year.
Changes in the size of the orifice are used most at intermediate velocities.
Surprisingly, given their ability to change color, all octopodes and most cephalopods are considered to be color blind.
Cirrate octopods have arch-shaped cartilaginous fin supports, which are sometimes referred to as a "shell vestige" or "gladius".
The blanket octopus male is an example of sexual-evolutionary dwarfism; females grow 10,000 to 40,000 times larger than the males and the sex ratio between males and females can be distinguished right after hatching of the eggs.
The velocity of the organism can be accurately predicted for a given mass and morphology of animal.
Nutrients and waste materials are exchanged between the gut and the digestive gland through a pair of connections linking the gland to the junction of the stomach and caecum.
The water's expulsion through the funnel can be used to power jet propulsion.
Deep-water cephalopods, whilst rare, have been found in the Lower Ordovician—but only in high-latitude waters.
The initiation of copulation begins when the male catches a female and wraps his arm around her, either in a ‘male to female neck’ position or mouth to mouth position, depending on the species.
In 2015, a novel mechanism for spectral discrimination in cephalopods was described.
Shells that are "lost" may be lost by resorption of the calcium carbonate component.
The water flow is controlled by contractions of the radial and circular mantle cavity muscles.
The cephalopod radula consists of multiple symmetrical rows of up to nine teeth &ndash; thirteen in fossil classes.
Reproductive strategies differ between cephalopod species.
:: Suborder † Anarcestina
Aggressive spawning is an activity that most cephalopods engage in; a protein in the male capsule sheath stimulates this behavior.
In giant pacific octopus, large eggs are laid in a den; it will often take several days to lay all of them.
The morphological construction gives cephalopod eyes the same performance as sharks'; however, their construction differs, as cephalopods lack a cornea, and have an everted retina.
Thus their paralarvae do not extensively use their fins (which are less efficient at low Reynolds numbers) and primarily use their jets to propel themselves upwards, whereas large adult cephalopods tend to swim less efficiently and with more reliance on their fins.
are neutrally buoyant or nearly so; in fact most cephalopods are about 2-3% denser than seawater), they achieve this in different ways.
They may terminate in a broadened, sucker-coated club.
Most cephalopod males develop a hectocotylus, an arm tip which is capable of transferring their spermatozoa into the female mantel cavity.
They also produce visual pigments throughout their body, and may sense light levels directly from their body.
One includes nautilus and most fossil nautiloids.
The teeth may be homodont (i.e.
Decapods such as cuttlefish and squid have five pairs.
Female cephalopods lay eggs in clutches; each egg is composed of a protective coat to ensure the safety of the developing embryo when released into the water column.
The similarity of the early shelled cephalopod ''Plectronoceras'' to some gastropods was used in support of this view.
:: Order † Intejocerida
The gills, which are much more efficient than those of other molluscs, are attached to the ventral surface of the mantle cavity.
Their diversity is greatest near the equator (~40 species retrieved in nets at 11°N by a diversity study) and decreases towards the poles (~5 species captured at 60°N).
** Order † Orthocerida ()
One species, ''Todarodes pacificus'', has been observed spreading tentacles in a flat fan shape with a mucus film between the individual tentacles while another, ''Sepioteuthis sepioidea,'' has been observed putting the tentacles in a circular arrangement.
The brain is protected in a cartilaginous cranium.
Females can store sperm in two places (1) the buccal cavity where recently mated males place their spermatophores, and (2) the internal sperm-storage receptacles where sperm packages from previous males are stored.
**** Order Octopoda: octopus
The organ is reduced or even vestigial in certain octopus species and is absent in ''Spirula''.
The shorter four pairs are termed ''arms'', and are involved in holding and manipulating the captured organism.
After death, if undisturbed, cephalopods decay relatively quickly.
The longer two, termed ''tentacles'', are actively involved in capturing prey; they can lengthen rapidly (in as little as 15 milliseconds).
Females of the octopus genus ''Argonauta'' secrete a specialised paper-thin eggcase in which they reside, and this is popularly regarded as a "shell", although it is not attached to the body of the animal.
However, some morphological evidence is difficult to reconcile with this view, and the redescription of ''Nectocaris pteryx'', which did not have a shell and appeared to possess jet propulsion in the manner of "derived" cephalopods, complicated the question of the order in which cephalopod features developed &ndash; provided ''Nectocaris'' is a cephalopod at all.
: Subclass † Endoceratoidea.
**** Order Teuthida: squid
** Order † Ammonitida ()
The efficiency of a propellor-driven waterjet (i.e.
Octopuses use their arms to explore their environment and can use them for depth perception.
The loss of the shell may also have resulted from evolutionary pressure to increase manoeuvrability, resulting in a more fish-like habit.
Some molecular phylogenies do not recover the mineralized coleoids (''Spirula'', ''Sepia'', and ''Metasepia'') as a clade; however, others do recover this more parsimonious-seeming clade, with ''Spirula'' as a sister group to ''Sepia'' and ''Metasepia'' in a clade that had probably diverged before the end of the Triassic.
The gills are also thought to be involved in excretion, with NH4+ being swapped with K+ from the seawater.
The three subclasses are traditional, corresponding to the three orders of cephalopods recognized by Bather.
: Subclass † Bactritoidea
The shorter arms lack this capability.
In a variety of marine organisms it is seen that females are larger in size compared to the males in some close related species.
'''Class Cephalopoda''' († indicates extinct groups)
Subsequent revisions include the establishment of three Upper Cambrian orders, the Plectronocerida, Protactinocerida and Yanhecerida; separation of the pseudorthocerids as the Pseudorthocerida, and elevating orthoceritoids as the Subclass Orthoceratoidea.
** Order † Oncocerida ()
Cephalopods employ a similar method of propulsion despite their increasing size (as they grow) changing the dynamics of the water in which they find themselves.
:: Suborder † Lytoceratina
Some squids have been shown to detect sound using their statocysts.
They quickly learn how to hunt, using encounters with prey to refine their strategies.
The salivary gland has a small tooth at its end which can be poked into an organism to digest it from within.
These exclusively marine animals are characterized by bilateral body symmetry, a prominent head, and a set of arms or tentacles (muscular hydrostats) modified from the primitive molluscan foot.
Flower and Kummel 1950, interjocerids included in the Endocerida.
*** Order † Aulacocerida ()
Water refills the cavity by entering not only through the orifices, but also through the funnel.
None of them can tolerate freshwater, but the brief squid, ''Lolliguncula brevis'', found in Chesapeake Bay,  is a notable partial exception in that it tolerates brackish water.
Flushing is used by both the male and female; it is the process of removing spermatophores of other males by continuously pumping strong jets of water into the buccal cavity of the female.
The coeloids have been thought to possibly represent a polyphyletic group, although this has not been supported by the rising body of molecular data.
Stearns (1992) suggested that in order to produce the largest possible number of viable offspring, spawning events depend on ecological environmental factors of the organism.
This action helps to pump the secreted waste into the sacs, to be released into the mantle cavity through a pore.
Unlike most modern cephalopods, most ancient varieties had protective shells.
An increase in the diversity of the coleoids and ammonoids is observed around the start of the Devonian period, and corresponds with a profound increase in fish diversity.
Some, such as ''Nautilus'', allow gas to diffuse into the gap between the mantle and the shell; others allow purer water to ooze from their kidneys, forcing out denser salt water from the body cavity; others, like some fish, accumulate oils in the liver; and some octopuses have a gelatinous body with lighter chlorine ions replacing sulfate in the body chemistry.
Cephalopods exchange gases with the seawater by forcing water through their gills, which are attached to the roof of the organism.
**** ?Order † Boletzkyida
Cells in the digestive gland directly release pigmented excretory chemicals into the lumen of the gut, which are then bound with mucus passed through the anus as long dark strings, ejected with the aid of exhaled water from the funnel.
The ancestors of coleoids (including most modern cephalopods) and the ancestors of the modern nautilus, had diverged by the Floian Age of the Early Ordovician Period, over 470 million years ago.
* Subclass † Ammonoidea: Ammonites ()
** Order † Bactritida ()
However, all molluscan shells are formed from the ectoderm (outer layer of the embryo); in cuttlefish (''Sepia'' spp.
This technique is used by the second male attempting to mate with a female.
The early embryological stages are reminiscent of ancestral gastropods and extant Monoplacophora.
Unlike most other molluscs, cephalopods do not have a morphologically distinct larval stage.
The shells develop from the ectoderm as an organic framework which is subsequently mineralised.
Cephalopods tend to concentrate ingested heavy metals in their body tissue.
Whilst jet propulsion is never the sole mode of locomotion, the stop-start motion provided by the jets continues to be useful for providing bursts of high speed - not least when capturing prey or avoiding predators.
Cephalopods are not broadcast spawners.
Flushing removes spermatophores in the buccal cavity that was placed there by the first mate by forcing water into the cavity.
The pattern of teeth repeats, but each row may not be identical to the last; in the octopus, for instance, the sequence repeats every five rows.
:: Order † Orthocerida  Includes orthocerids and pseudorthocerids
Because the volume of the tentacle remains constant, contracting the circular muscles decreases the radius and permits the rapid increase in length.
The jet is supplemented with fin motion; in the squid, the fins flap each time that a jet is released, amplifying the thrust; they are then extended between jets (presumably to avoid sinking).
Two important extinct taxa are the Ammonoidea (ammonites) and Belemnoidea (belemnites).
This strategy often results in the predator attacking the pseudomorph, rather than its rapidly departing prey.
These are used in feeding, mobility, and even reproduction.
Instead the juveniles are known as paralarvae.
Because protein (i.e.
One 'statistically robust' estimate has ''Nautilus'' diverging from ''Octopus'' at .
A single systemic heart then pumps the oxygenated blood through the rest of the body.
During the process of fertilization, the females use sperm provided by the male via external fertilization.
Fertilized egg clusters are neutrally buoyant depending at the depth that they were laid but can also be found in substrates such as sand, matrix of corals, or seaweed.
The tentacles and arms first appear at the hind part of the body, where the foot would be in other molluscs, and only later migrate towards the head.
For more information, see Inking behaviors.
Internal fertilization is seen only in octopods.
Most cephalopods rely on vision to detect predators and prey, and to communicate with one another.
The incorporation of ammonia is important for shell formation in terrestrial molluscs and other non-molluscan lineages.
which bind to its opsin.
The main organs involved with the release of this excess ammonium are the gills.
There are also stem group cephalopods of the traditional Ellesmerocerida that belong to neither clade.
), for example, an invagination of the ectoderm forms during the embryonic period, resulting in a shell (cuttlebone) that is internal in the adult.
Sexual maturation in male and female cephalopods can be observed internally by the enlargement of gonads and accessory glands.
These may include iridophores, leucophores, chromatophores and (in some species) photophores.
Cephalopods have also been known to climb out of their aquaria, maneuver a distance of the lab floor, enter another aquarium to feed on the crabs, and return to their own aquarium.
This could represent the origin of the two derived groups.
Mesozoic Ammonoidea (Arkel et al., 1957)
Neutral or positive buoyancy (i.e.
This relies on the exploitation of chromatic aberration (wavelength-dependence of focal length).
The ink sac solidifies around this point.
All living cephalopods have a two-part beak; most have a radula, although it is reduced in most octopus and absent altogether in ''Spirula''.
The authors claim this is the first evidence that cephalopod dermal tissues may possess the required combination of molecules to respond to light.
Most digestion, as well as the absorption of nutrients, occurs in the digestive gland, sometimes called the liver.
Filtered nitrogenous waste is produced in the pericardial cavity of the branchial hearts, each of which is connected to a nephridium by a narrow canal.
Chromatophores are colored pigment cells that expand and contract in accordance to produce color and pattern which they can use in a startling array of fashions.
These eggs are swelled with preivitelline fluid (PVF), a hypertonic fluid that prevents premature hatching.
Squid can expel up to 94% of the fluid within their cavity in a single jet thrust.
In the Early Palaeozoic, their range was far more restricted than today; they were mainly constrained to sublittoral regions of shallow shelves of the low latitudes, and usually occur in association with thrombolites.
In 2015, molecular evidence was published indicating that cephalopod chromatophores are photosensitive; reverse transcription polymerase chain reactions (RT-PCR) revealed transcripts encoding rhodopsin and retinochrome within the retinas and skin of the longfin inshore squid (''Doryteuthis pealeii''), and the common cuttlefish (''Sepia officinalis'') and broadclub cuttlefish (''Sepia latimanus'').
