Comparison of a particular animal's brain size with the expected brain size based on such an analysis provides an encephalization quotient that can be used as an indication of animal intelligence.
Like other placental mammals, cetaceans give birth to well-developed calves and nurse them with milk from their mammary glands.
Generally, underwater noise, which is still on the increase, is increasingly tied to strandings; because it impairs communication and sense of direction.
This additional oxygen storage is vital for deep diving, since beyond a depth around , the lung tissue is almost completely compressed by the water pressure.
The causes are not clear.
Cetacea are deliberate breathers who must be awake to inhale and exhale.
They showed dolphins real-time footage of themselves, recorded footage and another dolphin.
Whales direct lineage began in the early Eocene, more than 50 million years ago, with early artiodactyls.
While this particular study has not been replicated, dolphins later "passed" the mirror test.
Belugas are caught in the Amur Darya delta and their eastern coast and are transported domestically to aquaria or dolphinaria in Moscow, St. Petersburg and Sochi, or exported to countries such as Canada.
Vessel traffic also increases noise in the oceans.
*social bonds within a group, so that the pod follows a stranded animal
Duration is not necessarily a function of size.
They feed largely on fish and marine invertebrates; but a few, like the killer whale, feed on large mammals and birds, such as penguins and seals.
The baiji (Chinese river dolphin) has become "Possibly Extinct" in the past century, while the vaquita and Yangtze finless porpoise are ranked Critically Endangered by the International Union for Conservation of Nature.
The bony otic capsule, the petrosal, is connected to the skull with cartilage, so that it can swing independently.
Cetaceans usually bear one calf.
This is filled with air sacs and fat that aid in buoyancy and biosonar.
This gives stability during swimming at the expense of mobility.
), I baleen was used to construct houses in place of wood as roof support for winter houses, with half of the building buried under the ground.
Both species prefer deeper marine areas and species that live frequently or exclusively in coastal and shallow water areas.
Russia then became the largest provider.
The first efforts to protect whales came in 1931.
The hind limbs of these species were regressed and their body shapes resemble modern whales.
Almost all have a dorsal fin on their backs that can take on many forms depending on the species.
Dolphins are associated with other gods, such as Apollo, Dionysus and Aphrodite.
The ectotympanic offers a reduced attachment area for the tympanic membrane.
It appears to be a form of play and is most commonly seen off the coast of Argentina and South Africa.
'''Cetacea''' (), (from Latin ''cetus''  "whale" and Greek ''ketos'' "huge-fish") are a widely distributed and diverse clade of carnivorous, finned, aquatic marine mammals.
The cervical spine, found in all mammals, consists of seven vertebrae which, however, are reduced or fused.
They were said to love music - probably not least because of their own song - they saved, in the legends, famous musicians such as Arion of Lesbos from Methymna or Kairanos from Miletus.
Sounds can be disruptive at distances of more than .
Their wrists were stiffened and probably contributed to the typical build of flippers.
Sperm whales, beaked whales and right whales converge to a reduction in the number of chromosomes to 2n = 42.
Cetaceans use sound to communicate, using groans, moans, whistles, clicks or the 'singing' of the humpback whale.
The meat, blubber and oil of cetaceans have traditionally been used by indigenous peoples of the Arctic.
Some species are well adapted for diving to great depths.
This milk usually has a high fat content, ranging from 16 to 46%, causing the calf to increase rapidly in size and weight.
This has drastically affected their anatomy to be able to do so.
In 1971, SeaWorld captured a California gray whale calf in Mexico at Scammon's Lagoon.
In some small sperm whales, the malleus is fused with the ectotympanic.
Grey whales feed on bottom-dwelling mollusks.
The mother is solely responsible for brooding.
Damage varies across frequency and species.
Dolphins are hunted this way in several places around the world, including the Solomon Islands, the Faroe Islands, Peru and Japan (the most well-known practitioner).
All mention both live birth and suckling.
Dolphins are able to make very tight turns while swimming at high speeds.
Each breath can replace up to 90% of the total lung volume.
They were eventually released in South Africa.
Each population generally shares a distinct song, which evolves over time.
Since 2000, whale strandings frequently occurred following military sonar testing.
The pad passes anteriorly into the greatly enlarged mandibular foramen to reach in under the teeth and posteriorly to reach the thin lateral wall of the ectotympanic.
In many small cetaceans, suckling lasts for about four months.
They have conical teeth designed for catching fish or squid.
The United States Congress passed the Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972 sustain the marine mammal population.
Dolphins appear in Greek mythology.
Brucellosis affects almost all mammals.
In toothed whales, connective tissue exists in the melon as a head buckle.
A breeding pair of pygmy right whales were retained in a netted area.
Pod groups also hunt, often with other species.
Most molecular biological evidence suggests that hippos are the closest living relatives.
Because of their intelligence, they rescued multiple people from drowning.
Initially, organisms such as sharks and hagfish scavenge the soft tissues at a rapid rate over a period of months and as long as two years.
They were taken from the St. Lawrence River estuary until the late 1960s, after which they were predominantly taken from the Churchill River estuary until capture was banned in 1992.
Cetaceans appear to possess self-awareness.
For example, male sperm whales are up to 63% percent larger than females, and many beaked whales possess tusks used in competition among males.
They concluded that their evidence suggested self-awareness rather than social behavior.
His groundbreaking binomial system formed the basis of modern whale classification.
The second and third fingers display a proliferation of the finger members, a so-called hyperphalangy.
Once relentlessly hunted by commercial industries for their products, cetaceans are now protected by international law.
In many toothed whales, the depression in their skull is due to the formation of a large melon and multiple, asymmetric air bags.
Migratory species' reproductive sites often lie in the tropics and their feeding grounds in polar regions.
Cetacean eyes are set on the sides rather than the front of the head.
The Greeks paid tribute to both whales and dolphins with their own constellation.
This is called the 'spout' and varies across species in shape, angle and height.
This cycle is usually coupled with seasonal movements that can be observed in many species.
The primary threats to cetaceans come from people, both directly from whaling or drive hunting and indirect threats from fishing and pollution.
They also appear to enjoy biting the vortex rings, so that they burst into many separate bubbles and then rise quickly to the surface.
Fossil discoveries at the beginning of the 21st century confirmed this.
For most of the 20th century, Canada was the predominant source.
Other species were too rare, too shy or too big.
In 1995, Marten and Psarakos used video to test dolphin self-awareness.
The behavior in the group is aggressive only in situations of stress such as lack of food, but usually it is peaceful.
Years with increased strandings were associated with severe storms, which initiated cold water flows close to the coast.
Among the first whalers who described their experiences on whaling trips was Captain William Scoresby from Great Britain, who published the book ''Northern Whale Fishery'', describing the hunt for northern baleen whales.
Common anatomical features include similarities in the morphology of the posterior molars, and the bony ring on the temporal bone (bulla) and the involucre, a skull feature that was previously associated only with cetaceans.
This reproductive strategy provides a few offspring that have a high survival rate.
Cetaceans produce a number of vocalizations, notably the clicks and whistles of dolphins, the moaning songs of the humpback whale.
Smaller cetaceans, such as dolphins and porpoises, engage in complex play behavior, including such things as producing stable underwater toroidal air-core vortex rings or "bubble rings".
''Ambulocetus'' probably lived in mangroves in brackish water and fed in the riparian zone as a predator of fish and other vertebrates.
In the wild, females who survive infancy live 46 years on average and up to 70–80 years.
They are warm-blooded, i.e., they hold a nearly constant body temperature.
The transition from land to sea dates to about 49 million years ago, with the ''Ambulocetus'' ("running whale"), discovered in Pakistan.
In December 2001, the US Navy admitted partial responsibility for the beaching and the deaths of several marine mammals in March 2000.
Cetaceans belong to the order Cetartiodactyla (formed by combining Cetacea + Artiodactyla) and their closest living relatives are hippopotamuses and other hoofed mammals (camels, pigs, and ruminants), having diverged about 50 million years ago.
This means only species with pointed 'beaks' (such as dolphins) have good binocular vision forward and downward.
Corresponding findings are from Tethys Sea deposits in northern India and Pakistan.
As a result, the animals are more susceptible to disease and have fewer offspring.
Cetaceans show less definitive behavior of self-awareness, because they have no pointing ability.
The fishermen pull their nets hundreds of meters wide in a circle around the dolphin groups, in the expectation that they will net a tuna shoal.
Finally, sulfophilic bacteria reduce the bones releasing hydrogen sulfide enabling the growth of chemoautotrophic organisms, which in turn, support organisms such as mussels, clams, limpets and sea snails.
Baleen whales are largely monogamous within each reproductive period.
Food supplies are also reduced long-term by ocean acidification due to increased absorption of increased atmospheric carbon dioxide.
The braincase is concentrated through the nasal passage to the front and is correspondingly higher, with individual cranial bones that overlap.
Norway and Japan are committed to ending the ban.
This made it possible for whales to move around with the vertical tail hitting the water.
Hunting was replaced by whale and dolphin tourism.
The parvorder of Odontocetes - the toothed whales - include sperm whales, beaked whales, killer whales, dolphins and porpoises.
The southern right whale dolphin and the hourglass dolphin live only in the Southern Ocean.
Larger whales are also thought to engage in play.
Naval exercises with sonar regularly results in fallen cetaceans that wash up with fatal decompression.
The best known are mass strandings of pilot whales and sperm whales.
In the Bible especially, the leviathan plays a role as a sea monster.
There are around 89 species of cetaceans, and more than 70 belonging to Odontoceti.
Pods have a fixed hierarchy, with the priority positions determined by biting, pushing or ramming.
In 2013, SeaWorld's treatment of killer whales in captivity was the basis of the movie ''Blackfish'', which documents the history of Tilikum, a killer whale at SeaWorld Orlando, who had been involved in the deaths of three people.
In the second half of the 19th century, the explosive harpoon was invented, leading to a massive increase in the catch size.
Some rorquals can dive for up to 40 minutes, sperm whales between 60 and 90 minutes and bottlenose whales for two hours.
Baleen whales have bristles made of keratin instead of teeth.
Primates can touch the mark or the mirror, while cetaceans cannot, making their alleged self-recognition behavior less certain.
Whales were intensively hunted during this time; in the 1930s, 30,000 whales were killed.
They transformed from monsters into objects of wonder.
The rear limbs are vestigial, without connections to the spine.
In many places, bone elements are replaced by cartilage and even fat, thereby improving their hydrostatic qualities.
One of the first anatomical descriptions of the airways of a harbor porpoise dates from 1671 by John Ray.
They attack each other and their trainers as well.
Other cetaceans have fused neck vertebrae and are unable to turn their head at all.
In the 10th edition of Systema Naturae (1758), Swedish biologist and taxonomist Carl Linnaeus asserted that cetaceans were mammals and not fish.
North Sea whales were called Physeter, which was meant for the sperm whale ''Physter macrocephalus''.
While the teeth are divided into incisors, canines and molars among terrestrial archaeocetes, the teeth of modern cetaceans are brought into line with each other, which can be seen among the fish-eating odontocetes (transition from heterodont to homodont).
The remaining chromosomes are metacentric - the centromere is approximately in the middle - and are rather small.
*infections (bacterial or viral)
Sometimes, cetaceans consume these hazardous materials, mistaking them for food items.
Whales were described in narrative literature and paintings, most famously in the novels ''Moby Dick'' by Herman Melville and ''20,000 Leagues Under the Sea'' by Jules Verne.
Whales and dolphins have been kept in captivity for use in education, research and entertainment since the 19th century.
Tear glands secrete greasy tears, which protect the eyes from the salt in the water.
The back of the skull is significantly shortened and deformed.
Humpback whales also display this behaviour.
The initial karyotype includes a set of chromosomes from 2n = 44.
The connection between this auditory complex and the rest of the skull is reduced—to a single, small cartilage in oceanic dolphins.
Most cetaceans sexually mature at seven to 10 years.
The fetus is positioned for a tail-first delivery, so that the risk of drowning during delivery is minimal.
This shrinks the food supply for many marine animals, but the filter-feeding baleen whales are most impacted.
In the case of twins, one usually dies, because the mother cannot produce sufficient milk for both.
Despite the controversy thousands of dolphins are caught in drive hunts each year.
In repeated attempts in the 1960s and 1970s, narwhals kept in captivity died within months.
Hind legs are not present in cetaceans, nor are any other external body attachments such as a pinna and hair.
In the Book of Job, the leviathan is described in more detail ( to ).
A stranding is when a cetacean leaves the water to lie on a beach.
This animal is the size of a wolf, whose skeleton is known only partially.
River dolphins are known from the Ganges and - erroneously - the Nile.
It was up to  long.
Some individuals are capable of generating over 600 distinct sounds.
In Southeast Asia, they are sold as fish-replacement to locals, since the region's edible fish promise higher revenues from exports.
In addition, body temperature regulation is compromised.
Most mysticetes prefer the food-rich colder waters of the Northern and Southern Hemispheres, migrating to the Equator to give birth.
Atlantic and Korean gray whale populations were completely eradicated and the North Atlantic right whale population fell to some 300-600.
They spend their lives in the water, having to mate, give birth, molt or escape from predators, like killer whales, underwater.
Whales are described in particular by Aristotle, Pliny and Ambrose.
Gigi was the first captive baleen whale.
In the 1882 children's book ''Adventures of Pinocchio'' by Carlo Collodi, the wooden figures Pinocchio and Geppettos' creators were swallowed by a whale.
Aristotle, however, observed many physiological and anatomical similarities with the terrestrial vertebrates, such as blood (circulation), lungs, uterus and fin anatomy.
This complex is located in a cavity in the middle ear, which, in the Mysticeti, is divided by a bony projection and compressed between the exoccipital and squamosal, but in the odontoceti, is large and completely surrounds the bulla (hence called "peribullar"), which is, therefore, not connected to the skull except in physeterids.
Whales have an elongated head, especially baleen whales, due to the wide overhanging jaw.
Dolphins are mostly hunted for their meat, though some end up in dolphinaria.
These included descriptions of sea monsters, including huge whales, sharks, sea snakes, giant squid and octopuses.
Cetaceans have been depicted in various cultures worldwide.
Raymond Gilmore documented seventeen sperm whales in the estuary of the Elbe from 1723 to 1959 and thirty-one animals on the coast of Great Britain in 1784.
Males in these species developed external features absent in females that are advantageous in combat or display.
From 1976 to 1997, fifty-five whales were taken from the wild in Iceland, nineteen from Japan and three from Argentina.
In the 16th and 17th centuries, the Dutch fleet had about 300 whaling ships with 18,000 crewmen.
By shifting the nostrils to the top of the head, the nasal passages extend perpendicularly through the skull.
Each country has its own tank requirements; in the US, the minimum enclosure size is set by the Code of Federal Regulations, 9 CFR E § 3.104, under the ''Specifications for the Humane Handling, Care, Treatment and Transportation of Marine Mammals''.
Advocates counter that the behaviors are different from normal responses to another individual.
For land mammals, in comparison, this value is usually about 15%.
Until 2008, no case had ever been reported in porpoises, but isolated populations have an increased risk and consequentially a high mortality rate.
They have not been domesticated.
They have a streamlined shape, and their forelimbs are flippers.
Gestation ranges from 9 to 16 months.
The harbour porpoise was one of the most accessible species for early cetologists; because it could be seen close to land, inhabiting shallow coastal areas of Europe.
Such noise can disrupt cetacean behavior such as their use of biosonar for orientation and communication.
Ancient art often included dolphin representations, including the Cretan Minoans.
The whale was first mentioned in ancient Greece by Homer.
They are connected by cartilage.
In larger species, it can reach a thickness up to half a meter (1.6&nbsp;ft).
JJ, another gray whale calf, was kept at SeaWorld San Diego.
Dolphins belong to the domain of Poseidon and led him to his wife Amphitrite.
The direct ancestors of today's cetaceans are probably found within the Dorudontidae whose most famous member, ''Dorudon atrox'', lived at the same time as ''Basilosaurus''.
The nostrils are located on top of the head above the eyes so that the rest of the body can remain submerged while surfacing for air.
The two main methods of bubble ring production are rapid puffing of air into the water and allowing it to rise to the surface, forming a ring, or swimming repeatedly in a circle and then stopping to inject air into the helical vortex currents thus formed.
Although they knew that whales were harmless giants, they described battles with harpooned animals.
Sowerby's beaked whale and the Clymene dolphin exist only in the Atlantic and the Pacific white-sided dolphin and the northern straight dolphin live only in the North Pacific.
Aggression among captive killer whales is common.
Whales were used as attractions in museums and traveling exhibitions.
This was particularly true for the sperm whale, the most frequently stranded in larger groups.
These "songs" can be heard for hundreds of kilometers.
Dolphins and other smaller cetaceans are hunted in an activity known as dolphin drive hunting.
The stocks of species such as humpback and blue whales have recovered, though they are still threatened.
The ear and the muzzle contain a bone shape that is exclusive to cetaceans with a high density, resembling porcelain.
They have well-developed senses—their eyesight and hearing are adapted for both air and water, and they have advanced sonar capabilities using their melon.
