During the Stalinist "Great Purge", he was arrested for alleged espionage and Zionist activity, and executed in 1939.
Weizmann convinced the United States government to recognize the newly formed state of Israel.
Weizmann was absent from the first Zionist conference, held in 1897 in Basel, Switzerland, because of travel problems, but he attended each one thereafter.
Kovner's story was repeated in 1998 by another Nakam leader Yulik Harmatz.
Pilot plant development of laboratory procedures was completed in 1915 at the J&W Nicholson & Co gin factory in Bow, London, so industrial scale production of acetone could begin in six British distilleries requisitioned for the purpose in early 1916.
He was even accused of "possibly prolonging the war".
The majority of his family emigrated to Palestine, and two were also chemists; Dr. Anna (Anushka) Weizmann worked in his Daniel Sieff Research Institute lab, registering several patents in her name.
In May 1944, the British detained Joel Brand, a Jewish activist from Budapest, who wanted to evacuate 1 million Jews from Hungary on 10,000 trucks, with tea, coffee, cocoa, and soap.
"Dr Weizmann&nbsp;... asked when he could meet Sir Mark Sykes&nbsp;... Sir Mark fixed the appointment for the very next day, which was a Sunday."
He believed that the Balfour Declaration and the legislation that followed it, such as the (3 June 1922) Churchill White Paper and the League of Nations Mandate for Palestine all represented an astonishing accomplishment for the Zionist movement.
After the war, he grew embittered by the rise of violence in Palestine and by the terrorist tendencies amongst followers of the Revisionist fraction.
He regularly travelled by train to London to discuss spiritual and cultural Zionism with writers like Ahad Ha'am, a cultural Judaic Zionist.
The Entente had fulfilled its commitment to both Sharif Husein and Chaim Weizmann The Arab Revolt threatened to upset the apple cart.
Weizmann had a considerable following, yet was not involved in the discussions with Francois Georges-Picot at the French embassy: a British Protectorate, he knew would not require French agreement.
In 1894, he moved to Berlin to study at the Technische Hochschule Berlin.
Weizmann actively conducted research in the laboratories of this institute, primarily in the field of organic chemistry.
Zionists however had one goal only, the creation of their own state with British help.
This idea would later be crystallized in the foundation of the Technion – Israel Institute of Technology in 1912.
The institute was a global success attracting scientists from all over the Diaspora.
On 2 November 1949, anniversary of Balfour Declaration the Daniel Sieff Institute much enlarged and rebuilt was renamed the Weizmann Institute of Science.
However, two siblings remained in the Soviet Union following the Russian Revolution, a brother, Shmuel, and sister, Maria (Masha).
After the Shell Crisis of 1915 during World War I, Weizmann was director of the British Admiralty laboratories from 1916 until 1919.
His influence within the Zionist movement decreased, yet he remained overwhelmingly influential outside of Mandate Palestine.
Weizmann was born in the village of Motal near Pinsk in Belarus (at that time part of the Russian Empire).
The Manchester Zionists published a pamphlet ''Palestine'' on January 26, 1917, which did not reflect British policy, but already Sykes looked to Weizmann's leadership when they met on 20 March 1917.
Weizmann met Churchill on 4 November 1944 to urgently discuss the future of Palestine.
The effort produced 30,000 tonnes of acetone during the war, although a national collection of horse-chestnuts was required when supplies of maize were inadequate for the quantity of starch needed for fermentation.
Weizmann was determined to replace the Chief Rabbi as Jewish leader of Zionism.
Attitudes were changing to "dithyrambic" opposition; but in the Cabinet, to the Samuel Memorandum, it remained implacably opposed with the exception of Lloyd George, an outspoken radical.
Weizmann's personality became an issue but Weizmann had an international profile unlike his colleagues or any other British Zionist.
So to his Zionist friends he had swallowed the Revisionist ideas of 'Jingo' Jabotinsky, "a disease called Cadetism".
In 1915, Weizmann also began working with Sir Mark Sykes, who was looking for a member of the Jewish community for a delicate mission.
At the end of the month, the Paris Peace Conference decided that the Arab provinces of the Ottoman Empire should be wholly separated and the newly conceived mandate-system applied to them.
He was also criticized by Harry Cohen.
They raised the Jewish Brigade into the British Army, which took years to come to fruition.
Montagu did not regard Palestine as a "fit place for them to live".
He used the bacterium Clostridium acetobutylicum (the ''Weizmann organism'') to produce acetone.
He is one of the British Empire's air force casualties without a known grave commemorated at the Air Forces Memorial at Runnymede in Surrey, England.
Weizmann stated at the conference that "the Zionist objective was gradually to make Palestine as Jewish as England was English"  Shortly thereafter, both men made their statements to the conference.
Weizmann did not attend the meeting of Jewry's ruling Conjoint Committee when it met the Zionist leadership on April 14, 1915.
Yehiel Tschlenow had travelled from Berlin to speak at the congress.
Gradually Weizmann set up a separate following from Moses Gaster and L.J.
They founded a second parallel Cousinhood to the aristocratic Rothschilds.
During the war years, Brandeis headed the precursor of the Zionist Organization of America, leading fund-raising for Jews trapped in Europe and Palestine).
When he died on 9 November 1952, he was buried at Rehovot.
In 1939 at the outbreak of war, Weizmann was appointed as an Honorary adviser to the Ministry of Supply, using his extensive political expertise in the management of provisioning and supplies throughout the duration of the conflict.
Edwin Montagu opposed it, but Samuel and Lloyd George favoured Zionism.
In 1921 Weizmann played an important role in supporting Rutenberg's bid to the British for an exclusive electric concession for Palestine, in spite of bitter personal and principled disputes between the two figures.
James de Rothschild advised Weizmann seek to influence the British Government.
When Herut MK (Member of Knesset) Aryeh Ben-Eliezer spoke on behalf of Klausner saying there was no shame in collaboration, he was booed, as fascist, Followers of Mussolini!
The older generation of Greenberg, Joseph Cowen and Gaster were stepping down or being passed over.
Through editor C P Scott, Weizmann was mentor to Harry Sacher, and two other distinguished young men, Israel Sieff, and Simon Marks (founders of Marks & Spencer).
He had to be consoled with the Weizmann Institute's successes.
There is no independent evidence for the meeting and some historians doubt it.
In 1917, he expressed his view of Zionism in the following words,
This was the first official mention and declaration of a Zionist vision opting for a possible State with a majority of Jewish population, alongside a State with an Arab majority.
Beginning in 1901, he lobbied for the founding of a Jewish institution of higher learning in Palestine.
In 1942 Weizmann was invited by US President Roosevelt to work on the problem of synthetic rubber.
Apart from a short break in the thirties, Weizmann continued in the post through the latter war, with his deputy, David Ben Gurion playing an bellicose role as a liberationist.
Her husband James de Rothschild was serving with the French Army, but she was unable to influence her cousinhood to Weizmann's favour.
The Arab leaders, headed by Haj Amin al-Husseini, rejected the plan.
On 25 November 1936, testifying before the Peel Commission, Weizmann said that there were in Europe 6,000,000 Jews ... "for whom the world is divided into places where they cannot live and places where they cannot enter."
At the meeting on September 4, 1917, he faced some fanatical opposition.
Unrest amongst Arab antagonism to Jewish presence in Palestine increased erupting into riots.
He was elected on 16 February 1949, and served until his death in 1952.
Nakam's leader Abba Kovner, a former Lithuanian partisan, testified that he had approached Weizmann (at that time, President of the World Zionist Organization) with plans for a mass poisoning and that Wiezmann had put him in touch with a chemist who arranged for a quantity of poison to be procured.
As stated in his own words : "I trust and feel sure in my heart that science will bring to this land both peace and a renewal of its youth, creating here the springs of a new spiritual and material life.
In 1899, he was awarded a PhD in organic chemistry.
Nahum Sokolow acted as Weizmann's eyes and ears in Paris on a diplomatic mission; an Entente under the Ottoman Empire was unsettling.
His fate only became known to his wife and children in 1955.
Montagu believed in assimilation and saw his principles being swept from under by the new policy stance.
Weizmann had seen peace with Turkey out of the question in July 1917.
On 31 October 1917, Chaim Weizmann became president of the British Zionist Federation; he worked with Arthur Balfour to obtain the milestone Balfour Declaration;
Following mainstream Zionist rejection of that proposal, Weizmann was credited later with persuading Balfour, by then the Foreign Secretary, for British support to establish a Jewish homeland in Palestine, the original Zionist aspiration.
On November 7 and 8, 1914, he had a meeting with Madame Dolly Rothschild.
The War Cabinet had dealt an "irreparable blow to Jewish Britons", wrote Montagu.
He demanded that all heirless Jewish property should be handed over as part of the reparations for the rehabilitation of Nazi victims.
Greenberg in London.
Whilst some of the leading members of Britain's Jewish community regarded Weizmann's program with distaste, the Herbert Samuel Memorandum as it came to be known was a watershed moment in the Great War and annexation of Palestine.
The Zionists had been approached by the Germans, Weizmann told William Ormsby-Gore.
Lloyd George wanted a separate peace with Turkey to guarantee relations in the region secure.
Dr Chaim Weizmann was the Mapai candidate for president.
Scott described the diminutive leader as extraordinarily interesting, a rare combination of idealism and the severely practical which are the two essentials of statesmanship a perfectly clear sense conception of jewish nationalism, an intense and burning sense of the Jew as Jew, just as strong, perhaps more so, as that of the German as German or the Englishman as Englishman, and secondly arising out of that and necessary for its satisfaction and development, his demand for a country, a home land which for him and for anyone during his view of Jewish nationality can be no other that the ancient home of his race.
An American view is Weizmann persuaded the British cabinet to support Zionism by presenting the benefits of having a presence in Palestine in preference to the French.
85 votes to 15 declared for Weizmann.
Yishuv was put back to the lowest priority.
He stayed at Ahad's home in Hampstead, from whence he lobbied Whitehall, beyond his job as Director of the Admiralty for Manchester.
He was the third of 15 children born to Oizer and Rachel Czermerinsky Weizmann.
Furthermore, James de Rothschild proved a friend and guardian of the nascent state questioning Sykes' motivations as their dealings on Palestine were still secretive.
With the help of Philip Kerr the issue was moved up "the Agenda" to War Cabinet as a matter of urgency.
At the War Cabinet meeting of October 4, chaired by Lloyd George and Balfour present, Curzon also opposed this "barren and desolate" place as a home for Jews.
Again Weizmann blamed the Zionist movement for not being adequate during the best years of the British Mandate.
At 6 Buckingham Gate on 10 February 1917 another was held, in a series of winter meetings in London.
Kovner's biographer Dina Porat wrote that Weizmann was not in Palestine on the date of the alleged meeting but allows that he might have met Weizmann in early 1946 instead.
According to the story, Kovner did not tell Weizmann of his intention to poison millions of Germans via their water supply, but only of the backup plan to poison SS members who were in allied POW camps.
In July 1944, Weizmann pleaded on Brand's behalf but to no avail.
A Jewish Commonwealth needed to be established, and latterly Churchill revived his backing for this project.
The couple had two sons.
In a third memo Montagu labelled Weizmann a "religious fanatic".
Montagu believed that it would let down assimilationists and the ideals of British Liberalism.
Although when he spoke to Charles, second son of Nathan Mayer Rothschild, he approved the idea.
He was an Englishman, who happened to Jewish.
Acetone was used in the manufacture of cordite explosive propellants critical to the Allied war effort (see Royal Navy Cordite Factory, Holton Heath).
News of the February Revolution (also known as the Kerensky Revolution) in Russia shattered the illusion for World Jewry.
They discussed "International Control" the Russian Revolution and US involvement in the future of the Palestine Problem.
Like 20,000 military Jews living in East End of London, who had fled Russian pogroms, Weizmann was not particularly warlike.
In 1936 Weizmann addressed the Peel Commission (set up by the returning Conservative Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin), whose job it was to consider the working of the British Mandate of Palestine.
To established Jewry Zionists were foreign, and opponents consisted of a few maverick 'racists' like Leo Maxse, the editor of ''National Review''.
His brother, Prof. Moshe Weizmann, was the head of the Chemistry Faculty at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem.
"...those friends ... in  close cooperation all these years", he suggested should become the EZF Council- Manchester's Sieff, Sacher and Marks, and London's Leon Simon and Samuel Tollowsky.
This Belarus man from Motol had attended all but the first Zionist Congress by the time he came to England.
Weizmann also promoted a plan to bomb the Death Camps, but the British claimed that this was too risky, dangerous and unfeasible, due to technical difficulties.
Weizmann and Sokolow wanted to elicit from the government more than verbal promises.
In 1892, Weizmann left for Germany to study chemistry.
On September 20, 1945, Weizmann presented the first official documents to the British, USA, France, and Soviets, for the restitution of property, and indemnification.
In early October 1914 the ''USS North Carolina'' arrived in Jaffa harbor with money and supplies provided by Schiff, the American Jewish Committee, and the Provisional Executive Committee for General Zionist Affairs, then acting for the WZO, which had been rendered impotent by the war.
His eclipse led to the collapse of British rule, and the inundation by illegal immigrants.
Weizmann was married to Dr. Vera Khatzmann.
The Revisionist Party put forward Prof. Joseph Klausner.
Dr Rezso Kasztner took over the direct negotiations with Eichmann to release migrants, but they came to nothing.
Weizmann proposed to produce butyl alcohol from maize, then convert it to butylene and further to butadiene, which is a basis for rubber.
Their forces had already seized Kibbutz ''Mishmar Ha-Yarden''.
The Memorandum was not supposed to accentuate the prejudice of mentioning 'home of the Jewish people'.
Montagu as India Secretary had learnt debating skills, and Liberalism from Asquith, who also opposed Zionism.
He considered such a peace at odds with Zionist interests.
In his Presidential statement at the last Zionist congress that he attended at Basle, 9 December 1946 he unequivocally said:
He was President of EZF Executive Council.
From 1933 there were year-on-year leaps in mass immigration by 50%.
While serving as a pilot in No.
Israel Sieff had resigned from the BPC.
On 10 December 1914 at Whitehall, Samuel offered Weizmann a Jewish home land complete with funded developments.
In summer 1930, these two factions and visions of Zionism, would come to a compromise largely on Brandeis's terms, with a restructured leadership for the ZOA.
Leon Simon asked Weizmann not to "give up the struggle".
They had met in leafy Bloomsbury to thrash out the problems - Sokolow, Sieff, Marks, Simon, Ahad Ha'am, and at times Sacher.
Tirelessly energetic Weizmann entered London again in later October to speak for a solid hour with the Prime Minister, propped by ''The Guardian'' and his Manchester friends.
Moses Gaster was very reluctant to step aside.
Sacher tried to get the Foreign Secretary to redraft a statement rejecting Zionism.
Leon Simon resigned from the ZPC (Zionist Political Committee), because Weizmann refused to disavow the idea of a Jewish regiment
In 1897, he moved to Switzerland to complete his studies at the University of Fribourg.
Weizmann's attraction for British Liberalism enabled Lloyd George's influence at the Ministry of Munitions to do a financial and industrial deal with Imperial Chemicals to seal the future of the Zionist homeland.
Imperial interests on the Suez Canal as well as sympathy after the Holocaust were important factors for British support.
Weizmann first visited Jerusalem in 1907, and while there, he helped organize the Palestine Land Development Company as a practical means of pursuing the Zionist dream, and to found the Hebrew University of Jerusalem.
At that time, Arthur Balfour was a Conservative MP representing one of the districts of Manchester, and was also Prime Minister; the two met during one of Balfour's electoral campaigns in 1905-1906.
He envisioned a Jewish Community worldwide so that integration was complimentary with amelioration.
The importance of Weizmann's work gave him favour in the eyes of the British Government, this allowed Weizmann to have access to senior Cabinet members and utilise this time to represent Zionist aspirations.
However, when Lord Moyne, the British Governor of Palestine, met Churchill, he was surprised that he had changed his views in two years.
Weizmann issued a statement on 11 February 1917, and on the following day, they received news of the Kerensky take over in Petrograd.
Typically a sturdy yeoman, with a dome-shaped forehead, a short dark beard covering cheeks and jawline.
In February 1943 the British government also rejected a plan to pay $3.5 million and just $50 per head to allow 70,000, mostly Romanian, Jews to be protected and evacuated that Weizmann had suggested to the Americans.
Prime Minister Ramsay MacDonald's attempted reassurance on economic grounds in a White Paper did little to stabilize Arab-Israeli relations.
"The greatest Jewish emissary to the Gentile world..." was one academic verdict.
On December 2, Zionists celebrated the Declaration at the Opera House; the news of the Bolshevik Revolution, and withdrawal of Russian troops from the frontier war with Turkey, raised the pressure from Constantinople.
At this time, simmering differences over competing European and American visions of Zionism, and its funding of development versus political activities, caused Weizmann to clash with Louis Brandeis.
I speak of both science for its own sake and science as a means to an end."
His body was never found and he was listed as "missing".
502 Squadron RAF, he was killed when his plane was shot down over the Bay of Biscay in February 1942.
Cabinet ministers were worried about Germany playing the Zionist card.
He was denied any actualisation of the political role he had hoped for by the Left.
Shmuel Weizmann was a dedicated Communist and member of the anti-Zionist Bund movement.
The Honourable Chaim Weizmann met with United States President Harry Truman and worked to obtain the support of the United States, they discussed emigration, for the establishment of the State of Israel.
During World War I, at around the same time he was appointed Director of the British Admiralty's laboratories, Weizmann, in a conversation with David Lloyd George, suggested the strategy of the British campaign against the Ottoman Empire.
He was "pre-eminently what the Jewish people call folks-mensch...a man of the people, of the masses, not of a elite, a leader in whose breast beat the common heart of a man".
Cecil's personal foibles were representative of class consciousness, which the Zionists overcome through deeds rather than words.
The Triple Entente of Arab-Armenian-Zionist was fantastic to Weizmann leaving him cold and unenthusiastic.
Balfour supported the concept of a Jewish homeland, but felt that there would be more support among politicians for the then-current offer in Uganda, called the British Uganda Programme.
C. P. Scott, the editor of ''The Manchester Guardian'', formed a friendship with Weizmann after the two men encountered each other at a Manchester garden party in 1915.
Weizmann remained loyal to Britain, tried to shift the blame onto dark forces.
He also agreed that Israel should annexe the Negev desert, where no one was living.
Although Weizmann retained Zionist leadership, the clash led to a departure from Louis Brandeis's movement.
He had first met the Conservatives in 1906, but after being moved to tears at 12 Carlton Gardens, on December 12, 1914, Balfour told Weizmann "it is a great cause and I understand it".
He began his studies at the Polytechnic Institute of Darmstadt.
Massada, for all its heroism, was a disaster in our history; It is not our purpose or our right to plunge to destruction in order to bequeath a legend of martyrdom to posterity; Zionism was to mark the end of our glorious deaths and the beginning of a new path leading to life.
Manchester became an important intellectual resource for Zionism in Britain.
Sykes stressed the Entente: "We are pledged to Zionism, Armenianism liberation, and Arabian independence".
His acetone production method was of great importance for the British war industry during World War I.
He was genuinely overjoyed to convince the former Prime Minister in April 1917.
He is considered to be the father of industrial fermentation.
Many of Weizmann's contacts revealed the extent of the uncertainty in Palestine.
On 2 July 1948 a new kibbutz was founded facing the Syrian Heights overlooking the Jordan River, only 5 miles from Syrian territory.
Scott wrote to the Liberal Party's Lloyd George who set up a meeting for a reluctant Weizmann with Herbert Samuel, President of the Local Government Board, who was now converted to Zionism.
First Lord of the Admiralty Winston Churchill became aware of the possible use of Weizmann's discovery in early 1915, and Minister of Munitions David Lloyd George joined Churchill in encouraging Weizmann's development of the process.
Curzon's memo was mainly concerned by the non-Jews in Palestine to secure their civil rights  Worldwide there were 12 million Jews, and about 365,000 in Palestine by 1932.
The complexity of Arab ''desiderata'' - "facilities of colonization, communal autonomy, rights of language and establishment of a Jewish chartered company" This was followed by a meeting with Carson and the Conservatives (18 Apr) and another at Downing Street on 20 April.
Nonetheless the delegation left for Paris on 31 March 1917.
Wolf and Sacher used pressure on the Foreign Office to exemplify their placatory and cooperative stance on a non-interventionist position.
Weizmann learnt that all the deputies had resigned.
On December 11, Turkish armies were swept aside when Allenby entered Jerusalem.
In 1939 a conference was established at St James Palace when the government drew up the May 1939 White Paper which severely curtailed any spending in the Jewish Home Land.
Chaim Weizmann is buried beside his wife in the garden of his home at the Weizmann estate, which is located on the grounds of Israel's science research institute named after him.
The Turks were in no position to prevent movement.
A London delegate raised a censure motion: that Weizmann refused to condemn the regiment.
After 1920, he assumed leadership in the World Zionist Organization, creating local branches in Berlin  serving twice (1920–31, 1935–46) as president of the World Zionist Organization.
The Commission published a report that, for the first time, recommended partition, but the proposal was declared unworkable and formally rejected by the government.
While the war was raging in the outside world, the Zionists prepared for an even bigger fight for the survival of their homeland.
Just after the US President had left, the following morning, Lloyd George invited Weizmann to breakfast at which he promised Jewish support for Britain as the Jews "might be able to render more assistance than the Arabs."
Zionists began to believe racism existed within the administration, which remained inadequately policed.
Sokolow, Weizmann's diplomatic representative, cuttingly remarked to Picot underlining the irrelevance of the Triple Entente to French Jewry, but on 7 February 1917, the British government recognized the Zionist leader and agreed to expedite the claim.
At the outbreak of war the Jewish Agency pledged its support for the British war effort against Nazi Germany.
While in Britain, he was known by many as '''Charles Weizmann''', a name under which he registered about 100 research patents.
Weizmann's efforts to integrate Jews from Palestine in the war against Germany resulted in the creation of the Jewish Brigade of the British Army which fought mainly in the Italian front.
