Prokofiev's Overture on Hebrew Themes Op.
fl, cl, ob, bsn, hrn
Numerous major examples by Haydn (its creator), Mozart, Beethoven, Schubert, and many other leading composers (see article).
Examples are numerous: Bartók's Sonata for two pianos and percussion (1937), Schoenberg's ''Pierrot lunaire'', Charles Ives's ''Quartertone Pieces'' for two pianos tuned a quartertone apart.
It was Johannes Brahms who carried the torch of Romantic music toward the 20th century.
Such as the Poulenc Sextet, and another by Ludwig Thuille.
Darius Milhaud developed the use of polytonality, that is, music where different instruments play in different keys at the same time.
They often need to coordinate their bowing and "breathing" between phrases, to ensure a unified sound.
Flute, viola and harp
Many of Beethoven's quartets were first performed with patron Count Andrey Razumovsky on second violin.
Voice, Viola and Piano
34, Samuel Coleridge-Taylor's Op.
"Many musicians cannot take the strain of going ''mano a mano'' with the same three people year after year."
Mozart's KV 375 and 388, Beethoven's Op.
Milhaud wrote 18 string quartets; quartets number 14 and 15 are written so that each can be played by itself, or the two can be played at the same time as an octet.
Number of musicians
It was not merely an issue of finding new types of harmonies and melodic systems to replace the diatonic scale that was the basis of western harmony; the whole structure of western music – the relationships between movements and between structural elements within movements – was based on the relationships between different keys.
In between about 1750 and the late 1700s, the harpsichord gradually fell out of use.
Beethoven was to use this form in later quartets, and Brahms and others adopted it as well.
Most broadly, it includes any art music that is performed by a small number of performers, with one performer to a part (in contrast to orchestral music, in which each string part is played by a number of performers).
The Hellmesberger Quartet, led by Joseph Hellmesberger, and the Joachim Quartet, led by Joseph Joachim, debuted many of the new string quartets by Brahms and other composers.
"The century of the aeroplane deserves its music", wrote Debussy.
"These changes have often resulted in accusations that technology has destroyed chamber music and that technological advance is in inverse proportion to musical worth.
Giovanni Battista Sammartini, Ignaz Holzbauer, and Franz Xaver Richter wrote precursors of the string quartet.
Mrs. Norton, a violinist who studied quartet playing with the Kneisel Quartet at the beginning of the last century, goes so far that players of different parts in a quartet have different personality traits.
However, recent surveys suggest there is, on the contrary, a resurgence of home music making.
38, of the Septet, Op.
"With the technological advances have come questions of aesthetics and sociological changes in music", writes analyst Baron.
He was followed by a number of other twelve-tone composers, the most prominent of whom were his students Alban Berg, who wrote the Lyric Suite for string quartet, and Anton Webern, who wrote ''Five Movements for String Quartet'', op.
Beethoven transformed chamber music, raising it to a new plane, both in terms of content and in terms of the technical demands on performers and audiences.
91, for Contralto, Viola and Piano
The singer uses a technique called Sprechstimme, halfway between speech and song.
Among his last works were the clarinet quintet, Op.
Normally, the first violin leads the ensemble.
Haydn, Mozart, Beethoven, Schubert, Mendelssohn, Schumann, Brahms and many others.
In the sixth string quartet, for example, Bartók begins each movement with a slow, elegiac melody, followed by the main melodic material of the movement, and concludes the quartet with a slow movement that is built entirely on this elegy.
In this innovative ensemble, later used by Schubert, Boccherini gives flashy, virtuosic solos to the principal cello, as a showcase for his own playing.
Mozart's four Flute Quartets and one Oboe Quartet; Krommer's Flute Quartets (e.g.
2 of any instrument, either equal or not
Mozart introduced the newly invented clarinet into the chamber music arsenal, with the Kegelstatt Trio for viola, clarinet and piano, K. 498, and the Quintet for Clarinet and String Quartet, K. 581.
However, there are passages that require other instruments to lead.
103, Franz Lachner's Op.
In his Piano Quintet in E&nbsp;flat, Op.
Wind instrument and string quartet
This method makes it possible for the piano to play in any key; however, all the intervals except the octave sound very slightly out of tune.
Because each instrument was playing essentially the same melodies, all the instruments were equal.
David Waterman, cellist of the Endellion Quartet, writes that the chamber musician "needs to balance assertiveness and flexibility."
Concert halls have largely replaced the home as the venue for concerts.
The analogy to conversation recurs in descriptions and analyses of chamber music compositions.
Patrons invited street musicians to play evening concerts below the balconies of their homes, their friends and their lovers.
What do these changes mean for the future of chamber music?
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe described chamber music (specifically, string quartet music) as "four rational people conversing".
"A strange composite being we are in performance, not ourselves any more, but the Maggiore, composed of so many disjunct parts: chairs, stands, music, bows, instruments, musicians&nbsp;..." ''The Rosendorf Quartet'', by Nathan Shaham, describes the trials of a string quartet in Palestine, before the establishment of the state of Israel.
The septet is written as a classical divertimento in six movements, including two minuets, and a set of variations.
Playing together constitutes a major challenge to chamber music players.
Born into a wealthy Jewish family in Hamburg, Mendelssohn proved himself a child prodigy.
Two masterpieces by Brahms and Ligeti
During the Baroque period, chamber music as a genre was not clearly defined.
4 vln, 2 vla, 2 vc (less commonly 4 vln, 2 vla, vc, cb)
In ''Für kommende Zeiten'' (For Times to Come), Stockhausen writes verbal instructions describing what the performers are to play.
3 B♭ Clarinets and Bass Clarinet
Analysts agree that the role of chamber music in society has changed profoundly in the last 50 years; yet there is little agreement as to what that change is.
Wind Instrument and String Trio
11, as well as his own transcription, Op.
In 1820, Louis Spohr invented the chinrest, which gave violinists more freedom of movement in their left hands, for a more nimble technique.
In Hungary, composers Zoltán Kodály and Béla Bartók pioneered the science of ethnomusicology by performing one of the first comprehensive studies of folk music.
In addition, there was a lively market for string quartet arrangements of popular and folk tunes, piano works, symphonies, and opera arias.
To create a unified chamber music sound – to blend – the players must coordinate the details of their technique.
It appeared in transcriptions for many combinations – one of which, for clarinet, cello and piano, was written by Beethoven himself – and was so popular that Beethoven feared it would eclipse his other works.
The composers of the first half of the 19th century were acutely aware of the conversational paradigm established by Haydn and Mozart.
Sometimes composers mixed movements for chamber ensembles with orchestral movements.
"Any sounds in any combination and in any succession are henceforth free to be used in a musical continuity", Debussy wrote.
It is an experience too personal to talk about and yet it colors every aspect of our relationship, every good-natured musical confrontation, all the professional gossip, the latest viola joke."
The improved pianoforte was adopted by Mozart and other composers, who began composing chamber ensembles with the piano playing a leading role.
Clarinet-viola-piano trio
On the one hand, Brahms was a traditionalist, conserving the musical traditions of Bach and Mozart.
By Mozart there are the two types; Beethoven used the one with cl
Double Wind Quintet
ob, cl, vln, vla, cb
Many performers and authors have written about the specialized techniques required for a successful chamber musician.
Even though the pianoforte was invented by Bartolomeo Cristofori at the beginning of the 1700s, it did not become widely used until the end of that century, when technical improvements in its construction made it a more effective instrument.
The characteristic Haydn string quartet has four movements:
Mozart's Quintet for Clarinet and Strings, Franz Krommer's Quintet for Flute and Strings, Op.
Piano and Wind Quartet
''Music for the Love of It'', an organization to promote amateur playing, publishes a directory of music workshops that lists more than 500 workshops in 24 countries for amateurs in 2008 The Associated Chamber Music Players (ACMP) offers a directory of over 5,000 amateur players worldwide who welcome partners for chamber music sessions.
Balance refers to the relative volume of each of the instruments.
Chamber music performance is a specialized field, and requires a number of skills not normally required for the performance of symphonic or solo music.
And the last movement of Op.
A second direction in the search for a new tonality was twelve-tone serialism.
In the radio program "Amateurs Help Keep Chamber Music Alive" from 2005, reporter Theresa Schiavone cites a Gallup poll showing an increase in the sale of stringed instruments in America.
"The difficulty in string quartet intonation is to determine the degree of freedom you have at any given moment", says Steinhardt.
The standard repertoire for chamber ensembles is rich, and the totality of chamber music in print in sheet music form is nearly boundless.
He also wrote two songs for alto singer, viola and piano, Op.
Debussy's quartet, like the string quartets of Maurice Ravel and of Gabriel Fauré, created a new tone color for chamber music, a color and texture associated with the Impressionist movement.
Robert Schumann continued the development of cyclic structure.
132; the use of ''sul ponticello'' (playing on the bridge of the violin) for a brittle, scratchy sound in the Presto movement of Op.
The quartet uses the cyclic structure, and constitutes a final divorce from the rules of classical harmony.
Bartók was not alone in his explorations of folk music.
Including one written by Stravinsky and the delightful Petite Symphonie by Gounod.
While most of this growth is in popular music, some is in chamber music and art music, according to the study.
This view is supported by subjective impressions.
Two string quartets arranged antiphonically.
10, is considered a watershed in the history of chamber music.
A study by the European Music Office in 1996 suggests that not only older people are playing music.
By the late 1700s, the pianoforte became more popular as an instrument for performance.
20th Century: Shigeru Kan-no
As the theme develops, it ranges through various keys before coming back to the tonic G major.
Throughout the 18th century, the composer was normally an employee of an aristocrat, and the chamber music he or she composed was for the pleasure of aristocratic players and listeners.
Yet for all this disjointedness, each quartet is tightly designed, with an overarching structure that ties the work together.
After the final, vigorous Presto movement, he returns to the opening adagio to conclude the piece.
These quartets, from Beethoven's middle period, were pioneers in the romantic style.
Regardless of whether the number of amateur players has grown or shrunk, the number of chamber music concerts in the west has increased greatly in the last 20 years.
In Russia, Russian folk music permeated the works of the late 19th-century composers.
A variant is Flute, Cello and Harp.
Mozart's KV 581, Brahms's Op.
Paul Hindemith was another neoclassicist.
Stravinsky, like Bartók, used asymmetrical rhythms throughout his chamber music; the Histoire du soldat, in Stravinsky's own arrangement for clarinet, violin and piano, constantly shifts time signatures between two, three, four and five beats to the bar.
Some analysts consider the origin of classical instrumental ensembles to be the sonata da camera (chamber sonata) and the sonata da chiesa (church sonata).
Dvořák's fame in establishing a national art music was so great that the New York philanthropist and music connoisseur Jeannette Thurber invited him to America, to head a conservatory that would establish an American style of music.
"Today there are so many more millions of people listening to music, but far fewer playing chamber music just for the pleasure of it", says conductor and pianist Daniel Barenboim.
In his fifth quartet, for example, Bartók uses a time signature of , "startling to the classically-trained musician, but second-nature to the folk musician."
In his second string quartet, he opens the piece with a peaceful adagio section in A major, that contrasts with the stormy first movement in A minor.
This improved projection, and also made possible new bowing techniques.
Ensembles develop a close intimacy of shared musical experience.
2 Euphoniums, 2 Tubas(Standard Quartet).
Composers turned more and more to the rhythms and tonalities of their native lands for inspiration and material.
Robert Lucas de Pearsall's ''Lay a garland'' and Purcell's ''Hear My Prayer''.
When he showed the manuscript of the trios to Haydn, his teacher, prior to publication, Haydn approved of the first two, but warned against publishing the third trio, in C minor, as too radical, warning it would not "...be understood and favorably received by the public."
However, rather than writing strict, full-length fugues, they used counterpoint as another mode of conversation between the chamber music instruments.
The composers of this school had no use for chamber music.
"When a performance is in progress, all four of us together enter a zone of magic somewhere between our music stands and become a conduit, messenger, and missionary&nbsp;...
Twelve-tone technique was not the only new experiment in tonality.
In the years 1805 to 1806, Beethoven composed the three Op.
An example of the conversational mode of composition is Haydn's string quartet Op.
The idea of composing music that could be played at home has been largely abandoned.
132; a cello melody played high above all the other strings in the finale of Op.
"It is on the concert stage where the moments of true intimacy occur", writes Steinhardt.
Both Schumann and Mendelssohn, following the example set by Beethoven, revived the fugue, which had fallen out of favor since the Baroque period.
Chamber music playing, writes M.D.
An example of this is in the Brahms second string sextet, Op.
Several groups such as Classical Revolution and Simple Measures have taken classical chamber music out of the concert hall and into the streets.
2 vln, vla, vc with additional vla, vc, or cb
Bedřich Smetana, another Czech, wrote a piano trio and string quartet, both of which incorporate native Czech rhythms and melodies.
If Haydn created the conversational style of composition, Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart greatly expanded its vocabulary.
Often, works could be played on any variety of instruments, in orchestral or chamber ensembles.
The Providence (Rhode Island, USA) String Quartet has started the "Storefront Strings" program, offering impromptu concerts and lessons out of a storefront in one of Providence's poorer neighborhoods.
1, in F major, for example, there is a long, lyrical solo for cello in the second movement, giving the cello a new type of voice in the quartet conversation.
Playing chamber music requires special skills, both musical and social, that differ from the skills required for playing solo or symphonic works.
The String Quintet in C, D.956, is an example of how this conflict is expressed in music.
Both the bass instrument and the chordal instrument would play the basso continuo part.
A cellist's preparatory motion for pizzicato is larger and slower than that of a violinist."
When first violinist Ignaz Schuppanzigh complained of their difficulty, Beethoven retorted, "Do you think I care about your wretched violin when the spirit moves me?"
After developing the twelve-tone technique, Schoenberg wrote a number of chamber works, including two more string quartets, a string trio, and a wind quintet.
Cello Fury consists of three cellists and a drummer and Project Trio includes a flutist, bassist, and cellist.
During his adult life, Mendelssohn wrote two piano trios, seven works for string quartet, two string quintets, the octet, a sextet for piano and strings, and numerous sonatas for piano with violin, cello, and clarinet.
3 Euphoniums, 1 Tuba.
The playing of chamber music has been the inspiration for numerous books, both fiction and nonfiction.
"Star constellations/with common points/and falling stars&nbsp;...
The cello answers with its own triplet figure, then the viola, while the other instruments play a secondary theme against this movement.
Not only in harmony, but also in overall musical structure, Brahms was an innovator.
"After twenty years in the Guarneri Quartet, I'm happily surprised on occasion to find myself totally wrong about what I think a player will do, or how he'll react in a particular passage", says violist Michael Tree.
The number of chamber music camps and retreats, where amateurs can meet for a weekend or a month to play together, has burgeoned.
Over 500 works have been written for these instruments and related ones.
291 Octet is, rather, a couple of String Quartets (his 14th and 15th) performed simultaneously
Unlike Schubert, Felix Mendelssohn had a life of peace and prosperity.
Because chamber music is a conversation, sometimes one instrument must stand out, sometimes another.
But beyond the challenge of merely playing together from a rhythmic or intonation perspective is the greater challenge of sounding good together.
Moreover, string and wind players can use ''expressive intonation'', changing the pitch of a note to create a musical or dramatic effect.
These changes contributed to the effectiveness of public performances in large halls, and expanded the repertoire of techniques available to chamber music composers.
This was coupled with the feeling that the era that saw the invention of automobiles, the telephone, electric lighting, and world war needed new modes of expression.
Mozart's string quartets are considered the pinnacle of the classical art.
The players not only bow their amplified instruments, they also beat on them with thimbles, pluck them with paper clips and play on the wrong side of the bridge or between the fingers and the nut.
Players discuss issues of interpretation in rehearsal; but often, in mid-performance, players do things spontaneously, requiring the other players to respond in real time.
While Stravinsky's neoclassical works – such as the ''Double Canon for String Quartet'' – sound contemporary, they are modeled on Baroque and early classical forms – the canon, the fugue, and the Baroque sonata form.
By leading, this means that the violinist indicates the start of each movement and their tempos by a gesture with her head or bowing hand.
However, by convention, it usually does not include solo instrument performances.
The most common instrumentation is 2 flutes (piccolo), 2 oboes (or English horn), two clarinets, two horns and two bassoons.
When the piece was performed in 1995, the players had earphones with a click track to enable them to play at the right time.
20th and 21st centuries.
"Europe was impelled by the Romantic tendency to establish in musical matters the national boundaries more and more sharply", wrote Alfred Einstein.
The sonata da camera was a suite of slow and fast movements, interspersed with dance tunes; the sonata da chiesa was the same, but the dances were omitted.
But he was by no means the only composer developing new modes of chamber music.
Throughout his chamber music, he uses traditional techniques of counterpoint, incorporating fugues and canons into rich conversational and harmonic textures.
Joe Lamond, president of the National Association of Music Manufacturers (NAMM) attributes the increase to a growth of home music-making by adults approaching retirement.
Ives gave programmatic titles to much of his chamber music; his first string quartet, for example, is called "From the Salvation Army", and quotes American Protestant hymns in several places.
Many of Schumann's chamber works, including all three of his string quartets and his piano quartet have contrapuntal sections interwoven seamlessly into the overall compositional texture.
with 2nd vla: Michael Haydn, Mozart, Beethoven, Brahms, Bruckner; with 2nd vc: Boccherini, Schubert; with cb: Vagn Holmboe, Dvořák.
Frequently an additional bass instrument is added to the standard double wind quintet.
Claude Debussy's string quartet, Op.
American composer Charles Ives wrote music that was distinctly American.
Bartók's six string quartets are often compared with Beethoven's late quartets.
Piano and Wind Trio
4 (original version).
Telemann's 'Tafelmusik' (1733), for example, has five sets of movements for various combinations of instruments, ending with a full orchestral section.
While there is no agreement about the number of chamber music players, the opportunities for amateurs to play have certainly grown.
19th-century (Reicha, Danzi and others) and 20th-century composers (Carl Nielsen's Op.
Now a new custom arose that gave birth to a new form of chamber music: the serenade.
vn, va, vc and fl, ob, cl, bsn
"Bartók never conceived these quartets for private performance but rather for large, public concerts."
The alternating Sturm und Drang and relaxation continue throughout the movement.
