At its lowest point, it is  deep.
Immigrants have also arrived as legitimate Eurostar passengers without proper entry papers.
In 2013, operating profits rose 4 per cent from 2012, to £54 million.
Kent's regional development would benefit from the tunnel, but being so close to London restricts the benefits.
Financial restructuring of Eurotunnel occurred in mid-1998, reducing debt and financial charges.
TVM430, as used on LGV Nord and High Speed 1, is used in the tunnel.
In Britain, select committees examined the proposal, making history by holding hearings away from Westminster, in Kent.
Although the two countries agreed to build a tunnel in 1964, the phase 1 initial studies and signing of a second agreement to cover phase 2 took until 1973.
On 21 November 2014, EE announced that it had previously switched on LTE earlier in September 2014.
At the end of 2002, the Sangatte centre was closed after the UK agreed to take some of its refugees.
A serious risk with underwater tunnels is major water inflow due to the pressure from the sea above, under weak ground conditions.
Financing costs were 140% higher than forecast.
Illegal Immigrants and would-be asylum seekers have used the tunnel to attempt to enter Britain.
In 2009, former F1 racing champion John Surtees drove a Ginetta G50 EV electronic sports car prototype from England to France, using the service tunnel, as part of a charity event.
Ballastless track provides extra overhead clearance necessary for the passage of larger trains.
He was required to keep to the  speed limit.
Since the opening of the tunnel, small positive impacts on the wider economy have been felt, but it is difficult to identify major economic successes directly attributed to the tunnel.
Both the freight and passenger traffic forecasts that led to the construction of the tunnel were overestimated; in particular, Eurotunnel's commissioned forecasts were over-predictions.
Delays and cost overruns led to the price dropping; during demonstration runs in October 1994 it reached an all-time low.
In December 1999 road and rail tunnel proposals were presented to the British and French governments, but it was stressed that there was not enough demand for a second tunnel.
British Rail ordered seven more for services north of London.
There are three communication systems: concession radio (CR) for mobile vehicles and personnel within Eurotunnel's Concession (terminals, tunnels, coastal shafts); track-to-train radio (TTR) for secure speech and data between trains and the railway control centre; Shuttle internal radio (SIR) for communication between shuttle crew and to passengers over car radios.
The Queen travelled through the tunnel to Calais on a Eurostar train, which stopped nose to nose with the train that carried President Mitterrand from Paris.
In 1975 there was no campaign protesting against a fixed link, with one of the largest ferry operators (Sealink) being state-owned.
On 4 August 2015, a Sudanese migrant walked nearly the entire length of one of the tunnels.
On 11 September 2008, a fire occurred in the Channel Tunnel at 13:57 GMT.
On the French side at Sangatte, a deep shaft with adits was made.
The TBMs were of a closed nature during the initial , but then operated as open, boring through the chalk marl stratum.
Six machines were used, all commenced digging from Shakespeare Cliff, three marine-bound and three for the land tunnels.
Surveys were undertaken in 1958–1959, 1964–1965, 1972–1974 and 1986–1988.
The cross-Channel ferry industry protested under the name "Flexilink".
On the English side at Shakespeare Cliff, the government allowed  of  diameter tunnel to be driven.
The vehicles cannot turn around within the tunnel, and are driven from either end.
In a few instances, groups of men claiming to be refugees were able to sneak into a tanker truck carrying liquid chocolate and managed to survive, though they did not enter the UK in one attempt.
On 16 September 2003 the prime minister, Tony Blair, opened the first section of High Speed 1, from Folkestone to north Kent.
Maintenance activities are less than projected.
The Quaternary undersea valley Fosse Dangaered, and Castle Hill landslip at the English portal, caused concerns.
In April the French National Assembly gave unanimous support and, in June 1987, after a public inquiry, the Senate gave unanimous support.
The 24 STTS vehicles are used mainly for maintenance but also for firefighting and in emergencies.
Tunnel-induced regional development is small compared to general economic growth.
The United Kingdom blamed France for allowing Sangatte to open, and France blamed the UK for its lax asylum rules and the EU for not having a uniform immigration policy.
Full service resumed on 9 February 2009 after repairs costing €60&nbsp;million.
In 2002, after the European Commission told France that it was in breach of European Union rules on the free transfer of goods because of the delays and closures as a result of its poor security, a double fence was built at a cost of £5&nbsp;million, reducing the numbers of refugees detected each week reaching Britain on goods trains from 250 to almost none.
Precast segmental linings in the main TBM drives were used, but two different solutions were used.
These early works were encountered more than a century later during the TML project.
It is the third-longest rail tunnel in the world, behind the Gotthard Base Tunnel in Switzerland and the Seikan Tunnel in Japan, but with the longest under-sea section.
For some city-to-city trains, the train is a control zone.
There are juxtaposed controls, meaning that passports are checked before boarding first by officials belonging to departing country and then officials of the destination country.
The ''cause célèbre'' nature of the problem even included journalists detained as they followed refugees onto railway property.
Unfortunately this design led to unacceptable lateral forces on the trains so a reduction in train speed was required and restrictors were installed in the ducts.
The service tunnel acted as a pilot preceding the main ones, so that the geology, areas of crushed rock, and zones of high water inflow could be predicted.
The ventilation system maintains the air pressure in the service tunnel higher than in the rail tunnels, so that in the event of a fire, smoke does not enter the service tunnel from the rail tunnels.
Signalling in the tunnel is coordinated from two control centres:  The main control centre at the Folkestone terminal, and a backup at the Calais terminal, which is staffed at all times and can take over all operations in the event of a breakdown or emergency.
Eurotunnel said it was losing £5m per month because of the problem.
The LADOGS have a short wheelbase with a  turning circle, allowing two-point turns within the service tunnel.
The geology of this site generally consists of northeasterly dipping Cretaceous strata, part of the northern limb of the Wealden-Boulonnais dome.
It cost £5.8&nbsp;billion.
In 1979, the "Mouse-hole Project" was suggested when the Conservatives came to power in Britain.
The Maître d'Oeuvre was a supervisory engineering body employed by Eurotunnel under the terms of the concession that monitored project activity and reported back to the governments and banks.
There is a train protection system that stops the train if the speed exceeds that indicated on the in-cab display.
In April 1985 promoters were formally invited to submit scheme proposals.
The traditional railway south of London uses a 750&nbsp;V&nbsp;DC third rail to deliver electricity, but since the opening of High Speed 1 there is no longer any need for tunnel trains to use the third rail system.
The overall environmental impact is almost certainly negative.
Local authorities in both France and the UK called for the closure of Sangatte, and Eurotunnel twice sought an injunction against the centre.
Fire safety was a critical design issue.
Among reasons given for the selection was that it caused least disruption to shipping in the Channel, least environmental disruption, was the best protected against terrorism, and was the most likely to attract sufficient private finance.
Eurotunnel commissioned the UK Fire Research Station - now part of the Building Research Establishment - to give reports of vehicle fires, and liaised with Kent Fire Brigade to gather vehicle fire statistics over one year.
A Railway Usage Agreement was signed between Eurotunnel, British Rail and SNCF guaranteeing future revenue in exchange for the railways obtaining half of the tunnel's capacity.
"Pods" with different purposes, up to a payload of , are inserted into the side of the vehicles.
At the peak of construction 15,000&nbsp;people were employed with daily expenditure over £3&nbsp;million.
The service vehicles are rubber-tyred with a buried wire guidance system.
The type of track used is known as Low Vibration Track (LVT).
Pods up to 1&nbsp;tonne can be loaded onto the rear of the vehicles.
High Speed 1 trains travel at up to , the journey from London to Paris taking 2&nbsp;hours 15&nbsp;minutes, to Brussels 1&nbsp;hour 51&nbsp;minutes.
In contrast to the English machines, which were given alphanumeric names, the French tunnelling machines were all named after women: Brigitte, Europa, Catherine, Virginie, Pascaline, Séverine.
Overall cross-Channel traffic was overestimated.
Special arrival sidings accept a train that is on fire, as the train is not allowed to stop whilst on fire in the tunnel, unless continuing its journey would lead to a worse outcome.
Both EE and Vodafone plan to offer LTE services on the route; EE said it expected to cover the route with LTE connectivity by summer 2014.
Forty-six Class 92 locomotives for hauling freight trains and overnight passenger trains (the Nightstar project, which was abandoned) were commissioned, running on both overhead AC and third-rail DC power.
O2 service was expected to be available soon afterwards.
Eurotunnel completed the tunnel on time, and it was officially opened, one year later than originally planned, by Queen Elizabeth II and the French president, François Mitterrand, in a ceremony held in Calais on 6 May 1994.
According to the last official count in July 2015, about 3,000 migrants, mainly from Ethiopia, Eritrea, Sudan and Afghanistan, were living in the makeshift camps in Calais.
Public opinion strongly favoured a drive-through tunnel, but ventilation issues, concerns about accident management, and fear of driver mesmerisation led to the only shortlisted rail submission, CTG/F-M, being awarded the project in January 1986.
In the event of a fire, ventilation is used to keep smoke out of the service tunnel and move smoke in one direction in the main tunnel to give passengers clean air.
An early attempt at building a Channel Tunnel was made in the late 19th century, on the English side "in the hope of forcing the hand of the English Government".
The reason for juxtaposed controls is a wish to prevent illegal immigration before reaching British soil, and because a check of all passengers on a train can take 30 minutes, which creates long queues if done at arrival.
On the English side, the stratum dip is less than 5°; on the French side this increases to 20°.
To avoid confusion, microfossil assemblages were used to classify the chalk marl.
These buried TBMs were then used to provide an electrical earth.
The English Terminal and boring from Shakespeare Cliff was undertaken by the five British construction companies in the ''Translink Joint Venture''.
Eurostar cancelled all services.
This land was then made into the Samphire Hoe Country Park.
English access was provided at Shakespeare Cliff, French access from a shaft at Sangatte.
Private funding for such a complex infrastructure project was of unprecedented scale.
Maintenance is facilitated by the existence of two tunnel junctions or crossover facilities, allowing for two-way operation in each of the six tunnel segments thereby created, and thus providing safe access for maintenance of one isolated tunnel segment at a time.
It referred briefly to its protagonist, a Mr. McAllan, as having completed a British Channel tunnel successfully in 1940, five years into the future of the film's release.
At , the tunnel has the longest undersea portion of any tunnel in the world, although the Seikan Tunnel in Japan is both longer overall at  and deeper at  below sea level.
Since its construction, the tunnel has faced several problems.
By mid-1989 the price had risen to £11.00.
Identified by the 1964–65 geophysical survey, the Fosse Dangaered is an infilled valley system extending  below the seabed,  south of the tunnel route in mid-channel.
The service of EE and Vodafone commenced on the same date as the announcement.
Pumping stations remove water in the tunnels from rain, seepage, and so on.
A detailed geological survey was carried out in 1964–65.
The Channel Tunnel Rail Link (CTRL), now called High Speed 1, runs  from St Pancras railway station in London to the tunnel portal at Folkestone in Kent.
In 2005 Eurotunnel was described as being in a serious situation.
UIC60 (60&nbsp;kg/m) rails of 900A grade rest on  rail pads, which fit the RN/Sonneville bolted dual leaf-springs.
The surveying in 1958–59 catered for immersed tube and bridge designs as well as a bored tunnel, and thus a wide area was investigated.
Despite the restructuring, ''The Economist'' reported in 1998 that to break even Eurotunnel would have to increase fares, traffic and market share for sustainability.
All tunnel services run on electricity, shared equally from English and French sources.
Exploratory probing took place in the service tunnel, in the form of extensive forward probing, vertical downward probes and sideways probing.
* A  layer of chalk marl (French: ''craie bleue'') in the lower third of the lower chalk appeared to present the best tunnelling medium.
Military fears continued during World War II.
On 6 November 2007 the Queen officially opened High Speed 1 and St Pancras International station, replacing the original slower link to Waterloo International railway station.
The blocking of the tunnel led to the implementation of Operation Stack, the transformation of the M20 motorway into a linear car park.
The average depth is  below the seabed.
30% of the funding came from the Channel Tunnel Co Ltd, the largest shareholder of which was the British Transport Commission, as successor to the South Eastern Railway.
A Eurotunnel spokesperson explained that snow had evaded the train's winterisation shields, and that the transition from cold air outside to the tunnel's warm atmosphere had melted the snow, resulting in electrical failures.
In 1999 Eurostar posted its first net profit, having made a loss of £925m in 1995.
Thirty-one Eurostar trains, based on the French TGV, built to UK loading gauge with many modifications for safety within the tunnel, were commissioned, with ownership split between British Rail, French national railways (SNCF) and Belgian national railways (SNCB).
Shares in Eurotunnel were issued at £3.50 per share on 9 December 1987.
In 2001 and 2002, several riots broke out at Sangatte and groups of refugees (up to 550 in a December 2001 incident) stormed the fences and attempted to enter ''en masse''.
A  gauge railway was used on the English side during construction.
They would usually get onboard trucks, which would then get onto the freight trains.
The area of the UK site was severely constrained and the design was challenging.
In 1958 the 1881 workings were cleared in preparation for a £100,000 geological survey by the Channel Tunnel Study Group.
The tunnel consists of three bores: two  diameter rail tunnels,  apart,  in length with a  diameter service tunnel in between.
The 1964–65 surveys concentrated on a northerly route that left the English coast at Dover harbour; using 70&nbsp;boreholes, an area of deeply weathered rock with high permeability was located just south of Dover harbour.
Surveying undertaken in the 20 years before construction confirmed earlier speculations that a tunnel could be bored through a chalk marl stratum.
The French did not take the idea seriously and nothing came of Lloyd George's proposal.
The British ''Channel Tunnel Group'' consisted of two banks and five construction companies, while their French counterparts, ''France–Manche'', consisted of three banks and five construction companies.
There are also cross-passages and piston relief ducts.
The Eurotunnel does operate profitably, offering an alternative transportation mode unaffected by poor weather.
In December 1997 the British and French governments extended Eurotunnel's operating concession by 34&nbsp;years, to 2086.
At £4.65 billion, the project came in 80% over its predicted budget.
Both tunnels were closed on 17 January 2015 following a lorry fire which filled the midsection of Running Tunnel North with smoke.
The image of a region being connected to the European high-speed transport and active political response are more important for regional economic development.
The estimate caused rumours that Germany had already begun digging.
On the English side, only minor faults of displacement less than  exist; on the French side, displacements of up to  are present owing to the Quenocs anticlinal fold.
Conventional ballasted tunnel-track was ruled out owing to the difficulty of maintenance and lack of stability and precision.
A fleet of 15 Light Service Tunnel Vehicles (LADOGS) was introduced to supplement the STTSs.
Illegal immigrants have attempted to use the tunnel to enter the UK, causing a minor diplomatic disagreement over the siting of the refugee camp at Sangatte, which was eventually closed in 2002.
In 1995, the American magazine ''Popular Mechanics'' published the results.
The latter separate the blocks' mass movements from the lean encasement concrete.
Tunnelling was a major engineering challenge, with the only precedent being the undersea Seikan Tunnel in Japan.
The Crossing took under an hour, reaching speeds of 40&nbsp;mph–faster than most cross-channel ferries.
* Eurobridge: a  span suspension bridge with a roadway in an enclosed tube
On the English side, a marshalling area was  below the top of Shakespeare Cliff, the New Austrian Tunnelling method (NATM) was first applied in the chalk marl here.
The UK Home Office stated that approximately 19,000 attempts to cross the Channel during the first half of 2015 had been detected and prevented.
A cost benefit analysis of the tunnel indicated that there were few impacts on the wider economy and few developments associated with the project, and that the British economy would have been better off if it had not been constructed.
O2 turned on 2G, 3G and 4G services in November 2014.
At the terminals the shuttle trains traverse a figure eight to reduce uneven wear on the wheels.
The ventilation system can control smoke movement.
The two crossovers are the largest artificial undersea caverns ever built; 150 m long, 10 m high and 18 m wide.
The tunnel was closed to all traffic, with the undamaged South Tunnel reopening for limited services two days later.
Proponents estimated construction to be about US$150 million.
The railways on "classic" lines in Belgium are also electrified by overhead wires, but at 3000&nbsp;V&nbsp;DC.
Piston relief ducts of  diameter were chosen to solve the problem, with 4&nbsp;ducts per kilometre to give close to optimum results.
At the 1994 completion actual costs were, in 1985 prices, £4650&nbsp;million: an 80% cost overrun.
On the French side, neoprene and grout sealed bolted linings made of cast iron or high-strength reinforced concrete were used; on the English side, the main requirement was for speed so bolting of cast-iron lining segments was only carried out in areas of poor geology.
The tunnel connects end-to-end with the LGV Nord and High Speed 1 high-speed railway lines.
A 1996 report from the European Commission predicted that Kent and Nord-Pas de Calais had to face increased traffic volumes due to general growth of cross-Channel traffic and traffic attracted by the tunnel.
Under the terms of the Concession, Eurotunnel was obliged to investigate a cross-Channel road tunnel.
The incident started on an HGV shuttle train travelling towards France.
Both fires and cold weather have disrupted its operation.
At Calais there are  of track and 44&nbsp;turnouts.
The design limit was set at , using a mechanical cooling system with refrigeration plants on both sides that run chilled water circulating in pipes within the tunnel.
At Folkestone there are  of main-line track, 45&nbsp;turnouts and eight platforms.
A 1986 survey showed that a tributary crossed the path of the tunnel, and so the tunnel route was made as far north and deep as possible.
Steering cannot be locked like the STTS vehicles, and maximum speed is .
The wagon door systems are designed to withstand fire inside the wagon for 30&nbsp;minutes, longer than the transit time of 27&nbsp;minutes.
The agreements will enable both operators' subscribers to use 2G and 3G services.
The maximum speed is .
* a rail proposal based on the 1975 scheme presented by Channel Tunnel Group/France–Manche (CTG/F–M),
In 2001, most came from Afghanistan, Iraq and Iran, but African and Eastern European countries were also represented.
The French layout was achieved more easily.
The service tunnel is used for access to technical equipment in cross-passages and equipment rooms, to provide fresh-air ventilation and for emergency evacuation.
The French one was based on the Mount Baker Ridge freeway tunnel in Seattle; the UK cavern was dug from the service tunnel ahead of the main ones, to avoid delay.
On the French side, particularly near the coast, the chalk was harder, more brittle and more fractured than on the English side.
The removal of a bottleneck by means like the tunnel does not necessarily induce economic gains in all adjacent regions.
The terminals are designed to transfer vehicles from the motorway onto trains at a rate of 700&nbsp;cars and 113&nbsp;heavy vehicles per hour.
The shuttles have two separate halves: single and double deck.
The English crossover is  from Shakespeare Cliff, and the French crossover is  from Sangatte.
The tunnel is a build-own-operate-transfer (BOOT) project with a concession.
In June 2013 DB was granted access to the tunnel.
The cancellation costs were estimated to be £17 million.
The British government took no interest in funding the project, but Margaret Thatcher, the prime minister, said she had no objection to a privately funded project.
Ten migrants have died near the Channel tunnel terminal since June 2015.
On the English side, the land tunnels were driven from Shakespeare Cliff - same place as the marine tunnels - not from Folkestone.
The French effort required five TBMs: two main marine machines, one main land machine (the short land drives of  allowed one TBM to complete the first drive then reverse direction and complete the other), and two service tunnel machines.
Owing to limited space, the precast lining factory was on the Isle of Grain in the Thames estuary, which used Scottish granite aggregate delivered by ship from the Foster Yeoman coastal super quarry at Glensanda in Loch Linnhe on the west coast of Scotland.
The design and construction was done by the ten construction companies in the CTG/F-M group.
An independent report by Christopher Garnett (former CEO of Great North Eastern Railway) and Claude Gressier (a French transport expert) on the 18/19 December 2009 incidents was issued in February 2010, making 21 recommendations.
The South East of England is likely to benefit developmentally and socially from faster and cheaper transport to continental Europe, but the benefits are unlikely to be equally distributed throughout the region.
The following chart presents the estimated number of passengers and tonnes of freight, respectively, annually transported through the Channel Tunnel since 1994, in millions:
In 1981 Thatcher and François Mitterrand, the French president, agreed to set up a working group to look into a privately funded project, and in June 1982 the Franco-British study group favoured a twin tunnel to take conventional trains and a vehicle shuttle service.
By 1997 the problem had attracted international press attention, and the French Red Cross opened a refugee centre at Sangatte in 1999, using a warehouse once used for tunnel construction; by 2002 it housed up to 1,500&nbsp;people at a time, most of them trying to get to the UK.
Each half has two loading/unloading wagons and 12 carrier wagons.
Ideas for a cross-Channel fixed link appeared as early as 1802, but British political and press pressure over the compromising of national security stalled attempts to construct a tunnel.
In 1955, defence arguments were accepted to be irrelevant because of the dominance of air power, and both the British and French governments supported technical and geological surveys.
On the English side the chalk marl ran along the entire length of the tunnel, but on the French a length of  had variable and difficult geology.
