Visibly emotional, Chaplin accepted his award for "the incalculable effect he has had in making motion pictures the art form of this century".
Unwilling to be quiet about the issue, he openly protested the trials of Communist Party members and the activities of the House Un-American Activities Committee.
After two arduous trials, in which the prosecuting lawyer accused him of "moral turpitude", Chaplin was declared to be the father.
The troubles stemmed from his affair with an aspirant actress named Joan Barry, with whom he was involved intermittently between June 1941 and the autumn of 1942.
Having fulfilled his First National contract, Chaplin was free to make his first picture as an independent producer.
While making ''The Gold Rush'', Chaplin married for the second time.
He thereafter composed the scores for all of his films, and from the late 1950s to his death, he scored all of his silent features and some of his short films.
The character lives in poverty and is frequently treated badly, but remains kind and upbeat; defying his social position, he strives to be seen as a gentleman.
Chaplin finished editing ''City Lights'' in December 1930, by which time silent films were an anachronism.
Chaplin directed his own films from an early stage, and continued to hone his craft as he moved to the Essanay, Mutual, and First National corporations.
Chaplin then embarked on the Third Liberty Bond campaign, touring the United States for one month to raise money for the Allies of the First World War.
Barry, who displayed obsessive behaviour and was twice arrested after they separated, reappeared the following year and announced that she was pregnant with Chaplin's child.
Chaplin concluded the film with a five-minute speech in which he abandoned his barber character, looked directly into the camera, and pleaded against war and fascism.
Chaplin stated, "This is the picture that I want to be remembered by" at the time of the film's release.
An FBI investigation was opened, and Chaplin was forced to leave the United States and settle in Switzerland.
Throughout the 1980s, the Tramp image was used by IBM to advertise their personal computers.
Sennett kept him on, however, when he received orders from exhibitors for more Chaplin films.
The British Film Institute has also established the Charles Chaplin Research Foundation, and the first international Charles Chaplin Conference was held in London in July 2005.
His performance was so well received that he was called to London to play the role alongside William Gillette, the original Holmes.
Chaplin claimed that the Barry trials had "crippled his creativeness", and it was some time before he began working again.
By 1918, he was one of the best known figures in the world.
The public, however, seemed to have little interest in a Chaplin film without his presence, and it was a box-office disappointment.
He then had sets constructed and worked with his stock company to improvise gags and "business" using them, almost always working the ideas out on film.
This approach has prompted criticism, since the 1940s, for being "old fashioned", while the film scholar Donald McCaffrey sees it as an indication that Chaplin never completely understood film as a medium.
As his activities were widely reported in the press, and Cold War fears grew, questions were raised over his failure to take American citizenship.
One advantage Chaplin found in sound technology was the opportunity to record a musical score for the film, which he composed himself.
The same year, a study by the Boston Society for Psychical Research concluded that Chaplin was "an American obsession".
Their central archive is held at the archives of Montreux, Switzerland and scanned versions of its contents, including 83,630 images, 118 scripts, 976 manuscripts, 7,756 letters, and thousands of other documents, are available for research purposes at the Chaplin Research Centre at the Cineteca di Bologna.
The ending was unpopular, however, and generated controversy.
Chaplin, then 54, had been introduced to her by a film agent seven months earlier.
He made only four more films for Mutual over the first ten months of 1917: ''Easy Street'', ''The Cure'', ''The Immigrant'' and ''The Adventurer''.
Chaplin began performing at an early age, touring music halls and later working as a stage actor and comedian.
"It was like tidings from heaven", Chaplin recalled.
Although Chaplin still had plans for future film projects, by the mid-1970s he was very frail.
Three charges lacked sufficient evidence to proceed to court, but the Mann Act trial began in March 1944.
In America the hostility towards him continued, and, although it received some positive reviews, ''Limelight'' was subjected to a wide-scale boycott.
Sennett also allowed Chaplin to direct his next film himself, after Chaplin promised to pay $1,500 ($ in  dollars) if the film was unsuccessful.
Chaplin's 100th birthday anniversary in 1989 was marked with several events around the world, and on 15 April 2011, a day before his 122nd birthday, Google celebrated him with a special Google Doodle video on its global and other country-wide homepages.
At the 1st Academy Awards, Chaplin was given a special trophy "For versatility and genius in acting, writing, directing and producing ''The Circus''.
He was also friendly with several suspected communists, and attended functions given by Soviet diplomats in Los Angeles.
A preview before an unsuspecting public audience was not a success, but a showing for the press produced positive reviews.
Along with damage of the Joan Barry scandal, he was publicly accused of being a communist.
In the 21st century, several of Chaplin's films are still regarded as classics and among the greatest ever made.
Chaplin again vocalised his political views in ''Monsieur Verdoux'', criticising capitalism and arguing that the world encourages mass killing through wars and weapons of mass destruction.
Stephen M. Weissman has argued that Chaplin's problematic relationship with his mentally ill mother was often reflected in his female characters and the Tramp's desire to save them.
In other fields, Chaplin helped inspire the cartoon characters Felix the Cat and Mickey Mouse, and was an influence on the Dada art movement.
Chaplin's legacy is managed on behalf of his children by the Chaplin office, located in Paris.
Chaplin's films introduced a slower form of comedy than the typical Keystone farce, and he developed a large fan base.
Chaplin remained a controversial figure throughout the 1950s, especially after he was awarded the International Peace Prize by the communist-led World Peace Council, and after his meetings with Zhou Enlai and Nikita Khrushchev.
Chaplin decided to hold the world premiere of ''Limelight'' in London, since it was the setting of the film.
"There was nothing we could do but accept poor mother's fate", Chaplin later wrote, and she remained in care until her death in 1928.
He refused to move to sound films in the 1930s, instead producing ''City Lights'' (1931) and ''Modern Times'' (1936) without dialogue.
As he left Los Angeles, he expressed a premonition that he would not be returning.
Social commentary was a feature of Chaplin's films from early in his career, as he portrayed the underdog in a sympathetic light and highlighted the difficulties of the poor.
In 1919, Chaplin co-founded the distribution company United Artists, which gave him complete control over his films.
The young comedian headed the show and impressed reviewers, being described as "one of the best pantomime artists ever seen here".
Most serious of these was an alleged violation of the Mann Act, which prohibits the transportation of women across state boundaries for sexual purposes.
Before the divorce suit was filed, Chaplin had begun work on a new film, ''The Circus''.
He met with the company, and signed a $150-per-week ($ in  dollars) contract in September 1913.
Robinson writes that even in Chaplin's later years, his work continued "to take precedence over everything and everyone else."
Because he personally funded his films, Chaplin was at liberty to strive for this goal and shoot as many takes as he wished.
He was also awarded honorary Doctor of Letters degrees by the University of Oxford and the University of Durham in 1962.
Producing films in this manner meant Chaplin took longer to complete his pictures than almost any other filmmaker at the time.
Constance B. Kuriyama has identified serious underlying themes in the early comedies, such as greed (''The Gold Rush'') and loss (''The Kid'').
The cast included various members of his family, including his five oldest children and his half-brother, Wheeler Dryden.
Making a comedy about Hitler was seen as highly controversial, but Chaplin's financial independence allowed him to take the risk.
When the Essanay contract ended in December 1915, Chaplin – fully aware of his popularity – requested a $150,000 signing bonus from his next studio.
Chaplin was reported to be in a state of nervous breakdown, as the story became headline news and groups formed across America calling for his films to be banned.
In real life, he explained, "men and women try to hide their emotions rather than seek to express them".
His most successful role was a drunk called the "Inebriate Swell", which drew him significant recognition.
In his autobiography, Chaplin recalled that on his return to Los Angeles, "I was confused and without plan, restless and conscious of an extreme loneliness".
Before the creation of United Artists, Chaplin married for the first time.
His approach to filming was described by the art director Eugène Lourié: "Chaplin did not think in 'artistic' images when he was shooting.
The film was ''Mabel's Strange Predicament'', but "the Tramp" character, as it became known, debuted to audiences in ''Kid Auto Races at Venice'' – shot later than ''Mabel's Strange Predicament'' but released two days earlier.
Many of Chaplin's film have had a DVD and Blu-Ray release.
In 1972, as part of a renewed appreciation for his work, Chaplin received an Honorary Academy Award for "the incalculable effect he has had in making motion pictures the art form of this century".
Books about Chaplin continue to be published regularly, and he is a popular subject for media scholars and film archivists.
As Chaplin said in 1925, "The whole point of the Little Fellow is that no matter how down on his ass he is, no matter how well the jackals succeed in tearing him apart, he's still a man of dignity."
Given its general release in January 1931, ''City Lights'' proved to be a popular and financial success – eventually grossing over $3 million.
Following its September 1921 release, he chose to return to England for the first time in almost a decade.
The 1940s saw Chaplin face a series of controversies, both in his work and in his personal life, which changed his fortunes and severely affected his popularity in the United States.
He was proud of the film, writing in his autobiography, "''Monsieur Verdoux'' is the cleverest and most brilliant film I have yet made."
He soon developed the Tramp persona and formed a large fan base.
Chaplin founded a new production company, Attica, and used Shepperton Studios for the shooting.
The films he left behind can never grow old."
In July, a journalist for ''Motion Picture Magazine'' wrote that "Chaplinitis" had spread across America.
When Chaplin's contract came up for renewal at the end of the year, he asked for $1,000 a week ($ in  dollars) – an amount Sennett refused as too large.
Chaplin strongly disliked the picture, but one review picked him out as "a comedian of the first water".
At 16 years old, Chaplin starred in the play's West End production at the Duke of York's Theatre from October to December 1905.
The director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), J. Edgar Hoover, who had long been suspicious of Chaplin's political leanings, used the opportunity to generate negative publicity about him.
It was his first feature in 15 years to adopt political references and social realism, a factor that attracted considerable press coverage despite Chaplin's attempts to downplay the issue.
The scandal attracted vast attention, but Chaplin and his film were warmly received in Europe.
Chaplin returned to comedy for his next project.
Actor Bob Hope declared, "We were lucky to have lived in his time."
The camera should not intrude."
Filming began in November 1951, by which time Chaplin had spent three years working on the story.
He described the process in his autobiography:
He received several offers, including Universal, Fox, and Vitagraph, the best of which came from the Mutual Film Corporation at $10,000 a week.
In May 1906, Chaplin joined the juvenile act ''Casey's Circus'', where he developed popular burlesque pieces and was soon the star of the show.
It was an unhappy marriage, and Chaplin spent long hours at the studio to avoid seeing his wife.
The top 100 films as voted on by directors included ''Modern Times'' at number 22, ''City Lights'' at number 30, and ''The Gold Rush'' at number 91.
His mother and father had married four years previously, at which time Charles Sr. became the legal carer of Hannah's illegitimate son, Sydney John Hill.
Chaplin received a subpoena to appear before HUAC, but was not called to testify.
Unlike conventional slapstick comedies, Robinson states that the comic moments in Chaplin's films centre on the Tramp's attitude to the things happening to him: the humour does not come from the Tramp bumping into a tree, but from his lifting his hat to the tree in apology.
Although McGranery told the press that he had "a pretty good case against Chaplin", Maland has concluded, on the basis of the FBI files that were released in the 1980s, that the US government had no real evidence to prevent Chaplin's re-entry.
During the filming of his eleventh picture, ''Mabel at the Wheel'', he clashed with director Mabel Normand and was almost released from his contract.
For this new venture, Chaplin also wished to do more than comedy and, according to Louvish, "make his mark on a changed world."
Chaplin diverged from conventional slapstick by slowing the pace and exhausting each scene of its comic potential, with more focus on developing the viewer's relationship to the characters.
The final seven of Chaplin's 14 Essanay films were all produced at this slower pace.
Soon after, the pregnancy was found to be a false alarm.
The FBI wanted him out of the country, and early in 1947 they launched an official investigation.
May 1957), Annette Emily (b. December 1959), and Christopher James (b. July 1962).
Hannah was released from the asylum eight months later, but in March 1905 her illness returned, this time permanently.
''Limelight'' featured a cameo appearance from Buster Keaton, whom Chaplin cast as his stage partner in a pantomime scene.
According to film historian Jeffrey Vance, "although he relied upon associates to arrange varied and complex instrumentation, the musical imperative is his, and not a note in a Chaplin musical score was placed there without his assent."
The funeral, on 27 December, was a small and private Anglican ceremony, according to his wishes.
Chaplin was interred in the Corsier-sur-Vevey cemetery.
Norman Spencer Chaplin was born malformed, and died three days later.
If he was out of ideas he often took a break from the shoot, which could last for days, while keeping the studio ready for when inspiration returned.
The image of the Tramp has become a part of cultural history; according to Simon Louvish, the character is recognisable to people who have never seen a Chaplin film, and in places where his films are never shown.
A bitter divorce followed, in which Grey's application – accusing Chaplin of infidelity, abuse, and of harbouring "perverted sexual desires" – was leaked to the press.
Shortly after the publication of his memoirs, Chaplin began work on ''A Countess from Hong Kong'' (1967), a romantic comedy based on a script he had written for Paulette Goddard in the 1930s.
The 2012 ''Sight & Sound'' poll, which compiles "top ten" ballots from film critics and directors to determine each group's most acclaimed films,
The critic Leonard Maltin has written of the "unique" and "indelible" nature of the Tramp, and argued that no other comedian matched his "worldwide impact".
With the advent of sound technology, Chaplin began using a synchronised orchestral soundtrack – composed by himself – for ''City Lights'' (1931).
He was further nominated in the Best Actor, Best Original Screenplay, and Best Picture (as producer) categories for ''The Great Dictator'', and received another Best Original Screenplay nomination for ''Monsieur Verdoux''.
Film historian Mark Cousins has written that Chaplin "changed not only the imagery of cinema, but also its sociology and grammar" and claims that Chaplin was as important to the development of comedy as a genre as D.W. Griffith was to drama.
She eventually divorced Chaplin in Mexico in 1942, citing incompatibility and separation for more than a year.
Through his father's connections, Chaplin became a member of the Eight Lancashire Lads clog-dancing troupe, with whom he toured English music halls throughout 1899 and 1900.
Among the film industry's tributes, director René Clair wrote, "He was a monument of the cinema, of all countries and all times&nbsp;... the most beautiful gift the cinema made to us."
The marriage eventually ended in April 1920, with Chaplin explaining in his autobiography that they were "irreconcilably mismated".
In his home city, London, a statue of Chaplin as the Tramp, sculpted by John Doubleday and unveiled in 1981, is located in Leicester Square.
''A King in New York'' was not shown in America until 1973.
He experienced several further strokes, which made it difficult for him to communicate, and he had to use a wheelchair.
The character became more gentle and romantic; ''The Tramp'' (April 1915) was considered a particular turning point in his development.
The couple had refused to comment on the nature of their relationship, and it was not known whether they were married or not.
The infusion of pathos is a well-known aspect of Chaplin's work, and Larcher notes his reputation for "inducing laughter and tears".
He later recalled making his first amateur appearance at the age of five years, when he took over from Hannah one night in Aldershot.
This severely limited its revenue, although it achieved moderate commercial success in Europe.
His son, Michael, was cast as a boy whose parents are targeted by the FBI, while Chaplin's character faces accusations of communism.
The Tramp defies authority figures and "gives as good as he gets", leading Robinson and Louvish to see him as a representative for the underprivileged – an "everyman turned heroic saviour".
Chaplin was initially hesitant about accepting, but decided to return to the US for the first time in 20 years.
''Monsieur Verdoux'' was the first Chaplin release that failed both critically and commercially in the United States.
Many of his early films began with only a vague premise – for example "Charlie enters a health spa" or "Charlie works in a pawn shop."
Chaplin arrived in Los Angeles, home of the Keystone studio, in early December 1913.
In it, Chaplin demonstrated his increasing concern with story construction, and his treatment of the Tramp as "a sort of Pierrot".
Chaplin recalled that he "had a disquieting feeling of sinking back into a depressing commonplaceness", and was therefore delighted when a new tour began in October.
From the film industry, Chaplin drew upon the work of the French comedian Max Linder, whose films he greatly admired.
He then worked to fulfil his First National contract, releasing ''Pay Day'' in February 1922.
The first of these was a new boldness in expressing his political beliefs.
He built a story around the idea of walking a tightrope while besieged by monkeys, and turned the Tramp into the accidental star of a circus.
In a review, the playwright John Osborne called it Chaplin's "most bitter" and "most openly personal" film.
As Chaplin was not a trained musician, he could not read sheet music and needed the help of professional composers, such as David Raksin, Raymond Rasch and Eric James, when creating his scores.
He wished for the film to have a realistic feel, and directed his cast to give restrained performances.
Chaplin's early years in music hall allowed him to see stage comedians at work; he also attended the Christmas pantomimes at Drury Lane, where he studied the art of clowning through performers like Dan Leno.
He was the first to popularise feature-length comedy and to slow down the pace of action, adding pathos and subtlety to it.
Describing his working method as "sheer perseverance to the point of madness", Chaplin would be completely consumed by the production of a picture.
Chaplin's early years were spent with his mother and brother Sydney in the London district of Kennington; Hannah had no means of income, other than occasional nursing and dressmaking, and Chaplin Sr. provided no financial support.
''Caught in the Rain'', issued 4 May 1914, was Chaplin's directorial debut and was highly successful.
She was 16 and he was 35, meaning Chaplin could have been charged with statutory rape under California law.
Finally completed in October 1927, ''The Circus'' was released in January 1928 to a positive reception.
Chaplin received three Academy Awards: an Honorary Award for "versatility and genius in acting, writing, directing, and producing ''The Circus''" in 1929, a second Honorary Award for "the incalculable effect he has had in making motion pictures the art form of this century" in 1972, and a Best Score award in 1973 for ''Limelight'' (shared with Ray Rasch and Larry Russell).
His final projects were compiling a pictorial autobiography, ''My Life in Pictures'' (1974) and scoring ''A Woman of Paris'' for re-release in 1976.
Chaplin asserted a high level of control over his pictures, and started to put more time and care into each film.
Chaplin replaced the Tramp (while wearing similar attire) with "A Jewish Barber", a reference to the Nazi party's belief that he was Jewish.
It was a big success, and Chaplin received considerable press attention.
The visit attracted a large amount of press coverage, and at the Academy Awards gala he was given a twelve-minute standing ovation, the longest in the Academy's history.
It was adapted for Broadway two years later, re-titled ''Chaplin – A Musical''.
He is the only person that has that peculiar something called 'audience appeal' in sufficient quality to defy the popular penchant for movies that talk."
Every one of Chaplin's features received a vote.
In 1917, professional Chaplin imitators were so widespread that he took legal action, and it was reported that nine out of ten men who attended costume parties dressed as the Tramp.
The pair were caught in a large police operation in May, and Chaplin's coffin was found buried in a field in the nearby village of Noville.
The camera is there to photograph the actors".
Chaplin exercised complete control over his pictures, to the extent that he would act out the other roles for his cast, expecting them to imitate him exactly.
In 2011, two large murals depicting Chaplin on two 14-storey buildings were also unveiled in Vevey.
Although they never divorced, Chaplin's parents were estranged by around 1891.
The next year, his wife renounced her US citizenship and became a British citizen.
He completed one final tour of ''Sherlock Holmes'' in early 1906, before leaving the play after more than two-and-a-half years.
He believed that action is the main thing.
Setting his standards high, he told himself: "This next film must be an epic!
The Essanay Film Manufacturing Company of Chicago sent Chaplin an offer of $1,250 a week with a signing bonus of $10,000.
Calls were made for him to be deported; in one extreme and widely published example, Representative John E. Rankin, who helped establish HUAC, told Congress in June 1947: "Chaplin's very life in Hollywood is detrimental to the moral fabric of America.
The filmmaker was hurt by this failure – he had long wanted to produce a dramatic film and was proud of the result – and withdrew ''A Woman of Paris'' from circulation as soon as he could.
''City Lights'' had been a success, but Chaplin was unsure if he could make another picture without dialogue.
'''Sir Charles Spencer''' "'''Charlie'''" '''Chaplin''',  (16 April 1889&nbsp;– 25 December 1977) was an English comic actor, filmmaker, and composer who rose to fame in the silent era.
Chaplin began by playing a series of minor parts, eventually progressing to starring roles in 1909.
It was released in January 1921 with instant success, and by 1924 had been screened in over 50 countries.
He was a perfectionist, and his financial independence enabled him to spend years on the development and production of a picture.
If he is deported&nbsp;... his loathsome pictures can be kept from before the eyes of the American youth.
His films are characterised by slapstick combined with pathos, typified in the Tramp's struggles against adversity.
The high salary shocked the public and was widely reported in the press.
The 500-page book, which focused on his early years and personal life, became a worldwide best-seller, despite criticism over the lack of information on his film career.
For ''Limelight'', Chaplin composed "Terry's Theme", which was popularised by Jimmy Young as "Eternally" (1952).
Casting himself as an exiled king who seeks asylum in the United States, Chaplin included several of his recent experiences in the screenplay.
Chaplin did receive help, notably from his long-time cinematographer Roland Totheroh, brother Sydney Chaplin, and various assistant directors such as Harry Crocker and Charles Reisner.
John R. Freuler, the studio president, explained: "We can afford to pay Mr. Chaplin this large sum annually because the public wants Chaplin and will pay for him."
In an interview he granted in 1959, the year of his 70th birthday, Chaplin stated that there was still "room for the Little Man in the atomic age".
He was 88 years old.
The British Film Institute cites it as Chaplin's finest accomplishment, and the critic James Agee hails the closing scene as "the greatest piece of acting and the highest moment in movies".
In July 1962, ''The New York Times'' published an editorial stating that "we do not believe the Republic would be in danger if yesterday's unforgotten little tramp were allowed to amble down the gangplank of a steamer or plane in an American port".
