After further fraudulent activities, Powell fled to New York and published a book called ''The Living Authors of England'' with a chapter on Charles Dickens, who was not amused by what Powell had written.
Biographer Claire Tomalin has suggested Dickens was actually in Peckham when he suffered the stroke, and his mistress Nelly Ternan and her maids had him taken back to Gad's Hill so the public would not know the truth about their relationship.
Landing at Boston, he devoted the rest of the month to a round of dinners with such notables as Ralph Waldo Emerson, Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, and his American publisher, James Thomas Fields.
His works enjoyed unprecedented popularity during his lifetime, and by the twentieth century critics and scholars had recognised him as a literary genius.
Seymour committed suicide after the second instalment, and Dickens, who wanted to write a connected series of sketches, hired "Phiz" to provide the engravings (which were reduced from four to two per instalment) for the story.
He created some of the world's best-known fictional characters and is regarded as the greatest novelist of the Victorian era.
He asked Christopher Huffam, rigger to His Majesty's Navy, gentleman, and head of an established firm, to act as godfather to Charles.
At about this time he was made aware of a large embezzlement at the firm where his brother, Augustus, worked (John Chapman & Co.).
There were to be 12 performances, running between 11 January and 15 March 1870, the last at 8:00&nbsp;pm at St. James's Hall in London.
Perhaps Dickens's impressions on his meeting with Hans Christian Andersen informed the delineation of Uriah Heep.
His first reading tour, lasting from April 1858 to February 1859, consisted of 129 appearances in 49 different towns throughout England, Scotland and Ireland.
His son, Henry Fielding Dickens, described Dickens as someone who "possessed deep religious convictions".
For example, the prison scenes in ''The Pickwick Papers'' are claimed to have been influential in having the Fleet Prison shut down.
In his will, drafted more than a year before his death, Dickens left the care of his £80,000 estate to his longtime colleague John Forster and his "best and truest friend" Georgina Hogarth who, along with Dickens's two sons, also received a tax-free sum of £8,000 (about £800,000 in present terms).
On 8 June 1870, Dickens suffered another stroke at his home after a full day's work on ''Edwin Drood''.
This, along with scenes he had recently witnessed at the Field Lane Ragged School, caused Dickens to resolve to "strike a sledge hammer blow" for the poor.
He persuaded a group of twenty-five writers, headed by Washington Irving, to sign a petition for him to take to Congress, but the press were generally hostile to this, saying that he should be grateful for his popularity and that it was mercenary to complain about his work being pirated.
Claire Tomalin's book, ''The Invisible Woman'', argues that Ternan lived with Dickens secretly for the last 13 years of his life.
He began a friendship with William Harrison Ainsworth, the author of the highwayman novel ''Rookwood'' (1834), whose bachelor salon in Harrow Road had become the meeting place for a set that included Daniel Maclise, Benjamin Disraeli, Edward Bulwer-Lytton, and George Cruikshank.
All these became his friends and collaborators, with the exception of Disraeli, and he met his first publisher, John Macrone, at the house.
likewise gained currency as an idiom.
He often depicted the exploitation and oppression of the poor and condemned the public officials and institutions that not only allowed such abuses to exist, but flourished as a result.
When the warehouse was moved to Chandos Street in the smart, busy district of Covent Garden the boys worked in a room in which the window gave onto the street and little audiences gathered and watched them at work—in Dickens biographer Simon Callow's estimation, the public display was "a new refinement added to his misery".
Due to the difficulties of providing evidence in America to support his accusations, Dickens eventually made a private settlement with Powell out of court.
He performed 76 readings, netting £19,000, from December 1867 to April 1868.
Dickens worked at the law office of Ellis and Blackmore, attorneys, of Holborn Court, Gray's Inn, as a junior clerk from May 1827 to November 1828.
To celebrate the 200th anniversary of the birth of Charles Dickens in 2012, the Museum of London held the UK's first major exhibition on the author in 40 years.
The exceptional popularity of Dickens's novels, even those with socially oppositional themes (''Bleak House'', 1853; ''Little Dorrit'', 1857; ''Our Mutual Friend'', 1865), not only underscored his almost preternatural ability to create compelling storylines and unforgettable characters, but also ensured that the Victorian public confronted issues of social justice that had commonly been ignored.
While later novels also centre on idealised characters (Esther Summerson in ''Bleak House'' and Amy Dorrit in ''Little Dorrit''), this idealism serves only to highlight Dickens's goal of poignant social commentary.
In November 1836 Dickens accepted the position of editor of ''Bentley's Miscellany'', a position he held for three years, until he fell out with the owner.
This period came to an end in June 1822, when John Dickens was recalled to Navy Pay Office headquarters at Somerset House, and the family—minus Charles, who stayed behind to finish his final term of work—moved to Camden Town in London.
Henry James denied him a premier position, calling him "the greatest of superficial novelists": Dickens failed to endow his characters with psychological depth and the novels, "loose baggy monsters", betrayed a "cavalier organisation".
Over two years after the war, Dickens set sail from Liverpool on 9 November 1867 for his second American reading tour.
Dickens may have drawn on his childhood experiences, but he was also ashamed of them and would not reveal that this was where he gathered his realistic accounts of squalor.
Dickens was regarded as the literary colossus of his age.
His writing style is marked by a profuse linguistic creativity.
Although he had started to suffer from what he called the "true American catarrh", he kept to a schedule that would have challenged a much younger man, even managing to squeeze in some sleighing in Central Park.
Born in Portsmouth, Dickens left school to work in a factory when his father was incarcerated in a debtors' prison.
A group of 13 men then set out with Dickens to visit Looking Glass Prairie, a trip 30 miles into Illinois.
During this time he was also the publisher, editor, and a major contributor to the journals ''Household Words'' (1850–1859) and ''All the Year Round'' (1858–1870).
It is also the most-filmed of Dickens's stories, with many versions dating from the early years of cinema.
His mother's failure to request his return was a factor in his dissatisfied attitude towards women.
His journalism, in the form of sketches in periodicals, formed his first collection of pieces, published in 1836: ''Sketches by Boz''—Boz being a family nickname he employed as a pseudonym for some years.
Oscar Wilde generally disparaged his depiction of character, while admiring his gift for caricature.
After further provincial readings were cancelled, he began work on his final novel, ''The Mystery of Edwin Drood''.
Storey published her account in ''Dickens and Daughter'', but no contemporary evidence exists.
As he recalled to John Forster (from ''The Life of Charles Dickens''):
''Oliver Twist'' and ''Great Expectations'' are also frequently adapted, and, like many of his novels, evoke images of early Victorian London.
He later wrote that he wondered "how I could have been so easily cast away at such an age".
His 'Drooping Buds' essay in ''Household Words'' earlier on 3 April 1852 was considered by the hospital's founders to have been the catalyst for the hospital's success.
When pronounced by anyone with a head cold, "Moses" became "Boses"—later shortened to ''Boz''.
In late November 1851, Dickens moved into Tavistock House where he wrote ''Bleak House'' (1852–53), ''Hard Times'' (1854), and ''Little Dorrit'' (1856).
Dickens did receive a reply confirming Powell's embezzlement, but once the directors realised this information may have to be produced in court they refused to make further disclosures.
To cite one of numerous examples, the name Mr. Murdstone in ''David Copperfield'' conjures up twin allusions to "murder" and stony coldness.
Most of Dickens's major novels were first written in monthly or weekly instalments in journals such as ''Master Humphrey's Clock'' and ''Household Words'', later reprinted in book form.
Dickens's own name was considered "queer" by a contemporary critic, who wrote in 1849: "Mr Dickens, as if in revenge for his own queer name, does bestow still queerer ones upon his fictitious creations."
From Richmond, Virginia, Dickens returned to Washington, D.C., and started a trek westward to St. Louis, Missouri.
Its archetypal figures (Scrooge, Tiny Tim, the Christmas ghosts) entered into Western cultural consciousness.
Although Dickens and his wife had been separated for several years at the time of his death, he provided her with an annual income of £600 and made her similar allowances in his will.
Museums and festivals celebrating Dickens's life and works exist in many places with which Dickens was associated, such as the Charles Dickens Birthplace Museum in Portsmouth, the house in which he was born.
Through his journalism he campaigned on specific issues—such as sanitation and the workhouse—but his fiction probably demonstrated its greatest prowess in changing public opinion in regard to class inequalities.
Before rescuers arrived, Dickens tended and comforted the wounded and the dying with a flask of brandy and a hat refreshed with water, and saved some lives.
He went to theatres obsessively—he claimed that for at least three years he went to the theatre every single day.
To pay for his board and to help his family, Dickens was forced to leave school and work ten-hour days at Warren's Blacking Warehouse, on Hungerford Stairs, near the present Charing Cross railway station, where he earned six shillings a week pasting labels on pots of boot blacking.
Leo Tolstoy, G. K. Chesterton, and George Orwell praised his realism, comic voice, prose fluency, and genius for satiric caricature, as well as his passionate advocacy on behalf of children and the poor.
Dickens later used this experience as material for his short ghost story, "The Signal-Man", in which the central character has a premonition of his own death in a rail crash.
In 1856, his income from writing allowed him to buy Gad's Hill Place in Higham, Kent.
"Gamp" became a slang expression for an umbrella from the character Mrs Gamp, and "Pickwickian", "Pecksniffian", and "Gradgrind" all entered dictionaries due to Dickens's original portraits of such characters who were, respectively, quixotic, hypocritical, and vapidly factual.
He contributed to and edited journals throughout his literary career.
He declared they were both to drown there in the "sad sea waves".
He was enthusiastic, and even planned a travel book, ''The Uncommercial Traveller Upside Down'', but ultimately decided against the tour.
The story of Nell Trent in ''The Old Curiosity Shop'' (1841) was received as extraordinarily moving by contemporary readers but viewed as ludicrously sentimental by Oscar Wilde.
The instalment format allowed Dickens to evaluate his audience's reaction, and he often modified his plot and character development based on such feedback.
The success of ''Sketches by Boz'' led to a proposal from publishers Chapman and Hall for Dickens to supply text to match Robert Seymour's engraved illustrations in a monthly letterpress.
Masses of the illiterate poor chipped in ha'pennies to have each new monthly episode read to them, opening up and inspiring a new class of readers.
From the coaching inns on the outskirts of the city to the lower reaches of the Thames, all aspects of the capital are described over the course of his body of work.
When a certain number of grosses of pots had attained this pitch of perfection, I was to paste on each a printed label, and then go on again with more pots.
Dickens disapproved of Roman Catholicism and 19th-century evangelicalism, and was critical of what he saw as the hypocrisy of religious institutions and philosophies like spiritualism, all of which he considered deviations from the true spirit of Christianity.
''Master Humphrey's Clock'' was shut down, though Dickens was still keen on the idea of the weekly magazine, a form he liked, a liking that had begun with his childhood reading of the eighteenth-century magazines ''Tatler'' and ''The Spectator''.
Other signs of a certain restlessness and discontent emerge—in Broadstairs he flirted with Eleanor Picken, the young fiancée of his solicitor's best friend, and one night grabbed her and ran with her down to the sea.
A printed epitaph circulated at the time of the funeral reads: "To the Memory of Charles Dickens (England's most popular author) who died at his residence, Higham, near Rochester, Kent, 9&nbsp;June 1870, aged 58 years.
It was here that he indulged in the amateur theatricals described in Forster's "Life".
As a child, Dickens had walked past the house and dreamed of living in it.
The original manuscripts of many of his novels, as well as printers' proofs, first editions, and illustrations from the collection of Dickens's friend John Forster are held at the Victoria and Albert Museum.
In the late 1850s Dickens began to contemplate a second visit to the United States, tempted by the money that he believed he could make by extending his reading tour there.
After Dickens had regained sufficient strength, he arranged, with medical approval, for a final series of readings to partially make up to his sponsors what they had lost due to his illness.
His father was a clerk in the Navy Pay Office and was temporarily stationed in the district.
He briefed the illustrator on plans for each month's instalment so that work could begin before he wrote them.
One of them came up, in a ragged apron and a paper cap, on the first Monday morning, to show me the trick of using the string and tying the knot.
In 1833 he submitted his first story, "A Dinner at Poplar Walk", to the London periodical ''Monthly Magazine''.
He later wrote that as the tale unfolded he "wept and laughed, and wept again" as he "walked about the black streets of London fifteen or twenty miles many a night when all sober folks had gone to bed."
On Sunday, 19 June 1870, five days after Dickens was buried in the Abbey, Dean Arthur Penrhyn Stanley delivered a memorial elegy, lauding "the genial and loving humorist whom we now mourn", for showing by his own example "that even in dealing with the darkest scenes and the most degraded characters, genius could still be clean, and mirth could be innocent."
Charles spent time outdoors but also read voraciously, including the picaresque novels of Tobias Smollett and Henry Fielding, as well as ''Robinson Crusoe'' and ''Gil Blas''.
Unusually for Dickens, as a consequence of his shock, he stopped working, and he and Kate stayed at a little farm on Hampstead Heath for a fortnight.
On Sundays—with his sister Frances, free from her studies at the Royal Academy of Music—he spent the day at the Marshalsea.
''Nicholas Nickleby'' (1838–39), ''The Old Curiosity Shop'' and, finally, his first historical novel, ''Barnaby Rudge: A Tale of the Riots of 'Eighty'', as part of the ''Master Humphrey's Clock'' series (1840–41), were all published in monthly instalments before being made into books.
She writes that he assumed a role of "influential commentator", publicly and in his fiction, evident in his next few books.
At a time when Britain was the major economic and political power of the world, Dickens highlighted the life of the forgotten poor and disadvantaged within society.
The ''Encyclopædia Britannica'' online comments that, despite "patches of emotional excess", such as the reported death of Tiny Tim in ''A Christmas Carol'' (1843), "Dickens cannot really be termed a sentimental novelist".
He was a fierce critic of the poverty and social stratification of Victorian society.
The question as to whether Dickens belongs to the tradition of the sentimental novel is debatable.
In ''Oliver Twist'' Dickens provides readers with an idealised portrait of a boy so inherently and unrealistically good that his values are never subverted by either brutal orphanages or coerced involvement in a gang of young pickpockets.
He also bequeathed £19 19s to each servant in his employment at the time of his death.
''Oliver Twist,'' published in 1838, became one of Dickens's better known stories, and was the first Victorian novel with a child protagonist.
''A Christmas Carol'' is most likely his best-known story, with frequent new adaptations.
Dickens's public readings secured sufficient funds for an endowment to put the hospital on a sound financial footing—one reading on 9 February 1858 alone raised £3,000.
His early life seems to have been idyllic, though he thought himself a "very small and not-over-particularly-taken-care-of boy".
Marcus Stone, illustrator of ''Our Mutual Friend'', recalled that the author was always "ready to describe down to the minutest details the personal characteristics, and&nbsp;... life-history of the creations of his fancy."
They provided the inspiration for the Garlands in ''The Old Curiosity Shop''.
As the idea for the story took shape and the writing began in earnest, Dickens became engrossed in the book.
The seeds for the story became planted in Dickens's mind during a trip to Manchester to witness the conditions of the manufacturing workers there.
For example, Oliver Twist turns out to be the lost nephew of the upper-class family that rescues him from the dangers of the pickpocket group.
His works have never gone out of print, and have been adapted continually for the screen since the invention of cinema, with at least 200 motion pictures and TV adaptations based on Dickens's works documented.
Roylance was "a reduced impoverished old lady, long known to our family", whom Dickens later immortalised, "with a few alterations and embellishments", as "Mrs. Pipchin" in ''Dombey and Son''.
During this period he worked closely with the novelist and playwright Wilkie Collins.
In 1830, Dickens met his first love, Maria Beadnell, thought to have been the model for the character Dora in ''David Copperfield''.
He suffered a stroke on 18 April 1869 in Chester.
After a brief honeymoon in Chalk in Kent the couple returned to lodgings at Furnival's Inn.
Of these, ''A Christmas Carol'' was most popular and, tapping into an old tradition, did much to promote a renewed enthusiasm for the joys of Christmas in Britain and America.
Contrary to his wish to be buried at Rochester Cathedral "in an inexpensive, unostentatious, and strictly private manner," he was laid to rest in the Poets' Corner of Westminster Abbey.
He also based the story on several previous rail accidents, such as the Clayton Tunnel rail crash of 1861.
Dickens's will stipulated that no memorial be erected in his honour; nonetheless, a life-size bronze statue of Dickens entitled ''Dickens and Little Nell'', cast in 1891 by Francis Edwin Elwell, stands in Clark Park in the Spruce Hill neighbourhood of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Soon after his return to England, Dickens began work on the first of his Christmas stories, ''A Christmas Carol'', written in 1843, which was followed by ''The Chimes'' in 1844 and ''The Cricket on the Hearth'' in 1845.
Dickens catalysed the emerging Christmas as a family-centred festival of generosity, in contrast to the dwindling community-based and church-centred observations, as new middle-class expectations arose.
Notwithstanding, Dickens has been characterized as a professing Christian.
Dickens prepared meticulously and decided to imitate the comedian Charles Mathews, but ultimately he missed the audition because of a cold.
Charles's mother, Elizabeth Dickens, did not immediately support his removal from the boot-blacking warehouse.
People have grown sullen and obstinate, and are becoming disgusted with the faith which condemns them to such a day as this, once in every seven.
On his death, Dickens settled an annuity on Ternan which made her a financially independent woman.
Novelist William Makepeace Thackeray called the book "a national benefit, and to every man and woman who reads it a personal kindness".
In May 1846 Angela Burdett Coutts, heir to the Coutts banking fortune, approached Dickens about setting up a home for the redemption of fallen women of the working class.
Dickens's younger brother Frederick and Catherine's 17-year-old sister Mary, moved in with them.
My work was to cover the pots of paste-blacking; first with a piece of oil-paper, and then with a piece of blue paper; to tie them round with a string; and then to clip the paper close and neat, all round, until it looked as smart as a pot of ointment from an apothecary's shop.
He created some of the world's best-known fictional characters and is regarded as the greatest novelist of the Victorian era.
Another life-size statue of Dickens is located at Centennial Park, Sydney, Australia.
When ''The Old Curiosity Shop'' was being serialised, American fans waited at the docks in New York, shouting out to the crew of an incoming ship, "Is little Nell dead?"
Though in the early 1840s Dickens had showed an interest in Unitarian Christianity, the writer Gary Colledge has asserted that he "never strayed from his attachment to popular lay Anglicanism".
The strenuous and often harsh working conditions made a lasting impression on Dickens and later influenced his fiction and essays, becoming the foundation of his interest in the reform of socio-economic and labour conditions, the rigours of which he believed were unfairly borne by the poor.
His father's brief work as a clerk in the Navy Pay Office afforded him a few years of private education, first at a dame school, and then at a school run by William Giles, a dissenter, in Chatham.
On 2 May, he made his last public appearance at a Royal Academy Banquet in the presence of the Prince and Princess of Wales, paying a special tribute on the death of his friend, the illustrator Daniel Maclise.
She finally got free but afterwards kept her distance.
While there, he expressed a desire to see an American prairie before returning east.
The term ''Dickensian'' is used to describe something that is reminiscent of Dickens and his writings, such as poor social conditions or comically repulsive characters.
After living briefly in Italy (1844), Dickens travelled to Switzerland (1846), where he began work on ''Dombey and Son'' (1846–48).
That the two had a son who died in infancy was alleged by Dickens's daughter, Kate Perugini, whom Gladys Storey had interviewed before her death in 1929.
His success as a novelist continued.
Dickens worked intensively on developing arresting names for his characters that would reverberate with associations for his readers, and assist the development of motifs in the storyline, giving what one critic calls an "allegorical impetus" to the novels' meanings.
He toned down melodramatic and sensationalist exaggerations, cut long passages (such as the episode of Quilp's drowning in ''The Old Curiosity Shop''), and made suggestions about plot and character.
His friend Forster had a significant hand in reviewing his drafts, an influence that went beyond matters of punctuation.
In 1836, in a pamphlet titled ''Sunday Under Three Heads'', he defended the people's right to pleasure, opposing a plan to prohibit games on Sundays.
His last words were: "On the ground", in response to his sister-in-law Georgina's request that he lie down.
Powell was also an author and poet and knew many of the famous writers of the day.
Since Ellen Ternan also destroyed all of his letters to her, the extent of the affair between the two remains speculative.
The time in Hampstead was the occasion for a growing bond between Dickens and John Forster to develop and Forster soon became his unofficial business manager, and the first to read his work.
He never regained consciousness, and the next day, five years to the day after the Staplehurst rail crash, he died at Gad's Hill Place.
Two of his sons— Alfred D'Orsay Tennyson Dickens and Edward Bulwer Lytton Dickens—migrated to Australia, Edward becoming a member of the Parliament of New South Wales as Member for Wilcannia 1889–94.
Dickens was the most popular novelist of his time, and remains one of the best-known and most-read of English authors.
"You would need to have a heart of stone", he declared in one of his famous witticisms, "not to laugh at the death of little Nell."
In a New York address, he expressed his belief that "Virtue shows quite as well in rags and patches as she does in purple and fine linen".
Maria's parents disapproved of the courtship and ended the relationship by sending her to school in Paris.
On the expectation of this legacy, Dickens was released from prison.
On 2 April 1836, after a one-year engagement, and between episodes two and three of  ''The Pickwick Papers'', Dickens married Catherine Thomson Hogarth (1816–1879), the daughter of George Hogarth, editor of the ''Evening Chronicle''.
"Caught napping, as usual.
Clark published the letter in the ''New-York Tribune'' and several other papers picked up on the story.
Karl Marx asserted that Dickens "issued to the world more political and social truths than have been uttered by all the professional politicians, publicists and moralists put together".
Turn into the streets on a Sunday and mark the rigid gloom that reigns over everything around"
Huffam is thought to be the inspiration for Paul Dombey, the owner of a shipping company in Dickens's eponymous ''Dombey and Son'' (1848).
His 1843 novella, ''A Christmas Carol'', remains popular and continues to inspire adaptations in every artistic genre.
George Bernard Shaw even remarked that ''Great Expectations'' was more seditious than Marx's ''Das Kapital''.
The popularity he gained caused a shift in his self-perception according to critic Kate Flint, who writes the he "found himself a cultural commodity, and its circulation had passed out his control", causing him to become interested in and delve into themes of public and personal personas in the next novels.
After initially resisting, Dickens eventually founded the home, named "Urania Cottage", in the Lime Grove section of Shepherds Bush, which he managed for ten years, setting the house rules, reviewing the accounts and interviewing prospective residents.
Within a few years he had become an international literary celebrity, famous for his humour, satire, and keen observation of character and society.
They were writing up the log," said Nares, pointing to the ink-bottle.
Under the Insolvent Debtors Act, Dickens arranged for payment of his creditors, and he and his family left Marshalsea, for the home of Mrs Roylance.
This education was to inform works such as ''Nicholas Nickleby'', ''Dombey and Son'', and especially ''Bleak House''—whose vivid portrayal of the machinations and bureaucracy of the legal system did much to enlighten the general public and served as a vehicle for dissemination of Dickens's own views regarding, particularly, the heavy burden on the poor who were forced by circumstances to "go to law".
These instalments made the stories affordable and accessible, and the series of regular cliff-hangers made each new episode widely anticipated.
His portrait appeared on the reverse of the note accompanied by a scene from ''The Pickwick Papers''.
Leo Tolstoy and Fyodor Dostoyevsky referred to Dickens as "that great Christian writer".
Dickens had not thought of killing Little Nell, and it was Forster who advised him to entertain this possibility as necessary to his conception of the heroine.
Valerie Purton, in her recent ''Dickens and the Sentimental Tradition'', sees him continuing aspects of this tradition, and argues that his "sentimental scenes and characters are as crucial to the overall power of the novels as his darker or comic figures and scenes", and that "''Dombey and Son'' is  ...  Dickens's greatest triumph in the sentimentalist tradition".
Two or three other boys were kept at similar duty down-stairs on similar wages.
Drawn to the theatre—he became an early member of the Garrick—he landed an acting audition at Covent Garden, where the manager George Bartley and the actor Charles Kemble were to see him.
It has been argued that his technique of flooding his narratives with an 'unruly superfluity of material' that, in the gradual dénouement, yields up an unsuspected order, influenced the organisation of Charles Darwin's ''On the Origin of Species''.
Such coincidences are a staple of 18th-century picaresque novels, such as Henry Fielding's ''Tom Jones,'' which Dickens enjoyed reading as a youth.
He was a gifted mimic and impersonated those around him: clients, lawyers, and clerks.
The scenes of interminable court cases and legal arguments in ''Bleak House'' reflect Dickens's experiences as a law clerk and court reporter, and in particular his direct experience of the law's procedural delay during 1844 when he sued publishers in Chancery for breach of copyright.
Another important impact of Dickens's episodic writing style resulted from his exposure to the opinions of his readers and friends.
Later, he lived in a back-attic in the house of an agent for the Insolvent Court, Archibald Russell, "a fat, good-natured, kind old gentleman... with a quiet old wife" and lame son, in Lant Street in Southwark.
It had been carried out by Thomas Powell, a clerk, who was on friendly terms with Dickens and who had acted as mentor to Augustus when he started work.
Dickens was 45 and Ternan 18 when he made the decision, which went strongly against Victorian convention, to separate from his wife, Catherine, in 1858—divorce was still unthinkable for someone as famous as he was.
Despite his lack of formal education, he edited a weekly journal for 20 years, wrote 15 novels, five novellas, hundreds of short stories and non-fiction articles, lectured and performed extensively, was an indefatigable letter writer, and campaigned vigorously for children's rights, education, and other social reforms.
Major works soon followed, including ''A Tale of Two Cities'' (1859) and ''Great Expectations'' (1861), which were resounding successes.
In 1842, Dickens and his wife made their first trip to the United States and Canada.
His final appearance was at a banquet the American Press held in his honour at Delmonico's on 18 April, when he promised never to denounce America again.
This influenced Dickens's view that a father should rule the family, and a mother find her proper sphere inside the home: "I never afterwards forgot, I never shall forget, I never can forget, that my mother was warm for my being sent back".
The first of their ten children, Charley, was born in January 1837, and a few months later the family set up home in Bloomsbury at 48 Doughty Street, London, (on which Charles had a three-year lease at £80 a year) from 25 March 1837 until December 1839.
They display their feeling by staying away from church.
When Catherine left, never to see her husband again, she took with her one child, leaving the other children to be raised by her sister Georgina who chose to stay at Gad's Hill.
His writings inspired others, in particular journalists and political figures, to address such problems of class oppression.
The blacking-warehouse was the last house on the left-hand side of the way, at old Hungerford Stairs.
