He had been prepared to sacrifice everything for his love to Mrs O'Shea, including the cause to which he had devoted his political life.
Parnell is a major background character in Thomas Flanagan's 1988 historical novel, The Tenants of Time.
However, the Irish Parliamentary Party split in 1890 after the revelation of Parnell's long adulterous love affair, causing many English Liberals (many of them nonconformists) to refuse to work with him, and strong opposition from Catholic bishops.
Parnell was shocked to the extent that he offered Gladstone to resign his seat as MP.
However, while he was vindicated in triumph, links between the Home Rule movement and militancy had been established.
All that remained, it seemed, was to work out details of a new home rule bill with Gladstone.
In a North Sligo by-election, the defeat of his candidate by 2,493 votes to 3,261 was less resounding.
The Conservatives were defeated by the Liberal Party; William Gladstone was again Prime Minister.
Deposed as leader, he fought a long and fierce campaign for re-instatement.
He visited Paris where he met John O'Leary and J. J. O'Kelly both of whom were impressed by him and reported positively to the most capable and militant Leader of the American republican Clan na Gael organisation, John Devoy.
He strove to retain Fenian support but insisted when asked by a reporter that he personally could not join a secret society.
Speaking in Cork on 21 January 1885, he stated:
The film is notable as being Gable's biggest flop and occurred at the height of his career, when almost every Gable film was a smash hit.
He was imprisoned in Kilmainham Gaol in 1882 but, a very capable negotiator, was released when he renounced violent extra-Parliamentary action.
Parnell was first elected to the House of Commons as a Home Rule League Member of Parliament (MP) for County Meath on 21 April 1875 in a by-election backed by Fenian Patrick Egan.
He failed again in 1874 as home rule candidate in a County Dublin by-election.
Parnell was played by a clean-shaven Clark Gable in ''Parnell'', the 1937 MGM production about the Irish leader.
The Liberal split made the Unionists (the Liberal Unionists sat in coalition with the Conservatives after 1895 and would eventually merge with them) the dominant force in British politics until 1906, with strong support in Lancashire, Liverpool & Manchester, Birmingham (the fiefdom of its former mayor Joseph Chamberlain who as recently as 1885 had been a furious enemy of the Conservatives) and the House of Lords where many Whigs sat (a second Home Rule Bill would pass the Commons in 1893 only to be overwhelmingly defeated in the Lords).
At one point quicklime was thrown at his eyes by a hostile crowd in Castlecomer, County Kilkenny.
Parnell was vindicated, to the disappointment of the Tories and the Prime Minister, Lord Salisbury.
It is open to public view and is where the "Parnell Society" holds its annual August summer school.
He fulfilled his loyalty to Katharine when they married on 25 June 1891  after Parnell had unsuccessfully sought a church wedding.
Parnell preferred to keep all options open without clearly committing himself when he spoke in 1879 before Irish Tenant Defence Associations at Ballinasloe and Tralee.
His leading biographer, F.S.L.
As chairman, he blocked any motion to remove him.
Parnell is the subject of a discussion in Irish author James Joyce's first chapter of the semi-autobiographical novel ''A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man'', first serialised in ''The Egoist'' magazine in 1914–15.
The Orange Order, revived in the 1880s to oppose the Land League now openly opposed Home Rule.
Admiral Stewart's mother, Parnell's great-grandmother, belonged to the Tudor family, so Parnell had a distant relationship with the British Royal Family.
Flynn argues that the primary reason Parnell joined the Irish cause was his "implacable hostility towards England," which probably was founded on grievances from his school days, and his mother's hostility toward England.
Its continued agrarian agitation led to the passing of several Irish Land Acts that over three decades changed the face of Irish land ownership, replacing large Anglo-Irish estates with tenant ownership.
He returned to Dublin on 30 September.
Or they simply did not attend the House of Commons at all (some citing expense, given that MPs were unpaid until 1911 and the journey to Westminster both costly and arduous).
The young Parnell studied at Magdalene College, Cambridge (1865–69) but, due to the troubled financial circumstances of the estate he inherited, he was absent a great deal and never completed his degree.
Timothy Healy followed to cope with the press and they collected £70,000 for distress in Ireland.
Andrew Kettle, his 'right-hand man', became honorary secretary.
Parnell switched his support to the Liberals.
He died in his home at 10 Walsingham Terrace, Hove (now replaced by Dorset Court, Kingsway) on 6 October 1891 of pneumonia and in the arms of his wife Katharine  He was 45 years of age.
:''He gave his people back their self respect.''
He chose to sit for the Cork seat.
The Conservatives now emerged as enthusiastic unionists, Lord Randolph Churchill declared, ''"The Orange card is the one to play"''.
After Gladstone's government fell in June 1885, Parnell urged the Irish voters in Britain to vote against the Liberals.
Ever after, the ivy leaf became the Parnellite emblem, worn by his followers when they gathered to honour their lost leader.
He fundamentally changed the party, replicated the INL structure within it and created a well-organised grass roots structure, introduced membership to replace "ad hoc" informal groupings in which MPs with little commitment to the party voted differently on issues, often against their own party.
He found it heavily mortgaged and eventually sold it in 1899.
The bottom line for Lyons, however, is positive:
At the north end of O'Connell Street stands the Parnell Monument.
Both British parties toyed with various suggestions for greater self-government for Ireland.
Davitt and other prominent members left the IRB and many rank and file Fenians drifted into the Home Rule movement.
His reputation peaked in 1889-90 when letters published in ''The Times'' linking him to the Phoenix Park murders of 1882 were shown to have been forged by Richard Pigott.
In December at a reception for Michael Davitt on his release from prison, he met William Carrol who assured him of Clan na Gael's support in the struggle for Irish self-government.
The informal alliance between the new, tightly disciplined INL and the Catholic Church was one of the main factors for the revitalisation of the national Home Rule cause after 1882.
Parnell left the day-to-day running of the INL in the hands of his lieutenants Timothy Harrington as Secretary, William O'Brien, editor of its newspaper ''United Ireland'', and Timothy Healy.
Parnell's leadership was first put to the test in February 1886 when he forced the candidature of Captain William O'Shea, who had negotiated the Kilmainham Treaty, for a Galway by-election.
This might have pre-empted the need for Edward Carson, the Ulster leader, backed by the Ulster Covenant and his armed Ulster Volunteers, to force through a separate status for Ulster, as he did in his amending "exclusion of Ulster Bill" to the 1914 Third Home Rule Act, beginning a train of events resulting in the establishment of a Northern Ireland Home Rule Government in Belfast under the Government of Ireland Act 1920.
The hung Parliament of 1885 saw him hold the balance of power between William Gladstone's Liberals and Lord Salisbury's Conservatives.
Perhaps, had Parnell lived, the enactment of "All-Ireland Home Rule" with the consent of all of Ulster and its inclusion in an All-Ireland parliament, could have taken place.
Had All-Ireland Home Rule evolved earlier, there might perhaps also have been no Easter Rising, no Anglo-Irish War, no independent twenty-six county Free State and no ensuing civil war.
The decade-long liaison with Mrs. O'Shea was a disaster waiting to happen, and Parnell had made no preparations for it.
The vast majority of anti-Parnellites formed the Irish National Federation, later led by John Dillon and supported by the Catholic Church.
In the end, it resulted in a Parnell – Gladstone alliance working closely together.
What is known is that IRB involvement in the League's sister organisation, the ''Home Rule Confederation of Great Britain'', led to the moderate Butt's ousting from its presidency (even though he had founded the organisation) and the election of Parnell in his place on 28 August 1877.
He subsequently sat for the constituency of Youghal, Cork from 1880 until 1891.
Born into a wealthy and powerful Anglo-Irish Protestant landowning family, he entered the House of Commons in 1875.
He headed a small minority faction until his death in 1891.
Dublin named  Parnell Street and Parnell Square.
Salisbury formed his second government – a minority Conservative government with Liberal Unionist support.
In 1882, he changed his party's name to the Irish Parliamentary Party (IPP).
Only Bishop Edward O'Dwyer of Limerick withheld his signature.
Parnell is toasted in the famous 1938 poem of William Butler Yeats, "Come Gather Round Me, Parnellites", while he is also referred to in "To a Shade", where he performs the famous "C.S.Parnell Style", and in Yeats' two-line poem "Parnell".
The creation of a strict party whip and formal party structure was unique in party politics at the time.
When Parnell entered Parliament on 1 March 1890 after he was cleared, he received a hero's reception from his fellow MPs led by Gladstone.
The prospects shocked Unionists.
This led to a meeting in March 1878 between influential constitutionalists, Parnell and Frank Hugh O'Donnell, and leading Fenians O'Kelly, O'Leary and Carroll.
Above all there is the emphasis on constitutional action, as historians point to the Land Act of 1881; The creation of the powerful third force in Parliament using a highly disciplined party that he controlled; including Ireland in the Reform Act of 1884, while preventing any reduction in the number of Irish seats; the powerful role of the Irish National League and organizing locally, especially County conventions that taught peasants about democratic self-government; forcing Home Rule to be a central issue in British politics; and persuading the great majority of the Liberal party to adopt his cause.
Over a century after his death he is still surrounded by public interest.
It was like something fading in the sky."
In 1884, he imposed a firm 'party pledge' which obliged party MPs to vote as a bloc in parliament on all occasions.
He knew little of figures like Sarsfield, Tone or Emmett and even appeared unsure of who won the Battle of the Boyne.
Parnell's parents separated when he was six, and as a boy he was sent to different schools in England, where he spent an unhappy youth.
His notability was such that his gravestone of unhewn Wicklow granite, erected in 1940, reads only "Parnell".
Parnell's death shocks the character Eleanor in Virginia Woolf's novel The Years, published in 1937: "...how could he be dead?
Parliament was dissolved and elections called, with Irish Home Rule the central issue.
However, a Commission of Enquiry, which Parnell had requested, revealed in February 1889 after 128 sessions that the letters were a fabrication created by Richard Pigott, a disreputable anti-Parnellite rogue journalist.
In addition, the 'New Departure' asserted the Fenian movement and its armed strategies.
Shaw's victory was temporary, however.
Galway was the harbinger of the fatal crisis to come.
The scale of Parnell's impact can be seen in the fact that Irish parties from Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael have tried to claim him as "one of their own".
It had been a dangerous crisis in his career, yet Parnell had at all times remained calm, relaxed and unperturbed which greatly impressed his political friends.
He said "No" without a moment's hesitation.'
Parnell did not contest the divorce action at a hearing on 15 November, to ensure that it would be granted and he could marry Mrs O'Shea; so Captain O'Shea's allegations went unchallenged.
Parnell next turned to the Home Rule League Party, of which he was to remain the re-elected leader for over a decade, spending most of his time at Westminster, with Henry Campbell as his personal secretary.
:When Gladstone came to know him in later years, he was astonished to find that Parnell was ignorant even of the basic facts of Irish history.
The leaders of the Catholic Church largely recognised the Parnellite party as guardians of church interests, despite uneasiness with a powerful lay leadership.
However, all of his former close associates, Michael Davitt, John Dillon, William O'Brien and Timothy Healy deserted him to join the anti-Parnellites.
With Parnell obdurate, the alliance collapsed in bitterness.
He was a land reform agitator, and became leader of the Home Rule League in 1880, insisting on operating independently of the Liberals, and winning great influence by his balancing of constitutional, radical, and economic issues, and by his skillful use of parliamentary procedure.
His triumph facilitated his nomination in May in place of Shaw as leader of a new Home Rule League Party, faced with a country on the brink of a land war.
In 1991, Trevor Eve played Parnell in the television mini-series "Parnell and the Englishwoman."
He attempted to defuse the land question with ''dual ownership'' in the Second Land Act of 1881, establishing a Land Commission that reduced rents and enabled some tenants to buy their farms.
The bitterness of the split tore Ireland apart and resonated well into the next century.
This ambiguity shocked former adherents, who clashed physically with his supporters; his candidate lost by almost two to one.
Parnell also promised to use his good offices to quell the violence and to
A divorce decree was granted on 17 November 1890, but Parnell's two surviving children were placed in O'Shea's custody.
The most important one, dated 15 May 1882, ran as follows:
Parnell was portrayed by Robert Donat in the 1947 film ''Captain Boycott''.
Parnell then took ''The Times'' to court and the newspaper paid him £5,000 damages in an out-of-court settlement.
However, Murphy argues this to be unlikely because Unionist opposition after 1885 to any form "All-Ireland Home Rule" was extremely resilient and steadfast.
Since the centenary of his death in 1991, Magdalene College, Cambridge, where Parnell studied, has offered the Parnell Fellowship in Irish Studies, which is awarded to a scholar for up to a year for study without teaching or administrative responsibilities.
On each occasion, Parnell's demands were entirely within the accepted parameters of Liberal thinking, Gladstone noting that he was one of the best people he had known to deal with, a remarkable transition from an inmate at Kilmainham to an intimate at Hawarden in just over seven years.
In so doing, he linked the mass movement to the parliamentary agitation, with profound consequences for both of them.
He was an intellectual phenomenon."
The chief Catholic leader Archbishop Walsh of Dublin came under heavy pressure from politicians, his fellow bishops, and Cardinal Manning; Walsh finally declared against Parnell.
Besides the issue of tolerating immorality, the bishops sought to keep control of Irish Catholic politics, and they no longer trusted Parnell as an ally.
Parnell at first supported a Conservative government – they were still the smaller party after the elections – but after renewed agrarian distress arose when agricultural prices fell and unrest developed during 1885, Lord Salisbury's Conservative government announced coercion measures in January 1886.
Parnell continued the exhausting campaigning.
Parnell saw that the explicit endorsement of Catholicism was of vital importance to the success of this venture and worked in close co-operation with the Catholic hierarchy in consolidating its hold over the Irish electorate.
When Mrs O'Shea's aunt died in 1889, her money was left in trust.
He did this...by rallying an inert and submissive peasantry to believe that by organized and disciplined protest they could win a better life for themselves and their children.
In the aftermath of the divorce he fought violently to retain control in a hopeless cause.
In 1874, he became High Sheriff of Wicklow, his home county in which he was also an officer in the Wicklow militia.
Historian R. F. Foster argues that in the countryside the Land League "reinforced the politicization of rural Catholic nationalist Ireland, partly by defining that identity against urbanization, landlordism, Englishness and—implicitly—Protestantism."
He first came to attention in the public eye when in 1876 he claimed in the Commons that he did not believe that any murder had been committed by Fenians in Manchester.
Parnell soon died, and his faction dissipated.
When the annual party leadership election was held on 25 November, Gladstone's threat was not conveyed to the members until after they had loyally re-elected their 'chief' in his office.
In the December North Kilkenny by-election, he attracted Fenian "hillside men" to his side.
Parnell made it his business to cultivate Fenian sentiments both in Britain and Ireland and became associated with the more radical wing of the Home Rule League, which included Joseph Biggar (MP for Cavan from 1874), John O'Connor Power (MP for County Mayo from 1874) (both, although constitutionalists, had links with the IRB), Edmund Dwyer-Gray (MP for Tipperary from 1877), and Frank Hugh O'Donnell (MP for Dungarvan from 1877).
News of the long-standing adultery created a huge public scandal.
Parnell was a close friend and political associate of fellow land reform activist Thomas Nulty, the Roman Catholic Bishop of Meath, until Parnell's divorce crisis in 1889.
In March 1885 the Cabinet rejected the proposal of radical minister Joseph Chamberlain of democratic county councils which in turn would elect a Central Board for Ireland.
Parnell's grandfather William Parnell (1780–1821), who inherited the Avondale Estate in 1795, was a liberal Irish MP for Wicklow from 1817–1820.
On the same day, the Irish Catholic hierarchy, worried by the number of priests who had supported him in North Sligo, signed and published a near-unanimous condemnation: "by his public misconduct, has utterly disqualified himself to be … leader."
This drew the interest of the Irish Republican Brotherhood (IRB), a physical force Irish organisation that had staged a rebellion in 1867.
He is also discussed in ''Ulysses'', as is his brother.
This was planned and organised by John Redmond, who chose the American Augustus Saint Gaudens to sculpt the statue; it was funded by Americans and completed in 1911.
Parnell later took up residence with her in Eltham, Kent in the summer of 1886, and was a known overnight visitor at the O'Shea house in Brockley, London.
During the agrarian crisis, which intensified in 1886 and launched the Plan of Campaign organised by Parnell's lieutenants, he chose in the interest of Home Rule not to associate himself with it.
Charles Parnell was linked both with the landed aristocracy class and the Irish Republican Brotherhood, with speculation in the 1890s that he may have even joined the latter organisation.
He was conservative by nature, leading some historians to suggest that personally he would have been closer to the Conservative rather than to the Liberal Party, but for political needs.
He held all the reins of Irish nationalism and also harnessed Irish-America to finance the cause.
From August 1877 Parnell held a number of private meetings with prominent Fenian leaders.
In later years, the double effect of the Phoenix Park trauma and the O'Shea affair reinforced the conservative side of his nature.
Parnell issued a manifesto on 29 November saying a section of the party had lost its independence; he falsified Gladstone's terms for Home Rule and said they were inadequate.
The Liberals regained power on 1 February, their leader Gladstone – influenced by the status of Norway, which at the time was self-governing but under the Swedish Crown – moving towards Home Rule, which Gladstone's son Herbert revealed publicly under what became known as the "flying of the Hawarden Kite".
He engaged with them and played a leading role in a policy of obstructionism (i.e., the use of technical procedures to disrupt the House of Commons' ability to function) to force the House to pay more attention to Irish issues, which had previously been ignored.
In Ireland, unionist resistance (especially after the Irish Unionist Party was formed) became increasingly organised.
On 27 September, he addressed a crowd in pouring rain at Creggs, subjecting himself to a severe soaking.
Parnell rode roughshod over his lieutenants Healy, Dillon and O'Brien who were not in favour of O'Shea.
He vehemently insisted that the independence of the Irish party could not be compromised either by Gladstone or by the Catholic hierarchy.
The Catholic Church hierarchy in Ireland was shocked by Parnell's immorality and feared that he would wreck the cause of Home Rule.
On the difficult campaign trail, his health continuously deteriorated; furthermore he had kidney disease.
The militant Invincibles responsible fled to America, which allowed him to break links with radical Land Leaguers.
Parnell visited America that year accompanied by O'Connor Power.
Parnell saw the need to replace violent agitation with country-wide mass meetings and the application of Davitt's boycott, also as a means of achieving his objective of self-government.
Liberal leader H. H. Asquith called him as one of the three or four greatest men of the 19th century, while Lord Haldane described him as the strongest man the House of Commons had seen in 150 years.
He and his followers forcibly seized the offices of the party paper ''United Irishman''.
Parnell Fellows have often been historians, but have spanned a wide range of disciplines, including Nobel Prize-winning poet Seamus Heaney.
The historian Andrew Roberts argues that he was sworn into the IRB in the Old Library at Trinity College Dublin in May 1882 and that this was concealed for 40 years.
This behaviour was opposed by the less aggressive chairman (leader) of the Home Rule League, Isaac Butt.
He conducted a political tour of Ireland to re-establish popular support.
His death, and the divorce upheaval which preceded it, gave him a public appeal and interest that other contemporaries, such as Timothy Healy or John Dillon, could not match.
In W. Somerset Maugham's ''The Razor's Edge'', published in 1944, the author mentions Parnell and O'Shea: "Passion is destructive.
This was followed by a telegram from John Devoy in October 1878 which offered Parnell a "New Departure" deal of separating militancy from the constitutional movement as a path to all-Ireland self-government, under certain conditions: abandonment of a federal solution in favour of separatist self-government, vigorous agitation in the land question on the basis of peasant proprietorship, exclusion of all sectarian issues, collective voting by party members and energetic resistance to coercive legislation.
He replaced the deceased League MP, veteran Young Irelander John Martin.
Parliamentary constitutionalism was the future path.
In Knut Hamsun's 1892 novel ''Mysteries'', the characters, on a couple of occasions, briefly discuss Charles Stewart Parnell, particularly in relation to Gladstone: "Dr. Stenerson had a high opinion of Parnell, but if Gladstone was so opposed to him, he must know what he was about—with apologies to the host, Mr. Nagel, who couldn't forgive Gladstone for being an honourable man".
For generations of Irish people, his life as the "lost leader" was highly dramatic and deeply tragic, against whose mythical reputation no later leader who lived a normal lifespan and who faced the practicalities of governance that Parnell never faced, could hope to prevail.
Gladstone warned that if Parnell retained the leadership, it would mean the loss of the next election, the end of their alliance and also of Home Rule.
(The same term was applied 30 years earlier to Daniel O'Connell.)
During January 1890, resolutions of confidence in his leadership were passed throughout the country.
By 1885, he was leading a party well-poised for the next general election, his statements on Home Rule designed to secure the widest possible support.
Although the League discouraged violence, agrarian outrages grew from 863 incidents in 1879 to 2,590 in 1880 after evictions increased from 1,238 to 2,110 in the same period.
A total of 73 members were present for the fateful meeting in committee room 15 at Westminster.
Parnell now sought to use his experience and huge support to advance his pursuit of Home Rule and resurrected the suppressed Land League on 17 October 1882 as the Irish National League (INL).
The parliamentary party became much more Catholic and middle class, with a large number of journalists and lawyers elected and the disappearance of Protestant Ascendancy landowners and Tories from it.
Thus, from birth, Charles Stewart Parnell possessed an extraordinary number of links to many elements of society; he was linked to the old Irish Parliamentary tradition via his great-grandfather and grandfather, to the American War of Independence via his grandfather, to the War of 1812 (where his grandfather had been awarded a gold medal by the United States Congress for gallantry).
Letters were published which suggested Parnell was complicit in the murders.
The two-day trial revealed that Parnell had been the long-term lover of Mrs O'Shea and had fathered three of her children.
A central aspect of Parnell's reforms was a new selection procedure to ensure the professional selection of party candidates committed to taking their seats.
There were eleven children in all: five boys and six girls.
During the period 1886–90, Parnell continued to pursue Home Rule, striving to reassure English voters that it would be no threat to them.
It was in support of this movement that Parnell first tried to stand for election in Wicklow, but as high sheriff was disqualified.
It combined moderate agrarianism, a Home Rule programme with electoral functions, was hierarchical and autocratic in structure with Parnell wielding immense authority and direct parliamentary control.
Gladstone published his warning in a letter the next day; subsequently, angry members demanded a new meeting, and this was called for 1 December.
Gladstone on the other hand saying he was prepared to go 'rather further' than the idea of a Central Board .
Under Parnell, the number of Protestant and landlord MPs dwindled, as did the number of Tories seeking election.
He played a part in the process that undermined his own Anglo-Irish caste; within two decades absentee landlords were almost unknown in Ireland.
His prestige had a year before reached new heights, but the crisis crippled this support, and most rural nationalists turned against him.
His power was one factor in Gladstone's adoption of Home Rule as the central tenet of the Liberal Party.
He played an important role in the rise and fall of British governments in the mid-1880s and in Gladstone's conversion to Irish Home Rule.
However, his political diplomacy preserved the national Home Rule movement after the Phoenix Park Murders of the Chief Secretary Lord Cavendish, and his Under-Secretary, T.H.
Thereby he ruined his health and wrecked his movement; it never fully recovered.
Parnell was a restrained speaker in the House but his organisational, analytical and tactical skills earned wide praise, enabling him to take on the British organisation's presidency.
Parnell was elected president of Davitt's newly founded Irish National Land League in Dublin on 21 October 1879, signing a militant Land League address campaigning for land reform.
They held two meetings, one in March 1888 and a second more significant meeting at Gladstone's home in Hawarden on 18–19 December 1889.
The third Gladstone administration paved the way towards the generous response to Irish demands that the new Prime Minister had promised, but was unable to obtain the support of several key players in his own party.
The Parnells took up residence in Brighton.
Parnell's task was now to win acceptance of the principle of a Dublin parliament.
This he could have survived politically were it not for the crisis to follow.
The evidence suggests that later, following the signing of the Kilmainham Treaty, Parnell did take the IRB oath, possibly for tactical reasons.
Sixty-three Home Rulers were elected, including twenty-seven Parnell supporters, Parnell being returned for three seats: Cork City, Mayo and Meath.
