Continuing his research in London, Darwin's wide reading now included the sixth edition of Malthus's ''An Essay on the Principle of Population'', and on 28 September 1838 he noted its assertion that human "population, when unchecked, goes on doubling itself every twenty five years, or increases in a geometrical ratio", a geometric progression so that population soon exceeds food supply in what is known as a Malthusian catastrophe.
In 1860, the publication of ''Essays and Reviews'' by seven liberal Anglican theologians diverted clerical attention from Darwin, with its ideas including higher criticism attacked by church authorities as heresy.
An expanse of water adjoining the Beagle Channel was named ''Darwin Sound'' by Robert FitzRoy after Darwin's prompt action, along with two or three of the men, saved them from being marooned on a nearby shore when a collapsing glacier caused a large wave that would have swept away their boats, and the nearby Mount Darwin in the Andes was named in celebration of Darwin's 25th birthday.
By July, Darwin had expanded his "sketch" into a 230-page "Essay", to be expanded with his research results if he died prematurely.
Francis Galton named this field of study "eugenics" in 1883.
His thoughts on lifespan, asexual reproduction and sexual reproduction developed in his "B" notebook around mid-July on to variation in offspring "to adapt & alter the race to ''changing'' world" explaining the Galápagos tortoises, mockingbirds and rheas.
When his own exams drew near, Darwin focused on his studies and was delighted by the language and logic of William Paley's ''Evidences of Christianity'' (1794).
These extinct creatures were related to living species in South America.
He campaigned pugnaciously against the authority of the clergy in education, aiming to overturn the dominance of clergymen and aristocratic amateurs under Owen in favour of a new generation of professional scientists.
He assisted Robert Edmond Grant's investigations of the anatomy and life cycle of marine invertebrates in the Firth of Forth, and on 27 March 1827 presented at the Plinian his own discovery that black spores found in oyster shells were the eggs of a skate leech.
FitzRoy had given him the first volume of Charles Lyell's ''Principles of Geology'', which set out uniformitarian concepts of land slowly rising or falling over immense periods, and Darwin saw things Lyell's way, theorising and thinking of writing a book on geology.
On the evening of 28 June, Darwin's baby son died of scarlet fever after almost a week of severe illness, and he was too distraught to attend.
On the same day, he presented his mammal and bird specimens to the Zoological Society.
The Linnean Society of London has commemorated Darwin's achievements by the award of the Darwin–Wallace Medal since 1908.
In preparation, he joined Adam Sedgwick's geology course, then travelled with him in the summer for a fortnight, in order to map strata in Wales.
Darwin's old Cambridge tutors Sedgwick and Henslow dismissed the ideas, but liberal clergymen interpreted natural selection as an instrument of God's design, with the cleric Charles Kingsley seeing it as "just as noble a conception of Deity".
He found what they called "Macaw Cottage" (because of its gaudy interiors) in Gower Street, then moved his "museum" in over Christmas.
and said it should be left to theologians as it was too dangerous for ordinary readers.
Even Darwin's close friends Gray, Hooker, Huxley and Lyell still expressed various reservations but gave strong support, as did many others, particularly younger naturalists.
He preferred riding and shooting to studying.
Of his surviving children, George, Francis and Horace became Fellows of the Royal Society, distinguished as astronomer, botanist and civil engineer, respectively.
Early in March, Darwin moved to London to be near this work, joining Lyell's social circle of scientists and experts such as Charles Babbage,Darwin's Journal () backdated from August 1838 gives a date of 6 March 1837 who described God as a programmer of laws.
Darwin now had the framework of his theory of natural selection "by which to work", as his "prime hobby".
Gould met Darwin and told him that the Galápagos mockingbirds from different islands were separate species, not just varieties, and what Darwin had thought was a "wren" was also in the finch group.
On the geologically new Galápagos Islands, Darwin looked for evidence attaching wildlife to an older "centre of creation", and found mockingbirds allied to those in Chile but differing from island to island.
Darwin had convinced most scientists that evolution as descent with modification was correct, and he was regarded as a great scientist who had revolutionised ideas.
Early in 1842, Darwin wrote about his ideas to Charles Lyell, who noted that his ally "denies seeing a beginning to each crop of species".
He began a major reassessment of his theory of species, and in November realised that divergence in the character of descendants could be explained by them becoming adapted to "diversified places in the economy of nature".
Whenever they fell ill, he feared that they might have inherited weaknesses from inbreeding due to the close family ties he shared with his wife and cousin, Emma Wedgwood.
By his return, he was critical of the Bible as history, and wondered why all religions should not be equally valid.
His uncle Jos pointed out an area of ground where cinders had disappeared under loam and suggested that this might have been the work of earthworms, inspiring "a new & important theory" on their role in soil formation, which Darwin presented at the Geological Society on 1 November.
He later wrote that such facts "seemed to me to throw some light on the origin of species".
Darwin visited his home in Shrewsbury and saw relatives, then hurried to Cambridge to see Henslow, who advised him on finding naturalists available to catalogue the collections and agreed to take on the botanical specimens.
Darwin was intrigued by his half-cousin Francis Galton's argument, introduced in 1865, that statistical analysis of heredity showed that moral and mental human traits could be inherited, and principles of animal breeding could apply to humans.
Darwin stayed with his freethinking brother Erasmus, part of this Whig circle and a close friend of the writer Harriet Martineau, who promoted Malthusianism underlying the controversial Whig Poor Law reforms to stop welfare from causing overpopulation and more poverty.
Weeks later Huxley's ''Evidence as to Man's Place in Nature'' showed that anatomically, humans are apes, then ''The Naturalist on the River Amazons'' by Henry Walter Bates provided empirical evidence of natural selection.
Most of his zoology notes are about marine invertebrates, starting with plankton collected in a calm spell.
He looked for "centres of creation" to explain distribution, and related the antlion found near kangaroos to distinct "periods of Creation".
Darwin's work established evolutionary descent with modification as the dominant scientific explanation of diversification in nature.
On 20 September he had "an uncomfortable palpitation of the heart", so his doctors urged him to "knock off all work" and live in the country for a few weeks.
Cartoonists parodied animal ancestry in an old tradition of showing humans with animal traits, and in Britain these droll images served to popularise Darwin's theory in an unthreatening way.
After initially declining the work, he accepted the post in March 1838.
A seated statue of Darwin, unveiled 1897, stands in front of Shrewsbury Library, the building that used to house Shrewsbury School, which Darwin attended as a boy.
He was increasingly troubled by the problem of evil.
On their first stop ashore at St Jago in Cape Verde, Darwin found that a white band high in the volcanic rock cliffs included seashells.
Though Darwin's illness kept him away from the public debates, he eagerly scrutinised the scientific response, commenting on press cuttings, reviews, articles, satires and caricatures, and corresponded on it with colleagues worldwide.
In 1871 he examined human evolution and sexual selection in ''The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex'', followed by ''The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals'' (1872).
On 11 November, he returned to Maer and proposed to Emma, once more telling her his ideas.
Used to jotting down daily notes on animal breeding, he scrawled rambling thoughts about career and prospects on two scraps of paper, one with columns headed ''"Marry"'' and ''"Not Marry"''.
The Darwins had ten children: two died in infancy, and Annie's death at the age of ten had a devastating effect on her parents.
He thought men's eminence over women was the outcome of sexual selection, a view disputed by Antoinette Brown Blackwell in ''The Sexes Throughout Nature''.
In Britain, most shared Darwin's cautious views on voluntary improvement and sought to encourage those with good traits in "positive eugenics".
Darwin Day has become an annual celebration, and in 2009 worldwide events were arranged for the bicentenary of Darwin's birth and the 150th anniversary of the publication of ''On the Origin of Species''.
Patrick Matthew drew attention to his 1831 book which had a brief appendix  suggesting a concept of natural selection leading to new species, but he had not developed the idea.
Owen's surprising results included other gigantic extinct ground sloths as well as the ''Megatherium'', a near complete skeleton of the unknown ''Scelidotherium'' and a hippopotamus-sized rodent-like skull named ''Toxodon'' resembling a giant capybara.
Darwin's book ''The Structure and Distribution of Coral Reefs'' on his theory of atoll formation was published in May 1842 after more than three years of work, and he then wrote his first "pencil sketch" of his theory of natural selection.
He considered it "absurd to doubt that a man might be an ardent theist and an evolutionist" and, though reticent about his religious views, in 1879 he wrote that "I have never been an atheist in the sense of denying the existence of a God.&nbsp;– I think that generally ... an agnostic would be the most correct description of my state of mind".
Although he discussed his ideas with several naturalists, he needed time for extensive research and his geological work had priority.
Darwin College, a postgraduate college at Cambridge University, is named after the Darwin family.
When they reached Brazil, Darwin was delighted by the tropical forest, but detested the sight of slavery.
A life size seated statue of Darwin can be seen in the main hall of the Natural History Museum in London.
McCormick left the ship at this point, feeling that Darwin had supplanted him as naturalist.
Lyell was intrigued by Darwin's speculations without realising their extent.
Darwin's views on social and political issues reflected his time and social position.
When he read a paper by Alfred Russel Wallace, "On the Law which has Regulated the Introduction of New Species", he saw similarities with Darwin's thoughts and urged him to publish to establish precedence.
He now renewed a fascination and expertise in marine invertebrates, dating back to his student days with Grant, by dissecting and classifying the barnacles he had collected on the voyage, enjoying observing beautiful structures and thinking about comparisons with allied structures.
Though Darwin saw no threat, on 14 May 1856 he began writing a short paper.
After the 1880s, a eugenics movement developed on ideas of biological inheritance, and for scientific justification of their ideas appealed to some concepts of Darwinism.
On 5 September 1857, Darwin sent the American botanist Asa Gray a detailed outline of his ideas, including an abstract of ''Natural Selection'', which omitted human origins and sexual selection.
On 23 June, he took a break and went "geologising" in Scotland.
Amongst early favourable responses, Huxley's reviews swiped at Richard Owen, leader of the scientific establishment Huxley was trying to overthrow.
However, many favoured competing explanations and it was not until the emergence of the modern evolutionary synthesis from the 1930s to the 1950s that a broad consensus developed in which natural selection was the basic mechanism of evolution.
He read John Herschel's new book, ''Preliminary Discourse on the Study of Natural Philosophy'' (1831), which described the highest aim of natural philosophy as understanding such laws through inductive reasoning based on observation, and Alexander von Humboldt's ''Personal Narrative'' of scientific travels in 1799-1804.
His botanical work was interpreted and popularised by various writers including Grant Allen and H. G. Wells, and  helped transform plant science in the late C19 and early C20.
By the 1870s, the scientific community and much of the general public had accepted evolution as a fact.
By mid December, Darwin saw a similarity between farmers picking the best stock in selective breeding, and a Malthusian Nature selecting from chance variants so that "every part of newly acquired structure is fully practical and perfected", thinking this comparison "a beautiful part of my theory".
However, Darwin's holistic view of nature included "dependence of one being on another"; thus pacifists, socialists, liberal social reformers and anarchists such as Peter Kropotkin stressed the value of co-operation over struggle within a species.
Over time, his research drew on information from his relatives and children, the family butler, neighbours, colonists and former shipmates.
Darwin took care to remain in a private capacity to retain control over his collection, intending it for a major scientific institution.
He valued European civilisation and saw colonisation as spreading its benefits, with the sad but inevitable effect that savage peoples who did not become civilised faced extinction.
He grew up in a family of Whig reformers who, like his uncle Josiah Wedgwood, supported electoral reform and the emancipation of slaves.
Despite suffering badly from seasickness, Darwin wrote copious notes while on board the ship.
When Galton suggested that publishing research could encourage intermarriage within a "caste" of "those who are naturally gifted", Darwin foresaw practical difficulties, and thought it "the sole feasible, yet I fear utopian, plan of procedure in improving the human race", preferring to simply publicise the importance of inheritance and leave decisions to individuals.
The ship was to leave in four weeks on an expedition to chart the coastline of South America.
Charles Robert Darwin was born in Shrewsbury, Shropshire, England, on 12 February 1809 at his family's home, The Mount.
For fifteen years this work was in the background to his main occupation of writing on geology and publishing expert reports on the ''Beagle'' collections.
When the ''Beagle'' reached Falmouth, Cornwall, on 2 October 1836, Darwin was already a celebrity in scientific circles as in December 1835 Henslow had fostered his former pupil's reputation by giving selected naturalists a pamphlet of Darwin's geological letters.
It sold briskly at first, despite its size, and was translated into many languages.
Despite the grind of writing and editing the ''Beagle'' reports, Darwin made remarkable progress on transmutation, taking every opportunity to question expert naturalists and, unconventionally, people with practical experience such as farmers and pigeon fanciers.
Though he thought of religion as a tribal survival strategy, Darwin was reluctant to give up the idea of God as an ultimate lawgiver.
Zoologists had a huge backlog of work, and there was a danger of specimens just being left in storage.
In making the case for common descent, he included evidence of homologies between humans and other mammals.
He learned taxidermy in around 40 daily hour-long sessions from John Edmonstone, a freed black slave who had accompanied Charles Waterton in the South American rainforest.
Admiring visitors included Ernst Haeckel, a zealous proponent of ''Darwinismus'' incorporating Lamarckism and Goethe's idealism.
Darwin was well prepared to compare this to de Candolle's "warring of the species" of plants and the struggle for existence among wildlife, explaining how numbers of a species kept roughly stable.
Having outlined sexual selection, he hinted that it could explain differences between human races.
On board the ''Beagle'', Darwin was quite orthodox and would quote the Bible as an authority on morality.
He learned John Herschel's science which, like William Paley's natural theology, sought explanations in laws of nature rather than miracles and saw adaptation of species as evidence of design.
In the book, Darwin set out "one long argument" of detailed observations, inferences and consideration of anticipated objections.
Inspired with "a burning zeal" to contribute, Darwin planned to visit Tenerife with some classmates after graduation to study natural history in the tropics.
On 29 January, Darwin and Emma Wedgwood were married at Maer in an Anglican ceremony arranged to suit the Unitarians, then immediately caught the train to London and their new home.
Beagle'', a sum equivalent to about £ in .
They stopped at Bahía Blanca, and in cliffs near Punta Alta Darwin made a major find of fossil bones of huge extinct mammals beside modern seashells, indicating recent extinction with no signs of change in climate or catastrophe.
Robert Darwin objected to his son's planned two-year voyage, regarding it as a waste of time, but was persuaded by his brother-in-law, Josiah Wedgwood, to agree to (and fund) his son's participation.
Darwin's theories presented this as natural, and were cited to promote policies that went against his humanitarian principles.
Darwin experienced an earthquake in Chile and saw signs that the land had just been raised, including mussel-beds stranded above high tide.
His last words were to his family, telling Emma "I am not the least afraid of death&nbsp;– Remember what a good wife you have been to me&nbsp;– Tell all my children to remember how good they have been to me", then while she rested, he repeatedly told Henrietta and Francis "It's almost worth while to be sick to be nursed by you".
During Darwin's lifetime, many geographical features were given his name.
Since then, it has been used as a term of abuse by those opposed to what they think are the moral consequences of evolution.
As he later wrote in his ''Autobiography''''':'''
Darwin was passionately opposed to slavery, while seeing no problem with the working conditions of English factory workers or servants.
His research on plants was published in a series of books, and in his final book, ''The Formation of Vegetable Mould, through the Actions of Worms'' (1881), he examined earthworms and their effect on soil.
His taxidermy lessons in 1826 from the freed slave John Edmonstone, who he long recalled as "a very pleasant and intelligent man", reinforced his belief that black people shared the same feelings, and could be as intelligent as people of other races.
Despite his fears, most of the surviving children and many of their descendants went on to have distinguished careers (see Darwin-Wedgwood family).
The Church of England's response was mixed.
Having decided in favour, he discussed it with his father, then went to visit Emma on 29 July.
Darwin's work has continued to be celebrated by numerous publications and events.
The eight-year-old Charles already had a taste for natural history and collecting when he joined the day school run by its preacher in 1817.
His family was in crisis with children in the village dying of scarlet fever, and he put matters in the hands of his friends.
He was the fifth of six children of wealthy society doctor and financier Robert Darwin, and of Susannah Darwin (''née'' Wedgwood).
He did not get around to proposing, but against his father's advice he mentioned his ideas on transmutation.
The last word was the only variant of "evolved" in the first five editions of the book.
While he was house-hunting in London, bouts of illness continued and Emma wrote urging him to get some rest, almost prophetically remarking "So don't be ill any more my dear Charley till I can be with you to nurse you."
When FitzRoy's ''Narrative'' was published in May 1839, Darwin's ''Journal and Remarks'' was such a success as the third volume that later that year it was published on its own.
The two rheas were also distinct species, and on 14 March Darwin announced how their distribution changed going southwards.
In November, the anonymously published sensational best-seller ''Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation'' brought wide interest in transmutation.
The Fuegian they had named Jemmy Button lived like the other natives, had a wife, and had no wish to return to England.
He was the grandson of two prominent abolitionists: Erasmus Darwin on his father's side, and Josiah Wedgwood on his mother's side.
In December, Darwin received a letter from Wallace asking if the book would examine human origins.
He died at Down House on 19 April 1882.
On 24 January 1839, Darwin was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS).
While developing this intensive study of transmutation, Darwin became mired in more work.
His research using images was expanded in his 1872 book ''The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals'', one of the first books to feature printed photographs, which discussed the evolution of human psychology and its continuity with the behaviour of animals.
In mid-1857 he added a chapter heading; "Theory applied to Races of Man", but then left out this topic.
The survey continued to the south in Patagonia.
He continued his researches, obtaining information and specimens from naturalists worldwide including Wallace who was working in Borneo.
In ''The Descent of Man'', Darwin noted that aiding the weak to survive and have families could lose the benefits of natural selection, but cautioned that withholding such aid would endanger the instinct of sympathy, "the noblest part of our nature", and factors such as education could be more important.
Shocked that he had been "forestalled", Darwin sent it on that day to Lyell, as requested by Wallace, and although Wallace had not asked for publication, Darwin suggested he would send it to any journal that Wallace chose.
Darwin remained close friends with the vicar of Downe, John Brodie Innes, and continued to play a leading part in the parish work of the church, but from around 1849 would go for a walk on Sundays while his family attended church.
He wrote his first paper, showing that the South American landmass was slowly rising, and with Lyell's enthusiastic backing read it to the Geological Society of London on 4 January 1837.
In one example, the group of tanagers related to those Darwin found in the Galápagos Islands became popularly known as "Darwin's finches" in 1947, fostering inaccurate legends about their significance to his work.
In eight years of work on barnacles (Cirripedia), Darwin's theory helped him to find "homologies" showing that slightly changed body parts served different functions to meet new conditions, and in some genera he found minute males parasitic on hermaphrodites, showing an intermediate stage in evolution of distinct sexes.
On 17 February, Darwin was elected to the Council of the Geological Society, and Lyell's presidential address presented Owen's findings on Darwin's fossils, stressing geographical continuity of species as supporting his uniformitarian ideas.
He wrote most of a second part, on natural selection, but it remained unpublished in his lifetime.
Lyell had already popularised human prehistory, and Huxley had shown that anatomically humans are apes.
He was writing up his theory in 1858 when Alfred Russel Wallace sent him an essay that described the same idea, prompting immediate joint publication of both of their theories.
As Darwin was unqualified for the ''Tripos'', he joined the ''ordinary'' degree course in January 1828.
Darwin's theory also resonated with various movements at the time and became a key fixture of popular culture.
He heard that slight variations in the shape of tortoise shells showed which island they came from, but failed to collect them, even after eating tortoises taken on board as food.
He responded that he would avoid that subject, "so surrounded with prejudices", while encouraging Wallace's theorising and adding that "I go much further than you."
Three Fuegians on board had been seized during the first ''Beagle'' voyage, then during a year in England were educated as missionaries.
Fully recuperated, he returned to Shrewsbury in July.
He kept careful notes of his observations and theoretical speculations, and at intervals during the voyage his specimens were sent to Cambridge together with letters including a copy of his journal for his family.
Having published ''On the Origin of Species'' as an abstract of his theory, he pressed on with experiments, research, and writing of his "big book".
As FitzRoy had intended, Darwin spent most of that time on land investigating geology and making natural history collections, while the ''Beagle'' surveyed and charted coasts.
Another statue of Darwin as a young man is situated in the grounds of Christ's College, Cambridge.
At the end of the book he concluded that:
Ronald Fisher, an English statistician finally united Mendelian genetics with natural selection between 1918 and his 1930 book ''The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection'', giving the theory a mathematical footing and bringing broad scientific consensus that it was the basic mechanism of evolution, founding the basis for population genetics and the modern evolutionary synthesis, with J.B.S.
On 11 January 1844, Darwin mentioned his theorising to the botanist Joseph Dalton Hooker, writing with melodramatic humour "it is like confessing a murder".
He visited Glen Roy in glorious weather to see the parallel "roads" cut into the hillsides at three heights.
He studied Paley's ''Natural Theology or Evidences of the Existence and Attributes of the Deity'' (first published in 1802), which made an argument for divine design in nature, explaining adaptation as God acting through laws of nature.
In an attempt to improve his chronic ill health, Darwin went in 1849 to Dr. James Gully's Malvern spa and was surprised to find some benefit from hydrotherapy.
One day, Grant praised Lamarck's evolutionary ideas.
Both books proved very popular, and Darwin was impressed by the general assent with which his views had been received, remarking that "everybody is talking about it without being shocked."
British society became more racist in mid century, but Darwin remained strongly against slavery, against "ranking the so-called races of man as distinct species", and against ill-treatment of native people.
Then, in 1851, his treasured daughter Annie fell ill, reawakening his fears that his illness might be hereditary, and after a long series of crises she died.
William Whewell pushed Darwin to take on the duties of Secretary of the Geological Society.
His evolution-related experiments and investigations led to books on Orchids, ''Insectivorous Plants, The Effects of Cross and Self Fertilisation in the Vegetable Kingdom'', different forms of flowers on plants of the same species, and ''The Power of Movement in Plants''.
The ''Origin of Species'' was translated into many languages, becoming a staple scientific text attracting thoughtful attention from all walks of life, including the "working men" who flocked to Huxley's lectures.
He became a close friend and follower of botany professor John Stevens Henslow and met other leading parson-naturalists who saw scientific work as religious natural theology, becoming known to these dons as "the man who walks with Henslow".
Controversy erupted, and it continued to sell well despite contemptuous dismissal by scientists.
The armour fragments were actually from ''Glyptodon'', a huge armadillo-like creature as Darwin had initially thought.
Darwin completed his third geological book in 1846.
He read Lyell's second volume and accepted its view of "centres of creation" of species, but his discoveries and theorising challenged Lyell's ideas of smooth continuity and of extinction of species.
Darwin's book ''The Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication'' (1868) was the first part of his planned "big book", and included his unsuccessful hypothesis of pangenesis attempting to explain heredity.
After visiting Shrewsbury he joined his Wedgwood relatives at Maer Hall, Staffordshire, but found them too eager for tales of his travels to give him much rest.
Hooker replied "There may in my opinion have been a series of productions on different spots, & also a gradual change of species.
In his final examination in January 1831 Darwin did well, coming tenth out of 178 candidates for the ''ordinary'' degree.
High in the Andes he saw seashells, and several fossil trees that had grown on a sand beach.
Enquiries about insect pollination led in 1861 to novel studies of wild orchids, showing adaptation of their flowers to attract specific moths to each species and ensure cross fertilisation.
He covered human descent from earlier animals including evolution of society and of mental abilities, as well as explaining decorative beauty in wildlife and diversifying into innovative plant studies.
These attitudes were not unusual in Britain in the 1820s, much as it shocked visiting Americans.
Haldane and Sewall Wright, which set the frame of reference for modern debates and refinements of the theory.
Hooker increasingly doubted the traditional view that species were fixed, but their young friend Thomas Henry Huxley was firmly against the transmutation of species.
A year on, the mission had been abandoned.
Gray and Lyell sought reconciliation with faith, while Huxley portrayed a polarisation between religion and science.
That day, Huxley held the first meeting of what became the influential "X Club" devoted to "science, pure and free, untrammelled by religious dogmas".
Soon after the ''Origin'' was published in 1859, critics derided his description of a struggle for existence as a Malthusian justification for the English industrial capitalism of the time.
While ill in 1862 Darwin began growing a beard, and when he reappeared in public in 1866 caricatures of him as an ape helped to identify all forms of evolutionism with Darwinism.
In 1863 Lyell's ''Geological Evidences of the Antiquity of Man'' popularised prehistory, though his caution on evolution disappointed Darwin.
Owen's claim that brain anatomy proved humans to be a separate biological order from apes was shown to be false by Huxley in a long running dispute parodied by Kingsley as the "Great Hippocampus Question", and discredited Owen.
Another son, Leonard, went on to be a soldier, politician, economist, eugenicist and mentor of the statistician and evolutionary biologist Ronald Fisher.
Darwin's ''Journal'' was eventually rewritten as a separate third volume, on natural history.
Darwin has been described as one of the most influential figures in human history; and was honoured by burial in Westminster Abbey.
In his last book he returned to ''The Formation of Vegetable Mould through the Action of Worms''.
After some discussion, Lyell and Hooker decided on a joint presentation at the Linnean Society on 1 July of ''On the Tendency of Species to form Varieties; and on the Perpetuation of Varieties and Species by Natural Means of Selection''.
His cousin William Darwin Fox introduced him to the popular craze for beetle collecting; Darwin pursued this zealously, getting some of his finds published in Stevens' ''Illustrations of British entomology''.
The finds brought great interest when they reached England.
He identified the little-known ''Megatherium'' by a tooth and its association with bony armour, which had at first seemed to him to be like a giant version of the armour on local armadillos.
She accepted, then in exchanges of loving letters she showed how she valued his openness in sharing their differences, also expressing her strong Unitarian beliefs and concerns that his honest doubts might separate them in the afterlife.
