By Charlemagne's time the French vernacular had already diverged significantly from Latin.
The young prince was chased to the Adriatic littoral, and he fled to Constantinople to plead for assistance from Constantine V, who was waging war with Bulgaria.
Einhard explains that "the honour" was usually "given by the people" to the distinguished, but Pepin the Great and his brother Carloman the Wise received it as though hereditary, as had their father, Charles Martel.
Among the contingents of the Frankish army were Bavarians under Tassilo&nbsp;III, Duke of Bavaria, an Agilofing, the hereditary Bavarian ducal family.
While at table, he listened to reading or music.
In 1964, the young French singer France Gall released the hit song "Sacré Charlemagne" in which the lyrics blame the great king for imposing the burden of compulsory education on French children.
The elder of these two, Carloman, was made king of Italy, taking the Iron Crown that his father had first worn in 774, and in the same ceremony was renamed "Pepin."
The resulting standardisation economically harmonised and unified the complex array of currencies which had been in use at the commencement of his reign, thus simplifying trade and commerce.
This is evidenced by one of the regulations of the Council of Tours (813), which required that the parish priests preach either in the "rusticam Romanam linguam" (Romance) or "Theotiscam" (the Germanic vernacular) rather than in Latin.
In the Divine Comedy the spirit of Charlemagne appears to Dante in the Heaven of Mars, among the other "warriors of the faith."
Charlemagne, advised by scholar Alcuin of York, travelled to Rome, in November 800 and held a council on December 1.
Charlemagne had eighteen children over the course of his life with eight of his ten known wives or concubines.
The papacy had since 727 been in conflict with Irene's predecessors in Constantinople over a number of issues, chiefly the continued Byzantine adherence to the doctrine of iconoclasm, the destruction of Christian images; while from 750, the secular power of the Byzantine Empire in central Italy had been nullified.
He took up arms in opposition to the decision and was joined by Grifo, a half-brother of Pepin and Carloman, who had been given a share by Charles Martel, but was stripped of it and held under loose arrest by his half-brothers after an attempt to seize their shares by military action.
The new minuscule was disseminated first from Aachen and later from the influential scriptorium at Tours, where Alcuin retired as an abbot.
During this war the Frisians were also finally subdued and a large part of their fleet was burned.
In his first campaign, in 773, Charlemagne forced the Engrians to submit and cut down an Irminsul pillar near Paderborn.
Charlemagne also directed his attention to the Slavs to the west of the Avar khaganate: the Carantanians and Carniolans.
This made it difficult for multiple students to study one title, but helped ensure the safety of the tomes.
According to the ''Life'', Pepin died in Paris.
The ambassadors both met at Thionville, and Charlemagne upheld the pope's side.
In April 2014, on the occasion of the 1200th anniversary of Charlemagne's death, there was a 2-week public art installation ''Mein Karl'' by Ottmar Hörl at Katschhof place between city hall and cathedral of Aachen, displaying 500 Charlemagne statues.
Finally, in Eastphalia, he defeated a Saxon force, and its leader Hessi converted to Christianity.
However, large numbers of horses were used by the Frankish military during the age of Charlemagne.
The revolutionary character of the Carolingian reform, however, can be over-emphasised; efforts at taming the crabbed Merovingian and Germanic hands had been underway before Alcuin arrived at Aachen.
The empire would remain in continuous existence for nearly a millennium, as the Holy Roman Empire, a true imperial successor to Charles.
The title of emperor remained in the Carolingian family for years to come, but divisions of territory and in-fighting over supremacy of the Frankish state weakened its power and ability to lead.
The latter, loyal to Francia, now went to war with his brother over full possession.
Furthermore, the new title—carrying with it the risk that the new emperor would "make drastic changes to the traditional styles and procedures of government" or "concentrate his attentions on Italy or on Mediterranean concerns more generally"—risked alienating the Frankish leadership.
Pannonian Croat duke Vojnomir of Pannonian Croatia aided Charlemagne, and the Franks made themselves overlords over the Croats of northern Dalmatia, Slavonia, and Pannonia.
Belasko and the counties in the Marca Hispánica provided the necessary springboard to attack the Andalusians (expedition led by William Count of Toulouse and Louis the Pious to capture Barcelona in 801), in a way that Charlemagne had succeeded in expanding the Carolingian rule all around the Pyrenees by 812, although events in the Duchy of Vasconia (rebellion in Pamplona, count overthrown in Aragon, duke Seguin of Bordeaux deposed, uprising of the Basque lords, etc.)
The Battle of Roncevaux Pass, though less a battle than a mere skirmish, left many famous dead, including the seneschal Eggihard, the count of the palace Anselm, and the warden of the Breton March, Roland, inspiring the subsequent creation of the Song of Roland (''La Chanson de Roland'').
In there were a vast amount of live stock like cattle, horses, pigs, goats, chickens, donkeys, cows, calves, bulls, geese, and peacocks.
She was sent back to Francia, but died before reaching Lyons
In 750, Pepin was elected by an assembly of the Franks, anointed by the archbishop, and then raised to the office of king.
The most likely date of Charlemagne's birth is reconstructed from several sources.
If the reigns of both terminated with the incursion of the Saracens, then Roderic appears to have reigned a few years before the majority of Achila.
This puts him in the 99th percentile of tall people of his period, given that average male height of his time was .
The only part of the Empire which Louis was not promised was Italy, which Charlemagne specifically bestowed upon Pippin's illegitimate son Bernard.
As of 788 we hear of Adalric fighting and capturing Chorson, Carolingian count of Toulouse.
At Mass, on Christmas Day (25&nbsp;December), when Charlemagne knelt at the altar to pray, the Pope crowned him ''Imperator Romanorum'' ("Emperor of the Romans") in Saint Peter's Basilica.
Pepin himself was the grandson of two of the most important figures of the Austrasian Kingdom: Saint Arnulf of Metz and Pepin of Landen.
This division might have worked, but it was never to be tested.
Grifo had installed himself as Duke of Bavaria, but Pepin replaced him with a member of the ducal family yet a child, Tassilo, whose protector he had become after the death of his father.
Charles came to the realisation that the great Roman emperor, who claimed to be the head of the world hierarchy of states, in reality was no greater than Charles himself, a king as other kings, since beginning in 629 he had entitled himself "Basileus" (translated literally as "king").
For the next two years, Charlemagne was occupied, along with the Slavs, against the Saxons.
Alas for miserable me.
In 778, he led the Neustrian army across the Western Pyrenees, while the Austrasians, Lombards, and Burgundians passed over the Eastern Pyrenees.
Adrian sent ambassadors to Charlemagne in autumn requesting he enforce the policies of his father, Pepin.
However, the Eastern Orthodox Church views Charlemagne more controversially, labelling as heterodox his support of the filioque and recognition by the Bishop of Rome as legitimate Roman Emperor rather than Irene of Athens of the Eastern Roman Empire.
The armies met at Saragossa and Charlemagne received the homage of the Muslim rulers, Sulayman al-Arabi and Kasmin ibn Yusuf, but the city did not fall for him.
Grimoald was attacked by armies of Charles or his sons many times, but Charlemagne himself never returned to the Mezzogiorno, and Grimoald never was forced to surrender to Frankish suzerainty.
In return for their lives, the Lombards surrendered and opened the gates in early summer.
Charlemagne applied this system to much of the European continent, and Offa's standard was voluntarily adopted by much of England.
In one document uncovered during his time ruling it showed what he had in stock in these estates.
He returned to Saxony in 782 and instituted a code of law and appointed counts, both Saxon and Frank.
The campaigns would have continued if the Saxons had not revolted again in 792, breaking seven years of peace.
He decided to go home, since he could not trust the Basques, whom he had subdued by conquering Pamplona.
Charlemagne rushed back from Saxony and defeated the duke of Friuli in battle; the duke was slain.
There was also no record of anyone working at the manor, like smiths and huntsmen.
Charlemagne built a new camp at Karlstadt.
Her father's wrath was now aroused, and he would have gladly allied with Carloman to defeat Charles.
The remaining power confronting the Franks in the east were the Avars, however Charlemagne went on acquiring other Slav areas, including Bohemia, Moravia, Austria and Croatia.
The Germanic Saxons were divided into four subgroups in four regions.
The manor itself also contains seventeen other houses built inside the courtyard for nobles, family members and it wasn’t uncommon to have very large families to build alliances with other royal or noble families through marriage.
But to keep the state intact after it had been formed was a colossal task&nbsp;... Each of the minor states&nbsp;... had its little sovereign&nbsp;... who&nbsp;... gave himself chiefly to&nbsp;... plotting, pillaging and fighting."
Charlemagne was accorded sainthood inside the Holy Roman Empire after the twelfth century.
The pan-European nature of Charlemagne's influence is indicated by the origins of many of the men who worked for him: Alcuin, an Anglo-Saxon from York; Theodulf, a Visigoth, probably from Septimania; Paul the Deacon, Lombard; Peter of Pisa and Paulinus of Aquileia, Italians; and Angilbert, Angilram, Einhard, and Waldo of Reichenau, Franks.
With the exception of Nordalbingia, Saxony was under his control, but Saxon resistance had not ended.
His son Louis the Pious succeeded him.
He therefore ordered him to become ''true king''.
There was no mention of the imperial title however, which has led to the suggestion that, at that particular time, Charlemagne regarded the title as an honorary achievement which held no hereditary significance.
He could discipline clerics, control ecclesiastical property and define orthodox doctrine.
Soon the Avar tuduns had lost the will to fight and travelled to Aachen to subject themselves to Charlemagne as vassals and Christians.
Instead of handling business in a professional manner, he would have all members of the situation meet in his bedroom to be given orders from there.
For the Pope, then, there was "no living Emperor at the that time" though Henri Pirenne disputes this saying that the coronation "was not in any sense explained by the fact that at this moment a woman was reigning in Constantinople."
During these days, he would not get out of bed when a quarrel occurred in his kingdom.
The Muslim sources, however, present a more coherent view, such as in the ''Ta'rikh iftitah al-Andalus'' ("History of the Conquest of al-Andalus") by Ibn al-Qūṭiyya (a name meaning "the son of the Gothic woman", referring to the granddaughter of the last king of all Visigothic Spain, who married a Moor).
What is known, from the Byzantine chronicler Theophanes, is that Charlemagne's reaction to his coronation was to take the initial steps towards securing the Constantinopolitan throne by sending envoys of marriage to Irene, and that Irene reacted somewhat favourably to them.
The booty was sent to Charlemagne at his capital, Aachen, and redistributed to all his followers and even to foreign rulers, including King Offa of Mercia.
His great scholarly failure, as Einhard relates, was his inability to write: when in his old age he began attempts to learn—practising the formation of letters in his bed during his free time on books and wax tablets he hid under his pillow—"his effort came too late in life and achieved little success", and his ability to read – which Einhard is silent about, and which no contemporary source supports—has also been called into question.
Einhard says that Charlemagne was ignorant of the Pope's intent and did not want any such coronation:
After his death the surviving daughters were banished from the court by their brother, the pious Louis, to take up residence in the convents they had been bequeathed by their father.
Charlemagne demanded what the pope had requested, and Desiderius promptly swore never to comply.
were to prove it ephemeral on his death.
Most of the presently surviving works of classical Latin were copied and preserved by Carolingian scholars.
Charlemagne's coronation as Emperor, though intended to represent the continuation of the unbroken line of Emperors from Augustus to Constantine VI, had the effect of setting up two separate (and often opposing) Empires and two separate claims to imperial authority.
* Pippin the Hunchback (ca.
After 737, Charles governed the Franks without a king on the throne but declined to call himself ''king''.
In 1861, Charlemagne's tomb was opened by scientists who reconstructed his skeleton and estimated it to be measured .
Later Old French historians dubbed him ''Charles le Magne'' (Charles the Great), becoming Charlemagne in English after the Norman conquest of England.
He at first had such an aversion that he declared that he would not have set foot in the Church the day that they the imperial titles were conferred, although it was a great feast-day, if he could have foreseen the design of the Pope.
He also campaigned against the Saxons to his east, Christianising them upon penalty of death, leading to events such as the Massacre of Verden.
He had supreme jurisdiction in judicial matters, made legislation, led the army, and protected both the Church and the poor.
Their masters had been cornered in the Iberian peninsula by Abd ar-Rahman I, the Umayyad emir of Cordova.
This defence, last employed in the Danish-Prussian War of 1864, was at its beginning a  long earthenwork rampart.
In 787, Charlemagne directed his attention towards the Duchy of Benevento, where Arechis was reigning independently.
Charlemagne conquered Corsica and Sardinia at an unknown date and in 799 the Balearic Islands.
Charlemagne then accepted the surrender of the Wiltzes under Dragovit and demanded many hostages.
Charlemagne even had contact with the caliphal court in Baghdad.
He turned to leave Iberia, but as he was passing through the Pass of Roncesvalles one of the most famous events of his long reign occurred.
According to the Muslim historian Ibn al-Athir, the Diet of Paderborn had received the representatives of the Muslim rulers of Zaragoza, Girona, Barcelona, and Huesca.
His name does not appear among the 28 saints named Charles who are listed in the Roman Martyrology.
In 795, when the Saxons broke the peace, the Abotrites and Wiltzes rose in arms with their new master against the Saxons.
The French name, Gascony, derives from Vasconia.
He kept them at home with him and refused to allow them to contract sacramental marriages (though he originally condoned an engagement between his eldest daughter Rotrude and Constantine VI of Byzantium, this engagement was annulled when Rotrude was 11).
Charles was succeeded in 741 by his sons Carloman and Pepin the Short, the father of Charlemagne.
At least one of them, Bertha, had a recognised relationship, if not a marriage, with Angilbert, a member of Charlemagne's court circle.
During the first peace of any substantial length (780–782), Charles began to appoint his sons to positions of authority within the realm, in the tradition of the kings and leaders of the past.
The Saxons were once again brought to heel, but their main leader, Widukind, managed to escape to Denmark, home of his wife.
In the Battle of Trsat, the forces of Eric fled their positions and were totally routed by the forces of Višeslav.
Thereafter, the Saxons maintained the peace for seven years, but in 792 the Westphalians again rose against their conquerors.
Despite his efforts to make every one of his subjects educated and literate, Charlemagne himself could not write.
His fourth known concubine was Regina.
In 788, the Avars, a pagan Asian horde that had settled down in what is today Hungary (Einhard called them Huns), invaded Friuli and Bavaria.
The latter's kingdom is securely placed to the northeast, while Roderic seems to have taken the rest, notably Portugal.
Charles received Pepin's original share as Mayor: the outer parts of the kingdom bordering on the sea, namely Neustria, western Aquitaine, and the northern parts of Austrasia; while Carloman was awarded his uncle's former share, the inner parts: southern Austrasia, Septimania, eastern Aquitaine, Burgundy, Provence, and Swabia, lands bordering Italy.
Book production was completed slowly by hand, and took place mainly in large monastic libraries.
Charlemagne ordered Pepin and Louis to be raised in the customs of their kingdoms, and he gave their regents some control of their sub-kingdoms, but real power was always in his hands, though he intended his sons to inherit their realms some day.
From 800, he became the first Holy Roman Emperor—the first recognised emperor in Western Europe since the fall of the Western Roman Empire three centuries earlier.
The war that had lasted so many years was at length ended by their acceding to the terms offered by the King; which were renunciation of their national religious customs and the worship of devils, acceptance of the sacraments of the Christian faith and religion, and union with the Franks to form one people.
The typical sword was of a golden or silver hilt.
However, the stirrup, which made the "shock cavalry" lance charge possible, was not introduced to the Frankish kingdom until the late eighth century.
In 806, Charlemagne first made provision for the traditional division of the empire on his death.
* Theodrada (b.784), abbess of Argenteuil
Finally, Ohnsorge points out that in the spring of 813 at Aachen Charles crowned his youngest, only surviving son, Louis, as emperor without recourse to Rome and only with the acclamation of his Franks, also the form in which this acclamation was offered was no longer Roman, but Frankish-Christian; thus demonstrating both independence from Rome, and a Frankish understanding of empire different from Rome's.
The title was revived when Otto I was crowned emperor in 962, fashioning himself as the successor of Charlemagne.
He did leave a testament allocating his assets in 811 which was not updated prior to his death.
The Eastphalians and Nordalbingians joined them in 793, but the insurrection did not catch on and was put down by 794.
Carolingian minuscule was created partly under the patronage of Charlemagne.
The conflict lasted until 810, when the pro-Byzantine party in Venice gave their city back to the Byzantine Emperor, and the two emperors of Europe made peace: Charlemagne received the Istrian peninsula and in 812 the emperor Michael I Rhangabes recognised his status as Emperor, although not necessarily as "Emperor of the Romans".
A later story, told by Otho of Lomello, Count of the Palace at Aachen in the time of Otto&nbsp;III, would claim that he and Emperor Otto had discovered Charlemagne's tomb: the emperor, they claimed, was seated upon a throne, wearing a crown and holding a sceptre, his flesh almost entirely incorrupt.
37-60 ( online);R. McKitterick: ''Charlemagne''.
Of all the possible outcomes, he chose to impose a joint rule over distinct jurisdictions on the true heirs.
Charlemagne had more than his castle to live in in his vast kingdom.
The Second Council of Nicaea reintroduced the veneration of icons under Empress Irene.
Hunald was forced to flee to the court of Duke Lupus&nbsp;II of Gascony.
The Basques fell on his rearguard and baggage train, utterly destroying it.
He was supported in this appeal by Carloman, Charles' brother.
On 14 October 2014, the eighth major DLC for Crusader Kings II, a grand strategy game, was released.
Even then, he stubbornly did what he wanted and refused to listen to doctors, indeed he detested them, because they wanted to persuade him to stop eating roast meat, as was his wont, and to be content with boiled meat."
His reform focused on the strengthening of the church's power structure, improving the skill and moral quality of the clergy, standardising liturgical practices, improvements on the basic tenets of the faith and moral, and the rooting out of paganism.
'''Charlemagne''' (; 2 April 742/747/748Matthias Becher: ''Neue Überlegungen zum Geburtsdatum Karls des Großen'', in: ''Francia'' 19/1, 1992, pp.
And "because the Byzantines had proved so unsatisfactory from every point of view—political, military and doctrinal—he would select a westerner: the one man who by his wisdom and statesmanship and the vastness of his dominions&nbsp;... stood out head and shoulders above his contemporaries."
Only Duke Arechis II of Benevento refused to submit and proclaimed independence.
Charlemagne has been called the "Father of Europe" (''Pater Europae''), as he united most of Western Europe for the first time since the Roman Empire.
The last conquest brought them to the mouth of the Ebro and gave them raiding access to Valencia, prompting the Emir al-Hakam I to recognise their conquests in 813.
Stressing his opposition, the Pope had the original text inscribed in Greek and Latin on two heavy shields, which were displayed in Saint Peter's Basilica.
The council was not recognised by Charlemagne since no Frankish emissaries had been invited, even though Charlemagne ruled more than three provinces of the old Roman empire and was considered equal in rank to the Byzantine emperor.
Among Charlemagne descendants are several royal dynasties, including the Habsburg, Capetian, and Plantagenet dynasties.
The earliest surviving ''planctus'', the ''Planctus de obitu Karoli'', was composed by a monk of Bobbio, which he had patronised.
In deep depression (mostly because many of his plans were not yet realised), he took to his bed on 21&nbsp;January and as Einhard tells it:
The conquest of Italy brought Charlemagne in contact with the Saracens who, at the time, controlled the Mediterranean.
The subjects of the readings were the stories and deeds of olden time: he was fond, too, of St. Augustine's books, and especially of the one entitled "The City of God.
It is awarded annually to "personages of merit who have promoted the idea of western unity by their political, economic and literary endeavours."
Einhard tells again in the twenty fourth chapter: "In summer after the midday meal, he would eat some fruit, drain a single cup, put off his clothes and shoes, just as he did for the night, and rest for two or three hours.
The first event of the brothers' reign was the uprising of the Aquitainians and Gascons, in 769, in that territory split between the two kings.
Charlemagne reached the height of his power in 800 when he was crowned ''Emperor of the Romans'' by Pope Leo III on Christmas Day at Old St. Peter's Basilica.
Pursuing his father's reforms, Charlemagne abolished the monetary system based on the gold , and he and the Anglo-Saxon King Offa of Mercia took up the system set in place by Pippin.
His third wife was Fastrada, married 784, died 794.
Books were so in demand during Charlemagne’s time that these libraries lent out some books, but only if that borrower offered valuable collateral in return.
On the death of Pepin, 24 September 768, the kingship passed jointly to his sons, "with divine assent" (divino nutu).
Bavaria was subdivided into Frankish counties, as had been done with Saxony.
Charlemagne engaged in many reforms of Frankish governance, but he continued also in many traditional practices, such as the division of the kingdom among sons.
The epithet Carolus Magnus was widely used, leading to numerous translations into many languages of Europe.
His authority was now extended over church and state.
The ''annals'' tell a slightly different version, with the king dying at St-Denis, near Paris.
It came up repeatedly over the succeeding decades until the grandsons of Charlemagne created distinct sovereign kingdoms.
The charges were exaggerated, but Tassilo was deposed anyway and put in the monastery of Jumièges.
During Charles' reign, the Roman half uncial script and its cursive version, which had given rise to various continental minuscule scripts, were combined with features from the insular scripts that were being used in Irish and English monasteries.
He wore a blue cloak and always carried a sword with him.
Late in life he attempted to learn, and even kept a wax tablet under his pillow to practise making letters on during his leisure hours, but with little progress.
The defeat of Charlemagne's army in Roncevaux (778) confirmed him in his determination to rule directly by establishing the Kingdom of Aquitaine (son Louis the Pious proclaimed first king) based on a power base of Frankish officials, distributing lands among colonisers and allocating lands to the Church, which he took as ally.
During this period, the  and the  were counting units; only the  was a coin of the realm.
According to Werner Ohnsorge, for a long time it had been the custom of Byzantium to designate the German princes as spiritual "sons" of the Byzantines.
He was succeeded by his surviving son, Louis, who had been crowned the previous year.
"He despised foreign costumes, however handsome, and never allowed himself to be robed in them, except twice in Rome, when he donned the Roman tunic, chlamys, and shoes; the first time at the request of Pope Hadrian, the second to gratify Leo, Hadrian's successor."
This was because horses provided a quick, long-distance method of transporting troops, which was critical to building and maintaining such a large empire.
The siege lasted until the spring of 774, when Charlemagne visited the pope in Rome.
As of 794, we hear for the first time of a Frankish vassal, the Basque lord Belasko (''al-Galashki'', 'the Gaul') in the lands of Álava, but Pamplona remained in Cordovan and local hands up to 806.
The Frankish commander Eric of Friuli wanted to extend his dominion by conquering the Littoral Croat Duchy.
He also subdued the Frank-allied Wiltzes and fought the Abotrites.
Charlemagne is quoted by Dr Henry Jones Sr. (played by Sean Connery) in ''Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade''.
At a critical point in the campaign, Tassilo with all his Bavarians left the field.
Charlemagne returned through Westphalia, leaving encampments at Sigiburg and Eresburg, which had been important Saxon bastions.
In 803, Charlemagne sent a huge Bavarian army into Pannonia, defeating and bringing an end to the Avar confederation.
Winners of the prize include Count Richard Coudenhove-Kalergi, the founder of the pan-European movement, Alcide De Gasperi, and Winston Churchill.
The gold shortage was a direct consequence of the conclusion of peace with Byzantium, which resulted in ceding Venice and Sicily to the East and losing their trade routes to Africa.
Actor and singer Christopher Lee's Symphonic Metal concept album ''Charlemagne: By the Sword and the Cross'' and its Heavy Metal follow-up ''Charlemagne: The Omens of Death'' feature the events of Charlemagne's life.
By the Pope's decision, in which Pepin had a hand, Drogo was to be disqualified as an heir in favour of his cousin Charles.
There was, however, a certain ambiguity about quasi-inheritance.
He then returned to Italy and, for the first time, there was no immediate Saxon revolt.
There was still instability, however, in Italy.
When the family of Charles ceased to produce worthy heirs, the pope gladly crowned whichever Italian magnate could best protect him from his local enemies.
The union with Himiltrude produced a son:
* Hildegarde (782–783)
One of the great medieval literary cycles, the Charlemagne cycle or the ''Matter of France'', centres on the deeds of Charlemagne—the Emperor with the Flowing Beard of ''Roland'' fame—and his historical commander of the border with Brittany, Roland, and the paladins who are analogous to the knights of the Round Table or King Arthur's court.
The Transdanubian territories became integral parts of the Frankish realm, which was abolished by the Magyars in 899-900.
The Franks continued to press forward against the emir.
In the summer of 779, he again invaded Saxony and reconquered Eastphalia, Engria, and Westphalia.
