Lindbergh developed a long-term friendship with the automobile pioneer Henry Ford, who was well known for his anti-Semitic newspaper ''The Dearborn Independent''.
A massive ticker-tape parade followed running up Park Row, Centre St., and Lafayette St. to Astor Place, west on Ninth St. to Fifth Ave., up Fifth to 60th St., and then through Central Park on East Drive to Central Park Mall where he was honored at another ceremony hosted by New York Governor Al Smith attended by a crowd of 200,000.
In late July 2003, one of the largest national daily newspapers in Germany, Munich's ''Süddeutsche Zeitung'', reported that Lindbergh had fathered three children by German hat maker Brigitte Hesshaimer (1926–2003), who had lived in the small Bavarian town of Geretsried just south of Munich.
In Pat Buchanan's book ''A Republic, Not an Empire: Reclaiming America's Destiny'', he portrays Lindbergh and other pre-war isolationists as American patriots who were smeared by interventionists during the months leading up to the attack on Pearl Harbor.
In 1929, Bertolt Brecht wrote a musical called ''Der Lindberghflug'' (The Lindbergh Flight) with music by Kurt Weill and Paul Hindemith.
The ''Spirit'' flew for the first time just two months later, on , 1927, and after completing a series of test flights, Lindbergh took off from San Diego on  for St. Louis and on to Roosevelt Field on New York's Long Island from which he would take off for Paris just 10 days later.
Within a year of his flight, a quarter of Americans (an estimated 30 million) personally saw Lindbergh and the ''Spirit of St. Louis''.
Lindbergh later said that this year of Army flight training was critically important in his development as both a focused, goal-oriented individual, and as a skillful and resourceful aviator.
The award did not cause controversy until the war began and Lindbergh returned to the United States in 1939 to spread his message of nonintervention.
Dubbed the "Good Will Tour", it included stops in México (where he also met his future wife, Anne, the daughter of U.S.
He was inducted into the National Aviation Hall of Fame in 1967.
Lindbergh received the unprecedented opportunity to pilot the Bf 109.
He was buried on the grounds of the Palapala Ho'omau Church in Kipahulu, Maui.
Late in his training, Lindbergh experienced his most serious flying accident on , 1925, eight days before graduation.
Throughout his life, Lindbergh remained a key advocate of Goddard's work.
He not only had considerably less overall flying experience (and none over water) than the others, but also Lindbergh's efforts were being financed only by a single $15,000 bank loan, a $1,000 donation from his employer as an Air Mail pilot, and his own modest savings.
I cannot support her broken promises, but she has only moved a little faster than other nations&nbsp;... in breaking promises.
Berg reveals that while the attack on Pearl Harbor came as a shock to Lindbergh, he did predict that America's "wavering policy in the Philippines" would invite a bloody war there, and, in one speech, he warned that "we should either fortify these islands adequately, or get out of them entirely."
The speech was heavily criticized as being anti-Semitic.
Yet Berg also notes that "As late as April 1939 – after Germany overtook Czechoslovakia – Lindbergh was willing to make excuses for Hitler.
As a technical adviser with Ford in 1942, he was heavily involved in troubleshooting early problems encountered at the Willow Run Consolidated B-24 Liberator bomber production line.
Lindbergh also undertook a survey of aviation in the Soviet Union in 1938, and his findings were included in air intelligence reports long before the outbreak of World War II.
The following year, Lindbergh persuaded United Aircraft to designate him a technical representative in the Pacific Theater to study aircraft performances under combat conditions.
In 1938, the family moved to Île Illiec, a small four-acre island Lindbergh purchased off the Breton coast of France.
While on his deathbed, he had contacted his friend, William Jovanovich, head of Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, to edit the lengthy memoirs.
Four years after its 1953 publication, Lindbergh's second book about his flying "partner" served as the basis for the namesake major Hollywood Cinemascope motion picture ''The Spirit of St. Louis'', directed by Billy Wilder and released on , 1957, one month short of the 30th anniversary of the flight to Paris.
After both Brigitte and Anne Morrow Lindbergh had died, Astrid finally publicly disclosed the identity of her and her brothers' father.
They included pictures of him and other America Firsters using the stiff-armed Bellamy salute (a hand gesture described by Francis Bellamy to accompany his Pledge of Allegiance to the American flag); the photos were taken from an angle not showing the flag, so to observers it was indistinguishable from the Hitler salute.
", Lindbergh claimed the three groups, "pressing this country toward war are the British, the Jewish, and the Roosevelt Administration",  and said of Jewish groups,
People were "behaving as though Lindbergh had walked on water, not flown over it."
The district's sports teams are named the ''Flyers'' and ''Lindbergh Drive'' is a major road on the west side of town, leading to Charles A. Lindbergh State Park.
By the time he started college as a mechanical engineering student, he had also become fascinated with flying, though he "had never been close enough to a plane to touch it."
According to a Biography Channel profile on Lindbergh, she was the only woman whom he had ever asked out on a date.
It was estimated by city officials that upwards of 4,000,000 persons saw Lindbergh that day.
On the advice of his close friend, the eugenicist Alexis Carrel, he cancelled the trip.
After selling the Jenny, Lindbergh returned to Lincoln by train.
However, the manufacturers would not agree to a sale unless they were allowed to select the pilot.
"1927 marked the breakout year of commercial aviation in the United States and the beginning of what came to be called the Lindbergh boom.
The accident grounded him for a week until he could repair his plane.
Over the next 33.5 hours, he and the ''Spirit''—which Lindbergh always jointly referred to as "WE"—faced many challenges, including skimming over both storm clouds at  and wave tops at as low at , fighting icing, flying blind through fog for several hours, and navigating only by the stars (whenever visible), and dead reckoning before landing at Le Bourget Airport at 10:22 pm (22:22) on Saturday, .
On the same day Lindbergh and the ''Spirit'' arrived in Washington, the U.S. Post Office Department issued a 10-cent Air Mail stamp (Scott C-10) depicting the Spirit of St. Louis and a map of the flight.
The reserve of the villagers, most of whom had decided in advance he would be a blustering, boastful young American, is melting."
Lindbergh considered Russia a "semi-Asiatic" country compared to Germany, and he believed Communism was an ideology that would destroy the West's "racial strength" and replace everyone of European descent with "a pressing sea of Yellow, Black, and Brown."
He encountered derision for trying to play a 26-year-old man in his late 40s and ''The Spirit of St. Louis'' was a commercial failure.
On , 1998, a 32¢ stamp with the legend "Lindbergh Flies Atlantic" (Scott #3184m) depicting Lindbergh and the ''"Spirit"'' was issued as part of the Celebrate the Century stamp sheet series.
In his diaries, he wrote: "We must limit to a reasonable amount the Jewish influence&nbsp;...
The assiduous tracing of the serial numbers of $10 and $20 gold certificates passed in the New York City area over the next year and a half eventually led police to Richard Hauptmann, a 34-year-old German immigrant carpenter, who was arrested near his home in the Bronx, New York, on , 1934.
This conflicted with the  Franklin Roosevelt administration's official policy, which sought to protect Britain from a German takeover.
President Franklin D. Roosevelt disliked Lindbergh's outspoken opposition to intervention and his administration's policies, such as the Lend-Lease Act, and said to Treasury Secretary Henry Morgenthau in May 1940, "if I should die tomorrow, I want you to know this, I am absolutely convinced Lindbergh is a Nazi."
Those cities were the last three stops he and the ''Spirit'' made during their  "Good Will Tour" of Latin America and the Caribbean between , 1927, and , 1928.
Lindbergh's invention, a glass perfusion pump, named the "Model T" pump, is credited with making future heart surgeries possible.
In February 2002, the Medical University of South Carolina at Charleston, within the celebrations for the Lindbergh 100th birthday established the Lindbergh-Carrel Prize, given to major contributors to "development of perfusion and bioreactor technologies for organ preservation and growth".
His innovations in the use of Lockheed P-38 Lightning fighters impressed a supportive Gen. Douglas MacArthur.
While he carried no official mail in the ''Spirit'' to Paris or during the subsequent three-month, 48-state Guggenheim tour, at the request of Capt.
Tony Randall revived "Lucky Lindy" in an album of Jazz Age and Depression-era songs that he recorded entitled ''Vo Vo De Oh Doe'' (1967).
All seven children had been born between 1958 and 1967.
His message was popular throughout many Northern communities and especially well received in the Midwest, while the American South was anglophilic and supported a pro-British foreign policy.
Lindbergh introduced engine-leaning techniques to P-38 pilots, greatly improving fuel consumption at cruise speeds, enabling the long-range fighter aircraft to fly longer range missions.
Instead he said that "we" referred to himself and his financial backers in St. Louis, not his airplane, as the press had people believing, although his frequent unconscious use of the phrase seemed to suggest otherwise.
Although he continued to adamantly maintain his innocence, all of Hauptmann's appeals and petitions for clemency were rejected by early December 1935.
Although that initial time limit lapsed without a serious challenger, the state of aviation technology had advanced sufficiently by 1924 to prompt Orteig to extend his offer for another five years, and this time it began to attract an impressive grouping of well-known, highly experienced, and well-financed contenders.
Although Charles and Anne Lindbergh had made a brief unannounced holiday visit to the U.S. in December 1937, the family (including a third son, Land, born in London in May 1937) continued to live and travel extensively in Europe for more than three years before finally returning to reside again in the United States in April 1939, settling in a rented seaside estate at Lloyd Neck, Long Island, New York.
Lindbergh reported to the U.S. military that Germany was leading in metal construction, low-wing designs, dirigibles, and diesel engines.
In September, that figure was up 50 percent, to .
Stewart lobbied hard for the role as he had been a lifelong admirer of Lindbergh and described his trans-Atlantic flight as "one of the defining moments of my youth".
Following his flight to Paris, Lindbergh, together with Pan American World Airways head Juan Trippe, had interest in developing a great circle air route across Alaska and Siberia to China and Japan.
In his book written after the war, Lindbergh said that no one he met in pre-wartime Nazi Germany did not believe the country would be better off without the Jews, though some condemned the means used to achieve that goal.
News of the Lindberghs' "flight to Europe" did not become public until a full day later by way of an exclusive front-page story by ''The New York Times'' aviation editor Lauren "Deac" Lyman, a longtime family friend, supporter, and confidant, published in the paper's final Monday morning edition.
The number of applicants for pilots' licenses tripled that year," and the number of airplanes quadrupled.
While barnstorming in Lone Rock, WI Lindbergh helped local physician Dr. Bertha Reynolds make two emergency calls by transporting her across the Wisconsin River to patients in Clyde and Plain, which she otherwise could not have reached due to Spring flooding.
In 1980, Hopkins closed an older high school and renamed Lindbergh High as Hopkins Senior High School.
Copyright Office recorded three hundred applications for Lindbergh songs.
On , 1927, a Special Act of Congress awarded Lindbergh the Medal of Honor despite the fact that it was almost always awarded for heroism in combat.
Lindbergh wrote that the ideal romance was stable and long term, with a woman with keen intellect, good health, and strong genes.
Lindbergh and his mother slipped away early, telling no one, causing a panicked MacKay to have the estate searched for the missing pilot.
In 1930, Lindbergh's sister-in-law developed a fatal heart condition.
1942); and Reeve Lindbergh (b.
Although Lindbergh never returned to service as a regular U.S. Air Mail pilot, he used the immense fame his New York to Paris flight brought him to help promote the use of the U.S. Air Mail Service.
The Philip Roth novel, ''The Plot Against America'' (2004), a speculative fiction novel, explores an alternate history where Franklin Delano Roosevelt is defeated in the 1940 presidential election by Lindbergh, who allies the United States with Nazi Germany.
The family eventually rented "Long Barn" in Sevenoaks Weald, Kent, England.
Lindbergh himself designed the airport in 1929 when it was built as a refueling point for the first coast-to-coast air service.
But after Charles Lindbergh's flight, we could do no wrong.
It was presented to Lindbergh by President Coolidge at the White House on , 1928.
Lindbergh spent his last years on the Hawaiian island of Maui, where he died of lymphoma on , 1974, at age 72.
He kept track of each child's infractions, which included such activities as gum-chewing.
In the two incidents, which both occurred while he was approaching Chicago at night, Lindbergh came down by parachute near small farming communities in northeastern Illinois.
Another such replica hangs in the great hall of the Missouri History Museum in St. Louis.
Lindbergh has also been the subject of numerous screen, television, and other documentary films over the years, including ''Charles A. Lindbergh'' (1927), a UK documentary by De Forest Phonofilm based on Lindbergh's milestone flight, ''40,000 Miles with Lindbergh'' (1928) featuring Charles A. Lindbergh, and ''The American Experience—Lindbergh: The Shocking, Turbulent Life of America's Lone Eagle'' (1988) PBS documentary directed by Stephen Ives.
'''Nazi classification and racial definition'''
Although Lindbergh had "offered no public explanation" for the family's unannounced departure, shortly before they sailed, he had told Lyman in a private interview: "We Americans are a primitive people.
What a pity that this youngster has completely abandoned his belief in our form of government and has accepted Nazi methods because apparently they are efficient."
A stash containing $13,760 of the ransom money was subsequently found hidden in his garage.
He initially mistook the airfield for some large industrial complex with bright lights spreading out in all directions.
At Lindbergh's request, however, Lyman intentionally withheld the identity of the ship, as well as its time and port of departure, from that initial account.
Lindbergh was selected as the first ''Time'' magazine "Man of the Year" (for 1927), appearing in its cover on , 1928, and remains the youngest individual (age 25) to receive the designation.
Every major newspaper, magazine, and radio show in the U.S. wanted to interview him, and he was flooded with job offers from numerous companies, think tanks, and universities.
In 1929, Lindbergh became interested in the work of rocket pioneer Robert H. Goddard.
Place and date: From New York City to Paris, France, , 1927.
Lindbergh and the ''Spirit'' have been honored by a variety of world postage stamps over the last eight decades, including three issued by the United States.
Particularly concerned for the physical safety of their then three-year-old second son, Jon, by late 1935, the Lindberghs came secretly to the decision to go into voluntary exile in Europe.
Lindbergh later described his three years in the Kent village as "among the happiest days of my life."
In later years, Lindbergh's pump was further developed by others, eventually leading to the construction of the first heart-lung machine.
The ''Spirit'' was "portrayed" in the film by three flyable replicas of the Ryan NYP, while Lindbergh was played by veteran American actor and fellow Army aviator James Stewart.
A similar Ryan Brougham was bought by Stewart and modified with Lindbergh's supervision.
His duties included evaluating new aircraft types in development, recruitment procedures, and finding a site for a new air force research institute and other potential air bases.
Coincidentally, in 1925, just before he signed on to fly with CAM, Lindbergh had applied to serve as a pilot on CDR (later RADM) Richard E. Byrd's famed North Pole expedition, but apparently his bid came too late.
Because of Lindbergh's apparent Nazi sympathies, in 1950 Brecht removed all direct references to Lindbergh and renamed the piece ''Der Ozeanflug'' (The Ocean Flight).
Starting in early 1931 at the Rockefeller Institute and continuing during his time living in France, Lindbergh studied the perfusion of organs outside the body with Nobel Prize-winning French surgeon Dr. Alexis Carrel.
Three days later, Lindbergh resigned his commission as a colonel in the U.S. Army Air Corps in an  letter to the President in which he said he could find "no honorable alternative" to his taking such an action after Roosevelt had publicly questioned his loyalty.
In 1938, Lindbergh and Carrel described an artificial heart in the book in which they summarized their work, ''The Culture of Organs'', but it was decades before one was built.
Consequently, in the predawn hours of Sunday, , 1935, the family "sailed furtively" from Pier 60 (West 20th St, Manhattan) for Liverpool, England, as the only three passengers on board the United States Lines freighter SS ''American Importer''.
Although he enrolled in the College of Engineering at the University of Wisconsin–Madison in late 1920, Lindbergh dropped out in the middle of his sophomore year and then went to Lincoln, Nebraska, in March 1922 to begin flight training.
The original Lindbergh residence is maintained as a museum, the Charles A. Lindbergh Historic Site, and is listed as a National Historic Landmark.
Lindbergh's father, a U.S.
He further said, "The growth of our western civilization has been closely related to this superiority."
A year and two days after it had made its first flight, Lindbergh flew the ''Spirit'' from St. Louis to Bolling Field in Washington, D.C., and donated it to the Smithsonian Institution, where it has remained on static public display ever since.
A 25-year-old relative latecomer to the race, in relation to the others, Lindbergh was also virtually anonymous as an aviation figure.
"If we repeal the arms embargo with the idea of assisting one of the warring sides to overcome the other, then why mislead ourselves by talk of neutrality?
The day after he landed in Paris, his mother's house in Detroit was surrounded by a crowd estimated at about 1,000 persons in celebration of the flight to Paris.
On , 1969, Lindbergh and T. Claude Ryan (previous owner of the Ryan Flying Company that built the ''Spirit of St. Louis'' aircraft) were present at Cape Canaveral to watch the launch of Apollo 11.
The first edition dustjacket notes that Lindbergh wrote the book to provide the public with his "own story of his life and his transatlantic flight together with his views on the future of aviation".
"It seems so contrary to their sense of order and intelligence.
Designated as an award to the pilot of the first successful nonstop flight made in either direction between New York City and Paris within five years after its establishment, the $25,000 Orteig Prize was first offered by the French-born New York hotelier (Lafayette Hotel) Raymond Orteig on , 1919.
Wallace considers Lindbergh a well-intentioned, but bigoted and misguided, Nazi sympathizer whose career as the leader of the isolationist movement had a destructive impact on Jewish people.
Putnam's had selected the title without its author's knowledge or approval, however, and Lindbergh would forever complain about that interpretation of its meaning was wrong.
The school district was also later named after Lindbergh.
Lindbergh's brief four-month tour was also his first period of active military service since his graduation from the Army's Flight School 14 years earlier in 1925.
Lindbergh stated that France's military strength was inadequate and that Britain had an outdated military overly reliant upon naval power.
After being flown, the covers were backstamped and returned to their senders as a further means to promote awareness and the use of the Air Mail Service.
In 2016, as part of his series of scores based around historical events, Adam Young released a score based around The Spirit of St. Louis's flight.
Less than three weeks after the flight the U.S. Post Office Department issued a 10-cent "Lindbergh Air Mail" stamp (Scott C-10) on , 1927, with engraved illustrations of both the ''Spirit of St. Louis'' and a map of its route from New York to Paris.
On the evening of , 1932, in what the press of the time came to sensationally refer to as "The Crime of the Century," an intruder abducted 20-month-old Charles Augustus Lindbergh Jr. from his crib in the second-story nursery of his family's rural home, Highfields, in East Amwell, New Jersey, near the town of Hopewell.
At the urging of U.S.
Lindbergh was the 19th person to make a Transatlantic flight, the first being the Transatlantic flight of Alcock and Brown from Newfoundland in 1919, but Lindbergh's flight was almost twice the distance.
The group thus turned to B.F. Mahoney's much smaller Ryan Aircraft Company in San Diego, which agreed to design and build such a monoplane "from the ground up" for $10,580, and on , a deal was formally struck.
He believed that "in America they can be blended to form the greatest genius of all."
Lindbergh continued on as chief pilot of CAM-2 until mid-February 1927, when he left for San Diego, California, to oversee the design and construction of the ''Spirit of St.
Another fictional literary reference to Lindbergh appears in the Agatha Christie book (1934) and movie ''Murder on the Orient Express'' (1974) which begins with a fictionalized depiction of the Lindbergh baby kidnapping.
He believed that a strong defensive war machine would make America an impenetrable fortress and defend the Western Hemisphere from an attack by foreign powers, and that this was the U.S. military's sole purpose.
located on the Mall in Washington, D.C. a few blocks from the Capitol.
In April, the month before Lindbergh's flight,  of mail flew on airplanes.
Although he did not win, Chamberlin and his passenger, Charles A. Levine, made the far less-well-remembered second successful nonstop, single-pilot flight of a heavier-than-air aircraft across the Atlantic Ocean in the single-engine Wright-Bellanca WB-2 ''Miss Columbia'' (N-X-237), leaving Roosevelt Field on , 1927, two weeks after Lindbergh's flight and landing in Eisleben, Germany 43 hours and 31 minutes later on , 1927.
His speeches were heard by millions.
Lindbergh flew his Jenny to Iowa in October, where he sold it to a flying student.
1937), who studied anthropology at Stanford University and married Susan Miller in San Diego; Anne Lindbergh (1940–1993); Scott Lindbergh (b.
He soon became its most prominent public spokesman, speaking to overflowing crowds in Madison Square Garden in New York City and Soldier Field in Chicago.
The younger Lindbergh's solo flight from Republic Airport on Long Island, to Le Bourget Airport in Paris was completed in 17 hours and 7 minutes, or a little more than half the time of his grandfather's 33.5 hour original flight.
During this time, Lindbergh lived in Lloyd Neck, on Long Island, New York.
Lindbergh also attended over a dozen other schools from Washington, D.C., to California, during his childhood and teenage years (none for more than a year or two), including the Force School and Sidwell Friends School while living in Washington with his father, and Redondo Union High School in Redondo Beach, California, while living there with his mother.
The definitive oil painting of Lindbergh by St. Louisan Richard Krause entitled "The Spirit Soars" has been displayed there.
In the summer of 1931, with Trippe's support, Lindbergh and his wife Anne Morrow Lindbergh flew from Long Island to Nome, Alaska and from there to Siberia, Japan and China.
Ambassador to Mexico in 1927.
Known as "Horseshoe Mail" because each piece received a rubber stamp cachet of a large horseshoe with the legend "LINDBERGH AGAIN FLIES THE AIR MAIL" and "CHICAGO ST. LOUIS C.A.M.
Lindbergh's support for the America First Committee was representative of the sentiments of a number of American people.
"Bud" Gurney, flew the mail over CAM-2 in a fleet of four modified war-surplus de Havilland DH-4 biplanes.
Although they reached Paris on , 1927, Byrd was unable to land because of poor weather and was forced to return to the Normandy coast where he ditched the trimotor high-wing monoplane in the surf near the French village of Ver-sur-Mer.
The Lindberghs arrived in Liverpool on , 1935, where they secluded themselves before later departing for South Wales to stay with relatives.
They went on to have six children: Charles Augustus Lindbergh Jr. (1930–1932); Jon Morrow Lindbergh (b. , 1932); Land Morrow Lindbergh (b.
His most serious accident came when he ran into a ditch in a farm field in Glencoe, Minnesota, on , 1923, while flying his father (who was then running for the U.S. Senate) to a campaign stop.
Burdened by its heavy load of 450 U.S. gallons (1,704 liters) of gasoline weighing about 2,710&nbsp;lb (1,230&nbsp;kg), and hampered by a muddy, rain-soaked runway, Lindbergh's Wright Whirlwind-powered monoplane gained speed very slowly as it made its 7:52 am (07:52) takeoff run, but its J-5C radial engine still proved powerful enough to allow the ''Spirit'' to clear the telephone lines at the far end of the field "by about twenty feet six meters with a fair reserve of flying speed".
The story of Lindbergh and his association with the former German Nazi Party was featured on the Science Channel TV show, ''Dark Matters: Twisted But True''.
After quitting college in February 1922, Lindbergh enrolled as a student at the Nebraska Aircraft Corporation's flying school in Lincoln two months later and flew for the first time in his life on , 1922, when he took to the air as a passenger in a two-seat Lincoln Standard "Tourabout" biplane trainer piloted by Otto Timm.
While Fonck escaped the flames, his two crew members, Charles N. Clavier and Jacob Islamoff, died in the fire.
Lindbergh said his "experience in breeding animals on our farm had taught me the importance of good heredity."
The street where the school is located is still called Lindbergh Avenue.
Collectors still seek ''Lindberghiana''—these covers and other artifacts associated with or carried on flights piloted by Lindbergh.
The French Foreign Office flew the American flag, the first time it had saluted someone not a head of state.
Lindbergh later wrote the foreword for Apollo 11 astronaut Michael Collins's autobiography, ''Carrying the Fire''.
Lindbergh flew from Washington to New York City on , 1927 arriving at the Battery in lower Manhattan and traveling up Broadway to City Hall where he was received at a ceremony hosted by Mayor Jimmy Walker.
Nevertheless, Lindbergh publicly supported the war effort after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor and flew 50 combat missions in the Pacific Theater of World War II as a civilian consultant, though President Roosevelt had refused to reinstate his Army Air Corps colonel's commission.
Although Lindbergh considered Hitler a fanatic and avowed a belief in American democracy, he clearly stated elsewhere that he believed the survival of the white race was more important than the survival of democracy in Europe: "Our bond with Europe is one of race and not of political ideology," he declared.
The Lindbergh Center is located on the Hopkins High School campus.
In addition to ''"WE"'' and ''The Spirit of St. Louis'', Lindbergh also wrote prolifically over the years on other topics of interest to him, including science, technology, nationalism, war, materialism, and values.
Lindbergh received many awards, medals and decorations, most of which were later donated to the Missouri Historical Society and are on display at the Jefferson Memorial, now part of the Missouri History Museum in Forest Park in St. Louis, Missouri.
Rank and organization: Captain, U.S. Army Air Corps Reserve.
Included among those writings were five other books: ''The Culture of Organs'' (with Dr. Alexis Carrel) (1938), ''Of Flight and Life'' (1948), ''The Wartime Journals of Charles A. Lindbergh'' (1970), ''Boyhood on the Upper Mississippi'' (1972), and his final book, ''Autobiography of Values'', which was published posthumously in 1978.
Only 18 of the 104 cadets who started flight training a year earlier remained when Lindbergh graduated first overall in his class in March 1925, thereby earning his Army pilot's wings and a commission as a 2nd Lieutenant in the Air Service Reserve Corps.
In 1929–1931, Lindbergh carried much smaller numbers of souvenir covers on the first flights over routes in Latin America and the Caribbean, which he had earlier laid out as a consultant to Pan American Airways to be then flown under contract to the Post Office Department as Foreign Air Mail (FAM) routes 5 and 6.
In 2003, DNA tests confirmed that Lindbergh had fathered Dyrk, Astrid, and David, Brigitte's three children.
Lindbergh's Pulitzer Prize-winning biographer, A. Scott Berg, contends Lindbergh was not so much a supporter of the Nazi regime as someone so stubborn in his convictions and relatively inexperienced in political maneuvering that he easily allowed rivals to portray him as one.
In his , 1941, testimony in opposition to the Lend-Lease bill before the House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Lindbergh proposed that the United States negotiate a neutrality pact with Germany.
The dinner included diplomats and three of the greatest minds of German aviation, Ernst Heinkel, Adolf Baeumker, and Dr. Willy Messerschmitt.
The school newspaper is the ''Pilot'', the yearbook is the ''Spirit'', the students are known as the ''Flyers'', and the school's marching band holds the title of the ''Spirit of St. Louis Marching Band''.
Charged with kidnapping, extortion, and first-degree murder, Hauptmann went on trial in a circus-like atmosphere in Flemington, New Jersey, on , 1935.
Twice during the 10 months he flew CAM-2, Lindbergh would be called upon to exhibit his faithfulness to that oath after temporarily losing custody and control of mails he was transporting when he was forced to bail out of his mail plane owing to bad weather, equipment problems, and/or fuel exhaustion.
There, he joined Leon Klink and continued to barnstorm through the South for the next few months in Klink's Curtiss JN-4C "Canuck" (the Canadian version of the Jenny).
Wallace finds the Roosevelt Administration's accusations of dual loyalty or treason as unsubstantiated.
Lindbergh had planned to move to Berlin for the winter of 1938–39.
In a speech at an America First rally at the Des Moines Coliseum on , 1941, "Who Are the War Agitators?
Two days before he opened service on the route on , 1926, with its first early-morning southbound flight from Chicago to St. Louis, Lindbergh officially became authorized to be entrusted with the "care, custody, and conveyance" of U.S. Mails by formally subscribing and swearing to the Post Office Department's 1874 ''Oath of Mail Messengers''.
At the time, several Marine squadrons were flying bomber escorts to destroy the Japanese stronghold of Rabaul, New Britain, in the Australian Territory of New Guinea.
Lindbergh said certain races have "demonstrated superior ability in the design, manufacture, and operation of machines."
Following a few months of barnstorming through the South, the two pilots parted company in San Antonio, Texas, where Lindbergh had been ordered to report to Brooks Field on , 1924, to begin a year of military flight training with the United States Army Air Service both there and later at nearby Kelly Field.
This was also the first U.S. stamp to bear the name of a living person.
In late 1940, he became spokesman of the antiwar America First Committee.
Even the first walk on the moon doesn't come close.
Lindbergh specifically opposed military aid to assist England in 1939.
On , 1926, he attempted to fly eastbound from Roosevelt Field in New York in a three-engine Sikorsky S-35, but never got off the ground as his grossly overloaded (by 10,000&nbsp;lb) transport biplane crashed and burned on takeoff when its landing gear collapsed.
Ten days before he died on , 1974, Lindbergh wrote letters from his New York hospital bed to each of his three European mistresses, imploring them to maintain the "utmost secrecy" about their relationships after his death.
The American ambassador to Germany, Hugh Wilson, invited Lindbergh to dinner with Göring at the American embassy in Berlin in 1938.
