This is one of the few occasions on which the anti-religious fervour was stopped by the townfolk.
The central lancet beneath the rose shows the Virgin carrying the infant Christ.
This legend, however, was pure fiction (Charlemagne never went to the Holy Land) – probably invented in the 11th century to authenticate some relics at the Abbey of St Denis.
We’re going to die.
The building's exterior is dominated by heavy flying buttresses which allowed the architects to increase the window size significantly, while the west end is dominated by two contrasting spires&nbsp;– a 105-metre (349&nbsp;ft) plain pyramid completed around 1160 and a 113-metre (377&nbsp;ft) early 16th-century Flamboyant spire on top of an older tower.
The stained glass in the three lancets over the portals date from some time between 1145 and 1155, while the south spire, some 103&nbsp;metres high, was also completed by 1155 or later.
At the time, the framework over the crossing had the largest span of any iron framed construction in Europe.
The chamber below the chapel served the canons as their chapter house.
In fact, the relic was a gift to the cathedral from Charles the Bald and there is no evidence for its being an important object of pilgrimage prior to the 12th century.
Architectural critic Alexander Gorlin described the goal as a "great lie", writing that the "idea that the 13th century interior of Chartres can be recreated is so totally absurd as to be laughable" and that it is "against every single cultural trend today that values the patina of age and the mark of time rather than the shiny bling of cheap jewelry and faux finishes".
All that’s left most artists seem to feel these days, is man.
In 1757, a number of changes were made to the interior to increase the visibility of the Mass, in accordance with changing religious customs.
By the early 12th century the status of the School of Chartres was on the wane.
In the centre of the tympanum is Christ within a mandorla, surrounded by the four symbols of the evangelists (the ''Tetramorph'').
The three portals each focus on a different aspect of Christ's role; his earthly incarnation on the right, his second coming on the left and his eternal aspect in the centre.
The other 12th-century window, perhaps the most famous at Chartres, is the so-called «'' Notre-Dame de la Belle-Verrière ''», found in the first bay of the choir after the south transept.
The Virgin is depicted wearing a blue robe and sitting in a frontal pose on a throne, with the Christ Child seated on her lap raising his hand in blessing.
East of the crossing are four rectangular bays terminating in a semicircular apse.
Beneath the rose itself are five tall lancet windows (7.5&nbsp;m high) showing, in the centre, the Virgin as an infant held by her mother, St Anne – the same subject as the trumeau in the portal beneath it.
The jubé (choir screen) that separated the liturgical choir from the nave was torn down and the present stalls built (some of the magnificent sculpture from this screen was later found buried underneath the paving and preserved, though it is not on public display).
Less obvious than the jamb statues but far more intricately carved is the frieze that stretches all across the façade in the sculpted capitals on top of the jamb columns.
The restoration has however received almost universal backing from French experts and from the general public.
After its completion Jehan continued working on the cathedral, and began the monumental screen around the choir stalls, which was not completed until the beginning of the eighteenth century.
Even though there were innumerable changes to the details, the plan remains remarkably consistent.
Shortly after 1417, a small chapel was placed between the buttresses of the south nave for the Count of Vendôme.
Most feature the standing figure of a saint or Apostle in the upper two-thirds, often with one or two simplified narrative scenes in the lower part, either to help identify the figure or else to remind the viewer of some key event in their life.
Our songs will all be silenced – but what of it?
Opening on to the ''parvis'' (the large square in front of the cathedral where markets were held), the two lateral doors would have been the first entry point for most visitors to Chartres, as it remains today.
Adoration of the Magi and the Dream of the Magi
The presence of angels in the upper lintel, descending from a cloud and apparently shouting to those below, would seem to support the latter interpretation.
Equally notable are the three great façades, each adorned with hundreds of sculpted figures illustrating key theological themes and narratives.
From the beginning, it was intended that these towers flank a central porch of some sort and a narthex.
The rebuilding proceeded in phases over the next hundred years or so, culminating in 1145 in a display of public enthusiasm dubbed the "Cult of the Carts" – one of several such incidents recorded during the period.
Personifications of the Virtues and Vices
Of the Carolingian church that replaced it, all that remains is a semicircular chamber located directly below the centre of the present apse.
The presence of the arms of the French king (yellow fleurs-de-lis on a blue background) and of his mother, Blanche of Castile (yellow castles on a red background) are taken as a sign of royal patronage for this window.
Annunciation to Mary and the Visitation
Judgment of Solomon
Even before the Gothic cathedral was built, Chartres was a place of pilgrimage, albeit on a much smaller scale.
At the same time, some of the stained glass in the clerestory was removed and replaced with grisaille windows, greatly increasing the illumination of the High Altar.
The nave and transepts are flanked by single aisles, broadening to a double-aisled ambulatory around the choir and apse.
By eschewing the gallery level that featured in many early Gothic cathedrals (normally between arcade and triforium), the designers were able to make the richly glazed arcade and clerestory levels larger and almost equal in height, with just a narrow dark triforium in between.
The people who built this cathedral intended that its interior should be light.
The elevation of the nave is three-storied, with arcade, triforium and clerestory levels.
At the close of the war the windows were taken out of storage and reinstalled.
The archivolts contain the signs of the zodiac and the labours of the months – standard references to the cyclical nature of time which appear in many gothic portals.
To this end, some of the interior shafts in the western bay were removed and plans made to rebuild the organ there.
Nevertheless, work progressed rapidly.
Feeling that the beauty of Chartres and its unknown artisans and architects epitomized this sentiment, Welles, standing outside the cathedral and looking at it, eulogizes:
Life of St Giles in lower register, other Confessors in the remaining voussoirs
Joris-Karl Huysmans includes detailed interpretation of the symbolism underlying the art of Chartres Cathedral in his 1898 semi-autobiographical novel  ''La cathédrale''.
In 1323 a substantial two story construction was added at the eastern end of the choir, with a chapel dedicated to Saint Piat in the upper floor accessed by a staircase opening onto the ambulatory (the chapel of St Piat is normally closed to visitors, although it occasionally houses temporary exhibitions).
Each arm of the transept was originally meant to support two towers, two more were to flank the choir, and there was to have been a central lantern over the crossing – nine towers in all.
Most obvious are the jamb statues afixed to the columns flanking the doorways – tall, slender standing figures of kings and queens from whom the ''Portail royal'' derived its name.
The book used the Cathedral's architecture and history as clues in the search for a lost Gospel.
The nave and transept clerestory windows mainly depict saints and Old Testament prophets.
Notre Dame de Chartres.jpg|View from south-east
The result was a far greater area of window openings.
In 1506, lightning destroyed the north spire, which was rebuilt in the 'Flamboyant' style by local mason Jehan de Beauce (who also worked on the abbey church in Vendôme).
Although the sculpture on the portals at Chartres is generally of a high standard, the various carved elements inside, such as the capitals and string courses, are relatively poorly finished (when compared for example with those at Reims or Soissons) – the reason is simply that the portals were carved from the finest Parisian limestone, or ' 'calcaire' ', while the internal capitals were carved from the local "''Berchères stone''", that is hard to work and can be brittle.
According to legend, the relic was given to the cathedral by Charlemagne who received it as a gift from Emperor Constantine VI during a crusade to Jerusalem.
The premier work of man perhaps in the whole western world and it’s without a signature: Chartres.
When the north tower rose to the level of the second storey, the south was begun – the evidence lies in the profiles and in the masons marks on the two levels of the two towers.
This pier design, known as ''pilier cantonné'' was to prove highly influential and subsequently featured in a number of other high gothic churches.
The lower part of the window, showing scenes from the Infancy of Christ, dates from the main glazing campaign around 1225.
The cathedral was consecrated on 24 October 1260 in the presence of King Louis IX of France, whose coat of arms was painted over the apsidal boss.
Like most medieval buildings, the windows at Chartres suffered badly from the corrosive effects of atmospheric acids during the Industrial Revolution and subsequently.
One of the attractions at the Chartres Cathedral is the Chartres Light Celebration, when not only is the cathedral lit, but so are many buildings throughout the town, as a celebration of electrification.
It is 113&nbsp;metres high and took seven years to construct.
The fairs were held in the area administered by the cathedral and were attended by many of the pilgrims in town to see the cloak of the Virgin.
The majority of windows were cleaned and restored by the famous local workshop ''Atelier Lorin'' at the end of the 19th century but they continued to deteriorate.
In fact the present building is only marginally longer than Fulbert's cathedral.
The installation of the Vendôme Chapel between two buttresses of the nave in the early 15th century resulted in the loss of one more lancet window, though it did allow for the insertion of a fine late-gothic window with donor portraits of Louis de Bourbon and his family witnessing the Coronation of the Virgin with assorted saints.
The goal of the project, which is due for completion in 2017, is to make the cathedral look as it would have done when finished in the 13th century.
The undamaged western towers and façade were incorporated into the new works, as was the earlier crypt, effectively limiting the designers of the new building to the same general plan as its predecessor.
The cathedral is featured in the television travel series ''The Naked Pilgrim''; presenter Brian Sewell explores the cathedral and discusses its famous relic – the nativity cloak said to have been worn by the Virgin Mary.
A more likely explanation is that the Cathedral clergy wanted to emphasise the universal reach of the Church, particularly at a time when their relationship with the local community was often a troubled one.
Chartres was a major character in the religious thriller ''Gospel Truths'' by J. G. Sandom.
The use of a three-part elevation with external buttressing allowed for far larger windows than earlier designs, particularly at the clerestory level.
There were four great fairs which coincided with the main feast days of the Virgin Mary: the Presentation, the Annunciation, the Assumption and the Nativity.
I'm back in the Middle Ages.
A celebration to God’s glory and to the dignity of man.
The south porch with most of its sculpture was installed by 1210, and by 1215 the north porch had been completed and the western rose installed.
Whereas the lower windows in the nave arcades and the ambulatory consist of one simple lancet per bay, the clerestory windows are each made up of a pair of lancets with a plate-traceried rose window above.
Surrounding the tympanum, as a reminder of the glory days of the School of Chartres, the archivolts are carved with some very distinctive personifications of the Seven Liberal Arts as well as the classical authors and philosophers most associated with them.
The north transept rose (10.5&nbsp;m diameter, made c.1235), like much of the sculpture in the north porch beneath it, is dedicated to the Virgin.
Although in the 18th and 19th century these figures were mistakenly identified as the Merovingian monarchs of France (thus attracting the opprobrium of Revolutionary iconoclasts) they almost certainly represent the kings and queens of the Old Testament – another standard iconographical feature of gothic portals.
Ours, the scientists keep telling us, is a universe, which is disposable.
Above this the tympanum shows the Virgin and Child enthroned in the ''Sedes sapientiae'' pose.
On the whole, Chartres' windows have been remarkably fortunate.
Either side of this are four lancets showing the four evangelists sitting on the shoulders of four Prophets – a rare literal illustration of the theological principle that the New Testament builds upon the Old Testament.
The plan is cruciform.
It was nothing to do with ageing of the stone.
As well as their basic functions of providing access to the interior, portals are the main locations for sculpted images on the gothic cathedral and it is on the west façade at Chartres that this practice began to develop into a visual ''summa'' or encyclopedia of theological knowledge.
The central oculus shows the Virgin and Child and is surrounded by 12 small petal-shaped windows, 4 with doves (the 'Four Gifts of the Spirit'), the rest with adoring angels carrying candlesticks.
This window is actually a composite; the upper part, showing the Virgin and child surrounded by adoring angels, dates from around 1180 and was probably positioned at the centre of the apse in the earlier building.
The cathedral has three great façades, each equipped with three portals, opening into the nave from the west and into the transepts from north and south.
Normally medieval churches were built from east to west so that the choir could be completed first and put into use (with a temporary wall sealing off the west end) while the crossing and nave were completed.
The widespread belief that the cathedral was also the site of a pre-Christian druidical sect who worshipped a "Virgin who will give birth" is purely a late-medieval invention.
The north tower was started immediately afterwards – the south tower some time later.
None of these theories refer back to the actual stonework, and it is only when one has done so, as John James did exhaustively in 1969, that one realizes that the construction process was in fact simple and logical.
The major change occurred six years after work began when the seven deep chapels around the choir opening off a single ambulatory were turned into shallow recesses opening off a double-aisled ambulatory.
However, when metal was needed for the army the brass plaque in the centre of the labyrinth was removed and melted down; our only record of what was on the plaque was Felibien's description.
Either way, the opportunity was taken to begin a complete rebuilding of the choir and nave in the latest style.
Great scholars were attracted to the cathedral school, including Thierry of Chartres, William of Conches and the Englishman John of Salisbury.
Three of these are located beneath the rose in the west façade: the Passion window to the south, the Infancy of Christ in the centre and a Tree of Jesse to the north.
Most windows are made up of around 25–30 individual panels showing distinct episodes within the narrative; only «'' Notre-Dame de la Belle-Verrière ''» includes a larger image made up of multiple panels.
The lintel shows the Twelve Apostles while the archivolts show the 24 Elders of the Apocalypse.
The central door is only opened for the entry of processions on major festivals, of which the most important is the ''Adventus'' or installation of a new bishop.
Nothing survives of the earliest church, which was destroyed during an attack on the city by the Danes in 858.
Because of their greater distance from the viewer, the windows in the clerestory generally adopt simpler, bolder designs.
Naked, poor, forked, radish.
It is the rotting remains of a whitewash from the 18th century.
Chartres is no exception to this general principle and the north transept portals, with their deep sheltering porches, concentrate on the precursors of Christ, leading up to the moment of His incarnation, with a particular emphasis on the Virgin Mary.
One major exception to this scheme is the presence of large statues of St Modesta (a local martyr) and St Potentian on the north west corner of the porch, close to a small doorway where pilgrims visiting the crypt (where their relics were stored) would once have emerged blinking into the light.
Each bay of the aisles and the choir ambulatory contains one large lancet window, most of them roughly 8.1m high by 2.2m wide.
Around 876 the cathedral acquired the ''Sancta Camisa'', believed to be the tunic worn by the Blessed Virgin Mary at the time of Christ's birth.
Textiles were sold around the north transept, while meat, vegetable and fuel sellers congregated around the south porch.
King Solomon, the Queen of Sheba, various prophets
The harmonious appearance of the façade results in part from the relative proportions of the central and lateral portals, whose widths are in the ratio 10:7 – one of the common medieval approximations of the square root of 2.
There was nothing natural about its darkness.
Of the latter, one was effectively lost in the 1320s when the Chapel of St Piat was built.
Since at least the 12th century the cathedral has been an important destination for travellers&nbsp;– and remains so to the present, attracting large numbers of Christian pilgrims, many of whom come to venerate its famous relic, the ''Sancta Camisa'', said to be the tunic worn by the Virgin Mary at Christ's birth, as well as large numbers of secular tourists who come to admire the cathedral's architecture and historical merit.
At Chartres, nearly all of the 176 windows were filled with equally dense stained glass, creating a relatively dark but richly coloured interior in which the light filtering through the myriad narrative and symbolic windows was the main source of illumination.
This chapel was probably vaulted, and those vaults saved the western glass.
Although the town of Chartres was under the judicial and tax authority of the Counts of Blois, the area immediately surrounding the cathedral, known as the ''cloître'', was in effect a free-trade zone governed by the church authorities, who were entitled to the taxes from all commercial activity taking place there.
I'm back in the world that I was brought up in as a child, the Roman Catholic spiritual-image world, and it is magnificent ... That cathedral talks to me about the spiritual information of the world.
As well as greatly increasing the cathedral's income, throughout the 12th and 13th centuries this led to regular disputes, often violent, between the bishops, the chapter and the civic authorities – particularly when serfs belonging to the counts transferred their trade (and taxes) to the cathedral.
The personifications of the ''vita activa'' (directly overhead, just inside the inside of the left hand porch) are of particular interest for their meticulous depictions of the various stages in the preparation of flax – an important cash-crop in the area during the Middle Ages.
Maybe a man’s name doesn’t matter all that much.
Our works in stone, in paint, in print are spared, some of them for a few decades, or a millennium or two, but everything must finally fall in war or wear away into the ultimate and universal ash.
For example, Louis Grodecki argued that the lateral doors of the transept portals were cut through the walls at a later date, and van der Meulen that they had wanted to rebuild the western portals (then only 50 years old).
Part of the project involved painting the interior masonry creamy-white, with trompe l’oeil marbling and gilded detailing.
In the Middle Ages, the cathedral functioned as a kind of marketplace, with different commercial activities centred on the different portals, particularly during the regular fairs.
Some of the masters have been identified by John James, and drafts of these studies have been published on the web site of the International Centre of Medieval Art, New York.
There aren’t any celebrations.
The medieval glass largely escaped harm during the Huguenot iconoclasm and the religious wars of the 16th century although the west rose sustained damage from artillery fire in 1591.
There have been at least five cathedrals on this site, each replacing an earlier building damaged by war or fire.
Job on the Dunghill
The cathedral is in an exceptional state of preservation.
In 2009 the Monuments Historiques division of the French Ministry of Culture began a 18.5 million dollar program of works at the cathedral, described as a restoration project.
The majority of the original stained glass windows survive intact, while the architecture has seen only minor changes since the early 13th century.
'''Jamb figures:'''
Traces of the vaults and the shafts which supported them are still visible in the western two bays.
Each of these standing figures is shown symbolically triumphing over an enemy depicted in the base of the lancet beneath them – David over Saul, Aaron over Pharaoh, St Anne over ''Synagoga'', etc.
These buttresses supported the considerable lateral thrusts resulting from the 34m high stone vaults, higher and wider than any attempted before in France.
Old Testament Patriarchs, John the Baptist and St Peter
Although the upper parts of the three portals are treated separately, two sculptural elements run horizontally across the façade, uniting its different parts.
Tree of Jesse / Prophets
The subjects depicted in these windows, made between 1205 and 1235, include stories from the Old and New Testament and the Lives of the Saints as well as typological cycles and symbolic images such as the signs of the zodiac and labours of the months, or the Good Samaritan parable.
As with any medieval bishopric, Chartres Cathedral was the most important building in the town&nbsp;– the centre of its economy, its most famous landmark and the focal point of many activities that in modern towns are provided for by specialised civic buildings.
From the ambulatory radiate three deep semi-circular chapels (overlying the deep chapels of Fulbert's 11th-century crypt) and three much shallower ones.
In the event, this plan was abandoned, the glass in the western lancets was retained and the old organ was replaced with the present one.
It was claimed that during this religious outburst, a crowd of more than a thousand penitents dragged carts filled with building supplies and provisions including stones, wood, grain, etc.
The cathedral was damaged in the French Revolution when a mob began to destroy the sculpture on the north porch.
Australian architectural historian John James, who made a detailed study of the cathedral, has estimated that there were about 300 men working on the site at any one time, although it has to be acknowledged that current knowledge of working practices at this time is somewhat limited.
The order to destroy the cathedral was withdrawn, and the Allies later liberated the area.
Welles’ semi-autobiographical narration spoke to the power of art in culture and how the work itself may be more important than the identity of its creators.
Work on the remaining six towers continued at a slower pace for some decades, until it was decided to leave them without spires (as at Laon Cathedral and elsewhere).
Money-changers (an essential service at a time when each town or region had its own currency) had their benches, or ''banques'', near the west portals and also in the nave itself.
Above the right portal, the lintel is carved in two registers with (lower) the Annunciation, Visitation, Nativity, Annunciation to the Shepherds and (upper) the Presentation in the Temple.
The Cathedral of Chartres was therefore neither destroyed nor looted during the French Revolution and the numerous restorations have not diminished its reputation as a triumph of Gothic art.
+ Iconography of the various elements of the north transept portals
Another architectural breakthrough at Chartres was a resolution to the problem of how to arrange attached columns or shafts around a pier in a way that worked aesthetically – but which also satisfied the desire for structural logic that characterised French high gothic.
Colonel Welborn Barton Griffith, Jr. questioned the strategy of destroying the cathedral and volunteered to go behind enemy lines to find out whether the German Army was occupying the cathedral and using it as an observation post.
One of the few elements to survive from the mid-12th-century church, the ''Portail royal'' was integrated into the new cathedral built after the 1194 fire.
The south transept rose (10.5&nbsp;m diameter, made c.1225–30) is dedicated to Christ, who is shown in the central oculus, right hand raised in benediction, surrounded by adoring angels.
The Revolutionary Committee decided to destroy the cathedral via explosives, and asked a local architect to organise it.
Perhaps the most distinctive feature of Chartres Cathedral is the extent to which architectural structure has been adapted to meet the needs of stained glass.
It was gradually eclipsed by the newly emerging University of Paris, particularly at the School of the Abbey of St Victoire (the 'Victorines').
After he returned from his reconnaissance, he reported that the cathedral was clear of enemy troops.
Another fire in 962 is mentioned in the annals, though nothing is known about the subsequent rebuilding.
The true extent of the damage is unknown, though the fact that the lead cames holding the west windows together survived the conflagration intact suggests contemporary accounts of the terrible devastation may have been exaggerated.
It was replaced with a copper-clad roof supported by a network of cast iron ribs, known as the ''Charpente de fer''.
Malcolm Miller, author of a number of books on the cathedral and widely considered its greatest expert, dismissed the objections: "They talk about the patina of the centuries.
This window was a donation of the Mauclerc family, the Counts of Dreux-Bretagne, who are depicted with their arms in the bases of the lancets.
You know it might be just this one anonymous glory of all things, this rich stone forest, this epic chant, this gaiety, this grand choiring shout of affirmation, which we choose when all our cities are dust, to stand intact, to mark where we have been, to testify to what we had it in us, to accomplish.
Plans for a crossing tower were abandoned in 1221 and the crossing was vaulted over.
This is not the patina of the centuries.
The restoration architect in charge of this painting is Frédéric Didier.
A few windows were replaced with much lighter grisaille glass in the 14th century to improve illumination, particularly on the north side and several more were replaced with clear glass in 1753 as part of the reforms to liturgical practice that also led to the removal of the ''jubé''.
The overall iconographical themes are clearly laid-out; the glorification of Mary in the centre, the incarnation of her son on the left and Old Testament prefigurations and prophecies on the right.
By the middle of the century the importance of Chartres Cathedral had begun to shift away from education and towards pilgrimage, a changing emphasis reflected in the subsequent architectural developments.
Now this has been standing here for centuries.
It's a place for meditation, just walking around, just sitting, just looking at those beautiful things.
Several of the windows at Chartres include images of local tradesmen or labourers in the lowest two or three panels, often with details of their equipment and working methods.
Coronation of the Virgin
The relative darkness of the interior seems to have been a problem for some.
A more serious conflagration occurred in 1020, after which Bishop Fulbert (bishop from 1006 to 1028) began the construction of an entirely new building.
Between them on the first level, a chapel was constructed to Saint Michael.
With a single enlisted soldier to assist, Griffith proceeded to the cathedral and confirmed that the Germans were not using it.
Popular action-adventure video game ''Assassin's Creed'' features a climbable cathedral modeled heavily on the Chartres Cathedral.
Opinions are uncertain as the sizes and styles of the figures vary and some elements, such as the lintel over the right-hand portal, have clearly been cut down to fit the available spaces.
The sculpture was originally designed for these portals, but the layouts were changed by successive masters, see careful lithic analysis by John James.
This chamber, known as the Lubinus Crypt (named after the mid-6th-century Bishop of Chartres), is lower than the rest of the crypt and may have been the shrine of a local saint, prior to the church's rededication to the Virgin.
By the end of the 12th century, however, the church had become one of the most important popular pilgrimage destinations in Europe.
Although not the first example of this three-part elevation, Chartres was perhaps the first of the great churches to make a success of it and to use the same design consistently throughout.
Flanking this lancet are four more containing Old Testament figures.
Orson Welles famously used Chartres as a visual backdrop and inspiration for a montage sequence in his film ''F For Fake''.
In each façade the central portal is particularly large and was only used for special ceremonies, while the smaller side portals allowed everyday access for the different communities that used the cathedral
