The growing trend of witches on television that year led CBS to develop a reboot of ''Charmed''.
The monster of the week format is frequent during the early-half of the series, however Abernethy stated that, despite this, "the writers tend to explore the sibling dynamics to keep the show from growing redundant."
''Charmed'' has gathered several awards and nominations.
Bryant left her role midway through the second season, while Vaughan left at the end of the season.
However, as Holly Marie Combs revealed in ''The Women of Charmed'' documentary, the series aimed at following a mythology created by fantasy, and not adhering to Wiccan rules too closely, for fear of coming under criticism for either not being "technically correct enough" or missing the truth completely.
It feels too close."
The serial connection of episodes culminated in the second half of season four.
In the eighth and final season, Kaley Cuoco joined the show as the young witch Billie Jenkins.
''Witches of East End'' was noted by critics for its strong resemblance to ''Charmed'', as both shows are about a sisterhood of witches and have similar houses, which its executive producer Maggie Friedman has acknowledged.
Both the show and character Piper were referenced in the episode "Sorry for Your Loss" of ''The Tomorrow People'', when Piper&nbsp;Nichols (Aeriél Miranda) introduces herself to Russell Kwon (Aaron Yoo), who responds by saying "''Charmed'', Piper."
Following Doherty's departure at the end of season three, the season four opening credits had to be recreated to remove all footage of Doherty and to include her replacement, Rose&nbsp;McGowan.
In another episode of ''Popular'', entitled "The Shocking Possession of Harrison John," Josh asks George Austin (Anthony Montgomery) who is Michael Bernardino's (Ron Lester) "favorite hottie witch" on ''Charmed'' and George says it is Prue.
That same year, Rose McGowan won the award for "Favorite Sister" at the Family Television Awards.
Often through the assistance of their long-term ally, Darryl Morris (Dorian Gregory) of the San Francisco Police Department, they are able to avoid police suspicion, including the investigation of the most-recurring human antagonist, Inspector Sheridan (Jenya Lano), in the sixth and seventh seasons.
In the 2000 parody film, ''Shriek If You Know What I Did Last Friday the Thirteenth'', Barbara&nbsp;Primesuspect&nbsp;(Julie Benz) is said to be yelling  "''Charmed'' my ass!"
This version was also used in the Netflix version of the series.
The 2013 fall season saw a resurgence of witches in new shows ''The Originals'' and ''Witches of East End'' and in the third season of ''American Horror Story'' titled, ''Coven''.
These include Phoebe's demonic ex-husband, Cole Turner (Julian McMahon), until mid-season five; the scheming, misguided Elder, Gideon (Gildart Jackson), throughout season six; The Avatars until mid-season seven; the demon Zankou (Oded Fehr) until the season seven finale; and, in season eight, powerful sister witches Billie (Kaley Cuoco) and Christy Jenkins (Marnette Patterson), who fall under the influence of the demonic Triad (who earlier feature as early-season three antagonists).
In the eighth season, she becomes committed to a human parole officer, Henry Mitchell (Ivan Sergei), whom she marries.
In 2015, HarperCollins acquired the rights to publish a second series of ''Charmed'' novels from CBS Consumer Products.
Shannen Doherty tweeted to a fan, "I don't know yet.
For its second, third and fourth seasons, ''Charmed'' moved to Thursday nights.
'''''Charmed''''' is an American television series created by Constance M. Burge and produced by Aaron Spelling and his production company Spelling Television, with Brad Kern serving as showrunner.
By the end of season eight, ''Charmed'' had aired a total of 178 episodes and became the longest running hour-long television series featuring all female leads.
Four soundtrack albums of ''Charmed'' have been released and feature music that were used in the show.
The first novel, ''The War on Witches'', was published in May 2015 and its narrative is set between the events of ''Seasons 9'' and ''10'' of the comic book series.
It was also nominated for three Saturn Awards, including one "Best Network Television Series" nomination for its first season and two "Best Actress on Television" nominations for Shannen Doherty in 1999 and 2000.
It is written by Ruditis, who previously authored ''Season 9'' and edited ''Season 10'', and follows the younger Charmed Ones' reunions with Prue and Cole Turner after their resurrections.
The series was retitled ''Charmed'' after Spelling's suggestion of ''House of Sisters'' was dropped.
The order in which each lead actresses individual footage and name appeared in the opening was also changed; Milano's was moved up first, McGowan's was put in second, and Combs' was moved down third and listed "as Piper."
Brad Kern did the most writing, with a total of 26 episodes, as well as directing one of them.
Fuller left his role at the end of season six.
However, executive producer E. Duke Vincent lacked confidence, asking "Why would anybody want to watch a show about three witches?"
Her savior, Matt Johnson, is initially in utter disbelief of Nikki's supernatural nature, until it is proven true.
He also recognized the use of humor in creating "unexpected turns in stock storylines which are more interesting than one might expect."
In Greece, ''Charmed'' was called ''Οι Μάγισσες'' (''The Witches'') and originally aired on the Star Channel.
In 2004, Alyssa Milano was nominated for a Spacey Award in Canada for "Favorite Female TV Character" and in 2005, she was nominated for "Favorite Television Actress" at the Nickelodeon Kids' Choice Awards.
The show's success has led to its development in other media, including a video game, board games, novels, and a comic book series which serves as a continuation of its narrative.
As well as the show's action sequences—describing the Halliwells as "superheroes"—he noted that the series "plays up the stars' separate-but-equal charms" and admired both its "casting and pop-culture timing."
Speaking on the failure of the series to be picked up, Kern revealed that CBS and Paramount Television "decided at the last second to cut the budget in half," which resulted in the number of shooting days to be reduced, thus decreasing the quality of the pilot in being able to "'sell' the concept."
Online ranked Piper at number six on their list of "Pop Culture's Top 10 Most Bitchin' Witches."
The season four episode "Spell" of ''Smallville'' also received comparisons to ''Charmed'' as it focused on a trio of witches.
Online, cast member Alyssa Milano stated that she believes ''Charmed'' helped pave the way for these witch-themed shows, saying: "I think, really, it's due to the success of ''Charmed'' and the fact that it had so much success even after it was done, meaning that people looked for it, people searched it out and watched those episodes over and over.
In 2001, ''Charmed'' won a Cable Guide Award in the United Kingdom for "Favorite Sci-Fi/Fantasy Series."
Robert Masello, an executive story editor for the series, credits himself as the only demonologist hired for a series, in order to add his experience to the storyline.
In the Netherlands, ''Charmed'' was broadcast on NET 5 and in New Zealand, it was originally broadcast on TV3 NZ.
Executive producers Aaron Spelling and E. Duke Vincent maintained their roles until the series ended.
In France, the series was broadcast on M6.
At least they had the decency to call it what it is.
The series has also received numerous awards and nominations.
The complete series box set was re-released in the United States on November 11, 2014 and features a brand new cover of all four sisters.
''Charmed'' achieved a cult following and popularity on The WB with its first episode "Something Wicca This Way Comes" garnering 7.7&nbsp;million viewers, breaking the record for the highest-rated debut episode for The WB.
Additionally cast in main roles were Roger Daltrey, Ana Ortiz and Beatrice Rosen.
Piper's central love interest throughout the series is the sisters' whitelighter Leo Wyatt (Brian Krause); their early relationship is problematic due to the forbidden nature of witch-whitelighter relationships, and so in season two a love triangle forms with Piper, Leo and her neighbor, Dan Gordon (Greg Vaughan).
The writers with the most writing credits other than Kern include Daniel Cerone, Curtis Kheel, Zack Estrin, Chris Levinson, Krista Vernoff, Sheryl J. Anderson, Monica Owusu-Breen, Alison Schapker, Cameron Litvack, and Jeannine Renshaw.
Rose McGowan tweeted, "They really are running out of ideas in Hollywood," followed up by another tweet, "lame lame lame lamertons."
In season two, Greg Vaughan joined the series as the Halliwell sisters' new next-door neighbor Dan Gordon, while Karis Paige Bryant was cast as his niece Jenny Gordon.
In Turkey, ''Charmed'' was originally broadcast on DiziMax.
During the first two seasons, the sisters face various evil beings from week to week.
Both sets are styled after the show's ''Book of Shadows'', with one set being a regular release and the other being a limited deluxe edition.
She also claimed that the Halliwells' struggle for normal lives, "stability, and a sense of self is one of the reasons ''Charmed'' strikes such a chord with its viewers."
Lori Rom was originally cast as the youngest sister Phoebe Halliwell in the 28-minute unaired pilot episode.
For the fifth season, the series moved to Sunday nights at 8:00 pm and remained there until its eighth and final season.
In Belgium, reruns of ''Charmed'' have aired each weekday on 2BE.
Rosen also starred in ''Charmed's'' eighth season as Maya Holmes, an innocent whose image Piper inadvertently uses as her false identity Jenny Bennett.
In 2014, The Charmed Ones were ranked at number six on the "Pop Culture's Favorite Witches" list by MSN's Wonderwall.
Eventually, the two manage to marry and consecrate their union in season three, producing a son named Wyatt in season five.
''Charmed''...succeeded by combining sisterhood with the supernatural."
In 2014, he explored ''Charmed'''s transmedia storytelling at the Université Paris 3.
All eight seasons of ''Charmed'' were released individually on DVD in Regions 1, 2 and 4 between February 2005 and September 2007.
Vanessa Thorpe of ''The Guardian'' agreed with Alyssa Milano's description of ''Charmed'' as "perfect post-feminist girl-power," praising the balance between action and emotion as the "three sibling sorceresses know mischief, but are accessibly feminine."
In a 2003 episode of the Australian soap opera ''Neighbours'', Serena Bishop (Lara Sacher) and Erin Perry (Talia Zucker) find out they have a lot in common like their love for ''Charmed''.
After the title card faded in the seasons 1–3 opening, scenes from the pilot episode were shown, which included an overhead view of the sisters at a round table and a shot of them coming downstairs.
In Spain, the series was called ''Embrujadas'' (''Charmed'') and reruns aired on Cosmopolitan TV.
''Charmed'' has also become a pop culture reference in television shows and films.
She remained as creative consultant until season four.
Alyssa Milano tweeted, "The thing about them doing a #charmed reboot is&nbsp;...&nbsp;it just&nbsp;...&nbsp;it feels like yesterday.
The beginning of the opening remained the same.
After ''Charmed'' ended, there were never any other long-running shows about witches to rival shows about vampires and zombies.
The earlier seasons of ''Charmed'' received mostly favorable reviews from television critics, with its first season scoring a Metacritic score of 61 out of 100.
Spelling warmed to Burge's ideas and, after the concept was re-crafted to be a series about three sisters (now living in San Francisco) descended from a line of witches, it was pitched to The WB's President of Entertainment, Susanne Daniels, who liked it, allowing the series to begin development.
The mermaids originated from a sunken city and had supernatural abilities, including superhuman strength and agility, as well as being able to see in the dark, read emotions and had a connection with other sea creatures.
The 24th and final issue of ''Charmed Magazine'' was released in 2008.
A new packaging of the Region 4 DVDs for all seasons were released in April 2011.
In February 2005, it was announced that Brad Kern, Aaron Spelling and E. Duke Vincent had executive produced a one-hour pilot episode for The WB's 2005–06 season.
The last few scenes in the opening were also changed to include a cemetery, exterior shots of the Halliwell Manor, and pages in the Book of Shadows.
The first season of twenty-two episodes was picked up by The WB after only two episodes had aired.
By the end of the first episode, each sister learns that she has a unique magical power and that they can each cast spells and brew potions.
The song had previously appeared on the soundtrack of ''The Craft''.
However, in the third season, they discover that their ultimate enemy is The Underworld's demonic ruler, The Source of All Evil.
In addition to the supernatural themes explored in ''Charmed'', the characters contend with serious issues in their day-to-day lives such as relationships, careers, marriage, childbirth, illness and the deaths of loved ones.
The second comic book series, ''Charmed: Season 10'', debuted at the New York Comic Con during the weekend of October 9, 2014.
The ''Charmed'' fans are the greatest fans on the planet and the most loyal fans on the planet.
''Party of Five'' co-creator Christopher Keyser and Sydney Sidner were reportedly writing the script for CBS Television Studios and The Tannenbaum Company, who were going to executive produce the reboot alongside Keyser and Sidner.
After his demise, an annual season-long storyline and several antagonists are introduced in subsequent seasons (occasionally following the "Big Bad" television format).
The depiction of witchcraft in ''Charmed'' has had a significant impact on popular culture.
With this, her initial concept was a series set in Boston, Massachusetts about three friends and roommates who were all witches.
The pilot was written by Kern about a mermaid who attempts to live on dry land in Miami.
In Canada, reruns of ''Charmed'' were broadcast on Cosmopolitan TV.
After the short "unaired pilot" was shown to The WB and the series was picked up by the network, Brad Kern was recruited as the fourth executive producer and as the show runner in order to decipher how the series would develop over the course of its run.
Phoebe, the youngest of the three, initially possesses the power of premonition allowing her to receive visions of both the future and the past.
CBS only ordered a script for a pilot, however; no commitment to filming was made.
In 2015, he investigated the show's postfeminist subversion of fairy tales at the Université de Lorient.
In season three, her powers evolve further, as she is able to cause evil beings or objects to explode using her hands.
at Shannen Doherty, who does not appear on-screen.
Other board games include ''Charmed: The Power of Three'' and ''Charmed: The Prophecy'', both of which were released in 2005.
Australian actor Julian McMahon joined the cast of ''Charmed'' in season three as the half-demon Cole Turner.
The series also won a "Certificate of Merit" at the 2003 EDGE Awards for the season four episode "Muse to My Ears."
Many witch-themed shows after ''Charmed'' have been cancelled after one or two seasons.
The pilot was not picked up by The WB.
In Switzerland, the show was called ''Charmed – Zauberhafte Hexen'' (''Charmed – Magical Witches'') and reruns aired on SRF zwei.
The fourth soundtrack, ''Charmed: Score from the Television Series'', was released as a limited edition in June 2013 and featured a selection of cues from the show by composer J. Peter Robinson.
In 2000, Cult TV placed ''Charmed'' at number forty-four on its list of the "Top 100 Cult TV Shows."
During the first season, ''Entertainment Weekly'' writer Ken Tucker, speaking on the comparisons between ''Charmed'' and rival series, argued: "spike-heeled where ''Buffy'' is fleet-footed, ''Charmed'' is ''Charlie's Angels'' with an Ouija board."
The last few scenes in the opening showed the sisters' cat, a San Francisco cable car, and the sisters walking upstairs into their home with Doherty's character closing the door using her telekinetic powers.
''Charmed'' was the first primetime television show about a coven of witches.
The opening theme music used in the television airings of all eight seasons was Love Spit Love's cover version of "How Soon Is Now?"
Ever since ''Charmed'' ended in 2006, academics have appropriated its content and released essays and articles pointing out to the fact that ''Charmed'' is again more than meets the eye.
He departed the show midway through season five.
Paige, like Phoebe, has several multi-episode boyfriends, including fellow-witch and magic "addict" Richard Montana (Balthazar Getty) in season six, and an unstable FBI agent-turned-whitelighter Kyle Brody (Kerr Smith) in season seven.
In Austria, the show was titled ''Charmed – Zauberhafte Hexen'' (''Charmed – Magical Witches'') and aired on ProSieben Austria.
It consisted of various scenes from episodes and individual footages of characters that were updated from season to season.
Full episodes of ''Charmed'' are also available for viewing on TNT's official website.
As work progressed on ''Charmed''s fifth season double-episode premiere, "A Witch's Tail," the theme of mermaids was recognized to have potential for its own series, even though the episode was never meant to be a backdoor pilot for a television spin-off.
During the third season, Michael Abernethy of ''PopMatters'' credited ''Charmed'' as "more enjoyable than most shows in the good vs evil genre" largely due to the strength of the performers.
The game was released for mobile phones in Europe in 2003 and North America in 2004.
Prue, the eldest, has the power of telekinesis (the ability to move objects with her mind), and in season two she develops the power of astral projection.
In the season four episode "Me and the Devil" of ''True Blood'', Sookie Stackhouse (Anna Paquin) tells a witch named Marnie Stonebrook (Fiona Shaw) that one of her favorite television shows she watched as a child was ''Charmed''.
was also replaced by hard-rock instrumental music in the season eight DVD because the music license to use it had expired.
In 2010, HuffPost TV and AOL TV ranked ''Charmed'' at number ten on their joint list of "The Top 20 Magic/Supernatural Shows of All Time" and in 2013, ''TV Guide'' placed the series on its list of "The 60 Greatest Sci-Fi Shows of All Time."
When the theme of witchcraft was first pitched to her, she was aware of stereotypes of witches (flying brooms, black cats, and warts).
A limited ''Magic Chest'' box set edition was released in Region 2 on March 5, 2007 and included all eight seasons.
Other witch-themed shows that have been compared to ''Charmed'' include ''Hex'', ''Eastwick'' and ''The Secret Circle''.
Holly Marie Combs tweeted, "Here's the thing.
The opening began with images of the Golden Gate Bridge and flashing shots of the triquetra symbol.
In the episode "Faith" of ''Third Watch'', Fred Yokas (Chris Bauer) mentions to his wife Faith (Molly Price) that their daughter was upset she could not watch ''Charmed''.
Two novels, ''Seasons of the Witch'' (2003) and ''The Warren Witches'' (2005), are anthologies of short stories.
When Phoebe discovers the family's Book of Shadows, she learns that she and her sisters are the most powerful witches ever known, destined to protect both innocents and the world at large from demons, warlocks, and other evil creatures.
I guess I'm still processing the idea."
The reboot was described as a "re-imagining of the original series centered around four sisters who discover their destiny – to battle against the forces of evil using their witchcraft."
In the 2002 teen comedy film ''Big Fat Liar'', Kaylee (Amanda Bynes) recalls watching an episode of ''Charmed'' on The WB where Alyssa&nbsp;Milano's character Phoebe was about to put a spell on her demon boyfriend.
The series initially focuses on the three Halliwell sisters, Prue (Shannen Doherty), Piper (Holly Marie Combs) and Phoebe (Alyssa Milano).
The first novel, ''The Power of Three'', was released in November 1999 as a novelization of the series premiere episode, "Something Wicca This Way Comes."
Jon Langmead of ''PopMatters'' believed that ''Charmed'' "slipped markedly" in seasons seven and eight, noting that the final season lost appealing elements such as "smart casting" and "attention to relationship drama" of the show's earlier seasons.
A limited ''Book of Shadows'' box set edition was released in Region 4 on November 16, 2006 and featured seasons 1–7.
Piper, the middle sister, has the power to effectively "freeze" people and objects.
The series narrative follows a trio of sisters, known as The Charmed Ones, the most powerful good witches of all time, who use their combined "Power of Three" to protect innocent lives from evil beings such as demons and warlocks.
Similarly, BuzzFeed writer Jarett Wieselman agreed that "After Shannen Doherty’s exit, ''Charmed'' veered into slightly-absurd-yet-no-less-entertaining territory," noting that the addition of Rose McGowan "ushered in a wave of increasingly campy episodes."
She remained as executive consultant until the end of season four when she left ''Charmed''.
All subsequent novels – apart from ''Charmed Again'' (2001) which narrates the events of the two-part episode of the same name – are original stories revolving around the Halliwell sisters  and their allies.
Instead of ripping it off and then pretending to not be ripping it off."
In the United Kingdom, ''Charmed'' was originally broadcast on Living TV and Channel 5.
Doherty departed ''Charmed'' at the end of the third season and was replaced in the fourth season by film actress Rose McGowan, who played the long-lost younger half-sister Paige Matthews.
Constance M. Burge was hired to create the series as she was under contract with 20th Century Fox and Spelling Television after conceiving the drama series ''Savannah'' (1996–97).
In 2008, the religious organisation Beliefnet ranked The Charmed Ones at number eight on their list of the "Top 10 Witches in Pop Culture."
It's strange to think about a reboot.
The sisters also fight to prevent the exposure of the existence of magic to the human community at large, contending with several police and FBI investigations.
In 2011, ''Seventeen'' magazine named The Charmed Ones the ninth most fictional witches of all time, while E!
The set includes all seasons, with a cover that features all four Halliwell sisters together.
Former ''Beverly Hills, 90210'' actress Shannen Doherty was cast as the eldest sister Prue Halliwell, while her best friend and former ''Picket Fences'' actress Holly Marie Combs played the role of the middle sister Piper Halliwell.
The final episode's flashforward montage reveals Piper, Phoebe, and Paige to have three children each with their respective husbands.
He proposed that the series focus on family values and developed the series-long mantra of it being about "three sisters who happen to be witches, not three witches who happen to be sisters."
As she grows more proficient, she learns how to freeze only certain people or objects or body parts, as she wishes.
Nick Romano of Screen Crush wrote that "the storylines became wicca ridiculous and the dialogue became too cheesy," particularly in season eight.
Langmead also disliked the introduction of Kaley Cuoco and Marnette Patterson in the eighth season, and felt that Cuoco was "consistently painful to watch."
Most seasons consisted of 22 episodes, except for the fifth and sixth seasons, which contained 23 episodes, including their double-episode premieres and double-episode finales.
Upon its debut, ''Charmed'' received the largest audience for a series premiere in the network's history.
An action, platform video game of ''Charmed'' was developed by DC Studios and published by In-Fusio.
In Australia, ''Charmed'' was originally broadcast on Network Ten.
During its fifth season, the series became the highest-rated Sunday night program in The WB's history.
The series was originally broadcast by The WB for eight seasons from October 7, 1998, until May 21, 2006.
In another episode of ''So Notorious'', entitled "Cursed," Tori and Sasan (Zachary Quinto) discuss who has put a curse on her and Sasan says, "It's Shannen&nbsp;Doherty!
The first ten novels involve the original Charmed Ones, Prue, Piper, and Phoebe Halliwell, while the remaining thirty-three are set after both Prue's murder and the introduction of Paige Matthews as the youngest, new Charmed One.
In 2007, AOL TV ranked each Charmed One on its list of the "Top TV Witches"—Piper third, Phoebe seventh, Prue ninth and Paige twelfth.
The TNT network has aired reruns of ''Charmed'' ever since the show ended, with three repeat episodes every weekday morning at 6:00 am, 7:00 am and 8:00 am.
While Kern remained with the show until its end, between the second and third seasons Burge was not an executive producer.
Paige's magical abilities represent her dual heritage as both a witch and whitelighter; like Prue, she possesses a form of telekinesis, but she has to verbally call for objects to orb (or, teleport) them to their intended destination.
The show's first board game, ''Charmed: The Book of Shadows'', was released in 2001 and the second board game, ''Charmed: The Source'', was released in 2003.
However, on August 12, 2014, TVLine's Michael Ausiello revealed that CBS were not going ahead with the reboot.
Phoebe's romantic history involves a tortured relationship with half-demon Cole Turner in the show's third, fourth and fifth seasons; they have a turbulent marriage in the fourth, and in the fifth, following their divorce, she is compelled to vanquish him.
is the best show on television since ''Charmed''.
Author Paul Ruditis was the lead writer of the first series and Raven Gregory helped him co-write the first three issues.
In an interview with E!
Following the January 22, 2006, broadcast of the season eight episode "Payback's a Witch," ''Charmed'' became the longest running hour-long series in American television history featuring all female leads.
In the episode "Boy Parts" of ''American Horror Story: Coven'', a witch named Queenie (Gabourey Sidibe) mentions that she grew up watching ''Charmed''.
In 2012, he spoke about intertexuality and postmodernism in the series at the Université de Rouen.
In addition, more importance was given to the protagonists' personal lives.
A five-second opening was used for the two-part premiere episodes of seasons four and five; it featured flashing shots of the triquetra symbol and the show's title in large blue letters.
The final episode of ''Charmed'' shows them to have a daughter, many grandchildren, and to grow old together in the future.
Two complete series box sets were released in Region 1 on November 18, 2008.
However, following Prue's death in the third season finale, their long-lost half sister Paige Matthews (Rose McGowan) assumes her place within the "Power of Three" from season four onwards.
The final issue of ''Charmed: Season 9'', entitled ''The Power of 300'', was released in October 2012.
While grieving Prue's death, Piper and Phoebe discover that they have a younger half-sister, Paige Matthews (Rose McGowan), who had been the secret love child of their witch mother, Patty (Finola Hughes), and her whitelighter (guardian angel) Sam Wilder (Scott Jaeck).
In a 2005 episode of ''Neighbours'', Bree Timmins (Sianoa Smit-McPhee) mentions that ''The O.C.''
If you think otherwise you haven't read enough Shakespeare yet.
Keeping their supernatural identities separate and secret from their ordinary lives often becomes a challenge for them, with the exposure of magic having far-reaching consequences on their various relationships and resulting in a number of police and FBI investigations throughout the series.
Subscription video-on-demand service Netflix released the full series in July 2011 via their Instant Streaming Service.
Between the second and the third season, Burge left, leaving her former position to executive producer Kern.
Each sister possesses unique magical powers that grow and evolve, while they attempt to maintain normal lives in modern-day San Francisco.
A 28-minute version was filmed (the "unaired pilot," never aired on network television) with which the series was picked up by The WB.
