"Although I have never been a Mason ... Something I do seems to be the same as Masons do, I don't know what it is; but they often give me all kinds of grips and I give them back, then I tell them I don't know anything about it except just a few grips that have come to me naturally.
His mother died when he was 9 years old.
He was increasingly ill and weak during his last week.
A government expert investigated the "Miracle Wheat" and said it "was low in the Government tests".
These conventions were held yearly, but the process of 'regathering' took nearly twenty years.
He believed that his ordination was "of God" according to the biblical pattern, not requiring any denominational approval or theological training.
During his final ministerial tour of the western and southwestern United States, he became increasingly ill with cystitis, but ignored advice to abandon the tour.
A later court judgment noted that he had labelled the marriage "a mistake" three years before the dispute over her editorial ambitions had arisen.
Russell later said that, although he had not entirely agreed with Wendell's arguments, the presentation had inspired him with a renewed zeal and belief that the Bible is the word of God.
J. J. Ross (1871–1935), Pastor of the James Street Baptist Church in Hamilton, Ontario, published and widely distributed a four-page leaflet entitled, ''Some Facts about the Self-Styled "Pastor" Charles T. Russell (of Millennial Dawn Fame).''
He said there was a heavenly resurrection of 144,000 righteous, as well as a "great multitude", but believed that the remainder of mankind slept in death, awaiting an earthly resurrection, rather than suffering in a literal Hell.
After Russell's death, a crisis arose surrounding Rutherford's leadership of the society, culminating in a movement-wide schism.
They renamed their magazine as ''The Watchtower''.
In January 1917, Joseph Franklin Rutherford was elected president of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, despite disputes over the election process.
In 1881 he co-founded Zion's Watch Tower Tract Society with William Henry Conley as president; in 1884 the corporation was officially registered, with Russell as president.
Mrs. Russell alleged that Ball had told her Mr. Russell claimed to be an amorous "jellyfish floating around" to different women until someone responded to his advances.
Russell believed that the land of Palestine belonged exclusively to the Jewish race, that God was now calling them back to their land, and that they would be the center of earthly leadership under God's Kingdom.
In 1903, newspapers began publishing his written sermons.
It soon became known that much of the contents were written and compiled by two of Russell's associates, Clayton J. Woodworth and George H. Fisher, and edited by Joseph Rutherford, by then the new president of the Watch Tower Society.
On March 22, 1911, ''The Brooklyn Daily Eagle'' reported that Russell was accused of gaining profit from a strain of wheat named "Miracle Wheat" by K.B.
Shortly before his death, he used the Jewish press to stress that 1914 prophetically marked the time when Gentile nations no longer had earthly authority; he said that all Jews were, from that time onward, permitted and guided by God to gather to Palestine and boldly reclaim the land for themselves.
Russell blamed the marriage breakup on disagreements over Maria Russell's insistence on a greater editorial role in ''Zion's Watch Tower'' magazine.
The project's expenses put the organization under some financial pressures; the full cost was estimated at about US$300,000 (current value $).
(A seventh volume was commissioned by his successor as society president, Joseph Rutherford, and published in 1917.)
Rose Ball later married and lived in Australia.
After his death, the ''Watch Tower'' said that he had been made "ruler of all the Lord's goods".
In his youth he was known to chalk Bible verses on fence boards and city sidewalks in an attempt to convert unbelievers; he particularly noted the punishment of hell awaiting the unfaithful.
In 1903 she filed for legal separation on the grounds of mental cruelty, referring to forced celibacy and frequent cold, indifferent treatment by him.
They annually re-elected him "Pastor", and commonly referred to him as "Pastor Russell".
He concluded that the doctrine was Christian tradition.
He interpreted the outbreak of World War I as the beginning of Armageddon.
Russell sued the papers for libel; the jury decided in his favor, awarding him one dollar.
At age sixteen, a discussion with a childhood friend on faults perceived in Christianity (such as contradictions in creeds, along with medieval traditions) led Russell to question his faith.
He sold his five clothing stores for approximately $300,000 (current value $).
When the judge asked Mrs. Russell if she was accusing her husband of adultery, she replied, "No".
In response, Russell stated through various printed and public sources that he had never claimed knowledge of the Greek language, merely the alphabet and that early Christians were also criticized by the religious authorities for being unlearned and ignorant.
* ''The Time is at Hand'' (1889)
Russell wrote many articles, books, tracts, pamphlets and sermons, totaling approximately 50,000 printed pages.
In this work, Ross claimed that during the proceedings on March 17, 1913, Russell had repeatedly lied under oath by affirming that he was ordained, but denying the same when cross-examined, by affirming that he knew the Greek language, but when shown by Counselor Staunton an extract from the New Testament in Greek by Westcott & Hort, he was unable to recognize it, and that he had not been divorced from his wife, but retracted the statement under cross-examination.
Maria Russell died at the age of 88 in St. Petersburg, Florida on March 12, 1938 from complications related to Hodgkin's disease.
The Grand Lodge of British Columbia and Yukon has officially said that Russell was not a Freemason, and notes that these symbols under discussion used are not exclusive to Masonry but pre-date the fraternity.
Around January 1876 Russell received a copy of Nelson Barbour's ''Herald of the Morning'' in the mail.
By age twelve, Russell was writing business contracts for customers and given charge of some of his father's other clothing stores.
"Russell attacked Spiritualism (which he called Spiritism)".
The 162-page "pamphlet" was published using donated funds amounting to approximately $40,000 (current value $).
Barbour formed The Church of the Strangers that same year, continuing to publish ''Herald of the Morning''.
The delayed publication of the seventh volume became a source of great anticipation and mystery among Bible Students.
It accused Russell of being a dictatorial leader, a shrewd businessman who appeared eager to collect funds from the selling of the ''Millennial Dawn'' books, of cheating one of them financially, and of issuing thousands of ''Millennial Dawn'' books under a female pseudonym.
Some critics also claim that the pyramid near Russell's gravesite is Masonic, because of its shape and its use of the Cross and Crown symbol, although this remains disputed.
He alleged that Russell was involved in questionable business practices, had defrauded his estranged wife, and denounced his qualifications, legitimacy and moral example as a Pastor.
In 1912 ''The Continent'', a Presbyterian journal, stated that in North America Russell's writings had achieved a greater circulation "than the combined circulation of the writings of all the priests and preachers in North America."
Russell telegraphed Barbour to set up a meeting.
A text Russell had previously written, entitled ''The Object and Manner of our Lord's Return'', was published concurrently through the offices of the ''Herald of the Morning''.
During the trial Mrs. Russell's attorney alleged that in 1894 Mr. Russell had engaged in "improper intimacy" with Rose Ball, by then a 25-year-old woman.
Congregations that eventually formed in other nations also followed this tradition.
With the formation of the Watch Tower Society, Russell intensified his ministry.
Russell wrote a booklet ''A Conspiracy Exposed and Harvest Siftings'' in response, issuing it as an extra to the April 1894 ''Zion's Watch Tower'' magazine.
Russell also had many critics, and he was frequently described him as a heretic in this period.
He thought this would mark both a gradual deterioration of civilized society, and a climactic multi-national attack on a restored Israel accompanied by worldwide anarchy.
Russell directed the production of a worldwide roadshow presentation entitled ''The Photo-Drama of Creation'', an innovative eight-hour religious film in four parts.
* Christian Zionism.
Those who maintained fellowship with the Watch Tower Society adopted the name ''Jehovah's witnesses'' in 1931, while those who severed ties with the Society formed their own groups including the Pastoral Bible Institute in 1918, the Laymen's Home Missionary Movement in 1919, and the Dawn Bible Students Association in 1929.
In 1881, Russell founded Zion's Watch Tower Tract Society, with William Henry Conley as president and Russell as secretary-treasurer; they intended to disseminate tracts, papers, doctrinal treatises and Bibles.
He intended to pre-empt efforts by his critics to circulate their views to a wider audience of Bible Students.
It said that the entire corpus of his works were the third most circulated on earth, after the Bible and the Chinese Almanac.
Many Church leaders and scholars in his day considered this to be heresy.
He said that although sold for $1 per pound, Mr. Stoner allegedly routinely sold it for a $1.25 per pound.
These newspaper sermons were syndicated worldwide in as many as 4,000 newspapers, eventually reaching an estimated readership of some 15 million in the United States and Canada.
He believed that the various ascending and descending passages represented the fall of man, the provision of the Mosaic Law, the death of Christ, the exultation of the saints in heaven, etc.
In 1886, after reportedly not making back most of the money spent publishing these three titles, he began publication of what was intended to be a seven-volume series.
They conducted a debate in successive issues of the journal from early 1878 to mid-1879.
He also agreed with many other contemporary Protestants in belief in the imminent Second Coming of Christ, and Armageddon.
He viewed himself—and all other Christians anointed with the Holy Spirit—as "God's mouthpiece" and an ambassador of Christ.
Barbour and John Henry Paton visited in Allegheny in March 1876 at Russell's expense so that he could hear their arguments, and compare the conclusions that each side had made in their studies.
In 1897 Russell's wife, Maria, left him after a disagreement over the management of ''Zion's Watch Tower'' magazine.
* ''Thy Kingdom Come'' (1891)
They thought their own work was restoring Christianity to the purity of its first century.
Russell sued the ''Eagle'' for libel, but lost.
Russell's ideas, particularly stressing the imminence of the rapture and the second advent of Christ, were rejected both times.
"Throughout his ministry he said that he believed Christian identity is incompatible with Freemasonry.
He  investigated various other religions, but concluded that they did not provide the answers he was seeking.
He believed that certain biblical texts, including Isaiah 19:19–20 and others, prophesied a future understanding of the Great Pyramid.
* ''The Plan of the Ages''&nbsp;– later renamed ''The Divine Plan of the Ages'' (1886)
He predicted that a period known as the "Gentile Times" would end in 1914, and that Christ would take power of Earth's affairs at that time.
As many as three-quarters of the approximately 50,000 Bible Students who had been associating in 1917 had left by 1931.
She believed that, as his wife, she should have equal control over its administration and equal privilege in writing articles, preaching, and traveling abroad as his representative.
Russell was eager to lead a Christian revival and called two separate meetings of Christian leaders in Pittsburgh.
Many of the most prominent Bible Students who had left the society held their own meeting in October 1929 to gather other dissenters; the First Annual Bible Students Reunion Convention was held in the old Pittsburgh "Bible House" long used by Russell.
Russell printed copies of letters he had received from these former associates in order to show that their claims were false, and that those involved 'were guided by Satan in an attempt to subvert his work' as a "minister of the gospel".
He wrote that the "clear unfolding of truth" within his teachings was due to "the simple fact that God's due time has come; and if I did not speak, and no other agent could be found, the very stones would cry out."
During the same year he published ''Tabernacle and its Teachings'' which was quickly expanded and reissued as ''Tabernacle Shadows of the "Better Sacrifices",'' outlining his interpretation of the various animal sacrifices and tabernacle ceremonies instituted by Moses.
The couple separated in 1897.
In 1908, Russell transferred the headquarters of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society to its current location in Brooklyn, New York.
Russell withdrew his financial support and started his own journal, ''Zion's Watch Tower and Herald of Christ's Presence'', publishing his first issue in July 1879.
Those remaining supportive of Rutherford adopted the new name "Jehovah's witnesses" in 1931.
Russell agreed with many 19th-century Protestants, including Millerites, in the concept of a Great Apostasy that began in the first century AD.
Through the pages of the ''Herald'', he wrote about what he had concluded on the subject.
An associate of Russell's stated that at age 64 his body was more worn out than that of his father who died at age 89.
Mr. Russell denied the accusations and said he had never used such language to describe himself.
Maria Russell filed a suit for legal separation in the Court of Common Pleas at Pittsburgh in June 1903 and three years later filed for divorce under the claim of mental cruelty.
It had a circulation of nearly 1.5 million copies over a period of four months distributed throughout the United States, Canada and Great Britain by various channels.
She was granted a divorce, with alimony, in 1908.
Russell published six volumes in the series:
In 1910, he conducted a meeting at the New York Hippodrome Theatre, with thousands of Jews attending.
Russell's health had become increasingly poor in the last three years leading up to his death.
* Christ's Second Coming.
All materials were printed and bound by Russell's privately owned Tower Publishing Company for an agreed price, then distributed by colporteurs.
Further disputes arose over interpretation of sections of Russell's will dealing with the future contents of ''Zion's Watch Tower'' magazine, as well as who, if anyone, had authority to print new literature.
He suggested that his annual election as "Pastor" by over 500 congregations worldwide constituted him as properly ordained.
Later in his career he accepted without protest that many Bible Students viewed him as the "faithful and wise servant" of Matthew 24:45.
Jews and Christians alike were shocked by his teaching that Jews should not convert to Christianity.
In 1881, Russell published his first work to gain wide distribution: ''Food for Thinking Christians.''
Russell defended himself publicly, and in writing, claiming that the wheat was donated to the Watch Tower Society.
Production began as early as 1912, and the ''Drama'' was introduced in 1914 by the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania.
In 1975, the Watch Tower Society stated that gross receipts from the "Miracle Wheat" fundraiser totaled "about $1800" (current value $), of which "Russell himself did not get a penny".
Throughout 1912 and 1913, the ''Eagle'' continued to report on Russell's alleged fraud.
A book by the same name was also published.
He described Freemasonry, Knights of Pythias, Theosophy, and other such groups as "grievous evils" and "unclean".
Expanding upon an idea suggested by Nelson Barbour, Russell taught as early as 1879 that God's favor had been restored to Jews as the result of a prophetic "double" which had ended in 1878 (favor from Jacob to Jesus, then disfavor from Jesus until 1878).
Russell was the second of five children, of whom two survived into adulthood.
Barbour was an influential Adventist writer and publisher.
He was buried in Rosemont United Cemetery, Pittsburgh.
In June 1913, during a transcontinental speaking tour, Russell lectured in a Masonic hall in San Francisco, saying:
That year he also published ''The Tabernacle and its Teachings'' and ''Tabernacle Shadows of the Better Sacrifices''.
Charles Taze Russell was born to Scotch-Irish parents, immigrant Joseph Lytel Russell  (d. December 17, 1897) and Ann Eliza Birney (d. January 25, 1861), on February 16, 1852 in Allegheny, Pennsylvania.
With Russell's encouragement and financial backing, Barbour wrote an outline of their views in ''Three Worlds and the Harvest of This World'', published in 1877.
* ''The At-one-ment Between God and Men'' (1899)
For several years she had written articles for ''The People's Paper'' and was associated with the Bible Students in Australia until her death.
By the end of the 1920s, nearly three quarters of the Bible Student congregations had rejected Rutherford's on-going changes in organizational structure, doctrinal interpretations, and congregational practices, some of which began to appear in material printed by the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society as early as 1917.
Russell claimed that the distribution of these works and other tracts by the Watch Tower Society during 1881 exceeded by eight times that of the American Tract Society for the year 1880.
They criticized Ross for having fled Ontario when summoned and not being present during any of the court proceedings.
This seventh volume was a detailed interpretation of the Book of Revelation, but also included interpretations of Ezekiel and the Song of Solomon.
Dates such as 1874, 1914, and 1948 were purported to have been found through the study of this monument.
Russell believed in the divinity of Christ, but differed from orthodoxy by teaching Jesus had received that divinity as a gift from the Father after dying on the cross.
They began to debate over the issue of 'Christ's ransom,' and the two eventually separated because of their disagreements.
In writings as early as 1883 (and through to the end of his life), Russell repeatedly expressed the view that the world's climate would gradually change as a prelude to the re-establishment of Eden-like conditions.
At age thirteen, Russell left the Presbyterian Church to join the Congregational Church.
During cross-examination Russell said that he had attended public school for seven years, having left when he was about fourteen years of age, after which he received instruction through private tutors.
Confused by what was perceived to be an error in calculation, Russell re-examined the doctrine to see if he could determine whether it had biblical origins or was simply Christian tradition.
On March 13, 1879, Russell married Maria Frances Ackley (; 1850–1938) after a few months' acquaintance.
The Hamilton and Toronto Ontario newspapers reported the claims made by Ross and provided a brief outline of the court proceedings.
* Spiritualism and the occult.
The Russells lived for a time in Philadelphia before moving to Pittsburgh, where they became members of the Presbyterian Church.
Stoner of Fincastle, Virginia, who claimed to have discovered this strain.
His Scriptural interpretations differed from those of Catholics, and many Protestants, in the following areas:
Following his analytical examination of the Bible, Russell and other Bible Students came to believe that Christian creeds and traditions were harmful errors.
Russell, who had previously rejected prophetic chronology, was moved to devote his life to what he was convinced were now the last two years before the invisible, spiritual return of Christ.
Russell believed that Christ had returned invisibly in 1874, and that he had been ruling from the heavens since that date.
Russell contended that Ross and others were attacking him because they were unable to answer his theological arguments preferring instead to resort to slander and character assassination.
He also taught that the Holy Spirit is not a person, but the manifestation of God's power.
The Russells had cared for her as a foster daughter said to be an orphan.
He stated that he did not seek to found a new denomination, but intended to gather together those who were seeking the truth of God's Word "during this harvest time".
Controversy quickly surrounded both its publication and content.
This shift resulted in the formation of several groups that retained variations on the name ''Bible Students''.
Barbour, embarrassed by the failure of their expectations, rejected Russell's explanation.
He adopted and used Seiss's phrase, referring to it as "the Bible in stone".
Russell sold the wheat for $60 per bushel, far above the average cost of wheat at the time.
Russell devoted nearly a tenth of his fortune, along with contributed funds, in publishing and distributing ''Food for Thinking Christians'' in 1881.
The Watch Tower Society ceased publication of Russell's writings in 1927, though his books are still published by several independent groups.
In 1893 a paper was written and circulated to Bible Students in Pittsburgh by associates Otto van Zech, Elmer Bryan, J.B. Adamson, S.G. Rogers, Paul Koetitz, and others.
In a matter of months, Barbour changed some of the views which he and Russell had previously shared, and no longer relied on prophetic chronology.
After several delays the case came before Police Court Magistrate G. F. Jelfs on March 17, 1913.
In 1910 the secular journal ''Overland Monthly'' calculated that by 1909, Russell's writings had become the most widely distributed, privately produced English-language works in the United States.
Following Russell's death in 1916, a seventh volume entitled ''The Finished Mystery'' was published in 1917; this was advertised as his "posthumous work".
Following the libel case, Ross published an expanded edition of 48-pages entitled, ''Some Facts and More Facts about the Self-Styled "Pastor" Charles T. Russell (of Millennial Dawn Fame)''.
Prior to entering the court, the ''Eagle'' declared that "at the trial it will show that "Pastor" Russell's religious cult is nothing more than a money-making scheme."
It was the first major screenplay to incorporate synchronized sound, moving film, and color slides.
They did not refer to any alleged misconduct on the part of Russell.
Among the teachings Barbour introduced was the view that Christians who had died would be raised in April 1878.
''The Washington Post'' and the ''Mission Friend'' of Chicago reprinted the "jellyfish" story while also accusing Russell of immoral conduct.
Russell died on October 31, 1916 at age 64 near Pampa, Texas, while returning to Brooklyn by train.
Early in Russell's ministry, he speculated that the Jews would possibly flock to Palestine and form their own nation by the year 1910.
He said that he was versed in Latin terms "to an extent" but did not know Hebrew or Greek, that he had never been ordained by any bishop or minister, and had never attended a theological seminary or any schools of higher learning.
Russell in turn sued Ross for defamatory libel on December 2, 1912.
Russell agreed with other Protestants on the primacy of the Bible, and justification by faith alone, but thought that errors had been introduced in interpretation.
The separation was granted in 1906, with Russell charged to pay alimony.
The volumes were collectively called ''Millennial Dawn'', later renamed ''Studies in the Scriptures'' to clarify that they were not novels.
Calculations were made using the pattern of an inch per year.
The gravesite (''vide'' coordinates above) is marked by a headstone; nearby stands a  pyramid memorial erected by the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society in 1921.
It also said that "the Society itself made no claim for the wheat on its own knowledge and the money received went as a donation into Christian missionary work."
* ''The New Creation'' (1904)
When Charles was in his early teens, his father made him partner of his Pittsburgh haberdashery store.
As early as 1892, Russell's views and management style were strongly criticized by certain individuals associated with his ministry.
In July 1879, Russell began publishing a monthly religious journal, ''Zion's Watch Tower and Herald of Christ's Presence''.
Russell claimed to have no financial connection to the wheat, and said that no one claimed a refund although he had offered one for up to a year later for any who were dissatisfied with their purchase.
Many Bible Students were disaffected by Rutherford's rejection of Russell's views regarding his role in the restoration of the "truth" and support of the Great Pyramid as having been built under God's direction.
* ''The Day of Vengeance''&nbsp;– later renamed ''The Battle of Armageddon'' (1897)
From 1886 to 1904, he published a six-volume Bible study series originally entitled ''Millennial Dawn'', later renamed ''Studies in the Scriptures'', nearly 20 million copies of which were printed and distributed around the world in several languages during his lifetime.
As Rose Ball Henninges, she died November 22, 1950 at the age of 81 in Melbourne, Australia.
On April 1, 1913 the High Court of Ontario returned a verdict of "No Bill" ruling that Russell was not entitled to damages because the libel was not likely to result in any violence within Canada.
Russell was a charismatic figure, but claimed no special revelation or vision for his teachings and no special authority on his own behalf.
The Society was incorporated in 1884, with Russell as president, and in 1886 its name was changed to Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society.
Following views first taught by Christian writers such as John Taylor, Charles Piazzi Smyth and Joseph Seiss, Russell believed that the Great Pyramid of Giza was built by the Hebrews (associated to the Hyksos) under God’s direction, but to be understood only in our day.
Following an appeal, Russell received a cash settlement of $15,000 (current value $) plus court costs, and an agreement that the two papers publish his weekly syndicated sermons as well as a retraction defending his character.
In 1870, at age eighteen, he attended a presentation by Adventist minister Jonas Wendell.
Russell sponsored a speech by Barbour in St. George's Hall, Philadelphia in August 1876 and attended other lectures by Barbour.
However, Russell's use of the winged solar-disk originated from his understanding of Malachi 4:2, which denotes a sun with wings, as a symbol that Christ's millennial Kingdom had begun to emerge.
Some have claimed that various symbols Russell employed in his published literature are Masonic in nature, and that such associations implied he engaged in occult activity.
In later editions of the ''Studies in the Scriptures'' series a winged solar disk was stamped on the front cover, a symbol that is also associated with Freemasonry.
His Bible study group had grown to hundreds of local members, with followers throughout New England, the Virginias, Ohio, and elsewhere.
