He sent the French Navy across the Atlantic to pick up the French reserve of gold and was followed by several countries.
Nevertheless, a few days before D-Day, Churchill, whose relationship with the General had deteriorated since he arrived in Britain, decided he needed to keep him informed of developments, and on 2 June he sent two passenger aircraft and his representative, Duff Cooper to Algiers to bring de Gaulle back to Britain.
De Gaulle was born in the industrial region of Lille in the Nord departement, the third of five children.
Anne had Down's syndrome and died of pneumonia at the age of 20.
It was stated that French nuclear force should be capable of firing "in all directions"—thus including even America as a potential target.
On 29 May the French president, René Coty, appealed to the "most illustrious of Frenchmen" to confer with him and to examine what was immediately necessary for the creation of a government of national safety, and what could be done to bring about a profound reform of the country's institutions.
Although de Gaulle had moved quickly to consolidate French control of the territory during his brief first tenure as president in the 1940s, the communist Vietminh under Ho Chi Minh began a determined campaign for independence from 1946 onwards.
De Gaulle was targeted for death by the Organisation de l'armée secrète (OAS), in retaliation for his Algerian initiatives.
However, Debray pointed out that there is a difference between Napoleon and de Gaulle: "How can the exterminator be compared with the liberator?
Although he was naturally shy, the good use of amplification and patriotic music enabled him to deliver his message that though all of France was fragmented and suffering, together they would rise again.
I am sure that in the long run no understanding will be reached with General de Gaulle".
Keenly aware of the need to seize the initiative and to get the process under firm judicial control, de Gaulle appointed Justice Minister François de Menthon to lead the Legal Purge (Épuration légale) to punish traitors and to clear away the traces of the Vichy regime.
We are angry at each other much of the time."
The old provisional government ruled by decree, but de Gaulle was frustrated by the new Constituent Assembly and its "regime of parties" and believed that the draft constitution placed too much power in the hands of parliament with its shifting party alliances.
It was fortunate for de Gaulle that the Germans had forcibly removed members of the Vichy government and taken them to Germany a few days earlier on 20 August; it allowed him to enter Paris as a liberator in the midst of the general euphoria, but there were serious concerns that communist elements of the resistance, which had done so much to clear the way for the military would try to seize the opportunity to proclaim their own 'Peoples' Government' in the capital.
Dealing with the French Communists was a delicate issue, for they were under Moscow's control and the USSR was friendly with Germany in 1940–41.
Mary's husband was General Edward Spears, the British liaison to the Free French who had personally spirited de Gaulle to safety in Britain in 1940.
His expression, "Europe, from the Atlantic to the Urals", has often been cited throughout the history of European integration.
Bidault announced that France intended to defend its economic and cultural rights in Syria and Lebanon, and that there would be "no problem, as long as the British do not interfere".
A voracious reader, he later favored philosophical tomes by such writers as Bergson, Péguy, and Barrès.
France established diplomatic relations with the People's Republic of China – the first step towards formal recognition without first severing links with the Republic of China (Taiwan), led by Chiang Kai-shek.
Political leaders on many sides agreed to support the General's return to power, except François Mitterrand, Pierre Mendès France, Alain Savary, the Communist Party, and certain other leftists.
In August, concern over de Gaulle's policies had been voiced by Valéry Giscard d'Estaing when he queried 'the solitary exercise of power'.
On 14 June 1944, he left Britain for France for what was supposed to be a one-day trip.
Adenauer was also anxious to reassure Britain that nothing was being done behind its back and was quick to inform British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan of any new developments.
Therefore, it simply states, "Charles de Gaulle, 1890–1970".
The two Arab countries, occupying a region known as the Levant, had been ruled under a French mandate given by the League of Nations at the Paris Peace Conference.
De Gaulle retired once again to his beloved nine-acre country estate, La Boisserie (the woodland glade), in Colombey-les-Deux-Églises, 120 miles southeast of Paris.
This was an abrupt change in policy.
During the tour, de Gaulle showed his customary lack of concern for his own safety by mixing with the crowds and thus making himself an easy target for an assassin.
Roosevelt insisted that an Allied Military Government for Occupied Territories (AMGOT) should be implemented in France, but this was opposed by both the Secretary of War and the Under-Secretary for War, as well as by Eisenhower, who had been strongly opposed to the imposition of AMGOT in North Africa.
On the contrary, I have re-established them when they had disappeared.
But they were smuggled out in an operation that drew further denunciations from the French government.
This was meant to be a temporary measure but the dollar became permanently a floating fiat money and in October 1976, the U.S. government officially changed the definition of the dollar; references to gold were removed from statutes.
By far the most critical commodities in driving growth were coal and steel.
This came about because of his reading German newspapers (he had learned German at school and spent a summer vacation in the Black Forest region) and giving talks on his view of the progress of the conflict to fellow prisoners.
Dean Acheson believed that Britain made a grave error in not signing up to the European idea right from the start, and that they continued to suffer the political consequences for at least two decades afterwards.
He suggested that it might be possible to add France's name to the existing Anglo-Soviet Agreement if they agreed to recognise the Soviet-backed provisional Polish government known as the Lublin Committee as rightful rulers of Poland, but de Gaulle refused on the grounds that this would be 'un-French', as it would mean it being a junior partner in an alliance.
After 5 July, the exodus accelerated in the wake of the French deaths during the Oran massacre of 1962.
He summoned Duff Cooper and told him, "I recognise that we are not in a position to wage war against you, but you have betrayed France and betrayed the West.
He became Head of the Provisional Government of the French Republic in June 1944, the interim government of France following its Liberation.
Internationally, he rebuffed both the United States and the Soviet Union, pushing for an independent France with its own nuclear weapons, and strongly encouraged a "Free Europe", believing that a confederation of all European nations would restore the past glories of the great European empires.
Régis Debray called de Gaulle "super-lucide" and pointed out that virtually all of his predictions, such as the fall of communism, the reunification of Germany and the resurrection of 'old' Russia, came true after his death.
At a 19 May press conference, de Gaulle asserted again that he was at the disposal of the country.
The Biafran chief of staff stated that the French "did more harm than good by raising false hopes and by providing the British with an excuse to reinforce Nigeria."
As a ''commandant'' ("major") by the late 1920s, he briefly commanded a light infantry battalion at Trier (Treves) and then served a tour of duty in Syria, then a French protectorate under a mandate from the League of Nations.
De Gaulle had not been instrumental in setting up the new organization and, from the start, he opposed efforts by fellow EEC member countries to move toward some form of political integration that, in de Gaulle's thinking, would impinge on the sovereignty of France, both internally and externally.
''Le Monde'' took over the premises and facilities of the older ''Le Temps'', whose independence and reputation had been badly compromised during the Vichy years.
Mitterrand, who once wrote a vitriolic critique of him called the "Permanent Coup d'État", quoted a then recent opinion poll, saying, "As General de Gaulle, he has entered the pantheon of great national heroes, where he ranks ahead of Napoleon and behind only Charlemagne."
On 20 May, French troops opened fire on demonstrators in Damascus with artillery and mortars while aircraft dropped bombs.
The Eastern Region of Nigeria declared itself independent under the name of the Independent Republic of Biafra on 30 May 1967.
While the written press and elections were free, and private stations such as Europe 1 were able to broadcast in French from abroad, the state's ORTF had a monopoly on television and radio.
He died a year later at his residence in Colombey-les-Deux-Églises, leaving his Presidential memoirs unfinished.
At the beginning of July he at last visited Roosevelt in Washington, where he received the 17 gun salute of a senior military leader rather than the 21 guns of a visiting head of state.
This was the dawning of the collaborationist Vichy regime.
De Gaulle's policy then became one of friendship directly with Moscow, but Stalin showed little interest.
He was also influenced by his uncle, also called Charles de Gaulle, who was a historian and passionate Celticist who wrote books and pamphlets advocating the union of the Welsh, Scots, Irish and Bretons into one people.
This he did 'not without some satisfaction', and so on 29 August, the U.S. 28th Infantry Division was rerouted from its journey to the front line and paraded down the Champs Elysees.
In 1942, de Gaulle created the Normandie-Niemen squadron, a Free French Air Force regiment, in order to fight on the Eastern Front.
He spoke constantly of his resentment of U.S. influence in Latin America—"that some states should establish a power of political or economic direction outside their own borders".
De Gaulle made his headquarters at Carlton Gardens in central London.
General Raoul Salan, Commander-in-Chief in Algeria, announced on radio that he was assuming provisional power, and appealed for confidence in himself.
He again considered a referendum to support his moves, but on 30 May, Pompidou persuaded him to dissolve parliament (in which the government had all but lost its majority in the March 1967 elections) and hold new elections instead.
On 24 July, speaking to a large crowd from a balcony at Montreal's city hall, de Gaulle shouted "Vive le Québec libre!"
The last boats took to the sea in December 1969, directly after a major deal between France and now-independent Algeria exchanging French armaments for Algerian oil.
Although he initially enjoyed good relations with U.S. President John F. Kennedy, who admired his stance against the Soviet Union—particularly when the Berlin Wall was being built—and who called him "a great captain of the Western world", their relationship later cooled.
De Gaulle ignored ''les Anglo-Saxons'', and proclaimed the authority of Free France over the metropolitan territory the next day.
At one point, he was held with other POW officers from France, Great Britain, and Russia at a castle in Ingolstadt, Germany.
After the war ended, he was released.
The British, who had substantial forces in the region, said that they would be forced to intervene if the violence did not stop.
outside the integrated military command.
He set as conditions for his return that he be given wide emergency powers for six months and that a new constitution be proposed to the French people.
By recognizing Mao Zedong's government, de Gaulle signaled to both Washington and Moscow that France intended to deploy an independent foreign policy.
"It was like hearing the pope had converted to Islam", one said.
In 1956 France, Britain and Israel had cooperated in an elaborate effort to retake the Suez Canal from Egypt.
French voters approved his course in a 1961 referendum on Algerian self-determination.
On 10 September 1944 the Provisional Government of the French Republic, or Government of National Unanimity formed.
Upon his arrival at RAF Northolt on 4 June 1944 he received an official welcome, and a letter reading "My dear general!
Refusing to accept his government's armistice with Nazi Germany in 1940, de Gaulle exhorted the French population to resist occupation and to continue the fight against Axis powers in his Appeal of 18 June.
About 25% of the city was in ruins and public services and fuel were almost nonexistent.
At the Battle of Verdun in March 1916, while leading a charge to try to break out of a position which had become surrounded by the enemy, he received a bayonet wound to the thigh after being stunned by a shell and, passing out from the effects of poison gas, was captured at Douaumont, one of the few survivors of his battalion.
In captivity, de Gaulle acquired yet another nickname, ''Le Connétable'' ("The Constable").
Soon after the surrender of Japan in August 1945, de Gaulle sent the French Far East Expeditionary Corps to re-establish French sovereignty in French Indochina, making Admiral Georges d'Argenlieu High Commissioner and General Philippe Leclerc commander-in-chief and commander of the expeditionary corps.
On 29 May, De Gaulle disappeared without notifying Prime Minister Pompidou or anyone else in the government, stunning the country.
Churchill backed the French, and Eisenhower was so impressed with the French resolve that he eventually left his own troops in the city even at the risk of being cut off, for which de Gaulle expressed his extreme gratitude.
During the day he also usually took two strolls, one alone and the other with his wife Yvonne around the village.
There was a general feeling that he was trying to blackmail the assembly into complete subservience by threatening to withdraw his personal prestige which he insisted was what alone kept the ruling coalition together.
Liberation of the French capital was not high on the Allies' list of priorities as it had comparatively little strategic value, but both de Gaulle and the commander of the 2nd Armored Division, General Philippe Leclerc were still extremely concerned about a communist takeover.
Full-scale research began again in late 1954 when Prime Minister Pierre Mendès France authorized a plan to develop the atomic bomb; large deposits of uranium had been discovered near Limoges in central France, providing the researchers with an unrestricted supply of nuclear fuel.
Pétain claimed that France had "stupidly" declared war on Germany in 1939 at British prompting while de Gaulle spoke of the entire era since 1914 as "''la guerre de trente ans''" ("the thirty years' war"), arguing the two world wars were really one with a long truce in between.
With Allied forces advancing deep into Germany, another serious situation developed between American and French forces in Stuttgart and Karlsruhe, when French soldiers were ordered to transfer the occupation zones to U.S. troops.
Immediately after the liberation, countless women accused of aiding, abetting, and taking German soldiers as lovers were subjected to public humiliations such as being shaved bald and paraded through the streets in their underwear.
De Gaulle's proposal to change the election procedure for the French presidency was approved at the referendum on 28 October 1962 by more than three-fifths of voters despite a broad "coalition of no" formed by most of the parties, opposed to a presidential regime.
There were also a number of new faces in the government, including a literary academic, Georges Pompidou, who had written to one of de Gaulle's recruiting agents offering his services, and Jean Monnet, who in spite of his past opposition to the General now recognized the need for unity and served as Commissoner for Economic Planning.
After five years of experience, I am convinced that he is the worst enemy of France in her troubles ... he is one of the greatest dangers to European peace....
The next day, de Gaulle refused to address the French nation as the script again made no mention of his being the legitimate interim ruler of France.
The British ambassador to France Duff Cooper said that during this time de Gaulle seemed to seek out real or imagined insults to take offence at wherever possible.
("General de Gaulle is dead.
He threatened de Gaulle to withdraw American troops from European soil, but de Gaulle knew that the United States would lose the Cold War if they were to leave Europe.
Under de Gaulle's leadership, France embarked on a period of interference outside the traditional French zone of influence.
By including in his ideal of Europe all the territory up to the Urals, de Gaulle was implicitly offering détente to the Soviets.
Like her husband, Yvonne de Gaulle was a conservative Catholic, and campaigned against prostitution, the sale of pornography in newsstands and the televised display of nudity and sex, for which she earned the nickname "Tante (Aunt) Yvonne."
The two trials of the most infamous collaborator of all, Pierre Laval, who was heavily implicated in the murder of Jews, were widely criticised as being unfair for depriving him of the opportunity to properly defend himself, although Laval antagonized the court throughout with his bizarre behavior.
In addition, de Gaulle harboured a suspicion of the British in particular, believing that they were seeking to seize France's colonial possessions in the Levant.
After a motion of censure voted by the parliament on 4 October 1962, de Gaulle dissolved the National Assembly and held new elections.
Inflation showed no sign of slowing down and food shortages were severe.
France's independent Force de Frappe (strike force) came into being soon after de Gaulle's election with his authorization for the first nuclear test.
The Algiers Committee of Public Safety was loud in its demands on behalf of the settlers, but de Gaulle made more visits and sidestepped them.
When de Gaulle saw the Union Flags and Tricolours side by side on the ambulance, and heard French soldiers cheering, "Voilà Spears!
(Over the years, Papon remained in high official positions but continued to be implicated in controversial events such as the Paris massacre of 1961, eventually being convicted of crimes against humanity in 1998.)
Several assassination attempts were made on him; the most famous took place on 22 August 1962, when he and his wife narrowly escaped from an organized machine gun ambush on their Citroën DS limousine.
As early as 1944, de Gaulle introduced a dirigist economic policy, which included substantial state-directed control over a capitalist economy.
De Gaulle explained his position:
In turn, the French press attacked Britain as an enemy of France and accused the U.S. of helping Italy and Germany more than it helped France.
Finally, on 31 May, with the death toll exceeding a thousand Syrians, Churchill sent de Gaulle a message saying, "In order to avoid a collision between British and French forces, we request you immediately to order French troops to cease fire and withdraw to their barracks".
De Gaulle resigned the presidency at noon, 28 April 1969, following the rejection of his proposed reform of the Senate and local governments in a nationwide referendum.
While the battle began outside, he walked slowly down the aisle.
De Gaulle believed Britain and the U.S. were intending to keep their armies in France after the war and were secretly working to take over its overseas possessions and to prevent it from regaining its political and economic strength.
Under the leadership of General de Lattre de Tassigny, France fielded an entire army – a joint force of Free French together with French colonial troops from North Africa – on the Western Front.
Marshal Pétain and Maxime Weygand were war heroes from World War I and were now extremely old; convicted of treason, Pétain received a death sentence which his old protégé de Gaulle commuted to life imprisonment, while Weygand was eventually acquitted.
Between 1946 and 1958 the Fourth Republic had 24 separate ministries.
As the war neared its end, he grew depressed that he was playing no part in the victory, but despite his efforts, he remained in captivity until the German surrender.
Women were also allowed the vote for the first time, a new social security system was introduced to cover most medical costs, unions were expanded and price controls introduced to try to curb inflation.
Although the military's near-coup had contributed to his return to power, de Gaulle soon ordered all officers to quit the rebellious Committees of Public Safety.
Special trains were laid on to bring extra mourners to the region and the crowd was packed so tightly that those who fainted had to be passed overhead toward first-aid stations at the rear.
De Gaulle arranged a cease-fire in Algeria with the March 1962 Evian Accords, legitimated by another referendum a month later.
De Gaulle demanded political parity with Britain and America in NATO, and for its geographic coverage to be extended to include French territories abroad, including Algeria, then experiencing civil war.
By autumn 1943, Churchill had to acknowledge that de Gaulle had won the struggle for leadership of Free France.
Only the skill of the pilot saved them.
In the immediate post-war years France was in poor shape; wages remained at around half prewar levels, the winter of 1946–1947 did extensive damage to crops, leading to a reduction in the bread ration, hunger and disease remained rife and the black market continued to flourish.
De Gaulle was faced with his first major ministerial dispute when the very able but tough-minded economics minister Pierre Mendès France demanded a programme of severe monetary reform which was opposed by the Finance Ministry headed by Aime Lepercq, who favoured a programme of heavy borrowing to stimulate the economy.
During the 1930s, now a lieutenant-colonel, he served as a staff officer in France.
The settlers assumed he supported them, and would be stunned when he did not.
Later, colonial Senegalese troops were sent in with machine guns and, after several days, hundreds of Syrians lay dead in the bazaars and narrow streets of the capital, with reports of looting by the attacking forces.
Although the original broadcast could only be heard in a few parts of occupied France, de Gaulle's subsequent speeches reached many parts of the territories under the Vichy regime, helping to rally the French resistance movement and earning him much popularity amongst the French people and soldiers.
However, among the vehicles that took part was an ambulance from the Hadfield-Spears Ambulance Unit, staffed by French doctors and British nurses.
He began seeking an audience with Stalin to press his 'facing both ways' policy, and finally received an invitation in late 1944.
The mass demonstrations and strikes in France in May 1968 severely challenged De Gaulle's legitimacy.
At end of 1944 the coal industry and other energy companies were nationalised, followed shortly afterwards by major banks and finance houses, the merchant navy, the main aircraft manufacturers, airlines and a number of major private enterprises such as the Renault car company at Boulogne-Billancourt, whose owner had been implicated as a collaborator and accused of having made huge profits working for the Nazis.
Hitchcock describes him as obstreperous, inflexible, and unwilling to compromise his positions, but he also portrays him as an "extraordinary figure and a fascinating man who had a lot of courage and a lot of guts".
One of Charles de Gaulle's grandsons, also named Charles de Gaulle, was a member of the European Parliament from 1994 to 2004, his last tenure being for the National Front.
These were delivered with such patriotic fervor and confidence in victory that they called him by the title which had been given to the commander-in-chief of the French army during the monarchy.
Since the liberation, the only parliament in France had been an enlarged version of the Algiers Consultative Assembly, and at last, in October 1945, elections were held for a new Constituent Assembly whose main task was to provide a new constitution for the Fourth Republic.
De Gaulle would later claim in his memoirs that he blocked AMGOT.
This brought about a rapid transformation and expansion of the French economy.
De Gaulle oversaw tough economic measures to revitalise the country, including the issuing of a new franc (worth 100 old francs).
He retired in the early 1950s and wrote his ''War Memoirs,'' which quickly became a classic of modern French literature.
In addition, he demanded that the United Kingdom accept all the conditions laid down by the six existing members of the EEC (Belgium, France, West Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands) and revoke its commitments to countries within its own free trade area (which France had not done with its own).
''The Renewal'', the first of three planned volumes to be called ''Memoirs of Hope'', was quickly finished and immediately became the fastest seller in French publishing history.
He and de Gaulle both shared the same non-Wilsonian approach to world affairs, believing in nations and their relative strengths, rather than in ideologies, international organisations, or multilateral agreements.
During the establishment of the European Community, de Gaulle helped precipitate one of the greatest crises in the history of the EEC, the ''Empty Chair Crisis''.
During the argument which followed, de Gaulle reminded Truman that the U.S. was using the French port of Noumea in New Caledonia as a base against the Japanese.
Roosevelt directed Churchill to not provide de Gaulle with strategic details of the imminent invasion because he did not trust him to keep the information to himself.
The French greeted the news of his departure with some relief as the feeling had grown that he had outlived his usefulness.
In just a few months in 1962, 900,000 ''Pied-Noirs'' left the country.
he ordered that the unit be closed down immediately and its British staff sent home.
Much as he feared, the communists were not only extremely active, but they received a disturbing amount of support from the population.
Although the left progressed, the Gaullists won an increased majority—this despite opposition from the Christian democratic Popular Republican Movement (MRP) and the National Centre of Independents and Peasants (CNIP) who criticised de Gaulle's euroscepticism and presidentialism.
Relations between France and Nigeria had been under strain since the third French nuclear explosion in the Sahara in December 1960.
Wilson said he then gently raised the spectre of the threat of a newly powerful Germany as a result of the EEC, which de Gaulle agreed was a risk.
But that night, with the Syrians killing any French or Senegalese troops they could find, the French were forced to accept the British escort back to the safety of their barracks.
Meanwhile, with the Germans retreating in the face of the Allied onslaught, harried all the way by the resistance, there were widespread instances of revenge attacks on those accused of collaboration.
On 17 May, de Gaulle attacked German tank forces at Montcornet with 200 tanks but no air support.
Working with the French Resistance and other supporters in France's colonial African possessions after the Anglo-U.S. invasion of North Africa in November 1942, de Gaulle moved his headquarters to Algiers in May 1943.
Problems like inadequate housing and social services had been ignored.
In December 1965, de Gaulle returned as president for a second seven-year term.
By 1974, as a result of this measure, French employees received an average of 700 francs per head, equivalent to 3.2% of their salary.
It instructed the French people to obey Allied military authorities until elections could be held, and so the row continued, with de Gaulle calling Churchill a "gangster".
Debray compared him with Napoleon ('the great political myth of the 19th century'), calling de Gaulle his 20th century equivalent.
Their absence left the organisation essentially unable to run its affairs until the Luxembourg compromise was reached in January 1966.
The General was conveyed to the church on an armoured reconnaissance vehicle and carried to his grave, next to his daughter Anne, by eight young men of Colombey.
While a prisoner of war, de Gaulle wrote his first book, co-written by Matthieu Butler, ''L'Ennemi et le vrai ennemi'' (''The Enemy and the True Enemy''), analysing the issues and divisions within the German Empire and its forces; the book was published in 1924.
The UK was to retain hegemony over Greece, although there had been no agreement over Poland, whose eastern territories were already in Russian hands under the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact with Germany, and which retained a government in exile in London.
De Gaulle organised the Free French Forces and the Allies gave increasing support and recognition to de Gaulle's efforts.
De Gaulle told Eisenhower that France did not seek to compete with the Strategic Air Command or army of the United States, but believed that France needed a way to strike the Soviet Union.
De Gaulle's family turned the La Boisserie residence into a foundation.
It involved the financing of the Common Agricultural Policy, but almost more importantly the use of qualified majority voting in the EC (as opposed to unanimity).
He restored cordial Franco-German relations to create a European counterweight between the Anglo-American and Soviet spheres of influence.
The June 1968 elections were a major success for the Gaullists and their allies; when shown the spectre of revolution or civil war, the majority of the country rallied to him.
Churchill accused de Gaulle of treason in the height of battle, and demanded that he be flown back to Algiers "in chains if necessary".
In his letters to his parents, he constantly spoke of his frustration that the war was continuing without him, calling the situation "a shameful misfortune" and compared it to being cuckolded.
De Gaulle successfully lobbied for Paris to be made a priority for liberation on humanitarian grounds and obtained from Allied Supreme Commander General Dwight D. Eisenhower an agreement that French troops would be allowed to enter the capital first.
In January 1964, France was the first among the Western powers to open diplomatic relations with the People's Republic of China (PRC) which was established in 1949 and which was isolated on the international scene.
In January 1963, Germany and France signed a treaty of friendship, the Élysée Treaty.
He took me also by the elbow and, taking us a little apart, he said to Eisenhower, 'I do not know what Khrushchev is going to do, nor what is going to happen, but whatever he does, I want you to know that I am with you to the end.'
Although there were still shortages, particularly of bread, France was now on the road to recovery, and de Gaulle suddenly did not seem so indispensable.
Although he received a largely positive reception from the crowds who came out to see him, he reflected that only a few months previously the very same people had come out to cheer Marshal Pétain when he was serving the Vichy regime.
De Gaulle resigned in 1969 after losing a referendum in which he proposed more decentralization.
During his new 26-day visit, he was again keen to gain both cultural and economic influence.
He told an aide that the rebel generals "will not find de Gaulle in their baggage".
His antipathy towards Great Britain and Canada in his later years, including twice blocking accession of the UK to the European Union, generated considerable controversy.
De Gaulle hosted a superpower summit on 17 May 1960 for arms limitation talks and détente efforts in the wake of the 1960 U-2 incident between United States President Dwight Eisenhower, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev, and United Kingdom Prime Minister Harold Macmillan.
He simply said, "''Le général de Gaulle est mort; la France est veuve.''"
The website WW2history.com lists De Gaulle as one of the most overrated leaders of the Second World War, among others such as Churchill, Hitler and Stalin.
Joseph Darnand, who became an SS officer and led the Milice paramilitaries who hunted down members of the Resistance, was executed in October 1945.
Although the Algerian issue was settled, Prime Minister Michel Debré resigned over the final settlement and was replaced with Georges Pompidou on 14 April 1962.
In August 1963 France decided against signing the Partial Test Ban Treaty designed to slow the arms race because it would have prohibited it from testing nuclear weapons above ground.
France continued to carry out tests at the Algerian site until 1966, under an agreement with the newly independent Algeria.
After 1942, Roosevelt championed general Henri Giraud, more compliant with U.S. interests than de Gaulle, as the leader of the French Resistance.
When he was joined by his wife and daughters a short while later, they moved into a small state-owned villa on edge of Bois de Boulogne which had once been set aside for Hermann Göring.
