Instead, those wines tend to go better with smoked fish, spicy southeast Asian cuisine, garlic and guacamole dips.
After three centuries of failure with ''V.
During this period the number of Chardonnay plants increased fivefold and by 1990 it was the most widely planted white wine grape in Australia and third most planted overall behind Shiraz and Cabernet Sauvignon.
However, it does lessen the premium on needing to keep yields low that other wine regions  battle, since not much flavor is going to develop in the grapes, anyway.
The two winemaking decisions that most widely affect the end result of a Chardonnay wine is whether or not to use malolactic fermentation and the degree of oak influence used for the wine.
It is grown in eight ''grand cru'' vineyards; The "Montrachets"-Montrachet, Criots-Bâtard-Montrachet, Bâtard-Montrachet, Chevalier-Montrachet, and Bienvenues-Bâtard-Montrachet, as well as Charlemagne, Corton-Charlemagne, and Le Musigny.
In the four other main districts-Aube, Côte de Sézanne, Montagne de Reims, and Vallée de la Marne-Chardonnay lags behind Pinot noir in planting.
Chardonnay can be found in ''Appellation d'origine contrôlée'' (AOC) wines of the Loire Valley and Jura wine region, as well as the ''vin de pays'' wines of the Languedoc.
The next-largest concentration is found in the Languedoc, where it was first planted around the town of Limoux and up to 30% can be blended with Mauzac in the sparkling ''Blanquette de Limoux''.
It is most commonly paired with roast chicken and other white meats such as turkey.
Winemakers can counteract this by adding tartaric acid in a process known as "acidification".
Due to quarantine restrictions, plant cuttings were often smuggled into South Africa in the 1970s and 1980s and many times were misidentified as to what grape variety it really was.
Hazelnut, licorice, and spice are some of the flavors that can develop as these wines age.
By the late 1990s, efforts to promote "authentic" Chardonnay helped to increase plantings and by 2004 it was the third-most widely planted white wine grape behind Chenin blanc and Colombard.
According to Jancis Robinson, a sense of "smokiness" is one clue that could be picked up in a blind tasting of Chardonnay but there are many styles that do not have any "smokey" notes.
Examples include the lower-yielding clones 'Dijon-76', '95' and '96' that produce more flavor-concentrated clusters.
For new and developing wine regions, growing Chardonnay is seen as a "rite of passage" and an easy entry into the international wine market.
Oz Clarke described a view of Chardonnay as "...the ruthless coloniser and destroyer of the world's vineyards and the world's palates."
It is also permitted in the ''Denominación de Origen'' (DO) wines of Costers del Segre, Navarra and Somontano.
A peak in popularity in the late 1980s gave way to a backlash among those wine connoisseur who saw the grape as a leading negative component of the globalization of wine.
The time of harvesting is a crucial decision because the grape quickly begins to lose acidity as it ripens.
Due to the "malleability" of Chardonnay in winemaking and its ability to reflect its ''terroir'', there is not one distinct universal "style" or set of constants that could be applied to Chardonnay made across the globe.
New York has subsequently developed significant plantings of the variety since Fournier and Frank's early experiments.
This allows winemakers to maintain the acidity levels that balance the fruity and flint earthiness that have characterized Washington Chardonnay.
A notable exception to this is the most premium examples of Chablis and white Burgundies.
Sparkling Chardonnay based wines tend to exhibit more floral and steely flavors in their youth.
The vineyards around Chassagne-Montrachet tend to have a characteristic hazelnut aroma to them, while those of Puligny-Montrachet have more steely flavors.
The identifying styles of Chardonnay are regionally based.
Chardonnay is also found in the Valle d'Aosta DOC and Friuli-Venezia Giulia wine region.
Chardonnay grapes usually have little trouble developing sugar content, even in cooler climates, which translates into high potential alcohol levels and limits the need for chaptalization.
With malolactic fermentation (or MLF), the harder malic acid gets converted into the softer lactic acid, and diacetyl which creates the "buttery-ness" that is associated with some styles of Chardonnay.
The grapes most often blended with Chardonnay include Chenin blanc, Colombard and Sémillon.
In the United States, it is found most notably in California, Oregon, Texas, Virginia, and Washington, but also in Alabama, Arizona, Arkansas, Colorado, Connecticut, Georgia, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Oklahoma, South Carolina, Tennessee, and Vermont wine.
As better clonal varieties are discovered and planted, the overall quality of New Zealand Chardonnay have increased, particularly from places like Canterbury, Marlborough and Nelson.
The three main villages around the Côte grow Chardonnay that emphasizes certain characteristics that the Champagne producers seek depending on their house style.
While the style of Australian Chardonnay is mostly characterized by the mass-produced products of the hot Riverland region, the cooler climates of the Southern Highlands in New South Wales, Victoria and Tasmania have been creating more crisp, less oaked wines with lime notes.
Another theory stated that it originated from an ancient indigenous vine found in Cyprus.
Wines that have gone through malolactic fermentation tend to have softer acidity and fruit flavors with buttery mouthfeel and hazelnut notes.
The advocates of oak in Chablis point to the positive benefits of allowing limited oxygenation with the wine through the permeable oak barrels.
Despite being less planted, the ''Blanc de Blancs'' style of Champagne (made from only Chardonnay grapes) is far more commonly produced than ''Blanc de Noirs''.
Champagne, Chablis, and Burgundy account for more than three-fifths of all Chardonnay plantings in France.
The market was drinking more red wine, and there was a backlash against heavy, oaky, New World Chardonnays in favor of lighter wines such as Pinot grigio.
While the exact style of the wine varies by producer, some of the ''terroir'' characteristics associated with California Chardonnay include "flinty" notes with the Russian River Valley and mango and guava from Monterey.
This happened despite the fact that Chardonnay grapes get more golden-yellow in color close to harvest time and can be visually distinguished from Pinot blanc.
The regions of Alexander Valley, Los Carneros, Santa Maria Valley, Russian River Valley, and other parts of Sonoma County have shown success in producing wines that reflect more Burgundian styles.
While the wine made from this clone is not particularly distinguished, it can still be of very good quality.
In the 1930s, Chardonnay was crossed with a Seibel grape to create the hybrid grape Ravat blanc.
It is the dominant white wine variety of the area, overtaking Riesling in 1990.
Chardonnay lends itself to most any style of wine making from dry still wines, to sparkling wines to sweet late harvest and even botrytized wines (though its susceptibility to other less favorable rot makes these wines rarer).
Colder fermentation temperatures produces more "tropical" fruit flavors like mango and pineapple.
Some examples of Chablis can have an earthy "wet stone" flavor that can get mustier as it ages before mellowing into delicate honeyed notes.
It is a highly vigorous vine, with extensive leaf cover which can inhibit the energy and nutrient uptake of its grape clusters.
Chardonnay can blend well with other grapes and still maintain some of its unique character.
In Austria, the grape varieties known as ''Feinburgunder'' in Burgenland & Vienna and ''Morillon'' in Styria was not identified as Chardonnay till the late 1980s.
vinifera'', this achievement was realized in the Finger Lakes region of upstate New York.
A similar event happened in the German wine region of Baden during the 1980s.
Like many grape varieties, Chardonnay first came to Australia in the collection of James Busby in 1832, but it only really took off in the 1950s.
New York, like Burgundy and Washington, is a cool-climate viticultural region.
In certain conditions, the vines can be very high-yielding, but the wine produced from such vines suffers a drop in quality if yields go much beyond 4.5 tons per acre (80 hl/ha).
Overall, there has been a shift in style since the 1980s from deep golden, oily wines with melon and butterscotch flavors to lighter, paler Chardonnays with more structure and notes of white peaches and nectarines.
The Italian government did not dispatch researchers to try to distinguish the two vines until 1978.
In addition to Chablis, Chardonnay is found in the Côte d'Or (largely in the Côte de Beaune), as well as the Côte Chalonnaise and Mâconnais.
The amount of "char" in the barrel is often very light, which limits the amount of "toastiness" perceived in the wine.
Older, more mellow Chardonnays are often paired with more "earthy" dishes like mushroom soup and aged cheese.
While many New Zealand winemakers are still developing a characteristic style, the Chardonnay produced so far have emphasized the grape's affinity for oak.
Being cold tolerant, the Chardonnay grape is well suited for New York.
Nonetheless, it remains one of the most widely planted grape varieties, with over  worldwide, second only to Airén among white wine grapes and planted in more wine regions than any other grape – including Cabernet Sauvignon.
Outside of the regions discussed above, Chardonnay can be found in cooler climate sites in Italy, Greece, Israel and Lebanon as well as Austria, Bulgaria, Croatia, England, Georgia, Germany, Slovakia, Hungary, Macedonia, Moldova, Portugal, Romania, Slovenia, Spain, Serbia and Switzerland.
Frenchman Charles Fournier and Russian Konstantin Frank experimented with Chardonnay and other varietals in hopes of producing sparkling wines based on Old World grapes for the Gold Seal wine company.
By 2000,  more than  were planted, with many being used for wines under the ''Vin de Pays d'Oc''.
These wines were unique in that they were some of the first examples of Chardonnay to be varietally labeled as "Chardonnay".
In Oregon, the introduction of Dijon clones from Burgundy has helped to adapt the grape to the Oregon climate and soils.
A large portion of the Californian sparkling wine industry uses Chardonnay grapes from Carneros, Alexander, and Russian River valleys, with these areas attracting the attention of Champagne producers such as Bollinger, Louis Roederer, Moët et Chandon, and the Taittinger family, which have opened up wineries in last few decades.
Washington Chardonnays can be very similar to Californian Chardonnays, but tend to have more emphasis on fruit than creaminess.
Some flavors that can emerge from, particularly with extended time on its lees, include creamy and nuttiness with some floral notes.
South of the Côte d'Or are the Côte Chalonnaise and Mâconnais wine regions.
Early in the 21st century, demand outpaced supply and there was a shortage of Chardonnay grapes which prompted Australian winemakers to introduce new blending partners like Sémillon (known as "SemChard") and Colombard.
The Chardonay from Le Clos Jordanne placed first out of the 14 white wines, some of which were notable international wines, including: Chateau Montelena, Mer Soleil, Kumeu River, an aged reserve wine from Rosemount Estates, and a number of Burgundian entrants from producers such as Drouhin, Lamy, Boisset, Maison Louis Jadot, and others.
In warmer locations (such as the Adelaide Hills and Mornington Peninsula in Australia and Gisborne and Marlborough region of New Zealand), the flavors become more citrus, peach, and melon, while in very warm locations (such as the Central Coast AVA of California), more fig and tropical fruit notes such as banana and mango come out.
A large portion of the Chardonnay plantings from this period turned out to be Auxerrois blanc.
The Romans are thought to have brought Gouais blanc from Croatia, and it was widely cultivated by peasants in eastern France.
In the 1950s, James David Zellerbach, one-time US Ambassador to Rome, started Hanzell Vineyards winery and dedicated it to making Burgundian-style Chardonnay.
Chablis winemakers want to emphasise the ''terroir'' of the calcareous soil and cooler climate that help maintain high acidity.
In Jura, it is used to create ''vin de paille'' dessert wines.
Sparkling wine producers tend not to focus as much on limiting yields, since concentrated flavors are not as important as the wine's finesse.
Viticulturalists Maynard Amerine and Harold Olmo proposed a descendency from a wild ''Vitis vinifera'' vine that was a step removed from white Muscat.
The name is protected in the European Union and for wine sold in the EU, "Chablis" refers only to the Chardonnay wine produced in this region of the Yonne ''''.
In Canada, Chardonnay has seen some success with rich, oaky styles produced in Ontario and lighter styles produced in Quebec and British Columbia.
Apple notes are common, and depending on producer and appellation, can range from flavors of 'Golden Delicious' and 'Fuji' to 'Gala' and 'Jonathan'.
Oak can be introduced during fermentation or after in the form of the barrel aging.
In the "Judgement of Montreal", 10 judges at the ''Cellier'' tasting assessed 16 red and 14 white wines, primarily from France and California.
Here, the grape is known as Melon d'Arbois or Gamay blanc and is sometimes blended with Savagnin.
Another criticism of California Chardonnays, and one that has been levied against other Californian wines, is the very high alcohol levels which can make a wine seem out of balance.
Arboisier, Arnaison blanc, Arnoison, Aubain, Aubaine, Auvergnat blanc, Auvernas, Auvernas blanc, Auvernat blanc, Auxeras, Auxerras blanc, Auxerrois blanc, Auxois, Auxois blanc, Bargeois blanc, Beaunois, Biela Klevanjika, Blanc de Champagne, Blanc de Cramant, Breisgauer Suessling, Breisgauer Sussling, Burgundi Feher, Chablis, Chardenai, Chardenay, Chardenet, Chardennet, Chardonay, Chardonnet, Chatenait, Chatey Petit, Chatte, Chaudenay, Chaudenet, Chaudent, Clävner, Clevner Weiss, Cravner, Epinette, Epinette blanc, Epinette blanche, Epinette de Champagne, Ericey blanc, Feher Chardonnay, Feherburgundi, Feinburgunder, Gamay blanc, Gelber Weissburgunder, Gentil blanc, Grosse Bourgogne, Klawner, Klevanjka Biela, Klevner, Lisant, Luisant, Luizannais, Luizant, Luzannois, Maconnais, Maurillon blanc, Melon blanc, Melon D'Arbois, Meroué, Moreau blanc, Morillon blanc, Moulon, Noirien blanc, Obaideh, Petit Chatey, Petit Sainte-Marie, Petite Sainte Marie, Pineau blanc, Pino Sardone, Pino Shardone, Pinot Blanc à Cramant, Pinot Blanc Chardonnay, Pinot Chardonnay, Pinot de Bourgogne, Pinot Giallo, Pinot Planc, Plant de Tonnerre, Romere, Romeret, Rouci Bile, Rousseau, Roussot, Ruländer Weiß, Sainte Marie Petite, Sardone, Shardone, Shardonne, Später Weiß Burgunder, Weiß Burgunder (normally refers to Pinot blanc), Weiß Clevner, Weiß Edler, Weiß Elder, Weiß Klewner, Weiß Silber, Weißedler, Weißer Clevner, Weißer Rulander.
Chardonnay was one of the first European grape varieties to have been grown commercially east of the Rocky Mountains.
For sparkling wine production, the grapes will be harvested early and slightly unripe to maintain the acid levels.
Due to the wide range of styles, Chardonnay has the potential to be paired with a diverse spectrum of food types.
Typically, Mâcon blanc, basic Bourgogne, Beaujolais blanc, and Saint-Véran are meant to be consumed within two to three years of release.
In the wine regions of the former Soviet Union, Chardonnay has lagged behind in white wine grapes plantings in favor Rkatsiteli, Aligote and Riesling.
''Millerandage'' and ''coulure'' can also pose problems, along with powdery mildew attacking the thin skin of the grapes.
His success encouraged other Californian winemakers to follow suit and culminated in Chateau Montelena's victory over Burgundy Chardonnay in the 1976 blind tasting event conducted by French judges known as the Judgment of Paris.
In the Trentino-Alto Adige/Südtirol region this confusion appeared in the synonyms for each grape, with Pinot blanc being known as "Weissburgunder" (White Burgundy) and Chardonnay was known as "Gelber Weissburgunder" (Golden White Burgundy).
In Spain, Chardonnay has been increasingly used in the sparkling wine Cava.
Chardonnays from Washington, which is characterized by maintaining more acidity, tend to pair well with tomato-based dishes and items featuring sweet onions.
Since the two parents were genetically distant, many of the crosses showed hybrid vigour and were selected for further propagation.
It can also be used in the sparkling wines of Saumur and some Muscadet producers have begun experimenting with oak-aged Chardonnay.
Wente Vineyards developed a Chardonnay clone that was used to introduce the grape variety in several Californian vineyards throughout the 1940s.
Further south, in the region of Beaujolais, Chardonnay has started to replace Aligoté as the main white wine grape and is even replacing Gamay in some areas around Saint-Véran.
By the late 20th century, more concentrated efforts were put into identifying Chardonnay and making pure varietal versions of the wine.
Chardonnay long had a reputation as one of France's great white wines, but due to the dominance of geographical labeling, the fact that Chardonnay was the grape behind white Burgundy was not widely known by the wine-drinking public.
Burgundian winemaking tends to favor extended contact on the lees and even "stirring up" the lees within the wine while it is aging in the barrel in a process known as ''bâttonage''.
Chalk beds are found throughout the Champagne region, and the Côte-d'Or has many areas composed of limestone and clay.
The grape is very "malleable", in that it reflects and takes on the impression of its ''terroir'' and winemaker.
Other regions often associated with Chardonnay include Napa Valley, Monterey County, and Santa Barbara County.
Therefore, the Chardonnay grapes do not fully develop their fruit flavors and the still version of Champagne can taste very "un-Chardonnay"-like because of this.
In Switzerland, Chardonnay is found mostly around Bündner Herrschaft, Geneva and Valais.
By 2005, nearly  accounted for almost 25% of the world's total Chardonnay plantings.
In addition to being the most expensive, the Burgundy examples of Chardonnay were long considered the benchmark standard of expressing ''terroir'' through Chardonnay.
To combat the threat of frost, a method developed in Burgundy involves aggressive pruning just prior to budburst.
Winemakers in the Western Cape have experimented blending Chardonnay with Riesling and Sauvignon blanc.
The early trend was to imitate the great Burgundy wines, but this soon gave way to more rich buttery and oaked styles.
The Portuguese experimentation with Chardonnay has been mostly influenced by flying winemakers from Australia and the examples produced so far are very New World in style.
Harvesting time is crucial to winemaking, with the grape rapidly losing acidity as soon as it ripens.
When Chardonnay vines are planted densely, they are forced to compete for resources and funnel energy into their grape clusters.
In South Africa, for example, regions with stonier, shaley soils and high clay levels tend to produce lower-yielding and more Burgundian-style wine, despite having a discernibly warmer climate than France.
The success of California and new world Chardonnays, partly encouraged by the Californian showing at the Judgment of Paris wine tasting, brought varietal wine labeling to more prominence and the easy to pronounce Chardonnay grape was one of the largest beneficiaries.
This can have the effect of softening the wine and making the generally austere and acidic Chablis more approachable at a younger age.
Compared to other white wine grapes like Sauvignon blanc, Gewürztraminer and Viognier-Chardonnay has a more subtle and muted nose with no overwhelming aromatics that jump out of the wine glass.
Chardonnay has a long history in Italy but for a large part of it, the grape was commonly confused with Pinot blanc—often with both varieties interplanted in the same vineyard and blended together.
The "Old World" style of winemaking favors the use of wild, or ambient yeast, though some will also use specially cultivated yeast that can impart aromatic qualities to the wine.
This recognition, which caught the attention of the wine community, resulted from a blind tasting held in Quebec for ''Cellier'' magazine.
Being a rather neutral grape, Australian winemakers first approached Chardonnay in the same manner they were making wine from the similarly neutral Sultana grape.
In Champagne, it is most often blended with Pinot noir and Pinot Meunier, but is also used to produce single varietal ''blanc de blancs'' styles of sparkling wine.
In the nearby Les Perrieres vineyard, the topsoil is only around 12&nbsp;in (30&nbsp;cm) above the limestone and the wine from that region is much more powerful, minerally, and tight, needing longer in the bottle to develop fully.
The export driven Australian wine industry was well situated for the Chardonnay boom of the 1980s and 1990s and Australia responded with a unique style of wine that was characterized by big fruit flavors and easy approachability.
In response, the demand for Californian Chardonnay increased and Californian winemakers rushed to increase plantings.
In Piedmont and Tuscany, the grape is being planted in sites that are less favorable to Dolcetto and Sangiovese respectively.
While Chardonnay can adapt to almost all vineyard soils, the three it seems to like most are chalk, clay, and limestone, all very prevalent throughout Chardonnay's traditional "homeland".
Frank J. Prial of ''The New York Times'' was an early critic of this style, particularly because of the lack of "food friendliness" that was common with these massive wines.
The grape vines, leaves, and clusters look identical at first glance, but some subtle differences are seen.
The village of Avize grows grapes that produce the lightest wines, Cramant makes the most aromatic, and Mesnil produces wines with the most acidity.
In the Mâconnais, white wine production is centered on the town of Mâcon and the Pouilly-Fuissé region.
There was a new fashion, "ABC" - Anything But Chardonnay, identified by Frank Prial in 1995.
In North America, particularly California, Chardonnay found another region where it could thrive and produce a style of wine noticeably different from that of France.
As of 2006, 34 clonal varieties of Chardonnay could be found in vineyards throughout France, most of which were developed at the University of Burgundy in Dijon.
The 'Mendoza' clone is prone to develop ''millerandage'', also known as "hens and chicks", where the berries develop unevenly.
Other great examples of Ontario chardonnay include Closson Chase and Norman Hardie from the Prince Edward County region, and Tawse Winery, Hidden Bench Vineyards, and Southbrook Vineyards from the Niagara region.
Tyrell's vineyard was planted with Chardonnay cuttings that he "borrowed" from Penfolds' experimental plantings by hopping over their barb-wire fence one night and pruning their vines.
Other French wine regions with Chardonnay plantings include Alsace, Ardèche, Jura, Savoie, and the Loire Valley.
The most visible of these can be observed as the grapes are ripening, with Chardonnay grapes taking on a more golden-green color than Pinot blanc grapes.
Every year since 1991, Chardonnay production is celebrated in Limoux during the Toques et Clochers festival.
In the cool-climate South American wine regions of Argentina's Uco Valley and Chile's Casablanca, Chardonnay has started to develop a presence.
While many examples of Chardonnay can benefit from a few years of bottle aging, especially if they have high acidity, most Chardonnays are meant to be consumed in their youth.
Sparkling wines from Chardonnay are produced in the cool regions of Geelong, Adelaide Hills, Macedon Ranges and Tasmania.
In the Côte des Blancs (white slope) district of the Marne, Chardonnay thrives on the chalk soil.
However, many of the well-made examples of white Burgundy from the Côte d'Or need at least three years in the bottle to develop enough to express the aromas and character of the wine.
Today, Austrian Chardonnays range from the rich, oaked aged varieties to leaner, more aromatic styles based on Austrian Rieslings to sweet late harvest styles.
Chardonnay Blanc Musqué is mostly found around the Mâconnais village of Clessé and sometimes confused with the 'Dijon-166' clone planted in South Africa, which yields Muscat-like aromas.
vinifera'' varieties.
The wine is much more acidic than that of Chablis and is normally made bone-dry.
On the flip side, low acid levels can be a concern which make the wine taste "flabby" and dull.
The acidity can mellow with age and Chablis are some of the longest-living examples of Chardonnay.
Modern DNA fingerprinting research at University of California, Davis, now suggests that Chardonnay is the result of a cross between the Pinot noir and Gouais blanc (Heunisch) grape varieties.
This confusion between Pinot blanc and Chardonnay was very pervasive throughout northern Italy, where the two vines grew interspersed in the vineyard and were blended in winemaking.
Not only can it endure its cold winters, but also the variety buds late, reducing the risk of spring frosts.
For much of its history, a connection was assumed between Chardonnay and Pinot noir or Pinot blanc.
The use of oak is controversial in the Chablis community, with some winemakers dismissing it as counter to the "Chablis style" or ''terroir'', while others embrace its use, though not to the length that would characterise a "New World" Chardonnay.
A potential drawback of using wild yeast is that the fermentation process can go very slow with the results of the yeasts being very unpredictable and producing potentially a very different wine each year.
One Burgundian winemaker that favors the use of only wild yeast is Domaine des Comtes Lafon which had the fermentation of its 1963 Chardonnay batch take 5 years to complete when the fermentation process normally only takes a matter of weeks.
Chardonnay has served as parent to several French-American hybrid grapes, as well as crossings with other ''V.
In Chile, it has surpassed Sauvignon blanc and Sauvignon vert to be the most widely planted white wine grape.
The outlying regions, falling under the more basic "Petit Chablis" appellation, are planted on portlandian limestone which produces wines with less finesse.
Another reason for the backlash was that Chardonnay was seen as a symbol of the globalization of wine, in which local grape varieties were grubbed up in favor of the big names demanded by international markets.
A particular style of yeast used in Champagne is the ''Prise de Mousse'' that is cultivated for use worldwide in sparkling Chardonnay wines.
Despite the backlash, Chardonnay remains very popular.
But as more vineyards responded with massive new plantings of the variety, they found that fashions were changing again.
In places such as Oregon, the use of newer Dijon clones has had some success in those regions of the Willamette Valley with climates similar to that of Burgundy.
The villages of Mercurey, Montagny-lès-Buxy, and Rully are the largest producers of Chardonnay in the Côte Chalonnaise, with the best-made examples rivaling those of the Côte de Beaune.
Heavily oak influenced Chardonnays do not pair well with more delicate fish and seafood dish.
Chardonnay has a wide-ranging reputation for relative ease of cultivation and ability to adapt to different conditions.
Frank went on to found Konstantin Frank Vinifera Wine Cellars which helped demonstrate that a winery in the eastern US can produce European-style wines as a basis for a winery business.
In addition to being found in the same region of France for centuries, ampelographers noted that the leaves of each plant have near-identical shape and structure.
Despite being more famous for its Sauvignon blanc production, Chardonnay was New Zealand's most widely planted grape variety from 1990 till 2002 when Sauvignon blanc finally surpassed it.
In France, Chardonnay is the second-most widely planted white grape variety just behind Ugni blanc and ahead of Sémillon and Sauvignon blanc.
For example, pineapple notes are more commonly associated with Chardonnay from Napa Valley while Chablis will have more notes of green apples.
Rather, the element in Chardonnay that Champagne wine-makers look for is the finesse and balance of acidity that it brings to the blend.
Rather than using Dijon clones, Washington vineyards are planted with clones developed at the University of California-Davis that are designed to take longer to ripen in the warmer weather of the state's wine regions.
Most Chardonnay plantings are located in the northern wine regions, though plantings can be found throughout Italy as far south as Sicily and Apulia.
This is partly because Pinot noir and Pinot Meunier produce very coarse and heavy wines that lack the finesse and balance that Chardonnay brings to the mix.
Aromatic yeast were added and maceration was extended to get more flavors from skin contact.
The criticism was centered on the habits of winemakers to pull out or give up on local varieties in order to plant more Chardonnay which offered potentially more income but lack the uniqueness and character of local varieties.
In Lombardy, the grape is often used for ''spumante'' and in the Veneto it is often blended with Garganega to give more weight and structure to the wine.
In the late 1950s, they succeeded in harvesting the first commercial quantities of European grapes in eastern North America.
Pierre Galet disagreed with this assessment, believing that Chardonnay was not related to any other major grape variety.
In other areas, soil type can compensate for lack of ideal climate conditions.
In 2009, Le Clos Jordanne winery, of Jordan Village on the Niagara Peninsula, Ontario, received critical acclaim for its 2005 Claystone Terrace Chardonnay, which won the top spot for Chardonnay in the "Judgement of Montreal" experts’ tasting.
The wines rarely go through malolactic fermentation or are exposed to oak (though its use is increasing).
The region sits on the outer edges of the Paris Basin.
Nonsparkling still wine Chardonnay is produced under the Coteaux Champenois AOC.
By 2000, it was Italy's fourth most widely planted white wine grape.
