After the re-capture of Grozny in February 2000, the Ichkerian regime fell apart.
During the war, the Chechen economy fell apart.
The Chechens and Ingush were allowed to return to their land after 1956 during de-Stalinization under Nikita Khrushchev when Chechen-Ingush Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic was restored but both boundaries and ethnic composition of the territory significantly changed.
The latter proclaimed the Chechen Republic of Ichkeria, which sought independence.
With us in Chechen society, a wife is a housewife.
Birth rate was 25.41 in 2004.
The widespread demoralization of the Russian forces in the area and a successful offensive to re-take Grozny by Chechen resistance forces led by Aslan Maskhadov prompted Russian President Boris Yeltsin to declare a ceasefire in 1996, and sign a peace treaty a year later that saw a withdrawal of Russian forces.
Benoiski broke through the siege and continued to fight Russia for another two years until he was captured and killed by Russians.
Chechen rebels continued to fight Russian troops and conduct terrorist attacks.
In 2006 Human Rights Watch reported that pro-Moscow Chechen forces under the command, in effect, of chapter of republic Ramzan Kadyrov, as well as federal police personnel, used torture to get information about separatist forces.
Among the most prominent features was that those abused had no method of redress against assaults, ranging from kidnapping to torture, while those responsible were never held accountable.
The war between Nakh tribes and Russia resurfaced during the times of the Russian Revolution, which saw the Nakh struggle against Anton Denikin, and later against the Soviet Union.
In 1921 the Russians attacked and occupied the country and forcefully absorbed it into the Soviet state.
President Maskhadov started a major campaign against hostage-takers, and on October 25, 1998, Shadid Bargishev, Chechnya's top anti-kidnapping official, was killed in a remote-controlled car bombing.
According to Professor George Anchabadze of Ilia State University   American linguist Dr. Johanna Nichols " has used language to connect the modern people of the Caucasus region to the ancient farmers of the Fertile Crescent"  and her research suggests that "farmers of the region were proto-Nakh-Daghestanians."
Gross domestic product, if reliably calculable, would be only a fraction of the prewar level.
A third conviction leads to the death penalty, which can be carried out in a number of ways including stoning or beheading.
Some 40 percent of newborns had some kind of genetic defect.
Maskhadov sought to maintain Chechen sovereignty while pressing the Russian government to help rebuild the republic, whose formal economy and infrastructure were virtually destroyed.
Russia began to use a colonization tactic by destroying Nakh settlements and building Cossack defense lines in the lowlands.
Some Chechens were controlled by regional teips, or clans, despite the existence of pro- and anti-Russian political structures.
The Shafi'i school of jurisprudence has a long tradition among the Chechens, and thus it remains the most practiced.
Much better organized and planned than the first Chechen War, the Russian military took control over most regions.
So ethnicities are zealously guarding their numbers in order not to be outnumbered by others and thereby left with less representation in the government and the local economy.
It is estimated that about 80% of Chechens and Ingush left the Caucasus during the deportation.
The rebellion was led by Mansur Ushurma, a Chechen Naqshbandi (Sufi) sheikh—with wavering military support from other North Caucasian tribes.
Due to historical importance, many Chechens are Sufis, of either the Qadiri or Naqshbandi orders.
In 2001 he issued a decree prolonging his office for one additional year; he was unable to participate in the 2003 presidential election, since separatist parties were barred by the Russian government, and Maskhadov faced accusations of terrorist offences in Russia.
In Grozny itself there remained a 200,000 strong Russian-speaking population which did not hasten to leave it.
Despite overwhelming numerical superiority in men, weaponry, and air support, the Russian forces were unable to establish effective permanent control over the mountainous area due to numerous successful full-scale battles and insurgency raids.
Chechnya was a nation in the Northern Caucasus that fought against foreign rule continually since the 15th century.
However, before the current war the emigration of the Russian-speaking population from Chechnya was no more intense than that from Kalmykia, Tuva and Sakha-Yakutia.
In 1998, 176 people were kidnapped, 90 of whom were released, according to official accounts.
He has also openly defended honor killings on several occasions.
The War of Dagestan began on August&nbsp;7, 1999, during which the Islamic International Brigade (IIPB) began an unsuccessful incursion into the neighbouring Russian republic of Dagestan in favor of the Shura of Dagestan which sought independence from Russia.
The Armenian community, which used to number around 15,000 in Grozny alone, has dwindled to a few families.
In September, a series of apartment bombs that killed around 300 people in several Russian cities, including Moscow, were blamed on the Chechen separatists.
The capital of the new state was moved to Temir-Khan-Shura (Dagestan).
Bargishev's colleagues then insisted they would not be intimidated by the attack and would go ahead with their offensive.
In 1998, Grozny authorities declared a state of emergency.
In September 2004, separatist rebels occupied a school in the town of Beslan, North Ossetia, demanding recognition of the independence of Chechnya and a Russian withdrawal.
Peter sent a cavalry force to subdue them, but the Chechens routed them.
Maskhadov left Grozny and moved to the separatist-controlled areas of the south at the onset of the Second Chechen War.
The insurgency against Mongols begins.
There was an economic downturn.
Islam is the predominant religion in Chechnya.
Shamil left Boysangur Benoiski, a Chechen with one arm, one eye, and one leg, in charge of command at Gunib.
Tensions led to open clashes between the Chechen National Guard and Islamist militants, such as the July 1998 confrontation in Gudermes.
In the mountains there were discovered settlements made out of stone and surrounded by walls; some of them dated back to 8000 BC.
According to this treaty, Kartl-Kakheti received protection from Russia, and Georgia abjured any dependence on Iran.
German scientist Peter Simon Pallas  believed that Ingush people (Kist) were the direct descendants from Alania.
The militia, which began as his father's security force, has been accused of killings and kidnappings by human rights organizations such as Human Rights Watch.
Three months later, the leader of the separatist government, Akhmed Zakayev, called for a halt to armed resistance against the Chechen police force starting on August 1, 2009.
The name Chechen was however already used since as early as 1692.
The Russian Empire used Christianity to justify its conquests, allowing Islam to spread widely because it positioned itself as the religion of liberation from tsardom, which viewed Nakh tribes as "bandits".
Russian federal control was restored during the Second Chechen War.
However, despite Taliban recognition, there were no friendly relations between the Taliban and Ichkeria—Maskhadov rejected their recognition, stating that the Taliban were illegitimate.
On February&nbsp;1, 2009, the ''New York Times'' released extensive evidence to support allegations of consistent torture and executions under the Kadyrov government.
Nearly half a million people (40% of Chechnya's prewar population) had been internally displaced and lived in refugee camps or overcrowded villages.
The resistance of the Nakh tribes never ended and was a fertile ground for a new Muslim-Avar commander, Imam Shamil, who fought against the Russians from 1834 to 1859 (see Murid War).
The once-strong Russian minority in Chechnya, mostly Terek Cossacks and estimated as numbering approximately 25,000 in 2012, are predominantly Russian Orthodox, although presently only one church exists in Grozny.
One of the notable Chechen resistance fighters at the end of the 19th century was a Chechen abrek Zelimkhan Gushmazukaev and his comrade-in-arms Ingush abrek Sulom-Beck Sagopshinski.
In the 1930s Chechnya was flooded with many Ukrainians fleeing the  Holodomor.
After the 2004 school siege, Russian president Vladimir Putin announced sweeping security and political reforms, sealing borders in the Caucasus region and revealing plans to give the central government more power.
And the man is the owner.
As the result many of the Ukrainians settled in Chechen-Ingush ASSR on the permanent basis and were able to survive the famine.
According to the 2010 Census, the population of the republic is 1,268,989, up from 1,103,686 recorded in the 2002 Census.
The capital of the republic is the city of Grozny.
Following the First Chechen War with Russia, Chechnya gained ''de facto'' independence as the Chechen Republic of Ichkeria.
Diplomatic relations with Ichkeria were also established by the partially recognized Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan under the Taliban government on January 16, 2000.
;6000–4000 BCE: Neolithic era.
Traces of human settlement that date back to 40,000 BC were found near Lake Kezanoi.
Today, Chechnya is a relatively stable federal republic, although there is still some separatist movement activity.
, the republic was reported to have a population of 1,268,989 people; however, that number has been questioned by multiple demographers, who think such population growth after two deadly wars is highly implausible.
Two Russian brigades were permanently stationed in Chechnya.
Other groups include Russians (24,382, or 1.9%), Kumyks (12,221, or 1%), Ingush (1,296 or 0.1%) and a host of smaller groups, each accounting for less than 0.5% of the total population.
This led to the conclusion that Chechnya was being ruled without law, being run into further devastating destabilization.
1558 Temryuk of Kabarda sends his emissaries to Moscow requesting help against Vainakh tribes from Ivan the Terrible.
In response to the increasing terrorism, Russia tightened its grip on Chechnya and expanded its anti-terrorist operations throughout the region.
Many allege he is the wealthiest and most powerful man in the republic, with control over a large private militia referred to as the ''Kadyrovtsy''.
Despite the fact that over 50,000 Chechens and over 12,000 Ingush were fighting against Nazi Germany on the front line (including heroes of the USSR: Abukhadzhi Idrisov, Khanpasha Nuradilov, Movlid Visaitov), and despite the fact that Nazi German troops were stopped at two Chechen-Ingush ASSR cities Malgobek and Ordzhonikidze (renamed to Vladikavkaz) to a complete stop after capturing half of the Caucasus in less than a month; Chechens and Ingush were falsely accused as Nazi supporters and entire nations were deported during Operation Lentil to the Kazakh SSR (later Kazakhstan) in 1944 near the end of World War II where over 60% of Chechen and Ingush populations perished.
Russian forces killed Maskhadov on March 8, 2005, and the assassination of Maskhadov was widely criticized since it left no legitimate Chechen separatist leader with whom to conduct peace talks.
Chechens are overwhelmingly adherents to the Shafi'i Madhhab of Sunni Islam, the republic having converted to Islam between the 16th and the 19th centuries.
The artifacts were found near Nasare-Cort, Muzhichi, Ja-E-Bortz (also known as Surkha-khi), Abbey-Gove (also known as Nazran or Nasare)
A woman should give her love to us men... She would be man’s property.
Since 2002, Chechnya has experienced a classic post-conflict baby-boom.
On 19 January 2015 a march took place in Grozny against the publication of caricatures of the prophet Mohammed.
Russia continued to send money for the rehabilitation of the republic; it also provided pensions and funds for schools and hospitals.
In three months, Russia lost more tanks (over 1,997 tanks) in Grozny than during the Battle of Berlin in 1945.
In April 2009, Russia ended its counter-terrorism operation and pulled out the bulk of its army.
They offered Chechens and Ingush to leave the Caucasus for the Ottoman Empire (see Muhajir (Caucasus)).
In 1991 the Jordanian historian Abdul-Ghani Khassan presented the photocopy from old Arabic scripts claiming that Alania was in Chechnya and Ingushetia, and the document from Alanian historian Azdin Vazzar (1395–1460) who claimed to be from Nokhcho (Chechen) tribe of Alania.
The Budyonnovsk hospital hostage crisis in 1995 shocked the Russian public and led to international condemnation of the Chechen rebels.
Nichols stated: "The Nakh–Dagestanian languages are the closest thing we have to a direct continuation of the cultural and linguistic community that gave rise to Western civilization."
On December&nbsp;21, 1917, Ingushetia, Chechnya, and Dagestan declared independence from Russia and formed a single state: "United Mountain Dwellers of the North Caucasus" (also known as Mountainous Republic of the Northern Caucasus) which was recognized by major world powers.
;900–1200 AD: The kingdom in the center of the Caucasus splits into Alania and Noble Alania (known from Russian as Царственные Аланы).
the commander of 255th Separate Chechen-Ingush regiment Movlid Visaitov, the first to contact American forces at Elbe river) were deported.
The Armenian church of Grozny was demolished in 1930.
;1239 AD: Destruction of the Alania capital of Maghas (both names known solely from Muslim Arabs) and Alan confederacy of the Northern Caucasian highlanders, nations, and tribes by Batu Khan (a Mongol leader and a grandson of Genghis Khan) "Magas was destroyed in the beginning of 1239 by the hordes of Batu Khan.
Most of these funds were taken by Chechen authorities and divided between favoured warlords.
(25.7 in Achkhoi Martan, 19.8 in Groznyy, 17.5 in Kurchaloi, 28.3 in Urus Martan and 11.1 in Vedeno).
The president of this government was Aslan Maskhadov, the Foreign Minister was Ilyas Akhmadov, who was the spokesman for Maskhadov.
In August 2011, Archbishop Zosima of Vladikavkaz and Makhachkala performed the first mass baptism ceremony in the history of Chechen republic in the Terek River of Naursky District in which 35 citizens of Naursky and Shelkovsky districts were converted to Orthodoxy.
Some scholars place it in a wider Iberian-Caucasian super-family.
At the end of the Soviet era, ethnic Russians (including Cossacks) comprised about 23% of the population (269,000 in 1989).
The First Chechen War took place over a two-year period that lasted from 1994 to 1996, when Russian forces attempted to regain control over Chechnya, which had declared independence in November 1991.
The Russians were defeated again and withdrew, but this battle is responsible for the apocryphal story about how the Nokchi came to be known as "Chechens"-the people ostensibly named for the place the battle had taken place.
There are other dialects which are believed to define districts, but because these areas are so isolated, not much research has been done on these areas.
Chechen belongs to the Vaynakh or North-central Caucasian language family, which also includes Ingush and Batsb.
For first- and second-time offenders, the punishment is caning.
The Alan tribes build fortresses, castles, and defense walls locking the mountains from the invaders.
The Caucasian war for independence restarted, and the government went into exile.
Insurgency in the North Caucasus continued even after this date.
This change of status has been rejected by many Chechen politicians and military leaders who continue to support the existence of the republic.
According to the Chechen State Statistical Committee, Chechnya's population had grown to 1.205 million in January 2006.
After the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, the Chechen-Ingush ASSR was split into two parts: the Republic of Ingushetia and the Chechen Republic.
According to the Chechen government, the referendum passed with 95.5% of the votes and almost 80% turnout.
Chechen demographers in 2008 termed highly implausible the reported overall population growth as infant mortality in Chechnya was said to be 60 percent higher than the Russian average in 2007 and to have risen by 3.9 percent compared with 2006.
Part of the lowland tribes occupied by Mongols.
The Chechen authorities are regularly accused of crimes against the population, especially the Russian-speaking people.
Pottery is known to the region.
It weakened the resistance which went from open warfare to insurgent warfare.
The president Ramzan Kadyrov is quoted as saying "I have the right to criticize my wife.
Finally, it argued that Chechnya was a major hub in the oil infrastructure of the federation and hence its secession would hurt the country's economy and energy access.
1,100 people (including 777 children) were taken hostage.
Old settlements near Ali-Yurt and Magas, discovered in the modern times, revealed tools made out of stone: stone axes, polished stones, stone knives, stones with holes drilled in them, clay dishes etc.
Its regional constitution entered into effect on April 2, 2003 after an all-Chechen referendum was held on March 23, 2003.
According to some Russian sources, from 1991 to 1994 tens of thousands of people of non-Chechen ethnicity (mostly Russians, Ukrainians and Armenians) left the republic amidst reports of violence and discrimination against the non-Chechen population, as well as widespread lawlessness and ethnic cleansing under the government of Dzhokhar Dudayev.
The languages used in the Republic are Chechen and Russian.
On June 17, 2006, it was reported that Russian special forces killed Abdul Khalim Saidullayev in a raid in a Chechen town Argun.
The crisis ended with a large death toll mostly due to an unknown aerosol pumped throughout the building by Russian special forces to incapacitate the people inside.
He was unable to fully achieve this because in the course of the war he was betrayed by the Ottomans, handed over to Russians, and executed in 1794.
The Chechens converted over the next few centuries to Sunni Islam, as Islam was associated with resistance to Russian encroachment.
According to estimates, the number of Chechnya's unemployed will fall to 170,000 people by January 1, 2013, while the number in 2008 was 298,500.
In the ensuing decade, the territory was locked in an ongoing struggle between various factions, usually fighting unconventionally and forgoing the position held by the several successive Russian governments through the current administration.
Another successful Caucasus war against Persia several years later, starting in 1826 and ending in 1828 with the Treaty of Turkmenchay, and a successful war against Ottoman Turkey in 1828, enabled Russia to use a much larger portion of its army in subduing the natives of the North Caucasus.
Chechnya has one of the youngest populations in the generally aging Russian Federation; in the early 1990s, it was among the few regions experiencing natural population growth.
Aslan Maskhadov had been elected in an internationally monitored election in 1997 for 4 years, which took place after signing a peace agreement with Russia.
The Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre reports that after hundreds of thousands of ethnic Russians and Chechens fled their homes following inter-ethnic and separatist conflicts in Chechnya in 1994 and 1999, more than 150,000 people still remain displaced in Russia today.
Dr. Henry Harpending, University of Utah, supports her claims.
;1300–1400 AD: War between the Alans, Tamerlan, Tokhtamysh, and the Battle of the Terek River.
Following the forced ceding of the current territories of Dagestan, most of Azerbaijan, and Georgia by Persia to Russia, following the Russo-Persian War (1804–1813) and its outcoming Treaty of Gulistan, Russia significantly widened its foothold in the Caucasus at the expense of Persia.
The former separatist religious leader (mufti) Akhmad Kadyrov, looked upon as a traitor by many separatists, was elected president with 83% of the vote in an internationally monitored election on October 5, 2003.
Since 1990, the Chechen Republic has had many legal, military, and civil conflicts involving separatist movements and pro-Russian authorities.
On March&nbsp;10, 2011, Human Rights Watch reported that since Chechenization, the government has pushed for enforced Islamic dress code and other traditions which violently repress women.
Ivan the Terrible marries Temryuk's daughter Maria Temryukovna.
Human rights groups criticized the conduct of the 2005 parliamentary elections as unfairly influenced by the central Russian government and military.
The second prime minister elected was Vassan-Girey Dzhabagiev, an Ingush statesman, who also was the author of the constitution of the republic in 1917, and in 1920 he was re-elected for the third term.
He also vowed to take tougher action against domestic terrorism, including preemptive strikes against Chechen separatists.
This recognition ceased with the fall of the Taliban in 2001.
The Economist was skeptical of the results, arguing that "few outside the Kremlin regard the referendum as fair".
In 1859, Shamil was captured by Russians at aul Gunib.
With the impending dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, an independence movement, the Chechen National Congress, was formed, led by ex-Soviet Air Force general and new Chechen President Dzhokhar Dudayev.
There is a theory that the real reason why Chechens and Ingush were deported is the desire of Russia to attack Turkey, a non-communist country, as Chechens and Ingush could impede such plans.
It campaigned for the recognition of Chechnya as a separate nation.
On May 9, 2004, Kadyrov was assassinated in Grozny football stadium by a landmine explosion that was planted beneath a VIP stage and detonated during a parade, and Sergey Abramov was appointed to the position of acting prime minister after the incident.
Mansur hoped to establish a Transcaucasus Islamic state under shari'a law.
As an effect of the war, approximately 80% of the economic potential of Chechnya was destroyed.
Russia installed a pro-Russian Chechen regime.
Akhmed Zakayev, Deputy Prime Minister and a Foreign Minister under Maskhadov, was appointed shortly after the 1997 election and is currently living under asylum in England.
Under intermittent Persian rule since 1555, in 1783 the eastern Georgians of Kartl-Kakheti led by Erekle II and Russia signed the Treaty of Georgievsk.
According to Russian demographer Dmitry Bogoyavlensky, the 2002 census results were clearly manipulated in the North Caucasus: an estimated 800,000 to 1 million non-existent people were added to the actual population of the region.
On September&nbsp;1, 1997, Criminal Code reportedly being implemented in the Chechen Republic-Ichkeriya, Article 148 punishes "anal sexual intercourse between a man and a woman or a man and a man".
He and others chose Abdul Khalim Saidullayev, a relatively unknown Islamic judge who was previously the host of an Islamic program on Chechen television, to replace Maskhadov following his death.
It also argued that other republics of Russia, such as Tatarstan, would consider seceding from the Russian Federation if Chechnya were granted that right.
Here, if a woman does not behave properly, her husband, father, and brother are responsible.
Since 2007, Chechnya has been run by Ramzan Kadyrov.
In 2004, European Parliament recognized deportation of Chechens and Ingush as an act of genocide.
So, let women not wear shorts...".
The August 19–21, 1991 Soviet coup d'état attempt led to the abandonment of this reorganization.
This declaration was part of the reorganization of the Soviet Union.
In 1994, the separatists planned to introduce a new currency, but that did not happen due to Russian troops re-taking Chechnya in the Second Chechen War.
American historian Norman Naimark writes:  The deportation was supposedly justified by the materials prepared by notorious NKVD officer Bogdan Kobulov accusing Chechens and Ingush in a mass conspiracy preparing rebellion and providing assistance to the German forces.
Cave paintings, artifacts, and other archaeological evidence indicates continuous habitation for some 8,000&nbsp;years.
The economic situation in Chechnya has improved considerably since 2000.
Maskhadov was unable to influence a number of warlords who retain effective control over Chechen territory, and his power was diminished as a result.
The successor of Saidullayev became Doku Umarov.
However, his rule has also seen Chechnya rebuild, with much of Grozny already reconstructed.
Zelimkhan was killed in the beginning of the 20th century.
There were many (predominantly Russian) migrants from other parts of the Soviet Union, who often settled in the abandoned family homes of Chechens and Ingushes.
The attack lasted three days, resulting in the deaths of over 331 people, including 186 children.
In 2003, a referendum was held on a constitution that reintegrated Chechnya within Russia, but provided limited autonomy.
In 2005 and 2006, prominent separatist leaders Aslan Maskhadov and Shamil Basayev were killed.
According to our tradition, if a woman fools around, her family members kill her... That’s how it happens, a brother kills his sister or a husband kills his wife... As a president, I cannot allow for them to kill.
Many experts have expressed doubts about the increase from 1.1 million in the 1990 to an estimated nearly 1.3 million in 2010 following two devastating wars that displaced hundreds of thousands people and virtually eliminated the large ethnic Russian minority in the republic.
In 2009, the American organization Freedom House included Chechnya in the "Worst of the Worst" list of most repressive societies in the world, together with Burma, North Korea, Tibet, and others.
Many of the materials were later proved to be fabricated.
Ichkeria is/was a member of the Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization.
In 1732, after Russia already ceded back most of the Caucasus to Persia, now led by Nader Shah, following the Treaty of Resht, Russian troops clashed again with Chechens in a village called Chechen-aul along the Argun River.
Even distinguished Red Army officers who fought bravely against Germans (e.g.
As the Russians took control of the Caspian corridor and moved into Persian-ruled Dagestan, Peter's forces ran into mountain tribes.
However, since 2005 Ramzan Kadyrov (son of Akhmad Kadyrov) has been caretaker prime minister, and in 2007 was appointed a new president.
In lieu of the devastated economic structure, kidnapping emerged as the principal source of income countrywide, procuring over US$200 million during the three-year independence of the chaotic fledgling state, although victims were rarely killed.
On November&nbsp;26, 1990, the Supreme Council of Chechen-Ingush ASSR adopted the "Declaration of State Sovereignty of the Chechen-Ingush Republic".
And there is little chance that your torturer will be held accountable", said Holly Cartner, Director Europe and Central Asia division of HRW.
Kadyrov's rule has been characterized by high level corruption, a terrible human rights record and a growing Cult of personality.
Together they built up small units which constantly harassed Russian military convoys, government mints, and government post-service, mainly in Ingushetia and Chechnya.
The Russian tsar hoped that by sparing the life of Shamil, the resistance in the North Caucasus would stop, but it did not.
;1500 AD: First Russian involvement in the Caucasus.
The Cossacks suffered defeat after defeat, and were constantly attacked by mountaineers, who were robbing them of food and weaponry.
