Even while resting, they take turns at keeping a lookout.
The cheetahs in the painting were previously considered to be leopards.
However, his son Jahangir wrote in his memoirs, ''Tuzk-e-Jahangiri'', that only one of them gave birth to cubs.
While running, in addition to having good traction due to their semi-retractable claws, cheetahs use their tail as a rudder-like means of steering that enables them to make sharp turns, necessary to outflank antelopes that often change direction to escape during a chase.
Juveniles form mixed-sex groups after weaning, but most of the young females stay back with their mother, with whom they do not show any significant interaction.
Females become sexually mature at 21 to 22 months of age.
A sexually dimorphic species, males are generally larger than females.
Polyandrous, females can mate with several males.
Extinct North American cats resembling the cheetah had historically been assigned to ''Felis'', ''Puma'' or ''Acinonyx''.
Basically yellowish tan or rufous to greyish white, the coat of the cheetah is uniformly covered with nearly 2,000 solid black spots.
An alternative name for the cheetah is "hunting leopard".
Some males alternate between solitude and coalitions, whichever ensures encounters with a greater number of females.
A genome study concluded that cheetahs experienced two genetic bottlenecks in their history, the first about 100,000 years ago and the second about 12,000 years ago, greatly lowering their genetic variability.
The cheetah is unable to roar due to the presence of a sharp-edged vocal fold within the larynx.
Small, short, and rounded, the ears are marked by black patches on the back; the edges and base of the ears are tawny.
Females in oestrus will show maximum urine-marking, and her excrement can attract males from far off.
In areas with nomadic prey animals (such as the Thomson's gazelle in the Serengeti and the springbok the in Kalahari Desert), the home ranges cover hundreds of square kilometres.
No courtship behaviour is observed; the male immediately secures hold of the female's nape and copulation takes place.
Cheetah expert Laurie Marker points out that the high level of genetic uniformity would mean that if an infectious disease surfaced in a population, all of them have (or lack) the same level of immunity.
The protracted claws increase grip over the ground, while foot pads make the sprint more convenient over tough ground.
Females are not territorial, and live alone or with their offspring.
Iran declared 31August as National Cheetah Day in 2006.
However, they may have to wait until as long as 15 months of age to make a successful kill on their own.
The IUCN has recommended co-operation between countries across the cheetah's range to minimise the conflict between cheetahs and human beings.
A short mane, about  long, on the neck and the shoulders, is all that remains of the cape in adults.
Males fight among one another to secure access to the female; even males in a coalition may show some aggression toward one another on approaching a female.
Reliefs in the Deir el-Bahari temple complex tell of an expedition by Egyptians to the Land of Punt during the reign of the pharaoh Hatshepsut (1507–1458BC) that fetched, among other things, animals called "panthers" for Egypt.
The only extant member of the genus ''Acinonyx'', the cheetah was first described by Johann Christian Daniel von Schreber in 1775.
Males exhibit pronounced marking behaviourterritories, termite mounds, trees, common tracks, and junctions are marked by urine, faeces, and claw scratches.
In 2012 an 11-year-old cheetah from the Cincinnati Zoo named Sarah made a world record by running  in 5.95 seconds over a set run, during which she ran a recorded maximum speed of .
The southern half of the continent, therefore, is home to the largest number of cheetah.
Gestation is nearly three months long.
This arrangement, called a "visual streak", significantly enhances the sharpness of the vision.
The lifespan of wild cheetahs is 14 to 15 years for females; their reproductive cycle typically ends by 12 years of age.
The painting depicts a cheetah, hooded and collared by two Indian servants, along with a stag it was supposed to prey upon.
Regional estimates have been given as: 1,960 in eastern Africa (as of 2007); 4,190 in southern Africa (as of 2007); and 440 in western, central, and northern Africa (as of 2012).
The speeds attained by the cheetah are only slightly greater than those achieved by the pronghorn  and the springbok .
The last physical evidence of the cheetah in India was three individuals, all shot by the Maharajah of Surguja in 1947 in eastern Madhya Pradesh, a man also noted for holding a record for shooting 1,360 tigers.
Yet the cheetah has a greater probability of succeeding in the chase due to its exceptional accelerationit can attain a speed of  in just two seconds.
Zoologist Jonathan Kingdon considered the chirp of the cheetah as similar to the soft roar of the lion, and its churr as the latter's loud roar.
A remarkable feature of the cheetah is its unusually low genetic variability in comparison to other felids.
Every cheetah has a unique pattern of spots on its coat; hence, this serves as a distinct identity for each individual.
To defend itself or its prey, a cheetah will hold its body low to the ground, and produce a snarl with its mouth wide open, the eyes staring threateningly ahead and the ears folded backward.
In contrast, home ranges are merely  large where sedentary prey, such as the impala in the Kruger National Park, is available.
Since 1927 the king cheetah has been reported five more times in the wild; an individual was photographed in 1975.
However, cheetahs typically do not prefer livestock for prey.
Fights are characterised by biting, tearing out the fur and attempts at strangling on both sides.
Consequently, individuals show considerable genetic similarity to one another, as illustrated by skin grafts, electrophoretic evidence and reproductive surveys.
Cheetahs have rarely been observed to feed on the kills of other carnivores; this may be due to vultures and spotted hyena adroitly capturing and consuming heavy carcasses within a short time.
Hunting with cheetahs became more prevalent toward the seventh centuryAD.
Moreover, cheetahs are poor breeders in captivity, while wild individuals are far more successful.
Though home ranges often overlap, there is hardly any interaction between the females.
The pair then ignore each other and part ways.
Several African countries have taken steps to improve the standards of cheetah conservation.
In the 2001 study, it was observed that the claws of cheetah have features intermediate between those of felids and the wolf.
The upper parts are in stark contrast to the underbelly, which is completely white.
The study identified possible stress factors such as restricted habitat and interaction with human beings and other carnivores, and recommended private and spacious areas for captive cheetahs.
The extinct species of ''Acinonyx'' are older than the cheetah, with the oldest known from the late Pliocene; these fossils are about three million years old.
A variety of larger cheetah believed to have existed in Europe fell to extinction around half a million years ago.
Scent plays a significant role in olfactory communication.
Cases of roadkill involving cheetahs have been reported from Kalmand, Tūrān, and Bafq.
Hence, genetically the king cheetah is simply a variety of the common cheetah and not a separate species.
One stride or jump of a galloping cheetah averages .
The tight binding of the tibia and the fibula restrict rotation about the lower leg, thus stabilising the animal throughout the sprint; the downside, however, is that this reduces climbing efficiency.
Although the requirement of space for the habitat would have to be compromised in most cases, establishment of private reserves for cheetahs and ensuring the absence of predators and poachers could be a successful conservation measure.
During the New Kingdom (16th to 11th centuriesBC), cheetahs were common pet animals for the royalty, who decorated the animals with beautiful collars and leashes.
Groups rest in grassy clearings after dusk, though males and juveniles often roam around at night.
The consequences of such genetic uniformity might include a low sperm count, motility, deformed flagella, difficulty in captive breeding and susceptibility to disease.
They have been known to exist in Zimbabwe, Botswana and northern Transvaal.
It may resemble a growl.
The cheetah reaches nearly  at the shoulder, and weighs .
Their role is obscurethey may be serving as a shield for the eyes against the sun's glare, a helpful feature as the cheetah hunts mainly during the day; another purpose could be to define facial expressions.
The serval has a form very similar to that of the cheetah but is significantly smaller.
For example, the cheetah has a relatively long snout, long legs and deep chest, tough foot pads and blunt, semi-retractable claws; moreover, its hunting behaviour resembles that of canids.
The muscles between the skull and jaw are short, and thus do not allow the cheetah to open its mouth as much as other cats.
In the third centuryAD, Roman author Claudius Aelianus wrote of tame panthers in India and "smaller lions" that would be used for tracking and hunting; the account cannot be very reliable as Roman, as well as Greek, literature is not generally clear in its references to different types of cats.
The cheetah in general shows no hostility toward human beings, probably due to its sociable nature.
Cheetahs have a high concentration of nerve cells, arranged in a band in the centre of the eyes.
The exceptionally long and muscular tail measures , and ends in a bushy white tuft.
Feline infectious peritonitis caused two deaths.
These groups collectively defend their territories.
The first phase of taming would take several weeks, in which the cheetah would be kept tethered and made to get accustomed to human beings.
Females are not territorial; they may be solitary or live with their offspring in home ranges.
The cheetah is characterised by a slender body, deep chest, spotted coat, a small rounded head, black tear-like streaks on the face, long thin legs and a long spotted tail.
The study concluded that the survival rate of cubs till weaning was a mere 4.8%.
Game hunters may also try to harm cheetah as these carnivores can deprive them of valuable game.
A study noted that this mane gives a cheetah cub the appearance of the honey badger; this could act as a camouflage in both animals.
In a study at the Etosha National Park (Namibia), the cheetah consumed as much as  within two hours and stayed close to the remains for 11hours.
The pendulum-like motion of the scapula increases the stride length and assists in shock absorption.
This might be a reason why the cheetah can be easily tamed, as it has been since antiquity.
In 1764 English painter George Stubbs commemorated the gifting of a cheetah to George III by the English Governor of Madras, Sir George Pigot in his painting ''Cheetah with Two Indian Attendants and a Stag''.
The sizes can be location specific.
Mortality under captivity is generally high; reasons include stillbirths, birth defects, cannibalism, hypothermia, neglect of cubs by mothers, and infectious diseases.
Males have slightly bigger heads with wider incisors and longer mandibles than females.
Male coalitions, on the other hand, shunned dense habitats and spent most of the time in open savannahs.
The Egyptians would use their dogs to bring the concealed prey out in the open, after which a cheetah would be set upon it to kill it.
High mortality rates have been recorded in the Serengeti.
These social groups typically keep away from one another.
The aggressive expression is maintained during the run.
As such, human interference can disturb the activities, such as hunting and feeding, of cheetah.
In fact, the tail of an individual will typically resemble its siblings' to a greater extent than it resembles its mother's or any other individual's.
The first release of Apple Inc.'s Mac OS X, the Mac OS X 10.0, was code-named "Cheetah"; the subsequent releases have been named after big cats.
The mean number of motile sperm in a single ejaculation is nearly 25.3million.
This also minimises the risk of encountering larger carnivores.
Interestingly, the cheetah appears to show convergent evolution with canids in morphology as well as behaviour.
The mother frequently shifts the cubs to new locations.
The average period for which territories are held is four months for singletons, seven-and-a-half months for pairs, and 22 months for trios.
This case is similar to that of the black panthers.
In the Serengeti they hunt when the lions and hyenas are inactive.
Describing the animal, he noted its remarkable similarity to the cheetah, but the body of this individual was covered with fur as thick as that of a snow leopard and the spots merged to form stripes.
* Growling: Often accompanied by hissing and spitting, the cheetah growls to show its annoyance, or when faced with danger.
Each spot measures nearly  across.
Thanks to its prowess at hunting, the cheetah was tamed and used to kill game at hunts in the past.
The pronounced tear streaks are unique to the cheetah.
Cubs as young as six months try to capture small prey like hares and juvenile gazelles.
The hind legs are longer than the forelegs.
Territorial solitary males establish considerably larger territories, as large as  in the Serengeti or  in central Namibia.
Moreover, these were rich in prey availability.
Cheetah cubs are highly vulnerable during the first few weeks of their life; mothers keep their cubs hidden in dense vegetation for the first month.
Cheetahs do have low fertility rates, but they appear to have flourished for thousands of years with these low levels of genetic variance.
Each cub weighs nearly  at birth; the eyes, shut at birth, open in 4to 11 days.
Chinese emperors would use cheetahs, as well as caracals, as gifts.
These adaptations account for much of the cheetah's ability to catch fast-moving prey.
Another study concluded that excess of vitaminA in their diets could result in veno-occlusive disease in their livers.
The cheetah is a big cat with several distinctive featuresa slender body, deep chest, spotted pelage, a small rounded head, black tear-like streaks on the face, long thin legs and a long spotted tail.
The whole process could take as long as a year to complete.
The cheetah has been classified as Vulnerable by the IUCN; it is listed under AppendixI of the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals (CMS) and AppendixI of CITES (Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species).
The mutation is recessive, a reason behind the rareness of the mutation.
After weaning, juveniles may form mixed-sex herds; young females may stay back with their mother, but there is hardly any interaction between the mother and daughters.
Mughal rulers trained cheetahs as well as caracals in a similar way as the West Asians, and used them to hunt gameespecially blackbuck.
During the early 2000s, scientists from the Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology (CCMB), Hyderabad, proposed a plan to clone Asiatic cheetahs obtained from Iran.
This allows cheetahs to rapidly regain their stamina after a chase.
However, today the cheetah has been exterminated from the majority of its earlier range.
Females are polyoestrusthey have an oestrus ("heat") cycle every 12days (this can vary from 10to 20 days), each oestrus lasting one to three days.
The cheetah is often confused with the leopard and the cougar and can be distinguished by its small round spots in contrast to the leopard's rosettes and the cougar's plain coat; in addition, the leopard lacks the tear streaks of the cheetah.
Chronic gastritis was detected in 91% of the population.
Gestation is nearly three months long, resulting in a litter of typically three to five cubs (the number can vary from one to eight).
In the 13th and the 14th centuries, the Yuan rulers bought numerous caracals, cheetahs, and tigers from the western parts of the empire and Muslim merchants in return for gold, silver, cash, and silk.
Thus, it was suggested that play helps develop only certain aspects of predator defence.
Cheetahs often investigate urine-marked places (territories or common landmarks) for a long time by crouching on their forelegs and carefully smelling the place.
In eastern Asia, the records are confusing as regional names for the leopard and the cheetah may be used interchangeably.
In more severe cases, the ground is hit with the paws.
Glomerulosclerosis, a disease of the kidneys, emerged as another significant disease, affecting 84% of the cheetahs; another renal disease, nephrosclerosis, affected 39% of the cheetahs.
The vernacular name "cheetah" () is derived from the Hindi word चीता (''cītā''), which in turn comes from the Sanskrit word चित्रकायः ('''') meaning "bright" or "variegated".
Similarly, the ability to rapidly change direction is pivotal in ensuring hunting success.
In general, the speed of a hunting cheetah averages  during a chase, interspersed with a few short bursts when the speed may vary between ; the most reliable measurement of the typical speed during a short chase is .
An open area with some cover, such as diffused bushes, is probably ideal for the cheetah because it needs to stalk and pursue its prey over a distance, exploiting its speed.
The animated series ''ThunderCats'' had a character named "Cheetara", an anthropomorphic cheetah, voiced by Lynne Lipton.
The relatively longer metacarpals, metatarsals (of the lower leg), radius, ulna, tibia, and fibula increase the length of each jump.
As a result, if two mating cheetahs have the same gene, then a quarter of their offspring can be expected to be king cheetahs.
In a 1991 book, biologist R. D. Estes had enlisted, in addition to the aforementioned vocalisations, some other sounds made by the cheetah:
India asked Iran to transport one live pair to India, or, if that was not possible, allow them to collect sperm and  of the cheetah pair in Iran itself.
The generic name ''Acinonyx'' could have originated from the combination of two Greek words: ''akinetos'' means motionless, and ''onyx'' means claw.
This vocalisation can also be used at social meetings, during courtship, or in attempting to find another; the chirp of a mother searching for her cubs, which sounds more like the yelp of a dog than the chirp of a bird, can be heard up to  away.
A study of five wild cheetahs (three females, two males) during hunting reported a maximum speed of , with an average of .
Among the felids, the visual streak is most concentrated and efficient in the cheetah.
Cheetahs breed throughout the year; they are induced ovulators.
Although a coalition, due to its larger membership, demands a greater amount of resources than do the solitary males or their groups, the coalition has a greater chance of encountering and acquiring females for mating.
Digitigrade animals, the cheetah have tough foot pads that make it convenient to run on firm ground.
The sharp, narrow cheek teeth help in tearing flesh, whereas the small and flat canine teeth bite the throat of the prey to suffocate it.
After further similar animals were discovered, it was established they were similar to the cheetah in having non-retractable clawsa characteristic feature of the cheetah.
Each sister had mated with a wild male from the Transvaal region (where king cheetahs had been recorded).
A study comparing the health of captive and wild cheetahs noted that despite having similar genetic make-up, wild cheetahs are far healthier than their captive counterparts.
During more than half of the time of the sprint, the animal has all four limbs in the air; this also contributes to the stride length.
Fluffy fur covers the chest and the ventral side.
The cheetah will run no more than  at the tremendous speeds of ; very rarely do they run at these speeds as most chases are within .
Lions emerged as the major predator of juveniles, accounting for nearly 78% of the deaths.
They possibly diverged from this ancestor 8.25 million years ago.
The '''cheetah''' () (''Acinonyx jubatus''), also known as the '''hunting leopard''', is a big cat that occurs mainly in eastern and southern Africa and a few parts of Iran.
The mother brings kills to her cubs; the cubs might purr as the mother licks them clean after the meal.
The cheetah's body is specialised for speed, and it is the fastest land animal.
The cheetah has often been featured in marketing and animation.
Speed can be increased by almost  in a single stride.
Cheetahs kill their prey by tripping it during the chase; the cheetah can use its strong dewclaw to knock the prey off its balance.
According to the ''Ming Shilu'', the subsequent Ming dynasty (14th to 17th centuries) continued this practice.
For example, on the East African plains, its preferred prey is the Thomson's gazelle, somewhat smaller than the cheetah.
However, Iran rejected both proposals.
Females are regular visitors to male territories.
In contrast, only 20% of the North American captive cheetahs bred successfully in 1991.
Tim Caro, of the University of California, Davis, identified the various social classes and their longevity.
In the Middle East, the cheetah would accompany the nobility to hunts in special seats behind saddles.
Adult males are sociable despite their territoriality, forming groups called "coalitions".
The offspring may stay with the mother for 13 to 20 months, associating with one another and feeding on kills together.
It portrays a creature with a woman's head and a cheetah's body (often misidentified as a leopard's).
Thus, it is clearly taller than the leopard, which stands nearly  at the shoulder.
However, if a cub is the only male in the litter, then two or three lone males may form a small group, or a lone male may join an existing group.
The nasal passages are short and large; the smallness of the canines helps to accommodate the large nostrils.
At the same time, the animals should not be unnecessarily handled or disturbed, as cheetahs are particularly sensitive to human interference.
Cheetahs engage in several displays during fights, hunting, or self-defence.
In most cases, a coalition will comprise brothers born in the same litter who stayed together after weaning.
A joint initiative by the ZSL, the Wildlife Conservation Society, and the IUCN Cat Specialist Group, the program has among its major goals a review of the conservation policies adopted by the South African countries, and study and action on illegal hunting and trade of the cheetah.
Nearly 500 years ago, the cheetah was still common throughout Africa, though it avoided deserts and tropical forests.
As of 2015, the IUCN gives the total number of surviving individuals as nearly 6,700.
These bottlenecks may have been associated with migrations across Asia and into Africa (with the current African population founded about 12,000 years ago), and/or with a depletion of prey species at the end of the Pleistocene.
Carnivores, cheetah mainly prey upon antelopes and gazelles.
Moreover, it is much lighter than the lion, among which females weigh  and the much heavier males weigh .
The rampant hunting severely affected the populations of wild animals.
Absence of protection makes the claws blunt; however, the large and strongly curved dewclaw is remarkably sharp.
Males generally live as long as 10 years.
Generally, only groups of cheetahs will attempt to kill large animals such as hartebeest, although mothers with young cubs will attempt to secure a large prey all by themselves.
