Many specific reactions in organic chemistry are name reactions designated after their discoverers.
The electrophile attack results in the so-called σ-complex, a transition state in which the aromatic system is abolished.
Though sufficient for many purposes, these descriptions are not precisely correct.
In the second case, both electrons of the chemical bond remain with one of the products, resulting in charged ions.
This is followed by a rapid reaction with the nucleophile.
From the 16th century, researchers including Jan Baptist van Helmont, Robert Boyle and Isaac Newton tried to establish theories of the experimentally observed chemical transformations.
Although it is less controllable than the more conventional oxy-fuel welding, arc welding and flash welding, it requires much less equipment and is still used to mend rails, especially in remote areas.
Several theories allow calculating the reaction rates at the molecular level.
These two mechanisms differ in the stereochemistry of the products.
*Activation energy, which is defined as the amount of energy required to make the reaction start and carry on spontaneously.
The biochemical reactions that occur in living organisms are collectively known as metabolism.
The electron pair from the nucleophile attacks the substrate forming a new bond, while the leaving group departs with an electron pair.
The catalytic action of enzymes relies on several mechanisms including the molecular shape ("induced fit"), bond strain, proximity and orientation of molecules relative to the enzyme, proton donation or withdrawal (acid/base catalysis), electrostatic interactions and many others.
The E2 mechanism also requires a base, but there the attack of the base and the elimination of the leaving group proceed simultaneously and produce no ionic intermediate.
Examples of nucleophiles are hydroxide ion, alkoxides, amines and halides.
In the SN2 mechanism, the nucleophile forms a transition state with the attacked molecule, and only then the leaving group is cleaved.
:{Pb(NO3)2} + 2KI -> PbI2(v) + 2KNO3
If the addition of a functional group takes place at the less substituted carbon atom of the double bond, then the electrophilic substitution with acids is not possible.
Changes in temperature can also reverse the direction tendency of a reaction.
In the reaction, sodium metal goes from an oxidation state of 0 (as it is a pure element) to +1: in other words, the sodium lost one electron and is said to have been oxidized.
In organic chemistry, in addition to oxidation, reduction or acid-base reactions, a number of other reactions can take place which involve covalent bonds between carbon atoms or carbon and heteroatoms (such as oxygen, nitrogen, halogens, etc.).
A double arrow () pointing in opposite directions is used for equilibrium reactions.
The SN1 reaction proceeds in two steps.
Whether a certain cycloaddition would proceed depends on the electronic orbitals of the participating species, as only orbitals with the same sign of wave function will overlap and interact constructively to form new bonds.
These are called zero order reactions.
Nuclear chemistry is a sub-discipline of chemistry that involves the chemical reactions of unstable and radioactive elements where both electronic and nuclear changes may occur.
The associated free energy of the reaction is composed of two different thermodynamic quantities, enthalpy and entropy:
The phlogiston theory was proposed in 1667 by Johann Joachim Becher.
The reaction yield stabilizes at equilibrium, but can be increased by removing the product from the reaction mixture or changed by increasing the temperature or pressure.
In the Brønsted–Lowry acid–base theory, an acid-base reaction involves a transfer of protons (H+) from one species (the acid) to another (the base).
This proved to be false in 1785 by Antoine Lavoisier who found the correct explanation of the combustion as reaction with oxygen from the air.
Such reactions require the addition of energy in the form of heat or light.
According to the concept of vitalism, organic matter was endowed with a "vital force" and distinguished from inorganic materials.
Heterogeneous catalysts are usually solids, powdered in order to maximize their surface area.
Conversely, the sodium is oxidized or is the electron donor, and thus induces reduction in the other species and is considered the ''reducing agent''.
Reaction can take place at the solid|gas interface, surfaces at very low pressure such as ultra-high vacuum.
Another example is simple hydrogen gas combined with simple oxygen gas to produce a more complex substance, such as water.
This mechanism requires participation of a base.
First, the leaving group is eliminated creating a carbocation.
These reactions are particularly important for the production of chemical elements, such as chlorine or aluminium.
Acids are an example of a homogeneous catalyst, they increase the nucleophilicity of carbonyls, allowing a reaction that would not otherwise proceed with electrophiles.
Then the reaction proceeds as an avalanche until two radicals meet and recombine.
Although the catalyst takes part in the reaction, it is returned to its original state by the end of the reaction and so is not consumed.
Chemical reactions such as combustion in fire, fermentation and the reduction of ores to metals were known since antiquity.
Different chemical reactions are used in combinations during chemical synthesis in order to obtain a desired product.
An elementary reaction involves a few molecules, usually one or two, because of the low probability for several molecules to meet at a certain time.
The time to reach equilibrium depends on such parameters as temperature, pressure and the materials involved, and is determined by the minimum free energy.
More elaborate reactions are represented by reaction schemes, which in addition to starting materials and products show important intermediates or transition states.
One of the simplest models of reaction rate is the collision theory.
It is essential to make the reaction as efficient as possible, maximizing the yield and minimizing the amount of reagents, energy inputs and waste.
The most important elementary reactions are unimolecular and bimolecular reactions.
Elements with low electronegativity, such as most metals, easily donate electrons and oxidize – they are reducing agents.
On the contrary, many ions with high oxidation numbers, such as , , , ,  can gain one or two extra electrons and are strong oxidizing agents.
With a catalyst, a reaction which is kinetically inhibited by a high activation energy can take place in circumvention of this activation energy.
:;{R.} + {X2} -> {R{-}X} + {X.}
Dissociation plays an important role in triggering chain reactions, such as hydrogen–oxygen or polymerization reactions.
Faster reactions are usually studied with ultrafast laser spectroscopy where utilization of femtosecond lasers allows short-lived transition states to be monitored at time scaled down to a few femtoseconds.
In equilibrium, the Gibbs free energy must be zero.
The forward and reverse reactions are competing with each other and differ in reaction rates.
These perturbations result in different arrangement of electrons in the excited state of the involved molecules and therefore in different effects.
Here k is first-order rate constant having dimension 1/time, A(t) is concentration at a time ''t'' and A0 is the initial concentration.
In the first step, light or heat disintegrates the halogen-containing molecules producing the radicals.
Because of the similar conditions and reagents, the E2 elimination is always in competition with the SN2-substitution.
In the E1 mechanism, the leaving group is ejected first, forming a carbocation.
The temperature dependence of the rate constant usually follows the Arrhenius equation:
The nucleophile may be electrically neutral or negatively charged, whereas the substrate is typically neutral or positively charged.
Similar to the substitution reactions, there are several types of additions distinguished by the type of the attacking particle.
Reactions can proceed by themselves if they are exergonic, that is if they release energy.
Some of the most common are:
Equations should be balanced according to the stoichiometry, the number of atoms of each species should be the same on both sides of the equation.
is favored by low temperatures, but its reverse is favored by high temperature.
When a proton is removed from an acid, the resulting species is termed that acid's conjugate base.
Which of the involved reactants would be reducing or oxidizing agent can be predicted from the electronegativity of their elements.
:{\mathit a A} + \mathit b B -> {\mathit c C} + \mathit d D
Other examples are sigmatropic reaction such as the Cope rearrangement.
::  : free energy, : enthalpy, : temperature, : entropy, : difference(change between original and product)
SN1 leads to the non-stereospecific addition and does not result in a chiral center, but rather in a set of geometric isomers (''cis/trans'').
In this case, one has to use the hydroboration–oxidation reaction, where in the first step, the boron atom acts as electrophile and adds to the less substituted carbon atom.
Based on this idea and the atomic theory of John Dalton, Joseph Proust had developed the law of definite proportions, which later resulted in the concepts of stoichiometry and chemical equations.
Chemical reactions are determined by the laws of thermodynamics.
Among the most important of its mechanisms is the anabolism, in which different DNA and enzyme-controlled processes result in the production of large molecules such as proteins and carbohydrates from smaller units.
Additionally, heterogeneous catalysts can dissolve into the solution in a solid–liquid system or evaporate in a solid–gas system.
This process usually takes the form of a chain reaction, for example in the reaction of alkanes with halogens.
Reactions at the solid|gas interface are in some cases related to catalysis.
An important energy source is glucose, which can be produced by plants via photosynthesis or assimilated from food.
In photochemical reactions, atoms and molecules absorb energy (photons) of the illumination light and convert into an excited state.
At the second step, the nucleophilic hydroperoxide or halogen anion attacks the boron atom.
:{2Na(s)} + {Cl2(g)} -> 2NaCl(s)
Important tools of real time analysis are the measurement of pH and analysis of optical absorption (color) and emission spectra.
The equilibrium is determined by the acid and base dissociation constants (''K''a and ''K''b) of the involved substances.
Similarly, some minor products can be placed below the arrow, often with a minus sign.
Its integration yields:
For example, the 4+2 Diels-Alder reactions can be assisted by heat whereas the 2+2 cycloaddition is selectively induced by light.
This reaction is often catalyzed by acids or bases, where the acids increase by the electrophilicity of the carbonyl group by binding to the oxygen atom, whereas the bases enhance the nucleophilicity of the attacking nucleophile.
The reverse process in which electrons are released in redox reactions and can be used as electrical energy is possible and used in batteries.
Since the entropy increases with temperature, many endothermic reactions preferably take place at high temperatures.
Catalysts can be used in a different phase (heterogeneous) or in the same phase (homogeneous) as the reactants.
An important class of redox reactions are the electrochemical reactions, where electrons from the power supply are used as the reducing agent.
The splitting can be homolytic or heterolytic.
Because the chlorine is the one reduced, it is considered the electron acceptor, or in other words, induces oxidation in the sodium – thus the chlorine gas is considered the oxidizing agent.
The substance (or substances) initially involved in a chemical reaction are called reactants or reagents.
Many important processes involve photochemistry.
*Surface area available for contact between the reactants, in particular solid ones in heterogeneous systems.
The addition and its counterpart, the elimination, are reactions which change the number of substitutents on the carbon atom, and form or cleave multiple bonds.
In the third type of substitution reaction, radical substitution, the attacking particle is a radical.
They are accelerated by increasing the reaction temperature and finely dividing the reactant to increase the contacting surface area.
:{CO(g)} + {H2O({v})}  {CO2(g)} + {H2(g)}
Electrophilic substitution is the counterpart of the nucleophilic substitution in that the attacking atom or molecule, an electrophile, has low electron density and thus a positive charge.
*Pressure – increasing the pressure decreases the volume between molecules and therefore increases the frequency of collisions between the molecules.
In the Middle Ages, chemical transformations were studied by Alchemists.
All organisms use this energy to produce adenosine triphosphate (ATP), which can then be used to energize other reactions.
In the following redox reaction, hazardous sodium metal reacts with toxic chlorine gas to form the ionic compound sodium chloride, or common table salt:
In their names, S stands for substitution, N for nucleophilic, and the number represents the kinetic order of the reaction, unimolecular or bimolecular.
Some reactions, however, have rates that are ''independent'' of reactant concentrations.
Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac recognized in 1808 that gases always react in a certain relationship with each other.
The shift in reaction direction tendency occurs at .
Mechanisms of monitoring chemical reactions depend strongly on the reaction rate.
This process is often associated with an elimination, so that after the reaction the carbonyl group is present again.
Then, the leaving group, usually a proton, is split off and the aromaticity is restored.
In other words, acids act as proton donors and bases act as proton acceptors according to the following equation:
Nucleophilic addition of a carbanion or another nucleophile to the double bond of an alpha, beta unsaturated carbonyl compound can proceed via the Michael reaction, which belongs to the larger class of conjugate additions.
:  Dissociation of a molecule AB into fragments A and B
Noble gases themselves are chemically inactive.
Nucleophilic substitution can take place by two different mechanisms, SN1 and SN2.
Some specific reactions have their niche applications.
Reactions that proceed in the forward direction to approach equilibrium are often described as spontaneous, requiring no input of free energy to go forward.
In the 17th century, Johann Rudolph Glauber produced hydrochloric acid and sodium sulfate by reacting sulfuric acid and sodium chloride.
Their merger is called chemical synthesis or an addition reaction.
As with the free-radical substitution, the radical addition proceeds as a chain reaction, and such reactions are the basis of the free-radical polymerization.
A change in the concentrations of the reactants does not affect the equilibrium constant, but does affect the equilibrium position.
This is one of the most useful methods for the mild formation of C–C bonds.
Redox reactions can be understood in terms of transfer of electrons from one involved species (reducing agent) to another (oxidizing agent).
They consist of chemical or structural formulas of the reactants on the left and those of the products on the right.
The leaving order is reversed in the E1cb mechanism, that is the proton is split off first.
Most chemical reactions are reversible, that is they can and do run in both directions.
The next step, formation of the double bond, takes place with elimination of a proton (deprotonation).
In contrast, a reversal (Walden inversion) of the previously existing stereochemistry is observed in the SN2 mechanism.
Only one molecule is involved in a unimolecular reaction; it is transformed by an isomerization or a dissociation into one or more other molecules.
In complexation reactions, several ligands react with a metal atom to form a coordination complex.
This reaction takes place almost exclusively in aromatic hydrocarbons, where it is called electrophilic aromatic substitution.
The number of ligands that react with a central metal atom can be found using the 18-electron rule, saying that the valence shells of a transition metal will collectively accommodate 18 electrons, whereas the symmetry of the resulting complex can be predicted with the crystal field theory and ligand field theory.
The premier example is photosynthesis, in which most plants use solar energy to convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose, disposing of oxygen as a side-product.
Relatively slow processes can be analyzed in situ for the concentrations and identities of the individual ingredients.
Catalysts are substances which change the pathway (mechanism) of a reaction which in turn increases the speed of a reaction by lowering the activation energy needed for the reaction to take place.
Double and triple bonds can be produced by eliminating a suitable leaving group.
Typical examples of exothermic reactions are precipitation and crystallization, in which ordered solids are formed from disordered gaseous or liquid phases.
Cycloaddition is usually assisted by light or heat.
Of particular importance in heterogeneous catalysis are the platinum group metals and other transition metals, which are used in hydrogenations, catalytic reforming and in the synthesis of commodity chemicals such as nitric acid and ammonia.
A special case of the acid-base reaction is the neutralization where an acid and a base, taken at exactly same amounts, form a neutral salt.
Substances that increase the activity of catalysts are called promoters, and substances that deactivate catalysts are called catalytic poisons.
Most rearrangements are associated with the breaking and formation of new carbon-carbon bonds.
:{HA} + {B} -> {A} + {HB}
However, it can be inhibited, deactivated or destroyed by secondary processes.
Humans rely on photochemistry for the formation of vitamin D, and vision is initiated by a photochemical reaction of rhodopsin.
This rule states that "In the heterolytic addition of a polar molecule to an alkene or alkyne, the more electronegative (nucleophilic) atom (or part) of the polar molecule becomes attached to the carbon atom bearing the smaller number of hydrogen atoms."
*Arrhenius definition: Acids dissociate in water releasing H3O+ ions; bases dissociate in water releasing OH− ions.
The latter can also be obtained by recrystallization from microcrystalline salts.
Photochemical reactions include hydrogen–oxygen reactions, radical polymerization, chain reactions and rearrangement reactions.
*Temperature, which hastens reactions if raised, since higher temperature increases the energy of the molecules, creating more collisions per unit time,
In redox reactions, the transferred particle is an electron, whereas in acid-base reactions it is a proton.
Many significant photochemical reactions, such as ozone formation, occur in the Earth atmosphere and constitute atmospheric chemistry.
Reactions can also be characterized by the internal energy which takes into account changes in the entropy, volume and chemical potential.
The pressure dependence can be explained with the Le Chatelier's principle.
These proteins can specifically catalyze a single reaction, so that reactions can be controlled very precisely.
Chemical reactions are described with chemical equations, which symbolically present the starting materials, end products, and sometimes intermediate products and reaction conditions.
This field is referred to as reaction dynamics.
This type of reaction is also called metathesis.
Non-spontaneous reactions require input of free energy to go forward (examples include charging a battery by applying an external electrical power source, or photosynthesis driven by absorption of electromagnetic radiation in the form of sunlight).
Oxidation is better defined as an increase in oxidation state, and reduction as a decrease in oxidation state.
In the first type, a nucleophile, an atom or molecule with an excess of electrons and thus a negative charge or partial charge, replaces another atom or part of the "substrate" molecule.
On the contrary, many exothermic reactions such as crystallization occur at low temperatures.
On the other hand, the chlorine gas goes from an oxidation of 0 (it is also a pure element) to −1: the chlorine gains one electron and is said to have been reduced.
:{Mg} + {2H2O} -> {Mg(OH)2} + {H2\uparrow}
Complexation reactions also include ligand exchange, in which one or more ligands are replaced by another, and redox processes which change the oxidation state of the central metal atom.
Bioenergetics studies the sources of energy for such reactions.
Rapid precipitation results in an amorphous or microcrystalline residue and slow process can yield single crystals.
However, because of the relatively small diffusion rates in solids, the corresponding chemical reactions are very slow in comparison to liquid and gas phase reactions.
In contrast to the E1 eliminations, different stereochemical configurations are possible for the reaction product in the E2 mechanism, because the attack of the base preferentially occurs in the anti-position with respect to the leaving group.
Reactions may proceed in the forward or reverse direction until they go to completion or reach equilibrium.
They can then release this energy by breaking chemical bonds, thereby producing radicals.
Catalysts are especially helpful for reducing the energy required for the reaction and increasing its reaction rate.
This separation was ended however by the synthesis of urea from inorganic precursors by Friedrich Wöhler in 1828.
For bimolecular reactions, two molecules collide and react with each other.
Similar to the nucleophilic substitution, there are several possible reaction mechanisms which are named after the respective reaction order.
It usually takes place when the concentration of dissolved ions exceeds the solubility limit and forms an insoluble salt.
*The presence or absence of a catalyst.
The rate ''v'' of a first-order reaction, which could be disintegration of a substance A, is given by:
The latter have high electron density and enter nucleophilic aromatic substitution only with very strong electron withdrawing groups.
+ {R-H} -> {X-H} + {R.}
Reactions can take place between two solids.
Most experimentally observed reactions are built up from many elementary reactions that occur in parallel or sequentially.
A catalyst is not destroyed or changed during a reaction, so it can be used again.
This process can be assisted by adding a precipitating agent or by removal of the solvent.
In a rearrangement reaction, the carbon skeleton of a molecule is rearranged to give a structural isomer of the original molecule.
Changes in temperature can sometimes reverse the sign of the enthalpy of a reaction, as for the carbon monoxide reduction of molybdenum dioxide:
For example, the thermite reaction is used to generate light and heat in pyrotechnics and welding.
Here the analysis starts from the products, for example by splitting selected chemical bonds, to arrive at plausible initial reagents.
The number of electrons donated or accepted in a redox reaction can be predicted from the electron configuration of the reactant element.
The tip of the arrow points in the direction in which the reaction proceeds.
Enzymes increase the rates of biochemical reactions, so that metabolic syntheses and decompositions impossible under ordinary conditions can occur at the temperatures and concentrations present within a cell.
