For example, the Emperor authorized the use of toxic gas on 375 separate occasions during the Battle of Wuhan from August to October 1938.
(''See also: Chemical weapons in the Rif War'')
These attacks wounded or sickened more than 350 people.
A total 50,965&nbsp;tons of pulmonary, lachrymatory, and vesicant agents were deployed by both sides of the conflict, including chlorine, phosgene, and mustard gas.
With proper protective equipment, training, and decontamination measures, the primary effects of chemical weapons can be overcome.
The most recent arms control agreement in International Law, the ''Convention of the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on their Destruction'', or the Chemical Weapons Convention, outlaws the production, stockpiling, and use of chemical weapons.
As of 2012, stockpiles have been eliminated at 7 of the 9 chemical weapons depots and 89.75% of the 1997 stockpile has been destroyed by the treaty deadline of April 2012.
The weapon stock mostly containing mustard gas-lewisite mixture.
In June 1990 the Johnston Atoll Chemical Agent Disposal System began destruction of chemical agents stored on the Johnston Atoll in the Pacific, seven years before the Chemical Weapons Treaty came into effect.
The Western Allies did not use chemical weapons during the Second World War.
By contrast, ''persistent'' agents tend to remain in the environment for as long as several weeks, complicating decontamination.
In 1952, the U.S. Army patented a process for the "Preparation of Toxic Ricin", publishing a method of producing this powerful toxin.
Since industrial accidents can cause dangerous chemical releases (e.g., the Bhopal disaster), these activities are things that civilian, as well as military, organizations must be prepared to carry out.
The three applied an arsenic-containing mixture to loaves of bread, sickening more than 2,000 Nazi troops, of whom more than 200 required hospitalization.
Technically, the reported employment of tear gas by Argentine forces during the 1982 invasion of the Falkland Islands constitutes chemical warfare.
This incident is considered to have been experimental, and the bombs were described as "home-made, amateurish and relatively ineffective".
A substance is classified as incapacitating if less than 1/100 of the lethal dose causes incapacitation, e.g., through nausea or visual problems.
This technique overcame many of the risks of dealing with gas in cylinders.
None of these fall under the term conventional weapons which are primarily effective due to their destructive potential.
The code name for the sea tests was Project Shipboard Hazard and Defense—"SHAD" for short.
The reports grew more frequent in late 1966.
The organization, which turned out to be a single resident alien named Muharem Kurbegovic, claimed to have developed and possessed a supply of sarin, as well as four unique nerve agents named AA1, AA2, AA3, and AA4S.
* Viruses, bacteria, or other organisms.
During the Gulf War in 1991, Coalition forces began a ground war in Iraq.
Some of these items were captured and analyzed by the Allies.
Although the status of its own chemical weapons program remained uncertain, South Africa also deceptively bombarded Cuban and Angolan units with coloured smoke in an attempt to induce hysteria or mass panic.
Moving large numbers of heavy gas cylinders to the front-line positions from where the gas would be released was a lengthy and difficult logistical task.
The Joint Planning Staff, however, advised against the use of gas because it would inevitably provoke Germany to retaliate with gas.
The entire class known as Lethal Unitary Chemical Agents and Munitions have been scheduled for elimination by the CWC.
The methods used to disperse these agents during battle were relatively unrefined and inefficient.
In July 1944, fearing that rocket attacks on London would get even worse, and saying he would only use chemical weapons if it were "life or death for us" or would "shorten the war by a year", Churchill wrote a secret memorandum asking his military chiefs to "think very seriously over this question of using poison gas."
The nerve agent soman was later discovered by Nobel Prize laureate Richard Kuhn and his collaborator Konrad Henkel at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Medical Research in Heidelberg in spring 1944.
A chemical used in warfare is called a ''chemical warfare agent'' (''CWA'').
This threat was lent a great deal of credibility when a large archive of videotapes was obtained by the cable television network CNN in August 2002 showing, among other things, the killing of three dogs by an apparent nerve agent.
The names and number of categories varies slightly from source to source, but in general, types of chemical warfare agents are as follows:
The mustard gas stockpile was enlarged in 1942-1943 for possible use by RAF Bomber Command against German cities, and in 1944 for possible retaliatory use if German forces used chemical weapons against the D-Day landings.
Toxins produced by living organisms are considered chemical weapons, although the boundary is blurry.
Declaring an arsenal of 39,967 tons of chemical weapons in 1997, by far the largest arsenal, consisting of blister agents: Lewisite, Sulfur mustard, Lewisite-mustard mix, and nerve agents: Sarin, Soman, and VX.
It was subsequently withdrawn, as it was too toxic for safe use.
In early 2007, multiple terrorist bombings had been reported in Iraq using chlorine gas.
Maddison was taking part in sarin nerve agent toxicity tests.
The first effective use were when the German forces at the Second Battle of Ypres simply opened cylinders of chlorine and allowed the wind to carry the gas across enemy lines.
Spartan forces besieging an Athenian city placed a lighted mixture of wood, pitch, and sulfur under the walls hoping that the noxious smoke would incapacitate the Athenians, so that they would not be able to resist the assault that followed.
On January 5, 1967, the biggest gas attack came against the village of Kitaf, causing 270 casualties, including 140 fatalities.
According to Defence Minister Magnus Malan, this would force the Cubans to share the inconvenience of having to take preventative measures such as donning NBC suits, which would cut combat effectiveness in half.
The U.S. ratified the Geneva Protocol which banned the use of chemical and biological weapons on January 22, 1975.
Over the years, there were some refinements in this technique.
In the late 1950s, the chemical weapons production plant at Nancekuke was mothballed, but was maintained through the 1960s and 1970s in a state whereby production of chemical weapons could easily re-commence if required.
United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon condemned the attacks as "clearly intended to cause panic and instability in the country."
In February 1943, German troops stationed in Kuban received a telegram.
The actual first chemical ammunition was the French 26&nbsp;mm cartouche suffocante rifle grenade, fired from a flare carbine.
Stanley P. Lovell, Deputy Director for Research and Development of the Office of Strategic Services, reports in his book ''Of Spies and Stratagems'' that the Allies knew the Germans had quantities of Gas Blau available for use in the defense of the Atlantic Wall.
Chemical troops were set up (in Germany since 1934) and delivery technology was actively developed.
This research produced at least three more agents; the four agents (VE, VG, VM, VX) are collectively known as the "V-Series" class of nerve agents.
The official estimate does not include the civilian population contaminated in bordering towns or the children and relatives of veterans, many of whom have developed blood, lung and skin complications, according to the Organization for Veterans.
The "Laws of Manu," a Hindu treatise on statecraft (c. 400 BC) forbids the use of poison and fire arrows, but advises poisoning food and water.
On November 25, 1969, President Richard Nixon unilaterally renounced the use of chemical weapons and renounced all methods of biological warfare.
First, a percentage of the agent is lost by incineration in the initial blast and by being forced onto the ground.
The proposal was backed by Admiral Thomas Cochrane of the Royal Navy.
Possible targets include enemy flank positions (averting possible counterattacks), artillery regiments, commando posts or supply lines.
It is a requirement when people have been contaminated with persistent agents.
The most common techniques include munitions (such as bombs, projectiles, warheads) that allow dissemination at a distance and spray tanks which disseminate from low-flying aircraft.
On 29 October 1988, personnel attached to Angola's 59 Brigade, accompanied by six Soviet military advisors, reported being struck with chemical weapons on the banks of the Mianei River.
Göring answered that the reason gas was not used had to do with horses.
About 70 different chemicals have been used or stockpiled as chemical warfare agents during the 20th century.
collective protection, and decontamination.
In 1923, Hans von Seeckt pointed the way, by suggesting that German poison gas research move in the direction of delivery by aircraft in support of mobile warfare.
* Defoliants and herbicides that destroy vegetation, but are not immediately toxic or poisonous to human beings.
In the 1950s and early 1960s, chemical artillery rockets and cluster bombs contained a multitude of submunitions, so that a large number of small clouds of the chemical agent would form directly on the target.
Of the 80,000 survivors, some 5,000 seek medical treatment regularly and about 1,000 are still hospitalized with severe, chronic conditions.
Russia signed into the Chemical Weapons Convention on January 13, 1993 and ratified it on November 5, 1995.
Significant research is still being applied toward this technique.
Beginning in the final week of 1935 and continuing into 1936, Fascist Italy used mustard gas during its invasion of Ethiopia in the Second Italo-Abyssinian War.
Despite the fact that they did possess chemical weapons, Iraq did not use any chemical agents against coalition forces.
Much speculation was made about aerial bombardment of major cities with gas in Mesopotamia, with Winston Churchill, then-Secretary of State at the British War Office, arguing in favor of gas.
Hans Tappen, a chemist in the Heavy Artillery Department of the War Ministry, suggested to his brother, the Chief of the Operations Branch at German General Headquarters, the use of the tear-gases benzyl bromide or xylyl bromide.
Civilian authorities dealing with an attack or a toxic chemical accident will invoke the Incident Command System, or local equivalent, to coordinate defensive measures.
Second, the sizes of the particles vary greatly because explosive dissemination produces a mixture of liquid droplets of variable and difficult to control sizes.
Soon after, the French modified artillery munitions to contain phosgene – a much more effective method that became the principal means of delivery.
Despite this tendency, there have been several attempts to initiate large-scale implementation of poison gas in several wars, but with the notable exception of World War I, the responsible authorities generally rejected the proposals for ethical reasons.
The CWC was ratified by the Senate that same month.
In 1993, the United States signed the Chemical Weapons Treaty, which required the destruction of all chemical weapon agents, dispersal systems, and production facilities by April 2012.
In June 1997, India declared that it had a stockpile of 1044 tonnes of sulphur mustard in its possession.
In 1997, future US Vice President Dick Cheney opposed the signing ratification of a treaty banning the use chemical weapons, a recently unearthed letter shows.
These agents may be in liquid, gas or solid form.
Of the hostages who died, all but one or two died from the effects of the agent.
Gas clouds gave plenty of warning, allowing the enemy time to protect themselves, though many soldiers found the sight of a creeping gas cloud unnerving.
in the form of a spraying device with neutralizing agents such as Chlorine, Fichlor, strong alkaline solutions or enzymes.
The weapons are classified as abandoned chemical weapons under the Chemical Weapons Convention and from September 2010 Japan has started their destruction in Nanjing using mobile destruction facilities in order to do so.
Ranajit Ghosh, a chemist at the Plant Protection Laboratories of Imperial Chemical Industries was investigating a class of organophosphate compounds (organophosphate esters of substituted aminoethanethiols), for use as a pesticide.
For flammable aerosols, the cloud is sometimes totally or partially ignited by the disseminating explosion in a phenomenon called ''flashing''.
Although the idea was rejected, it has provoked debate.
Liquid agents that evaporate quickly are said to be ''volatile'' or have a ''high vapor pressure''.
The Wehrmacht was dependent upon horse-drawn transport to move supplies to their combat units, and had never been able to devise a gas mask horses could tolerate; the versions they developed would not pass enough pure air to allow the horses to pull a cart.
Iraq has also declared stockpiles of chemical weapons, and because of their recent accession is the only State Party exempted from the destruction time-line.
Mass decontamination is a less common requirement for people than equipment, since people may be immediately affected and treatment is the action required.
On February 12, 1967, it said it would welcome a UN investigation.
Additionally, precursors to the agents are usually much easier to stabilize than the agents themselves, so this technique also made it possible to increase the shelf life of the agents a great deal.
Shells were tested successfully at the Wahn artillery range near Cologne on 9 January 1915, and an order was placed for 15&nbsp;cm howitzer shells, designated ‘T-shells’ after Tappen.
In the late 15th century, Spanish conquistadors encountered a rudimentary type of chemical warfare on the island of Hispaniola.
He stated "it is absurd to consider morality on this topic when everybody used it in the last war without a word of complaint..."
The U.S. prohibition on the transport of chemical weapons has meant that destruction facilities had to be constructed at each of the U.S.'s nine storage facilities.
Casualty estimates vary, and an assumption, considered conservative, is that the mustard-and-phosgene-filled aerial bombs caused approximately 1,500 fatalities and 1,500 injuries.
Arsenical smokes were known to the Chinese as far back as c. 1000 BC  and Sun Tzu's "Art of War" (c. 200 BC) advises the use of fire weapons.
Decontamination is especially important for people contaminated with persistent agents; many of the fatalities after the explosion of a WWII US ammunition ship carrying mustard gas, in the harbor of Bari, Italy, after a German bombing on 2 December 1943, came when rescue workers, not knowing of the contamination, bundled cold, wet seamen in tight-fitting blankets.
Motivated by a desire to obtain revenge on Germans for the Holocaust, three members of a Jewish group calling themselves Dahm Y'Israel Nokeam ("Avenging Israel's Blood") hid in a bakery in the Stalag 13 prison camp near Nuremberg, Germany, where several thousand SS troops were being detained.
The use of nerve gas on the Normandy beachhead would have seriously impeded the Allies and possibly caused the invasion to fail altogether.
During the 1980s and 1990s, binary versions of several Soviet agents were developed and are designated as "Novichok" agents (after the Russian word for "newcomer").
Many chemical agents are made volatile so they can be dispersed over a large region quickly.
The best-known of these is probably VX, assigned the UK Rainbow Code ''Purple Possum'', with the Russian V-Agent coming a close second (Amiton is largely forgotten as VG).
Thermal dissemination is the use of explosives or pyrotechnics to deliver chemical agents.
Between 1951 and 1969, Dugway Proving Ground was the site of testing for various chemical and biological agents, including an open-air aerodynamic dissemination test in 1968 that accidentally killed, on neighboring farms, approximately 6,400 sheep by an unspecified nerve agent.
Chemical weapons are inert agents that come in four categories: choking, blister, blood and nerve.
The proposal was passed, despite a single dissenting vote from the United States.
In the early 1950s, nerve agents such as sarin were produced in small quantities—about 20 tons were made from 1954 until 1956.
The most important factor in the effectiveness of chemical weapons is the efficiency of its delivery, or dissemination, to a target.
Since then, Albania, Libya, Russia, the United States, and India have declared over 71,000 metric tons of chemical weapon stockpiles, and destroyed about a third of them.
In civilian situations in developed countries, these are duties of HAZMAT organizations, which most commonly are part of fire departments.
Despite the 1899 Hague Declaration ''IV, 2 - Declaration on the Use of Projectiles the Object of Which is the Diffusion of Asphyxiating or Deleterious Gases'', Article 23 (a) of the 1907 Hague Convention ''IV - The Laws and Customs of War on Land'', and a resolution adopted against Japan by the League of Nations on May 14, 1938, the Imperial Japanese Army frequently used chemical weapons.
There are other chemicals used militarily that are not scheduled by the Chemical Weapons Convention, and thus are not controlled under the CWC treaties.
'''Chemical warfare''' ('''CW''') involves using the toxic properties of chemical substances as weapons.
* '''Schedule 2''' – Have no large-scale industrial uses, but may have legitimate small-scale uses.
They were also profusely used during the invasion of Changde.
Playfair’s response was used to justify chemical warfare into the next century:
The Institute of Forensic Medicine at the University of Berne made a statement, based on a Red Cross report, that the gas was likely to have been halogenous derivatives—phosgene, mustard gas, lewisite, chloride or cyanogen bromide.
General Alan Brooke, Commander-in-Chief, Home Forces, in command of British anti-invasion preparations of the Second World War said that he "''...had every intention of using sprayed mustard gas on the beaches''" in an annotation in his diary.
* '''Schedule 1''' – Have few, if any, legitimate uses.
The earliest target of chemical warfare agent research was not toxicity, but development of agents that can affect a target through the skin and clothing, rendering protective gas masks useless.
Although it produced limited results in World War I, this technique shows how simple chemical weapon dissemination ''can'' be.
In 1958 the British government traded their VX technology with the United States in exchange for information on thermonuclear weapons.
Examples include dimethyl methylphosphonate, a precursor to sarin  also used as a flame retardant, and thiodiglycol, a precursor chemical used in the manufacture of mustard gas but also widely used as a solvent in inks.
The UN first accused Cuba of deploying chemical weapons against Angolan civilians and partisans in 1988.
This technique, developed in the 1920s, was a major improvement over earlier dispersal techniques, in that it allowed significant quantities of an agent to be disseminated over a considerable distance.
Later, during the American Civil War, New York school teacher John Doughty proposed the offensive use of chlorine gas, delivered by filling a 10-inch (254 millimeter) artillery shell with two to three quarts (two to three liters) of liquid chlorine, which could produce many cubic feet (a few cubic meters) of chlorine gas.
If, for example, the captain of a US Navy ship believes there is a serious threat of chemical, biological, or radiological attack, the crew may be ordered to set Circle William, which means closing all openings to outside air, running breathing air through filters, and possibly starting a system that continually washes down the exterior surfaces.
Agents classified as ''nonpersistent'' lose effectiveness after only a few minutes or hours or even only a few seconds.
Following the September 11, 2001 attacks on the U.S. cities of New York City and Washington, D.C., the organization Al-Qaeda responsible for the attacks announced that they were attempting to acquire radiological, biological, and chemical weapons.
The agents are organized into several categories according to the manner in which they affect the human body.
On October 26, 2002, Russian special forces used a chemical agent (presumably KOLOKOL-1, an aerosolized fentanyl derivative), as a precursor to an assault on Chechen terrorists, ending the Moscow theater hostage crisis.
to be asked of Hermann Göring during his interrogation.
These comprise a common agent mixed with thickeners to provide gelatinous, sticky agents.
Struggling to defend themselves from the Roman legions, Germanic tribes poisoned the wells of their enemies, with Roman jurists having been recorded as declaring "armis bella non venenis geri", meaning "war is fought with weapons, not with poisons."
Their use is classified as herbicidal warfare.
Shortly after the end of World War I, Germany's General Staff enthusiastically pursued a recapture of their preeminent position in chemical warfare.
In July 1917, the Germans employed mustard gas.
In July 1974, a group calling themselves the Aliens of America successfully firebombed the houses of a judge, two police commissioners, and one of the commissioner’s cars, burned down two apartment buildings, and bombed the Pan Am Terminal at Los Angeles International Airport, killing three people and injuring eight.
The OPCW announced "The government of Iraq has deposited its instrument of accession to the Chemical Weapons Convention with the Secretary General of the United Nations and within 30 days, on 12 February 2009, will become the 186th State Party to the Convention".
By 1961 the U.S. was producing large amounts of VX and performing its own nerve agent research.
The governments we should be concerned about are likely to cheat on the CWC, even if they do participate," reads the letter, published by the Federation of American Scientists.
The troops also received two wagons of toxin antidotes.
Small amounts of VX were produced there, mainly for laboratory test purposes, but also to validate plant designs and optimise chemical processes for potential mass production.
Collaboration between Germany and the USSR in poison gas continued on and off through the 1920s.
During the Battle of Cuito Cuanavale, South African troops then fighting in Angola were issued with gas masks and ordered to rehearse chemical weapons drills.
In 2002, the Pentagon admitted for the first time that some of tests used real chemical and biological weapons, not just harmless simulants.
In December 2001, the United States Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), and National Personal Protective Technology Laboratory (NPPTL), along with the U.S. Army Research, Development and Engineering Command (RDECOM), Edgewood Chemical and Biological Center (ECBC), and the U.S. Department of Commerce National Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST) published the first of six technical performance standards and test procedures designed to evaluate and certify respirators intended for use by civilian emergency responders to a chemical, biological, radiological, or nuclear weapon release, detonation, or terrorism incident.
Canadian funds are also being used for the operation of a Green Cross Public Outreach Office, to keep the civilian population informed on the progress made in chemical weapons destruction activities.
After the battle in mid-May 1942, roughly 3000 soldiers and civilians not evacuated by sea were besieged in a series of caves and tunnels in the nearby Adzhimuskai quarry.
A special form of persistent agents are thickened agents.
For example, by modifying the properties of the liquid, its breakup when subjected to aerodynamic stress can be controlled and an idealized particle distribution achieved, even at supersonic speed.
After the evaluation was complete, several members of this class of compounds were developed into a new group of much more lethal nerve agents, the V agents.
On May 14, 2009 India informed the United Nations that it has completely destroyed its stockpile of chemical weapons.
There were no reports of gas during 1964, and only a few were reported in 1965.
The study of chemicals and their military uses was widespread in China and India.
Thus, gas was of no use to the German Army under most conditions.
Another disadvantage was that gas clouds had limited penetration, capable only of affecting the front-line trenches before dissipating.
Under this Convention, any toxic chemical, regardless of its origin, is considered a chemical weapon unless it is used for purposes that are not prohibited (an important legal definition known as the General Purpose Criterion).
While simple, this technique had numerous disadvantages.
Kautilya's "Arthashastra", a statecraft manual of the same era, contains hundreds of recipes for creating poison weapons, toxic smokes, and other chemical weapons.
The first full-scale deployment of deadly chemical warfare agents during World War I was at the Second Battle of Ypres, on April 22, 1915, when the Germans attacked French, Canadian and Algerian troops with chlorine gas.
The dissemination is highly dependent on atmospheric conditions because many chemical agents act in gaseous form.
Why a poisonous vapor which would kill men without suffering is to be considered illegitimate warfare is incomprehensible.
Detection has been referred to above, as a technical MASINT discipline; specific military procedures, which are usually the model for civilian procedures, depend on the equipment, expertise, and personnel available.
Since the United States only maintains nuclear Weapons of Mass Destruction, it is the stated policy that the United States will regard all WMD attacks (Biological, chemical, or nuclear) as a nuclear attack and will respond to such an attack with a nuclear strike.
Many were hit by mustard gas.
It is considered a legitimate mode of warfare to fill shells with molten metal which scatters among the enemy, and produced the most frightful modes of death.
Rick Atkinson, in his book ''The Day of Battle,'' describes the intelligence that prompted Allied leaders to deploy mustard gas to Italy.
The gas attacks stopped for three weeks after the Six-Day War of June, but resumed in July, against all parts of royalist Yemen.
Shortly afterwards, UNITA also sighted strikes carried out with a brown agent which it claimed resembled mustard gas.
Many nations possess vast stockpiles of weaponized agents in preparation for wartime use.
Both were turned over to the German Army Weapons Office prior to the outbreak of the war.
The following year, Aum Shinrikyo released sarin into the Tokyo subway system killing 12 and injuring over 5,000.
The Director-General of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, Ambassador Rogelio Pfirter, welcomed Iraq's decision to join the OPCW as a significant step to strengthening global and regional efforts to prevent the spread and use of chemical weapons.
Second, gas shells could be delivered without warning, especially the clear, nearly odorless phosgene– there are numerous accounts of gas shells, landing with a "plop" rather than exploding, being initially dismissed as dud high explosive or shrapnel shells, giving the gas time to work before the soldiers were alerted and took precautions.
testing of chemical weapons sensors and protective clothing).
Under the Convention, chemicals that are toxic enough to be used as chemical weapons, or that may be used to manufacture such chemicals, are divided into three groups according to their purpose and treatment:
Primary targets for this kind of use include airfields, due to the increased persistency and difficulty of decontaminating affected areas.
This technique eliminates many of the limitations of thermal dissemination by eliminating the flashing effect and theoretically allowing precise control of particle size.
Reportedly the bombers were affiliated with Al-Qaeda in Iraq, and they have used bombs of various sizes up to chlorine tanker trucks.
The Egyptian government denied using poison gas, and alleged that Britain and the US were using the reports as psychological warfare against Egypt.
Russia met its treaty obligations by destroying 1 percent of its chemical agents by the 2002 deadline set out by the Chemical Weapons Convention, but requested an extension on the deadlines of 2004 and 2007 due to technical, financial, and environmental challenges of chemical disposal.
The toxin was also observed to have killed plant life.
If the wind was fickle, as at Loos, the gas could blow back, causing friendly casualties.
The target may have been Prince Hassan bin Yahya, who had installed his headquarters nearby.
Since, Russia has received help from other countries such as Canada which donated C$100,000, plus a further C$100,000 already donated, to the Russian Chemical Weapons Destruction Program.
One of the earliest reactions to the use of chemical agents was from Rome.
The Egyptian authorities suggested that the reported incidents were probably caused by napalm, not gas.
Non-volatile liquid agents, such as blister agents and the oily VX nerve agent, do not easily evaporate into a gas, and therefore present primarily a contact hazard.
To the right is a summary of the nations that have either declared weapon stockpiles or are suspected of secretly stockpiling or possessing CW research programs.
In 1924, German officers debated the use of poison gas versus non-lethal chemical weapons against civilians.
In actuality, the altitude of dissemination, wind direction and velocity, and the direction and velocity of the aircraft greatly influence particle size.
