Similar results were found in a study involving colorectal cancer patients treated with the popular FOLFOX regimen.
Depending on the patient, the cancer, the stage of cancer, the type of chemotherapy, and the dosage, intravenous chemotherapy may be given on either an inpatient or an outpatient basis.
Chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV) are common with many treatments and some forms of cancer.
Drugs used in chemotherapy can induce cell stress, which can kill a cancer cell; however, under certain conditions, cells stress can induce changes in gene expression that enables resistance to several types of drugs.
Some chemotherapy drugs are used in diseases other than cancer, such as in autoimmune disorders, and noncancerous plasma cell dyscrasia.
This leads to a form of programmed cell death called apoptosis.
These drugs are cell cycle-specific.
Nausea and vomiting are two of the most feared cancer treatment-related side-effects for cancer patients and their families.
This was later followed by sulfonamides (sulfa drugs) and penicillin.
Taxanes are natural and semi-synthetic drugs.
Oncologists are already individualizing dosing of some cancer drugs based on exposure.
However, a high index of suspicion is appropriate, since diarrhea and bloating are also symptoms of typhlitis, a very serious and potentially life-threatening medical emergency that requires immediate treatment.
However, when in vitro fertilization and embryo cryopreservationis practised between or shortly after treatment, possible genetic risks to the growing oocytes exist, and hence it has been recommended that the babies be screened.
Passive targeting exploits the difference between tumor blood vessels and normal blood vessels.
Dexamethasone along with either bortezomib or melphalan is commonly used as a treatment for AL amyloidosis.
They are hollow rod shaped structures that are required for cell division, among other cellular functions.
Vinca alkaloids and taxanes are the two main groups of anti-microtubule agents, and although both of these groups of drugs cause microtubule dysfunction, their mechanisms of action are completely opposite.
In Japan, the government has approved the use of some medicinal mushrooms like ''Trametes versicolor'', to counteract depression of the immune system in patients undergoing chemotherapy.
In the same study, investigators compared the incidence of common 5-FU-associated grade 3/4 toxicities between the dose-adjusted patients and the BSA-dosed patients.
In the 5-FU clinical study cited above, patients whose dose was adjusted to achieve a pre-determined target exposure realized an 84% improvement in treatment response rate and a six-month improvement in overall survival (OS) compared with those dosed by BSA.
Myelosuppressive therapy can cause a tendency to bleed easily, leading to anemia.
Weight gain can also be caused by some steroid medications.
The massive toxicity seen with the use of cytotoxics is due to the lack of cell specificity of the drugs.
This fusion protein has enzyme activity that can be inhibited by imatinib, a small molecule drug.
Nitrosoureas include N-Nitroso-N-methylurea (MNU), carmustine (BCNU), lomustine (CCNU) and semustine (MeCCNU), fotemustine and streptozotocin.
Among the anthracyclines, doxorubicin and daunorubicin were the first, and were obtained from the bacterium ''Streptomyces peucetius''.
These micrometastases can be treated with adjuvant chemotherapy and can reduce relapse rates caused by these disseminated cells.
It primarily inhibits the enzyme thymidylate synthase, but also has effects on DHFR, aminoimidazole carboxamide ribonucleotide formyltransferase and glycinamide ribonucleotide formyltransferase.
found that patients receiving chemotherapy ranked nausea and vomiting as the first and second most severe side-effects, respectively.
A study in France between 1999 and 2011 came to the result that embryo freezing before administration of gonadotoxic agents to females caused a delay of treatment in 34% of cases, and a live birth in 27% of surviving cases who wanted to become pregnant, with the follow-up time varying between 1 and 13 years.
Specific chemotherapeutic agents are associated with organ-specific toxicities, including cardiovascular disease (e.g., doxorubicin), interstitial lung disease (e.g., bleomycin) and occasionally secondary neoplasm (e.g., MOPP therapy for Hodgkin's disease).
According to the ESOPE project (European Standard Operating Procedures of Electrochemotherapy), the Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) for electrochemotherapy were prepared, based on the experience of the leading European cancer centres on electrochemotherapy.
(In autologous BMTs, cells are removed from the patient before the treatment, multiplied and then re-injected afterward; in ''allogenic'' BMTs, the source is a donor.)
The reason for this is that the formula only takes into account the individual's weight and height.
Performance status is often used as a measure to determine whether a patient can receive chemotherapy, or whether dose reduction is required.
Hair loss (Alopecia) can be caused by chemotherapy that kills rapidly dividing cells; other medications may cause hair to thin.
Inhibition of topoisomerase I or II interferes with both of these processes.
In today's usage, the sense "any treatment of disease with drugs" is often expressed with the word ''pharmacotherapy''.
With an established target exposure for optimized treatment effectiveness with minimized toxicities, dosing can be personalized to achieve target exposure and optimal results for each patient.
This allows the normal unwinding of DNA to occur during replication or transcription.
Aziridines include thiotepa, mytomycin and diaziquone (AZQ).
Upregulation of these genes can overcome the DNA damage and prevent the induction of apoptosis.
The BSA is usually calculated with a mathematical formula or a nomogram, using a patient's weight and height, rather than by direct measurement of body mass.
Targeted therapies are a relatively new class of cancer drugs that can overcome many of the issues seen with the use of cytotoxics.
The term was coined in the early 1900s by Paul Ehrlich as meaning any use of chemicals to treat any disease (''chemo-'' + ''-therapy''), such as the use of antibiotics (''antibacterial chemotherapy'').
The efficacy of chemotherapy depends on the type of cancer and the stage.
The drugs differ in their mechanism and side-effects.
Malignancies with slower growth rates, such as indolent lymphomas, tend to respond to chemotherapy much more modestly.
In many cases, this can result in sub-optimal treatment.
Chemotherapy may be given with a curative intent (which almost always involves combinations of drugs), or it may aim to prolong life or to reduce symptoms (palliative chemotherapy).
However, some patients still develop diseases because of this interference with bone marrow.
The anti-folates include methotrexate and pemetrexed.
Also, after misincorporation of the molecules into DNA, DNA damage can occur and programmed cell death (apoptosis) is induced.
These transporters pump out most chemotherapy drugs, which reduces their efficacy for treatment of brain tumors.
Successful treatment hinges on early diagnosis provided by a high index of suspicion and the use of CT scanning, nonoperative treatment for uncomplicated cases, and sometimes elective right hemicolectomy to prevent recurrence.
The long-term effects of exposure include chromosomal abnormalities and infertility.
The topoisomerase II poisons cause increased levels enzymes bound to DNA.
The method has been reported as safe, simple and highly effective in all reports on clinical use of electrochemotherapy.
Some CIPN appears to be irreversible.
mitomycin C, anthracyclines, BCNU, melphalan) including CDDP could be reversed at least partially by the addition of heat.
Topical chemotherapies, such as 5-fluorouracil, are used to treat some cases of non-melanoma skin cancer.
Pain can often be managed with drug or other treatment but the numbness is usually resistant to treatment.
Vinca alkaloids are derived from the Madagascar periwinkle, ''Catharanthus roseus'' (formerly known as ''Vinca rosea'').
Although prophylaxis is available and is often initiated in patients with large tumors, this is a dangerous side-effect that can lead to death if left untreated.
Traditional chemotherapeutic agents are cytotoxic by means of interfering with cell division (mitosis) but cancer cells vary widely in their susceptibility to these agents.
This may manifest as systemic infections, such as sepsis, or as localized outbreaks, such as Herpes simplex, shingles, or other members of the Herpesviridea.
'''Chemotherapy''' (often abbreviated to '''chemo''' and sometimes '''CTX''' or '''CTx''') is a category of cancer treatment that uses one or more anti-cancer drugs (chemotherapeutic agents) as part of a standardized chemotherapy regimen.
Another mechanism of resistance is gene amplification, a process in which multiple copies of a gene are produced by cancer cells.
With more copies of the gene, the drug can not prevent all expression of the gene and therefore the cell can restore its proliferative ability.
Topoisomerase inhibitors are drugs that affect the activity of two enzymes: topoisomerase I and topoisomerase II.
Typhlitis is a medical emergency.
Subtypes of the anti-metabolites are the anti-folates, fluoropyrimidines, deoxynucleoside analogues and thiopurines.
treatments whose efficacy is confined to the anatomic area where they are applied) for cancer such as radiation therapy, surgery, and/or hyperthermia therapy.
Drug transporters can pump out drugs from the brain and brain's blood vessel cells into the cerebrospinal fluid and blood circulation.
Antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) comprise an antibody, drug and a linker between them.
This occurs when bleomycin binds to a metal ion, becomes chemically reduced and reacts with oxygen.
Methotrexate inhibits dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR), an enzyme that regenerates tetrahydrofolate from dihydrofolate.
These side-effects can frequently be reduced or eliminated with antiemetic drugs.
Following this, high levels of uric acid, potassium and phosphate are found in the blood.
Chemotherapy drugs are also used in conditioning regimens prior to bone marow transplant (hematopoietic stem cell transplant).
When used in non-cancer setting, the treatment is still called Chemotherapy, and is often done in the same treatment center as cancer patients.
The platinum-based drugs are the exception; with these drugs, sensation may continue to deteriorate for several months after the end of treatment.
Potential protective or attenuating agents include GnRH analogs, where several studies have shown a protective effect ''in vivo'' in humans, but some studies show no such effect.
The cause of this is most likely due to the production of free radicals in the cell and subsequent DNA damage.
Malnutrition and dehydration can result when the patient does not eat or drink enough, or when the patient vomits frequently, because of gastrointestinal damage.
Chemotherapy is one of the major categories of medical oncology (the medical discipline specifically devoted to pharmacotherapy for cancer).
In other words, if two patients receive the same dose of a given drug based on BSA, the concentration of that drug in the bloodstream of one patient may be 10 times higher or lower compared to that of the other patient.
This results in the most common side-effects of chemotherapy: myelosuppression (decreased production of blood cells, hence also immunosuppression), mucositis (inflammation of the lining of the digestive tract), and alopecia (hair loss).
Electrochemotherapy is the combined treatment in which injection of a chemotherapeutic drug is followed by application of high-voltage electric pulses locally to the tumor.
The survivors were later found to have very low white blood cell counts.
In one study of patients who had been newly diagnosed with incurable, stage 4 cancer, more than two-thirds of patients with lung cancer and more than four-fifths of patients with colorectal cancer still believed that chemotherapy was likely to cure their cancer.
Active targeting uses biological molecules (antibodies, proteins, DNA and receptor ligands) to preferentially target the nanoparticles to the tumor cells.
It has a very poor prognosis and is often fatal unless promptly recognized and aggressively treated.
Sometimes, chemotherapy treatments are postponed because the immune system is suppressed to a critically low level.
Positive response increased from 46% in the BSA-dosed patients to 70% in the dose-adjusted group.
To counteract this they then signal for new blood vessels to grow.
Sometimes, chemotherapy treatments are postponed to allow platelet counts to recover.
In females previously having undergone chemotherapy, miscarriage and congenital malformations are not increased in subsequent conceptions.
This group includes novobiocin, merbarone, and aclarubicin, which also have other significant mechanisms of action.
In males previously having undergone chemotherapy or radiotherapy, there appears to be no increase in genetic defects or congenital malformations in their children conceived after therapy.
Following this, cell cycle arrest occurs, which induces programmed cell death (apoptosis).
Several classification schemes have been used to subdivide the medicines used for cancer into several different types.
Two topoisomerase I inhibitors, irinotecan and topotecan, are semi-synthetically derived from camptothecin, which is obtained from the Chinese ornamental tree ''Camptotheca acuminata''.
The standard method of determining chemotherapy dosage is based on calculated body surface area (BSA).
Mitomycin is a cytotoxic antibiotic with the ability to alkylate DNA.
Development of secondary neoplasia after successful chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy treatment can occur.
Healthcare workers exposed to antineoplastic agents take precautions to keep their exposure to a minimum.
Hyperthermia therapy is heat treatment for cancer that can be a powerful tool when used in combination with chemotherapy (thermochemotherapy) or radiation for the control of a variety of cancers.
One approach that can help clinicians individualize chemotherapy dosing is to measure the drug levels in blood plasma over time and adjust dose according to a formula or algorithm to achieve optimal exposure.
By common usage, the term ''chemotherapy'' has come to connote the use of rather non-specific intracellular poisons, especially related to inhibiting the process of cell division known as mitosis, and generally excludes agents that more selectively block extracellular growth signals (i.e.
They are so named because of their ability to alkylate many molecules, including proteins, RNA and DNA.
These drugs promote microtubule stability, preventing their disassembly.
Female infertility by chemotherapy appears to be secondary to premature ovarian failure by loss of primordial follicles.
Taxanes present difficulties in formulation as medicines because they are poorly soluble in water.
Sometimes hair has a tendency to curl after regrowth, resulting in "chemo curls."
On the other hand, therapies with low risk of gonadotoxicity include plant derivatives such as vincristine and vinblastine, antibiotics such as bleomycin and dactinomycin, and antimetabolites such as methotrexate, mercaptopurine, and 5-fluorouracil.
Anti-metabolites resemble either nucleobases or nucleosides (a nucleotide without the phosphate group), but have altered chemical groups.
Other drugs used to treat myeloma such as lenalidomide have shown promise in treating AL amyloidosis.
Targeted therapies are designed to affect cellular proteins or processes that are utilised by the cancer cells.
Chemotherapies with high risk include procarbazine and other alkylating drugs such as cyclophosphamide, ifosfamide, busulfan, melphalan, chlorambucil, and chlormethine.
Because only a fraction of the cells in a tumor die with each treatment (fractional kill), repeated doses must be administered to continue to reduce the size of the tumor.
CIPN often follows the first chemotherapy dose and increases in severity as treatment continues, but this progression usually levels off at completion of treatment.
Hence, greater effectiveness of antitumor treatment is achieved.
Chemotherapy drugs associated with CIPN include thalidomide, epothilones, vinca alkaloids, taxanes, proteasome inhibitors, and the platinum-based drugs.
The second group, catalytic inhibitors, are drugs that block the activity of topoisomerase II, and therefore prevent DNA synthesis and translation because the DNA cannot unwind properly.
Since then, many other drugs have been developed to treat cancer, and drug development has exploded into a multibillion-dollar industry, although the principles and limitations of chemotherapy discovered by the early researchers still apply.
It was reasoned that an agent that damaged the rapidly growing white blood cells might have a similar effect on cancer.
They bind to specific sites on tubulin, inhibiting the assembly of tubulin into microtubules.
This formula was originally derived in a 1916 study and attempted to translate medicinal doses established with laboratory animals to equivalent doses for humans.
Cancer cells can also cause defects in the cellular pathways of apoptosis (programmed cell death).
Chemotherapy-related toxicities can occur acutely after administration, within hours or days, or chronically, from weeks to years.
Such an algorithm was used in the clinical trials cited above and resulted in significantly improved treatment outcomes.
Cancer is the uncontrolled growth of cells coupled with malignant behaviour: invasion and metastasis (among other features).
Some patients report fatigue or non-specific neurocognitive problems, such as an inability to concentrate; this is sometimes called post-chemotherapy cognitive impairment, referred to as "chemo brain" by patients' groups.
Different drugs will affect different parts of the kidney and the toxicity may be asymptomatic (only seen on blood or urine tests) or may cause acute renal failure.
Nanoparticles can be targeted passively or actively.
Alkylating agents are the oldest group of chemotherapeutics in use today.
The main purpose of these approaches is to deliver a very high dose of chemotherapy to tumor sites without causing overwhelming systemic damage.
Recently, new electrochemotherapy modalities have been developed for treatment of internal tumors using surgical procedures, endoscopic routes or percutaneous approaches to gain access to the treatment area.
They impair cell function by forming covalent bonds with the amino, carboxyl, sulfhydryl, and phosphate groups in biologically important molecules.
They are divided into two groups: small molecule and antibodies.
When the DNA double-strand helix is unwound, during DNA replication or transcription, for example, the adjacent unopened DNA winds tighter (supercoils), like opening the middle of a twisted rope.
* Combination chemotherapy involves treating a patient with a number of different drugs simultaneously.
Although patients are encouraged to wash their hands, avoid sick people, and take other infection-reducing steps, about 85% of infections are due to naturally occurring microorganisms in the patient's own gastrointestinal tract (including oral cavity) and skin.
For example, in a randomized clinical trial, investigators found 85% of metastatic colorectal cancer patients treated with 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) did not receive the optimal therapeutic dose when dosed by the BSA standard—68% were underdosed and 17% were overdosed.
Severe hair loss occurs most often with drugs such as doxorubicin, daunorubicin, paclitaxel, docetaxel, cyclophosphamide, ifosfamide and etoposide.
Sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) has shown similar effect, but its mechanism of inhibiting the sphingomyelin apoptotic pathway may also interfere with the apoptosis action of chemotherapy drugs.
Many of them have a similar structure to the building blocks of DNA and RNA.
For this reason the effect on the cell is dose dependent; the fraction of cells that die is directly proportional to the dose of drug.
Because of the reduced toxicity, dose-adjusted patients were able to be treated for longer periods of time.
Other clinically used drugs in the anthracyline group are pirarubicin, aclarubicin, and mitoxantrone.
Fluorouracil is a nucleobase analogue that is metabolised in cells to form at least two active products; 5-fluourouridine monophosphate (FUMP) and 5-fluoro-2'-deoxyuridine 5'-phosphate (fdUMP).
This allows a high dose to cancer tissues with a relatively low dose to other tissues.
Now it is clear that there is often a range of protein targets that the drug can bind.
Nephrotoxicity (kidney damage) can be caused by tumor lysis syndrome and also due direct effects of drug clearance by the kidneys.
Isolated limb perfusion (often used in melanoma), or isolated infusion of chemotherapy into the liver or the lung have been used to treat some tumors.
Nitrogen mustards include mechlorethamine, cyclophosphamide, melphalan, chlorambucil, ifosfamide and busulfan.
Drugs with medium risk include doxorubicin and platinum analogs such as cisplatin and carboplatin.
Pemetrexed is another anti-metabolite that affects purine and pyrimidine production, and therefore also inhibits DNA synthesis.
Now this drug and another in this class, docetaxel, are produced semi-synthetically from a chemical found in the bark of another Yew tree; ''Taxus baccata''.
Hepatotoxicity (liver damage) can be caused by many cytotoxic drugs.
Some patients are overdosed while others are underdosed.
Ototoxicity (damage to the inner ear) is a common side effect of platinum based drugs that can produce symptoms such as dizziness and vertigo.
Drug absorption and clearance are influenced by multiple factors, including age, gender, metabolism, disease state, organ function, drug-to-drug interactions, genetics, and obesity, which has a major impact on the actual concentration of the drug in the patient's bloodstream.
Recently, bortezomid in combination with cyclophosphamide and dexamethasone has also shown promise as a treatment for AL amyloidosis.
deficiencies and/or anemia of chronic disease.
Recently, the validity of this method in calculating uniform doses has been questioned.
Patients may choose between several methods of fertility preservation prior to chemotherapy, including cryopreservation of semen, ovarian tissue, oocytes, or embryos.
Dosage of chemotherapy can be difficult: If the dose is too low, it will be ineffective against the tumor, whereas, at excessive doses, the toxicity (side-effects) will be intolerable to the patient.
Reduced systemic toxicity means that they can also be used in sicker patients, and that they can carry new chemotherapeutic agents that would have been far too toxic to deliver via traditional systemic approaches.
Non-classical alkylating agents include procarbazine and hexamethylmelamine.
These approaches can help control solitary or limited metastases, but they are by definition not systemic, and, therefore, do not treat distributed metastases or micrometastases.
This overcomes the effect of drugs that reduce the expression of genes involved in replication.
The first drug of their class, paclitaxel, was originally extracted from the Pacific Yew tree, ''Taxus brevifolia''.
These include Rheumatoid arthritis, Systemic lupus erythematosus, Multiple sclerosis, Vasculitis, and many others.
Several clinical studies have demonstrated that when chemotherapy dosing is individualized to achieve optimal systemic drug exposure, treatment outcomes are improved and toxic side effects are reduced.
Other chemotherapeutic agents that cause cardiotoxicity, but at a lower incidence, are cyclophosphamide, docetaxel and clofarabine.
Extremely low platelet counts may be temporarily boosted through platelet transfusions and new drugs to increase platelet counts during chemotherapy are being developed.
The subtypes of alkylating agents are the nitrogen mustards, nitrosoureas, tetrazines, aziridines, cisplatins and derivatives, and non-classical alkylating agents.
The antibody will be targeted at a preferentially expressed protein in the tumour cells (known as a tumor antigen) or on cells that the tumor can utilise, such as blood vessel endothelial cells.
The susceptibility of an individual to liver damage can be altered by other factors such as the cancer itself, viral hepatitis, immunosuppression and nutritional deficiency.
They bind to the tumor antigen and are internalised, where the linker releases the drug into the cell.
Originally derived from mustard gas used in World War I, there are now many types of alkylating agents in use.
Since the 1990s, several novel classes of antiemetics have been developed and commercialized, becoming a nearly universal standard in chemotherapy regimens, and helping to successfully manage these symptoms in a large portion of patients.
Effective mediation of these unpleasant and sometimes-crippling symptoms results in increased quality of life for the patient and more efficient treatment cycles, due to less stoppage of treatment due to better tolerance by the patient, and due to better overall health of the patient.
Permanent thinning or hair loss can result from some standard chemotherapy regimens.
The first chemotherapy drug to be developed from this line of research was mustine.
Self-care measures, such as eating frequent small meals and drinking clear liquids or ginger tea, are often recommended.
In 1983, Coates et al.
Research on p-glycoprotein and other such chemotherapy efflux pumps is currently ongoing.
If the cancer has central nervous system involvement, or with meningeal disease, intrathecal chemotherapy may be administered.
This causes kidney damage and the high levels of potassium can cause cardiac arrhythmia.
The incidence of serious diarrhea was reduced from 12% in the BSA-dosed group of patients to 1.7% in the dose-adjusted group, and the incidence of severe mucositis was reduced from 15% to 0.8%.
Anti-metabolites are a group of molecules that impede DNA and RNA synthesis.
Alkylating agents will work at any point in the cell cycle and thus are known as cell cycle-independent drugs.
Many chemotherapy drugs also cause DNA damage, which can be repaired by enzymes in the cell that carry out DNA repair.
Mustard gas was used as a chemical warfare agent during World War I and was discovered to be a potent suppressor of hematopoiesis (blood production).
Specially targeted delivery vehicles aim to increase effective levels of chemotherapy for tumor cells while reducing effective levels for other cells.
These agents include etoposide, doxorubicin, mitoxantrone and teniposide.
Medications that kill rapidly dividing cells or blood cells can reduce the number of platelets in the blood, which can result in bruises and bleeding.
