Chennaiyin FC representing the city plays in Indian Super League, an association football tournament and its home ground is Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium.
The government has constructed grade separators and flyovers at major intersections, and built Inner Ring Road and Outer Ring Road.
As per the 2001 census, the number of speakers mother tongue wise are as follows, Tamil is spoken by 3,424,107 (78.83%), followed by Telugu by 419,209 (9.65%), Urdu by 180,245 (4.1%), Malayalam by 113,828 (2.6%), Hindi by 104,084 (2.39%), and Kannada by 22,250 (0.5%).
The first theory is that it was derived from the name of a Telugu ruler Damarla Chennappa Nayakudu, father of Damarla Venkatapathy Nayak, a Nayak ruler who served as a general under Venkata III of the Vijayanagar Empire from whom the British acquired the town in 1639.
The city's sewer system was designed in 1910, with some modifications in 1958.
Tamils form the majority of Chennai's population.
Madras was the only Indian city to be attacked by the Central Powers during World War I, when an oil depot was shelled by the German light cruiser  on 22 September 1914, as it raided shipping lanes in the Indian Ocean, causing disruption to shipping.
Gothic revival style buildings include the Chennai Central and Chennai Egmore railway stations.
Many software and software services companies have development centres in Chennai, which contributed 14 percent of India's total software exports of  14,42,140 lakh during 2006–07, making it the second largest Indian city software exporter following Bangalore.
Chennai is a major centre for music, art and culture in India.
Radio broadcasting started from the radio station at the Rippon Buildings complex, founded in 1930 and was then shifted to All India Radio in 1938.
Chennai's soil is mostly clay, shale and sandstone.
Education in Chennai starts with two years of Kindergarten from age three onward and then follows the Indian 10+2+3 plan, ten years of school, two years of higher secondary education, and three years of undergraduate education.
The Tamil film industry and the Tamil television industry are also significant parts of Chennai's economy.
Per Supreme Court guidelines, the city needs 65 shelters for the homeless.
Madras Boat Club (founded in 1846) and the Royal Madras Yacht Club (founded by Sir Francis Spring in 1911) promote the sailing sports in Chennai, and organise national and international sailing events.
Chennai also has Indian Maritime University to impart quality education in maritime management, engineering and different pre sea courses.
The other means of road transport in the city include vans, regionally known as ''Maxi Cabs'', auto rickshaws, on-call metered taxis and tourist taxis.
The evening dailies are, ''The Trinity Mirror'' and ''The News Today''.
In 1843, the bank merged with the Carnatic Bank (1788), the British Bank of Madras (1795) and the Asiatic Bank (1804) and became the Bank of Madras, which was one of the three Presidency banks of India, the other two being the Bank of Bengal and the Bank of Bombay.
Major multiplexes include Sathyam Cinemas, Escape cinemas, Devi, Abirami complex and Mayajaal.
Wildlife conservation and research activities take place at
It was opened, on 23 January 1909, by the Governor of Fort St. George, Sir Arthur Lawley, and called the Victoria Memorial Hall after the Queen-Empress Victoria.
The city is base to around 40 percent of India's automobile industry and 45 percent of auto components industry.
From the 1930s onwards, many buildings in George Town were built in this style, including the United India building (presently housing LIC) and the Burma Shell building (presently the Chennai House), both built in the 1930s, and the Dare House, built in 1940.
The Chennai suburban railway network, one of the oldest in the country, facilitates transportation within the city.
Prominent financial institutions, including the World Bank, Standard Chartered Bank, ABN AMRO, Bank of America, The Royal Bank of Scotland, Goldman Sachs, Barclays, HSBC, ING Group, Allianz, Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corporation, The Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ, Abu Dhabi Commercial Bank, Asian Development Bank, Credit Suisse, BNP Paribas Fortis, Irevna, Deutsche Bank and Citibank have back office and development centre operations in the city.
A study conducted by the National Housing Bank on the residential price index of Indian cities showed that Chennai experienced the highest growth after the 2008–2012 global financial crisis.
The Integral Coach Factory manufactures railway coaches and other rolling stock for Indian Railways.
The major Tamil dailies include the ''Dina Thanthi'', ''Dinakaran'', ''Dina Mani'', ''Dina Malar'', ''The Hindu Tamil'', ''Tamil Murasu'', ''Makkal Kural'' and ''Malai Malar''.
Chennai is currently the largest electronics hardware exporter in India, accounting for 45% of the total exports in 2010–11.
Annadurai left the party to form the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK).
Elliot's Beach lies south of the Adyar delta.
The Chennai port is the largest in Bay of Bengal, with an annual cargo tonnage of 6.146&nbsp;crore (2010–2011), and second largest containerise hub in India, with an annual container volume of 15.23&nbsp;lakh TEUs (2010–2011).
The first official use of the name ''Chennai'' is said to be in a sale deed, dated 8 August 1639, to Francis Day of the East India Company.
The city has two 18–hole golf courses, the Cosmopolitan Club and the Gymkhana Club, both established in the late nineteenth century.
The city has a diverse theatre scene and is one of the important centres for Bharata Natyam, a classical dance form that originated in Tamil Nadu and is the oldest dance of India.
The American Consulate in Chennai is one of the top adjudication posts in the world and the number one in processing employment-based visas.
The corporation is headed by a mayor, an office presently occupied by Saidai Sa.
The city also hosts two art festivals annually.
The civic body also spends  400 crore a year on solid waste management.
Automobile racing in India has been closely connected with Chennai since its beginnings shortly after independence.
In 1996, the Government of Tamil Nadu officially changed the name from ''Madras'' to ''Chennai''.
In 2010, the crime rate in the city was 169.2 per 100,000 people, as against an average of 341.9 in the 35 major cities of India.
Chennai contributes more than 50 percent of India's leather exports.
The ground water table in Chennai is at 4-5m below ground in most of the areas, which was considerably improved and maintained through the mandatory rain water harvesting system.
Chennai, sometimes referred to as the "Gateway to South India," is located on the south–eastern coast of India in the north–eastern part of Tamil Nadu on a flat coastal plain known as the Eastern Coastal Plains.
The quantity of wetlands in the city has decreased from 650 to only 27 currently.
The Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium is associated for hosting Football and athletic competitions, it also houses a multi–purpose indoor complex for competition in volleyball, basketball and table tennis.
Public schools run by the Chennai Corporation are all affiliated with the Tamil Nadu State Board, while private schools may be affiliated with either of the Tamil Nadu Board of Secondary Education or the Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE).
The Gemini flyover, built in 1973 crosses over the arterial road, and eases the traffic movements towards Anna Salai and towards the Kathipara Flyover.
Chennai is classified as a global city by GaWC, with a ranking of Beta based on the extent of global reach and financial influence.
(prior to the expansion of Chennai Corporation area), Chennai city has a sanctioned strength of 14,000 police personnel.
The fair is typically held for about 10 days between the last week of December and the third week of January.
Prominent cricketers from the city include former cricket captains S.&nbsp;Venkataraghavan and Kris&nbsp;Srikkanth.
Chennai outer ring road is 62.3&nbsp;km long connecting NH 45 (GST Road) at Perungalathur, NH 4 (GWT Road) at Nazarathpet, NH 205 (CTH Road) at Nemilicherry(Thiruninravur), NH 5 (GNT Road) at Nallur and TPP road at Minjur under the process by Chennai Metropolitan Area.
Covelong beach lies along the coromandal coast.
The British regained control in 1749 through the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle and strengthened the town's fortress wall to withstand further attacks from the French and Hyder Ali, the Sultan of Mysore.
Chennai's First Corporate Leisure Newspaper, ''The Shopping Express''.
The corporation also owns 52 community halls across the city.
When opened, the Chennai Mofussil Bus Terminus (CMBT) was the largest bus station in Asia.
With the advent of railways in India in the 19th century, the thriving urban centre was connected to other important cities such as Bombay and Calcutta, promoting increased communication and trade with the hinterland.
The financial district is also located here.
The peak power consumption is for four months between May and August, with the city consuming the highest during June because it is when the summer peaks.
An important cultural centre for Bharata Natyam is Kalakshetra, on the beach in the south of the city.
The Connemara Public Library is one of four National Depository Centres in India that receive a copy of all newspapers and books published in the country.
By the early 20th century, the art deco too made its entry upon the city's urban landscape.
The coolest part of the year is January, with minimum temperatures around .
Chennai city is governed by the Greater Chennai Corporation (formerly "Corporation of Madras"), which was established in 1688.
Private Tamil satellite television networks such as Sun TV, Raj TV, Zee Tamizh, Star Vijay, Jaya TV, Makkal TV, Vasanth TV, Kalaignar TV, Captain TV and PuthiyaThalaimurai TV broadcast out of Chennai.
The Indian Army's Officers Training Academy is also headquartered in the city.
The city has more than 12,500 beds in its hospitals, including about 5,000 in multi-specialty hospitals in the private sector and over 6,000 beds in the public sector.
The region has the oldest rocks in the country dating back to nearly a billion years.
In market areas, the conservancy work is done during the night.
The city also has a permanent exhibition complex in Nandambakkam called the Chennai Trade Centre.
The government-aided hospitals include General Hospital, Adyar Cancer Institute, TB Sanatorium, and National Institute of Siddha.
The city's contiguous satellite towns include Mahabalipuram in the south, Chengalpattu and Maraimalai Nagar in the southwest, and Sriperumpudur, Arakkonam, Kanchipuram and Tiruvallur to the west.
2G Mobile internet connections are provided by all the operators and 4G, 3G mobile broadband are provided by few operators in the city.
It is known as the Cultural Capital of South India  and is the most visited city in India by international tourists according to Euromonitor.
The metro line first phase from Alandur to Koyambedu was inaugurated on 29 June 2015.
The larger suburbs are governed by town municipalities, and the smaller are governed by town councils called panchayats.
Many film personalities have gone on to become politicians including C.N.Annadurai, M. Karunanidhi, M.G.
Major hospitals in Chennai include Apollo Hospitals, Apollo Speciality Hospital, SRM Medical College Hospital and Research Centre, Chettinad Health City, MIOT Hospitals, Sri Ramachandra Medical College and Research Institute, Fortis Malar Hospital, Lifeline Hospitals, Vasan Healthcare,  Dr Mehta Hospitals, Global Hospitals & Health City, Sankara Nethralaya and Vijaya Medical & Educational Trust.
Being the capital of the Madras Province that covered a vast area of the Deccan region, Chennai remained the centre of politics in the southern region of India during the British colonial era.
During 1st century CE, a poet and weaver named Thiruvalluvar lived in the town of Mylapore (a neighbourhood of present Chennai).
It was ranked among the top globally in issuing 'L' and 'H' category visas for workers and professionals and was ranked eighth globally in terms of all category of visas being issued.
Chennai was the venue of the 1995 South Asian Games.
About 43,700 of them are kept vacant.
South Madras and West Madras, previously mostly residential, are fast becoming commercial, home to a growing number of information technology firms, financial companies and call centres.
The Indian Institute of Technology Madras (IIT Madras) and the Anna University are two well known centres for engineering education in the city.
In 2015 Chennai was named the "hottest" city (worth visiting, and worth living in for long term) by the BBC, citing the mixture of both modern and traditional values.
Newspaper publishing started in Chennai with the launch of a weekly, ''The Madras Courier'', in 1785.
On 22 August 1639, which is referred to as Madras Day, the English East India Company under Francis Day bought a small strip of land stretching 3 miles on the Coromandel Coast.
The Tamil Nadu State Transport Corporation operates Volvo air-conditioned services from Chennai to nearby cities like Pondicherry, Vellore, Hosur and Trichy.
, an estimated population of 11,116 (0.16 percent) were homeless.
About 75,000 birds migrate to Chennai every year.
Chennai ranks second to Kolkata of Indian heritage buildings.
Vijay Amritraj, Mahesh Bhupathi Ramesh Krishnan and Somdev Devvarman are tennis players from Chennai.
The southern stretch of Chennai's coast from Tiruvanmiyur to Neelangarai are favoured by the endangered Olive Ridley sea turtles to lay eggs every winter.
The Ambattur–Padi industrial zone houses many textile manufacturers, and a special economic zone (SEZ) for apparel and footwear manufacturing has been set up in the southern suburbs of the city.
In 1769 the city was threatened by Mysore and the British were defeated by Hyder Ali, after which the Treaty of Madras ended the war.
Major power plants in the city include North Chennai Thermal Power Station, GMR Vasavi Diesel Power Plant, Ennore Thermal Power Station, Basin Bridge Gas Turbine Power Station, Madras Atomic Power Station and Vallur Thermal Power Project.
Chennai has three parliamentary constituencies—Chennai North, Chennai Central and Chennai South—and elects 16 Members of the Legislative Assembly (MLAs) to the state legislature.
The major English dailies published in Chennai are ''The Hindu'', ''The New Indian Express'', ''The Deccan Chronicle'' and ''The Times of India'' and many more.
Chennai is an important gold market in India contributing to 45 percent of the 800-tonne annual national gold uptake.
At that time many Indian cities underwent a change of name.
The best examples of this style include the Madras High Court (built in 1892), Southern Railway headquarters, Ripon Building, Government Museum, Senate House of the University of Madras, Amir Mahal, Bharat Insurance Building, Victoria Public Hall and the College of Engineering.
The city also serves as the location of the Madras Stock Exchange, India's fourth stock exchange, one of four permanently recognised by SEBI, and India's third-largest by trading volume, ranked behind the Bombay Stock Exchange and the National Stock Exchange of India.
It is the oldest surviving municipal corporation in India and the second oldest surviving corporation in the world.
The ruler Damarla Chennappa Nayakudu, the Nayaka of Chandragiri, granted the English permission to build a factory and warehouse for their trading enterprises.
After independence, the city hosted the Congress in 1955 in its suburb of Avadi.
Chennai attracts about 45 percent of health tourists from abroad and 30 percent to 40 percent of domestic health tourists.
''The Spectator'', founded in 1836, was the first English newspaper in Chennai to be owned by an Indian and became the city's first daily newspaper in 1853.
Chennai is the birthplace of the idea of the Indian National Congress, commonly known as the Congress Party.
The Greater Chennai Police is a division of the Tamil Nadu Police, and the administrative control lies with the Tamil Nadu Home Ministry.
Historically, Chennai has relied on the annual rains of the monsoon season to replenish water reservoirs, as no major rivers flow through the area.
Guindy National Park is a protected area within the city limits.
The port handles transportation of automobiles, motorcycles and general industrial cargo.
The Anna Centenary Library is the largest library in Asia.
It consists of 121 Police stations and is headed by a commissioner of police.
The Chennai suburban police had about 4,093 police personnel and a ratio of 1:1,222.
The Madras High Court, is the highest judicial authority in the state, whose jurisdiction extends across Tamil Nadu and Puducherry.
Horse racing is held at the Guindy Race Course, while rowing competitions are hosted at the Madras Boat Club.
In 2011, North Chennai zone had 30 police stations and 3 police out posts, Central Chennai zone had 28 police stations and 3 police out posts, and South Chennai zone had 30 police stations.
The associated ''Agraharam'' architecture, which consists of traditional row houses surrounding a temple, can still be seen in these areas.
Sandy areas are found along the river banks and coasts, and include areas such as Tiruvottiyur, George Town, Madhavaram, New Washermanpet, Chepauk, Mylapore, Porur, Adyar, Besant Nagar and Uthandi.
The residential architecture in the city was based on the bungalow or the continuous row house prototypes.
The National Institute of Siddha is one of the seven apex national-level educational institutions that promote excellence in Indian system of medicine and Ayurveda.
, eight mobile phone service companies operate seven GSM networks including Airtel, Aircel, BSNL, Vodafone, Tata Docomo GSM, Idea, Reliance GSM and three CDMA networks including MTS, Relaince CDMA, Tata Docomo CDMA in the city.
The "Fort Museum" inside the premises of Fort St. George is an important museum having a noteworthy collection of objects of the British era in its collection.
While three sectors are operated on-grade, the fourth sector is majorly an elevated corridor, which links Chennai Beach to Velachery and is interlinked with the remaining rail network.
According to the 2011 Indian census, it is the sixth-largest city and fourth-most populous urban agglomeration in India.
Other examples include the Bombay Mutual building (presently housing LIC) and the South Indian Chamber of Commerce building.
The violent agitations of 1965 against the compulsory imposition of Hindi and in support of English in India in the state marked a major shift in the political dynamics of the city and eventually it had a big impact on the whole state.
Chennai is ranked as a beta-level city in the Global Cities Index  and was ranked the best city in India by ''India Today'' in the 2014 annual Indian city survey.
The city serves as the gateway to the southern part of India with tourists landing in the city and starting their trip to the rest of the region.
Chennai is connected to other parts of the state and the Union Territory of Puducherry by state highways.
Chennai handles 400 flights a day, again placing it fourth among Indian airports.
The city is also the base to the World Gold Council's India operations.
Chidambaram Stadium established in 1916 is among the oldest cricket stadium in India.
However, it has only 15, of which 8 are functioning and two are under renovation.
The hottest part of the year is late May to early June, known regionally as ''Agni Nakshatram'' ("fire star") or as ''Kathiri Veyyil'', with maximum temperatures around .
The Sun Network one of India's largest broadcasting companies is based in the city.
''Malayala Manorama'' and ''Mathrubhumi'' are the major Malayalam dailies while major Telugu dailies include ''Eenadu'', ''Vaartha'', ''Andhra Jyothi'' and ''Sakshi''.
Previous world chess champion Viswanathan Anand grew up in Chennai.
Other important recreation centres include Madras Boat Club, which is over 140 years old, and Gymkhana Club, which is famous for its 18-hole golf courses.
The thirty-fifth edition of the fair was held in 2012.
, there were 9.8 million mobile phone users in Chennai.
Chennai attracts 45 percent of health tourists visiting India, and 30 to 40 percent of domestic health tourists.
Chennai Central station, the city's largest, provides access to other major cities as well as many other smaller towns across India, whereas Chennai Egmore provides access to destinations primarily within Tamil Nadu; however, it also handles a few inter–state trains.
Chennai has a total coast length of more than 19&nbsp;km.
With the history of many neighbourhoods of the city such as Mylapore and Triplicane antedating that of the city, the architecture of Chennai ranges in a wide chronology.
, the city consumes around 3.83 crore units of power a day or 1,400 crore units annually.
''Pookolam'', a form of art that uses coloured flour to create patterns and designs, comes from Kerala, but can be seen in abundance at the time of Onam.
The peak evening demand of the city is 1,500 MW which is about 50 percent of the state's peak evening demand of 3,000 megawatt.
is a 20-acre botanical garden located in the downtown.
Tamil and English are the primary medium of instruction, though some schools also use Telugu and Urdu as medium of instruction in their schools.
Since the 19th century, when Western scholars proposed that Dravidian languages, which dominated the southern region of India, formed a different linguistic group to that of the Indo-Aryan languages that are predominant in the north of the subcontinent, the aspects of Tamil nationalism gained prominence.
Garbage is dumped in two dump-yards in the city—One in Kodungaiyur and another in Perungudi, with a major portion of the latter covering the Pallikaranai marshland.
Chennai is the base for the Tamil film industry, known as Kollywood.
Chennai was the host of the World Chess Championship 2013 match between Viswanathan Anand and Magnus Carlsen.
The MTC provides an exclusive intracity bus service, consisting of 3,421 buses on 724 routes, which provides transportation to 55.2&nbsp;lakh passengers daily.
Cyclones in the Bay of Bengal sometimes hit the city.
The Corporation of Chennai provides civic services to the city.
Owing to the geotectonic zone the city falls in, the city is considered a potential geothermal energy site.
Chennai, as the capital of the state of Tamil Nadu, houses the state executive and legislative headquarters primarily in the Secretariat Buildings in the Fort&nbsp;St&nbsp;George campus.
Availability of power in the city has become a concern in recent years due to increasing demand and slow paced addition of power plants, due to which scheduled power cuts have become increasingly common.
In 2011, Chennai was ranked 41st in global top 100 city destination ranking, with 3,174,500 tourists, a 14 percent increase from 2010.
According to the 2012 report by property consultant Cushman & Wakefield, ''Main Streets Across the World'', Khader Nawaz Khan Road at Nungambakkam ranked 10th position in the list of 'Top 10 Global Highest Retail Rental Growth Markets 2012', with 36.7 percent jump in rents.
Madras is divided into four broad regions: North, Central, South and West.
It is expected that temperatures of around 200 to 300&nbsp;C° will be available if the ground were drilled 4 to 5&nbsp;km deep.
On 17 July 1996, the city known as Madras was officially renamed Chennai, in line with what was then a nationwide trend to using less Anglicised names.
With temples, beaches and centres of historical and cultural significance, including the UNESCO Heritage Site of Mahabalipuram, Chennai is one of the most visited cities in India.
It is India's leading institution for herpeto faunal conservation and the first crocodile breeding centre in Asia.
The city generates 4,500 tonnes of garbage every day of which 429 tonnes are plastic waste.
Chennai is home to the national level commercial banks Indian Bank and Indian Overseas Bank and many state level co–operative banks, finance and insurance companies.
As per the religious census of 2011, Chennai had 80.73% Hindus, 9.45% Muslims, 7.72% Christians, 0.06% Sikhs, 0.06% Buddhists, 1.11% Jains, 0.83% following other religions and 0.04% following no religion or did not indicate any religious preference.
In 1612, the Dutch established themselves near Pulicat, north of Chennai.
In a 2013 survey titled 'Emerging trends in real estate in Asia Pacific 2014', Chennai emerged in the top 25 real estate destinations list in the Asia Pacific region.
An earlier estimate shows that there is a need to generate about 420,000 units for low-income groups by 2016.
The city is known for its classical dance shows.
The consular presence in the city dates back to 1794, when William Abbott was appointed US consular agent for South India.
A year later, the English built Fort St. George, the first major English settlement in India, which became the nucleus of the growing colonial city and urban Chennai, grew around this Fort.
They got a license to build a fort and a castle in the contracted region.
According to the Tamil Nadu Generation and Distribution Corporation Limited (TANGEDCO), , the city consumes about 20 percent of the electricity in the state of Tamil Nadu.
Chennai International Airport, comprising the Anna international terminal and the Kamaraj domestic terminal with a total passenger movements of 1.29&nbsp;crore and aircraft movements of 124,712 in 2013–2014, Chennai is the fourth busiest airport in India after Delhi, Mumbai and Bengaluru and in terms of international passengers Chennai is the third busiest airport behind Delhi and Mumbai.
Motor racing events are held on a special purpose track in Irungattukottai, Sriperumbudur, which has also been the venue for several international competitions.
, the city had 21 luxury five-star hotels with over 4,500 rooms in the inventory.
In 2011, the jurisdiction of the Chennai Corporation was expanded from  to an area of , dividing into three regions—North, South and Central, which covers 200 wards.
The British military mapmakers believed Madras was originally ''Mundir-raj'' or ''Mundiraj''.
Marina Beach runs for , spanning along the shoreline of the city between the deltas of Cooum and Adyar, and is the second longest urban beach in the world.
Hume, the idea was originally conceived in a private meeting of 17 men after a Theosophical Convention held in the city in December 1884.
The 2015 Chennai Floods submerged major portions of the city, killing 269 people and resulting in damages of .
The city has a rugby union team called the Chennai Cheetahs.
Chennai Book Fair, an annual book fair organised in Chennai by the Booksellers and Publishers Association of South India (BAPASI), is the largest exhibition for Tamil book publishers to display their books.
Chennai is home to the first European-style banking system in India with the establishment of the 'Madras Bank' on 21 June 1683, almost a century before the establishment of the first commercial banks, such as the Bank of Hindustan and the General Bank of India, which were established in 1770 and 1786, respectively.
It was introduced in 1864 with the foundation of the Madras Cricket Club.
Marshy wetlands such as Pallikaranai also play host to a number of migratory birds during the monsoon and winter.
The Triumph of Labour, also known as the Labour statue, is a statue at the Marina Beach, Chennai, India.
Chennai has two CSIR research institutions namely Central Leather Research Institute and Structural Engineering Research Centre.
