Many people in the US still use paper money orders to pay bills or transfer money which is a unique type of cheque.
At that time, a number of countries took the opportunity to phase out the use of cheques altogether.
Canada's usage of cheques is less than that of the US and is declining rapidly.
"Special Presentation" needed to be stated at the time of depositing in the cheque.
A 1995 amendment provided for the electronic presentment of cheques and removed the previous requirement to deliver cheques physically to the paying bank, opening the way for cheque truncation and imaging.
Cheques are a type of bill of exchange and were developed as a way to make payments without the need to carry large amounts of money.
Since MICR characters are no longer necessarily printed in magnetic ink and will be scanned by optical rather than magnetic means, the readers will be unable to distinguish pen ink from pre-printed magnetic ink; these changes allow cheques to be printed on ordinary home and office printers without requiring pre-printed cheque forms, allow ATM deposit capture, allow mobile deposits, and facilitate electronic copies of cheques.
In some countries, such as the US, the payee may endorse the cheque, allowing them to specify a third party to whom it should be paid.
"T + 6" is the last day that a cheque can bounce without the recipient's permission—this is known as "certainty of fate".
In some cases, the payee will take the cheque to a branch of the drawee bank, and cash the cheque there.
As automation increased, the following years saw a dramatic change in the way in which cheques were handled and processed.
These forms were printed on "cheque paper" to prevent fraud, and customers had to attend in person and obtain a numbered form from the cashier.
A cheque differs from a warrant in that the warrant is not necessarily payable on demand and may not be negotiable.
The oldest surviving example of a complete American chequebook from the 1790s was discovered by a family in New Jersey.
Many merchants accept Interac debit payments but not credit card payments, even though most Interac terminals can support credit card payments.
Until 1 April 2012, cheques in India were valid for a period of six months from the date of their issue, before the Reserve Bank of India issued a notification reducing their validity to three months from the date of issue.
Those funds are then set aside in the bank's internal account until the cheque is cashed or returned by the payee.
All Nordic countries have used an interconnected international giro system since the 1950s, and in Sweden, cheques are now almost totally abandoned; in Denmark, all banks will stop accepting cheques by 1 January 2017. Credit cards are now preferred for direct shop payments when not using cash.
Concerns were expressed, however, by charities and older people, who are still heavy users of cheques, and replacement plans were criticised as open to fraud.
The routing transit number is a nine-digit number in which the first four digits identifies the US Federal Reserve Bank's cheque-processing centre.
This wording was brought in after a bank was successfully sued for libel after returning a cheque with the phrase "Insufficient Funds" after making an error—the court ruled that as there were sufficient funds the statement was demonstrably false and damaging to the reputation of the person issuing the cheque.
In particular the handling of money transfer requires more effort and is time consuming.
The cheques can be used to pay for certain goods and services in the UK.
If a cheque is refused at the drawee bank (or the drawee bank returns the cheque to the bank that it was deposited at) because there are insufficient funds for the cheque to clear, it is said that the cheque has been ''dishonoured''.
In the late 19th century, several countries formalised laws regarding cheques.
In the US, at the top (when cheque oriented vertically) of the reverse side of the cheque, there are usually one or more blank lines labelled something like "Endorse here".
It is not a legal requirement to write down the amount in words, although some banks will refuse to accept cheques that do not have the amount in both numbers and words.
In the Netherlands, Austria, and Germany, all kinds of invoices are commonly accompanied by so-called ''acceptgiros'' (Netherlands) or ''Überweisungen'' (German), which are essentially standardised bank transfer order forms preprinted with the payee's account details and the amount payable.
Currys (and other stores in the DSGi group) and WH Smith also no longer accept cheques.
A bank may levy additional charges for clearing an oversized cheque.
Cheques sometimes include additional documents.
Cheques are usually dishonoured because the drawer's account has been frozen or limited, or because there are insufficient funds in the drawer's account when the cheque was redeemed.
This was the first bankers' clearing house.
A page in a chequebook may consist of both the cheque itself and a stub or ''''&nbsp;– when the cheque is written, only the cheque itself is detached, and the stub is retained in the chequebook as a record of the cheque.
It had a long tradition of using cheques and passed laws to formalise cheque usage as early as 1881.
A cheque drawn on an account with insufficient funds is said to have ''bounced'' and may be called a ''rubber cheque''.
Cheques are now widely predicted to become a thing of the past, or at most, a niche product used to pay private individuals or for the very large number of small service providers who are not willing to provide their bank details to customers to allow electronic payments to be made to them or do not wish to be burdened with checking their bank accounts frequently and reconciling them with amounts due (for example, music teachers, driving instructors, children's sports lessons, small shops, schools).
A drawer may also issue a ''stop'' on a cheque, instructing the financial institution not to honour a particular cheque.
Parties to regular cheques generally include a ''drawer'', the depositor writing a cheque; a ''drawee,'' the financial institution where the cheque can be presented for payment; and a ''payee,'' the entity to whom the drawer issues the cheque.
One must be especially careful of lower case descenders when filling out the signature and memo lines which are often at the bottom of the cheque in close proximity.
As such, if a cheque is dishonoured in Scotland, what funds are present in the bank account are "attached" and frozen, until either sufficient funds are credited to the account to pay the cheque, the drawer recovers the cheque and hands it into the bank, or the drawer obtains a letter from the payee stating that they have no further interest in the cheque.
This has resulted in many businesses no longer accepting traveller's cheques.
Until about 1770, an informal exchange of cheques took place between London banks.
The use of credit or debit cards has begun to replace the traveller's cheque as the standard for vacation money due to their convenience and additional security for the retailer.
In Australia, following global trends, the use of cheques continues to decline.
The drawer writes the various details including the monetary amount, date, and a payee on the cheque, and signs it, ordering their bank, known as the ''drawee'', to pay that person or company the amount of money stated.
Banks use the agencies to screen checking account applicants.
Most utilities in the United Kingdom charge lower prices to customers who pay by direct debit than for other payment methods, including electronic methods.
In Turkey, cheques are usually used for commercial transactions only, and using post-dated cheques is legally possible.
Oversized cheques are often used in public events such as donating money to charity or giving out prizes such as Publishers Clearing House.
These were handwritten, and one of the earliest known still to be in existence was drawn on Messrs Morris and Clayton, scriveners and bankers based in the City of London, and dated 16 February 1659.
This eliminates the cumbersome physical presentation and saves time and processing costs.
They intended to perform annual checks on the progress of other payments systems and a final review of the decision would have been held in 2016.
The account number is assigned independently by the various banks.
Even before the introduction of online banking, it has been possible in some countries to make payments to third parties using ATMs, which may accurately and rapidly capture invoice amounts, due dates, and payee bank details via a bar code reader to reduce keying.
The process is also procedurally more simple, as no cheques are ever posted, can claim to have been posted, or need banking or clearance.
Muslim traders are known to have used the cheque or ṣakk system since the time of Harun al-Rashid (9th century) of the Abbasid Caliphate.
Of these, 2.5&nbsp;billion were cleared through the inter-bank clearing managed by the C&CCC, the remaining 1.5&nbsp;billion being in-house cheques which were either paid into the branch on which they were drawn or processed intra-bank without going through the clearings.
Alternatively, cheques may be recorded with carbon paper behind each cheque, in ledger sheets between cheques or at the back of a chequebook, or in a completely separate transaction register that comes with a chequebook.
This makes the cheque non-transferable and is to avoid cheques being endorsed and paid into an account other than that of the named payee.
Thus, a certified cheque cannot "bounce", and its liquidity is similar to cash, absent failure of the bank.
An issue date was added, and cheques may not be valid a certain amount of time after issue.
They kept the note as proof of payment.
Bounced cheques are called .
Their report said that clearing times could be improved, but that the costs associated with speeding up the cheque clearing cycle could not be justified considering the use of cheques was declining.
In Germany, Austria, the Netherlands, Belgium, and Scandinavia, cheques have almost completely vanished in favour of direct bank transfers and electronic payments.
Traveller's cheques can usually be replaced if lost or stolen, and people often used to use them on vacation instead of cash as many businesses used to accept traveller's cheques as currency.
Cheques can be lost or go astray within the cycle, or be delayed if further verification is needed in the case of suspected fraud.
''Checks'' were associated with chartered commercial banks.
The cheque has to be handed over in person or sent through mail.
However, debit cards are widespread in these countries, since virtually all Austrian, German and Dutch banks issue debit cards instead of simple ATM cards for use on current accounts.
An advantage to the drawer of using cheques instead of debit card transactions, is that they know the drawer's bank will not release the money until several days later.
India is one of the few countries in Asia that did have significant cheque usage.
Typically, the term cashier's cheques are used in the US and banker's drafts are used in the UK and most of the Commonwealth.
This meant that the payee no longer had to go to the bank that issued the cheque, instead they could deposit it at their own bank or any other banks and the cheque would be routed back to the originating bank and funds transferred to their own bank account.
Cashier's cheques and banker's drafts also known as a '''bank cheque''', '''treasurer's cheque''' or '''banker's cheque''',  are cheques issued against the funds of a financial institution rather than an individual account holder.
Such an order was referred to as a ''bill of exchange''.
The Interac system, which allows instant fund transfers via chip or magnetic strip and PIN, is widely used by merchants to the point that few brick and mortar merchants accept cheques.
This allowed for some basic fraud detection by banks and made sure one cheque was not presented twice.
As cheque usage increased during the 19th and 20th centuries additional items were added to increase security or to make processing easier for the bank or financial institution.
Being paper-based, cheques are costly for banks to process in comparison to electronic payments, so banks in many countries now discourage the use of cheques, either by charging for cheques or by making the alternatives more attractive to customers.
However, countries including the U.S. and members of the British Commonwealth did not participate and so it remained very difficult for cheques to be used across country borders.
The person writing the cheque, the ''drawer'', has a transaction banking account  (often called a current, cheque, chequing or checking account) where their money is held.
A dishonoured cheque cannot be redeemed for its value and is worthless; they are also known as an ''RDI'' (returned deposit item), or ''NSF'' (non-sufficient funds) cheque.
For additional protection, a cheque can be crossed, which restricts the use of the cheque so that the funds must be paid into a bank account.
This allowed the creation of electronic cheques and translation (truncation) of paper cheques into electronic replacements, reducing cost and processing time.
It is advisable to treat the signature and memo lines as boundaries rather than baselines and sign above them.
For large shop payments, such as car purchases, a type of cheque, a money order (Swedish:postväxel) is still used.
In 2009 the Reserve Bank of India reported there had been five percent decline in cheque usage compared to the previous year.
Electronic payments across the European Union are now fast and inexpensive—usually free for consumers.
Paying with a cheque and making a deposit before it clears the drawer's bank is called "kiting" or "floating" and is generally illegal in the US, but rarely enforced unless the drawer uses multiple chequing accounts with multiple institutions to increase the delay or to steal the funds.
The cheque is now a ''cancelled cheque''.
* fractional routing number (U.S. only)—also known as the transit number, consists of a denominator mirroring the first four digits of the routing number.
Payroll cheques issued by the military to soldiers, or by some other government entities to their employees, beneficiants, and creditors, are referred to as warrants.
A cheque sold by a post office, bank or merchant such as a grocery store for payment by a third party for a customer is referred to as a money order or postal order.
Cheque volumes continued to grow; in the late 20th century, cheques were the most popular non-cash method for making payments, with billions of them processed each year.
Cheque usage has been declining for some years, both for point of sale transactions (for which credit cards and debit cards are increasingly preferred) and for third party payments (for example, bill payments), where the decline has been accelerated by the emergence of telephone banking and online banking.
There a bank will pick up all the mail, sort it, open it, take the cheques and remittance advice out, process it all through electronic machinery, and post the funds to the proper accounts.
Many European and South American states as well as Japan joined the convention.
In the US until recent years the social security number was sometimes included on cheques.
This concept went on to spread to England and elsewhere.
The access to these archives is now worldwide, as most bank programming is now done offshore.
A payee that accepts a cheque will typically deposit it in an account at the payee's bank, and have the bank process the cheque.
Despite the use of this revised phrase, successful libel lawsuits brought against banks by individuals remained for similar errors.
Where cheques were used they have been declining rapidly, by 2009 there was negligible consumer cheque usage in Japan, South Korea and Taiwan.
The Canadian government has said it will be phasing out all government cheques by April 2016.
The format and wording varies from country to country, but generally two parallel lines may be placed either vertically across the cheque or in the top left hand corner.
The Cheque was introduced in India by the Bank of Hindustan, the first joint stock bank established in 1770.
As volumes started to fall, the challenges faced by the clearing banks were then of a different nature: how to benefit from technology improvements in a declining business environment.
Taking advantage of the float period (cheque kiting) to delay the notice of non-existent funds.
As of 2010, many countries have either phased out the use of cheques altogether or signalled that they would do so in the future.
This is frequently done formally using a provided slip when paying a bill, or informally via a letter when sending an ad hoc cheque.
Cheque clearing is usually done through an electronic cheque broker, such as The Clearing House, Viewpointe LLC or the Federal Reserve Banks.
A cheque may also be dishonoured because it is stale or not cashed within a "void after date".
Cashing a foreign bank cheque is possible, but usually very expensive.
If the cheque is crossed with the words 'Account Payee' or similar then the cheque can only be paid into the bank account of the person initially named as the payee, thus it cannot be endorsed to a different payee.
This service allowed cheques to be guaranteed at point of sales up to a certain value, normally £50 or £100, when signed in front of the retailer with the additional cheque guarantee card.
By 2006 cheques lagged well behind EFTPOS (debit card) transaction and electronic credits, making up only nine percent of transactions, with an annual average of 41 cheque transaction per capita.
Certain types of cheques drawn on a government agency, especially payroll cheques, may be called a ''payroll warrant''.
The rise of automated teller machines (ATMs) means that small amounts of cash are often easily accessible, so that it is sometimes unnecessary to write a cheque for such amounts instead.
Ultimately, there is also at least one ''endorsee'' which would typically be the financial institution servicing the payee's account, or in some circumstances may be a third party to whom the payee owes or wishes to give money.
About 70 billion cheques were written annually in the US by 2001, though around 17 million adult Americans do not have bank accounts at all.
However, on 12 July 2011, the Payments Council announced that after opposition from MPs, charity groups and public opinion, the cheque will remain in use and there would no longer be a reason to seek an alternative paper-initiated payment.
Many utilities and most credit cards will also allow customers to pay by providing bank information and having the payee draw payment from the customer's account (direct debit).
The practice was discontinued as identity theft became widespread.
Starting in the 1960s machine readable routing and account information was added to the bottom of cheques in MICR format.
Since then cheque usage has fallen, being partly replaced by electronic payment systems.
In the United Kingdom this is not available and such notes are sometimes written on the reverse side of the cheque.
In the US, banks are not required by the Uniform Commercial Code to honour a ''',''' which is a cheque presented six months after it is dated.
Those with low debit scores are denied checking accounts because a bank can not afford an account to be overdrawn.
In June 2014, following a successful trial in the UK by Barclays, the British government gave the go-ahead for a cheque photo plan allowing people to pay in a cheque by taking a photo of it, rather than physically depositing the paper cheque at a bank.
A cheque that has an issue date in the future, a post-dated cheque, may not be able to be presented until that date has passed, writing a post dated cheque may simply be ignored or is illegal in some countries.
By the 17th century, bills of exchange were being used for domestic payments in England.
When a certified cheque is drawn, the bank operating the account verifies there are currently sufficient funds in the drawer's account to honour the cheque.
A traveller's cheque is designed to allow the person signing it to make an unconditional payment to someone else as a result of paying the issuer for that privilege.
It is also very common to allow the payee to automatically withdraw the requested amount from the payer's account (''Lastschrifteinzug'' (German) or ''Incasso (machtiging)'' (Netherlands)).
These cashiers held the money for a fee.
Direct bank transfers, using so-called giro transfers, have been standard procedure since the 1950s to send and receive regular payments like rent and wages and even mail-order invoices.
The Canadian Payments Association reported that in 2012, cheque use in Canada accounted for only 40% of total financial transactions.
A '''cheque''' (or '''check''' in American English) is a document that orders a bank to pay a specific amount of money from a person's account to the person in whose name the cheque has been issued.
Electronic payment transfer continued to gain popularity in India and like other countries this has caused a subsequent reduction in volumes of cheques issued each year.
In many Asian countries cheques were never widely used and generally only used by the wealthy, with cash being used for the majority of payments.
In 2002, the Eurocheque system was phased out and replaced with domestic checking systems.
A cheque used to pay wages may be referred to as a payroll cheque.
The information provided at the bottom of the cheque is country specific and is driven by each country's cheque clearing system.
In addition to regular cheques, a number of variations were developed to address specific needs or to address issues when using a regular cheque.
(However, ''draft'' in the US Uniform Commercial Code today means any bill of exchange, whether payable on demand or at a later date; if payable on demand it is a "demand draft", or if drawn on a financial institution, a cheque.)
In contrast, giro is more akin to wire transfer, in that the payer pushes his money away towards the payee).
Cheques are still widely used for government cheques, payroll, rent, and utility bill payments, though direct deposits and online/telephone bill payments are also widely and increasingly used.
The account holder can request a copy of a cancelled cheque as proof of a payment.
Cheques are also more costly for the issuer and receiver of a cheque.
There may also be a ''beneficiary''—for example, in depositing a cheque with a custodian of a brokerage account, the payee will be the custodian, but the cheque may be marked "F/B/O" ("for the benefit of") the beneficiary.
Many of the developing countries in Asia have seen an increasing use of electronic payment systems, 'leap-frogging' the less efficient chequeing system altogether.
Intrusion into the MICR area can cause problems when the cheque runs through the clearinghouse, requiring someone to print an MICR cheque correction strip and glue it to the cheque.
It is thought that the Commercial Bank of Scotland was the first bank to personalise its customers' cheques, in 1811, by printing the name of the account holder vertically along the left-hand edge.
The Payments Council proposed to close the centralised cheque clearing altogether in the UK and had set a target date for this of 31 October 2018.
Even when the use of cheques for paying wages and salaries became rare, the vocabulary "pay cheque" still remained commonly used to describe the payment of wages and salaries.
This was soon followed by other major fuel retailers, such as Texaco, BP, and Total.
Since 2001, businesses in the United Kingdom have made more electronic payments than cheque payments.
Conversely, an antedated cheque has an issue date in the past.
Their use subsequently spread to other European countries.
These ''cheque books'' became a common format for the distribution of cheques to bank customers.
It was therefore announced by the UK Payments Council in July 2011 that the cheque would not be eliminated as a paper-initiated payment.
The same year, the C&CCC set up the euro cheque clearing system to process euro denominated cheques separately from sterling cheques in Great Britain.
Dishonoured payments from current accounts can be marked in the same manner as missed payments on the customer's credit report.
* Typically the routing number is followed by a group of eight or nine MICR digits that indicates the particular account number at that bank.
Terms of service for many mobile (cell phone camera) deposits also require the MICR section to be readable.
Financial institutions also facilitate transfers between accounts within different institutions with the Email Money Transfer (EMT) service.
This often involves trying to convince a merchant or other recipient, hoping the recipient will not suspect that the cheque will not clear, giving time for the fraudster to disappear.
When a cheque is mailed, a separate letter or "remittance advice" may be attached to inform the recipient of the purpose of the cheque&nbsp;– formally, which account receivable to credit the funds to.
The UK Payments Council from 30 June 2011 withdrew the existing ''Cheque Guarantee Card Scheme'' in the UK.
Not all of the MICR characters have been printed at the time you manually fill out the cheque as additional characters will be printed later to encode the amount; thus your sloppy signature could obscure characters that you didn't realize would later be printed there.
The drawer would sign the cheque in front of the retailer, who would compare the signature to the signature on the card and then write the cheque-guarantee-card number on the back of the cheque.
Cancelled cheques are placed in the account holder's file.
In 1993, cheques accounted for over half of transactions through the national banking system, with an annual average of 130 cheques per capita.
The suppression of banknotes in eighteenth-century England further promoted the use of cheques.
From the mid-1990s, many countries enacted laws to allow for cheque truncation, in which a physical cheque is converted into electronic form for transmission to the paying bank or clearing-house.
At "T + 2" (two business days afterwards) the value would count for calculation of credit interest or overdraft interest on the recipient's account.
Instrument-specific legislation includes the Cheques Act 1960, part of the Bills of Exchange Act 1908, which codifies aspects related to the cheque payment instrument, notably the procedures for the endorsement, presentment and payment of cheques.
The cheques are commonly  in size, however, according to the Guinness Book of World Records, the largest ever is .
Following concerns about the amount of time it took banks to clear cheques, the United Kingdom Office of Fair Trading set up a working group in 2006 to look at the cheque clearing cycle.
In the US, the bottom 5/8" of the cheque is a keep out zone reserved for MICR characters only which should not be intruded upon by handwriting.
This is known as the cheque clearing cycle.
Such cards were generally phased out and replaced by debit cards, starting in the mid-1990s.
In this case they are an instruction to the entity's treasurer department to pay the warrant holder on demand or after a specified maturity date.
Once banked, cheques are processed electronically together with other retail payment instruments.
Although the UK did not adopt the euro as its national currency when other European countries did in 1999, many banks began offering euro denominated accounts with chequebooks, principally to business customers.
A lost or stolen cheque can still be stopped like any other cheque, so payment is not completely guaranteed.
A  number of measures have been introduced to combat fraud over the years.
In the 9th century, a merchant in country A could cash a ''saqq'' drawn on his bank in country B.
Truncation allows for the transmission of an electronic image of all or part of the cheque to the paying bank’s branch, instead of the cumbersome physical presentment.
This is followed by digits 5 through 8, identifying the specific bank served by that  cheque-processing centre.
In the case of a savings and loan association it was a ''negotiable order of withdrawal'' (compare Negotiable Order of Withdrawal account); if a credit union it was a ''share draft.''
In 1999, banks adopted a system to allow faster clearance of cheques by electronically transmitting information about cheques, this brought clearance times down from five to three days.
Sometimes, forgery is the method of choice in defrauding a bank.
The UK Payments Council announced in December 2009 that cheques would be phased out by October 2018, but only if adequate alternatives were developed.
This can cause considerable inconvenience as the depositor may have to wait days for the bank to be open and may have difficulty getting to the bank even when they are open; this can delay the availability of the portion of a deposit which their bank makes available immediately as well as the balance of the deposit.
This provides a guarantee, save for a failure of the bank, that it will be honoured.
At "T + 4" clients would be able to withdraw funds on current accounts or at "T + 6" on savings accounts (though this will often happen earlier, at the bank's discretion).
Many cheques have an explicit notice printed on the cheque that it is void after some period of days.
