Cumming arranged to take seven prominent Cherokee, including ''Attakullakulla'',  to London, England.
North Carolina militia in 1776 and 1780 invaded and destroyed the Overhill towns.
In 1721, the Cherokee ceded lands in South Carolina.
A "white" organization of elders represented the seven clans.
They lived interspersed among the Delawares and Shawnees of that area.
In 1907, the Oklahoma and Indian Territories entered the union as the state of Oklahoma.
* Redbird Smith (1850–1918), traditionalist, political activist, and chief of the Nighthawk Keetoowah Society
The three federally recognized groups assert themselves as the only groups having the legal right to present themselves as Cherokee Indian Tribes and only their enrolled members as Cherokee.
When Sequoyah taught children to read and write with the syllabary, he reached the adults.
In August 2010, OICA acquired a letterpress and had the Cherokee syllabary recast to begin printing one-of-a-kind fine art books and prints in the Cherokee language.
It may have originally been derived from the Choctaw word ''Cha-la-kee'', which means "people who live in the mountains", or Choctaw ''Chi-luk-ik-bi,'' meaning "people who live in the cave country".
According to a statement by BIA head Larry Echohawk the Cherokee Nation is not the historical Cherokee tribe but instead a "successor in interest."
''Worcester v. Georgia'' is considered one of the most important dicta in law dealing with Native Americans.
From here he fought a guerrilla war against settlers, which lasted from 1776-1794.
In 1831 Georgia militia arrested Samuel Worcester for residing on Indian lands without a state permit, imprisoning him in Milledgeville.
1775–1868), veteran of the Creek War, who saved President Andrew Jackson's life
Cherokee in Indian Territory divided into Union and Confederate factions, with most supporting the Confederacy.
Cherokee and other Native Americans were classified on the colored side and suffered the same racial segregation and disfranchisement as former slaves.
De Soto's expedition visited villages in present-day western Georgia and eastern Tennessee, recording them as ruled by the Coosa chiefdom.
A European-American man could legally marry a Cherokee woman by petitioning the federal court, after gaining approval of ten of her blood relatives.
William Holland Thomas, a white store owner and state legislator from Jackson County, North Carolina, helped over 600 Cherokee from Qualla Town obtain North Carolina citizenship, which exempted them from forced removal.
Cherokee fought with the Yamasee, Catawba, and British in late 1712 and early 1713 against the Tuscarora in the Second Tuscarora War.
They were mostly mixed-race and Cherokee women married to white men.
Once married, the man had status as an "Intermarried White," a member of the Cherokee tribe with restricted rights; for instance, he could not hold any tribal office.
By the 19th century, European settlers in the United States called the Cherokee one of the "Five Civilized Tribes," because they had adopted numerous cultural and technological practices of the European American settlers.
Any changes to the tribe's enrollment procedures must be approved by the Department of Interior.
the Greater Los Angeles and SF Bay areas), and they usually live in farming communities, by military bases and other Indian reservations.
Some attained the honorary status of minor chiefs and/or members of significant delegations.
In 1738 and 1739 smallpox epidemics broke out among the Cherokee, who had no natural immunity.
''See also the Albuquerque Cherokee Nation Township (Cherokee Nation)'' about the Cherokee community of Albuquerque, New Mexico.
This was a way to protect the families of men expected to be leaders of the tribe.
During the late Archaic and Woodland Period, Indians in the region began to cultivate plants such as marsh elder, lambsquarters, pigweed, sunflowers, and some native squash.
Other examples of borrowed words are  () for ''coffee'' and  () for ''watch'' (which led to  () or "big watch" for ''clock'').
However, the tribe does not have the power to change its membership procedures and maintain federal recognition.
Notable traders, agents, and refugee Tories among the Cherokee included John Stuart, Henry Stuart, Alexander Cameron, John McDonald, John Joseph Vann (father of James Vann), Daniel Ross (father of John Ross), John Walker Sr., John McLemore (father of Bob), William Buchanan, John Watts (father of John Watts Jr.), John D. Chisholm, John Benge (father of Bob Benge), Thomas Brown, John Rogers (Welsh), John Gunter (German, founder of Gunter's Landing), James Adair (Irish), William Thorpe (English), and Peter Hildebrand (German), among many others.
1710–1783), war chief during the Anglo-Cherokee War,
Common law marriages were more popular.
* Will Rogers (1879-1935), entertainer, roper, journalist, and author
In addition, the dominance of English colonists in the Southeast led to a discounting of Spanish sources for some time.
Others, however, are controversial for their attempts to gain economically through their claims to be Cherokee.
He exported cotton to England, and owned a steamboat on the Tennessee River.
The party included Daniel Colston, John Vann, Archibald, James and Joseph Spear.
Eventually Hawkins helped them set up blacksmiths, gristmills and cotton plantations.
* Nancy Ward, ''Nanye'hi'' (Beloved Woman) (ca.
Such facts were pointed out by Cherokee citizens of CNO during the Constitutional Convention held to ratify a new governing document.
Initially only the ''didanvwisgi'' adopted and used such materials, which were considered extremely powerful in a spiritual sense.
In the aftermath of Reconstruction, conservative white Democrats regained power in North Carolina and other southern states.
During the Mississippian Culture-period (800 to 1500 CE), local women developed a new variety of maize (corn) called eastern flint corn.
On January 14, 2011, the tribal district court ruled that the 2007 constitutional amendment was invalid because it conflicted with the 1866 treaty guaranteeing the Freedmen's rights.
For self-identified people of Cherokee heritage, see List of Self-identified people of Cherokee ancestry.
Article 8 in the 1817 treaty with the Cherokee stated Cherokees may wish to become citizens of the United States.
Initially his innovation was opposed by both Cherokee traditionalists and white missionaries, who sought to encourage the use of English.
Under 25 CFR 83 the Office of Federal Acknowledgment is required to first apply its own anthropological, genealogical, and historical research methods to any request for change by the tribe.
During this period, divisions arose between the acculturated elite and the great majority of Cherokee, who clung to traditional ways of life.
They would be born outside the clans and traditionally were not considered Cherokee citizens.
Native Americans were registered on the Dawes Rolls and allotted land from the common reserve.
the Cumberland Plateau) to Tennessee.
1703–1780), war chief, diplomat to Britain, founded the town of Ultiwa
The CN controls Cherokee Nation Entertainment, Cherokee Nation Industries, and Cherokee Nation Businesses.
At one time W.W. Keeler served not only as Principal Chief of the Cherokee Nation, but at the same time held the position as Chairman of the Texas Cherokee and Associated Bands (TCAB) Executive Committee.
Descendants of the Texas Cherokees and the Mount Tabor Community joined together to try to gain redress from treaty violations, stemming from the Treaty of Bowles Village in 1836.
The Spanish recorded a '''Chalaque''' nation as living around the Keowee River where North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia meet.
In 1776, allied with the Shawnee led by Cornstalk, Cherokee attacked settlers in South Carolina, Georgia, Virginia, and North Carolina in the Second Cherokee War.
A group of Cherokee traditionalists led by ''Di'wali'' moved to Spanish Texas in 1819.
The Cherokee Nation, under the leadership of Principal Chief Bill John Baker, has significant business, corporate, real estate, and agricultural interests.
In 1839, as President of the Western Cherokee, Sequoyah signed an Act of Union with John Ross that reunited the two groups of the Cherokee Nation.
Many of them still reside in Rusk and Smith counties of east Texas.
In 1836, they signed a treaty with Texas President Sam Houston, an adopted member of the Cherokee tribe.
In 1975 the tribe drafted a constitution, which they ratified on June 26, 1976, and the tribe received federal recognition.
The Eastern Band, aided by William Thomas, became the Thomas Legion of Cherokee Indians and Highlanders, fighting for the Confederacy in the American Civil War.
* Oconostota, ''Aganstata'' (Beloved Man) (ca.
For Indian Territory, this meant abolition of the Cherokee courts and governmental systems.
Another theory is that the Cherokee had been in the Southeast for thousands of years.
Together, these groups were the ancestors of the federally recognized Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians, and some of the state-recognized tribes in surrounding states.
In ''Worcester v. Georgia'' (1832), the US Supreme Court Chief Justice John Marshall ruled that American Indian nations were "distinct, independent political communities retaining their original natural rights," and entitled to federal protection from the actions of state governments that infringed on their sovereignty.
Convinced the tribe's survival required English-speaking leaders who could negotiate with the U.S., the legislature appointed John Ross as Principal Chief.
In 1830 Congress passed the Indian Removal Act, authorizing the forcible relocation of American Indians east of the Mississippi to a new Indian Territory.
However, since the fairly recent addition of the Cherokee syllables to Unicode, the Cherokee language is experiencing a renaissance in its use on the Internet.
It then forwards its recommendations to the Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs for consideration.
The Cherokee Nation participates in numerous joint programs with the Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians.
The ears are slit and stretched to an enormous size, putting the person who undergoes the operation to incredible pain, being unable to lie on either side for nearly forty days.
Traditionally, couples, particularly women, can divorce freely.
It also participates in cultural exchange programs and joint Tribal Council meetings involving councilors from both Cherokee Tribes.
The document that was eventually ratified by a small portion of the electorate.
Both the Cherokee Nation (of Oklahoma) and the United Keetoowah Band of Cherokee, as well as other tribes, contribute funding to the CHC.
The Cherokee have claimed the ancient settlement of ''Kituwa'' on the Tuckasegee River, formerly next to and now part of Qualla Boundary (the reserve of the Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians) in North Carolina, as the original Cherokee settlement in the Southeast.
The Crown found the ruling difficult to enforce with colonists.
Following the adoption of the Cherokee constitution in 1976, TCAB descendants whose ancestors had remained a part of the physical Mount Tabor Community in Rusk County, Texas were excluded from citizenship.
On June 25, 1865, two months after Robert E. Lee surrendered at Appomattox, Stand Watie became the last Confederate General to stand down.
This ruling was consistent with the 1975 Constitution of the Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma, in its acceptance of the Cherokee Freedmen on the basis of historical citizenship, rather than documented blood relation.
In 1802, the federal government promised to extinguish Indian titles to lands claimed by Georgia in return for Georgia's cession of the western lands that became Alabama and Mississippi.
The Museum of the Cherokee Indian, also in Cherokee, displays permanent and changing exhibits, houses archives and collections important to Cherokee history, and sponsors cultural groups, such as the Warriors of the AniKituhwa dance group.
''(Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights)''
''Tsalagi'' () is sometimes misused as a name for the people; ''Tsalagi'' is actually the Cherokee () word for the Cherokee language.
Hundreds of other Cherokee committed suicide due to their losses and disfigurement from the disease.
The Cherokee, eventually, migrated as far north as the Missouri Bootheel by 1816.
The following year, a combined force of English and Pamunkey drove the newcomers away.
In the late nineteenth century, the US government put new restrictions on marriage between a Cherokee and non-Cherokee, although it was still relatively common.
In the 1700s, the Tuscarora left the Southeast and "returned" to the New York area by 1722 because of harsh warfare in the southern region.
The Cherokee brought their grievances to a US judicial review that set a precedent in Indian Country.
* Ned Christie (1852–1892), statesman, Cherokee Nation senator, infamous outlaw
In 1988, the federal court in the Freedmen case of ''Nero v. Cherokee Nation'' held that Cherokees could decide citizenship requirements and exclude freedmen.
The two-tiered legislature was led by Major Ridge and his son John Ridge.
British soldiers built forts in Cherokee country to defend against the French in the Seven Years' War, called the French and Indian War in North America.
Cherokees constitute over 2% of population of three largely rural communities in California–Covelo, Hayfork and San Miguel, one town in Oregon and one town in Arizona.
An additional 400 Cherokee stayed on reserves in Southeast Tennessee, North Georgia, and Northeast Alabama, as citizens of their respective states.
Cherokees are most concentrated in Oklahoma and North Carolina, but some reside in the US West Coast, due to economic migrations caused by the Dust Bowl during the Great Depression, job availability during the Second World War, and the Federal Indian Relocation program during the 1950s–1960s.
Ethnographer James Mooney, who studied the Cherokee in the late 1880s, was the first to trace the decline of the former hierarchy to this revolt.
A master of hit-and-run cavalry tactics, Watie fought those Cherokee loyal to John Ross and Federal troops in Indian Territory and Arkansas, capturing Union supply trains and steamboats, and saving a Confederate army by covering their retreat after the Battle of Pea Ridge in March 1862.
Researchers have debated the reasons for the change.
The identity of the ''Rechahecrians'' has been much debated.
* William Holland Thomas (1805–1893), non-Native but adopted into tribe, founding Principal Chief of the Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians, commanding officer of Thomas Legion of Cherokee Indians and Highlanders
His son 'Rich Joe' Vann developed the plantation to , cultivated by 150 slaves.
Researchers in the 19th century recorded conversations with elders who recounted an oral tradition of the Cherokee people's migrating south from the Great Lakes region in ancient times.
* Tom Threepersons (1889—1969), Cherokee lawman from Vinita, Indian Territory
Chickamauga Town was his headquarters and the colonists tended to call his entire band the Chickamauga.
* R. Lynn Riggs (1899-1954), author, poet, and playwright; his play ''Green Grow the Lilacs'' was the basis of the Broadway hit ''Oklahoma!''
* Doublehead, ''Taltsuska'' (d. 1807), a war leader during the Cherokee–American wars, led the Lower Cherokee, signed land deals with US
Cherokee warriors led by Major Ridge played a major role in General Andrew Jackson's victory at the Battle of Horseshoe Bend.
They also often lost their historical documentation for identification as Indians, when the Southern states classified them as colored.
Andrew Jackson said the removal policy was an effort to prevent the Cherokee from facing extinction as a people, which he considered the fate that "the Mohegan, the Narragansett, and the Delaware" had suffered.
In 1777, surviving Cherokee town leaders signed treaties with the states.
To convince the Cherokee to move voluntarily in 1815, the US government established a Cherokee Reservation in Arkansas.
The reservation boundaries extended from north of the Arkansas River to the southern bank of the White River.
These included Fort Loudoun near Chota.
John Ross traveled to Washington, D.C., and won support from National Republican Party leaders Henry Clay and Daniel Webster.
The Qualla Arts and Crafts Mutual, Inc., of Cherokee, North Carolina is the oldest continuing Native American art co-operative.
Corn became celebrated among numerous peoples in religious ceremonies, especially the Green Corn Ceremony.
Two years later President Martin Van Buren ordered 7,000 Federal troops and state militia under General Winfield Scott into Cherokee lands to evict the tribe.
He spoke no English, but his experiences as a silversmith dealing regularly with white settlers, and as a warrior at Horseshoe Bend, convinced him the Cherokee needed to develop writing.
* Dragging Canoe, ''Tsiyugunsini'' (1738–1792), general of the militant Cherokee during the Cherokee–American wars, principal chief of the Chickamauga (or Lower Cherokee)
Although he never learned English, he sent his son and nephews to New England to be educated in mission schools.
The word  is a Delaware Indian word for "welcome" (more precisely the Delaware word is  which can mean "welcome" or "friend" in the Delaware Language).
American colonist Henry Timberlake described the Cherokee people as he perceived them in 1761:
The Texas Cherokees were mostly neutral during the Texas War of Independence.
Historians noted the name closely resembled that recorded for the ''Eriechronon'' or ''Erielhonan'', commonly known as the Erie tribe.
After the Civil War, the US government required the Cherokee Nation to sign a new treaty, because of its alliance with the Confederacy.
On May 14, 2007, the Cherokee Freedmen were reinstated as citizens of the Cherokee Nation by the Cherokee Nation Tribal Courts through a temporary order and temporary injunction until the court reached its final decision.
The state's northwestern border reached the Chattahoochee, the border of the Cherokee Nation.
Many other words were borrowed from the languages of tribes who settled in Oklahoma in the early 20th century.
The US government counted the remainder of tribal land as "surplus" and sold it to non-Cherokee individuals.
Georgia sold Cherokee lands to its citizens in a Land Lottery, and the state militia occupied New Echota.
v. Cherokee Nation Registrar''.
In 1771–1772, North Carolinian settlers squatted on Cherokee lands in Tennessee, forming the Watauga Association.
* Ostenaco, ''Ustanakwa'' (ca.
As late as the winter of 1838, Cherokee and Creek living in the Missouri and Arkansas areas petitioned the War Department to remove the Osage from the area.
They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.''
Glottochronology studies suggest the split occurred between about 1,500 and 1,800 BCE.
They translated the Bible into Cherokee syllabary.
The Cherokee were one of the first, if not the first, major non-European ethnic group to become U.S. citizens.
Daniel Boone and his party tried to settle in Kentucky, but the Shawnee, Delaware, Mingo, and some Cherokee attacked a scouting and forage party that included Boone's son.
On March 3, 2007 a constitutional amendment was passed by a Cherokee vote limiting citizenship to Cherokees on the Dawes Rolls for those listed as Cherokee by blood on the Dawes roll, which did not include partial Cherokee descendants of slaves, Shawnee and Delaware.
The outdoor drama ''Unto These Hills'', which debuted in 1950, recently broke record attendance sales.
Many of these people trace descent from persons enumerated on official rolls such as the Guion-Miller, Drennan, Mullay and Henderson Rolls, among others.
Chief James Vann opened a tavern, inn and ferry across the Chattahoochee and built a cotton-plantation on a spur of the road from Athens, Georgia to Nashville.
To remedy this, they generally slit but one at a time; so soon as the patient can bear it, they wound round with wire to expand them, and are adorned with silver pendants and rings, which they likewise wear at the nose.
On June 22, 1839, a party of twenty-five Ross supporters assassinated Major Ridge, John Ridge and Elias Boudinot.
''All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights.
* Stand Watie, ''Degataga'' (1806–1871), signer of the Treaty of New Echota, last Confederate general to cease hostilities in the American Civil War as commanding officer of the First Indian Brigade of the Army of Trans-Mississippi.
1762–1794), warrior of the Lower Cherokee during the Cherokee–American wars
It closely resembled modern corn and produced larger crops.
Many words, however, have been borrowed from the English language, such as ''gasoline'', which in Cherokee is  ().
In 2007, the Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians entered into a partnership with Southwestern Community College and Western Carolina University to create the Oconaluftee Institute for Cultural Arts (OICA), to emphasize native art and culture in traditional fine arts education, thus preserving traditional art forms and encouraging exploration of contemporary ideas.
John Ross, who had reluctantly agreed to ally with the Confederacy, was captured by Federal troops in 1862.
Major Ridge moved his family to Rome, Georgia, where he built a substantial house, developed a large plantation and ran a ferry on the Oostanaula River.
Despite the consensus among most specialists in Southeast archeology and anthropology, some scholars contend that ancestors of the Cherokee people lived in western North Carolina and eastern Tennessee for a far longer period of time.
The constitution stated that "No person who is of negro or mulatto  parentage, either by the father or mother side, shall be eligible to hold any office of profit, honor or trust under this Government," with an exception for, "negroes and descendants of white and Indian men by negro women who may have been set free."
In 1756 the Cherokee were allies of the British in the French and Indian War.
The Cherokee organized a national government under Principal Chiefs Little Turkey (1788–1801), Black Fox (1801–1811), and Pathkiller (1811–1827), all former warriors of Dragging Canoe.
These raids came to a head at the Battle of Taliwa in 1755, present-day Ball Ground, Georgia, with the defeat of the Muscogee.
Boudinot's brother Stand Watie fought and survived that day, escaping to Arkansas.
By the time of Mooney, the structure of Cherokee religious practitioners was more informal, based more on individual knowledge and ability than upon heredity.
Di'wali (The Bowl), Sequoyah, Spring Frog and Tatsi (Dutch) and their bands settled there.
The Iroquois in New York have historically called the Cherokee ''Oyata’ge'ronoñ'' ("inhabitants of the cave country").
The tribe issues their own tribal vehicle tags.
George Washington sought to 'civilize' Southeastern American Indians, through programs overseen by the Indian Agent Benjamin Hawkins.
But, there is ample evidence that the Cherokee were adapting modern farming techniques.
Their chief is Joe Bunch.
Another major source of early cultural history comes from materials written in the 19th century by the ''didanvwisgi'' (), Cherokee medicine men, after Sequoyah's creation of the Cherokee syllabary in the 1820s.
Cherokee Nation spokesman Mike Miller has suggested that some groups, which he calls Cherokee Heritage Groups, are encouraged.
The Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma has around 300,000 tribal members, making it the largest of the 566 federally recognized tribes in the United States.
The Cherokee Freedmen had 90 days to appeal this amendment vote which disenfranchised them from Cherokee citizenship and file appeal within the Cherokee Nation Tribal Council, which is currently pending in ''Nash, et al.
While most Mount Tabor residents returned to the Cherokee Nation following the death of John Ross in 1866, today there is a sizable group that is well documented but outside that body.
The US required the 1866 Treaty to provide for the emancipation of all Cherokee slaves, and full citizenship to all Cherokee freedmen and all African Americans who chose to continue to reside within tribal lands, so that they "shall have all the rights of native Cherokees."
The Cherokees are of a middle stature, of an olive colour, tho' generally painted, and their skins stained with gun-powder, pricked into it in very pretty figures.
This hierarchy had disappeared long before the 18th century.
Examples include ''ditiyohihi'' (), which means "he argues repeatedly and on purpose with a purpose," meaning "attorney."
In addition, numerous groups claiming Cherokee lineage, some of which are state-recognized, have members who are among those 819,000-plus people claiming Cherokee ancestry on the US census.
These Cherokees became known as "Old settlers."
Moytoy agreed to recognize King George II of Great Britain as the Cherokee protector.
Attractions include the Oconaluftee Indian Village, Museum of the Cherokee Indian, and the Qualla Arts and Crafts Mutual.
Scholars posit a split between the groups in the distant past, perhaps 3500–3800 years ago.
Other remnant populations continue to exist throughout the Southeast United States and individually in the states surrounding Oklahoma.
When the Cherokee government ceded all territory east of the Little Tennessee River to North Carolina in 1819, they withdrew from the Nation.
The United Keetoowah Band of Cherokee Indians requires a minimum one-quarter Keetoowah Cherokee blood quantum (equivalent to one grandparent), and the UKB does not allow members that have relinquished their membership to re-enroll in the UKB.
In keeping with the tribe's "blood law" that prescribed the death penalty for Cherokee who sold lands, Ross's son arranged the murder of the leaders of the "Treaty Party".
In 2012, the Fine Art degree program at OICA was incorporated into Southwestern Community College and moved to the SCC Swain Center, where it continues to operate.
The Tuscarora War marked the beginning of a British-Cherokee relationship that, despite breaking down on occasion, remained strong for much of the 18th century.
The UKB are mostly descendants of "Old Settlers," Cherokee who migrated to Arkansas and Oklahoma about 1817.
The traders and British government agents dealing with the southern tribes in general, and the Cherokee in particular, were nearly all of Scottish extraction, especially from the Highlands.
