It generally stages 5 or 6 plays each year.
The founder members of the band River City People (guitarist Tim Speed, his drummer brother Paul Speed) are from Chester.
Chester was founded as a "castrum" or Roman fort with the name ''Deva Victrix'' in the reign of the Emperor Vespasian in 79 AD.
In 973, the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle records that, two years after his coronation at Bath, King Edgar of England, came to Chester where he held his court in a palace in a place now known as Edgar's Field near the old Dee bridge in Handbridge.
The fortress was garrisoned by the legion until at least the late 4th century.
Roman artefacts are on display in the Roman Gardens which run parallel to the city walls from Newgate to the River Dee, where there's also a reconstructed hypocaust system.
It now has seven designated platforms but once had fourteen.
The church was shortened after the dissolution of the monasteries and ruins of the former east end remain outside the church.
Much of Chester's architecture dates from the Victorian era, many of the buildings being modelled on the Jacobean half-timbered style and designed by John Douglas, who was employed by the Duke as his principal architect.
The Dewa Roman Experience has hands-on exhibits and a reconstructed Roman street.
The network became the Shropshire Union Canal.
The A55 road runs along the North Wales coast to Holyhead and the A483 links the city to nearby Wrexham and Swansea to the far south.
Annual rainfall is barely over 700mm due to a rain shadow effect caused by the Welsh Mountains.
Towards the end of World War II, a lack of affordable housing meant many problems for Chester.
In 616, Æthelfrith of Northumbria defeated a Welsh army at the brutal and decisive Battle of Chester, and probably established the Anglo-Saxon position in the area from then on.
A national scandal ensued and many new bridges of similar design were either taken down or heavily altered.
Deva handball club play in National league 1 of handball, and also an American Football team, the Chester Romans, part of the British American Football League.
In 1911, Douglas' protégé and city architect James Strong designed the then active fire station on the west side of Northgate Street.
The River Dee is home to rowing clubs, notably Grosvenor Rowing Club and Royal Chester Rowing Club, as well as two school clubs, The King's School Chester Rowing Club and Queen's Park High Rowing Club.
In late 1847 the Dee bridge disaster occurred when a bridge span collapsed as a train passed over the River Dee by the Roodee.
Chester is one of the best preserved walled cities in Britain.
The Odeon site is currently being transformed through the RENEW project.
Trains travelled via Northwich to Manchester Central.
Other churches are now redundant and have other uses; St Michael's in Bridge Street is a heritage centre, St Mary-on-the-Hill is an educational centre, and Holy Trinity now acts as the Guildhall.
On Eastgate is Eastgate Clock which is said to be the most photographed clock in England after Big Ben.
Its architecture dates back to the Norman era, with additions made most centuries since.
Annually, an average of 35.5 air frosts should be recorded.
This status was renewed by the Fairtrade Foundation on 20 August 2003.
A war memorial to those who died in the world wars is in the town hall and it contains the names of all Chester servicemen who died in the First World War.
They had a number of hits in the early 1990s.
Each July the Chester Raft Race is held on the River Dee in aid of charity.
However a number of Chester's other Renaissance projects continue.
''Deverdoeu'' was a Welsh name for Chester as late as the 12th century (cf ''Dyfrdwy'', Welsh for the river Dee).
The oldest church in the city is St John's, which is outside the city walls and was at one time the cathedral church.
To the east side of the city is Chester Zoo, the UK's largest zoo with over 11,000 animals in 110 acres of award-winning gardens.
*Catholic High School
From about 1794 to the late 1950s, when the canal-side flour mills were closed, narrowboats carried cargo such as coal, slate, gypsum or lead ore as well as finished lead (for roofing, water pipes and sewerage) from the leadworks in Egerton Street (Newtown).
Chester was granted city status in 1541.
The Chester Canal had locks down to the River Dee.
The major museum in Chester is the Grosvenor Museum which includes a collection of Roman tombstones and an art gallery.
The price comparison website moneysupermarket.com is based over the Welsh border in Ewloe.
This canal, which runs beneath the northern section of the city walls of Chester, is navigable and remains in use today.
Other bands that have gone on to achieve a degree of success outside of the city include The Suns, The Wayriders and Casino.-
(The town's importance is noted by its taking the simpler form in each case, while Isca Augusta in Monmouthshire, another important legionary base, was known first as Caerleon on the Usk, and now as Caerleon).
Chester Visitor Centre, opposite the Roman Amphitheatre, issues a leaflet giving details of tourist attractions.
Much of the interior is in Norman style and this is considered to be the best example of 11th–12th-century church architecture in Cheshire.
All that remains are small areas of uncovered track inside the former bus depot, and a few tram-wire supports attached to buildings on Eastgate/Foregate Street, although substantial sections of the track remain buried beneath the current road surface.
Canal boats could enter the river at high tide to load goods directly onto seagoing vessels.
Grain from Cheshire was stored in granaries on the banks of the canal at Newtown and Boughton and salt for preserving food arrived from Northwich.
The elaborately carved canopies of the choirstalls are considered to be one of the finest in the country.
The western side towards the Dee Estuary was marsh and wetland habitats.
Chester was one of the last cities in England to fall to the Normans.
*Queens Park High School
This partnership, including Cheshire West and Chester Council, Arts Council England, arts producer Storyhouse and Chester City Library, with additional funding from MBNA and various trusts and foundations, will culminate in the £37m integrated arts centre ‘Storyhouse’.
Chester also has a large number of Christians at 76.4%.
Another, attested in the 9th century ''History of the Britons'' traditionally attributed to Nennius, is '''' ("Fort" or "City of the Legion"); this later developed into '''' and then the modern Welsh ''''.
The first recorded race meet in England at Roodee Fields was on 9 February 1540.
From the 14th century to the 18th century the city's prominent position in North West England meant that it was commonly also known as Westchester.
However, although Wrexham itself was bypassed, the plan to join the rivers Severn, Mersey and Dee was completed, first by cutting the Wirral Arm from Chester to Ellesmere Port (Whitby wharf) then by extending the Llangollen Arm via Ellesmere, Whitchurch and Bettisfield Moss through to the Chester Canal at Hurleston.
An original hypocaust system discovered in the 1720s can be seen in the basement of the Spudulike restaurant at 39 Bridge Street, which is open to the public.
It is the largest known military amphitheatre in Britain, and is also a Scheduled Monument.
The Forum, which houses stores and the indoor market, will be demolished in the Northgate Development scheme to make way for new shopping streets, a new indoor market, an enlarged library, a car park and bus station, and a performing arts centre.
*Christleton High School
In the 2011 Census there were 90,524 people living within the Chester urban area, which included Christleton, Waverton and Saltney.
'''Chester''' ( ) is a walled city in Cheshire, England, on the River Dee, close to the border with Wales.
The port facilities at Crane Wharf, by Chester racecourse, made an important contribution to the commercial development of the north-west region .
On 13 January 2002, Chester was granted Fairtrade City status.
The more unusual landmarks in the city are the city walls, the Rows and the black-and-white architecture.
A footpath runs along the top of the walls, crossing roads by bridges over Eastgate, Northgate, St Martin's Gate, Watergate, Bridgegate, Newgate, and the Wolf Gate, and passing a series of structures, namely Phoenix Tower (or King Charles' Tower), Morgan's Mount, the Goblin Tower (or Pemberton's Parlour), and Bonewaldesthorne's Tower with a spur leading to the Water Tower, and Thimbleby's Tower.
They play at Chester City's Deva Stadium, also known as the Swansway Chester Stadium for sponsorship reasons, and were elected to the Northern Premier League Division One North for the 2010–11 season, ending their first season as that division's champions, securing a place in the Northern Premier League Premier Division for the 2011–12 season.
In its place will be a new multi-storey car park, bus exchange, performing arts centre, library, homes, retail space and a department store which will be anchored by House of Fraser.
There are retail parks to the west and south.
Chester General also had a large marshalling yard and a motive power depot, most of which has now been replaced with housing.
Dee 106.3 is the city's radio station, with Heart North West, Capital North West and Wales and BBC Radio Merseyside also broadcasting locally.
Cheshire Phoenix – formerly known as Cheshire Jets – play at the Cheshire Oaks Arena at nearby Ellesmere Port; and a wheelchair basketball team, Celtic Warriors, formerly known as the Chester Wheelchair Jets.
Another feature of all buildings belonging to the estate of Westminster is the 'Grey Diamonds'&nbsp;– a weaving pattern of grey bricks in the red brickwork laid out in a diamond formation.
Cheshire Oaks Designer Outlet and Broughton Retail Park are near the city.
The Northumbrian Anglo-Saxons used an Old English equivalent of the British name, '''', which was current until the 11th century, when, in a further parallel with Welsh usage, the first element fell out of use and the simple name Chester emerged.
With a population of 79,645 it is the most populous settlement of Cheshire West and Chester, which had a population of 329,608 at the 2011 Census.
Chester Golf Club is near the banks of the Dee, and there are numerous private golf courses near the city, as well as a 9-hole municipal course at Westminster Park.
Numerous pubs, nightclubs and bars, some of which are based in medieval buildings, populate the city.
The Chester Philharmonic Orchestra (CPO) was founded in 1884 and is one of the premier non-professional orchestras in North West England.
A new bus exchange is being built in the city at Gorse Stacks and is scheduled for completion in November 2016.
The Iceland frozen food company is based in nearby Deeside.
The tramway was established in 1871 by Chester Tramways Company.
From 21 October 2016, a new regular bus service will run from Chester to Manchester Airport.
Following their demise, a new team – Chester FC – was founded.
Taking the helm of a barge, he was rowed the short distance up the River Dee from Edgar's Field to the great Minster Church of St John the Baptist by six (the monk Henry Bradshaw records he was rowed by eight kings) tributary kings called ''reguli''.
Renamed as Chester Corporation Tramways, it was reconstructed to the 3'6" gauge, and electrified with overhead cables.
The races take place within view of the City walls and attract tens of thousands of visitors.
To the north of the cathedral are the former monastic buildings.
The original Chester Canal was constructed to run from the River Dee near Sealand Road, to Nantwich in south Cheshire, and opened in 1774.
In an average year, the warmest day should reach , and 12.0 days in total should attain a temperature of  or higher.
At a cost of £1.3&nbsp;billion it has been nicknamed Chester Renaissance.
In 1968, a report by Donald Insall in collaboration with authorities and government recommended that historic buildings be preserved in Chester.
Associated with the museum is 20 Castle Street in which rooms are furnished in different historical styles.
The Northgate Development project began in 2007 with the demolition of St. Martin's House on the city's ring road.
Other notable buildings include the preserved shot tower, the highest structure in Chester.
It was demolished in the 1970s and the site is now part of the Northgate Arena leisure centre.
It has a number of medieval buildings, but some of the black-and-white buildings within the city centre are Victorian restorations.
Although the army had abandoned the fortress by 410 when the Romans retreated from Britannia, the Romano-British civilian settlement continued (probably with some Roman veterans staying behind with their wives and children) and its occupants probably continued to use the fortress and its defences as protection from raiders from the Irish Sea.
It now encompasses four sections: The Choir has 170 members drawn from Chester and the surrounding district; The Youth Choirs support three choirs: Youth Choir, Preludes, and the Alumni Choir; Celebrity Concerts promote a season of six high quality concerts each year; The Club is a long established section which aims to encourage young musicians and in many cases offers the first opportunity to perform in public.
Lache FM is currently Chester's only Community radio station.
Grosvenor Park Open Air Theatre, founded in 2010, is the only site-specific professional open-air theatre company outside London.
The Victorian City Baths are in the city centre.
0.9% described themselves as Asian.
Over 1mm of rain is reported on 131.6 days.
These new developments caused local concern as the physicality and therefore the feel of the city was being dramatically altered.
Potential schemes include a new pedestrian and cycling bridge across the River Dee, linking the Meadows with Huntington and Great Boughton, an access route between Curzon Park and the Roodee, an extension to the existing greenway route from Hoole to Guilden Sutton and Mickle Trafford, and an access route between the Millennium cycle route and Deva Link.
Work on the new bus station started in October 2015 and it is due to open in early 2017.
Chester Northgate, which was located North East of the city centre, opened in 1875 as a terminus for the Cheshire Lines Committee.
It was established in the land of the Celtic Cornovii, according to ancient cartographer Ptolemy, as a fortress during the Roman expansion northward, and was named Deva either after the goddess of the Dee, or directly from the British name for the river.
King Arthur is said to have fought his ninth battle at the "city of the legions" (''Caerlleon'') and later St Augustine came to the city to try to unite the church, and held his synod with the Welsh Bishops.
The present station has manned ticket offices and barriers, waiting rooms, toilets, shops and a pedestrian bridge with lifts.
The city's central shopping area includes its unique Rows or galleries (two levels of shops) which date from medieval times and are believed to include the oldest shop front in England.
Just over the Welsh border to the west, Broughton is home to a large Airbus UK factory (formerly British Aerospace), employing around 6,000 staff, where the wings of the Airbus aeroplanes are manufactured, and there are food processing plants to the north and west.
The festival went into liquidation in 2012.
On the south side of the River Dee, in Handbridge, is Edgar's Field, another public park, which contains Minerva's Shrine, a Roman shrine to the goddess Minerva.
The major museum in Chester is the Grosvenor Museum which includes a collection of Roman tombstones and an art gallery.
In common with most of the rest of the United Kingdom, Chester has an oceanic climate.
The fortress was 20% larger than other fortresses in the Roman province of Britannia built around the same time at York (Eboracum) and Caerleon (Isca Augusta); this has led to the suggestion that the fortress, rather than London (Londinium), was intended to become the capital of the Roman province of Britannia Superior.
It is in Gothic Revival style and has a tower and a short spire.
Grosvenor is the Duke's family name, which explains such features in the city as the Grosvenor Bridge, the Grosvenor Hotel, and Grosvenor Park.
It also has free publications, such as the newspapers ''Midweek Chronicle'' and ''Chester Standard'' and the free student magazine ''Wireless''.
The cathedral was formerly the church of St Werburgh's Abbey.
Queen Victoria, who was the school's first patron, issued a decree naming it "The Queen's School" in 1882.
Chester has a brass band that was formed in 1853.
The Industrial Revolution brought railways, canals, and new roads to the city, which saw substantial expansion and development&nbsp;– Chester Town Hall and the Grosvenor Museum are examples of Victorian architecture from this period.
The Orchestra is a registered charity and usually perform four or five concerts, under the direction of well known professional conductors, each year (including an annual carol concert), which take place in the magnificent setting of Chester's ancient Cathedral.
Chester's newspapers are the daily ''Chester Evening Leader'', and the weekly ''Chester Chronicle''.
After the Roman troops withdrew, the Romano-British established a number of petty kingdoms.
It has over 20,000 students at its two main campuses in Ellesmere Port and Chester as well as in workplaces and community venues.
0.7% described themselves as Mixed Race.
Much later, the body of Æthelred's niece, St Werburgh, was removed from Hanbury in Staffordshire in the 9th century and, to save it from desecration by Danish marauders, was reburied in the Church of SS Peter & Paul - later to become the Abbey Church (the present cathedral).
The current active projects are; The Delamere Street development and The £60million HQ development.
Chester is thought to have become part of Powys.
The Saxons extended and strengthened the walls of Chester to protect the city against the Danes, who occupied it for a short time until Alfred seized all the cattle and laid waste the surrounding land to drive them out.
The city has many chain stores, and also features an indoor market, a department store (Browns of Chester, now absorbed by the Debenhams chain), and two main indoor shopping centres: The Grosvenor Shopping Centre and the Forum (a reference to the City's Roman past).
Television in Chester is usually served by BBC North West Tonight and ITV Granada, and with its close proximity with North Wales, viewers can also receive overspills from BBC Wales Today and ITV Cymru Wales rather than their local relays, Chester is where Channel 4's soap-opera Hollyoaks is set (although most filming takes place around Liverpool).
A major new music festival was launched in March 2013 (previously known as Chester Performs), running annually every summer.
Her name is still remembered in St Werburgh's Street which passes alongside the cathedral, and near the city walls.
Much of the rest of the castle has been replaced by the neoclassical county court and its entrance, the Propyleum.
From December 2017, there will also be an hourly train to Leeds stopping at Warrington Bank Quay, Manchester and Bradford.
It was Alfred's daughter Æthelflæd, Lady of the Mercians, that built the new Saxon ''burh''.
Areas just outside the city include; Saughall, Mollington, Christleton, Tarvin and Mickle Trafford.
Apart from a  section, the listed Grade I walls are almost complete.
Chester is an unparished area within the unitary authority of Cheshire West and Chester as of 1 April 2009 replacing the old Chester City Council and the local ward is the City ward electing 3 councillors.
The tramway was closed in February 1930, a fate experienced by most other systems in the UK.
The eastern and northern part of Chester consisted of heathland and forest.
Central Chester's four main roads, Eastgate, Northgate, Watergate and Bridgegate, follow routes laid out at this time.
It has an eight-week annual summer repertory season.
The area between the river and the city walls here is known as the Roodee, and contains Chester Racecourse which holds a series of horse races and other events.
Ensemble Deva regularly features soloists and section leaders from the country’s leading symphony orchestras including Liverpool Philharmonic, the Hallé and Manchester Camerata.
A website was launched by the Renaissance team, so that interested parties could monitor progress on all the projects.
*Blacon High School
The King's School, an independent school, is one of seven schools re-established by King Henry VIII in 1541.
Chester Little Theatre is based in Newtown and run by Chester Theatre Club.
A small area around Chester Castle remains a civil parish of Chester Castle.
The absolute maximum temperature recorded was  during August 1990 (actually the Welsh record).
In 2007 Chester Council announced a 10-year plan to see Chester become a "must see European destination".
The city is a hub for major roads, including the M53 motorway towards the Wirral Peninsula and Liverpool and the M56 motorway towards Manchester.
and *St Thomas of Canterbury Church
Chester has had a professional classical music festival – the Chester Summer Music Festival, since 1967 and regularly from 1978.
A series of festivals is organised in the city, including mystery plays, a summer music festival and a literature festival.
More recently, Shy and the Fight, featuring Chester-based musicians, have achieved national attention via airplay on Radio 1 and Radio 2, also appearing at Wychwood and Swn festivals.
The Member of Parliament for the City of Chester is Chris Matheson (Labour), elected in 2015.
William the Conqueror ordered the construction of a castle, to dominate the town and the nearby Welsh border.
Chester has its own university, the University of Chester, and a major hospital, the Countess of Chester Hospital, named after Diana, Princess of Wales and Countess of Chester.
In 1805, the Wirral section of the Ellesmere Canal was opened, which ran from Netherpool (now known as Ellesmere Port) to meet the Chester Canal at Chester canal basin.
Chester Music Society was founded in 1948 as a small choral society.
Chester formerly had two railway stations.
Its members wear a blue-jacketed uniform with an image of the Eastgate clock on the breast pocket of the blazer.
Often given the correctly aligned breezy conditions, a föhn effect will operate, meaning local temperatures are somewhat higher than surrounding area.
In September 2007 extensive renovations took place to improve pedestrian access, and parking.
The most prominent buildings in the city centre are the town hall and the cathedral.
A new Church dedicated to St Peter alone was founded in AD 907 by the Lady Æthelfleda at what was to become the Cross.
Sunday 11 December 2011 saw the first  Chester Santa Dash.
The major public park in Chester is Grosvenor Park.
The town hall was opened in 1869.
To the southwest of the city the River Dee curves towards the north.
As of July 2013, Chester had the highest rate of home foreclosure in the country, at three times the national average.
Those on the first floor are entered behind a continuous walkway, often with a sloping shelf between the walkway and the railings overlooking the street.
They consist of buildings with shops or dwellings on the lowest two storeys.
Later services also went to Seacombe (Wallasey) and Wrexham Central via .
The Northgate Arena is the city's main leisure centre, there are smaller sports centres in Christleton and Upton.
In 689, King Æthelred of Mercia founded the Minster Church of West Mercia, which later became Chester's first cathedral, and the Saxons extended and strengthened the walls to protect the city against the Danes.
There is a successful hockey club, Chester HC, who play at the County Officers' Club on Plas Newton Lane, a Handball team Deva Handball Club, who boast to be the largest handball team in the country.
The Dewa Roman Experience has hands-on exhibits and a reconstructed Roman street.
The 'victrix' part of the name was taken from the title of the Legio XX ''Valeria Victrix'' which was based at Deva.
Bus transport in the city is provided by Stagecoach Group and Arriva Buses Wales, the council owned and operated ChesterBus (formerly Chester City Transport) having been sold to First Chester & The Wirral in mid-2007.
To the south of the city runs the River Dee, with its 11th century weir.
The development will see the demolition of the market hall, bus station, theatre and NCP car park.
Other secondary schools include:
Those not covered above include cruises on the River Dee and on the Shropshire Union Canal, and guided tours on an open-air bus.
Formerly a teacher training college, it gained full university status in 2005 and is the county's main provider of tertiary education.
Much of the architecture of central Chester looks medieval and some of it is but by far the greatest part of it, including most of the black-and-white buildings, is Victorian, a result of what Pevsner termed the "black-and-white revival".
At the intersection of the former Roman roads is Chester Cross, to the north of which is the small church of St Peter's which is in use as an ecumenical centre.
In 689, King Æthelred of Mercia founded the Minster Church of West Mercia on what is considered to be an early Christian site: it is known as the Minster of St John the Baptist, Chester (now St John's Church) which later became the first cathedral.
The population was forecast to grow by 5% in the period 2005 to 2021.
Consequently, the buildings were used in new and different ways instead of being flattened.
