He kept up a token effort, believing that to drop out would cast doubt on his actions in office and raise questions about his health, but by the time the convention began in June, his defeat was assured.
During his winter breaks, Arthur served as a teacher at a school in Schaghticoke.
In his first annual presidential address to Congress in 1881, Arthur requested civil service reform legislation and Pendleton again introduced his bill, but Congress did not pass it.
Murphy was also a hatter who sold goods to the Union Army, and Arthur represented him in Washington.
Arthur and his subordinates, Naval Officer Alonzo B. Cornell and Surveyor George H. Sharpe, refused to obey the president's order; Sherman encouraged Arthur to resign, offering him appointment by Hayes to the consulship in Paris in exchange, but Arthur refused.
Arthur then selected Charles J. Folger, his friend and fellow New York Stalwart as Windom's replacement.
Garfield and his supporters knew they would face a difficult election without the support of the New York Stalwarts and decided to offer one of them the vice presidential nomination.
Blaine did not remain in office long enough to see the effort through, and when Frederick T. Frelinghuysen replaced him at the end of 1881, the conference efforts lapsed.
The vacation had the opposite effect, and Arthur suffered from intense pain before returning to Washington.
Among those who dealt with the Custom House, Arthur was one of the era's more popular collectors.
Opinions varied on how to balance the budget; the Democrats wished to lower tariffs, in order to reduce revenues and the cost of imported goods, while Republicans believed that high tariffs ensured high wages in manufacturing and mining.
The running mates, never close, detached as Garfield continued to freeze out the Stalwarts from his patronage.
This argument struck home in the swing states of New York and Indiana, where many were employed in manufacturing.
Arthur agreed with his party, and in 1882 called for the abolition of excise taxes on everything except liquor, as well as a simplification of the complex tariff structure.
Even as his professional life improved, however, Arthur and his wife experienced a personal tragedy as their only child, William, died suddenly that year at the age of three.
Arthur thought otherwise and accepted.
While still in Waterville, he departed from his legal studies and his Presbyterian upbringing to join the Free Will Baptists; he spent the rest of his life as a minister in that sect.
Legislation required to bring the treaty into force failed in the House, however, rendering it a dead letter.
In the years following the Civil War, American naval power declined precipitously, shrinking from nearly 700 vessels to just 52, most of which were obsolete.
They preferred the government spend more on internal improvements and reduce excise taxes.
Arthur immediately took advantage of the resulting free time to work for the election of Edward Cooper as New York City's next mayor.
The first vacancy arose in July 1881 with the death of Associate Justice Nathan Clifford, a Democrat who had been a member of the Court since before the Civil War.
The funds were crucial in the close election, and winning his home state of New York was critical.
In addition, he indulged his military interest by becoming Judge Advocate General for the Second Brigade of the New York Militia.
The Collector was responsible for hiring hundreds of workers to collect the tariffs due at the United States' busiest port.
Arthur made appointments to fill two vacancies on the United States Supreme Court.
Realizing this, they adjusted their approach to claim that Democrats would lower the country's protective tariff, which would allow cheaper manufactured goods to be imported from Europe, and thereby put thousands out of work.
In 1861, Arthur was appointed to the military staff of Governor Edwin D. Morgan as engineer-in-chief.
In addition, Grand Army of the Republic posts in Ogdensburg, Wisconsin and Medford, Oregon were named in his honor.
Conkling eventually relented, and campaigned for the ticket.
In that year, reform-minded Republicans formed the Liberal Republican party and voted against Grant, but he was re-elected in spite of their opposition.
He had an opportunity to serve at the front when the 9th New York Volunteer Infantry Regiment elected him colonel early in the war, but at Governor Morgan's request, he turned it down to remain at his post in New York.
Arthur left office in 1885 and returned to his New York City home.
As vice president, Arthur cast tie-breaking votes in favor of the Republicans when Mahone opted to join their caucus.
Conkling and his fellow Stalwarts, including Arthur, wished to follow up their 1879 success at the 1880 Republican National Convention by securing the nomination for their ally, ex-President Grant.
Morgan leaned toward the conservative wing of the New York Republican party, as did the men who worked with him in the organization, including Weed, Seward (who continued in office under President Andrew Johnson), and Roscoe Conkling (an eloquent Utica Congressman and rising star in the party).
He succeeded by embracing the cause of civil service reform.
Grant offered the position to John Augustus Griswold and William Orton, each of whom declined and recommended Arthur.
The commission's recommendations were ignored, however, as the House Ways and Means Committee, dominated by protectionists, provided a 10% reduction.
On August&nbsp;1, 1882, Arthur vetoed the bill to widespread popular acclaim; in his veto message, his principal objection was that it appropriated funds for purposes "not for the common defense or general welfare, and which do not promote commerce among the States."
Even so, the Senate remained deadlocked for two months over Garfield's nominations because of Conkling's opposition to some of them.
Since the end of Reconstruction, conservative white Democrats (or "Bourbon Democrats") had regained power in the South, and the Republican party dwindled rapidly as their primary supporters in the region, blacks, were disenfranchised.
Mark Twain wrote of him, "It would be hard indeed to better President Arthur's administration."
That treaty allowed only a "reasonable" suspension of immigration.
Arthur rarely articulated his own political ideas during his time as a part of the machine; as was common at the time, loyalty and hard work on the machine's behalf was more important than actual political positions.
The Indian Wars were winding down, and public sentiment was shifting toward more favorable treatment of Native Americans.
In 1859, they were married at Calvary Episcopal Church in Manhattan.
As expected, the election was close.
Garfield ultimately appointed a Stalwart, Thomas Lemuel James, to be Postmaster General, but the cabinet fight and Arthur's ill-considered speech left the President and Vice President clearly estranged when they took office on March&nbsp;4, 1881.
When Arthur was admitted to the bar in 1854, he joined Culver's firm, which was subsequently renamed Culver, Parker, and Arthur.
Conkling, elected in 1867 to the United States Senate, noticed Arthur and facilitated his rise in the party, and Arthur became chairman of the New York City Republican executive committee in 1868.
Arthur's unpopularity in life carried over into his assessment by historians, and his reputation after leaving office disappeared.
In September 1877, Hayes demanded the three men's resignations, which they refused to give.
In the presidential election of 1864, Arthur and Murphy raised funds from Republicans in New York and attended Abraham Lincoln's inauguration in 1865.
On September 22 he re-took the oath of office, this time before Chief Justice Morrison R. Waite.
Congress attempted to balance the budget from the other side of the ledger, with increased spending on the 1882 Rivers and Harbors Act in the unprecedented amount of $19 million.
In total, his income came to more than $50,000—more than the president's salary, and more than enough for him to enjoy fashionable clothes and a lavish lifestyle.
The chief examiner, Silas W. Burt, was a long-time reformer who had been Arthur's opponent when the two men worked at the New York Customs House.
Custom Houses were managed by political appointees who served as Collector, Naval Officer and Surveyor.
The Senate's Commerce Committee, chaired by Conkling, unanimously rejected all the nominees; the full Senate rejected Roosevelt and Prince by a vote of 31–25, and confirmed Merritt only because Sharpe's term had expired.
The commission issued its first rules in May 1883; by 1884, half of all postal officials and three-quarters of the Customs Service jobs were to be awarded by merit.
He also signed in August of that year the Immigration Act of 1882, which levied a 50-cent tax on immigrants to the United States, and excluded from entry the mentally ill, the intellectually disabled, criminals, or any other person potentially dependent upon public assistance.
The statue was dedicated in 1899 and unveiled by Arthur's sister, Mary Arthur McElroy.
He was laid beside his wife in a sarcophagus on a large corner of the plot.
In just two years' time, an unrepentant Stalwart had become the president who ushered in long-awaited civil service reform.
The bill passed the Senate and House by overwhelming margins, but this as well was vetoed by Arthur, who concluded the 20-year ban to be a breach of the renegotiated treaty of 1880.
Shortly thereafter, President Grant gave Conkling control over New York patronage, including the Customs House at the Port of New York.
Republicans were pleased with the committee's make-up but were surprised when, in December 1882, they submitted a report to Congress calling for tariff cuts averaging between 20 and 25%.
Arthur's status in the administration diminished when, a month before inauguration day, he gave a speech before reporters suggesting the election in Indiana, a swing state, had been won by Republicans through illegal machinations.
Senator George Edmunds was Arthur's next choice, but he declined to be considered.
Attorney General Wayne MacVeagh was next to resign, believing that, as a reformer, he had no place in an Arthur cabinet.
Reformers feared Arthur, as a former supporter of the spoils system, would not commit to continuing the investigation into the scandal.
While in Albany on July 2, Arthur learned that Garfield had been shot.
He managed a few public appearances, until the end of 1885.
With high revenue held over from wartime taxes, the federal government had collected more than it spent since 1866; by 1882 the surplus reached $145 million.
The next morning, Arthur suffered a cerebral hemorrhage and never regained consciousness; he died the following day at the age of 57.
To their surprise, Arthur vetoed it and requested revisions, which they made and which Arthur then approved.
Hayes then submitted the appointment of Theodore Roosevelt, Sr., L. Bradford Prince, and Edwin Merritt (all supporters of Conkling's rival William M. Evarts) to the Senate for confirmation as their replacements.
Once in Washington he destroyed the mailed proclamation and issued a formal call for a special session.
Levi P. Morton, the first choice of Garfield's supporters, consulted with Conkling, who advised him to decline, which he did.
To rejuvenate his health outside the confines of Washington, Arthur and some political friends traveled to Florida in April 1883.
Hayes again offered Arthur the position of consul general in Paris as a face-saving consolation; Arthur again declined, as Hayes knew he probably would.
Conkling succeeded to leadership of the conservative wing of New York's Republicans by 1868 as Morgan concentrated more time and effort on national politics, including serving as chairman of the Republican National Committee.
Later that year, he started a new law partnership with a friend, Henry D. Gardiner, and traveled with him to Kansas to consider purchasing land and setting up a law practice there.
When Arthur was nominated for vice president in 1880, a New York attorney and political opponent, Arthur P. Hinman, initially speculated that Arthur was born in Ireland and did not come to the United States until he was fourteen years old.
The closest Arthur came to the front was when he traveled south to inspect New York troops near Fredericksburg, Virginia, in May 1862, shortly after forces under Major General Irvin McDowell seized the town during the Peninsula Campaign.
Eventually, the pressure to replace Murphy grew too great, and Grant asked for his resignation in 1871.
Arthur did, however, effectively intervene to overturn a court-martial ruling against a black West Point cadet, Johnson Whittaker, after the Judge Advocate General of the Army, David G. Swaim, found the prosecution's case against Whittaker to be illegal and based on racism.
In the state elections of 1879, he and Conkling worked to ensure that the Republican nominees for state offices would be men of Conkling's faction, who had become known as Stalwarts.
Republicans considered the law a success at the time, but later concluded that it contributed to their loss of seats in the elections of 1882.
The two became associates within New York Republican party circles, eventually rising in the ranks of the conservative branch of the party dominated by Thurlow Weed.
The bill passed both houses narrowly on March&nbsp;3, 1883, the last full day of the 47th Congress; Arthur signed the measure into law, with no effect on the surplus.
Arthur and the machine had rebuked Hayes and their intra-party rivals, but Arthur had only a few days to enjoy his triumph when, on January&nbsp;12, 1880, his wife died suddenly while he was in Albany organizing the political agenda for the coming year.
Hancock did not help his own cause when, in an attempt to remain neutral on the tariff, he said that "the tariff question is a local question", which only served to make him appear uninformed about an important issue.
He gained praise for his veto of a Rivers and Harbors Act that would have appropriated federal funds in a manner he thought excessive.
Garfield had believed polygamy was criminal behavior and was morally detrimental to family values, and Arthur's views were, for once, in line with his predecessor's.
He proclaimed to onlookers: "I am a Stalwart, and Arthur will be President!"
These restraints&nbsp;... distinguished him sharply from the stereotype politician."
By 1975, however, Thomas C. Reeves would write that Arthur's "appointments, if unspectacular, were unusually sound; the corruption and scandal that dominated business and politics of the period did not tarnish his administration."
Arthur and Frelinghuysen continued Blaine's efforts to encourage trade among the nations of the Western Hemisphere; a treaty with Mexico providing for reciprocal tariff reductions was signed in 1882 and approved by the Senate in 1884.
Arthur's coalition policy was only successful in Virginia, however, and by 1885 the Readjuster movement began to collapse with the election of a Democratic president.
Arthur took this step to ensure procedural compliance; there had been a lingering question about whether a state court judge (Brady) could administer a federal oath of office.
The family remained in Fairfield until 1832, when William Arthur's profession took them on the road again, to churches in several towns in Vermont and upstate New York.
This step ensured that the Senate had legal authority to convene immediately and choose a Senate president pro tempore, who would be able to assume the presidency if Arthur died.
Other federal action on behalf of blacks was equally ineffective: when the Supreme Court struck down the Civil Rights Act of 1875 in an 1883 decision, Arthur expressed his disagreement with the decision in a message to Congress, but was unable to persuade Congress to pass any new legislation in its place.
The administration faced a different challenge in the West, where the LDS Church was under government pressure to stop the practice of polygamy in Utah Territory.
He was named "Chester" after Chester Abell, the physician and family friend who assisted in his birth, and "Alan" for his paternal grandfather.
In 1898, the Arthur memorial statue—a fifteen-foot, bronze figure of Arthur standing on a Barre Granite pedestal—was created by sculptor George Edwin Bissell and installed at Madison Square, in New York City.
After graduating, Arthur returned to Schaghticoke and became a full-time teacher, and soon began to pursue an education in the law.
After a juror came forward with allegations that the defendants attempted to bribe him, the judge set aside the guilty verdicts and granted a new trial.
He played no role in the 1884 campaign, which Blaine would later blame for his loss that November to the Democratic nominee, Grover Cleveland.
In 1871 Grant offered to name Arthur as Commissioner of Internal Revenue, replacing Alfred Pleasonton; Arthur declined the appointment.
The allotment system was favored by liberal reformers at the time, but eventually proved detrimental to Native Americans as most of their land was resold at low prices to white speculators.
After their first child, Regina, was born, the Arthurs moved to Vermont.
Candidates for high office did not personally campaign in those days, but as state Republican chairman, Arthur played a part in the campaign in his usual fashion: overseeing the effort in New York and raising money.
Notwithstanding his cooperation, the Jay Commission issued a second report critical of Arthur and other Custom House employees, and subsequent reports urging a complete reorganization.
Republicans lost seats in the 1882 congressional elections, in which Democrats campaigned on the reform issue.
The nation's military focus over the fifteen years before Garfield and Arthur's election had been on the Indian wars in the West, rather than the high seas, but as the region was increasingly pacified, many in Congress grew concerned at the poor state of the Navy.
Congress overrode his veto the next day and the new law reduced the surplus by $19 million.
Reporters accompanied the presidential party, helping to publicize the new National Park system.
The electoral college result was more decisive—214 to 155—and Garfield and Arthur were elected.
To the surprise of reformers, Arthur took up the cause of reform, though it had once led to his expulsion from office.
Arthur urged Congress to increase funding for Indian education, which it did in 1884, although not to the extent he wished.
On November&nbsp;22, a private funeral was held at the Church of the Heavenly Rest in New York City, attended by President Cleveland and ex-President Hayes, among other notables.
In the months leading up to the 1884 Republican National Convention, however, Arthur began to realize that neither faction of the Republican party was prepared to give him their full support: the Half-Breeds were again solidly behind Blaine, while Stalwarts were undecided; some backed Arthur, with others considering Senator John A. Logan of Illinois.
Arthur's political prospects improved along with his law practice when his patron, ex-Governor Morgan, was elected to the United States Senate.
This claim, too, failed to gain credence.
His advocacy for, and subsequent enforcement of, the Pendleton Civil Service Reform Act was the centerpiece of his administration.
Arthur was reluctant to be seen acting as president while Garfield lived, and for the next two months there was a void of authority in the executive office, with Garfield too weak to carry out his duties, and Arthur reluctant to assume them.
After spending the summer of 1886 in New London, Connecticut, he returned home, and became seriously ill and, on November&nbsp;16, ordered nearly all of his papers, both personal and official, burned.
The contracts to build the ABCD ships were all awarded to the low bidder, John Roach & Sons of Chester, Pennsylvania, even though Roach once employed Secretary Chandler as a lobbyist.
Arthur had a better reputation than Murphy, but reformers still criticized the patronage structure and the moiety system as corrupt.
He continued his law practice (now a solo practice after Gardiner's death) and his role in politics, becoming a member of the prestigious Century Club in 1867.
Frelinghuysen advised Arthur not to fill any future vacancies with Stalwarts, but when Postmaster General James resigned in January 1882, Arthur selected Timothy O. Howe, a Wisconsin Stalwart.
The Senate confirmed the nomination but, as expected, Conkling declined it, the last time a confirmed nominee declined an appointment.
A rising tide of reform within the party caused Arthur to rename the financial extractions from employees as "voluntary contributions" in 1872, but the concept remained, and the party reaped the benefit of controlling government jobs.
Through the summer, Arthur refused to travel to Washington and was at his Lexington Avenue home when, on the night of September&nbsp;19, he learned that Garfield had died.
Arthur was commissioned as a brigadier general and assigned to the state militia's quartermaster department.
After the election, Arthur worked in vain to persuade Garfield to fill certain positions with his fellow New York Stalwarts—especially that of the Secretary of the Treasury; the Stalwart machine received a further rebuke when Garfield appointed Blaine, Conkling's arch-enemy, as Secretary of State.
In 1828, the family moved again, to Fairfield, where Chester Alan Arthur was born the following year; he was the fifth of nine children.
Having won an election in that state on a platform of more education funding (for black and white schools alike) and abolition of the poll tax and the whipping post, many northern Republicans saw the Readjusters as a more viable ally in the South than the moribund southern Republican party.
His health limited his activity with the firm, and Arthur served only of counsel.
According to a purported eyewitness account by journalist William C. Hudson, Conkling and Arthur argued, with Arthur telling Conkling, "The office of the Vice-President is a greater honor than I ever dreamed of attaining."
One of his first teachers said Arthur was a boy "frank and open in manners and genial in disposition."
During his time at school, he gained his first political inclinations and supported the Whig Party.
When Garfield won the Republican nomination for president in 1880, Arthur, an eastern Stalwart, was nominated for vice president to balance the ticket.
When Arthur joined the firm, Culver and New York attorney John Jay (the grandson of the Founding Father of the same name) were pursuing a ''habeas corpus'' action against Jonathan Lemmon, a Virginia slaveholder who was passing through New York with his eight slaves.
Navy Secretary William H. Hunt was next to resign, in April 1882, and Arthur attempted a more balanced approach by appointing William E. Chandler to the post, on Blaine's recommendation.
Some black Republicans felt betrayed by the pragmatic gambit, but others (including Frederick Douglass and ex-Senator Blanche K. Bruce) endorsed the administration's actions, as the Southern independents had more liberal racial policies than the Democrats.
Finally, when Interior Secretary Samuel J. Kirkwood resigned that same month, Arthur appointed Henry M. Teller, a Colorado Stalwart to the office.
Based on the suggestions in the report, Congress appropriated funds for the construction of three steel protected cruisers (''Atlanta'', ''Boston'', and ''Chicago'') and an armed dispatch-steamer (''Dolphin''), collectively known as the "ABCD Ships" or the "Squadron of Evolution".
Both Democratic and Republican leaders realized that they could attract the votes of reformers by turning against the spoils system and, by 1882, a bipartisan effort began in favor of reform.
Like his Republican predecessors, Arthur struggled with the question of how his party was to challenge the Democrats in the South and how, if at all, to protect the civil rights of black southerners.
At the outset, Arthur struggled to overcome a slightly negative reputation, which stemmed from his early career in politics as part of New York's Republican political machine.
The couple took their son's death hard, and when they had another son, Chester Alan Jr., in 1864, they lavished attention on him.
The two married in Dunham on April 12, 1821, soon after meeting.
Sherman ordered a commission led by John Jay to investigate the New York Custom House.
Arthur's successor, Grover Cleveland, finding that title belonged to the Indians, revoked Arthur's order a few months later.
The Conkling machine was solidly behind General Ulysses S. Grant's candidacy for president, and Arthur raised funds for Grant's election in 1868.
With the war fifteen years in the past and Union generals at the head of both tickets, the tactic was less effective than the Republicans hoped.
Reform-minded Republicans, friendlier to Arthur after he endorsed civil service reform, were still not certain enough of his reform credentials to back him over Senator George F. Edmunds of Vermont, who had long favored their cause.
The Arthur administration was challenged by changing relations with western American Indian tribes.
In July 1882 Congress easily passed a bill regulating steamships that carried immigrants to the United States.
The Yellowstone trip was more beneficial to Arthur's health than his Florida excursion, and he returned to Washington refreshed after two months of travel.
Also, after Conkling's resignation, the Senate had adjourned without electing a ''president pro tempore,'' who would normally follow Arthur in the succession.
They next approached Arthur, and Conkling advised him to also reject the nomination, believing the Republicans would lose.
The Senate in the 47th United States Congress was divided among 37 Republicans, 37 Democrats, one independent (David Davis) who caucused with the Democrats, one Readjuster (William Mahone), and four vacancies.
In September 1879 Arthur became Chairman of the New York State Republican Executive Committee, a post in which he served until October 1881.
To their surprise, he acted quickly to appoint the members of the Civil Service Commission that the law created, naming reformers Dorman Bridgman Eaton, John Milton Gregory, and Leroy D. Thoman as commissioners.
Failure to obtain a conviction tarnished the administration's image, but Arthur did succeed in putting a stop to the fraud.
Journalist Alexander McClure later wrote, "No man ever entered the Presidency so profoundly and widely distrusted as Chester Alan Arthur, and no one ever retired&nbsp;... more generally respected, alike by political friend and foe."
Arthur received plaudits for his work, but his post was a political appointment, and he was relieved of his militia duties in January 1863 when Governor Horatio Seymour, a Democrat, took office.
Suffering from poor health, Arthur made only a limited effort to secure the Republican Party's nomination in 1884; he retired at the close of his term.
Congress also approved funds to rebuild four monitors (''Puritan'', ''Amphitrite'', ''Monadnock'', and ''Terror,'') which had lain uncompleted since 1877.
Arthur appointed a committee of Custom House workers to determine where the cuts were to be made and, after a written protest, carried them out.
He joined other young Whigs in support of Henry Clay, even participating in a brawl against students who supported James K. Polk.
He also turned down command of four New York City regiments organized as the Metropolitan Brigade, again at Morgan's request.
Business leaders supported him, as did Southern Republicans who owed their jobs to his control of the patronage, but by the time they began to rally around him, Arthur had decided against a serious campaign for the nomination.
He was hired by Thomas Murphy, a Republican politician, but also a friend of William M. Tweed, the boss of the Tammany Hall Democratic organization.
At that time, the state was the scene of a brutal struggle between pro-slavery and anti-slavery forces, and Arthur lined up firmly with the latter.
Following the war, he devoted more time to Republican politics and quickly rose in the political machine run by New York Senator Roscoe Conkling.
Just before going into recess in May 1881, the situation became more complicated when Conkling and the other Senator from New York, Thomas C. Platt, resigned in protest of Garfield's continuing opposition to their faction.
Arthur was born in Fairfield, Vermont, grew up in upstate New York, and practiced law in New York City.
Blaine, nemesis of the Stalwart faction, remained Secretary of State until Congress reconvened, then departed immediately.
During Arthur's presidency, settlers and cattle ranchers continued to encroach on Indian territory.
Nevertheless, the movement for civil service reform continued to chip away at Conkling's patronage machine; in 1874 Custom House employees were found to have improperly assessed fines against an importing company as a way to increase their own incomes, and Congress reacted, repealing the moiety system and putting the staff, including Arthur, on regular salaries.
Arthur initially resisted their efforts, but after Secretary of the Interior Henry M. Teller, an opponent of allotment, assured him that the lands were not protected, Arthur opened up the Crow Creek Reservation in the Dakota Territory to settlers by executive order in 1885.
Neither candidate commanded a majority of delegates and, deadlocked after thirty-six ballots, the convention turned to a dark horse, James A. Garfield, an Ohio Congressman and Civil War General who was neither Stalwart nor Half-Breed.
Hayes further struck at the heart of the spoils system by issuing an executive order that forbade assessments and barred federal office holders from "taking part in the management of political organizations, caucuses, conventions, or election campaigns".
An 1882 trial of the ringleaders resulted in convictions for two minor conspirators and a hung jury for the rest.
Arthur's job was only spared until July 1878, when Hayes took advantage of a Congressional recess to fire him and Cornell, replacing them with the recess appointment of Merritt and Silas W. Burt.
Conkling opposed the confirmation of Merritt and Burt when the Senate reconvened in February 1879, but Merritt was approved by a vote of 31–25, as was Burt by 31–19, giving Hayes his most significant civil service reform victory.
In 1856, Arthur courted Ellen Herndon, the daughter of William Lewis Herndon, a Virginia naval officer.
Arthur telegraphed his congratulations to Blaine and accepted his defeat with equanimity.
Chester Alan Arthur was born October&nbsp;5, 1829, in Fairfield, Vermont.
Blatchford served on the Court until his death in 1893.
He was assigned MOLLUS insignia number 2430.
Arthur's mother, Malvina Stone, was born in Vermont, the daughter of George Washington Stone and Judith Stevens.
As the 1884 presidential election approached, James G. Blaine was considered the favorite for the Republican nomination, but Arthur, too, contemplated a run for a full term as president.
Both children survived to adulthood.
