The wood seems to reach its highest tannin content after the trees reach 30 years old.
So, most producers earn less than $5,000 per year, with a third of the total not having sold anything so far.
Other catkins have these pollen-bearing flowers, but also carry near the twig from which these spring, small clusters of female or fruit-producing flowers.
The superior fruiting varieties among European chestnuts have good size, sweet taste, and easy-to-remove inner skins.
To the early Christians, chestnuts symbolized chastity.
Where chestnut trees touch, virtually no fruit is produced.
They can remain on the tree longer than they hold the fruit, but more often achieve complete opening and release the fruits only after having fallen on the ground; opening is partly due to soil humidity.
The last decades' worldwide renewal may have profited from the huge reforestation efforts started in the 1930s in the United States to establish varieties of ''C.
Dry, chestnut firewood is best burned in a closed log-burner, because of its tendency to spit when on an open fire.
Chestnut buds have been listed as one of the 38 substances used to prepare Bach flower remedies, a kind of alternative medicine promoted for its effect on health.
It has been a staple food in southern Europe, Turkey, and southwestern and eastern Asia for millennia, largely replacing cereals where these would not grow well, if at all, in mountainous Mediterranean areas.
The leaves are not as prone to be insect-eaten as those of the oak, and are also used for fodder.
As the chestnuts ripen, the starch is slowly converted into sugars, and moisture content also starts decreasing.
France annually produces over 1,000 metric tons, but still imports about 8,000 metric tons, mainly from Italy.
Chestnut flowers are not self-compatible, so two trees are required for pollination.
In Corsica, the flour is fried into doughnut-like fritters called ''fritelli'' and made into ''necci, pattoni, castagnacci,'' and ''cialdi''.
When chestnuts are just starting to ripen, the fruit is mostly starch and is very firm under finger pressure from the high water content.
Chestnuts  contain very little fat, mostly unsaturated, and no gluten.
The burrs are often paired or clustered on the branch and contain one to seven nuts according to the different species, varieties, and cultivars.
Chestnut cake may be prepared using chestnut flour.
Many communities owe their origin and former richness to the ensuing chestnut woods.
The bark imparts a dark colour to the tannin, and has a higher sugar content, which increases the percentage of soluble non-tans, or impurities, in the extract; so it was not employed in this use.
With age, American species' bark becomes grey and darker, thick and deeply furrowed; the furrows run longitudinally, and tend to twist around the trunk as the tree ages; it sometimes reminds one of a large cable with twisted strands.
In 1911, the food book ''The Grocer's Encyclopedia'' noted that a cannery in Holland included in its "vegetables-and-meat" ready-cooked combinations, a "chestnuts and sausages" casserole besides the more classic "beef and onions" and "green peas and veal".
In 1583, Charles Estienne and Jean Liébault wrote, "an infinity of people live on nothing else but (the chestnut)".
Efforts started in the 1930s are still ongoing to repopulate the country with these trees, in Massachusetts and many places elsewhere in the United States.
Although it may indicate another tree, it indicates the fruit was a local staple food in the early 17th century.
Seeds germinate in late winter or early spring, but the life length is short.
There is no unpleasant aroma, such as yeast, fungus, mold or paper, which sometimes occur with other chestnuts.
Wide spacing between the trees encourages low, broad crowns with maximum exposure to sunshine to increase fruit production.
In 1882 at Privas, he invented the technology to make ''marrons glacés'' on an industrial scale (although a great number of the more than 20 necessary steps from harvest to the finished product are still accomplished manually).
In Swiss cuisine, a similar dish made with kirsch and butter is called ''vermicelles''.
mollissima'') possibly for 2,000 to 6,000 years.
sativa'' responds well to competitive pressure from ''Pseudotsuga menziesii'', the latter also showing a higher productivity.
They appeared in France in the 16th century.
They grow so abundantly there,  their presence would have determined the place's name.
In addition, chestnuts contain about 8% of various sugars, mainly sucrose, glucose, fructose, and, in a lesser amount, stachyose and raffinose, which are fermented in the lower gut, producing gas.
Chestnuts can be dried and milled into flour, which can then be used to prepare breads, cakes, pies, pancakes, pastas, polenta (known in Corsica as ''pulenda''), or used as thickener for stews, soups, and sauces.
They must be protected from the cold in their first winter, and also from mice and squirrels.
A study of the sector in 2005 found that US producers are mainly part-timers diversifying an existing agricultural business, or hobbyists.
Chestnuts are considered self-sterile, so at least two trees are needed for pollination.
Their popularity declined during the last few centuries, partly due to their reputation of "food for poor people".
Trees can be found at altitudes between 200 and 1000 metres above sea level; some mention between 300 and 750 m altitude, while the famous Chestnut Tree of One Hundred Horses on Mount Etna stands at 1200 metres.).
It is therefore uncommon to find large pieces of chestnut in building structures, but it has always been highly valued for small outdoor furniture pieces, fencing, cladding (shingles) for covering buildings, and pit-props, for which durability is an important factor.
The French varieties of marrons are highly favoured and sold at high prices in gourmet shops.
Young chestnut wood has proved more durable than oak for woodwork that has to be partly in the ground, such as stakes and fences.
American chestnuts are usually very small (around ), but sweet-tasting with easy-to-remove pellicles.
The main region in Italy for chestnut production is the Mugello region; in 1996, the European Community granted the fruit Protected Geographic Indication (equivalent to the French Appellation d'Origine Contrôlée) status to the  Mugello sweet chestnut.
A first soak in limewater removes their bitter flavour, then they are ground and mixed with the ordinary provender.
Chestnuts depart from the norm for culinary nuts in that they have very little protein or fat, their calories coming chiefly from carbohydrates.
The produce is mostly sold to the domestic fresh fruit market.
In the Mediterranean climate zone, chestnut trees are rarer in Greece because the chalky soil is not conducive to the tree's growth.
The ripe pollen carries a heavy, sweet odour that some people find too sweet or unpleasant.
Soon after that, though, the American chestnuts were nearly wiped out by chestnut blight.
This is just enough to preserve the genetic material used to engineer an American chestnut tree with the minimal necessary genetic input from any of the disease-immune Asiatic species.
American and Chinese chinquapins (''Castanea pumila'' and ''Castanea henryi'') have very small nuts that are an important source of food for wildlife.
Moreover, the plantings have so far been mostly of Chinese species, but the products are not readily available.
Chestnut trees are of moderate growth rate (for the Chinese chestnut tree) to fast-growing for American and European species.
A fine granular sugar can be obtained from the fermentation of the juice, as well as a beer; the roasted fruit provides a coffee substitute.
Another recent study indicates that investment in a new plantation takes 13 years to break even, at least within the current Australian market.
The two woods' textures are similar.
Chestnut trees particularly flourish in the Mediterranean basin.
The timber becomes neither as hard nor as strong as oak.
These properties make chestnut extract especially suitable for the tanning of heavy hides and to produce leather soles for high-quality shoes in particular.
It is possible to obtain a leather with high yield in weight, which is compact, firm, flexible, and waterproof.
In 1584, the governor of Genua, which dominated Corsica, ordered all the farmers and landowners to plant four trees yearly, among which a chestnut tree – plus olive, fig and mulberry trees (this assumedly lasted until the end of Genoese rule over Corsica in 1729).
Because of their high water content, transpiration rates and consequent loss weight, the nuts react as fresh fruits (not as nuts).
On alkaline soils, chestnut trees can be grown by grafting them onto oak rootstocks.
Some catkins are made of only male flowers, which mature first.
The American Chestnut Foundation recommends waiting a little while more before large-scale planting.
In some parts of Italy, a cake made of chestnuts is used as a substitute for potatoes.
The fruit is contained in a spiny (very sharp) cupule  in diameter, also called "bur" or "burr".
The pellicle closely adheres to the seed itself, following the grooves usually present at the surface of the fruit.
Until the introduction of the potato, whole forest-dwelling communities which had scarce access to wheat flour relied on chestnuts as their main source of carbohydrates.
dentata'' and some others, long before European immigrants introduced their stock to America, and before the arrival of chestnut blight.
The name is cited twice in the King James Version of the Bible.
The fruit inside these shows two cotyledons with a creamy-white flesh throughout, except in some varieties which show only one cotyledon, and whose episperm is only slightly or not intruded at all.
Most wood production is done by coppice systems, cut on a 12-year rotation to provide small timber which does not split as badly as large logs.
Chestnut wood is a useful source of natural tannin and was used for tanning leather before the introduction of synthetic tannins.
In one instance, Jacob puts peeled twigs in the water troughs to promote healthy offspring of his livestock.
This determines its astringency and its capability to fix raw hides.
Linen cloth can be whitened with chestnut meal.
The leaves and the skins (husk and pellicle) of the fruits provide a hair shampoo.
The southern European chestnut wood usually contains at least 10 to 13% more tannin than chestnut trees in northern climates.
Another predetermining factor in the small productivity of the sector is that most orchards have been created less than 10 years ago, so have young trees which are as now barely entering commercial production.
The name ''Castanea'' is probably derived  from the old name for the sweet chestnut, either in Latin or in Ancient Greek.
Chestnuts are often added to animal fodder.
The main regions in France for chestnut production are the départements of Ardèche, with the famous  "Châtaigne d'Ardèche" (A.O.C), of the Var, and of the Lyon region.
Chestnut bread can stay fresh as long as two weeks.
Independently from annual rainfall, it is recommended to water young trees at least during summer and early autumn.
It has been proven that the roofs of these buildings are actually Durmast oak, which closely resembles chestnut in grain and color.
Upon pressing the chestnut, a slight 'give' can be felt; the hull is not so tense, and  space occurs between it and the flesh of the fruit.
After most growth is achieved, older chestnut timber tends to split and warp when harvested.
For three centuries, most barns and homes east of the Mississippi River were made from it.
In Portugal's archipelago of Madeira, chestnut liquor is a traditional beverage, and it is gaining popularity with the tourists and in continental Portugal.
American Indians were eating the American chestnut species, mainly ''C.
When in a growing stage, with very little sap wood, a chestnut tree contains more timber of a durable quality than an oak of the same dimensions.
sativa'' which may be resistant to chestnut blight, as well as to relieve the strain on cereal supplies.
Their carbohydrate content compares with that of wheat and rice; chestnuts have twice as much starch as the potato on an as-is basis.
In 1802, an Italian agronomist said of Tuscany that "the fruit of the chestnut tree is practically the sole subsistence of our highlanders", while in 1879 it was said that it almost exclusively fed whole populations for half the year, as "a temporary but complete substitution for cereals".
The optimum rainfall for chestnut trees is  or more, ideally in even distribution throughout the year.
These synonyms are or have been in use: ''Fagus castanea'' (used by Linnaeus in first edition of ''Species Plantarum'', 1753), Sardian nut, Jupiter's nut, husked nut, and Spanish chestnut (U.S.).
Around the time the fruits reach maturity, the burrs turn yellow-brown and split open in two or four sections.
The Chinese chestnut prefers a fertile, well-drained soil, but it grows well in fairly dry, rocky, or poor soils.
As it tends to give a brownish tone to the leather, it is most often used in combination with quebracho, mimosa, tara, myrabolans, and valonia.
The dormant plant is very cold-hardy in Britain.
Chestnuts are now slowly gaining popularity in Australia.
dentata'' seedlings in Ohio confirmed the need for sun for optimal growth.
It is markedly sweet, peels easily, is not excessively floury or astringent, and has notes of vanilla, hazelnut, and, more subtly, fresh bread.
sativa'' stock, which is still the dominant species.
Each flower has eight stamens, or 10 to 12 for ''C.
sustainable forest management incorporates more mixed plantings of proven efficiency, as opposed to monosylviculture.
Ancient Greeks, such as Dioscorides and Galen, wrote of chestnuts to comment on their medicinal properties—and of the flatulence induced by eating too much of it.
They should be kept cool at all times, including in shops when on display for sale.
The two latter's foliage has striking yellow autumn colouring.
Clément Faugier ingénieur des Ponts et Chaussées was looking for a way to revitalize the regional economy.
Sheep pop the chestnuts out with their hooves, when in pastures containing the trees.
It is traditional to eat roasted chestnuts in Portugal on St. Martin's Day.
In Italy, chestnut is also used to make barrels used for aging balsamic vinegar and some alcoholic beverages, such as whisky or lambic beer.
Chestnut extracts were evaluated through several biochemical assays showing evident antioxidant properties.
The leaves are simple, ovate or lanceolate,  long and  wide, with sharply pointed, widely spaced teeth, with shallow rounded sinuates between.
Their mature heights vary from the smallest species of chinkapins, often shrubby, to the giant of past American forests, ''C.
The American chestnut ''C.
dentata'' seedlings in Ohio reforestation efforts are best achieved by planting them in places with little or no arboreous land cover, because of the need for light.
If kept moist, they can be stored in a cool place for a few months, but must be checked regularly for signs of germination.
Another possible source of the name is the town of Kastania in Thessaly, Greece; more probable, though, is that the town took its name from the most common tree growing around it.
Chestnuts grow well in southwest Western Australia, which has cold winters and warm to hot summers.
The United States imported 4,056 metric tons of European in-shell chestnuts worth $10 million in 2007.
It is given to horses and cattle in the Orient, and to pigs in England, France and other places.
In France, the ''marron glacé'', a candied chestnut involving 16 different processes in a typically French cooking style, is always served at Christmas and New Year's time.
Roasting requires scoring the fruit beforehand to prevent explosion of the fruit due to expansion.
These grooves are of variable sizes and depths according to the species and variety.
The flowers follow the leaves, appearing in late spring or early summer or into July.
Frosts and snowfalls are beneficial rather than harmful to the trees.
This method of preparation is popular in northern China, Portugal, Spain, Turkey, Greece, Italy, France, Austria, Slovenia, Croatia, Korea, and Southeast Asia, where the scored chestnuts may be cooked mixed with a little sugar.
Sweet chestnuts are not easy to peel when cold.
crenata'') does well in wet and humid weather and in hot summers (about 30&nbsp;°C); and was introduced to New Zealand in the early 1900s, more so in the upper North Island region
Some trees in northern Victoria are around 120 years old and up to 60 m tall.
The Australian gold rush of the 1850s and 1860s led to the first recorded plantings of European chestnut trees, brought in from Europe by the first settlers.
Shelled and cooked nuts should be covered, refrigerated, and used within three to four days.
Chestnut timber is decorative.
dentata'' that could reach .
During British colonial rule in the mid-1700s to 1947, the sweet chestnut ''(C. sativa)'' was widely introduced in the temperate parts of the Indian Subcontinent, mainly in the lower-to-middle Himalayas.
The tree prefers sloping, deep soils; it does not like shallow or heavy soils with impermeable, clay subsoils.
Parmentier, who among other things was a famous potato promoter, extracted sugar from chestnuts and sent a chestnut sugarloaf weighing several pounds to the Academy of Lyon.
In the 1970s, geneticist Charles Burnham began back-breeding Asian chestnut into American chestnut populations to confer blight resistance with the minimum difference in genes.
Other methods of preparation are also used.
In many varieties, the fruit is flattened on one or two sides.
Fabric can be starched with chestnut meal.
Starting a small-scale operation requires a relatively low initial investment; this is a factor in the small size of the present production operations, with half of them being within 3 to .
Chinese chestnut pellicles are usually easy to remove, and their sizes vary greatly according to the varieties, although usually smaller than the Japanese chestnut.
The amount of vitamin C decreases by about 40% after heating.
crenata'') is a major cultivar in  Liaoning Province.
Mature trees often grew straight and branch-free for , up to 100 feet, averaging up to 5&nbsp;ft in diameter.
In some places, such as the Appalachian Mountains, one-quarter of hardwoods were chestnuts.
Chestnuts behave similarly to seeds in that they produce very little ethylene, and their respiration rate is low, varying between 5 and 20&nbsp;mg/(kg·h) depending on the temperature.
Some imports come from Portugal and France.
Alexander the Great and the Romans planted chestnut trees across Europe while on their various campaigns.
A considerable increase in production is expected in the next 10 years, due to the increase in commercial plantings during the last 15 to 25 years.
China has about 300 chestnut cultivars.
Chestnut-based recipes and preparations are making a comeback in Italian cuisine, as part of the trend toward rediscovery of traditional dishes and better nutrition.
Current industrial planting spacings can range from 7 x 7 m to 20 x 20 m. The closer plantings, which are more popular, mean quicker increases in short-term production, but heavy pruning or even tree removal is required later.
By far, the most common species in Australia is the European chestnut, but small numbers of the other species, as well as some hybrids have been planted.The Japanese chestnut (''C.
Thus, the ''marrons glacés'' eaten at Christmas are those picked the year before.
It is better to sow them as soon as ripe, either in cold frames or seedbeds outdoors, where they can be left ''in situ'' for 1 to 2 years before being planted in their permanent positions, or in pots, where the plants can be put out into their permanent positions in summer or autumn.
The husks contain 10–13% tannin.
It also corrodes iron slowly, although copper, brass, or stainless metals are not affected.
Another method of eating the fruit involves roasting, which does not require peeling.
Fresh chestnuts contain about 52% water by weight, which evaporates relatively quickly during storage; they can lose as much as 1% of weight in one day at 20&nbsp;°C (68&nbsp;°F) and 70% relative humidity.
Moreover, the Dandong chestnut (belonging to the Japanese chestnut ''C.
Chestnut wood, though, loses much of its durability when the tree is more than 50 years old, and despite the local chestnut's quick growth rate, the timber used for these two buildings is considerably larger than a 50-year-old chestnut's girth.
It is an ellagic tannin and its main constituents are identified by castalagin (14.2%) and vescalagin (16.2%).It has a naturally low pH value, relatively low salts content, and high acids content.
It grows so freely in Britain that it was long considered a truly native species, partly because the roof of Westminster Hall and the Parliament House of Edinburgh were mistakenly thought to be constructed of chestnut wood.
The chestnut forests on Mount Etna contain many trees that are said to be even larger.
The nuts can also be eaten candied, boiled, steamed, deep-fried, grilled, or roasted in sweet or savoury recipes.
Chestnuts are picked in autumn, and candied from the start of the following summer for the ensuing Christmas.
Evidence of its cultivation by man is found since around 2000 BC.
Light brown in color, it is sometimes confused with oak wood.
One kilogram of untainted chestnuts yields about 700 g of shelled chestnuts.
When standing on their own, they spread on the sides and develop broad, rounded, dense crowns at maturity.
Recently cleared land is best avoided to help resist the root rot, ''Armillaria mellia''.
Today, the nut's demand outstrips supply.
Towards the end of 19th century, Lyon went into a recession with the collapse of the textile market, notably silk.
Since the mid-20th century, most of the US imports are from Southern Italy, with the large, meaty, and richly flavored Sicilian chestnuts being considered among the best quality for bulk sale and supermarket retail.
Kastania is located on one of the relatively few sedimentary or siliceous outcrops.
The name also refers to the edible nuts they produce.
They are widely found in British-founded hill stations in northern India, and to a lesser extent in Bhutan and Nepal.
This tree measured over  in circumference at  from the ground in 1720.
As of 2008, the price for chestnuts sold fresh in the shell ranges from $1.50 per pound ($3.30/kg) wholesale to about $5 per pound ($11/kg) retail, depending mainly on the size.
The discovery of the blight fungus on some Asian chestnut trees planted on Long Island, New York, was made public in 1904.
The sweet chestnut was introduced into Europe from Sardis, in Asia Minor; the fruit was then called the Sardian nut.
mollissima'') at about , then the European chestnut (''C.
However, according to Cancer Research UK, "there is no scientific evidence to prove that flower remedies can control, cure or prevent any type of disease, including cancer".
Still others take the name as coming from the Greek name of ''Sardis glans'' (Sardis acorn) – Sardis being the capital of Lydia, Asia Minor, from where the fruit had spread.
Cooked chestnuts, either whole, chopped, or pureed, may be frozen in an airtight container and held up to 9 months.
Some slandered chestnut products in such words as the bread which "gives a sallow complexion" written in 1770, or in 1841 "this kind of mortar which is called a soup".
Hydrolysable chestnut tannins can be used for partial phenol substitution in phenolic resin adhesives production and also for direct use as resin.
Chestnut is hardy to zone 5, which is 22&nbsp;°C (39.6&nbsp;°F) lower in average minimal temperature than London in zone 9.
But the young growth in spring, even on mature plants, is frost-tender; bud-burst is later than most other fruit trees, so late frosts can be damaging to young buds.
Other trees commonly mistaken for chestnut trees are the chestnut oak (''Quercus prinus'') and the American beech (''Fagus grandifolia''), both of which are also in Fagaceae.
