They effectively became a ''third division'' of the Cheyenne people, between the Northern Cheyenne, who ranged north of the Platte River, and the Southern Cheyenne, who occupied the area north of the Arkansas River.
There are conflicting claims as to whether the band was hostile or friendly.
In 1997 the Oklahoma Historal Society negoiated with the Northern Cheyenne to return the pipe to the tribal keeper of the Sacred Medicine Hat Bundle James Black Wolf.
In 1804, Lewis and Clark visited a surviving Cheyenne village in North Dakota.
The Cheyenne at this time lived between the Mississippi River and Mille Lacs Lake in present-day Minnesota.
In 2003, approximately 8,000 of these identified themselves as Cheyenne, although with continuing intermarriage it has become increasingly difficult to separate the tribes.
Historians believe that Chief Black Kettle, head of the band, was not part of the war party but the peace party within the Cheyenne nation.
According to tribal history, during the 17th century, the Cheyenne had been driven by the Assiniboine (Hóheeheo'o - ″wrapped ones or swaddled″, adaptive from the Lakota/Dakota word ''Hóhe'', meaning “rebels”) from the Great Lakes region to present-day Minnesota and North Dakota, where they established villages.
The Southern Cheyenne, known in Cheyenne as '''Heévâhetaneo'o''' meaning "Roped People", together with the Southern Arapaho, form the Cheyenne and Arapaho Tribes, in western Oklahoma.
Formerly, the Só'taeo'o (Só'taétaneo'o) or Suhtai (Sutaio) bands of Southern and Northern Cheyennes spoke ''Só'taéka'ękóne'' or ''Só'taenęstsestôtse'', a language so close to ''Tsêhésenêstsestôtse'' (Cheyenne language), that it is sometimes termed a Cheyenne dialect.
On 9 September 1878, a portion of the Northern Cheyenne, led by Little Wolf and Dull Knife started their trek back to the north.
Due to an increasing division between the Dog Soldiers and the council chiefs with respect to policy towards the whites, the Dog Soldiers became separated from the other Cheyenne bands.
His efforts to negotiate with the Northern Cheyenne, the Arapaho and other tribes led to a great council at Fort Laramie in 1851.
After the ''Masikota'' and ''Oo'kóhta'oná'' bands had been almost wiped out through a cholera epidemic in 1849, the remaining Masikota joined the Dog Soldiers warrior society (''Hotamétaneo'o'').
In 1846, Thomas Fitzpatrick was appointed US Indian agent for the upper Arkansas and Platte River.
In the early 18th century they migrated west across the Mississippi River and into North and South Dakota, where they adopted the horse culture.
They were told that if they dipped their hands in a nearby spring, they had only to raise their hands to repel army bullets.
Anthropologists debate about Cheyenne society organization.
The four original military societies of the Cheyenne were the Swift Fox Society, Elk Horn Scrapper or Crooked Lance Society, Shield Society, and the Bowstring Men Society.
The range of the Cheyenne was first the area in and near the Black Hills, but later all the Great Plains from Dakota to the Arkansas River.
The members often opposed policies of peace chiefs such as Black Kettle.
From the products of hunting and gathering, the women also made lodges, clothing, and other equipment.
Many of the enemies the Cheyenne fought were only encountered occasionally, such as on a long distance raid or hunt.
Such European American explorers learned many different names for the Cheyenne, and did not realize how the different sections were forming a unified tribe.
(See Battle of Julesburg, Battle of Mud Springs, Battle of Rush Creek, Powder River Expedition, Battle of Platte Bridge)
He left the large camp and returned with 80 lodges of his tribesmen to the Arkansas River, where he intended to seek peace with the US.
To the north the Cheyenne made a strong alliance with the Lakota Sioux, which allowed them to expand their territory into part of their former lands around the Black Hills.
* Hónowa (''Háovôhnóva'')
On March 19, 1900, President William McKinley extended the reservation to the west bank of the Tongue River, making a total of .
Warriors gained rank in Cheyenne society by performing and accumulating various acts of bravery in battle known as coups.
In January 1865, they planned and carried out an attack with about 1000 warriors on Camp Rankin, a stage station and fort at Julesburg.
Sumner ordered a cavalry charge and the troops charged with drawn sabers; the Cheyenne fled.
Eventually the US forced the Northern Cheyenne onto a reservation, in southern Montana.
The etymology of the name Tsitsistas (technically Tsétsėhéstȧhese), which the Cheyennes call themselves, is uncertain.
It is expected of all Cheyenne women to be hardworking, chaste, modest, skilled in traditional crafts, knowledgeable about Cheyenne culture and history and speak Cheyenne fluently.
When younger members of the band took part in raiding parties, European Americans blamed the entire band for the incidents and casualties..
General warfare broke out and Indians made many raids on the trail along the South Platte, which Denver depended on for supplies.
The Northern Cheyenne, who were sharing the Lakota land at Pine Ridge Indian Reservation were finally allowed to return to the Tongue River on their own reservation.
During their return to Fort Atkinson at the Council Bluff in Nebraska, the commission had successful negotiations with the Ota, the Pawnee and the Omaha.
Cheyenne parties attacked at least three emigrant settler parties before returning to the Republican River.
He was named for ''motsé'eonȯtse'' (sweetgrass), one of the sacred plant medicines used by many Plains peoples in ceremmonies.
In 1867, most of the band were killed by United States Army forces in the Battle of Summit Springs.
Also, if she is friendly and compatible with her female relatives and does not have members in her extended family who are alcoholics or otherwise in disrepute.
The Cheyenne also managed to retain their culture, religion and language.
(The Seminole tribe of Florida never made a treaty with the US government.)
The Northern Cheyenne were given the right to remain in the north, near the Black Hills, land which they consider sacred.
He went against the Cheyenne in the spring of 1857.
The ''Ésevone / Hóhkėha'e'' ("Sacred Buffalo Hat") is kept among the Northern Cheyenne and Northern Só'taeo'o.
At that time, the US had competition on the upper Missouri from British traders, who came down from Canada.
“scouting all over ones”), Assiniboine, and Plains Cree (Vóhkoohétaneo'o - “rabbit people”) to the north and west of Cheyenne territory.
Treaties were negotiated by a commission consisting of Fitzpatrick and David Dawson Mitchell, US Superintendent of Indian Affairs, with the Indians of the northern plains.
By 1776, the Lakota had overwhelmed the Cheyenne and taken over much of their territory near the Black Hills.
The term for the Cheyenne homeland is ''Tsiihistano."
The Cheyenne economy was based on the collection of wild rice and hunting, especially of bison, which lived in the prairies 70–80 miles west of the Cheyenne villages.
* Ohktounna (''Oqtóguna'')
Military societies played an important role in Cheyenne government.
Most of the Indians moved north into Nebraska on their way to the Black Hills and the Powder River.
That led by Dull Knife (mostly women, children and elders) surrendered and were taken to Fort Robinson, where subsequent events became known as the Fort Robinson tragedy.
News of the event traveled across the United States and reached Washington, D.C., just as the nation was celebrating its Centennial.
The raid ended in disaster with heavy resistance from Mexican lancers, resulting in all but three of the war party being killed.
He returned to the Cheyenne on the plains.
Their combined population is 12,130, .
There warriors smoked the war pipe, passing it from camp to camp among the Sioux, Cheyenne and Arapaho.
The groups became the Southern Cheyenne, known as Sówoníă (Southerners) and the Northern Cheyenne, known as O'mǐ'sǐs (Eaters).
Public reaction arose in outrage against the Cheyenne.
Perhaps because of severe loss of trade during the 1849 season, Bent's Fort was abandoned and burned.
They may have migrated to the south for winter.
However, some anthropologists reported that the Cheyenne had a matrilineal band system.
The ''Ésevone / Hóhkėha'e (Sacred Buffalo Hat)'' is kept in the ''vonȧhéome'' (old term) or ''hóhkėha'éome'' (new term) ("Sacred Hat Lodge, Sacred Hat Tepee").
On November 29, 1864, the Colorado Militia attacked a Cheyenne and Arapaho encampment under Chief Black Kettle, although it flew a flag of truce and indicated its allegiance to the US government.
Their oral history relays that both tribal peoples are characterized, and represented by two cultural heroes or prophets who received divine articles from their god '''Ma'heo'o''' (″Sacred Being, God″, commonly in English '''Maheo, Mahiu''', this is a post-missionary term, formerly the plural '''Ma'heono''' was used), which the Só'taeo'o called '''He'emo''' (″Goddess, Female Sacred Being, God″, equivalent to ''Ma'heo'o'' in the Tsétsêhéstâhese dialect).
Sometime around 1811 the Cheyenne made a formal alliance with the Arapaho people (Hetanevo'eo'o - „People of the Sky“, „Cloud People“, because of their close interaction also known as Héstanėheo'o - “people, mankind, tribe of people”), which would remain strong throughout their history and into modern times.
At times they have been allied with the Lakota and Arapaho, and at other points enemies of the Lakota.
As part of a US increase in troops following the Battle of the Little Bighorn, the Army reassigned Colonel Ranald S. Mackenzie and his Fourth Cavalry to the Department of the Platte.
* Hévhaitanio (''Heévâhetaneo'o'')
Sumner's command went west along the North Platte to Fort Laramie, then down along the Front Range to the South Platte.
The western boundary is the Crow Indian Reservation.
In 1908 a Cheyenne named Three Fingers gave the horn back to the Hat; the pipe came into possession of a Cheyenne named Burnt All Over who gave it to Hattie Goit of Poteau, Oklahoma who in 1911 gave the pipe to the Oklahoma Historical Society.
About 1730, they introduced the horse to Lakota bands (Ho'óhomo'eo'o - “the invited ones (to Cheyenne lands i.e.
They were first of the later Plains tribes into the Black Hills and Powder River Country.
The Só'taeo'o prophet '''Tomȯsévėséhe''' ("Erect Horns")  had received the ''Ésevone'' (aka ''Is'siwun'' - "Sacred (Buffalo) Hat Bundle") at ''Toh'nihvoos'' (″Stone Hammer Mountain″) near the Great Lakes in the present state of Minnesota.
Stationed initially at Camp Robinson, they formed the core of the Powder River Expedition.
With tired horses after long marches, the cavalry could not engage more than a few Cheyenne, as their horses were fresh.
A Cheyenne woman has a higher status if she is part of an extended family with distinguished ancestors.
Starting in 1859 with the Colorado Gold Rush, European-American settlers moved into lands reserved for the Cheyenne and other Plains Indians.
Approximately 800 people speak Cheyenne in Oklahoma.
The separation of the tribe was only a geographic one and the two divisions had regular and close contact.
* Só'taeo'o (''Suhtai'' or ''Sutaio'', Northern and Southern)
To reduce intertribal warfare on the Plains, the government officials "assigned" territories to each tribe and had them pledge mutual peace.
Sumner continued to Bent's Fort.
These tribes merged in the early 19th century.
Tribal powwow princesses are expected to have these characteristics.
The earliest known written historical record of the Cheyenne comes from the mid-17th century, when a group of Cheyenne visited the French Fort Crevecoeur, near present-day Peoria, Illinois.
The survivors fled northeast and joined the camps of the Cheyenne on the Smokey Hill and Republican rivers.
The commission's efforts to contact the Blackfoot and the Assiniboine were unsuccessful.
Those who had homesteaded east of the Tongue River were relocated to the west of the river.
As early as 1820, traders and explorers reported contact with Cheyenne at present-day Denver, Colorado and on the Arkansas River.
Many of the Cheyenne worked with the army as scouts.
The US established the Tongue River Indian Reservation, now named the Northern Cheyenne Indian Reservation, of  by the executive order of President Chester A. Arthur November 16, 1884.
Four years later, on November 27, 1868, George Armstrong Custer and his troops attacked Black Kettle's band at the Battle of Washita River.
The fifth society is split between the Crazy Dog Society and the famous Dog Soldiers.
The Cheyenne Nation is descended from two related tribes, the '''Tsétsêhéstâhese / Tsitsistas''' (Cheyenne proper) and '''Só'taeo'o / Só'taétaneo'o''' (better known as Suhtai or Sutaio), the latter may have joined the Tsétsêhéstâhese in the early 18th century.
A warrior was viewed by the people not as a maker of war but as a protector, provider, and leader.
The sixth society is the Contrary Warrior Society, most notable for riding backwards into battle as a sign of bravery.
Both major divisions of the Cheyenne, the Northern Cheyenne and Southern Cheyenne were allies to the Arapaho who like the Cheyenne are split into northern and southern divisions.
Like many other plains Indian nations, the Cheyenne were a horse and warrior people who developed as skilled and powerful mounted warriors.
South of Cheyenne territory they fought with the Kiowa (Vétapâhaetó'eo'o - “greasy wood ones”), Comanche (Šé'šenovotsétaneo'o - “snake people”), Ute (Mo'ȯhtávėhetaneo'o - “black (skinned) people”), Plains Apache (Mȯhtséheonetaneo'o - “occupied.comp-people”), Osage (Oo'kóhtâxétaneo'o - “cut hair people”), Wichita people, various Apache tribes and Navajo (Hotamó'keeho - “Indians from out west”; collective name for tribes of the Southswest and Great Basin).
Many Cheyenne did not sign the treaty, and they continued to live and hunt on their traditional grounds in the Smokey Hill and Republican basins, between the Arkansas and the South Platte, where there were plentiful buffalo.
The tribes were compensated with annuities of cash and supplies for such encroachment on their territories.
Historians have estimated that the population of the Cheyenne, Lakota and Arapaho encampment along the Little Bighorn River was approximately 10,000, making it one of the largest gatherings of Native Americans in North America in pre-reservation times.
The Cheyenne, together with the Lakota, other Sioux warriors and a small band of Arapaho, killed General George Armstrong Custer and much of his 7th Cavalry contingent of soldiers.
Each society had selected leaders who would invite those that they saw worthy enough to their society lodge for initiation into the society.
The Cheyenne language is one of the larger Algonquian-language group.
Through these two bundles, Ma'heo'o assures continual life and blessings for the people.
The most prominent of the ancient Cheyenne villages is Biesterfeldt Village, in eastern North Dakota along the Sheyenne River.
An infusion of the pulverized leaves and blossoms of tansy is used for dizziness and weakness.
* Heviksnipahis (''Iviststsinihpah'')
On the Missouri River, the Cheyenne came into contact with the neighboring Mandan, Hidatsa (Tsé-heše'émâheónese) - „people, who have soil houses (that is, earth lodges“) and Arikara people (Ónoneo'o), and they adopted many of their cultural characteristics.
The Cheyenne alphabet contains 14 letters.
Grinnell's record is typical; he states "They call themselves Tsistsistas sic, Tsitsistas is the correct pronunciation, which the books commonly give as meaning "people".
Following the Battle of the Little Bighorn, the US Army increased attempts to capture the Cheyenne.
Slightly more than one quarter of the population five years or older spoke a language other than English.
The Fort Laramie Treaty of 1851 affirmed the Cheyenne and Arapaho territory on the Great Plains between the North Platte River and the Arkansas.
The Southern Cheyenne and Southern Arapaho were assigned to the same reservation in Oklahoma Indian Territory and remained together as the federally recognized Cheyenne and Arapaho Tribes after the reservation was opened to American settlement and into modern times.
Their lives were active and physically demanding.
The ''Tséá'enōvȧhtse'' (″Sacred (Buffalo) Hat Keeper″ or ″Keeper of the Sacred (Buffalo) Hat″) must belong to the Só'taeo'o (Northern or Southern alike).
Allied with the Arapaho, the Cheyenne pushed the Kiowa to the Southern Plains.
The Cheyenne of Montana and Oklahoma speak the Cheyenne language, known as ''Tsêhésenêstsestôtse'' (common spelling: Tsisinstsistots).
For several years there was peace between settlers and Indians.
It spread in mining camps and waterways due to poor sanitation.
The tribal history also relates that they first reached the Missouri River in 1676.
The Cheyenne Nation or '''Tsêhéstáno''' was at one time composed of ten bands that spread across the Great Plains from southern Colorado to the Black Hills in South Dakota.
The enemies of the Cheyenne included the Crow (Óoetaneo'o - “crow (bird) people”), Shoshone (Sósone'eo'o), Blackfeet (Mo'ôhtávêhahtátaneo'o, same literally meaning), Flathead (Kȧhkoestséataneo'o - “flat-headed-people”), Nez Perce (Otaesétaneo'o - “pierced nose people”), Arikara, Gros Ventre (Hestóetaneo'o - “beggars for meat”, “spongers” or Môhónooneo'o - lit.
Specific warrior societies developed among the Cheyenne as with other plains nations.
It most likely means related to one another, similarly bred, like us, our people, or us.
To punish the Cheyenne, he distributed their annuities to the Arapaho.
When the Northern Cheyenne arrived at Indian Territory, conditions were very difficult: rations were inadequate, there were no buffalo near the reservation and, according to several sources, there was malaria among the people.
The title of war chief could be earned by any warrior who performs enough of the specific coups required to become a war chief.
To the east of Cheyenne Territory they fought with the Sioux, Pawnee (Ho'néhetaneo'o - “wolf people”, possibly an adaptive from the Skiri/Skidi Pawnee or Wolf Pawnee), Ponca (Onéhao'o), Kaw (Oo'kóhtâxétaneo'o - “cut hair people”), Iowa, Ho-Chunk and Omaha (Onéhao'o).
In the 16th century, they lived in the regions near the Great Lakes.
Dull Knife's group was first offered food and firewood and then, after a week and a half, they were told to go back to Indian territory.
The combined force of 400 troops went east through the plains searching for Cheyenne.
The only conflicts were related to the endemic warfare between the Cheyenne and Arapaho of the plains and the Utes of the mountains.
In turn, they were pushed west by the more numerous Lakota.
Black Kettle continued to desire peace and did not join in the second raid or in the plan to go north to the Powder River country.
The Hairy Rope band is reputed to have been the first band to move south, capturing wild horses as far south as the Cimarron River Valley.
But, he did not command absolute authority over members of his band and the European Americans did not understand this.
When they said no, they were then locked in the wooden barracks with no food, water or firewood for heat for four days.
In the 1870s tribal leaders became disenchanted with the keeper of the bundle demanded the keeper Broken Dish give up the bundle; he agreed but his wife did not and desecrated the Sacred Hat and its contents; a ceremonial pipe and a buffalo horn were lost.
General Atkinson and his fellow commissioner left Fort Atkinson on May 16, 1825.
The Northern Cheyenne, known in Cheyenne either as '''Notameohmésêhese''', meaning "Northern Eaters" or simply as '''Ohmésêhese''' meaning "Eaters", live in southeastern Montana on the Northern Cheyenne Indian Reservation.
Society leaders were often in charge of organizing hunts and raids as well as ensuring proper discipline and the enforcement of laws within the nation.
It excluded Cheyenne who had homesteaded further east near the Tongue River.
The alliance helped the Cheyenne expand their territory which stretched from southern Montana, through most of Wyoming, the eastern half of Colorado, far western Nebraska, and far western Kansas.
In the mid-19th century, the bands began to split, with some bands choosing to remain near the Black Hills, while others chose to remain near the Platte Rivers of central Colorado.
Fort Keogh became a staging and gathering point for the Northern Cheyenne.
Numerous battles were fought including a notable fight along the Washita River in 1836 with the Kiowa which resulted in the death of 48 Cheyenne warriors of the Bowstring society.
The Indian agent at Fort Laramie negotiated with the Cheyenne to reduce hostilities, but the Secretary of War ordered the 1st Cavalry Regiment (1855) to carry out a punitive expedition under the command of Colonel Edwin V. Sumner.
Having settled the Black Hills of South Dakota and the Powder River Country of present-day Montana, they introduced the horse culture to Lakota bands about 1730.
In response to the construction of Bent’s Fort by Charles Bent, a friend of the Cheyenne who established a popular trading area for the Cheyenne, a large portion of the tribe moved further south and stayed around the area.
Today, the Cheyenne people are split into two federally recognized Nations: the Southern Cheyenne, who are enrolled in the Cheyenne and Arapaho Tribes in Oklahoma, and the Northern Cheyenne, who are enrolled in the Northern Cheyenne Tribe of the Northern Cheyenne Indian Reservation in Montana.
After the soldiers destroyed the lodges and supplies, and confiscated the horses, the Northern Cheyenne soon surrendered.
In retaliation, the US Cavalry attacked a Cheyenne camp on Grand Island in Nebraska.
They captured much loot and killed many European Americans.
Historians estimate about 2,000 Cheyenne died, one-half to two-thirds of their population.
Conflict with the Comanche, Kiowa, and Plains Apache ended in 1840 when the tribes made an alliance with each other.
There are only a handful of vocabulary differences between the two locations.
They migrated west in the 18th century and hunted bison on the Great Plains.
On reaching the northern area, they split into two bands.
They killed ten Cheyenne warriors and wounded eight or more.
The '''Cheyenne''' ( ) are one of the Indigenous peoples of the Great Plains and their language is of the Algonquian language family.
Contact with Euro-Americans was mostly light, with most contact involving mountain men, traders, explorers, treaty makers, and painters.
The treaties acknowledged that the tribes lived within the United States, vowed perpetual friendship between the US and the tribes, and, recognizing the right of the United States to regulate trade, the tribes promised to deal only with licensed traders.
They were Dull Knife, Standing Elk and Wild Hog with around 130 Cheyenne.
The Tsétsêhéstâhese / Tsitsistas prophet '''Motsé'eóeve''' (Sweet Medicine Standing, Sweet Root Standing, commonly called '''Sweet Medicine''') had received the ''Maahótse'' (in English known as ''Mahuts'', a bundle of (Sacred) Arrows or the (Sacred) Arrows Bundle) at ''Nóávóse'' (″medicine(sacred)-hill″, name for Bear Butte, northwest of Rapid City, South Dakota), which they carried when they waged tribal-level war and were kept in the ''maahéome'' (Arrow Lodge or Arrow Tepee).
They fought their traditional enemies, the Crow and later (1856–79) the United States Army forces.
The Arapaho were present with the Cheyenne at the Sand Creek Massacre when a peaceful encampment of mostly women, children, and the elderly were attacked and massacred by US soldiers.
On November 25, 1876, his column discovered and defeated a village of Northern Cheyenne in the Dull Knife Fight in Wyoming Territory.
Under the influence of the medicine man White Bull (also called Ice) and Grey Beard (also called Dark), the Cheyenne went into battle believing that strong spiritual medicine would prevent the soldiers' guns from firing.
The Cheyenne and Arapaho people formed an alliance around 1811 that helped them expand their territories and strengthen their presence on the plains.
This system also regulated the Cheyenne military societies that developed for planning warfare, enforcing rules, and conducting ceremonies.
Over time, the Dog Soldiers took a prominent leadership role in the wars against the whites.
Many families began to migrate south to the Tongue River watershed area, where they established homesteads.
The Cheyenne who traveled to Fort Keogh (present day Miles City, Montana), including Little Wolf, settled near the fort.
Perhaps from traders, the cholera epidemic reached the Plains Indians in 1849, resulting in severe loss of life during the summer of that year.
Often, societies would have minor rivalries; however, they might work together as a unit when warring with an enemy.
Sweet Medicine is the Cheyenne prophet who predicted the coming of the horse, cow, whiteman, etc.
The troops continued on and two days later burned a hastily abandoned Cheyenne camp; they destroyed lodges and the winter supply of buffalo meat.
In addition, the government secured permission to build and maintain roads for European-American travelers and traders through Indian country on the Plains, such as the Emigrant Trail and the Santa Fe Trail, and to maintain forts to guard them.
The other part of the tribe continued to live along the headwaters of the North Platte and Yellowstone rivers.
The Cheyenne scouts were pivotal in helping the Army find Chief Joseph and his band of Nez Percé in northern Montana.
Conflict with migrating Lakota and Ojibwe people forced the Cheyenne further west, and they, in turn, pushed the Kiowa to the south.
The unified tribe then divided themselves into ten principal bands:
The central traditional government system of the Cheyenne is the Arrow Keeper, followed by the Council of Forty-Four.
Studies into whether, and if so, how much the Cheyenne developed a matrilineal clan system are continuing.
During the California Gold Rush, emigrants brought in cholera.
In April 1856, an incident at the Platte River Bridge (near present-day Casper, Wyoming), resulted in the wounding of a Cheyenne warrior.
He intended further punitive actions, but the Army ordered him to Utah because of an outbreak of trouble with the Mormons (this would be known as the Utah War).
Smaller bands or sub-bands had no right to send delegates to the council.
This territory included what is now Colorado, east of the Front Range of the Rockies and north of the Arkansas River; Wyoming and Nebraska, south of the North Platte River; and extreme western Kansas.
