After the Japanese invasion of Manchuria in 1931, Chiang resigned as Chairman of the National Government.
Chiang claims that he said he was in favor of an international presence on the islands.
The relationship between Chiang Kai-shek and Chinese capitalists remained poor throughout the period of his administration.
Chiang's government and army retreated to Taiwan, where Chiang imposed martial law and persecuted people critical of his rule in a period known as the "White Terror".
In his diary on June 1948, Chiang wrote that the KMT had failed, not because of external enemies but because of rot from within.
The Chinese Civil War resumed, with the CCP defeating the Nationalists and declaring the People's Republic of China in 1949.
In the West he has been criticized for his poor military skills.
Chen claiming that, by the time she married Chiang, he had already divorced Yao, and that Chen was therefore his wife.
In 1950, Chiang Ching-kuo became director of the secret police (Bureau of Investigation and Statistics), which he remained until 1965.
Despite being a Methodist, he made reference to the Buddha in his diary, and encouraged the establishment of a Buddhist political party under Master Taixu.
Ma Bufang attacked the Tibetan Buddhist Tsang monastery in 1941.
The aircraft ''May-ling'' evacuated them to Taiwan on the same day.
Stilwell estimated that at least half of the $100&nbsp;million spent on construction of airbases was embezzled by Nationalist party officials.
In Guangdong, Li attempted to create a new government composed of both Chiang supporters and those opposed to Chiang.
Quotes from the Quran and Hadith were used by Muslims in the Kuomintang-controlled Muslim publication, the ''Yuehua'', to justify Chiang Kai-shek's rule over China.
In 1931, Hu Hanmin, Chiang's old supporter, publicly voiced a popular concern that Chiang's position as both premier and president flew in the face of the democratic ideals of the Nationalist government.
Dancing and Western music were discouraged.
Movie theaters in the Soviet Union showed newsreels and clips of Chiang.
Most of those prosecuted were labeled by the Kuomintang as "bandit spies" (匪諜), meaning spies for Chinese Communists, and punished as such.
In 1917, Sun Yat-sen moved his base of operations to Guangzhou, and Chiang joined him in 1918.
Chiang played the Soviets and Americans against each other during the war.
He was reelected by the National Assembly as president four times—doing so in 1954, 1960, 1966, and 1972.
He manipulated America, Nazi Germany, and the Soviet Union to regain lost territories for China as he viewed all the powers as imperialists trying to curtail and suppress China's power and national resurrection.
Chiang and Mao had a son, Ching-kuo.
Chiang viewed Japan, America, the Soviet Union, France and Britain as all being imperialists with nobody else's interests in mind but their own, seeing them as hypocritical to condemn each other for imperialism which they all practiced.
While he was still living in Shanghai, Chiang and Yao adopted a son, Wei-kuo.
Roosevelt offered Chiang control of all of Indochina.
Under Chiang, the government recognized limited civil and economic freedoms, property rights (personal and intellectual) and other liberties.
Believing that corruption and a lack of morals were key reasons that the KMT lost mainland China to the Communists, Chiang attempted to purge corruption by dismissing members of the KMT accused of graft.
Chiang, as a nationalist and a Confucianist, was against the iconoclasm of the May Fourth Movement.
Westad says the Communists won the Civil War because they made fewer military mistakes than Chiang Kai-Shek, and because in his search for a powerful centralized government, Chiang antagonized too many interest groups in China.
In early 1912, a dispute arose between Chen and Tao Chen-chang, who was an influential member of the Revolutionary Alliance and who opposed both Sun Yat-sen and Chen.
He began his military training at the Baoding Military Academy in 1906, the same year Japan left its bimetallic currency standard, devaluing its yen.
The Yihewani (Ikhwan al Muslimun a.k.a.
The Kuomintang used traditional Chinese religious ceremonies, and promoted Martyrdom in Chinese culture.
For about 50 days, Chiang stayed with Sun, protecting and caring for him and earning his lasting trust.
Li vowed that he would "return to crush" Chiang once he returned to China.
With help from foreign military advisers, Chiang's Fifth Campaign finally surrounded the Chinese Red Army in 1934.
He argues that the Communists, since the 1980s, have essentially created the state envisioned by Chiang in the 1930s.
Chiang's legacy has been the target of heated debates because of the different views held about him.
Mitter has observed that, ironically, today's China is closer to Chiang's vision than to Mao Zedong's.
The early years at Whampoa allowed Chiang to cultivate a cadre of young officers loyal to both the KMT and himself.
At this time Sun remained largely sidelined; and, without arms or money, was soon expelled from Guangzhou and exiled again to Shanghai.
However, he is still known as ''Lord Chiang'' (蔣公) (without the title or space), along with the name ''Chiang Chung-cheng'', in Taiwan.
In a pairing of great political significance, Chiang was Sun's brother-in-law: he had married Soong Mei-ling, the younger sister of Soong Ching-ling, Sun's widow, on December 1, 1927.
As part of a policy of protracted resistance, Chiang authorized the use of scorched earth tactics, resulting in many civilian deaths.
Unable to maintain Sun's good relations with the Communists, he purged them in a massacre at Shanghai and repression of uprisings at Guangzhou and elsewhere.
They forced Chiang into making a "Second United Front" with the Communists against Japan.
He initially considered fleeing Guangzhou and even booked passage on a Japanese steamer, but then decided to use his military connections to declare martial law on March 20, 1926, and crack down on Communist and Soviet influence over the NRA, the military academy, and the party.
In deference to tradition, family members did not use the register name in conversation with people outside of the family.
Chiang relieved Li of the position as vice-president in the National Assembly on March 1954.
Tao sought to avoid escalating the quarrel by hiding in a hospital but was discovered there by Chiang.
She bore him no children.
A contest ensued among Wang Jingwei, Liao Zhongkai, and Hu Hanmin.
American troops and weapons soon bolstered KMT forces, allowing them to reclaim cities.
He also financed armed groups in mainland China, such as Muslim soldiers of the ROC Army left in Yunnan under Li Mi, who continued to fight.
While married to Mao, Chiang adopted two concubines (concubinage was still a common practice for well-to-do, non-Christian males in China): he married Yao Yecheng (姚冶誠, 1889–1972) in 1912 and Chen Jieru (陳潔如, 1906–1971) in December 1921.
Chiang allowed for the "escape" of Soviet agent and advisor Mikhail Borodin and Soviet military officer Vasily Blücher (Galens) to safety after the purge.
There is speculation that a clash between Communist forces and a Japanese warship in 1978 was caused by Chinese anger after Prime Minister Takeo Fukuda attended Chiang's funeral.
Chiang resigned from the office for one month in disagreement with Sun's extremely close cooperation with the Comintern, but returned at Sun's demand.
Chiang was popular among many people and dressed in plain, simple clothes, unlike contemporary Chinese warlords who dressed extravagantly.
Chiang also ordered Ma Bufang to put his Muslim soldiers on alert for an invasion of Tibet in 1942.
During the Cairo Conference in 1943, Chiang said that Roosevelt asked him whether China would like to claim the Ryukyu Islands from Japan in addition to retaking Taiwan, the Pescadores, and Manchuria.
This was meant to fulfill President Roosevelt's promise to Chiang Kai-shek to begin bombing operations against Japan by November 1944.
Chiang never obtained either the photo or its negative.
(Colloquially, the school name is called "big name" (大名), whereas the "milk name" is known as the "small name" (小名).)
Sun had already fled to the naval yard and boarded the SS&nbsp;''Haiqi'', but his wife narrowly evaded shelling and rifle fire as she fled.
However, Chiang presided over purges, political authoritarianism, and graft during his tenure in mainland China, and ruled throughout a period of imposed martial law.
He left for Tokyo Shinbu Gakko, a preparatory school for the Imperial Japanese Army Academy intended for Chinese students, in 1907.
In the early morning of December 10, 1949, Communist troops laid siege to Chengdu, the last KMT-controlled city in mainland China, where Chiang Kai-shek and his son Chiang Ching-kuo directed the defense at the Chengdu Central Military Academy.
In the West and in the Soviet Union, Chiang Kai-shek was known as the "Red General".
His constant demands for Western support and funding also earned him the nickname of "General Cash-My-Check".
Chiang ruled Taiwan securely as President of the Republic of China and General of the Kuomintang until his death in 1975.
Ma Ching-chiang, a Muslim General, served as an advisor to Chiang Kai-shek.
He served as chairman of the National Military Council of the Nationalist Government of the Republic of China (ROC) from 1928 to 1948.
The rapid replacement of leadership enabled Chiang to effectively end civilian oversight of the military after May 15, though his authority was somewhat limited by the army's own regional composition and divided loyalties.
The Ili Rebellion and Pei-ta-shan Incident plagued relations with the Soviet Union during Chiang's rule and caused trouble with the Uyghurs.
Others note that the first character of his courtesy name is also the first character of the courtesy name of his brother and other male relatives on the same generation line, while the second character of his courtesy name ''shi'' (石—meaning "stone") suggests the second character of his "register name" ''tai'' (泰—the famous Mount Tai of China).
That same year, Sun sent Chiang to spend three months in Moscow studying the Soviet political and military system.
At Moscow, Sun Yat-sen University portraits of Chiang were hung on the walls; and, in the Soviet May Day Parades that year, Chiang's portrait was to be carried along with the portraits of Karl Marx, Vladimir Lenin, Joseph Stalin, and other socialist leaders.
'''Chiang Kai-shek''' (October 31, 1887&nbsp;– April 5, 1975), also known as '''Jiang Jieshi''' or '''Jiang Zhongzheng''', was a Chinese political and military leader who served as the leader of the Republic of China between 1928 and 1975.
Dai ordered Kuomintang agents to spy on American officers.
Kuomintang ideology promoted the view that the souls of Party martyrs who died fighting for the Kuomintang, the revolution, and the party founder Dr. Sun Yat-sen were sent to heaven.
Alleged infiltration of the U.S. government by Chinese Communist agents may have also played a role in the suspension of American aid.
Chiang Kai-shek would never return to the mainland.
By December, the capital city of Nanjing had fallen to the Japanese resulting in the Nanking Massacre.
Thus, the actual name that Chiang received at birth was '''Jiang Ruiyuan''' ().
There, he came under the influence of compatriots to support the revolutionary movement to overthrow the Qing and to set up a Han-dominated Chinese republic.
This so-called "register name" (譜名) is the one under which his extended relatives knew him, and the one he used in formal occasions, such as when he got married.
He is generally unpopular among Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) voters and supporters.
The Communists, tipped off that a Nationalist offensive was imminent, retreated in the Long March, during which Mao Zedong rose from a mere military official to the most influential leader of the Communist Party of China.
The , renamed the ''Zhongshan'' in Sun's honor, had appeared off Changzhou—the location of the Whampoa Academy—on apparently falsified orders and amid a series of unusual phone calls trying to ascertain Chiang's location.
Now with an established national government in Nanjing, and supported by conservative allies including Hu Hanmin, Chiang's expulsion of the Communists and their Soviet advisers led to the beginning of the Chinese Civil War.
The government's official line for these martial law provisions stemmed from the claim that emergency provisions were necessary, since the Communists and KMT were still in a state of war.
After the war, 200,000 Chinese troops under General Lu Han were sent by Chiang Kai-shek to northern Indochina (north of the 16th parallel) to accept the surrender of Japanese occupying forces there, and remained in Indochina until 1946, when the French returned.
In 1912, when Jiang Zhiqing was in Japan, he started to use the name '''Chiang Kai-shek''' (Chinese: 蔣介石; Pinyin: ; Wade-Giles: Chiang Chieh-shih) as a pen name for the articles that he published in a Chinese magazine he founded: ''Voice of the Army'' (Chinese: 軍聲).
He asked Chen Guofu to purchase a photograph that had been taken in Japan around 1895 or 1898.
The Yuehua, a Chinese Muslim publication, quoted the Quran and Hadith to justify submitting to Chiang Kai-shek as the leader of China, and as justification for Jihad in the war against Japan.
The ultimate goal of the KMT revolution was democracy, which was not considered to be feasible in China's fragmented state.
Wang named himself President of the Executive Yuan and Chairman of the National Government (not the same 'National Government' as Chiang's), and led a surprisingly large minority of anti-Chiang/anti-Communist Chinese against his old comrades.
Chiang was born in Xikou, a town in Fenghua, Zhejiang, about  of central Ningbo.
On June 5, 1926, he was named commander-in-chief of the National Revolutionary Army and, on July 27, he finally launched Sun's long-delayed Northern Expedition, aimed at conquering the northern warlords and bringing China together under the KMT.
Among the Kuomintang Generals present were the Muslim Generals Bai Chongxi and Ma Fuxiang.
The Nationalists eventually blamed three local commanders for the fire and executed them.
However, Chiang's allied commander Zhang Xueliang, whose forces were used in his attack and whose homeland of Manchuria had been recently invaded by the Japanese, did not support the attack on the Communists.
After returning to Guangzhou, a rift developed between Sun, who sought to militarily unify China under the KMT, and Guangdong Governor Chen Jiongming, who wanted to implement a federalist system with Guangdong as a model province.
The Western powers backed the Zhili Clique, and were concerned about either the Soviet-backed Kuomintang or the Japanese-backed Fengtian Clique seizing control of China.
Conflict between Chiang and Li persisted.
Even so, armed Japanese troops remained in China well into 1947, with some noncommissioned officers finding their way into the Nationalist officer corps.
He befriended fellow Zhejiangese Chen Qimei, and in 1908 Chen brought Chiang into the Tongmenghui, an important revolutionary brotherhood of the era.
Furthermore, his party was weakened in the war against Japan.
"Kai-shek" soon became his courtesy name (字).
Li visited the President of the United States, Harry S. Truman, and denounced Chiang as a dictator and an usurper.
After his father's split from the First United Front in 1927, Ching-kuo was forced to stay there, as a hostage, until 1937.
After assembling his forces in Jiangxi, Chiang led his armies against the newly established Chinese Soviet Republic.
The NRA branched into three divisions: to the west was the returned Wang Jingwei, who led a column to take Wuhan; Bai Chongxi's column went east to take Shanghai; Chiang himself led in the middle route, planning to take Nanjing before pressing ahead to capture Beijing.
Contrary to Communist propaganda that Chiang was pro-capitalism, Chiang Kai-shek antagonized the capitalists of Shanghai, often attacking them and confiscating their capital and assets for the use of the government.
In Nanjing, on April 1931, Chiang Kai-shek attended a national leadership conference with Zhang Xueliang and Muslim General Ma Fuxiang, in which Chiang and Zhang dauntlessly upheld that Manchuria was part of China in the face of the Japanese invasion.
Historically, Japanese attempts to normalize their relationship with the People's Republic were met with accusations of ingratitude in Taiwan.
During the Cold War, he was also seen as the leader who led Free China and the bulwark against a possible Communist invasion.
Chiang also used American support and military power in China against the ambitions of the Soviet Union to dominate the talks, stopping the Soviets from taking full advantage of the situation in China with the threat of American military action against the Soviets.
Although he did not hold a formal executive position in the government, Chiang continued to issue orders to the army, and many officers continued to obey Chiang rather than Li.
The British were unable to retaliate.
Chiang's commitment to the Second United Front was nominal at best, and it was all but broken up in 1941.
The Japanese, controlling the puppet-state of Manchukuo and much of China's eastern seaboard, appointed Wang Jingwei as a Quisling-ruler of the occupied Chinese territories around Nanjing.
Chiang moved the government inland, first to Wuhan and later to Chongqing.
Chiang confiscated the wealth of capitalists even while he denounced and fought against communists.
Chiang personally dealt extensively with religions and power figures in China during his regime.
Some opponents charge that Chiang's efforts in developing Taiwan were mostly to make the island a strong base from which to one day return to mainland China, and that Chiang had little regard for the long-term prosperity and well-being of the Taiwanese people.
The Chinese used the VNQDD, the Vietnamese branch of the Chinese Kuomintang, to increase their influence in Indochina and to put pressure on their opponents.
(''Jieshi'' is the Pinyin romanization of the name, based on Mandarin, but the most recognized romanized rendering is ''Kai-shek'' which is in Cantonese romanization.
One of these was the Battle of Kashgar (1934) where a Muslim army loyal to the Kuomintang massacred 4,500 Uyghurs, and killed several British at the British consulate in Kashgar.
Li's attempts to carry out his policies faced varying degrees of opposition from Chiang's supporters, and were generally unsuccessful.
During the Ili Rebellion and Peitashan incident, Chiang deployed Hui troops against Uyghur mobs in Turfan, and against Soviet Russian and Mongols at Peitashan.
Despite the democratic constitution, the government under Chiang was a one-party state, consisting almost completely of mainlanders; the "Temporary Provisions Effective During the Period of Communist Rebellion" greatly enhanced executive powers, and the goal of retaking mainland China allowed the KMT to maintain a monopoly on power and the prohibition of opposition parties.
Though Chiang had achieved status abroad as a world leader, his government deteriorated as the result of corruption and inflation.
On October 10, 1928, Chiang was named director of the State Council, the equivalent to President of the country, in addition to his other titles.
It was not until the 1980s that these troops were finally airlifted to Taiwan.
Today, Chiang's popularity in Taiwan is divided along political lines, enjoying greater support among Kuomintang supporters.
Chiang Kai-shek believed that these martyrs witnessed events on earth from heaven.
He had a record of issuing unrealistic orders and persistently attempting to fight unwinnable battles, leading to the loss of his best troops.
Other Muslim sects, like the Xidaotang and Sufi brotherhoods like Jahriyya and Khuffiya were also supported by his regime.
The inability of Li to coordinate KMT military forces led him to put into effect a plan of defense that he had contemplated in 1948.
While much of the urban areas were now under the control of the KMT, much of the countryside remained under the influence of weakened yet undefeated warlords and Communists.
According to the memoirs of Chen Jieru, Chiang's second wife, she contracted gonorrhea from Chiang soon after their marriage.
Chiang Kai-shek considered both the Han Chinese and all the minority peoples of China, the Five Races Under One Union, as descendants of Yellow Emperor, the Yellow Emperor and semi mythical founder of the Chinese nation, and belonging to the Chinese Nation Zhonghua Minzu and he introduced this into Kuomintang ideology, which was propagated into the educational system of the Republic of China.
Chiang Kai-shek, father and son, sang the Republic of China National Anthem while leaving the Academy all the way to the airfield.
This relationship was rooted largely in the generous and lenient treatment of Japanese prisoners-of-war by the Nationalist government in the years immediately following the Japanese surrender in 1945, and was felt especially strongly as a bond of personal obligation by the most senior members then in power.
Successive demands of the Western powers and Japan since the Opium War had left China owing millions of taels of silver.
Muslim brotherhood) was the predominant Muslim sect backed by the Chiang government during Chiang's regime.
People also put portraits of Chiang in their homes and in public on the streets.
Upon reaching Beijing, Chiang paid homage to Sun Yat-sen and had his body moved to the new capital of Nanjing to be enshrined in a grand mausoleum.
It would be embarrassing to have our Father of the Chinese Republic shown in a subordinate position".
During Chiang's time in Shanghai, he was watched by British-administered Shanghai International Settlement police, who charged him with various felonies.
To overcome Chiang's intransigence Li began ousting Chiang's supporters within the central government.
The war had severely weakened the Nationalists, while the Communists were strengthened by their popular land-reform policies, and by a rural population that supported and trusted them.
Eventually, Wang and his leftist party surrendered to Chiang and joined him in Nanjing.
He told her that he acquired this disease after separating from his first wife and living with his concubine Yao Yecheng, as well as with many other women he consorted with.
Chiang continued Dr. Sun Yat-sen's anti capitalist ideology, directing Kuomintang media to openly attack capitalists and capitalism, demanding government controlled industry instead.
In 1953, seven days after surviving an assassination attempt, Wu Kuo-chen lost his position as governor of Taiwan Province to Chiang Ching-kuo.
He promoted the Uyghur Yulbars Khan to Governor during the Kuomintang Islamic Insurgency in China (1950–1958) for resisting the Communists, even though the government had already evacuated to Taiwan.
With the attack on Pearl Harbor and the opening of the Pacific War, China became one of the Allied Powers.
During Chiang's rule, attacks on foreigners by Kuomintang forces flared up in several incidents.
After fleeing to United States the same year, he became a vocal critic of Chiang's family and government.
Often the name is shortened to "Chung-cheng" only ("Zhongzheng" in Pinyin).
Chiang Kai-shek returned to Guangzhou and in 1924 was appointed Commandant of the Whampoa Military Academy by Sun.
File:Soong_May-ling_wearing_China_Air_Force_pin.jpg|Soong Mei-ling (宋美齡, 1898–2003) Moved to the United States after Chiang Kai-shek's death.
Many even went to study in China then return to fight for the cause.
Salafism attempted to gain a foothold in China during his regime, but the Yihewani and Hanafi Sunni Gedimu denounced the Salafis as radicals, engaged in fights against them, and declared them heretics, forcing the Salafis to form a separate sect.
When the Northern Expedition was complete, Kuomintang Generals led by Chiang Kai-shek paid tribute to Dr. Sun's soul in heaven with a sacrificial ceremony at the Xiangshan Temple in Beijing in July 1928.
Chiang became a founding member of the KMT after the success of the 1911 Revolution.
Chiang's portrait hung over the Tiananmen before Mao's portrait was set up in its place.
In 1944, the United States Army Air Corps commenced Operation Matterhorn in order to bomb Japan's steel industry from bases to be constructed in mainland China.
Li agreed to return under the condition that Chiang surrender most of the gold and US dollars in his possession that belonged to the central government, and that Chiang stop overriding Li's authority.
Sun Yat-sen died on March 12, 1925, creating a power vacuum in the Kuomintang.
Chiang may not have taken part in the act but would later assume responsibility to help Chen avoid trouble.
However, this policy of avoiding a frontal war against the Japanese was widely unpopular.
In fact, the concept of real or original name is not as clear-cut in China as it is in the Western world.
Chiang Ching-kuo orchestrated the controversial court-martial and arrest of General Sun Li-jen in August 1955, for plotting a coup d'état with the American Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) against his father Chiang Kai-shek and the Kuomintang.
Many top nationalist generals, including Chiang, had studied and trained in Japan before the Nationalists had returned to the mainland in the 1920s, and maintained close personal friendships with top Japanese officers.
One of the most famous quotes from Chiang (during that time) was that he would rather mistakenly kill 1000 innocent people rather than allow one Communist to escape.
All Muslim Generals commissioned by Chiang in the National Revolutionary Army swore allegiance to him.
He developed the ROC army in order to prepare for an invasion of the mainland, and to defend Taiwan in case of an attack by the Communist forces.
In the Central Plains War, Beijing was taken on June, 1928, from an alliance of the warlords Feng Yuxiang and Yan Xishan.
After the war, Chiang appointed Ma Bufang as ambassador to Saudi Arabia.
He and Dr. Sun criticized the May Fourth intellectuals as corrupting the morals of China's youth.
Wang Jingwei's National Government was weak militarily, and was soon ended by Chiang with the support of a local warlord (Li Zongren of Guangxi).
Originally rebuffed in the early 1920s, Chiang managed to ingratiate himself to some degree with Soong Mei-ling's mother by first divorcing his wife and concubines and promising to sincerely study the precepts of Christianity.
Chiang became a sworn brother of the Muslim General Ma Fuxiang and appointed him to high ranking positions.
Chiang's right-hand man, the secret police Chief Dai Li, was both anti-American and anti-Communist.
At the onset of the Second Sino-Japanese War, which later became the Chinese theater of World War II, Zhang Xueliang kidnapped Chiang and obliged him to establish a Second United Front with the Communists.
Shortly after Chiang's resignation the Communists halted their advances and attempted to negotiate the virtual surrender of the ROC.
Like many other Chinese historical figures, Chiang used several names throughout his life.
Throughout his rule, complete eradication of the Communists remained Chiang's dream.
On April 12, Chiang carried out a purge of thousands of suspected Communists and dissidents in Shanghai, and began large-scale massacres across the country collectively known as the "White Terror".
According to Sun Yat-sen's plans, the Kuomintang (KMT) was to rebuild China in three steps: military rule, political tutelage, and constitutional rule.
The government acted to modernize the legal and penal systems, attempted to stabilize prices, amortize debts, reform the banking and currency systems, build railroads and highways, improve public health facilities, legislate against traffic in narcotics, and augment industrial and agricultural production.
The Chinese Muslim Association, a pro-Kuomintang and anti-Communist organization, was set up by Muslims working in his regime.
However, it was readily accepted by members of the Chinese Nationalist Party and is the name under which Chiang Kai-shek is still commonly known in Taiwan.
Chinese music composer Hwang Yau-tai wrote the Chiang Kai-shek Memorial Song.
