and in 2010 Chicago's murder rate fell to 435 (16.14 per 100,000), a 5% decrease from 2009 and lowest levels since 1965.
Other notable schools include: Chicago State University; the School of the Art Institute of Chicago, the Illinois Institute of Art&nbsp;– Chicago; East–West University; National Louis University; North Park University; Northeastern Illinois University; Columbia College Chicago; Robert Morris University Illinois; Roosevelt University; Saint Xavier University; Rush University; and Shimer College.
A 2007 report on the Chicago music industry by the University of Chicago Cultural Policy Center ranked Chicago third among metropolitan U.S. areas in "size of music industry" and fourth among all U.S. cities in "number of concerts and performances".
Manufacturing, printing, publishing and food processing also play major roles in the city's economy.
In addition, the Chicago Sister Cities program hosts a number of delegation and formal exchanges.
Chicago has a Hispanic or Latino population of 28.9%.
* '''Shanghai''' (China) ''1985''
They have won three World Series titles (1906, 1917, 2005) and six American League pennants, including the first in 1901.
What would become the influential ''Poetry'' magazine was founded in 1912 by Harriet Monroe, who was working as an art critic for the ''Chicago Tribune''.
His legacy continues with the multiple community colleges in the Chicago proper, including the seven City Colleges of Chicago: Richard J. Daley College, Kennedy–King College, Malcolm X College, Olive–Harvey College, Truman College, Harold Washington College and Wilbur Wright College, in addition to the privately held MacCormac College.
On December 2, 1942, physicist Enrico Fermi conducted the world's first controlled nuclear reaction at the University of Chicago as part of the top-secret Manhattan Project.
During its first hundred years, Chicago was one of the fastest-growing cities in the world.
Dutch Wheels a world renowned company that manufactures ferris wheels was selected to design the new wheel.
A 2011 study by Walk Score ranked Chicago the fourth-most walkable of fifty largest cities in the United States.
Chicago is served by O'Hare International Airport, the world's second-busiest airport measured by airline operations, on the far Northwest Side, and Midway International Airport on the Southwest Side.
In 2016, Chicago was ranked the sixth-most walkable large city in the United States.
To accommodate rapid population growth and demand for better sanitation, the city improved its infrastructure.
An attempt was made in the early 20th century to link Chicago with New York City via the Chicago&nbsp;– New York Electric Air Line Railroad.
Chicago has a distinctive fine art tradition.
These visitors contributed more than  billion to Chicago's economy.
Much notable Chicago fiction focuses on the city itself, with social criticism keeping exultation in check.
Violent crime rates vary significantly by area of the city, with more economically developed areas having low rates, but other sections have much higher rates of crime.
* 32.9% Black or African American;
The Chicago Loop is the central business district, but Chicago is also a city of neighborhoods.
It will also have entertainment systems inside the gondolas as well as a climate controlled environment.
The city can experience extreme winter cold waves and summer heat waves that may last for several consecutive days.
Annual festivals feature various acts, such as Lollapalooza and the Pitchfork Music Festival.
In the 1920s and 1930s, the great majority of African Americans moving to Chicago were clustered in a so‑called "Black Belt" on the city's South Side.
In March 1937, there was a violent strike by about 3,500 drivers for Checker and Yellow Cab Companies which included rioting that went on for weeks.
Chicago is also a prominent center of the Polish Cathedral style of church architecture.
The ratification of the 18th amendment to the Constitution in 1919 made the production and sale (including exportation) of alcoholic beverages illegal in the United States.
The city is part of the USDA Plant Hardiness zone 6a, transitioning to 5b in the suburbs.
It includes nineteen boulevards, eight parks, and six squares, along twenty-six miles of interconnected streets.
Ten years later, he became the secretary and then the president of the first Illinois State Board of Health, which carried out most of its activities in Chicago.
Chicago is one of the largest hubs of passenger rail service in the nation.
This led to the creation of the atomic bomb by the United States, which it used in World War II in 1945.
However, Chicago and other major U.S. cities, experienced a significant reduction in violent crime rates through the 1990s, falling to 448 homicides in 2004, its lowest total since 1965 and only 15.65 murders per 100,000).
* '''Milan''' (Italy) ''1973''
Polish language productions for Chicago's large Polish speaking population can be seen at the historic Gateway Theatre in Jefferson Park.
The park is listed on the National Register of Historic Places listings in South Side Chicago.
As well as the mayor, Chicago's clerk and treasurer are also elected citywide.
This was higher than in New York City and Los Angeles, the two largest cities in the United States, which have lower murder rates and lower total homicides.
It includes Rush University Medical Center, ranked as the second best hospital in the Chicago metropolitan area by ''U.S.
''Sporting News'' named Chicago the "Best Sports City" in the United States in 1993, 2006, and 2010.
There are 31 sand beaches, a plethora of museums, two world-class conservatories, and 50 nature areas.
In 2012, Chicago was listed as an alpha global city by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network, and ranked seventh in the world in the 2014 Global Cities Index.
Both O'Hare and Midway are owned and operated by the City of Chicago.
Most of the city's high-rise commercial and residential buildings are close to the waterfront.
During much of that time, the city administration found opposition mainly from a liberal "independent" faction of the Democratic Party.
Chicago is one of the United States' most densely populated major cities, and the largest city in the Great Lakes Megalopolis.
Chicago was the location of the infamous St. Valentine's Day Massacre in 1929, where Al Capone sent men to gun down members of his rival gang, North Side, led by Bugs Moran.
Chicago's Western Avenue is the longest continuous urban street in the world.
* '''Paris''' (France) ''1996'' (friendship and cooperation agreement only)
The aldermanic, mayoral, and other city offices are filled through nonpartisan elections with runoffs as needed.
The city's distinctive accent, made famous by its use in classic films like ''The Blues Brothers'' and television programs like the ''Saturday Night Live'' skit "Bill Swerski's Superfans", is an advanced form of Inland Northern American English.
Civil and criminal law cases are heard in the Cook County Circuit Court of the State of Illinois court system, or in the Northern District of Illinois, in the federal system.
Chicago rests on a continental divide at the site of the Chicago Portage, connecting the Mississippi River and the Great Lakes watersheds.
The team was founded before the 2006 WNBA season began.
The average land elevation is  above sea level.
A number of Chicago neighborhoods emerged along these roadways in the 19th century.
It also has professional sports teams in each of the major professional leagues.
In 2015, roughly 17,290 people or 4% of the population identified as LGBT.
These include from the time of the Great Chicago Fire to about 1900, what became known as the Chicago Literary Renaissance in the 1910s and early 1920s, and the period of the Great Depression through the 1940s.
Ravinia Festival, located  north of Chicago, is the summer home of the CSO, and is a favorite destination for many Chicagoans.
Several major franchises have won championships within recent years&nbsp;– the Bears (1985), the Bulls (91, '92, '93, '96, '97, and '98), the White Sox (2005), the Blackhawks (2010, 2013, 2015), and the Fire (1998).
Henri Joutel, in his journal of 1688, noted that the wild garlic, called "chicagoua", grew abundantly in the area.
* German: (120,328)
Additionally, the Chicago metropolitan area recorded the greatest number of new or expanded corporate facilities in the United States for calendar year 2014.
* '''Petah Tikva''' (Israel) ''1994''
Discovery Channel films two shows in Chicago: ''Cook County Jail'' and the Chicago version of ''Cash Cab''.
Their service territory borders Iroquois County to the south, the Wisconsin border to the north, the Iowa border to the west and the Indiana border to the east.
Because of the dominance of the Democratic Party in Chicago, the Democratic primary vote held in the spring is generally more significant than the general elections in November for U.S. House and Illinois State seats.
Chicago gave its name to the Chicago School and was home to the Prairie School, two movements in architecture.
The three sides of the city are represented on the Flag of Chicago by three horizontal white stripes.
* '''Busan''' (South Korea) ''2007''
The Museum Campus joins the southern section of Grant Park, which includes the renowned Art Institute of Chicago.
The University of Chicago Oriental Institute has an extensive collection of ancient Egyptian and Near Eastern archaeological artifacts.
From the last two decades of the 19th century, Chicago was the destination of waves of immigrants from Ireland, Southern, Central and Eastern Europe, including Italians, Jews, Poles, Lithuanians, Serbs and Czechs.
The Bears have won more games in the history of the NFL than any other team, and only the Green Bay Packers, their longtime rivals, have won more championships.
Whole neighborhoods were completely changed based on race.
&nbsp;—Non-Hispanic
Since the 1980s, many motion pictures have been filmed in the city such as ''The Blues Brothers'', ''Brewster's Millions'', ''Ferris Bueller's Day Off'', ''Sixteen Candles'', ''Home Alone'', ''The Fugitive'', ''I, Robot'', ''Wanted'', ''Batman Begins'', ''The Dark Knight'', ''Transformers: Dark of the Moon'', ''Transformers: Age of Extinction'', ''Divergent'', ''Insurgent'', ''Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice'',  ''Sinister 2'' and ''Suicide Squad''.
The availability of jobs attracted African-Americans from the Southern United States.
The Chicago Bulls of the National Basketball Association (NBA) is one of the most recognized basketball teams in the world.
News & World Report''; the new Prentice Women's Hospital; and Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago.
Moreover, the construction of the Illinois and Michigan Canal, which helped move goods from the Great Lakes south on the Mississippi River, and of the railroads in the 19th century made the city a major transportation center in the United States.
He was re‑elected in 1987 but died of a heart attack soon after.
* '''Lucerne''' (Switzerland) ''1998''
As new additions to the city were platted, city ordinance required them to be laid out with eight streets to the mile in one direction and sixteen in the other direction (about one street per 201 meters by two in the other direction).
The Cook County medical examiner's office had reported a total of 410 homicides with 16 of those including fatal police shootings, all within the same time period.
In the 1980s and 90s, the city was the global center for house and industrial music, two forms of music created in Chicago, as well as being popular for alternative rock, punk, and new wave.
On February 23, 2011, former Illinois Congressman and White House Chief of Staff, Rahm Emanuel, won the mayoral election, beating five rivals with 55 percent of the vote, and was sworn in as Mayor on May 16, 2011.
They have played more games and have more wins than any other team in Major League baseball since 1876.
Electricity for most of northern Illinois is provided by Commonwealth Edison, also known as ComEd.
The first known non-indigenous permanent settler in Chicago was Jean Baptiste Point du Sable.
Chicago is famous for its outdoor public art with donors establishing funding for such art as far back as Benjamin Ferguson's 1905 trust.
The new DW60 will be the first in the United States and will be the sixth tallest in the U.S.  Chicago was the first city in the world to ever erect a ferris wheel.
Included among these are its nationally renowned deep-dish pizza; this style is said to have originated at Pizzeria Uno.
Walter Payton College Prep High School is ranked second, Jones College Prep is third, and the oldest magnet school in the city, Whitney M. Young Magnet High School, which was opened in 1975, is ranked fourth.
These institutions consistently rank among the top "National Universities" in the United States, as determined by ''U.S.
The Illinois Medical District is on the Near West Side.
The Chicago Sky is a professional basketball team based in Rosemont, Illinois, playing in the Women's National Basketball Association (WNBA).
Grant Park holds Millennium Park, Buckingham Fountain (1927), and the Art Institute of Chicago.
Chicago Public Radio produces programs such as PRI's ''This American Life'' and NPR's ''Wait Wait...Don't Tell Me!''
In 1968 and 1969, members of the Chicago Imagists, such as Roger Brown, Leon Golub, Robert Lostutter, Jim Nutt, and Barbara Rossi produced bizarre representational paintings.
The tradition of serving the Greek dish, saganaki while aflame, has its origins in Chicago's Greek community.
The city grew significantly in size and population by incorporating many neighboring townships between 1851 and 1920, with the largest annexation happening in 1889, with five townships joining the city, including the Hyde Park Township, which now comprises most of the South Side of Chicago and the far southeast of Chicago, and the Jefferson Township, which now makes up most of Chicago's Northwest Side.
* '''Galway''' (Ireland) ''1997''
Ethnically originated creations include chicken Vesuvio, with roasted bone-in chicken cooked in oil and garlic next to garlicky oven-roasted potato wedges and a sprinkling of green peas.
In 1883, Chicago's railway managers needed a general time convention, so they developed the standardized system of North American time zones.
* 0.5% American Indian.
6 NBA Championships
The Chicago Marathon has been held each year since 1977 except for 1987, when a half marathon was run in its place.
Continuing racial tensions and violence, such as the Chicago Race Riot of 1919, also occurred.
The city served as the venue for the medical dramas ''ER'' and ''Chicago Hope'', as well as the fantasy drama series ''Early Edition'' and the 2005–2009 drama ''Prison Break''.
9 Championships (1 Super Bowl)
In the ''Encyclopedia of Chicago'', Northwestern University Professor Bill Savage describes Chicago fiction as prose which tries to "''capture the essence of the city, its spaces and its people''".
Chicago is currently the setting for CBS's ''The Good Wife'' and ''Mike and Molly'', Showtime's ''Shameless'', and NBC's ''Chicago Fire'', ''Chicago P.D.''
The Chicago-style hot dog, typically an all-beef hot dog, is loaded with an array of toppings that often includes pickle relish, yellow mustard, pickled sport peppers, tomato wedges, dill pickle spear and topped off with celery salt on a poppy seed bun.
She helped reduce crime in the Cabrini-Green housing project and led Chicago's school system out of a financial crisis.
Chicago has also been the setting for many popular television shows, including the situation comedies ''Perfect Strangers'' and its spinoff ''Family Matters'', ''Punky Brewster'', ''Married... with Children'', ''Kenan & Kel'', ''The League'', ''The Bob Newhart Show'', and ''Shake It Up''.
Chicago was named the fourth-most important business center in the world in the MasterCard Worldwide Centers of Commerce Index.
The South Side hosts one of the city's largest parades, the annual African American Bud Billiken Parade and Picnic, which travels through Bronzeville to Washington Park.
Mayor Richard J. Daley, a Democrat, was elected in 1955, in the era of machine politics.
The city has also been rated as having the most balanced economy in the United States, due to its high level of diversification.
The Chicago Symphony Orchestra (CSO) performs at Symphony Center, and is recognized as one of the best orchestras in the world.
* '''Amman''' (Jordan) ''2004''
Between 1910 and 1930, the African-American population of Chicago increased dramatically, from 44,103 to 233,903.
Du Sable was of African and French descent and arrived in the 1780s.
Germans, Irish, Poles, Swedes and Czechs made up nearly two-thirds of the foreign-born population (by 1900, whites were 98.1% of the city's population).
According to reports in 2013, "most of Chicago's violent crime comes from gangs trying to maintain control of drug-selling territories", and is specifically related to the activities of the Sinaloa Cartel, which by 2006 had decided to seek to control illicit drug distribution, against local street gangs.
The City Beautiful movement inspired Chicago's boulevards and parkways.
The DW60 will stand at approximately 196&nbsp;ft (60 m), which is 46&nbsp;ft taller than the previous wheel.
The term "midway" for a fair or carnival referred originally to the Midway Plaisance, a strip of park land that still runs through the University of Chicago campus and connects the Washington and Jackson Parks.
The Chicago Blackhawks of the National Hockey League (NHL) began play in 1926, and are one of the "Original Six" teams of the NHL.
In June 2016, McDonald's confirmed plans to move its global headquarters to Chicago's West Loop neighborhood by early 2018.
Many additional diagonal streets were recommended in the Plan of Chicago, but only the extension of Ogden Avenue was ever constructed.
The boulevards and the parks were authorized by the Illinois legislature in 1869.
Finally, two fountains near the Loop also function as monumental works of art: Plensa's Crown Fountain as well as Burnham and Bennett's Buckingham Fountain.
In Millennium Park, there is the reflective ''Cloud Gate'' sculpture.
These schools offer a rigorous curriculum with mainly honors and Advanced Placement (AP) courses.
In the summer, many outdoor concerts are given in Grant Park and Millennium Park.
Chicago had a murder rate of 18.5 per 100,000 residents in 2012, ranking 16th among cities with 100,000 people or more.
Black or African American
The cab companies hired "strike breakers", and the cab drivers union hired "sluggers" who ragged through the downtown Chicago area looking for cabs and drivers not participating in the strike.
In 2005, indie rock artist Sufjan Stevens created a concept album about Illinois titled ''Illinois''; many of its songs were about Chicago and its history.
As the site of the Chicago Portage, the city became an important transportation hub between the eastern and western United States.
The first two Parliament of the World's Religions in 1893 and 1993 were held in Chicago.
According to his diary of late September 1687:
* European: (15,753)
Chicago has five 50,000 watt AM radio stations: the CBS Radio-owned WBBM and WSCR; the Tribune Broadcasting-owned WGN; the Cumulus Media-owned WLS; and the ESPN Radio-owned WMVP.
In 1795, following the Northwest Indian War, an area that was to be part of Chicago was turned over to the United States for a military post by native tribes in accordance with the Treaty of Greenville.
The Blackhawks have won six Stanley Cups, including in 2010, 2013, and 2015.
For much of the twentieth century, it nurtured a strong style of figurative surrealism, as in the works of Ivan Albright and Ed Paschke.
Chicago is also featured in a few video games, including ''Watch Dogs'' and ''Midtown Madness'', a real-life, car-driving simulation game.
+ Major league professional teams in Chicago (ranked by attendance)
* '''São Paulo''' (Brazil) ''2007''
The University of Illinois College of Medicine at UIC is the largest medical school in the United States (2,600 students including those at campuses in Peoria, Rockford and Urbana–Champaign).
Though the meatpacking industry currently plays a lesser role in the city's economy, Chicago continues to be a major transportation and distribution center.
* 45.0% White (31.7% non-Hispanic whites);
The fountain's two towers display visual effects from LED images of Chicagoans' faces, along with water spouting from their lips.
In addition, Chicago is the recent home of satirical national news outlet, ''The Onion'', as well as its sister pop-culture publication, ''The A.V.
Over a third of the city population is concentrated in the lakefront neighborhoods from Rogers Park in the north to South Shore in the south.
As of the 2010 census, there were 2,695,598 people with 1,045,560 households living in Chicago.
News & World Report'' for 2010–11; the Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago, which is ranked the best U.S. rehabilitation hospital by ''U.S.
* French (except Basque): (11,410)
* '''Durban''' (South Africa) ''1997''
During World War I and the 1920s there was a major expansion in industry.
Also, the proximity to Lake Michigan keeps lakefront Chicago cooler in early summer and milder in winter than areas to the west.
According to the National Weather Service, Chicago's highest official temperature reading of  was recorded on July 24, 1934, although Midway Airport reached  one day prior and recorded a heat index of  during the 1995 heatwave.
The city is the headquarters of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago (the Seventh District of the Federal Reserve).
Like other major cities, Chicago also experiences urban heat island, making the city and its suburbs milder than surrounding rural areas, especially at night and in winter.
William Rainey Harper, the first president of the University of Chicago, was instrumental in the creation of the junior college concept, establishing nearby Joliet Junior College as the first in the nation in 1901.
The independents finally gained control of city government in 1983 with the election of Harold Washington (in office 1983–1987).
In 2009 Chicago placed 9th on the UBS list of the world's richest cities.
* American: (37,118)
The lowest official temperature of  was recorded on January 20, 1985, at O'Hare Airport.
This dialect can also be found in other cities bordering the Great Lakes such as Cleveland, Milwaukee, Detroit, and Rochester, New York, and most prominently features a rearrangement of certain vowel sounds, such as the short 'a' sound as in "cat", which can sound more like "kyet" to outsiders.
The city also has two PBS member stations: WTTW 11, producer of shows such as ''Sneak Previews'', ''The Frugal Gourmet'', ''Lamb Chop's Play-Along'' and ''The McLaughlin Group'', just to name a few, and WYCC 20.
* 28.9% Hispanic or Latino (of any race);
The desire to join the city was driven by municipal services the city could provide its residents.
Washington's first term in office directed attention to poor and previously neglected minority neighborhoods.
Male full-time workers had a median income of $47,074 versus $42,063 for females.
The South Side is the largest section of the city, encompassing roughly 60% of the city's land area.
Downtown is the center of Chicago's financial, cultural, governmental and commercial institutions and the site of Grant Park and many of the city's skyscrapers.
The name "Chicago" is derived from a French rendering of the Native American word ''shikaakwa'', known to botanists as ''Allium tricoccum'', from the Miami-Illinois language.
Chicago's culture includes the visual arts, novels, film, theater, especially improvisational comedy, and music, particularly jazz, blues, soul, gospel and house music.
From 1989 until May 16, 2011, Chicago was under the leadership of its longest serving mayor, Richard M. Daley, the son of Richard J. Daley.
CREATE, the Chicago Region Environmental and Transport Efficiency program, comprises about 70 programs, including crossovers, overpasses and underpasses, that intend to significantly improve the speed of freight movements in the Chicago area.
This proved successful and blue bins were rolled out across the city.
In 1933, Chicago Mayor Anton Cermak was fatally wounded in Miami, Florida during a failed assassination attempt on President-elect Franklin D. Roosevelt.
Lake Shore Drive runs adjacent to a large portion of Chicago's lakefront.
In 2013, Chicago was chosen as one of the "Top Ten Cities in the United States" to visit for its restaurants, skyscrapers, museums, and waterfront, by the readers of ''Condé Nast Traveler''.
Large swaths of the city's residential areas away from the lake are characterized by brick bungalows built from the early 20th century through the end of World War II.
Along with Boston, Chicago is the only city to continuously host major professional sports since 1871, having only taken 1872 and 1873 off due to the Great Chicago Fire.
The Loop's historic buildings include the Chicago Board of Trade Building, the Fine Arts Building, 35&nbsp;East Wacker, and the Chicago Building, 860-880 Lake Shore Drive Apartments by Mies van der Rohe.
The building of the boulevard system continued intermittently until 1942.
In 2011, Chicago's murders fell another 1.2% to 431 (a rate of 15.94 per 100,000).
* Russian: (19,771)
The city's waterfront location and nightlife has attracted residents and tourists alike.
