The Air Force took delivery of the final two of ten F-16s, all purchased from the U.S., in March 2007 after several decades of U.S. debate and previous refusal to sell.
After the military coup in September 1973 the Chilean national police (Carabineros) were incorporated into the Defense Ministry.
The first general census was conducted by the government of Agustín de Jáuregui between 1777 and 1778; it indicated that the population consisted of 259,646 inhabitants: 73.5 percent of European descent, 7.9 percent mestizos, 8.6 percent indigenous peoples and 9.8 percent blacks.
Most of these visitors come from other countries in the American continent, mainly Argentina; followed by a growing number from the United States, Europe, and Brazil with a growing number of Asians from South Korea and PR China.
Common English words have been absorbed and appropriated into everyday Spanish speech.
According to 17th-century Spanish chronicler Diego de Rosales, the Incas called the valley of the Aconcagua "Chili" by corruption of the name of a Picunche tribal chief ("cacique") called ''Tili'', who ruled the area at the time of the Incan conquest in the 15th century.
The 1999 law on religion prohibits religious discrimination.
Codelco, the state mining firm, competes with private ones.
The two mountain ranges intersect, virtually eliminating the intermediate depression.
The Boundary treaty of 1881 between Chile and Argentina confirmed Chilean sovereignty over the Strait of Magellan.
The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and other laws and policies contribute to the generally free practice of religion.
Chile is a founding member of the United Nations, the Union of South American Nations and the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States.
The relatively small central area dominates in terms of population and agricultural resources, and is the cultural and political center from which Chile expanded in the late 19th century when it incorporated its northern and southern regions.
Agriculture in Chile encompasses a wide range of different activities due to its particular geography, climate and geology and human factors.
In January 2010, Chileans elected Sebastián Piñera as the first rightist President in 20 years, defeating former President Eduardo Frei Ruiz-Tagle of the ''Concertación'', for a four-year term succeeding Bachelet.
Francisco Hurtado, Governor of the province of Chiloé, conducted a census in 1784 and found the population consisted of 26,703 inhabitants, 64.4 percent of which were whites and 33.5 percent of which were natives.
The coastal plains are wide and allow the establishment of cities and ports along the Pacific, while the coastal mountains down its height.
None of the nine presidential candidates got more than 50 percent of the vote.
The Chilean Congress conducted a runoff vote between the leading candidates, Allende and former president Jorge Alessandri and keeping with tradition, chose Allende by a vote of 153 to 35.
Chile achieved global recognition for the successful rescue of 33 trapped miners in 2010.
Its rate of population growth has been decreasing since 1990, due to a declining birth rate.
Anita Lizana won the US Open in 1937, becoming the first woman from Latin America to win a Grand Slam tournament.
It is characterized by the presence of the Atacama desert, the most arid in the world.
The''' fauna of Chile''' is characterized by a high degree of endemism, due to its particular geography.
In the 2009 legislative elections in Chile, the Communist Party won 3 out of 120 seats in the Chamber of Deputies for the first time in 30 years (the Communist Party was not allowed to exist as such during the dictatorship).
The main football clubs are Colo-Colo, Universidad de Chile and Universidad Católica.
Of these, we highlight the archipelago of Juan Fernandez and Easter Island, which is located in the fracture zone between the Nazca plate and the Pacific plate known as East Pacific Rise.
According to the Köppen system, Chile within its borders hosts at least ten major climatic subtypes.
Gen. Gustavo González Jure is the head of the national police force of 40,964 men and women who are responsible for law enforcement, traffic management, narcotics suppression, border control, and counter-terrorism throughout Chile.
Tourism in Chile has experienced sustained growth over the last few decades.
On the slopes of the Andes, besides the scattered tola desert brush, grasses are found.
According to a 2012 database of the International Telecommunications Union (ITU), 61.42% of the Chilean population uses the internet, making Chile the country with the highest internet penetration in South America.
The conquest of Chile began in earnest in 1540 and was carried out by Pedro de Valdivia, one of Francisco Pizarro's lieutenants, who founded the city of Santiago on 12 February 1541.
The current account deficit was 4% in the first quarter of 2013, financed mostly by foreign direct investment.
The stadium was renamed for Jara in 2003.
File:Zorrito Chile.JPG|Chilla fox, common in the region
Spanish attempts to re-impose arbitrary rule during what was called the Reconquista led to a prolonged struggle, including infighting from Bernardo O'Higgins, who challenged Carrera's leadership.
After these events, a movement for total independence, under the command of José Miguel Carrera (one of the most renowned patriots) and his two brothers Juan José and Luis Carrera, soon gained a wider following.
In the 1960s and 1970s the country experienced severe left-right political polarization and turmoil.
Chile's most famous poet is Pablo Neruda, who received the Nobel Prize for Literature (1971) and is world-renowned for his extensive library of works on romance, nature, and politics.
The two countries maintain consular relations and are represented at the Consul General level.
Through initiatives such as the English Opens Doors Program, the government made English mandatory for students in fifth-grade and above in public schools.
Despite royal prohibitions, relations remained strained from continual colonialist interference.
Each time the Mapuche and other native groups revolted, the southern border of the colony was driven northward.
In December 1993, Christian Democrat Eduardo Frei Ruiz-Tagle, the son of previous president Eduardo Frei Montalva, led the Concertación coalition to victory with an absolute majority of votes (58%).
However, Chile's mountainous landscape limits the extent and intensity of agriculture so that arable land corresponds only to 2.62% of the total territory.
In the mid-1960s native musical forms were revitalized by the Parra family with the Nueva canción Chilena, which was associated with political activists and reformers such as Víctor Jara, Inti-Illimani, and Quilapayún.
In the 1970 election, Senator Salvador Allende of the Socialist Party of Chile (then part of the "Popular Unity" coalition which included the Communists, Radicals, Social-Democrats, dissident Christian Democrats, the Popular Unitary Action Movement, and the Independent Popular Action), achieved a partial majority in a plurality of votes in a three-way contest, followed by candidates Radomiro Tomic for the Christian Democrat Party and Jorge Alessandri for the Conservative Party.
On October 1973, at least 72 people were murdered by the Caravan of Death.
Much of the banking sector was nationalized.
However, by 2009, it has been reported that had been lost from the pension system to the global financial crisis.
surfing is popular at some coastal towns.
By the 1920s, the emerging middle and working classes were powerful enough to elect a reformist president, Arturo Alessandri, whose program was frustrated by a conservative congress.
Although the amount of available information is still very small, a first effort has been made to estimate the number of fungal species endemic to Chile, and 1995 species have been tentatively identified as possible endemics of the country.
Gabriela Mistral was the first Latin American to receive a Nobel Prize in Literature (1945).
If one considers only mainland territory, Chile is unique within this group in its narrowness from east to west, with the other long north-south countries (including Brazil, Russia, Canada, and the United States, among others) all being wider from east to west by a factor of more than 10.
The Chilean Government has formed a Council on Innovation and Competition, hoping to bring in additional FDI to new parts of the economy.
Wesleyan, Lutheran, Reformed Evangelical, Presbyterian, Anglican, Episcopalian, Baptist and Methodist churches are also present.
It was re-elected as a member of the UN Human Rights Council in 2011 for a three-year term.
Because of its proximity to Santiago, the coast of the Valparaíso Region, with its many beach resorts, receives the largest number of tourists.
Excluding its Pacific islands and Antarctic claim, Chile lies between latitudes 17° and 56°S, and longitudes 66° and 75°W.
The Congress is located in the port city of Valparaíso, about  west of the capital, Santiago.
The Government Junta of Chile proclaimed Chile an autonomous republic within the Spanish monarchy (in memory of this day Chile celebrates its National Day on 18 September each year).
The Chilean currency is the Chilean peso (CLP).
The first years of the regime were marked by human rights violations.
Late Paleozoic, 251 million years ago, Chile belonged to the continental block called Gondwana.
Jorge Alessandri succeeded Ibáñez del Campo in 1958, bringing Chilean conservatism back into power democratically for another term.
As of November 2012, about 11.1 million people (64% of the population) benefit from government welfare programs, via the "Social Protection Card", which includes the population living in poverty and those at a risk of falling into poverty.
Due to the geography of Chile dissimilar cultural expressions vary markedly in different parts of the country.
and Greater Valparaíso with 824,000.
As a result of the War of the Pacific with Peru and Bolivia (1879–83), Chile expanded its territory northward by almost one-third, eliminating Bolivia's access to the Pacific, and acquired valuable nitrate deposits, the exploitation of which led to an era of national affluence.
In June 2005, Chile completed a nationwide overhaul of its criminal justice system.
Other theories say Chile may derive its name from a Native American word meaning either "ends of the earth" or "sea gulls"; from the Mapuche word ''chilli,'' which may mean "where the land ends;" or from the Quechua ''chiri'', "cold", or ''tchili'', meaning either "snow" or "the deepest point of the Earth".
The Chilean relief consists of the central depression, which crosses the country longitudinally, flanked by two mountain ranges that make up about 80% of the territory: the Andes mountains to the east-natural border with Bolivia and Argentina, with its most alton 18 located on the Nevado Ojos del Salado, at 6891.3 m, the highest volcano in the world, in the region of Atacama and Coastal Range west-minor height from the Andes, with its highest point located on the hill Vicuña Mackenna, at 3114 meters, located in the Sierra Vicuña Mackenna, the south of Antofagasta.
Also controlled but only temporarily inhabited (by some local fishermen) are the small islands of San Ambrosio and San Felix.
Chileans voted in the first round of presidential elections on 17 November 2013.
Chile has a total of 372 runways (62 paved and 310 unpaved).
Their waters mainly flow from Andean snowmelt in the summer and winter rains.
Chile's most popular sport is association football.
In southern Chile, south of the Biobío River, heavy precipitation has produced dense forests of laurels, magnolias, and various species of conifers and beeches, which become smaller and more stunted to the south.
Irreligious people, atheists, and agnostics account for around 12 percent of the population.
That the Chilean population was largely formed in a small section at the center of the country and then migrated in modest numbers to the north and south helps explain this relative lack of differentiation, which was maintained by the national reach of radio, and now television, which also helps to diffuse and homogenize colloquial expressions.
Most private schools in Chile start teaching English from kindergarten.
With Carrera in prison in Argentina, O'Higgins and anti-Carrera cohort José de San Martín, hero of the Argentine War of Independence, led an army that crossed the Andes into Chile and defeated the royalists.
Patagonia extends from within Reloncavi, at the height of parallel 41 ° S, to the south.
The existence of rivers flowing through the territory allows the formation of transverse valleys, where agriculture has developed strongly in recent times, while the coastal plains begin to expand.
Escondida is the largest copper mine in the world, producing over 5% of global supplies.
Due to Chile's topography a functioning transport network is vital to its economy.
All employees pay 7 percent of their monthly income to the fund.
However, it is undeniable that immigrants have played a significant role in Chilean society.
The Air Force also operates an airbase on King George Island, Antarctica.
The National Health Fund (''Fonasa''), created in 1979, is the financial entity entrusted to collect, manage and distribute state funds for health in Chile.
The southern coast is a labyrinth of fjords, inlets, canals, twisting peninsulas, and islands.
The Andes, as he had done previously Cordillera de la Costa, begins to break in the ocean causing a myriad of islands and islets and disappear into it, sinking and reappearing in the Southern Antilles arc and then the Antarctic Peninsula, where it is called Antartandes, in the Chilean Antarctic Territory, lying between the meridians 53 ° W and 90 ° W.
It is an official national holiday celebrated in May every year.
During the period of Radical Party dominance (1932–52), the state increased its role in the economy.
However, this latter claim is suspended under the terms of the Antarctic Treaty, of which Chile is a signatory.
The abolition of slavery by the Spanish crown in 1683 was done in recognition that enslaving the Mapuche intensified resistance rather than cowing them into submission.
Chile slowly started to expand its influence and to establish its borders.
Some major agriculture products of Chile includes grapes, apples, pears, onions, wheat, corn, oats, peaches, garlic, asparagus, beans, beef, poultry, wool, fish and timber.1 Due to its geographical isolation and strict customs policies Chile is free from diseases such as Mad Cow Disease, fruit fly and Phylloxera.
Currently in 2015, the majority religion in Chile is Christianity (68%), with an estimated 55% of Chileans belonging to the Catholic church, 13% Protestant or Evangelical and just 7% with any other religion.
The Central Bank of Chile in Santiago serves as the central bank for the country.
By early 1973, inflation was out of control.
Arica, Iquique, Antofagasta, La Serena and Coquimbo are the main summer centers in the north, and Pucón on the shores of Lake Villarrica is the main center in the south.
Growth slowed to 4.1% in the first quarter of 2013.
A new Constitution was approved by a controversial plebiscite on 11 September 1980, and General Pinochet became president of the republic for an eight-year term.
Nevado Ojos del Salado1
It settled all its territorial disputes with Argentina during the 1990s except for part of the border at Southern Patagonian Ice Field.
An associate member of Mercosur and a full member of APEC, Chile has been a major player in international economic issues and hemispheric free trade.
Privatization of the telephone system began in 1988; Chile has one of the most advanced telecommunications infrastructure in South America with a modern system based on extensive microwave radio relay facilities and domestic satellite system with 3 earth stations.
The relatively small Central Valley, which includes Santiago, dominates the country in terms of population and agricultural resources.
Much of the Chilean flora is distinct from that of neighboring Argentina, indicating that the Andean barrier existed during its formation.
In 2005, St. Alberto Hurtado was canonized by Pope Benedict XVI and became the country's second saint after St. Teresa de los Andes.
Only those that practiced their native culture or spoke their native language were considered to be Indians, irrespective of their "racial purity".
A Chilean court decision in November 2009 considered to be a landmark ruling on indigenous rights and made use of the convention.
A classification of this flora necessitates its division into at least three general zones: the desert provinces of the north, Central Chile, and the humid regions of the south.
Since the early decades after independence, Chile has always had an active involvement in foreign affairs.
The percentage of Chileans with per capita household incomes below the poverty line—defined as twice the cost of satisfying a person's minimal nutritional needs—fell from 45.1 percent in 1987 to 11.5 percent in 2009, according to government surveys.
These include eliminating the positions of appointed senators and senators for life, granting the President authority to remove the commanders-in-chief of the armed forces, and reducing the presidential term from six to four years.
Industrial output increased sharply and unemployment fell during the Allende administration's first year.
Universidad de Chile was the last international champion (Copa Sudamericana 2011).
After the Spanish invasion, Spanish took over as the lingua franca and the indigenous languages have become minority languages, with some now extinct or close to extinction.
The Andes maintains altitudes above 6000m but descend slowly starts approaching the 4000 meters on average.
Its headquarters are in Santiago and decentralized public service is conducted by various Regional Offices.
The measure was passed unanimously by Congress.
Tennis is Chile's most successful sport.
Its national team won the World Team Cup clay tournament twice (2003 & 2004), and played the Davis Cup final against Italy in 1976.
The reform has replaced inquisitorial proceedings with an adversarial system more similar to that of the United States.
The Navy also operates four submarines based in Talcahuano.
Finally, Easter Island in the Pacific Ocean is one of the main Chilean tourist destinations.
In November 2005 the government launched a campaign under the brand "Chile: All Ways Surprising" intended to promote the country internationally for both business and tourism.
Roughly 500,000 of Chile’s population is of full or partial Palestinian origin.
Southern Chile is rich in forests and grazing lands, and features a string of volcanoes and lakes.
Between 1851 and 1924, Chile only received 0.5% of European immigration to Latin America, compared to 46% to Argentina, 33% to Brazil, 14% to Cuba, and 4% to Uruguay.
The desert is fragmented by streams that originate in the area known as the pampas Tamarugal.
It is the world's southernmost country that is geographically on the mainland.
German migrants influenced the Bavarian style rural architecture and cuisine in the south of Chile in cities such as Valdivia, Frutillar, Puerto Varas, Osorno, Temuco, Puerto Octay, Llanquihue, Faja Maisan, Pitrufquén, Victoria, Pucón and Puerto Montt.
Viña del Mar, Valparaíso's northern affluent neighbor, is popular because of its beaches, casino, and its annual song festival, the most important musical event in Latin America.
Through the founding of Fort Bulnes by the Schooner Ancud under the command of John Williams Wilson, the Magallanes region joined the country in 1843, while the Antofagasta area, at the time part of, Bolivia, began to fill with people.
The 2011 Latinobarómetro survey asked respondents in Chile what race they considered themselves to belong to.
Church and state are officially separate in Chile.
The Diocese of Concepción conducted a census in areas south of the Maule river in 1812, but did not include the indigenous population or the inhabitants of the province of Chiloé.
Overall, Chile produces a third of the world’s copper.
In the census, the term ''evangelical'' referred to all non-Catholic Christian churches with the exception of the Orthodox Church (Greek, Persian, Serbian, Ukrainian, and Armenian), The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Mormons), Seventh-day Adventists, and Jehovah's Witnesses, essentially limiting it to the Protestants (although Adventism is often considered a part of it).
In the 2001 congressional elections, the conservative Independent Democratic Union (UDI) surpassed the Christian Democrats for the first time to become the largest party in the lower house.
There are various theories about the origin of the word ''Chile''.
Chile's 2002 census reported a population of 15 million people.
Santiago is headquarters of Latin America's largest airline holding company and Chilean flag carrier LAN Airlines.
It was also elected to one of five non-permanent seats on the UN Security Council in 2013.
The Ministry of Health (''Minsal'') is the cabinet-level administrative office in charge of planning, directing, coordinating, executing, controlling and informing the public health policies formulated by the President of Chile.
The diverse climate of Chile ranges from the world's driest desert in the north—the Atacama Desert—through a Mediterranean climate in the center, humid subtropical in Easter Island, to an oceanic climate, including alpine tundra and glaciers in the east and south.
Other results achieved by the national football team include five finals and one title at the Copa América, one silver and two bronze medals at the Pan American Games, a bronze medal at the 2000 Summer Olympics and two third places finishes in the FIFA under-17 and under-20 youth tournaments.
The Andes, split in two and whose eastern arm runs Bolivia, has a high altitude and volcanic activity, which has allowed the formation of the Andean altiplano and salt structures as the Salar de Atacama, due to the gradual accumulation of sediments over time.
Between 1950 and 1970 appears a rebirth in folk music leading by groups such as Los de Ramón, Los Cuatro Huasos and Los Huasos Quincheros, among others with composers such as Raúl de Ramón, Violeta Parra and others.
Students then attend secondary school until graduation at age 17.
Other European influences, primarily English, French, and German began in the 19th century and have continued to this day.
The last congressional elections were held on 17 November 2013, concurrently with the presidential election.
After Pinochet's defeat in the 1988 plebiscite, the constitution was amended to ease provisions for future amendments to the Constitution.
Soon after, the country engaged in a vastly expensive naval arms race with Argentina that nearly led to a war.
The French influenced Chile's legal and educational systems and had a decisive impact on Chile, through the architecture of the capital in the boom years at the turn of the 20th century.
Chile completed a 2-year non-permanent position on the UN Security Council in January 2005.
* subsidized schools that receive some money from the government which can be supplemented by fees paid by the student's family, which are attended by mid-income students and typically get mid-level results; and
Christian Democrat Patricio Aylwin, the candidate of a coalition of 17 political parties called the ''Concertación'', received an absolute majority of votes (55%).
Most of the traditions of the culture of Chile have a festive purpose, but some, such as dances and ceremonies have religious components.
Buses are now the main means of long distance transportation in Chile, following the decline of its railway network.
Chile controls Easter Island and Sala y Gómez Island, the easternmost islands of Polynesia, which it incorporated to its territory in 1888, and Robinson Crusoe Island, more than  from the mainland, in the Juan Fernández Islands.
Real GDP growth in 2012 was 5.5%.
In 1999 the ''Cultural Heritage Day'' was established as a way to honour and commemorate Chiles cultural heritage.
Chile also took delivery in 2007 of a number of reconditioned Block 15 F-16s from the Netherlands, bringing to 18 the total of F-16s purchased from the Dutch.
These islands are notable because they extend Chile's claim to territorial waters out from its coast into the Pacific Ocean.
Chile also claims about  of Antarctica, although all claims are suspended under the Antarctic Treaty.
Just over 3,000 species of fungi are recorded in Chile, but this number is far from complete.
The commander in chief of the Chilean Army is General Humberto Oviedo Arriagada.
Parties are thus forced to form wide coalitions and, historically, the two largest coalitions (Concertación and Alianza) split most of the seats.
The Government of Chile continues to pay down its foreign debt, with public debt only 3.9 percent of GDP at the end of 2006.
The Chilean Army is 45,000 strong and is organized with an Army headquarters in Santiago, six divisions throughout its territory, an Air Brigade in Rancagua, and a Special Forces Command in Colina.
Descendants of different European ethnic groups often intermarried in Chile.
In the forest region, several types of marsupials and a small deer known as the pudu are found.
The bus system covers the entire country, from Arica to Santiago (a 30-hour journey) and from Santiago to Punta Arenas (about 40 hours, with a change at Osorno).
Chile ratified it in 2008.
Buccaneers and English adventurers menaced the colony in addition to the Mapuche, as was shown by Sir Francis Drake's 1578 raid on Valparaíso, the colony's principal port.
The current Senate has a 21–15 split in favor of the governing coalition and 2 independents.
Few freshwater fish are native, but North American trout have been successfully introduced into the Andean lakes.
Rodeo is the country's national sport and is practiced in the more rural areas of the nation.
Chile is one of 22 countries to have signed and ratified the only binding international law concerning indigenous peoples, the Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention, 1989.
Serving as a sort of frontier garrison, the colony found itself with the mission of forestalling encroachment by both the Mapuche and Spain's European enemies, especially the British and the Dutch.
In a plebiscite on 5 October 1988, Pinochet was denied a second eight-year term as president (56% against 44%).
Another theory points to the similarity of the valley of the Aconcagua with that of the Casma Valley in Peru, where there was a town and valley named ''Chili.''
There are many species of small birds, but most of the larger common Latin American types are absent.
Its large geography generates different musical styles in the north, center and south of the country, including also Easter Island and Mapuche music.
The true total number of fungal species occurring in Chile is likely to be far higher, given the generally accepted estimate that only about 7 percent of all fungi worldwide have so far been discovered.
The Chilean Government has diplomatic relations with most countries.
Due to term limits, Sebastián Piñera did not stand for re-election in 2013, and his term expired in March 2014 resulting in Michelle Bachelet returning to office.
Historically agriculture is one of the bases of Chile's economy, now agriculture and allied sectors like forestry, logging and fishing accounts only for 4.9% of the GDP  and employed 13.6% of the country's labor force.
Fonasa is part of the NHSS and has executive power through the Ministry of Health (Chile).
The flag of Chile is similar to the Flag of Texas, although the Chilean flag is 21 years older.
Accent varies only very slightly from north to south; more noticeable are the differences in accent based on social class or whether one lives in the city or the country.
When constitutional rule was restored in 1932, a strong middle-class party, the Radicals, emerged.
In 2005, tourism grew by 13.6 percent, generating more than 4.5 billion dollars of which 1.5 billion was attributed to foreign tourists.
Senators serve for eight years with staggered terms, while deputies are elected every 4 years.
