In southern Ethiopia, children with physical abnormalities are considered to be ritually impure or mingi, the latter are believed to exert an evil influence upon others, so disabled infants have traditionally been disposed of without a proper burial.
Each country also showed a connection between the father not working outside of the home and either emotional or physical child abuse.
Although these factors can likely contribute to child maltreatment, differences in cultural perspectives play a significant role in the treatment of children.
They are: 1) determining and normalizing thinking and behaving, 2) evaluating language, 3) shifting attention away from problem talk 4) describing times when the attachment problem isn't happening, 5) focusing on how family members "successfully" solve problematic attachment behavior; 6) acknowledging "unpleasant emotions" (i.e., angry, sad, scared) underlying negative interactional patterns, 7) identifying antecedents (controlling conditions) and associated negative cognitive emotive connections in behavior (reciprocal role of thought and emotion in behavioral causation), 8) encouraging previously abused children to experience or "own" negative thoughts and associated aversive emotional feelings, 9) modeling and rewarding positive behavior change (with themselves and in relationships), and 10) encouraging and rewarding thinking and behaving differently.
It is supported by two studies of one sample.
are all forms of abuse, because they injure the integrity and dignity of a child, even if their consequences are not visible right away.
While there is a new openness and acceptance regarding parenting styles and close relationships with children, child abuse still remains a serious concern.
Such marriages have significant potential to constitute a form of child abuse.
In 2009 CBS News reported that child abuse in the United States had increased during the economic recession.
It targets externalizing behaviors and strengthens prosocial behaviors.
Some women felt a considerable amount of pressure to carry out their motherly duties, obtaining an "authoritarian" parenting style, acting dominating and emotionally distant towards her children while overly involved in her own career.
Susan Orr, former head of the United States Children's Bureau U.S. Department of Health and Services Administration for Children and Families, 2001–2007, states that "much that is now defined as child abuse and neglect does not merit governmental interference".
A study conducted by members from several Baltic and Eastern European countries, together with specialists from the United States, examined the causes of child abuse in the countries of Latvia, Lithuania, Macedonia and Moldova.
The World Health Organization (WHO) and the International Society for Prevention of Child Abuse and Neglect (ISPCAN) identify multiple factors at the level of the individual, their relationships, their local community, and their society at large, that combine to influence the occurrence of child maltreatment.
April has been designated Child Abuse Prevention Month in the United States since 1983.
The World Health Organization (WHO) defines ''child abuse'' and ''child maltreatment'' as "all forms of physical and/or emotional ill-treatment, sexual abuse, neglect or negligent treatment or commercial or other exploitation, resulting in actual or potential harm to the child's health, survival, development or dignity in the context of a relationship of responsibility, trust or power."
Leading statements that can distort the story are avoided.
The Adverse Childhood Experiences Study is a long-running investigation into the relationship between childhood adversity, including various forms of abuse and neglect, and health problems in later life.
The National Center on Shaken Baby Syndrome focuses its efforts on the specific issue of preventing child abuse that is manifested as shaken baby syndrome.
There may be a higher risk of developing cancer later in life, as well as possible immune dysfunction.
A private environment away from suspected abusers is desired for interviewing and examining.
It is difficult to obtain reliable estimates concerning the number of children trafficked each year, primarily due to the covert and criminal nature of the practice.
A child marriage is a marriage between two minors, or between an adult and a minor, often before the minor has reached puberty.
The consequences of FGM include physical, emotional and sexual problems, and include serious risks during childbirth.
Child sexual abuse (CSA) is a form of child abuse in which an adult or older adolescent abuses a child for sexual stimulation.
Instead, physicians often looked for undiagnosed bone diseases or accepted parents' accounts of accidental mishaps such as falls or assaults by neighborhood bullies.
Before the article's publication, injuries to children—even repeated bone fractures—were not commonly recognized as the results of intentional trauma.
The American psychoanalyst Elisabeth Young-Bruehl maintains that harm to children is justified and made acceptable by widely held beliefs in children's inherent subservience to adults, resulting in a largely unacknowledged prejudice against children she terms ''childism''.
Data on the effects of TF-CBT for children who experienced only non-sexual abuse was not available .
Child abuse is a complex phenomenon with multiple causes.
Unintended conception increases the risk of subsequent child abuse, and large family size increases the risk of child neglect.
Victims of child abuse and neglect are more likely to commit crimes as juveniles and adults.
The terms ''abuse'' and ''maltreatment'' are often used interchangeably in the literature.
In addition to possible immediate adverse physical effects, household dysfunction and childhood maltreatment are strongly associated with many chronic physical and psychological effects, including subsequent ill-health in childhood, adolescence and adulthood, with  higher rates of chronic conditions, high-risk health behaviors and shortened lifespan.
This duty conflicts with an ethical obligation to protect children from preventable harm.
Bedner, accused of severely injuring his infant daughter, sued for the right to determine whether or not she remain on life support; keeping her alive, which would have prevented a murder charge, created a motive for Bedner to act that conflicted with the apparent interests of his child.
In Western countries this practice is illegal and considered a form of child abuse.
A study by Dante Cicchetti found that 80% of abused and maltreated infants exhibited symptoms of disorganized attachment.
Children who are victims of neglect have a more difficult time forming and maintaining relationships, such as romantic or friendship, later in life due to the lack of attachment they had in their earlier stages of life.
There is a relationship between child physical and sexual abuse and suicide.
Asian parenting perspectives, specifically, hold different ideals from American culture.
Disorganized attachment is associated with a number of developmental problems, including dissociative symptoms, as well as anxiety, depressive, and acting out symptoms.
Children's school programs regarding "good touch … bad touch" can provide children with a forum in which to role-play and learn to avoid potentially harmful scenarios.
In the U.S. in 2013, of the 294,000 reported child abuse cases only 81,124 received any sort of counseling or therapy.
According to the World Health Organization (WHO), estimates of the rates of child maltreatment vary widely by country, depending on how child maltreatment is defined, the type of maltreatment studied, the scope and quality of data gathered, and the scope and quality of surveys that ask for self-reports from victims, parents, and caregivers.
In general, ''abuse'' refers to (usually deliberate) acts of commission while ''neglect'' refers to acts of omission.
There exist several international instruments protecting children from child labor, including the Minimum Age Convention, 1973 and the Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention.
Dolls are sometimes used to help explain what happened.
Also, girls are particularly vulnerable to sexual violence, exploitation and abuse in situations of armed conflict and refugee settings, whether by combatants, security forces, community members, aid workers, or others.
When some of these children become parents, especially if they suffer from posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), dissociative symptoms, and other sequelae of child abuse, they may encounter difficulty when faced with their infant and young children's needs and normative distress, which may in turn lead to adverse consequences for their child's social-emotional development.
Each of these types of treatment can be used to better assist the client, depending on the form of abuse they have experienced.
This would aid the individual in becoming less fearful of specific stimuli that would arouse debilitating fear, anger, sadness or other negative emotion.
The decline in sexual abuse adds to an already substantial positive long-term trend.
A 1991 source reported that studies indicate that 90 percent of maltreating adults were maltreated as children.
Throughout the 20th century, until the 1970s, in some Western countries, children from ethnic minority origin were forcefully removed from their families and communities, by state and church authorities, and forced to "assimilate".
Overall, emotional effects caused by child abuse can result in long-term and short-term effects that ultimately affect a child's upbringing and development.
The 1962 publication of the article "The Battered Child Syndrome" by pediatric psychiatrist C. Henry Kempe represents the moment that child maltreatment entered mainstream awareness.
Such policies include the Stolen Generations (in Australia for Australian Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children) and the Canadian Indian residential school system (in Canada for First Nations, Métis and Inuit), with such children often suffering severe abuse.
Some reportedly suffer from some type of chronic head, abdominal, pelvic, or muscular pain with no identifiable reason.
Some child abuse policies in Western countries have been criticized both by some conservatives, who claim such policies unduly interfere in the privacy of the family, and by some feminists of the left wing, who claim such policies disproportionally target and punish disadvantaged women who are often themselves in vulnerable positions.
Balancing disciplinary responsibilities within parenting is common in many Asian cultures, including China, Japan, Singapore, Vietnam and Korea.
There is a high correlation between the number of different adverse childhood experiences (A.C.E.s) and risk for poor health outcomes in adults including cancer, heart attack, mental illness, reduced longevity drug and alcohol abuse.
There are focused cognitive behavioral therapy, first developed to treat sexually abused children, is now used for victims of any kind of trauma.
Damage results from intracranial hypertension (increased pressure in the skull) after bleeding in the brain, damage to the spinal cord and neck, and rib or bone fractures.
Bioethicists Jacob M. Appel and Thaddeus Mason Pope recently argued, in separate articles, that such cases justify the replacement of the accused parent with an alternative decision-maker.
* Impaired brain development.
Studies indicate that such abusive treatment often involves parents attributing conflict to their child's willfulness or rejection, as well as "coercive family dynamics and conditioned emotional responses".
Factors involved in the escalation of ordinary physical punishment by parents into confirmed child abuse may be the punishing parent's inability to control their anger or judge their own strength, and the parent being unaware of the child's physical vulnerabilities.
Parent–child interaction therapy was designed to improve the child-parent relationship following the experience of domestic violence.
Although the abuse victim does not always realize the abuse is wrong, the internal confusion can lead to chaos.
Unemployment and financial difficulties are associated with increased rates of child abuse.
Even though the majority of childhood abuse victims know or believe that their abuse is, or can be, the cause of different health problems in their adult life, for the great majority their abuse was not directly associated with those problems, indicating that sufferers were most likely diagnosed with other possible causes for their health problems, instead of their childhood abuse.
Child trafficking is the recruitment, transportation, transfer, harbouring or receipt of children for the purpose of exploitation.
Definitions of what constitutes child abuse vary among professionals, and between social and cultural groups, as well as across time.
* Exposure to violence during childhood is associated with shortened telomeres and with reduced telomerase activity.
Child abuse also poses ethical concerns related to confidentiality, as victims may be physically or psychologically unable to report abuse to authorities.
Accordingly, many jurisdictions and professional bodies have made exceptions to standard requirements for confidentiality and legal privileges in instances of child abuse.
The report notes that accusations against children are a recent phenomenon; women and the elderly were formerly more likely to be accused.
Douglas J. Besharov, the first Director of the U.S. Center on Child Abuse and Neglect, states "the existing laws are often vague and overly broad" and there is a "lack of consensus among professionals and Child Protective Services (CPS), personnel about what the terms abuse and neglect mean".
In addition, children who experience child abuse and/or neglect are 59% more likely to be arrested as juveniles, 28% more likely to be arrested as adults, and 30% more likely to commit violent crime.
Maltreated children may grow up to be maltreating adults.
Defining child maltreatment depends on prevailing cultural values as they relate to children, child development, and parenting.
Children who are the victims are also at an increased risk of sexually transmitted infections due to their immature immune systems and a high potential for mucosal tears during forced sexual contact.
He states that sexual abuse had declined 62% from 1992 to 2009.
The WHO defines physical abuse as:
It targets trauma-related symptoms in infants, toddlers, and preschoolers, including PTSD, aggression, defiance, and anxiety.
Many children who have been abused in any form develop some sort of psychological problem.
A number of treatments are available to victims of child abuse.
Some professionals argue that cultural norms that sanction physical punishment are one of the causes of child abuse, and have undertaken campaigns to redefine such norms.
He writes, "the roots of child abuse lie not in parental psycho-pathology or in socio-environmental stress (though their influences cannot be discounted) but in a sick culture which denigrates and depersonalizes, which reduces children to property, to sexual objects so that they become the legitimate victims of both adult violence and lust".
This study showed that children with disabilities were vulnerable to child abuse in their schools.
For legal and cultural reasons as well as fears by children of being taken away from their parents most childhood abuse goes unreported and unsubstantiated.
Resources for child-protection services are sometimes limited.
A 2010 UNICEF report describes children as young as eight being burned, beaten and even killed as punishment for suspected witchcraft.
The International Labour Organization considers such labor to be a form of exploitation and abuse of children.
The International Labour Organization estimates that 1.2 million children are trafficked each year.
At the individual level, such factors include age, sex, and personal history, while at the level of society, factors contributing to child maltreatment include cultural norms encouraging harsh physical punishment of children, economic inequality, and the lack of social safety nets.
Health inequality also has its origins in the family, where it is associated with the degrees of lasting affective problems (lack of affection, parental discord, the prolonged absence of a parent, or a serious illness affecting either the mother or father) that individuals report having experienced in childhood.
The differences in these cultural beliefs demonstrate the importance of examining all cross-cultural perspectives when studying the concept of child abuse.
Most importantly, overall parental behavior is genuinely different in various countries.
Despite these limitations, international studies show that a quarter of all adults report experiencing physical abuse as children, and that and 1 in 5 women and 1 in 13 men report experiencing childhood sexual abuse.
Started over 25 years ago at what is now known as the National Children's Advocacy Center in Huntsville, Alabama by District Attorney Robert "Bud" Cramer these multi-disciplinary teams have met to coordinate their efforts so that cases of child abuse can be investigated quickly and efficiently, ultimately reducing trauma to the child and garnering better convictions.
Each culture has their own "range of acceptability," and what one may view as offensive, others may seem as tolerable.
The immediate physical effects of abuse or neglect can be relatively minor (bruises or cuts) or severe (broken bones, hemorrhage, or even death).
These children have apparently learned to adapt to an abusive and inconsistent caregiver by becoming cautiously self-reliant, and are often described as glib, manipulative and disingenuous in their interactions with others as they move through childhood.
Being accused of witchcraft in Africa is very dangerous, as a witch is culturally understood to be the symbol of evil, and the cause of all ills.
The World Health Organization distinguishes four types of child maltreatment: physical abuse; sexual abuse; emotional and psychological abuse; and neglect.
Customary beliefs in witchcraft are common in many parts of the world, even among the educated.
These steps fall into one of three theoretical orientations (i.e., rational or solution focused, cognitive emotive, and behavioral) and are intended to provide abused children and their adoptive parents with positive behavior change, corrective interpersonal skills, and greater control over themselves and their relationships.
The long-term impact of child abuse and neglect on physical health and development can be:
They can lack confidence or become anxious, appear to not have a close relationship with their parent, exhibit aggressive behavior or act nasty towards other children and animals.
Children who are constantly ignored, shamed, terrorized or humiliated suffer at least as much, if not more, than if they are physically assaulted.
These alterations in brain maturation have long-term consequences for cognitive, language, and academic abilities.
In some cases the physical effects are temporary; however, the pain and suffering they cause a child should not be discounted.
In the Nigeria, Akwa Ibom State and Cross River State about 15,000 children were branded as witches.
* Shaken baby syndrome.
Also parental stress caused by substance increases the likelihood of the minor exhibiting internalizing and externalizing behaviors.
''Child maltreatment'' can also be an umbrella term covering all forms of child abuse and child neglect.
Among professionals and the general public, people often do not agree on what behaviors constitute physical abuse of a child.
NICHD, also known as the National Institute of Child Health & Human Development is a broad organization, but helps victims of child abuse through one of its branches.
Treatment is greatly important for abused children.
FGM is mostly found in a geographical area ranging across Africa, from east to west – from Somalia to Senegal, and from north to south – from Egypt to Tanzania.
This type of therapy shifts victims thoughts away from the bad and changes their behavior.
Most sexual abuse offenders are acquainted with their victims; approximately 30% are relatives of the child, most often brothers, sisters, fathers, mothers, uncles or cousins; around 60% are other acquaintances such as friends of the family, babysitters, or neighbours; strangers are the offenders in approximately 10% of child sexual abuse cases.
A study on child abuse sought to determine: the forms of child abuse perpetrated on children with disabilities; the extent of child abuse; and the causes of child abuse of children with disabilities.
The United States Children's Bureau leads activities for the Month, including the release of updated statistics about child abuse and neglect, candlelight vigils, and fundraisers to support prevention activities and treatment for victims.
On the other hand, there are some children who are raised in child abuse, but who manage to do unexpectedly well later in life regarding the preconditions.
FGM is most often carried out on young girls aged between infancy and 15 years.
In the United States, interviews with parents reveal that as many as two thirds of documented instances of physical abuse begin as acts of corporal punishment meant to correct a child's behavior, while a large-scale Canadian study found that three quarters of substantiated cases of physical abuse of children have occurred within the context of physical punishment.
Rates of depression are twice as high.
Other organizations focus on specific prevention strategies.
When parents' expectations are far beyond what is appropriate to the child (e.g., preschool children who are expected to be totally responsible for self-care or provision of nurturance to parents) the resulting frustration caused by the child's non-compliance is believed to function as a contributory if not necessary cause of child abuse.
Briere (1992) argues that only when "lower-level violence" of children ceases to be culturally tolerated will there be changes in the victimization and police protection of children.
In many jurisdictions, abuse that is suspected, not necessarily proven, requires reporting to child protection agencies, such as the Child Protection Services in the United States.
Babies and pre-school children who are being emotionally abused or neglected may be overly affectionate towards strangers or people they haven’t known for very long.
The purpose of dealing with the thoughts and feelings associated with the trauma is to deal with nightmares, flashbacks and other intrusive experiences that might be spontaneously brought on by any number of discriminative stimuli in the environment or in the individual’s brain.
U.S. President Barack Obama continued that tradition by declaring April 2009 Child Abuse Prevention Month.
The effects of abused children can also differ when it comes to babies and young children.
In other words, the individual would have some control or mastery over those emotions.
Multiple injuries or fractures at different stages of healing can raise suspicion of abuse.
For instance, Paulo Sergio Pinheiro writes in the UN Secretary-General's Study on Violence Against Children:
Abused children can grow up experiencing insecurities, low self-esteem, and lack of development.
To some cultures, forceful parenting may be seen as abuse, but in other societies such as these, the use of force is looked at as a reflection of parental devotion.
* Poor physical health.
Videoconferencing has also been used to diagnose child abuse in remote emergency departments and clinics.
Other forms of treatment include group therapy, play therapy, and art therapy.
In 1999 the BBC reported on the RAHI Foundation's survey of sexual abuse in India, in which 76% of respondents said they had been abused as children, 40% of those stating the perpetrator was a family member.
Such children have been termed '''', as inspired from the way that dandelions seem to prosper irrespective of soil, sun, drought, or rain.
Through the Child Development and Behavior (CDB) Branch, NICHD raises awareness efforts by supporting research projects to better understand the short- and long-term impacts of child abuse and neglect.
This exception allows professionals to breach confidentiality and make a report even when the child or his/her parent or guardian has specifically instructed to the contrary.
FGM is classified into four types, of which type 3 – infibulation – is the most extreme form.
Shaking a baby is a common form of child abuse that often results in permanent neurological damage (80% of cases) or death (30% of cases).
While controlling parenting may be less of a concern, financial difficulty, unemployment, and substance abuse still remain to be dominating factors in child abuse throughout Eastern Europe.
Reports by UNICEF, UNHCR, Save The Children and Human Rights Watch have highlighted the violence and abuse towards children accused of witchcraft in Africa.
Sexual victimization at a young age has been correlated with several risk factors for contracting HIV including decreased knowledge of sexual topics, increased prevalence of HIV, engagement in risky sexual practices, condom avoidance, lower knowledge of safe sex practices, frequent changing of sexual partners, and more years of sexual activity.
Adults who experienced abuse or neglect during childhood are more likely to suffer from physical ailments such as allergies, arthritis, asthma, bronchitis, high blood pressure, and ulcers.
The long-term impact of emotional abuse has not been studied widely, but recent studies have begun to document its long-term consequences.
There is also a slight tendency for children who have been abused to become child abusers themselves.
Children can also experience reactive attachment disorder (RAD).
Sexual abuse refers to the participation of a child in a sexual act aimed toward the physical gratification or the financial profit of the person committing the act.
An anonymous self-reporting survey of Washington State students finds 6–7% of 8th, 10th and 12th grade students actually attempt suicide.
Children resulting from unintended pregnancies are more likely to be abused or neglected.
Another study found that over two-thirds of cases of child maltreatment involved parents with substance abuse problems.
Sometimes, parents set expectations for their child that are clearly beyond the child's capability.
Physical abuse, sexual abuse, and other types of maltreatment, were less common, making up 18%, 9%, and 11% of cases, respectively ("other types" included emotional abuse, parental substance abuse, and inadequate supervision).
In the United States, approximately 15% to 25% of women and 5% to 15% of men were sexually abused when they were children.
Many were encouraged to use more firm and direct disciplinary methods, as well as be overbearing and overprotective of their children.
With the end of the Communist Era, many positive changes have followed.
It is supported by one randomized study.
Although it is now more publicly recognized, it has certainly not ceased to exist.
The design of a child's artwork can be a symbolic representation of what they are feeling, relationships with friends or family, and more.
Child abuse and neglect have been shown, in some cases, to cause important regions of the brain to fail to form or grow properly, resulting in impaired development.
Founding editor of the ''International Journal of Children's Rights'', Michael Freeman, also argues that the ultimate causes of child abuse lie in prejudice against children, especially the view that human rights do not apply equally to adults and children.
Medical professionals, including doctors, therapists, and other mental health workers typically owe a duty of confidentiality to their patients and clients, either by law and/or the standards of professional ethics, and cannot disclose personal information without the consent of the individual concerned.
Other risk behaviors are even higher.
The long-term decline in sexual and physical abuse may have important implications for public policy."
A non-CPS study estimated that one in four children experience some form of maltreatment in their lifetimes, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
The Bureau also sponsors a "Blue Ribbon Campaign," in which people wear blue ribbons in memory of children who have died from abuse, or in honor of individuals and organizations that have taken important steps to prevent child abuse and neglect.
Parents who physically abuse their spouses are more likely than others to physically abuse their children.
Data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System corroborate these high rates.
Behaviors that are normal to some may be viewed as abusive to others, all depending on the societal norms of that particular country.
However, CPS reports may underestimate the true scope of child maltreatment.
Elisabeth Young-Bruehl maintains that despite the growing numbers of child advocates and interest in protecting children which took place, the grouping of children into "the abused" and the "non-abused" created an artificial distinction that narrowed the concept of children's rights to simply protection from maltreatment, and blocked investigation of the ways in which children are discriminated against in society generally.
It also includes a component for non-offending parents.
Another effect of the way child abuse and neglect have been studied, according to Young-Bruehl, was to close off consideration of how children themselves perceive maltreatment and the importance they place on adults' attitudes toward them.
Joan Durrant and Ron Ensom write that most physical abuse is physical punishment "in intent, form, and effect".
Child labor refers to those occupations which infringe the development of children (due to the nature of the job and/or the lack of appropriate regulation) and does not include age appropriate and properly supervised jobs in which minors may participate.
He states: "It is unfortunate that information about the trends in child maltreatment are not better publicized and more widely known.
A recent study has discovered that a crucial structure in the brain's reward circuits is compromised by childhood abuse and neglect, and predicts Depressive Symptoms later in life.
Now that the father was in that role, the children began to come in with injuries.
The countries which choose to ratify the Istanbul Convention, the first legally binding instrument in Europe in the field of violence against women and domestic violence, are bound by its provisions to ensure that FGM is criminalized.
Bruises, scratches, burns, broken bones, lacerations, as well as repeated "mishaps," and rough treatment that could cause physical injury, can be physical abuse.
They provide programs and observe National Child Abuse Prevention Month every April since 1984.
Definitions of child maltreatment can vary across the sectors of society which deal with the issue,  such as child protection agencies, legal and medical communities, public health officials, researchers, practitioners, and child advocates.
Different jurisdictions have developed their own definitions of what constitutes child abuse for the purposes of removing a child from his/her family and/or prosecuting a criminal charge.
It targets trauma-related symptoms in children including post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), clinical depression and anxiety.
However, children who experience childhood trauma do not heal from abuse easily.
, between 25,000 and 50,000 children in Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo, had been accused of witchcraft and abandoned.
One way the Federal government of the United States provides funding for child-abuse prevention is through Community-Based Grants for the Prevention of Child Abuse and Neglect (CBCAP).
RAD can present as a persistent failure to start or respond in a developmentally appropriate fashion to most social situations.
