Other ethnic minority languages in southwest China include Zhuang, Thai, Dong and Sui of the Tai-Kadai family, Miao and Yao of the Hmong–Mien family, and Wa of the Austroasiatic family.
On 21 May 2014 President Xi, speaking at a conference in Shanghai, pledged to settle China's territorial disputes peacefully.
At least 840 animal species are threatened, vulnerable or in danger of local extinction in China, due mainly to human activity such as habitat destruction, pollution and poaching for food, fur and ingredients for traditional Chinese medicine.
However, remaining Nationalist forces continued to wage an insurgency in western China throughout the 1950s.
In 1966, Mao and his allies launched the Cultural Revolution, sparking a decade of political recrimination and social upheaval which lasted until Mao's death in 1976.
Endangered wildlife is protected by law, and , the country has over 2,349 nature reserves, covering a total area of 149.95 million hectares, 15 percent of China's total land area.
Rates of stunting, a condition caused by malnutrition, have declined from 33.1% in 1990 to 9.9% in 2010.
Freedom of religion is guaranteed by China's constitution, although religious organizations that lack official approval can be subject to state persecution.
Its King&nbsp;Zheng proclaimed himself the First Emperor of the Qin Dynasty (''Qín Shǐhuáng'' or ''Shǐ Huángdì'').
The HSR track network is set to reach approximately  by 2020.
AlignBars = justify
A major environmental issue in China is the continued expansion of its deserts, particularly the Gobi Desert.
In 2010, the annual education expenditure per secondary school student in Beijing totalled ¥20,023, while in Guizhou, one of the poorest provinces in China, only totalled ¥3,204.
China is furthermore engaged in developing an indigenous stealth aircraft and numerous combat drones.
China also won the most medals of any nation at the 2012 Summer Paralympics, with 231 overall, including 95 gold medals.
Chinese officials have protested on numerous occasions when foreign countries have made diplomatic overtures to Taiwan, especially in the matter of armament sales.
The country's lowest point, and the world's third-lowest, is the dried lake bed of Ayding Lake (−154m) in the Turpan Depression.
bar:France from:start till:2902 text:2,902
Compared to its closed-door policies until the mid-1970s, the administrative climate is less restrictive than before.
During the war, China, along with the UK, the US and the Soviet Union, were referred to as "trusteeship of the powerful" and were recognized as the Allied "Big Four" in the Declaration by United Nations.
Hu Shih and Lu Xun were pioneers in modern literature.
, the average life expectancy at birth in China is 75 years, and the infant mortality rate is 12 per thousand.
, China has the world's second-largest economy in terms of nominal GDP, totalling approximately US$10.380 trillion according to the International Monetary Fund.
Since ancient times, Chinese culture has been heavily influenced by Confucianism and conservative philosophies.
The scholar-official stratum became a supporting force of industry and commerce in the tax boycott movements, which, together with the famines and the wars against Japanese invasions of Korea and Manchu invasions led to an exhausted treasury.
This marked China's transition from a planned economy to a mixed economy with an increasingly open market environment.
Much of current Chinese foreign policy is reportedly based on Premier Zhou Enlai's Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, and is also driven by the concept of "harmony without uniformity", which encourages diplomatic relations between states despite ideological differences.
They sought to change some traditional aspects of Chinese culture, such as rural land tenure, sexism, and the Confucian system of education, while preserving others, such as the family structure and culture of obedience to the state.
bar:Japan text:Japan
It also has the world's largest number of internet and broadband users, with over 688 million internet users , equivalent to around half of its population.
The Chinese democracy movement, social activists, and some members of the Communist Party of China have all identified the need for social and political reform.
Under Xi, the Chinese government began large-scale efforts to reform its economy, which has suffered from structural instabilities and slowing growth.
In 1999, when there were 70 million practitioners, the persecution of Falun Gong began, resulting in mass arrests, extralegal detention, and reports of torture and deaths in custody.
The Song Dynasty ended the separatist situation in 960, as a result the balance of power appeared between Song and Khitan Liao.
After Yuan Shikai's death in 1916, China was politically fragmented.
China is also a member of numerous formal and informal multilateral organizations, including the WTO, APEC, BRICS, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), the BCIM and the G-20.
The Chinese population almost doubled from around 550 million to over 900 million.
In the south, the general Liu Yu secured the abdication of the Jin in favor of the Liu Song.
In the face of popular condemnation and opposition from his own Beiyang Army, he was forced to abdicate and reestablish the republic.
The various successors of these states became known as the Northern and Southern dynasties, with the two areas finally reunited by the Sui in 581.
China has over 2,000 river and seaports, about 130 of which are open to foreign shipping.
In 2009, Chinese students from Shanghai achieved the world's best results in mathematics, science and literacy, as tested by the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA), a worldwide evaluation of 15-year-old school pupils' scholastic performance.
China emerged victorious but war-ravaged and financially drained.
Along with the other three great powers, China was one of the four major Allies of World War II, and was later considered one of the primary victors in the war.
At present, the urban unemployment rate of China is about 4.1%.
Generally, China's staple food is rice in the south, wheat based breads and noodles in the north.
Since the 1990s, China has been involved in negotiations to resolve its disputed land borders, including a disputed border with India and an undefined border with Bhutan.
Among the most popular folk cults are those of Mazu (goddess of the seas), Huangdi (one of the two divine patriarchs of the Chinese race), Guandi (god of war and business), Caishen (god of prosperity and richness), Pangu and many others.
In recent decades, China has suffered from severe environmental deterioration and pollution.
In recent decades, China has followed a policy of engaging with African nations for trade and bilateral co-operation; in 2012, Sino-African trade totalled over US$160 billion.
The Chinese government has responded to foreign criticism by arguing that the right to subsistence and economic development is a prerequisite to other types of human rights, and that the notion of human rights should take into account a country's present level of economic development.
China has over 160 cities with a population of over one million, including the seven megacities (cities with a population of over 10 million) of Chongqing, Shanghai, Beijing, Guangzhou, Tianjin, Shenzhen, and Wuhan.
China's total area is generally stated as being approximately .
The Yangtze and Yellow Rivers, the third and sixth longest in the world, respectively, run from the Tibetan Plateau to the densely populated eastern seaboard.
According to the Chinese government, China's military budget for 2014 totalled US$132 billion, constituting the world's second-largest military budget.
Some 80% of China's airspace remains restricted for military use, and Chinese airlines made up eight of the 10 worst-performing Asian airlines in terms of delays.
The network includes the Beijing–Guangzhou–Shenzhen High-Speed Railway, the single longest HSR line in the world, and the Beijing–Shanghai High-Speed Railway, which has three of longest railroad bridges in the world.
Chinese mathematicians were the first to use negative numbers.
The Chinese Basketball Association and the American National Basketball Association have a huge following among the people, with native or ethnic Chinese players such as Yao Ming and Yi Jianlian held in high esteem.
China ranked 29th in the Global Competitiveness Index in 2009, although it is only ranked 136th among the 179 countries measured in the 2011 Index of Economic Freedom.
According to the 2010 census, the sex ratio at birth was 118.06 boys for every 100 girls, which is beyond the normal range of around 105 boys for every 100 girls.
China also invests abroad, with a total outward FDI of $62.4&nbsp;billion in 2012, and a number of major takeovers of foreign firms by Chinese companies.
In addition, China is home to a huge number of cyclists, with an estimated 470 million bicycles .
However, in recent years, China's rapid economic growth has contributed to severe consumer inflation, leading to increased government regulation.
In 2004, it proposed an entirely new East Asia Summit (EAS) framework as a forum for regional security issues.
The Qing dynasty also began experiencing internal unrest in which tens of millions of people died.
The "three teachings", including Confucianism,Taoism, and Buddhism (Chinese Buddhism), historically have a significant role in shaping Chinese culture, each of them finding a role within common (or popular) Chinese religion.
, there are more than 262&nbsp;million migrant workers in China, mostly rural migrants seeking work in cities.
Urban air pollution is a severe health issue in the country; the World Bank estimated in 2013 that 16 of the world's 20 most-polluted cities are located in China.
For millennia, China's political system was based on hereditary monarchies known as dynasties.
China's middle-class population (if defined as those with annual income of between US$10,000 and US$60,000) had reached more than 300&nbsp;million by 2012.
The Manchu Qing dynasty then allied with Ming dynasty general Wu Sangui and overthrew Li's short-lived Shun dynasty, and subsequently seized control of Beijing, which became the new capital of the Qing Dynasty.
Nonetheless, the level of public support for the government and its management of the nation is high, with 80–95% of Chinese citizens expressing satisfaction with the central government, according to a 2011 survey.
In 1898, the Guangxu Emperor drafted a reform plan to establish a modern constitutional monarchy, but these plans were thwarted by the Empress Dowager Cixi.
Pushed by a burgeoning citizen class in the Ming dynasty, Chinese classical fiction rose to a boom of the historical, town and gods and demons fictions as represented by the Four Great Classical Novels which include ''Water Margin'', ''Romance of the Three Kingdoms'', ''Journey to the West'' and ''Dream of the Red Chamber''.
The world's highest point, Mount Everest (8,848m), lies on the Sino-Nepalese border.
The government is now dropping the one-child policy in favor of a two-child policy.
Some authors also question the definition of "superpower", arguing that China's large economy alone would not qualify it as a superpower, and noting that it lacks the military and cultural influence of the United States.
The policy, along with traditional preference for boys, may be contributing to an imbalance in the sex ratio at birth.
However, the Chinese economy is highly energy-intensive and inefficient; China became the world's largest energy consumer in 2010, relies on coal to supply over 70% of its energy needs, and surpassed the US to become the world's largest oil importer in September 2013.
The languages most commonly spoken belong to the Sinitic branch of the Sino-Tibetan language family, which contains Mandarin (spoken natively by 70% of the population), and other Chinese varieties: Wu (including Shanghainese), Yue (including Cantonese and Taishanese), Min (including Hoochew, Hokkien and Teochew), Xiang, Gan, and Hakka.
Korean is spoken natively along the border with North Korea.
China is also a founding member of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), along with Russia and the Central Asian republics.
The Shang ruled the plain of the Yellow River in eastern China from the 17th to the 11th century&nbsp;.
Compared with the 2000 population census, the Han population increased by 66,537,177 persons, or 5.74%, while the population of the 55 national minorities combined increased by 7,362,627 persons, or 6.92%.
China has the world's largest market for automobiles, having surpassed the United States in both auto sales and production.
During the 2000s and early 2010s, the Chinese government was increasingly tolerant of NGOs that offer practical, efficient solutions to social problems, but such "third sector" activity remained heavily regulated.
In 2012, the Ports of Shanghai, Hong Kong, Shenzhen, Ningbo-Zhoushan, Guangzhou, Qingdao, Tianjin, Dalian ranked in the top in the world in container traffic and cargo tonnage.
China has a high level of economic inequality, which has increased in the past few decades.
Various sects of indigenous origin comprise 2—3% of the population, while Confucianism as a religious self-designation is popular among intellectuals.
Languages of the Tibeto-Burman branch, including Tibetan, Qiang, Naxi and Yi, are spoken across the Tibetan and Yunnan–Guizhou Plateau.
In 1991, there were only six bridges across the main stretch of the Yangtze River, which bisects the country into northern and southern halves.
Approximately 10—16% are Buddhists, 2—4% are Christians, and 1—2% are Muslims.
Over the millennia, Chinese civilization has been influenced by various religious movements.
This was soon followed by Japan, Australia, Singapore, the United Kingdom, and Canada.
Some of the most important early texts include the ''I Ching'' and the ''Shujing'' within the Four Books and Five Classics which served as the Confucian authoritative books for the state-sponsored curriculum in dynastic era.
China supports the Leninist principle of "democratic centralism", but critics describe the elected National People's Congress as a "rubber stamp" body.
During the 1950s and 1960s, after the defeat of the Kuomingtang in the Chinese Civil War, it was also referred to as "Communist China" or "Red China".
With the budding of capitalism, philosophers such as Wang Yangming further critiqued and expanded Neo-Confucianism with concepts of individualism and equality of four occupations.
There were 182 commercial airports in China in 2012.
The English name "China" is first attested in Richard Eden's 1555 translation of the 1516 journal of the Portuguese explorer Duarte Barbosa.
Scholars note that in China there is no clear boundary between religions, especially Buddhism, Taoism and local folk religious practice.
In February 2006, the government pledged to provide completely free nine-year education, including textbooks and fees.
According to the most recent demographic analyses, an average 80% of the Chinese population practice some form of Chinese folk religions, Taoism and Confucianism.
The literary emphasis of the exams affected the general perception of cultural refinement in China, such as the belief that calligraphy, poetry and painting were higher forms of art than dancing or drama.
His dynasty also conquered the Yue tribes in Guangxi, Guangdong, and northern Vietnam.
China's undervalued exchange rate has caused friction with other major economies, and it has also been widely criticized for manufacturing large quantities of counterfeit goods.
Furthermore, some Chinese politicians have spoken out in support of democratization, although others remain more conservative.
Its high productivity, low labor costs and relatively good infrastructure have made it a global leader in manufacturing.
The population growth rate for 2013 is estimated to be 0.46%.
A major loosening of the policy was enacted in December 2013, allowing families to have two children if one parent is an only child.
According to the Global Growth Generators index announced by Citigroup in February 2011, China has a very high 3G growth rating.
The Xi–Li Administration also announced major reforms to the one-child policy and prison system.
Numerous offshoots of Chinese food, such as Hong Kong cuisine and American Chinese food, have emerged in the nations that play host to the Chinese diaspora.
By one measure, China has over 34,687 species of animals and vascular plants, making it the third-most biodiverse country in the world, after Brazil and Colombia.
The figures in the table below are from the 2010 census, and are only estimates of the urban populations within administrative city limits; a different ranking exists when considering the total municipal populations (which includes suburban and rural populations).
Sarikoli, the language of Tajiks in western Xinjiang, is an Indo-European language.
Living standards continued to improve rapidly despite the late-2000s recession, but centralized political control remained tight.
Portuguese ''China'' is thought to derive from Persian ''Chīn'' (), and perhaps ultimately from Sanskrit ''Cīna'' ().
China has a close economic and military relationship with Russia, and the two states often vote in unison in the UN Security Council.
China's climate is mainly dominated by dry seasons and wet monsoons, which lead to pronounced temperature differences between winter and summer.
The Premier of China is the head of government, presiding over the State Council composed of four vice premiers and the heads of ministries and commissions.
The 2010 census recorded a total of 593,832 foreign citizens living in China.
Chinese literature is based on the literature of the Zhou dynasty.
China is developing its own satellite navigation system, dubbed Beidou, which began offering commercial navigation services across Asia in 2012, and is planned to offer global coverage by 2020.
Losses due to emigration were added to by conflicts and catastrophes such as the Northern Chinese Famine of 1876–79, in which between 9 and 13 million people died.
Modern-day China is mainly characterized as having a market economy based on private property ownership, and is one of the leading examples of state capitalism.
China's high-speed rail (HSR) system, built entirely since the early 2000s, had  of track in 2013 and was the longest HSR network in the world.
During China's 18th National Communist Party Congress in November 2012, Hu Jintao was replaced as General Secretary of the Communist Party by Xi Jinping.
Li Bai and Du Fu opened the forking ways for the poetic circles through romanticism and realism respectively.
Falun Gong was first taught publicly in 1992.
In the 13th century, China was gradually conquered by the Mongol Empire.
It emphasizes the rise in the Chinese standard of living, literacy rate and average life expectancy since the 1970s, as well as improvements in workplace safety and efforts to combat natural disasters such as the perennial Yangtze River floods.
In the early 2010s, China's economic growth rate began to slow amid domestic credit troubles, weakening international demand for Chinese exports and fragility in the global economy.
China also has five subdivisions officially termed autonomous regions, each with a designated minority group; four municipalities; and two Special Administrative Regions (SARs), which enjoy a degree of political autonomy.
In 1644, Beijing was captured by a coalition of peasant rebel forces led by Li Zicheng.
According to Credit Suisse, the total value of online transactions in China grew from an insignificant size in 2008 to around RMB 4 trillion (US$660 billion) in 2012.
The important sinologist John Lagerwey clearly defines China as "a religious state".
After the surrender of Japan in 1945, Taiwan, including the Pescadores, was returned to Chinese control.
China has participated in the Olympic Games since 1932, although it has only participated as the PRC since 1952.
color:tan1 width:10
About 16.60% of the population were 14 years old or younger, 70.14% were between 15 and 59 years old, and 13.26% were over 60 years old.
The Shang were conquered by the Zhou, who ruled between the 11th and 5th centuries&nbsp;, though centralized authority was slowly eroded by feudal warlords.
China extends across much of East Asia, bordering Vietnam, Laos, and Myanmar (Burma) in Southeast Asia; India, Bhutan, Nepal, Afghanistan, and Pakistan in South Asia;  Tajikistan, Kyrgyzstan and Kazakhstan in Central Asia; and Russia, Mongolia, and North Korea in Inner Asia and Northeast Asia.
Inefficient state-owned enterprises (SOEs) were restructured and unprofitable ones were closed outright, resulting in massive job losses.
Although a middle-income country by Western standards, China's rapid growth has pulled hundreds of millions of its people out of poverty since 1978.
In 2003, China became the third country to independently send humans into space, with Yang Liwei's spaceflight aboard Shenzhou 5; , ten Chinese nationals have journeyed into space, including two women.
China is one of the cradles of civilization, with its known history beginning with an ancient civilization – one of the world's earliest – that flourished in the fertile basin of the Yellow River in the North China Plain.
According to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute's data, China became the world's third largest exporter of major arms in 2010–14, an increase of 143 per cent from the period 2005–09.
Chinese characters have been used as the written script for the Sinitic languages for thousands of years.
bar:China from:start till:10355 text:10,355
According to a 2013 report by the US Department of Defense, China fields between 50 and 75 nuclear ICBMs, along with a number of SRBMs.
By 2025, it is estimated that the country will be home to 221 cities with over a million inhabitants.
color:tan1 width:10
Other major rivers include the Xi, Mekong, Brahmaputra and Amur.
In 2013, its PPP GDP per capita was US$12,880, while its nominal GDP per capita was US$7,589.
Under their administration, China's economic performance pulled an estimated 150&nbsp;million peasants out of poverty and sustained an average annual gross domestic product growth rate of 11.2%.
The Chinese online payment market is dominated by major firms such as Alipay, Tenpay and China UnionPay.
Tibetan uses an alphabet based on an Indic script.
Both cases put China behind around eighty countries (out of 183 countries on the IMF list) in global GDP per capita rankings.
Both the ROC and PRC continue to claim to be the legitimate government of all China.
China's railways, which are state-owned, are among the busiest in the world, handling a quarter of the world's rail traffic volume on only 6 percent of the world's tracks in 2006. , the country had  of railways, the third longest network in the world.
China's landscape is vast and diverse, ranging from forest steppes and the Gobi and Taklamakan Deserts in the arid north to subtropical forests in the wetter south.
With the rise of Chinese nationalism and the end of the Cultural Revolution, various forms of traditional Chinese art, literature, music, film, fashion and architecture have seen a vigorous revival, and folk and variety art in particular have sparked interest nationally and even worldwide.
However, there remains an inequality in education spending.
The state still dominates in strategic "pillar" sectors such as energy production and heavy industries, but private enterprise has expanded enormously, with around 30&nbsp;million private businesses recorded in 2008.
Melting glaciers in the Himalayas could potentially lead to water shortages for hundreds of millions of people.
China hosted the 2013 East Asian Games in Tianjin and the 2014 Summer Youth Olympics in Nanjing.
China's domestic retail market was worth over 20 trillion yuan (US$3.2 trillion) in 2012 and is growing at over 12% annually , while the country's luxury goods market has expanded immensely, with 27.5% of the global share.
China Telecom and China Unicom, the world's two largest broadband providers, accounted for 20% of global broadband subscribers.
"China stays committed to seeking peaceful settlement of disputes with other countries over territorial sovereignty and maritime rights and interests", he said.
In 2013, Beijing's Capital Airport ranked second in the world by passenger traffic (it was 26th in 2002).
The PRC is one of the world's few remaining socialist states openly endorsing communism (see Ideology of the Communist Party of China).
It was during this period that Zheng He led voyages throughout the world, reaching as far as Africa.
'''China''', officially the '''People's Republic of China''' ('''PRC'''), is a sovereign state in East Asia.
In 2012, China's Gini coefficient was 0.474.
Its legitimacy is disputed by the Republic of China and a few other countries; it is thus the largest and most populous state with limited recognition.
Chinese cuisine is also known for its width of cooking methods and ingredients, as well as food therapy that is emphasized by traditional Chinese medicine.
A peasant named Zhu Yuanzhang overthrew the Yuan Dynasty in 1368 and founded the Ming dynasty.
Many more traditional sports, such as dragon boat racing, Mongolian-style wrestling and horse racing are also popular.
China is home to at least 551 species of mammals (the third-highest such number in the world), 1,221 species of birds (eighth), 424 species of reptiles (seventh) and 333 species of amphibians (seventh).
In the online realm, China's e-commerce industry has grown more slowly than the EU and the US, with a significant period of development occurring from around 2009 onwards.
Graph comparing the 2014 nominal GDPsof major economies in US$ billions (IMF)
While regulations such as the 1979 Environmental Protection Law are fairly stringent, they are poorly enforced, as they are frequently disregarded by local communities and government officials in favor of rapid economic development.
The electoral system is pyramidal.
In 1978 Deng Xiaoping took power and instituted significant economic reforms.
Since 2010, the Hong Kong International Airport and Shanghai Pudong International Airport have ranked first and third in air cargo tonnage.
Pork is now the most popular meat in China, accounting for about three-fourths of the country's total meat consumption.
Air and Sea denial weaponry advances have increased the regional threat from the perspective of Japan as well as Washington.
China is a recognized nuclear weapons state and has the world's largest standing army and second-largest defense budget.
Standard Mandarin, a variety of Mandarin based on the Beijing dialect, is the official national language of China and is used as a lingua franca in the country between people of different linguistic backgrounds.
China is now the third-most-visited country in the world, with 55.7&nbsp;million inbound international visitors in 2010.
However, Mao's Great Leap Forward, a large-scale economic and social reform project, resulted in an estimated 45&nbsp;million deaths between 1958 and 1961, mostly from starvation.
Both have improved significantly since the 1950s.
Under its leadership, China developed an independent industrial system and its own nuclear weapons.
However, rapid growth also severely impacted the country's resources and environment, and caused major social displacement.
Examinations and a culture of merit remain greatly valued in China today.
Chinese-born scientists have won the Nobel Prize in Physics four times, the Nobel Prize in Chemistry and Physiology or Medicine once respectively, though most of these scientists conducted their Nobel-winning research in western nations.
China's constitution states that  The People's Republic of China "is a socialist state under the people's democratic dictatorship led by the working class and based on the alliance of workers and peasants," and that the state organs "apply the principle of democratic centralism."
In 2013, China successfully landed the Chang'e 3 probe and Yutu rover onto the Moon; China plans to collect lunar soil samples by 2017.
