Because the haptophyte chloroplast has four membranes, tertiary endosymbiosis would be expected to create a six membraned chloroplast, adding the haptophyte's cell membrane and the dinophyte's phagosomal vacuole.
The reactive oxygen species also directly kill any pathogens within the cell.
It is likely that chloroplast and cell division are somewhat synchronized, though the mechanisms for it are mostly unknown.
The peridinin chloroplast is thought to be the dinophytes' "original" chloroplast, which has been lost, reduced, replaced, or has company in several other dinophyte lineages.
Some dinophytes, like ''Kryptoperidinium'' and ''Durinskia'' have a diatom (heterokontophyte) derived chloroplast.
The new cpDNA structures separate, creating daughter cpDNA chromosomes.
These chloroplasts are bounded by up to ''five'' membranes, (depending on whether you count the entire diatom endosymbiont as the chloroplast, or just the red algal derived chloroplast inside it).
Of the approximately 3000 proteins found in chloroplasts, some 95% of them are encoded by nuclear genes.
The ribosomes in chloroplasts are similar to bacterial ribosomes.
'''Chlorophyll&nbsp;''b'''''
It can waste up to half the carbon fixed by the Calvin cycle.
Plastoglubuli contain both structural proteins and enzymes involved in lipid synthesis and metabolism.
Phycobilins are also common cyanobacterial pigments, usually organized into hemispherical phycobilisomes attached to the outside of the thylakoid membranes (phycobilins are not shared with all chloroplasts though).
Haptophyte dinophytes c
Normally, the reenergized electrons are taken by NADP+, though sometimes they can flow back down more H+-pumping electron transport chains to transport more hydrogen ions into the thylakoid space to generate more ATP.
Chromoplasts and amyloplasts can also become chloroplasts, like what happens when a carrot or a potato is illuminated.
Not all cells in a multicellular plant contain chloroplasts.
In normal green chloroplasts, the vast majority of plastoglobuli occur singularly, attached directly to their parent thylakoid.
They consist of a matrix opaque to electrons, surrounded by two hemispherical starch plates.
These proteins are active at the poles of the chloroplast, preventing Z-ring formation there, but near the center of the chloroplast, MinE inhibits them, allowing the Z-ring to form.
Chloroplasts are highly dynamic—they circulate and are moved around within plant cells, and occasionally pinch in two to reproduce.
In algae with carbon concentrating mechanisms, the enzyme rubisco is found in the pyrenoids.
Pyrenoids and stacked thylakoids are common in chromalveolate chloroplasts, and the outermost membrane of many are continuous with the rough endoplasmic reticulum and studded with ribosomes.
The Min system manages the placement of the Z-ring, ensuring that the chloroplast is cleaved more or less evenly.
Even if a chloroplast is eventually lost, the genes it donated to the former host's nucleus persist, providing evidence for the lost chloroplast's existence.
Palisade mesophyll cells can contain 30–70 chloroplasts per cell, while stomatal guard cells contain only around 8–15 per cell, as well as much less chlorophyll.
'''Unicellular red algae'''
Wrapped around the grana are helicoid stromal thylakoids, also known as frets or lamellar thylakoids.
They then use the ATP and NADPH to make organic molecules from carbon dioxide in a process known as the Calvin cycle.
In primitive red algae, the chloroplast DNA nucleoids are clustered in the center of the chloroplast, while in green plants and green algae, the nucleoids are dispersed throughout the stroma.
Cryptophyte chloroplasts require their nucleomorph to maintain themselves, and ''Dinophysis'' species grown in cell culture alone cannot survive, so it is possible (but not confirmed) that the ''Dinophysis'' chloroplast is a kleptoplast—if so, ''Dinophysis'' chloroplasts wear out and ''Dinophysis'' species must continually engulf cryptophytes to obtain new chloroplasts to replace the old ones.
Its purpose is thought to be to increase the chloroplast's surface area for cross-membrane transport between its stroma and the cell cytoplasm.
They contain many types of lipids including plastoquinone, vitamin E, carotenoids and chlorophylls.
Inside the outer and inner chloroplast membranes is the chloroplast stroma, a semi-gel-like fluid that makes up much of a chloroplast's volume, and in which the thylakoid system floats.
They are also common in etioplasts, but decrease in number as the etioplasts mature into chloroplasts.
These large protein complexes may act as spacers between the sheets of stromal thylakoids.
Next, the two plastid-dividing rings, or PD rings form.
It corresponds to the peptidoglycan cell wall of their cyanobacterial ancestors, which is located between their two cell membranes.
Most of them produce sperm cells that do not contain any plastids.
Inside cryptophyte chloroplasts is a pyrenoid and thylakoids in stacks of two.
The two phases are linked by the energy carriers adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP+).
High levels of reactive oxygen species will cause the hypersensitive response.
In 1884, Eduard Strasburger adopted the term "chloroplasts" (''Chloroplasten'').
Practically all plastoglobuli form on or near the highly curved edges of the thylakoid disks or sheets.
The chloroplastidan chloroplasts, or green chloroplasts, are another large, highly diverse primary chloroplast lineage.
The outermost membrane is not connected to the endoplasmic reticulum.
While the reliability of this mechanism has not yet been studied for all relevant crop species, recent results in tobacco plants are promising, showing a failed containment rate of transplastomic plants at 3 in 1,000,000.
However, exactly what they do is controversial.
They were once thought to be related to the helicosproidia, but it is now known that the helicosproida are green algae rather than chromalveolates.
There is no proplastid differentiation—when an algal cell divides, its chloroplast divides along with it, and each daughter cell receives a mature chloroplast.
As a result, protein synthesis must be coordinated between the chloroplast and the nucleus.
The hydrogen ions in the thylakoid space then diffuse back down their concentration gradient, flowing back out into the stroma through ATP synthase.
Other chloroplasts have lost the cyanobacterial wall, leaving an intermembrane space between the two chloroplast envelope membranes.
In some groups of mixotrophic protists, like some dinoflagellates, chloroplasts are separated from a captured alga or diatom and used temporarily.
The chloroplast stroma contains many proteins, though the most common and important is Rubisco, which is probably also the most abundant protein on the planet.
The word ''chloroplast'' () is derived from the Greek words ''chloros'' (χλωρός), which means green, and ''plastes'' (πλάστης), which means "the one who forms".
Cyanobacteria also contain a peptidoglycan cell wall, which is thicker than in other gram-negative bacteria, and which is located between their two cell membranes.
The red phycoerytherin pigment is an adaptation to help red algae catch more sunlight in deep water—as such, some red algae that live in shallow water have less phycoerytherin in their rhodoplasts, and can appear more greenish.
While etioplasts lack chlorophyll, they have a yellow chlorophyll precursor stocked.
The ATP and NADPH made in the light reactions is used to convert the 3-PGA into glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate, or G3P sugar molecules.
From here, chloroplast proteins bound for the stroma must pass through two protein complexes—the TOC complex, or '''''t'''ranslocon on the '''o'''uter '''c'''hloroplast membrane'', and the TIC translocon, or '''''t'''ranslocon on the '''i'''nner '''c'''hloroplast membrane translocon''.
Chloroplasts in  plants are notable as they exhibit a distinct chloroplast dimorphism.
While different parts of the thylakoid system contain different membrane proteins, the thylakoid membranes are continuous and the thylakoid space they enclose form a single continuous labyrinth.
The chloroplasts of some hornworts and algae contain structures called pyrenoids.
In some of these genera, the diatom endosymbiont's chloroplasts aren't the only chloroplasts in the dinophyte.
Pyrenoids can divide to form new pyrenoids, or be produced "de novo".
Plant chloroplasts provide plant cells with many important things besides sugar, and apicoplasts are no different—they synthesize fatty acids, isopentenyl pyrophosphate, iron-sulfur clusters, and carry out part of the heme pathway.
Cryptophytes, or cryptomonads are a group of algae that contain a red-algal derived chloroplast.
Chloroplasts are a special type of a plant cell organelle called a '''plastid''', though the two terms are sometimes used interchangeably.
Chlorophyll ''b'' is an olive green pigment found only in the chloroplasts of plants, green algae, any secondary chloroplasts obtained through the secondary endosymbiosis of a green alga, and a few cyanobacteria.
Plastoglobuli form when a bubble appears between the layers of the lipid bilayer of the thylakoid membrane, or bud from existing plastoglubuli—though they never detach and float off into the stroma.
Photorespiration can occur when the oxygen concentration is too high.
All dinophytes store starch in their cytoplasm, and most have chloroplasts with thylakoids arranged in stacks of three.
When replication forks form, the strand not being copied is single stranded, and thus at risk for A → G deamination.
Deamination occurs when an amino group is lost and is a mutation that often results in base changes.
In addition to the early microscopy experiments, this model is also supported by the amounts of deamination seen in cpDNA.
'''Rhodophyceae''' (Red algae)
''Paulinella'' cells contain one or two sausage shaped blue-green photosynthesizing structures called chromatophores, descended from the cyanobacterium ''Synechococcus''.
They are surrounded by a lipid monolayer.
Rhodoplasts have chlorophyll ''a'' and phycobilins for photosynthetic pigments; the phycobilin phycoerytherin is responsible for giving many red algae their distinctive red color.
A chloroplast is one of three types of plastids, characterized by its high concentration of chlorophyll, the other two types, the leucoplast and the chromoplast, contain little chlorophyll and do not carry out photosynthesis.
Euglenophytes are a group of common flagellated protists that contain chloroplasts derived from a green alga.
In those cases, chloroplast-targeted proteins do initially travel along the secretory pathway).
Studies of ''Vallisneria gigantea'', an aquatic flowering plant, have shown that chloroplasts can get moving within five minutes of light exposure, though they don't initially show any net directionality.
In a few species like ''Cyanidioschyzon merolæ'', chloroplasts have a third plastid-dividing ring located in the chloroplast's intermembrane space.
Starch can also accumulate around the pyrenoids when CO2 is scarce.
They synthesize ordinary starch, which is stored in granules found in the periplastid space—outside the original double membrane, in the place that corresponds to the red alga's cytoplasm.
Nucleoids of chloroplast DNA, chloroplast ribosomes, the thylakoid system with plastoglobuli, starch granules, and many proteins can be found floating around in it.
Phosphorylation helps many proteins bind the polypeptide, keeping it from folding prematurely.
Most of the genome has migrated to the nucleus, and only critical photosynthesis-related genes remain in the chloroplast.
As in prokaryotes, genes in chloroplast DNA are organized into operons.
Pyrenoids are roughly spherical and highly refractive bodies which are a site of starch accumulation in plants that contain them.
Many other dinophytes have lost the chloroplast (becoming the nonphotosynthetic kind of dinoflagellate), or replaced it though ''tertiary'' endosymbiosis—the engulfment of another chromalveolate containing a red algal derived chloroplast.
The number of thylakoids and the total thylakoid area of a chloroplast is influenced by light exposure.
An important feature of these chloroplasts is that their chloroplast DNA is highly reduced and fragmented into many small circles.
However, the haptophyte was heavily reduced, stripped of a few membranes and its nucleus, leaving only its chloroplast (with its original double membrane), and possibly one or two additional membranes around it.
Water (H2O) and carbon dioxide (CO2) are used in photosynthesis, and sugar and oxygen (O2) is made, using light energy.
While linked to low photosynthesis rates, the starch grains themselves may not necessarily interfere significantly with the efficiency of photosynthesis, and might simply be a side effect of another photosynthesis-depressing factor.
When the original experiments on cpDNA were performed, scientists did notice linear structures; however, they attributed these linear forms to broken circles.
All secondary chloroplasts come from green and red algae—no secondary chloroplasts from glaucophytes have been observed, probably because glaucophytes are relatively rare in nature, making them less likely to have been taken up by another eukaryote.
The protein-rich, alkaline, aqueous fluid within the inner chloroplast membrane and outside of the thylakoid space is called the stroma, which corresponds to the cytosol of the original cyanobacterium.
Most of the chloroplasts depicted in this article are green chloroplasts.
Light, however, does not guarantee that a proplastid will develop into a chloroplast.
It consists of filaments about 5 nanometers across, arranged in rows 6.4 nanometers apart, and shrinks to squeeze the chloroplast.
All green parts of a plant contain chloroplasts—the chloroplasts, or more specifically, the chlorophyll in them are what make the photosynthetic parts of a plant green.
This is important because it prevents chloroplast proteins from assuming their active form and carrying out their chloroplast functions in the wrong place—the cytosol.
For example, while diatoms (a heterokontophyte) now have a red algal derived chloroplast, the presence of many green algal genes in the diatom nucleus provide evidence that the diatom ancestor (probably the ancestor of all chromalveolates too) had a green algal derived chloroplast at some point, which was subsequently replaced by the red chloroplast.
This suggests that incompatible hybrid genes might interfere with the mechanisms that prevent paternal inheritance.
The most important apicoplast function is isopentenyl pyrophosphate synthesis—in fact, apicomplexans die when something interferes with this apicoplast function, and when apicomplexans are grown in an isopentenyl pyrophosphate-rich medium, they dump the organelle.
Green algae and plants keep their starch ''inside'' their chloroplasts, and in plants and some algae, the chloroplast thylakoids are arranged in grana stacks.
'''Haptophytes''' and '''Dinophytes'''
Green algae have been taken up by the euglenids, chlorarachniophytes, a lineage of dinoflagellates, and possibly the ancestor of the chromalveolates in three or four separate engulfments.
Several mechanisms have evolved in different lineages that raise the carbon dioxide concentration relative to oxygen within the chloroplast, increasing the efficiency of photosynthesis.
This ability to distribute chloroplasts so that they can take shelter behind each other or spread out may be the reason why land plants evolved to have many small chloroplasts instead of a few big ones.
'''Tertiary endosymbiosis'''
''Lepidodinium viride'' and its close relatives are dinophytes that lost their original peridinin chloroplast and replaced it with a green algal derived chloroplast (more specifically, a prasinophyte).
Unlike most epidermal cells, the guard cells of plant stomata contain relatively well-developed chloroplasts.
The two RNA polymerases may recognize and bind to different kinds of promoters within the chloroplast genome.
Because the cell acquiring a chloroplast already had mitochondria (and peroxisomes, and a cell membrane for secretion), the new chloroplast host had to develop a unique protein targeting system to avoid having chloroplast proteins being sent to the wrong organelle, and the wrong proteins being sent to the chloroplast.
Chloroplasts have no definite S-phase—their DNA replication is not synchronized or limited to that of their host cells.
In higher plants, chloroplast movement is run by phototropins, blue light photoreceptors also responsible for plant phototropism.
Within a leaf, chloroplasts are mainly found in the mesophyll layers of a leaf, and the guard cells of stomata.
They contain a pyrenoid, and have triplet-stacked thylakoids.
Chlorarachniophyte chloroplasts are notable because the green alga they are derived from has not been completely broken down—its nucleus still persists as a nucleomorph found between the second and third chloroplast membranes—the periplastid space, which corresponds to the green alga's cytoplasm.
Greater diversity in chloroplast shapes exists among the algae, which often contain a single chloroplast that can be shaped like a net (e.g., ''Oedogonium''), a cup (e.g., ''Chlamydomonas''), a ribbon-like spiral around the edges of the cell (e.g., ''Spirogyra''), or slightly twisted bands at the cell edges (e.g., ''Sirogonium'').
Over time, the cyanobacterium was assimilated, and many of its genes were lost or transferred to the nucleus of the host.
In organisms like plants, whose cells contain multiple chloroplasts, coordination is looser and less important.
Starch is stored in the form of paramylon, which is contained in membrane-bound granules in the cytoplasm of the euglenophyte.
The helices ascend at an angle of 20–25°, connecting to each granal thylakoid at a bridge-like slit junction.
Some algae have two chloroplasts in each cell; they are star-shaped in ''Zygnema'', or may follow the shape of half the cell in order Desmidiales.
Because NADP+ reduction removes electrons from the electron transport chains, they must be replaced—the job of photosystem II, which splits water molecules (H2O) to obtain the electrons from its hydrogen atoms.
Some contain pyrenoids.
Lower levels of reactive oxygen species initiate systemic acquired resistance, triggering defense-molecule production in the rest of the plant.
The chloroplast is surrounded by two membranes and has no nucleomorph—all the nucleomorph genes have been transferred to the dinophyte nucleus.
Chlorarachniophyte chloroplasts are bounded by four membranes, except near the cell membrane, where the chloroplast membranes fuse into a double membrane.
Cryptophyte chloroplasts contain a nucleomorph that superficially resembles that of the chlorarachniophytes.
Chromatophore DNA is about a million base pairs long, containing around 850 protein encoding genes—far less than the three million base pair ''Synechococcus'' genome, but much larger than the approximately 150,000 base pair genome of the more assimilated chloroplast.
One of competing model for cpDNA replication asserts that most cpDNA is linear and participates in homologous recombination and replication structures similar to bacteriophage T4.
One of the main functions of the chloroplast is its role in photosynthesis, the process by which light is transformed into chemical energy, to subsequently produce food in the form of sugars.
The results of the microscopy experiments led to the idea that chloroplast DNA replicates using a double displacement loop (D-loop).
The Calvin cycle, which fixes CO into sugar takes place in the stroma.
Many apicomplexans keep a vestigial red algal derived chloroplast called an apicoplast, which they inherited from their ancestors.
β-carotene is a bright red-orange carotenoid found in nearly all chloroplasts, like chlorophyll ''a''.
'''Euglenophytes''' and '''Chlorarachniophytes'''
Phycobilins come in all colors, though phycoerytherin is one of the pigments that makes many red algae red.
They have lost their phycobilisomes and exchanged them for chlorophyll ''c'', which isn't found in primary red algal chloroplasts themselves.
They take light energy and store it in NADPH, a form of NADP+, and ATP to fuel the dark reactions.
However the diatom endosymbiont can't store its own food—its starch is found in granules in the dinophyte host's cytoplasm instead.
They store  in a four-carbon compound, which is why the process is called '' photosynthesis''.
One model has the granum as a stack of thylakoids linked by helical stromal thylakoids; the other has the granum as a single folded thylakoid connected in a "hub and spoke" way to other grana by stromal thylakoids.
Chloroplasts' main role is to conduct photosynthesis, where the photosynthetic pigment chlorophyll captures the energy from sunlight and converts it and stores it in the energy-storage molecules ATP and NADPH while freeing oxygen from water.
This reduces exposure and protects them from photooxidative damage.
Mitochondria have also been observed to follow chloroplasts as they move.
Blue light generally causes chloroplasts to seek shelter, while red light draws them out to maximize light absorption.
While photosystem II photolyzes water to obtain and energize new electrons, photosystem I simply reenergizes depleted electrons at the end of an electron transport chain.
This has the end result of ATP energy being wasted and  being released, all with no sugar being produced.
These chloroplasts are called muroplasts (from Latin ''"mura"'', meaning "wall").
This is often interpreted as meaning the outer chloroplast membrane is the product of the host's cell membrane infolding to form a vesicle to surround the ancestral cyanobacterium—which is not true—both chloroplast membranes are homologous to the cyanobacterium's original double membranes.
The plant cells which contain chloroplasts are usually parenchyma cells, though chloroplasts can also be found in collenchyma tissue.
Each granum can contain anywhere from two to a hundred thylakoids, though grana with 10–20 thylakoids are most common.
Gymnosperms, such as pine trees, mostly pass on chloroplasts paternally, while flowering plants often inherit chloroplasts maternally.
Rubisco has a problem—it has trouble distinguishing between carbon dioxide and oxygen, so at high oxygen concentrations, rubisco starts accidentally adding oxygen to sugar precursors.
Being in the early stages of endosymbiosis, ''Paulinella chromatophora'' can offer some insights into how chloroplasts evolved.
Rhodoplasts synthesize a form of starch called floridean starch, which collects into granules outside the rhodoplast, in the cytoplasm of the red alga.
However, since they also contain the blue-green chlorophyll ''a'' and other pigments, many are reddish to purple from the combination.
The small vesicles sometimes observed may serve as transport vesicles to shuttle stuff between the thylakoids and intermembrane space.
However, there are now many documented cases of angiosperms inheriting chloroplasts paternally.
Similar inverted repeats exist in the genomes of cyanobacteria and the other two chloroplast lineages (glaucophyta and rhodophyceae), suggesting that they predate the chloroplast, though some chloroplast DNAs have since lost or flipped the inverted repeats (making them direct repeats).
Chlorarachniophytes  are a rare group of organisms that also contain chloroplasts derived from green algae, though their story is more complicated than that of the euglenophytes.
Fucoxanthin is also found in haptophyte chloroplasts, providing evidence of ancestry.
These chloroplasts, which can be traced back directly to a cyanobacterial ancestor, are known as ''primary plastids'' (''"plastid"'' in this context means almost the same thing as chloroplast).
Recent research has suggested that the ancestor of the chromalveolates acquired a green algal prasinophyte endosymbiont.
Glaucophytes have chloroplasts that retain a peptidoglycan wall between their double membranes, like their cyanobacterial parent.
Chloroplasts have their own ribosomes, which they use to synthesize a small fraction of their proteins.
These mechanisms are called carbon dioxide concentrating mechanisms, or CCMs.
The only chloroplast structure that can considered analogous to it is the internal thylakoid system.
The outer plastid-dividing ring is found wrapped around the outer chloroplast membrane.
Because of this, they lack thylakoids organized into grana stacks—though bundle sheath chloroplasts still have free-floating thylakoids in the stroma where they still carry out cyclic electron flow, a light-driven method of synthesizing ATP to power the Calvin cycle without generating oxygen.
Interestingly though, unlike prokaryotic DNA molecules, chloroplast DNA molecules contain introns (plant mitochondrial DNAs do too, but not human mtDNAs).
It is not clear whether that symbiont is closely related to the ancestral chloroplast of other eukaryotes.
Some chloroplasts contain a structure called the chloroplast peripheral reticulum.
'''Chlorophyll&nbsp;''d'' and ''f'''''
The second two are the largest, and the green chloroplast lineage is the one that contains the land plants.
Thylakoid extent can change within minutes of light exposure or removal.
They are sometimes called blue-green algae even though they are prokaryotes.
Chloroplast, amyloplast, chromoplast, proplast, etc., are not absolute states—intermediate forms are common.
It is the chlorophylls ''a'' and ''b'' together that make most plant and green algal chloroplasts green.
Fucoxanthin-containing chloroplasts are characterized by having the pigment fucoxanthin (actually 19′-hexanoyloxy-fucoxanthin and/or 19′-butanoyloxy-fucoxanthin) and no peridinin.
Plants lack specialized immune cells—all plant cells participate in the plant immune response.
Many of the chloroplast's protein complexes consist of subunits from both the chloroplast genome and the host's nuclear genome.
Some plants seem to have kept the genes for the synthesis of the peptidoglycan layer, though they've been repurposed for use in chloroplast division instead.
Much of what we know about chloroplast division comes from studying organisms like ''Arabidopsis'' and the red alga ''Cyanidioschyzon merolæ''.
Mesophyll chloroplasts have a little more peripheral reticulum than bundle sheath chloroplasts.
Chloroplasts, along with the nucleus, cell membrane, and endoplasmic reticulum, are key players in pathogen defense.
Cyclic photophosphorylation is common in  plants, which need more ATP than NADPH.
Photosystem II and photosystem I contain light-harvesting complexes with chlorophyll and carotenoids that absorb light energy and use it to energize electrons.
Diatoms have been engulfed by dinoflagellates at least three times.
About 0.3–0.8% of the nuclear DNA in ''Paulinella'' is from the chromatophore, compared with 11–14% from the chloroplast in plants.
All primary chloroplasts belong to one of three chloroplast lineages—the glaucophyte chloroplast lineage, the rhodophyte, or red algal chloroplast lineage, or the chloroplastidan, or green chloroplast lineage.
Plastoglobuli were once thought to be free-floating in the stroma, but it is now thought that they are permanently attached either to a thylakoid or to another plastoglobulus attached to a thylakoid, a configuration that allows a plastoglobulus to exchange its contents with the thylakoid network.
