Chlorine combines with almost all other elements to produce compounds that are usually called chlorides.
This process was not very efficient, and alternative production methods were sought.
The most common compound of chlorine, sodium chloride (common salt), has been known since ancient times.
Essentially no chlorine was created in the Big Bang.
Chlorine is detectable with measuring devices in concentrations as low as 0.2 parts per million (ppm), and by smell at 3 ppm.
These "putrid miasmas" were thought by many to cause the spread of "contagion" and "infection" – both words used before the germ theory of infection.
Along with chlorine, the method yields hydrogen gas and sodium hydroxide, which is the most valuable product.
Regardless of what he thought, Scheele did isolate chlorine by reacting MnO2 (as the mineral pyrolusite) with HCl:
The fracture surface shows iron and calcium salts that were deposited in the leaking joint from the water supply before failure.
Human respiratory systems can be protected from chlorine gas by gas masks with activated charcoal or other filters, which makes chlorine gas much less lethal than other chemical weapons.
Chlorine reacts with water in the mucosa of the lungs to form hydrochloric acid, destructive to living tissue and potentially lethal.
It was pioneered by a German scientist later to be a Nobel laureate, Fritz Haber of the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute in Berlin, in collaboration with the German chemical conglomerate IG Farben, which developed methods for discharging chlorine gas against an entrenched enemy.
Most chloride salts are soluble in water; therefore, chloride-containing minerals are found in abundance only in dry climates or deep underground.
The Iraqi authorities tightened security for elemental chlorine, which is essential for providing safe drinking water to the population.
Around 1630, chlorine gas was first synthesized in a chemical reaction, but not recognized as a fundamentally important substance.
Labarraque's research resulted in the use of chlorides and hypochlorites of lime (calcium hypochlorite) and of sodium (sodium hypochlorite) in the ''boyauderies.''
In the form of chloride ions, chlorine is necessary to all known species of life.
The name "halogen", meaning "salt producer", was originally used for chlorine in 1811 by Johann Salomo Christoph Schweigger.
Coughing and vomiting may occur at 30 ppm and lung damage at 60&nbsp;ppm.
Dissolved elemental chlorine gas is present only in a neutral or acidic solution.
Industries often avoid using chlorine directly, preferring cheaper reagents such as hydrogen chloride, as deployed in hydrohalogenation and oxychlorination.
Along with fluorine, bromine, iodine, and astatine, chlorine is a member of the halogen series that forms the group 17 (formerly VII, VIIA, or VIIB) of the periodic table.
It is the second most abundant halogen and 21st most abundant chemical element in Earth's crust.
Chlorine gas was first used by French chemist Claude Berthollet to bleach textiles in 1785.
The major inorganic compounds include HCl, Cl2O, HOCl, NaClO3, chlorinated isocyanurates, AlCl3, SiCl4, SnCl4, PCl3, PCl5, POCl3, AsCl3, SbCl3, SbCl5, BiCl3, S2Cl2, SCl2, SOCI2, ClF3, ICl, ICl3, TiCl3, TiCl4, MoCl5, FeCl3, ZnCl2, etc.
Free chlorine is rare on Earth, and is usually a result of direct or indirect oxidation by oxygen.
Like the other halogens, chlorine participates in free-radical substitution reactions with hydrogen-containing organic compounds.
If their crystals are heated to a high temperature, they undergo a further, final disproportionation:
In this respect, chlorinated organics resemble fluorinated organics.
Chlorine-iron fires are a risk in chemical process plants, where much of the pipework that carries chlorine gas is made of steel.
These compounds are stable while solid and may be used in powdered, granular, or tablet form.
Chlorine is used in the manufacture of a wide range of consumer products, about two-thirds of them organic chemicals such as polyvinyl chloride, and many intermediates for production of plastics and other end products which do not contain the element.
As introduced by Deacon, early catalysts were based on copper.
Large amounts of 36Cl were produced by irradiation of seawater during atmospheric detonations of nuclear weapons between 1952 and 1958.
Thus, as an event marker of 1950s water in soil and groundwater, 36Cl is also useful for dating waters less than 50 years before the present.
Chlorine is in the halogen group (17) and is the second lightest halogen, following fluorine.
Chlorine combines with almost all elements to produce chlorides.
Some organochlorine compounds, either as industrial by-products or commercial end-products, are serious pollutants that persist in the environment, including some chlorinated pesticides and chlorofluorocarbons.
It has a relative atomic mass of about 35.5.
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health has designated a recommended exposure limit of 0.5 ppm over 15 minutes.
:2 NaCl + 2 H2O → Cl2 + H2 + 2 NaOH
In a second method, a strong acid such as sulfuric acid or hydrochloric acid is reacted with sodium hypochlorite solution to release chlorine gas.
Breathing lower concentrations can aggravate the respiratory system and exposure to the gas can irritate the eyes.
About 1000&nbsp;ppm can be fatal after a few deep breaths of the gas.
After its first use, both sides in the conflict used chlorine as a chemical weapon, but it was soon replaced by the more deadly phosgene and mustard gas.
In meteorites and on Earth, chlorine is found primarily as the chloride ion in minerals.
Chlorine is added to pesticides and pharmaceuticals to make the molecules more resistant to enzymatic degradation by bacteria, insects, and mammals, but this property has the effect of reducing biodegradability and prolonging the residence time of these compounds in the environment.
Chlorine is usually used (in the form of hypochlorous acid) to kill bacteria and other microbes in drinking water supplies and public swimming pools.
In a third method, one of the same strong acids is reacted with sodium chlorate to produce chlorine gas and chlorine dioxide gas.
Scottish chemist and industrialist Charles Tennant first produced a solution of calcium hypochlorite ("chlorinated lime"), then solid calcium hypochlorite (bleaching powder).
Elemental chlorine solutions dissolved in chemically basic water (sodium and calcium hypochlorite) were first used as anti-putrifaction agents and disinfectants in the 1820s, in France, long before the establishment of the germ theory of disease.
One reference makes it clear that chloride of lime was used to disinfect the offal and filth in the streets surrounding the Broad Street pump—a common practice in mid-nineteenth century England.
Small batches of chlorine gas are prepared in the laboratory by combining hydrochloric acid and manganese dioxide.
Even small water supplies are now routinely chlorinated.
Laboratory analysis of clothing and soil samples confirmed the use of chlorine gas against Kurdish Peshmerga Forces in a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device attack on January 23, 2015 at the Highway 47 Kiske Junction near Mosul.
It also tasted metallic and stung the back of the throat and chest.
Examples include polycarbonates, polyurethanes, silicones, polytetrafluoroethylene, carboxymethyl cellulose, and propylene oxide.
Scheele observed several of the properties of chlorine: the bleaching effect on litmus, the deadly effect on insects, the yellow green color, and the smell similar to aqua regia.
It is often impractical to store and use poisonous chlorine gas for water treatment, so alternative methods of adding chlorine are used.
The element iron can combine with chlorine at high temperatures in a strong exothermic reaction, creating a ''chlorine-iron fire''.
Membrane cell electrolysis employs permeable membrane as an ion exchanger.
There have been allegations of chlorine gas attacks during the Syrian Civil War such as the 2014 Kafr Zita chemical attack.
In 1809, chemists suggested that the gas might be a pure element, and this was confirmed by Sir Humphry Davy in 1810, who named it from .
Chlorine has the highest electron affinity and the third highest electronegativity of all the reactive elements.
+ 2 OH− →  + H2O + 2 e−
'''Chlorine''' is a chemical element with symbol&nbsp;'''Cl''' and atomic number&nbsp;17.
He named the new element within this oxide as ''muriaticum''.
Elemental chlorine is commercially produced from brine by electrolysis.
These include hypochlorite solutions, which gradually release chlorine into the water, and compounds like sodium dichloro-s-triazinetrione (dihydrate or anhydrous), sometimes referred to as "dichlor", and trichloro-s-triazinetrione, sometimes referred to as "trichlor".
In 1809, Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac and Louis-Jacques Thénard tried to decompose ''dephlogisticated muriatic acid air'' by reacting it with charcoal to release the free element ''muriaticum'' (and carbon dioxide).
The prize was won by Antoine-Germain Labarraque, a 44-year-old French chemist and pharmacist who had discovered that Berthollet's chlorinated bleaching solutions ("''Eau de Javel''") not only destroyed the smell of putrefaction of animal tissue decomposition, but also actually retarded the decomposition.
Chlorine gas is a strong oxidizer, which may react with flammable materials.
More than 2000 naturally occurring organic chlorine compounds are known.
This was not simply modern calcium chloride, but chlorine gas dissolved in lime-water (dilute calcium hydroxide) to form calcium hypochlorite (chlorinated lime).
The attacks killed two people from the explosives, and sickened more than 350.
:Anode: 2 Cl−(aq) → Cl2(g) + 2 e−
He named this new element "chlorine", from the Greek word χλωρος (''chlōros''), meaning green-yellow.
Chlorine often imparts desired properties to an organic compound, in part owing to the relative stability of the C-Cl bond.
Other types of chlorine compounds are rare in living organisms, and artificially produced chlorinated organics range from inert to toxic.
Long before the germ theory of disease, Semmelweis theorized that "cadaveric particles" were transmitting decay from fresh medical cadavers to living patients, and he used the well-known "Labarraque's solutions" as the only known method to remove the smell of decay and tissue decomposition (which he found that soap did not).
The boiling point at standard pressure is around −34 ˚C, but it liquefies at room temperature at 740 kPa (107 psi).
Elemental chlorine at high concentrations is extremely dangerous and poisonous for all living organisms, and was used in World War I as the first gaseous chemical warfare agent.
When chlorine is inhaled at concentrations greater than 30&nbsp;ppm, it reacts with water and cellular fluid, producing hydrochloric acid (HCl) and hypochlorous acid (HClO).
Compounds with oxygen, nitrogen, xenon, and krypton are known, but are not formed by direct reaction of the elements.
In hot concentrated alkali solution, hypochlorite disproportionates:
This compound in liquid or solid form disproportionates to a mixture of +5 and +7 oxidation states, occurring as the ionic compound chloryl perchlorate, .
Higher concentrations of chloride are found in the Dead Sea and in underground brine deposits and evaporites.
36Cl decays to 36S and to 36Ar, with a combined half-life of 308,000 years.
The chloroxy cation chloryl (ClO2+) is known and has the same structure as chlorite but with a positive charge and chlorine in the +5 oxidation state.
About 15,000 chlorine compounds are used commercially.
Chlorine is used extensively in polymers and in organic chemistry.
The anode reaction progression is:
The Chemical Weapons Convention, signed in 1993, prohibits the use of chlorine gas in war.
The melting point and density of these compounds is increased by substitution of chlorine in place of hydrogen.
In 1823, Michael Faraday liquefied chlorine for the first time, and demonstrated that what was then known as "solid chlorine" had a structure of chlorine hydrate (Cl2·H2O).
Compounds of chlorine with other halogens are colored, as are many chlorine oxides.
Because it is denser than air, it tends to accumulate at the bottom of poorly ventilated spaces.
The most significant of organic compounds in terms of production volume are 1,2-dichloroethane and vinyl chloride, intermediates in the production of PVC.
Chloride is a component of the salt deposited in the earth and dissolved in the oceans — about 1.9% of the mass of seawater is chloride ions.
Nearly all chlorine in the Earth's crust is in the form of ionic chloride compounds, which includes table salt.
Radioactive 36Cl exists in the environment in a ratio with stable isotopes of about 7x10−13 to 1.
Carl Wilhelm Scheele wrote a description of chlorine gas in 1774, supposing it to be an oxide of a new element.
Sodium chlorate and potassium chlorate can be crystallized from solutions formed by the above reactions.
Most of the deaths were caused by the force of the explosions rather than the effects of chlorine, since the toxic gas is readily dispersed and diluted in the atmosphere by the blast.
Chlorides of bromine and iodine are also known.
Several catastrophic collapses of swimming pool ceilings have occurred from chlorine induced stress corrosion cracking of stainless steel suspension rods.
Chloride is one of the most common anions in nature.
In 1810, Sir Humphry Davy tried the same experiment again, and concluded that it is an element, and not a compound.
Much later, during World War I in 1916, a standardized and diluted modification of Labarraque's solution containing hypochlorite (0.5%) and boric acid as an acidic stabilizer, was developed by Henry Drysdale Dakin (who gave full credit to Labarraque's prior work in this area).
Chlorine is presently an important chemical for water purification (such as in water treatment plants), in disinfectants, and in bleach.
At standard temperature and pressure, two chlorine atoms form the diatomic molecule Cl2, a yellow-green gas with a strong, distinctive odor, familiar to most people from common household bleach.
Some polymers are also sensitive to attack, including acetal resin and polybutene.
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) was invented in 1912, initially without a purpose.
Elemental chlorine is yellow-green, but the chloride ion, in common with other halide ions, has no color in either minerals or solutions (example, table salt).
Chlorine is used either in chlorine dioxide and sodium hypochlorite stages in elemental chlorine free (ECF) bleaching, or not at all (total chlorine free or TCF bleaching).
This term was later used as a generic term to describe all the elements in the chlorine family (fluorine, bromine, iodine), after a suggestion by Jöns Jakob Berzelius in 1842.
As with other halogens, chlorine atoms impart no color to organic chlorides when they replace hydrogen atoms organic compounds, such as tetrachloromethane.
The acid forms of these anions are hypochlorous acid (HOCl), chlorous acid (HClO2), chloric acid (HClO3) and perchloric acid (HClO4), respectively.
Many important industrial products are produced via organochlorine intermediates.
This was done in "gut factories" (''boyauderies''), and it was an odiferous and unhealthy process.
:Cathode: 2 H+(aq) + 2 e− → H2(g)
Chlorine gas reacts with most organic compounds, and sluggishly supports the combustion of hydrocarbons.
The Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons has run investigations into the use of chemical attacks in Syria.
Overall process: 2 NaCl (or KCl) + 2 H2O → Cl2 + H2 + 2 NaOH (or KOH)
In the subsurface environment, 36Cl is generated primarily as a result of neutron capture by 35Cl or muon capture by 40Ca.
The two stable isotopes are 35Cl (75.77%) and 37Cl (24.23%).
When added in small amounts to pool water or industrial water systems, the chlorine atoms hydrolyze from the rest of the molecule forming hypochlorous acid (HOCl), which acts as a general biocide, killing germs, micro-organisms, algae, and so on.
Labarraque's discovery helped to remove the terrible stench of decay from hospitals and dissecting rooms, and by doing so, effectively deodorised the Latin Quarter of Paris.
One source claims chloride of lime was used by Dr. John Snow to disinfect water from the cholera-contaminated well that was feeding the Broad Street pump in 1854 London, though three other reputable sources that describe that famous cholera epidemic do not mention the incident.
Chlorine forms a variety of interhalogen compounds, such as the chlorine fluorides, chlorine monofluoride (), chlorine trifluoride (), chlorine pentafluoride ().
Chlorine is widely used for purifying water, especially potable water supplies and water used in swimming pools.
The organochlorine compound produced on the largest scale is polyvinyl chloride, 23 billion kilograms of which were produced in 2000.
The element is a yellow-green diatomic gas under standard conditions.
In the upper atmosphere, chlorine-containing organic molecules such as chlorofluorocarbons have been implicated in ozone depletion.
In some bombings, over a hundred civilians were hospitalized due to breathing difficulties.
In his 1828 work, Labarraque recommended that doctors breathe chlorine, wash their hands in chlorinated lime, and even sprinkle chlorinated lime about the patients' beds in cases of "contagious infection".
+ 2 OH− →  + H2O + 2 e−
Notable is the chlorination of alkenes and aromatic compounds with a Lewis acid catalyst.
Labarraque's chlorinated lime and soda solutions have been advocated since 1828 to prevent infection (called "contagious infection", presumed to be transmitted by "miasmas"), and to treat putrefaction of existing wounds, including septic wounds.
Hyperchlorite bleach (a popular laundry additive) combined with ammonia (another popular laundry additive) produces chloramines, another toxic group of chemicals.
The high oxidizing potential of elemental chlorine led to the development of commercial bleaches and disinfectants, and a reagent for many processes in the chemical industry.
The electrolysis of chloride solutions all proceed according to the following equations:
36Cl is produced in the atmosphere by spallation of 36Ar from collisions of cosmic ray protons.
Chlorine forms a variety of oxides: chlorine dioxide (ClO2), dichlorine monoxide (Cl2O), dichlorine hexoxide (Cl2O6), and dichlorine heptoxide (Cl2O7).
As a disinfectant in water, chlorine is more than three times as effective against ''Escherichia coli'' as bromine, and more than six times as effective as iodine.
When applied to organic substrates, reaction is often—but not invariably—non-regioselective, and, hence, may result in a mixture of isomeric products.
The same chemicals were found to be useful in the routine disinfection and deodorization of latrines, sewers, markets, abattoirs, anatomical theatres, and morgues.
For this reason, chlorine is a strong oxidizing agent.
As a common disinfectant, elemental chlorine and chlorine-generating compounds are used more directly in swimming pools to keep them clean and sanitary.
The remaining 19% of chlorine produced is used for bleaches and disinfection products.
Chlorine oxidizes bromide and iodide salts to bromine and iodine, respectively, but cannot oxidize fluoride salts to fluorine.
Chlorine has a wide range of isotopes.
Modern bleaches resulted from further work by Berthollet, who first produced sodium hypochlorite in 1789 in his laboratory in the town of Javel (now part of Paris, France), by passing chlorine gas through a solution of sodium carbonate.
It is often difficult to control the degree of substitution as well, so multiple substitutions are common.
By 1918, the US Department of Treasury called for all drinking water to be disinfected with chlorine.
Quantitatively, of all elemental chlorine produced, about 63% is used in the manufacture of organic compounds, and 18% in the manufacture of inorganic chlorine compounds.
This is known as the chloralkali process, first introduced on an industrial scale in 1892, and now the source of most elemental chlorine and sodium hydroxide.
The salt solution (brine) is continuously fed to the anode compartment and flows through the diaphragm to the cathode compartment, where the caustic alkali is produced and the brine is partially depleted.
;Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant
The IDLH (immediately dangerous to life and health) concentration is 10 ppm.
Elemental chlorine was first prepared and studied in 1774 by Swedish chemist Carl Wilhelm Scheele, and he is credited with the discovery.
Together they give chlorine a relative atomic mass of 35.4527&nbsp;g/mol.
On October 24, 2014, it was reported that the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant had used chlorine gas in the town of Duluiyah, Iraq.
The process proceeds according to the following chemical equation:
This practice---sometimes overseen personally by Fritz Haber, a man whose positive contributions to humanity are listed under nitrogen (7)—was slowly phased out as experience showed that roughly equal numbers of soldiers on both sides died regardless of who set off the gas."
In the United States, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has set the permissible exposure limit for elemental chlorine at 1 ppm, or 3&nbsp;mg/m3.
This method, the chloralkali process industrialized in 1892, now provides most industrial chlorine gas.
Saturated sodium (or potassium) chloride solution is passed through the anode compartment, leaving at a lower concentration.
Chlorine in the universe is created and distributed through the interstellar medium from nucleosynthesis in supernovae, via the r-process.
Other materials present in the water may generate disinfection by-products that are associated with negative effects on human health.
In the home, accidents occur when hypochlorite bleach solutions come into contact with certain acidic drain-cleaners.
Chlorine gas, also known as '''bertholite''', was first used as a weapon in World War I by Germany on April 22, 1915 in the Second Battle of Ypres.
Near the end of the nineteenth century, E. S. Smith patented a method of sodium hypochlorite production involving electrolysis of brine to produce sodium hydroxide and chlorine gas, which then mixed to form sodium hypochlorite.
Commercial processes, such as the Mitsui MT-Chlorine Process, have switched to chromium and ruthenium-based catalysts.
:4 HCl + MnO2 → MnCl2 + 2 H2O + Cl2
The compound "chlorine trioxide" does not occur, but is found in gas form as the dimeric dichlorine hexoxide (Cl2O6) with a +6 oxidation state.
The picture on the right shows a fractured acetal joint in a water supply system.
Industrial examples of this are the production of methyl chloride, methylene chloride, chloroform, and carbon tetrachloride from methane, allyl chloride from propylene, and trichloroethylene, and tetrachloroethylene from 1,2-dichloroethane.
They were successful in hospitals, lazarets, prisons, infirmaries (both on land and at sea), magnaneries, stables, cattle-sheds, etc.
Chloride of lime was used for destroying odors and "putrid matter".
The reaction requires a catalyst.
The cracks started at injection molding defects in the joint and slowly grew until the part failed.
Common chemical theory at that time held that an acid is a compound that contains oxygen (still sounding in the German and Dutch names of oxygen: ''sauerstoff'' or ''zuurstof'', both translating into English as ''acid substance''), so a number of chemists, including Claude Berthollet, suggested that Scheele's ''dephlogisticated muriatic acid air'' must be a combination of oxygen and the yet undiscovered element, ''muriaticum''.
Soldiers would position a line of gas cylinders at the front lines, wait for the wind to shift towards the enemy, then open the valves and run like hell.
The half-life of this isotope makes it suitable for geologic dating in the range of 60,000 to 1&nbsp;million years.
Chlorine is a toxic gas that attacks the respiratory system, eyes, and skin.
Perhaps the most famous application of Labarraque's chlorine and chemical base solutions was in 1847, when Ignaz Semmelweis used chlorine-water (chlorine dissolved in pure water, which was cheaper chlorinated lime solutions) to disinfect the hands of Austrian doctors, which Semmelweis noticed still carried the stench of decomposition from the dissection rooms to the patient examination rooms.
Theodore Gray wrote in his book ''The Elements: A Visual Exploration of Every Atom in the Universe,'' "Chlorine was used as a poison gas during the grueling trench-warfare phase.
The drawback of using chlorine in swimming pools is that the chlorine reacts with the proteins in human hair and skin (see Hypochlorous acid), and becomes chemically bonded.
:2 H2O + 2 e− → 2 OH− + H2 (−0.83 volts)
Chlorine gas was also used during the Iraq War in Anbar Province in 2007, with insurgents packing truck bombs with mortar shells and chlorine tanks.
In diaphragm cell electrolysis, an asbestos (or polymer-fiber) diaphragm separates a cathode and an anode, preventing the chlorine forming at the anode from re-mixing with the sodium hydroxide and the hydrogen formed at the cathode.
Elemental chlorine has since served a continuous function in topical antisepsis (wound irrigation solutions and the like) and public sanitation, particularly in swimming and drinking water.
Other particularly important organochlorines are methyl chloride, methylene chloride, chloroform, vinylidene chloride, trichloroethylene, perchloroethylene, allyl chloride, epichlorohydrin, chlorobenzene, dichlorobenzenes, and trichlorobenzenes.
If the different reaction products are easily separated (by distillation or the like), substitutive free-radical chlorination (in some cases accompanied by concurrent thermal dehydrochlorination) may be a useful synthetic route.
The anionic derivatives of these same oxides are also well known and include hypochlorite (ClO−), chlorite (), chlorate (), and perchlorate ().
Hydrogen chloride and its aqueous solution, hydrochloric acid, are commercially produced by the megaton annually as valued intermediates and as undesirable pollutants.
In the Earth's crust, chlorine is present at average concentrations of about 126 parts per million, predominantly in such minerals as ''halite'' (sodium chloride), ''sylvite'' (potassium chloride), and ''carnallite'' (potassium magnesium chloride hexahydrate).
Called Dakin's solution, the method of wound irrigation with chlorinated solutions allowed antiseptic treatment of a wide variety of open wounds, long before the modern antibiotic era.
In the past, pulp bleaching was often done with elemental chlorine, producing organochlorine pollution; today, that process is prohibited by environmental laws.
