Since the 2000s, Western Africa produces almost two-thirds of the world's cocoa, with Ivory Coast growing almost half of that.
The Maya grew cacao trees in their backyards, and used the cacao seeds the trees produced to make a frothy, bitter drink.
For example, one vessel found at an Olmec archaeological site on the Gulf Coast of Veracruz, Mexico, dates chocolate's preparation by pre-Olmec peoples as early as 1750 BCE.
The 2005 film was very well received by critics and was one of the highest-grossing films that year, earning over US$470,000,000 worldwide.
The beans with their surrounding pulp are removed from the pods and placed in piles or bins, allowing access to micro-organisms so fermentation of the pectin-containing material can begin.
One solution for fair labor practices is for farmers to become part of an Agricultural cooperative.
The Nahuatl term, ''chicolatl'', meaning "beaten drink", may derive from the word for the frothing stick, ''chicoli''.
European rules specify a minimum of 35% cocoa solids.
The primary purpose of tempering is to assure that only the best form is present.
Chocolate is associated with festivals such as Easter, when moulded chocolate rabbits and eggs are traditionally given in Christian communities, and Hanukkah, when chocolate coins are given in Jewish communities.
Chocolate makers use harvested cacao beans and other ingredients to produce couverture chocolate (covering).
Chocolate has been the center of several successful book and film adaptations.
The novel centers on a poor boy named Charlie Bucket who takes a tour through the greatest chocolate factory in the world, owned by Willy Wonka.
Chocolate is generally stored away from other foods, as it can absorb different aromas.
The fermentation process, which takes up to seven days, also produces several flavor precursors, eventually resulting in the familiar chocolate taste.
Bittersweet chocolate is chocolate liquor to which some sugar (typically a third), more cocoa butter, vanilla, and sometimes lecithin have been added.
In June 2007, as a response to consumer concern after the proposed change, the FDA reiterated "Cacao fat, as one of the signature characteristics of the product, will remain a principal component of standardized chocolate."
The residues and the kind of vessel in which they were found indicate the initial use of cacao was not simply as a beverage, but the white pulp around the cacao beans was likely used as a source of fermentable sugars for an alcoholic drink.
Those who lived in areas ruled by the Aztecs were required to offer cacao seeds in payment of the tax they deemed "tribute".
The beans are cleaned (removing twigs, stones, and other debris), roasted, and graded.
The refined and blended chocolate mass is kept in a liquid state by frictional heat.
However, reports from 2014 indicate that "chocolate might be a significant source" of lead ingestion for children if consumption is high and "one 10 g cube of dark chocolate may contain as much as 20% of the daily lead oral limit."
The finest, plain dark chocolate couvertures contain at least 70% cocoa (both solids and butter), whereas milk chocolate usually contains up to 50%.
The temperature in which the crystals obtain enough energy to break apart from their rigid conformation would depend on the milk fat content in the chocolate and the shape of the fat molecules, as well as the form of the cocoa butter fat.
Some manufacturers provide the percentage of chocolate in a finished chocolate confection as a label quoting percentage of "cocoa" or "cacao".
The term "chocolatier", for a chocolate confection maker, is attested from 1888.
Early forms of another genotype have also been found in what is now Venezuela.
Until the 16th century, no European had ever heard of the popular drink from the Central and South American peoples.
High-quality chocolate is conched for about 72&nbsp;hours, and lesser grades about four to six hours.
'''Chocolate'''  is a typically sweet, usually brown, food preparation of ''Theobroma cacao'' seeds, roasted and ground, often flavored, as with vanilla.
The U.S. companies, such as Mars and Hershey's alone, generate $13 billion a year in chocolate sales and account for two-thirds of U.S. production.
Criollos are particularly difficult to grow, as they are vulnerable to a variety of environmental threats and produce low yields of cocoa per tree.
Moving chocolate from one temperature extreme to another, such as from a refrigerator on a hot day, can result in an oily texture.
The term "chocolate chip" was first used in 1940.
It is unadulterated chocolate: the pure, ground, roasted chocolate beans impart a strong, deep chocolate flavor.
Chocolate is very sensitive to temperature and humidity.
A 100 gram serving of milk chocolate supplies 540 calories.
Next, the shell of each bean is removed to extract the nib.
A few years thereafter, in 1828, he created a press to remove about half the natural fat (cocoa butter or cacao butter) from chocolate liquor, which made chocolate both cheaper to produce and more consistent in quality.
"White chocolate" contains cocoa butter, sugar, and milk, but no cocoa solids.
The sequencing in 2010 of the genome of the cacao tree may allow yields to be improved.
How the word came into Spanish is less certain, and there are competing explanations.
The liquor can be further processed into two components: cocoa solids and cocoa butter.
One of the main tenets of fair trade is that farmers receive a fair price, but this does not mean that the larger amount of money paid for fair trade cocoa goes directly to the farmers.
Two film adaptations of the novel were produced.
Traditionally, Africa and other developing countries received low prices for their exported commodities such as cocoa, which caused poverty to abound.
Cocoa beans were often used as currency.
The flavor of criollo is described as delicate yet complex, low in classic chocolate flavor, but rich in "secondary" notes of long duration.
Glossy, firm, best snap, melts near body temperature (37&nbsp;°C)
The length of the conching process determines the final smoothness and quality of the chocolate.
This provides the best appearance and texture and creates the most stable crystals, so the texture and appearance will not degrade over time.
Major chocolate producers, such as  Nestlé, buy cocoa at commodities exchanges where Ivorian cocoa is mixed with other cocoa.
Two classic ways of manually tempering chocolate are:
Thirty percent of children under age 15 in sub-Saharan Africa are child laborers, mostly in agricultural activities including cocoa farming.
Soft, crumbly, melts too easily
Cacao plantations spread, as the English, Dutch, and French colonized and planted.
In 1964, Roald Dahl published a children's novel titled ''Charlie and the Chocolate Factory''.
Firm, poor snap, melts too easily
Generally, the chocolate is first heated to  to melt all six forms of crystals.
New processes that sped the production of chocolate emerged early in the Industrial Revolution.
The film earned 11 Ariel Awards from the Academia Mexicana de Artes y Ciencias Cinematográficas, including Best Picture.
The new craze for chocolate brought with it a thriving slave market, as between the early 1600s and late 1800s, the laborious and slow processing of the cacao bean was manual.
After the process is complete, the chocolate mass is stored in tanks heated to about  until final processing.
By 1662, the bishop of Rome had declared that religious fasts were not broken by consuming chocolate drinks.
The high cost of chocolate in the Ivory Coast also means that it is inaccessible to the majority of the population, who are unaware of what it tastes like.
The chocolate is then heated to about  to eliminate any type IV crystals, leaving just type V. After this point, any excessive heating of the chocolate will destroy the temper and this process will have to be repeated.
Cacao has been cultivated by many cultures for at least three millennia in Mesoamerica.
Poorly tempered chocolate may have whitish spots on the dark chocolate part, called chocolate bloom; it is an indication that sugar and/or fat has separated due to poor storage.
Fair trade seeks to establish a system of direct trade from developing countries to counteract this unfair system.
Cacao trees cannot tolerate a temperature lower than .
An early Classic-period (460–480 AD) Mayan tomb from the site in Rio Azul had vessels with the Maya glyph for cacao on them with residue of a chocolate drink, suggests the Maya were drinking chocolate around 400&nbsp;AD.
Chocolate is also used in cold and hot beverages such as chocolate milk and hot chocolate and in some alcoholic drinks, such as creme de cacao.
On the Pacific coast of Chiapas, Mexico, a Mokaya archaeological site provides evidence of cacao beverages dating even earlier, to 1900 BCE.
''Charlie and the Chocolate Factory'' was also recognized at the 78th Academy Awards, where it was nominated for Best Costume Design for Gabriella Pesucci.
The fruit, called a cacao pod, is ovoid,  long and  wide, ripening yellow to orange, and weighing about  when ripe.
The seeds of the cacao tree have an intense bitter taste and must be fermented to develop the flavor.
Trinitario originated in Trinidad after an introduction of forastero to the local criollo crop.
During cultivation and production, chocolate may absorb lead from the environment, but the total amounts typically eaten are less than the tolerable daily limit for lead consumption, according to a World Health Organization report from 2010.
As a solid piece of chocolate, the cocoa butter fat particles are in a crystalline rigid structure that gives the chocolate its solid appearance.
Because the cocoa mass is usually liquefied before being molded with or without other ingredients, it is called chocolate liquor.
Chocolate Easter eggs or rabbits and Santa Claus figures are two examples.
In 1815, Dutch chemist Coenraad van Houten introduced alkaline salts to chocolate, which reduced its bitterness.
; Fry's, Trebor Basset and the fair trade brand Green & Black's also belongs to the group.
According to the World Cocoa Foundation, some 50&nbsp;million people around the world depend on cocoa as a source of livelihood.
The shell is removed to produce cacao nibs, which are then ground to cocoa mass, pure chocolate in rough form.
By the 15th century, the Aztecs gained control of a large part of Mesoamerica and adopted cacao into their culture.
In the EU a product can be sold as chocolate if it contains up to 5% vegetable oil, and must be labelled as 'family milk chocolate' rather than 'milk chocolate' if it contains 20% milk.
Chocolate is made from cocoa beans, the dried and partially fermented seeds of the cacao tree (''Theobroma cacao''), a small (4– to 8-m-tall (15– to 26-ft-tall) evergreen tree native to the deep tropical region of the Americas.
Food conglomerates Nestlé SA and Kraft Foods both have chocolate brands.
Firm, good snap, melts too easily
''Chocolat'', a 1999 novel by Joanne Harris, tells the story of Vianne Rocher, a young mother, whose confections change the lives of the townspeople.
White chocolate contains cocoa butter, sugar, and milk, but no cocoa solids.
The liquor also may be processed into two components: cocoa solids and cocoa butter.
Currently, the FDA does not allow a product to be referred to as "chocolate" if the product contains any of these ingredients.
Recent genetic studies suggest the most common genotype of the plant originated in the Amazon basin and was gradually transported by humans throughout South and Central America.
Soft, crumbly, melts too easily
The final process is called tempering.
Chocolate and cocoa contain moderate to high amounts of oxalate, which may increase risk for kidney stones.
Although cocoa originated in the Americas, recent years have seen African nations assuming a leading role in producing cocoa.
The source of most chocolate marketed, forastero cocoas are typically strong in classic "chocolate" flavor, but have a short duration and are unsupported by secondary flavors, producing "quite bland" chocolate.
Despite the expanding reach of the chocolate industry internationally, cocoa farmers and labourers in the Ivory Coast are unaware of the uses of the beans.
The most commonly grown bean is forastero, a large group of wild and cultivated cacaos, most likely native to the Amazon basin.
Cacao pods are harvested by cutting them from the tree using a machete, or by knocking them off the tree using a stick.
The word "chocolate" entered the English language from Spanish in about 1600.
Chocolate contains alkaloids such as theobromine and phenethylamine, which may have physiological effects in humans, but the presence of theobromine renders it toxic to some animals, such as dogs and cats.
The dried beans are then transported to a chocolate manufacturing facility.
* Working the molten chocolate on a heat-absorbing surface, such as a stone slab, until thickening indicates the presence of sufficient crystal "seeds"; the chocolate is then gently warmed to working temperature.
Making chocolate considered "good" is about forming as many type V crystals as possible.
It is typically used in baking or other products to which sugar and other ingredients are added.
Dark chocolate is produced by adding fat and sugar to the cacao mixture.
Christopher Columbus and his son Ferdinand encountered the cacao bean on Columbus's fourth mission to the Americas on 15 August 1502, when he and his crew seized a large native canoe that proved to contain cacao beans among other goods for trade.
Numerous types of candy and snacks contain chocolate, either as a filling (e.g., M&M's) or as a coating (e.g., chocolate-coated raisins or chocolate-coated peanuts).
Ideally, chocolates are packed or wrapped, and placed in proper storage with the correct humidity and temperature.
For example, the Aztecs used a system in which one turkey cost 100 cacao beans and one fresh avocado was worth three beans.
They naturally grow within 20° of either side of the equator because they need about 2000&nbsp;mm of rainfall a year, and temperatures in the range of .
A sample cup is filled with the chocolate and placed in the unit which then displays or prints the results.
Documents in Maya hieroglyphs stated chocolate was used for ceremonial purposes, in addition to everyday life.
They say they make diverse sorts of it, some hot, some cold, and some temperate, and put therein much of that "chili"; yea, they make paste thereof, the which they say is good for the stomach and against the catarrh.
Such confections can be solid, hollow, or filled with sweets or fondant.
Chocolate is used as a flavouring product in many desserts, such as chocolate cakes, chocolate brownies, chocolate mousse and chocolate chip cookies.
The widespread use of children in cocoa production is controversial, not only for the concerns about child labor and exploitation, but also because up to 12,000 of the 200,000 children working in Côte d'Ivoire, the world's biggest producer of cocoa, may be victims of trafficking or slavery.
In 1893, Milton S. Hershey purchased chocolate processing equipment at the World's Columbian Exposition in Chicago, and soon began the career of Hershey's chocolates with chocolate-coated caramels.
When the heat is removed, the cocoa butter crystals become rigid again and come closer together, allowing the chocolate to solidify.
According to the WCF's 2012 report, the Ivory Coast is the largest producer of cocoa in the world.
There, it quickly became a court favorite.
Many candies are filled with or coated with sweetened chocolate, and bars of solid chocolate and candy bars coated in chocolate are eaten as snacks.
Mars Incorporated, a large privately owned U.S. corporation, produces Mars Bar, Milky Way, M&M's, Twix, and Snickers.
This innovation introduced the modern era of chocolate.
Chocolate is an acceptable gift on other holidays and on occasions such as birthdays.
Chocolate has become one of the most popular food types and flavors in the world, and a vast number of foodstuffs involving chocolate have been created, particularly desserts including cakes, pudding, mousse, chocolate brownies, and chocolate chip cookies.
The fats in cocoa butter can crystallize in six different forms (polymorphous crystallization).
The word "chocolatl" does not occur in central Mexican colonial sources, making this an unlikely derivation.
Although visually unappealing, chocolate suffering from bloom is perfectly safe for consumption.
Chocolate is used as an ingredient in a huge variety of candy bars, which typically contain various confectionary ingredients (e.g., nougat, wafers, caramel, nuts, etc.)
Unsweetened baking chocolate (bitter chocolate) contains primarily cocoa solids and cocoa butter in varying proportions.
Manufacturers may add other fats, sugars, and milk as well, all of which increase the caloric content of chocolate.
Pure, unsweetened chocolate, often called "baking chocolate", contains primarily cocoa solids and cocoa butter in varying proportions.
Cooperatives pay farmers a fair price for their cocoa so farmers have enough money for food, clothes, and school fees.
Chocolate with a higher fat content will melt at a lower temperature.
The 2000 film adaptation, ''Chocolat'', also proved successful, grossing over US$150,000,000 worldwide, and receiving Academy Award and Golden Globe nominations for Best Picture, Best Actress, and Best Original Score.
Cocoa solids are a source of flavonoids and  alkaloids, such as theobromine, phenethylamine and caffeine.
Uncontrolled crystallization of cocoa butter typically results in crystals of varying size, some or all large enough to be clearly seen with the naked eye.
Different manufacturers develop their own "signature" blends based on the above formulas, but varying proportions of the different constituents are used.
It has less sugar and more liquor than semisweet chocolate, but the two are interchangeable in baking.
In 2007, the Chocolate Manufacturers Association in the United States, whose members include Hershey, Nestlé, and Archer Daniels Midland, lobbied the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to change the legal definition of chocolate to let them substitute partially hydrogenated vegetable oils for cocoa butter, in addition to using artificial sweeteners and milk substitutes.
In 2009, Salvation Army International Development (SAID) UK stated that 12,000 children have been trafficked on cocoa farms in the Ivory Coast of Africa, where half of the world's chocolate is made.
Unsweetened chocolate is pure chocolate liquor, also known as bitter or baking chocolate.
The effectiveness of fair trade has been questioned.
Some alcoholic liqueurs are flavoured with chocolate, such as chocolate liqueur and creme de cacao.
Big Chocolate is the grouping of major international chocolate companies in Europe and the U.S.
If refrigerated or frozen without containment, chocolate can absorb enough moisture to cause a whitish discoloration, the result of fat or sugar crystals rising to the surface.
The uniform sheen and crisp bite of properly processed chocolate are the result of consistently small cocoa butter crystals produced by the tempering process.
After fermentation, the beans are dried, cleaned, and roasted.
Chocolate is a popular flavour of ice cream and pudding, and chocolate sauce is a commonly added as a topping on ice cream sundaes.
The earliest evidence of use traces to the Mokaya (Mexico and Guatemala), with evidence of chocolate beverages dating back to 1900 BCE.
* Stirring solid chocolate into molten chocolate to "inoculate" the liquid chocolate with crystals (this method uses the already formed crystals of the solid chocolate to "seed" the molten chocolate).
Chocolatiers use the finished couverture to make chocolate candies (bars, truffles, etc.
Ideal storage temperatures are between , with a relative humidity of less than 50%.
A few studies have documented allergic reactions from chocolate in children.
The Aztecs were not able to grow cacao themselves, as their home in the Mexican highlands was unsuitable for it, so chocolate was a luxury imported into the empire.
The conching process produces cocoa and sugar particles smaller than the tongue can detect, hence the smooth feel in the mouth.
Yet it is a drink very much esteemed among the Indians, where with they feast noble men who pass through their country.
The two main jobs associated with creating chocolate candy are chocolate makers and chocolatiers.
Milk chocolate is sweet chocolate that also contains milk powder or condensed milk.
In 100 gram amounts, milk chocolate is an excellent source (> 19% of the Daily Value, DV) of riboflavin, vitamin B12 and the dietary minerals, manganese, phosphorus and zinc (table).
It is not toxic and can be safely consumed.
In a 2014 article, ''The Economist'' stated that workers on fair trade farms have a lower standard of living than on similar farms outside the fair trade system.
Hard, takes weeks to form
Another derivation comes from the Yucatec Mayan word ''chokol'' meaning hot, and the Nahuatl ''atl'' meaning water.
Raw chocolate is high in cocoa butter, a fat which is removed during chocolate refining, then added back in varying proportions during the manufacturing process.
Producers of high-quality, small-batch chocolate argue that mass production produces bad-quality chocolate.
In 2009, the Salvation Army International Development Department stated that child labor and the human trafficking and slavery of child laborers are used in African cocoa cultivation.
They are significantly hardier and of higher yield than criollo.
Spanish conquistador Hernán Cortés may have been the first European to encounter it, as the frothy drink was part of the after-dinner routine of Montezuma.
To accomplish this, the temperature is carefully manipulated during the crystallization.
Lindt is known for its truffle balls and gold foil-wrapped Easter bunnies.
It is estimated that more than 1.8 million children in West Africa are involved in growing cocoa.
Climate and weather permitting, this is done by spreading the beans out in the sun from five to seven days.
Fat bloom is caused by storage temperature fluctuating or exceeding , while sugar bloom is caused by temperature below  or excess humidity.
It is made in the form of a liquid, paste, or in a block, or used as a flavoring ingredient in other foods.
Some mass-produced chocolate contains much less cocoa (as low as 7% in many cases), and fats other than cocoa butter.
Besides Nestlé, a number of notable chocolate companies had their start in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
However, other methods of chocolate tempering are used.
Cadbury was manufacturing boxed chocolates in England by 1868.
Nearly all cacao produced over the past five decades is of the forastero or lower-grade trinitario varieties.
In the United States, some large chocolate manufacturers lobbied the federal government to permit confections containing cheaper hydrogenated vegetable oil in place of cocoa butter to be sold as "chocolate".
Roughly two-thirds of the entire world's cocoa is produced in West Africa, with 43% sourced from Ivory Coast, where child labor is a common practice to obtain the product.
Cocoa growers object to allowing the resulting food to be called "chocolate", due to the risk of lower demand for their crops.
In the U.K. and Ireland, milk chocolate must contain a minimum of 20% total dry cocoa solids; in the rest of the European Union, the minimum is 25%.
Loathsome to such as are not acquainted with it, having a scum or froth that is very unpleasant taste.
Semisweet chocolate is a dark chocolate with a low sugar content.
Approximately 65% of the fat in milk chocolate is saturated, composed mainly of palmitic acid and stearic acid, while the predominant unsaturated fat is oleic acid (table, see USDA reference for full report).
Chocolate hearts and chocolate in heart-shaped boxes are popular on Valentine's Day and are often presented along with flowers and a greeting card.
The penultimate process is called conching.
In the 2000s, some chocolate producers began to engage in fair trade initiatives, to address concerns about the marginalization of cocoa laborers in developing countries.
which are coated in chocolate.
To distinguish between different types of bloom, one can rub the surface of the chocolate lightly, and if the bloom disappears, it is fat bloom.
The plot incorporates magical realism with Mexican cuisine, and the title is a double entendre in its native language, referring both to a recipe for hot chocolate and to an idiom that is a metaphor for sexual arousal.
Heating the working areas of the table-mill, an innovation that emerged in France in 1732, also assisted in extraction.
Guylian is best known for its chocolate sea shells; Cadbury for its Dairy Milk and Creme Egg.
