On occasion the People's Congress can be venues of discussion on municipal issues, although this is dependent on the actions of individual delegates.
The fish is often served steamed or baked.
* The Black Mountain Valley (''Heishangu'').
The official abbreviation of the city, Yu (), was approved by the State Council on 18 April 1997.
In addition, more than 1,300 people moved into the city daily, adding almost 100 million yuan (US$15 million) to the local economy.
Specifically, the central urban area is located on a huge folding area (similar to the landscape of the Appalachian Mountains in the United States), and the Yuzhong District, Nan'an District, Shapingba District and Jiangbei District are located right on a big syncline.
They are both class 4C airports and serve passenger flights to some domestic destinations including Beijing, Shanghai and Kunming.
Chongqing's local government is hoping through the promotion of favorable economic policies for the electronics and information technology sectors, that it can create a 400 billion RMB high technology manufacturing hub which will surpass its car industry and account for 25% of its exports.
In addition, in parts of southeastern Chongqing, the Miao and Tujia languages are also used by some Miao and Tujia people.
* China National Highway 210
The only municipal-level TV network is Chongqing TV, claimed to be the 4th largest television station in China.
There are two other airports in Chongqing Municipality: '''Qianjiang Wulingshan Airport''' (IATA: JIQ, ICAO: ZUQJ) and '''Wanzhou Wuqiao Airport''' (IATA: WXN, ICAO: ZUWX).
The city has also invested heavily in infrastructure to attract investment.
On 8 February 2010, Chongqing became one of the five National Central/Core cities, the other four are Beijing, Shanghai, Guangzhou and Tianjin.
Coming from northwest and running through "the Jialing Lesser Three Gorges" of Libi, Wentang and Guanyin, the Jialing River joins the Yangtze in Chongqing.
These improvements will add  of road and railway to the existing transportation infrastructure and 93 new train stations will be added to the 111 stations that are already in place.
There are numerous luxury cruise ships that terminate at Chongqing, cruising downstream along the Yangtze River to Yichang, Wuhan, Nanjing or even Shanghai.
In the first decade of the 21st century, the city became notorious for organised crime and corruption.
With its special topographical features, Chongqing has the unique scenery of mountains, rivers, forests, springs, waterfalls, gorges, and caves.
* Major hot-springs around the city.
It is believed to be the place where Da Yu, the founder of Xia Dynasty, met his wife Tushan Shi.
They are owned by the Chongqing-based Lifan Group, which manufactures motorcycles, cars and spare parts.
The Ba people supposedly established Chongqing during the Spring and Autumn period after moving from their first capital Yicheng () in Hubei under pressure from Chu.
The mayor usually represents the city when foreign guests visit.
* China National Highway 212
Aside from the city's first two Yangtze River bridges, which were built, respectively, in 1960 and 1977, all of the other bridges were completed since 1995.
Of a total 10,470,000 households (2004), 1,360,000 consisted of one person, 2,940,000 two-person, 3,190,000 three-person, 1,790,000 four-person, 783,000 five-person, 270,000 six-person, 89,000 seven-person, 28,000 eight-person, 6,000 nine-person, and 10,000 households of 10 or more persons per household.
It is envisaged that Chongqing can become the global leading exporter of these products by air, signs of this potential rise being the addition of cargo routes to Frankfurt, Sydney, Chicago, and New York City.
In 1621 (Ming Dynasty), another short-lived kingdom of Daliang () was established by She Chongming () with Chongqing as its capital.
In other places, such as Jiangbei, large areas of homes and buildings have recently been cleared to improve the road network and create better urban planning.
Currently, only Yangtze River Tramway is still operating.
In order to create, this several steps must be followed very carefully.
Furthermore, the nearby Three Gorges Dam which is the world's largest, will not only supply Chongqing with power once completed but also allows oceangoing ships to reach Chongqing's Yangtze River port.
* Snowy Jade Cave, a cave in Fengdu County.
Historically there were three aerial tramways in Chongqing: the Yangtze River Tramway, the Jialing River Tramway and the South Mountain Tramway.
A new subway, '''Line 6''', is currently in trials and is expected to open later in 2012.
Chongqing TV broadcasts many local-oriented channels, and can be viewed on many TV sets throughout China.
* Chongqing-Suining Expressway
Chongqing's city centre has many restaurants and food stalls where meals often cost less than RMB10.
It is located in Yubei District.
They play at Datianwan Arena, in the same sporting complex as Datianwan Stadium.
* Chongqing-Dazhou-Xi'a Highway (Dazhou-Xi'an section under construction)
The People's Congress, like those of other provincial jurisdictions, is generally seen as a symbolic body.
Recently, there has been a drive to move up the value chain by shifting towards high technology and knowledge intensive industries resulting in new development zones such as the Chongqing New North Zone (CNNZ).
This is due to the extremely hilly and mountainous nature of Chongqing's roads and streets.
* The Baiheliang Underwater Museum, China's first underwater museum,
It is where Mao Zedong signed the "Double 10 (10 October) Peace Agreement" with the Kuomintang.
It is also known as "Little Chongqing".
As well as beef, pork, lotus and other vegetables, items such as pig's kidney, brain, duck's bowels and cow's stomach are often consumed.
Also according to this report, seven of the ten most air-polluted cities are in China, including Taiyuan, Beijing, Urumqi, Lanzhou, Chongqing, Jinan and Shijiazhuang.
The daily passenger volume is about 10,000.
Chiang Kai Shek as Supreme Commander in China worked closely with Stilwell.
* Fishing Town or Fishing City, also called the “Oriental Mecca” and “the Place That Broke God's Whip”, is one of the three great ancient battlefields of China.
Chongqing airport was the 10th busiest airport nationwide in 2010 measured by passenger traffic, handling 15,802,334 people.
This abbreviation is derived from the old name of a part of the Jialing River that runs through Chongqing and feeds into the Yangtze River.
The whole area slopes down from north and south towards the Yangtze River valley, with sharp rises and falls.
The elevation of E-ling Hill is 379 meters.
The General Joseph W. Stilwell Museum, dedicated to General "Vinegar Joe" Stilwell, a World War II general, the air force cemetery in the Nanshan area, in memory of those air force personnel killed during the Second Sino-Japanese War (1937–1945), and the Red Rock Village Museum, a diplomatic site for the Communist Party in Chongqing led by Zhou Enlai during World War II.
In the near-suburban Chongqing, however, there are several high mountains.
However, its overall economic performance is still lagging behind eastern coastal cities such as Shanghai.
The domestic terminal is capable of handling 30 million passengers while its international terminal is able to handle more than 1 million passengers annually.
The municipality also has a People's Congress, theoretically elected by lower level People's Congresses.
In 1644, after the fall of the Ming Dynasty to rebel army, Chongqing, together with the rest of Sichuan, was captured by Zhang Xianzhong, who was said to have massacred a large number of people in Sichuan and depopulated the province.
* Luohan Si, a Ming Dynasty temple,
Construction of many expressways have connected Chongqing to neighbouring provinces.
Chongqing was also a municipality of the Republic of China (ROC) administration, serving as its wartime capital during the Second Sino-Japanese War (1937–1945).
* Xueyu Cave in Fengdu County is the only example of a pure-white, jade-like karst cave in China,
They would quickly rise to top tier of the system and experience their greatest achievement in winning the 2000 Chinese FA Cup, and coming in fourth within the league.
This new capital was first named Jiangzhou ().
It received its current name in 1189, after Prince Zhao Dun of the Southern Song Dynasty described his crowning as king and then Emperor Guangzong as a "double celebration" (, or ''chongqing'' in short).
In 2009, city authorities under the auspices of municipal Communist Party secretary Bo Xilai undertook a large-scale crackdown, arresting 4,893 suspected gangsters, "outlaws" and corrupt cadres, leading to optimism that the period of gangsterism was over.
It is a major manufacturing centre and transportation hub; a July 2012 report by the Economist Intelligence Unit described it as one of China's "13 emerging megacities".
Chongqing has many historic war-time buildings or sites, some of which have since been destroyed.
Jiangbei airport is a hub for China Southern Airlines, Chongqing Airlines, Sichuan Airlines and Hainan Airlines's new China West Air.
Known as one of the "Three Furnaces" of the Yangtze River, along with Wuhan and Nanjing, its summers are long and among the hottest and most humid in China, with highs of  in July and August in the urban area.
The night scene of the city is very illuminated, with millions of lights and their reflection on the rivers.
Today, the monument serves as a symbol for the city.
* Chongqing-Guiyang Highway
The highest point in downtown is the top of E-ling Hill, which is a smaller syncline hill that keeps Yangtze River and Jialing River apart for some more kilometers.
During the Second Sino-Japanese War (1937–1945) also called World War II, it was Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek's provisional capital.
The municipality became the spearhead of China's effort to develop its western regions and to coordinate the resettlement of residents from the reservoir areas of the Three Gorges Dam project.
Chongqing's population  is just over 30 million with an urban population of 18.38 million.
It is located  north of the city-centre of Chongqing and serves as an important aviation hub for south-western China.
The pipeline itself, though not yet finished, will eventually run from Sittwe (in Myanmar's western coast) through Kunming in Yunnan province before reaching Chongqing and it will provide China with fuels sourced from Myanmar, the Middle East and Africa.
* Huangguan Escalator, the second longest escalator in Asia.
Chongqing FC was an association football club located in the city, and competed in China League One, the country's second-tier football division, before being relegated to the China League Two, and dissolving due to a resultant lack of funds.
* Chongqing-Chengdu Expressway
Two tributary ranges of Huaying Mountain (Zhongling Mountain and Tongluo Mountain) roughly forms the eastern and western boundaries of Central Chongqing.
In December 2009, one defence lawyer was controversially arrested and sentenced to 18 months in prison for "coaching his client to make false claims of torture" and in July 2010, another lawyer released videotapes of his client describing the torture in detail.
Each vice mayor is given jurisdiction over specific municipal departments.
The paste can also be hardened, cut into slivers and seasoned with sesame oil, garlic and chili oil.
It borders the following provinces: Hubei in the east, Hunan in the southeast, Guizhou in the south, Sichuan in the west and northwest, and Shaanxi to the north in its northeast corner.
Due to the bravery, contributions and sacrifices made by the local people during World War II, Chongqing became known as the City of Heroes.
The first, second and third phase of the airport came into operation in January 1990, December 2004, and December 2010 respectively.
These sites include the People's Liberation Monument, located in the center of Chongqing city.
* The Dazu Rock Carvings, in Dazu county, are a series of Chinese religious sculptures and carvings, dating back as far as the 7th century A.D., depicting and influenced by Buddhist, Confucian and Taoist beliefs.
Local specialties here include dumplings and pickled vegetables and, different from many other Chinese cuisines, Chongqing dishes are suitable for the solo diner as they are often served in small individual sized portions.
* Chongqing Science and Technology Museum has an IMAX theatre.
During the first half of year 2011, Chongqing airport handled 8.87 million passengers, and surpassed Hangzhou Xiaoshan International Airport (8.48 million) to become the 9th busiest airport in terms of passenger traffic in mainland China.
The name Yu however survives to this day as an abbreviation for Chongqing, and the city centre where the old town stood is also called Yuzhong (Central Yu).
Chongqing has been identified by the Economist Intelligence Unit in the November 2010 Access China White Paper as a member of the CHAMPS ('''C'''hongqing, '''H'''efei, '''A'''nshan, '''M'''aanshan, '''P'''ingdingshan and '''S'''henyang), an economic profile of the top 20 emerging cities in China.
Gangsters oversaw businesses involving billions of yuan and the corruption reached into the law-enforcement and justice systems.
The first bridge on Yangtze River is the Shibanpo Yangtze River Bridge (or Chongqing Yangtze River Bridge) built in 1977.
With many bridges on Yangtze River and Jialing River in urban area, Central Chongqing is sometimes called the Capital of Bridge of China.
This is one of the largest public assembly buildings in China which, though built in modern times, emulates traditional architectural styles.
Yangtze River meets its major tributary stream, Jialing River, in Central Chongqing.
, three metro lines, the  long CRT '''Line 1''', a conventional subway, and the  long heavy monorail CRT '''Line 2''' (through Phase II), '''Line 3''', a new heavy monorail connects the airport and the southern part of downtown, have already opened.
Typical karst landscape is common in this area, and stone forests, numerous collections of peaks, limestone caves and valleys can be found in many places.
An important industrial area in western China, Chongqing is also rapidly urbanising.
As of October 2014, the municipality had 31 bridges across the Yangtze River including over a dozen in the city's urban core.
Among the delicacies and local specialties are these dishes:
More precisely, the great majority of the municipality, save for Xiushan, speak Sichuanese, including the primary Chengdu-Chongqing dialect and Minjiang dialect spoken in Jiangjin and Qijiang.
The area is featured by mountain and hills, with large sloping areas at different heights.
The Chongqing Daily is the largest newspaper group, controlling more than 10 newspapers and one news website.
Originally named the ''Monument for the Victory over Axis Armies'', it is the only building in China for that purpose.
* Chongqing Amusement Park.
The municipal People's Government serves as the day-to-day administrative authority, and is headed by the mayor, who is assisted by numerous vice mayors and mayoral assistants.
Chongqing is one of the most important inland ports in China.
The airport offers a growing network of direct flights to China, South East Asia, the Middle East and Europe.
* The Great Hall of the People in Chongqing is based on the Great Hall of the People in Beijing.
It is noted for its resistance to the Mongol armies during the Southern Song Dynasty (1127–1279) and the location where the Mongol leader Möngke Khan died in 1259,
According to the National Environmental Analysis released by Tsinghua University and the Asian Development Bank in January 2013, Chongqing is among one of the ten most air-polluted cities in the world.
Leading makers of cars and motor bikes includes China's fourth biggest automaker; Changan Automotive Corp and Lifan Hongda Enterprise, as well as Ford Motor Company, with the US car giant having 3 plants in Chongqing.
Until 2014, within the range of Central Chongqing, there are 20 bridges on Yangtze River and 28 bridges on Jialing River.
Originally called ''Qianwei (Vanguard) Wuhan'', the club formed in 1995 to take part in the recently developed, fully professional Chinese football league system.
Chongqing also is a focus city of Air China, therefore it is very well connected with Star Alliance and Skyteam's international network.
However, since then they have struggled to replicate the same success, and have twice been relegated from the top tier.
By 2050, Chongqing was initially planning to have ten metro lines, totaling , with 270 stations, although more recent reports have now indicated as many as 18 lines are planned to be in operation.
On 18 June 2010, Liangjiang New Area was established in Chongqing, which is the third State-level new areas at the time of its establishment.
As the capital at that time, Chongqing had many residential and other buildings for these officials.
* Nanshan (Southern Mountain of Chongqing), or Tongluo Mountain academically.
Notable individuals who have held the municipal Party Secretary position include He Guoqiang, Wang Yang, Bo Xilai, Zhang Dejiang, and Sun Zhengcai, the latter three were Politburo members during their term as party chief.
The major airport of Chongqing is '''Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport''' (IATA: CKG, ICAO: ZUCK).
The airport was also the 11th busiest airport by cargo traffic and by traffic movements in China.
As exemplified by Youyang County below, conditions are often cooler in the southeast part of the municipality due to the higher elevations there.
However, local media later highlighted the apparent reliance by the authorities on torture to extract confessions upon which convictions were based.
The natural mountainous terrain that Chongqing is built on makes many road projects difficult to construct, including for example some of the world's highest road bridges.
* The large domed Three Gorges Museum presents the history, culture, and environment of the Three Gorges area and Chongqing.
The municipal Political Consultative Conference (''zhengxie'') meets at around the same time as the People's Congress.
Chongqing food is largely a hybrid of Sichuan cuisine and local specialty dishes.
Chongqing is headquarters of the 13th Group Army of the People's Liberation Army, one of the two group armies that formerly comprise the Chengdu Military Region, which in 2016 was re-organized into the Western Theater Command.
An additional 83,000 had registered in Chongqing, but not yet settled there.
Due to its mountainous environment, many people were saved from the bombing.
Chongqing is situated at the transitional area between the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau and the plain on the middle and lower reaches of the Yangtze River in the sub-tropical climate zone often swept by moist monsoons.
The Yangtze River runs through the whole area from west to east, covering a course of , cutting through the Wu Mountains at three places and forming the well-known Three Gorges: the Qutang, the Wuxia and the Xiling gorges.
Listed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site, the Dazu Rock Carvings are made up of 75 protected sites containing some 50,000 statues, with over 100,000 Chinese characters forming inscriptions and epigraphs.,
Tu), a part of Southern Mountain of Chongqing (Tongluo Mountain).
Of these, approximately 8.5 million people live in Chongqing city proper; Fuling District, Wanzhou District and Qianjiang District are in fact cities in their own right.
The network of roads and railways connecting Chongqing to the rest of China has been expanded and upgraded reducing logistical costs.
* Fengdu Ghost City in Fengdu County is the Gate of the Hell in traditional Chinese literature and culture.
Jiangzhou was subsequently renamed during the Southern and Northern Dynasties to Chu Prefecture (), then in 581 AD (Sui Dynasty) to Yu Prefecture (), and later in 1102 during Northern Song to Gong Prefecture ().
* '''Xiao mian''' (little noodle) - lamian noodles with chili oil and rich mixtures of spices and ingredients.
These infrastructure improvements have led to the arrivals of numerous foreign direct investors (FDI) in industries ranging from car to finance and retailing; such as Ford, Mazda, HSBC, Standard Chartered Bank, Citibank, Deutsche Bank, ANZ Bank, Scotiabank, Wal-Mart, Metro AG and Carrefour,  among other multinational corporations.
In the recent past, this provided virtually the only transportation option along the river.
The central urban area of Chongqing, or Chongqing proper, is a city of unique features.
* The Memorial of Great Tunnel Massacre, a former air-raid shelter where a major massacre occurred during World War II.
According to the 2010 census, Chongqing is the most populous Chinese municipality, and also the largest direct-controlled municipality in China, and comprises 21 districts, 13 counties, and 4 autonomous counties.
The city is located on a big syncline valley.
Central Chongqing is in the eastern edge of Sichuan Basin.
Chongqing Lifan is a professional Chinese football club who currently plays in the Chinese Super League.
* Chongqing-Wanzhou-Yichang Highway (Wanzhou-Yichang section under construction)
In terms of age distribution in 2004, of the 30.55 million total population, 6.4 million (20.88%) were age 0–14, 20.7 million (67.69%) were 15–64, and 3.5 million (11.46%) were 65 and over.
* Chongqing-Chengdu 2nd Expressway (under construction)
It often rains at night in late spring and early summer, and thus the city is famous for its "night rain in the Ba Mountains", as described by poems throughout Chinese history including the famous ''Written on a Rainy Night-A Letter to the North'' by Li Shangyin.
Coal, raw minerals and containerized goods provide the majority of traffic plying this section of the river.
Important manufacturers include Chongqing Iron and Steel Company and South West Aluminium which is Asia's largest aluminium plant.
The 2005 statistical yearbook also lists 15.22 million (49.82%) males and 15.33 million (50.18%) females.
* '''Quanshui Chicken''' (Spring Water Chicken) - Quanshui Chicken is cooked with the natural spring water in the Southern Mountain of Chongqing.
* The Chongqing Zoo, a zoo that exhibits many rare species including the giant panda, the extremely rare South China tiger, and the African elephant.
However, despite this, Chongqing is a large manufacturing centre for these types of vehicles.
Manganese is mined in the Xiushan area.
The party chief heads the municipal party standing committee, the ''de facto'' top governing council of the municipality.
The resulting single division became Chongqing Municipality, containing 30,020,000 people in forty-three former counties (without intermediate political levels).
There are tons of places of interests in this mountain, including the Laojun Temple, the Wenfeng Pagoda, the Great Golden Eagle, the Tu Shan Temple, the Huangge Path, the former residential halls of Chiang Kai-shek, etc.
In late November 1949 the Nationalist KMT government fled the city.
For instance, statistics suggest that new construction added approximately 137,000 square metres (1.5 million square feet) daily of usable floor space to satisfy demands for residential, commercial and factory space.
Under the Soviet-inspired nomenklatura system of appointments, individuals are appointed to the position by the central leadership of the Communist Party, and bestowed to an official based on seniority and adherence to party orthodoxy, usually given to an individual with prior regional experience elsewhere in China and nearly never a native of Chongqing.
Several port handling facilities exists throughout the city, including many impromptu river bank sites.
Among them, is a fish local to the region, Jiangtuan fish: Hypophthalmichthys nobilis although more commonly known as bighead carp.
The municipality is also one of the nine largest iron and steel centres in China and one of the three major aluminium producers.
The reports didn't give figures for other types of religion; 72.32% of the population may be either irreligious or involved in worship of nature deities, Buddhism, Confucianism, Taoism, folk religious sects, and minorities of Muslims.
Chongqing is known for its spicy food.
The standing committee is typically composed of 13 individuals which includes the party chiefs of important subdivisions and other leading figures in the local party and government organization, as well as one military representative.
On 14 March 1997, the Eighth National People's Congress decided to merge the Sub-provincial city with the neighbouring Fuling, Wanxian, and Qianjiang prefectures that it had governed on behalf of the province since September 1996.
Chongqing is the only Chinese city that keeps public aerial tramways.
Chongqing covers a large area crisscrossed by rivers and mountains.
* '''Jiangtuan fish''' - since Chongqing is located along Jialing River, visitors have a good opportunity to sample varieties of aquatic products.
It used to be the highest building in the area, but is now surrounded and dwarfed by numerous shopping centres.
The mayor is the second-highest-ranking official in the municipality.
Chongqing has been, since 1997, a direct-controlled municipality in the Chinese administrative structure, making it a provincial-level division with commensurate political importance.
In his honour, Yu Prefecture was therefore renamed Chongqing subprefecture marking the occasion of his enthronement.
This has seen many tunnels and large bridges needing to be built across the city.
The highest one is called Wugong Ling Mountain, with the altitude of 1709.4 meters.
The Japanese Air Force heavily bombed it.
Currently, Jiangbei airport has two terminals: Terminal 1 (old original terminal) serving international flights; Terminal 2, larger building split into Halls A and B serving domestic flights.
Chongqing itself is part of the West Triangle Economic Zone, along with Chengdu and Xi'an.
The Chongqing People's Broadcast Station is Chongqing's largest radio station.
As the provisional Capital of China for almost ten years (1937 to 1945), the city was also known as one of the three headquarters of the Allies during World War II, as well as being a strategic center of many other wars throughout China's history.
The language native to Chongqing is Southwestern Mandarin.
The lowest point in Central Chongqing is Chaotian Gate, where the two rivers merge with each other.
