Others believe that suffering will gradually be eliminated prior to his coming, and that the elimination of injustice is our part in preparing for that event.
Thus, the Council declared that in Christ there are two natures; each retaining its own properties, and together united in one subsistence and in one single person.
Saint Ambrose wrote of the Seven Gifts of the Holy Spirit poured out on a believer at baptism: 1.
The Christological debates following the Council of Nicaea sought to make sense of the interplay of the human and divine in the person of Christ while upholding the doctrine of the Trinity.
Regarding the temptation of performing a sign that would affirm his sonship by throwing himself from the pinnacle of the temple, MacLeod observes, "The sign was for himself: a temptation to seek reassurance, as if to say, ‘the real question is my own sonship.
Docetism (from the Greek verb ''to seem'') taught that Jesus was fully divine, and his human body was only illusory.
Therefore, are banished from heaven and suffer in hell for all eternity.
The unusual word ''theopneustos'' is rendered in some modern English translations as "God-breathed" (NIV) or "breathed out by God" (ESV) to avoid the word ''inspiration'' altogether, since its connotation, unlike its Latin root, leans toward breathing in instead of breathing out.
Note that the presence of the office of "bishop" within a church is not proof of episcopal polity.
Origen also taught the transmigration of the souls and their preexistence, but these views were officially rejected in 553 in the Fifth Ecumenical Council.
Purgatory is the condition or temporary punishment in which, it is believed, the souls of those who die in a state of grace are made ready for Heaven.
Some of these views could be described as Unitarianism (although that is a modern term) in their insistence on the oneness of God.
As a result of that act of Christ, all who put their trust in Christ alone now have unrestricted access to God through prayer and in presence.
This belief invests the efficacy of the ''ordinance'' in the obedience and participation of the believer and the witness of the presiding minister and the congregation.
The Nestorian Theodore of Mopsuestia went in the other direction, arguing that in Christ there were two natures (dyophysite) (human and divine) and two hypostases (in the sense of "essence" or "person") that co-existed.
That relationship can only be restored through acceptance of Jesus Christ and his death on the cross as a sacrifice for mankind's sin (see Salvation and Substitutionary atonement).
Total depravity does not mean, however, that people are as evil as possible.
Most Christians believe that Jesus’ resurrection brings reconciliation with God (II Corinthians 5:18), the destruction of death (I Corinthians 15:26), and forgiveness of sins for followers of Jesus Christ.
Parallel approaches can also be used in the interpretation of other prophetic passages.
Thus they are seen as defenses but not good theodicies.
The temptations Christ faced focused upon his person and identity as the incarnate Son of God.
They remained distinct (yet acted with one accord).
;What sort of amalgamation?
''Pneuma'' (πνεῦμα) is Greek for "breath", which metaphorically describes a non-material being or influence.
The following approaches are applied by interpreters specifically to the book of ''Revelation'', but ''Revelation'' occupies such a central place in Christian eschatology that it is worth mentioning them in this, more general, overview.
The apostle Peter, in what has become a famous proclamation of faith among Christians since the 1st century, said, "You are the Christ, the Son of the living God."
Rather, it means that even the good which a person may intend is faulty in its premise, false in its motive, and weak in its implementation; and there is no mere refinement of natural capacities that can correct this condition.
Spirit of Strength; 5.
The minister of the church (sometimes referred to as a ''teaching elder'') is a member of and presides over the session; lay representatives (''ruling elders'' or, informally, just elders) are elected by the congregation.
Augustine insisted that concupiscence was not ''a being'' but ''bad quality'', the privation of good or a wound.
Note that, in episcopal polity, a presbyter refers to a priest.
The Council further taught that each of these natures, the human and the divine, was distinct and complete.
The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the ''communion'' of the blood of Christ?
Cherubim are depicted as accompanying God's chariot-throne ( Ps.80:1).
Some Protestants agree with Augustine that people in these categories will be damned to Hell for original sin, while others believe that God will make an exception in these cases.
A similar belief in at least the possibility of a final salvation for all is held by Mormonism.
A notable monophysite theologian was Eutyches (c. 380–456).
This belief gradually developed into the modern formulation of the Trinity, which is the doctrine that God is a single entity (Yahweh), but that there is a trinity in God's single being, the meaning of which has always been debated.
Jesus, having become fully human in all respects, suffered the pains and temptations of a mortal man, yet he did not sin.
It is a principle of congregationalism that ministers do not govern congregations by themselves.
The Protestant Old Testament is synonymous with the "Hebrew Scriptures" included in the Jewish canon, but not the Catholic Old Testament, which contains additional texts.
For example, the author quotes Psalm 45:6 as addressed by the God of Israel to Jesus.
The "New Testament apocrypha" has a very different meaning.
What is the comparative emphasis and relationship between worship service, spiritual formation, and mission, and is the Church's role to create disciples of Christ or some other function?
In many monotheist religions, God is addressed as the father, in part because of his active interest in human affairs, in the way that a father would take an interest in his children who are dependent on him and as a father, he will respond to humanity, his children, acting in their best interests.
Some Christians reject the concept of the real presence, believing that the Eucharist is only a memorial of the death of Christ.
In many passages of the Bible it claims divine inspiration of itself.
Many Christians believe they receive the forgiveness of sins ( Acts 2:38), life ( Rom.
The invisible component (manifested inwardly) is understood to be brought about by the action of the Holy Spirit,  God's grace working in the sacrament's participants, while the visible (or outward) component entails the use of such things as water, oil, and bread and wine that is blessed or consecrated; the laying-on-of-hands; or a particularly significant covenant that is marked by a public benediction (such as with marriage or absolution of sin in the reconciliation of a penitent).
Heaven is the English name for a transcendental realm wherein human beings who have transcended human living live in an afterlife.
Christologies from above start with the Logos, the second Person of the Trinity, establish his eternality, his agency in creation, and his economic Sonship.
;Anthropological approaches
Various saints have had visions of heaven ().
Common ideas surrounding sin in various religions include:
Donald MacLeod gives several Christological implications of a virgin birth:
The matter boiled down to one iota; Arianism taught ''Homo'''i'''ousia''&nbsp;– the belief that Jesus's divinity is ''similar'' to that of God the Father&nbsp;– as opposed to ''Homoousia''&nbsp;– the belief that Jesus's divinity is the ''same'' as that of God the Father.
The spirit (Hebrew ''ruach'', Greek , ''pneuma'', which can also mean "breath") is likewise an immaterial component.
Atonement is a doctrine that describes how human beings can be reconciled to God.
Modern theologians generally describe Hell as the logical consequence of the soul using its free will to reject the will of God.
The cosmos was created by God by divine command, in the best-known and most complete account in the Bible, that of Genesis 1.
Eusebius of the early church worked out this threefold classification, which during the Reformation played a substantial role in scholastic Lutheran Christology and in John Calvin's and John Wesley's Christology.
The experience of the Holy Spirit is sometimes referred to as being anointed.
This mysterious "Trinity" has been described as hypostases in the Greek language (subsistences in Latin), and "persons" in English.
Some Protestants prefer to call it an ''ordinance'', viewing it not as a specific channel of divine grace but as an expression of faith and of obedience to Christ.
The most direct references to Jesus as God are found in various letters.
Bishops in this system may be subject to higher ranking bishops (variously called archbishops, metropolitans or patriarchs, depending upon the tradition; ''see also Bishop for further explanation of the varieties of bishops''.)
Other denominations and traditions, both in eastern and western Christianity may affirm only Baptism and Eucharist as sacraments, these include many of the Protestant denominations and some of the Old Believers in the Orthodox communion, some of whom reject all sacraments except Baptism.
Christians overwhelmingly assert that monotheism is central to the Christian faith, as the very Nicene Creed (among others) which gives the orthodox Christian definition of the Trinity does begin with: "I believe in one God".
;Communication of attributes
The Biblical accounts of Jesus' ministry include miracles, preaching, teaching, healing, Death, and resurrection.
Believers in the relevance of the supernatural gifts sometimes speak of a ''Baptism of the Holy Spirit'' or ''Filling of the Holy Spirit'' which the Christian needs to experience in order to receive those gifts.
In this time period, the Christological views of various groups within the broader Christian community led to accusations of heresy, and, infrequently, subsequent religious persecution.
Episcopal polity is used in several closely related senses.
His sacredness is reflected in the New Testament gospels which proclaim blasphemy against the Holy Spirit as unforgivable.
:;What sort of divinity?
In the New Testament, it is described as the place or state of punishment after death or last judgment for those who have rejected Jesus.
This is because a human conception and birth would seem to yield a fully human Jesus, with some other mechanism required to make Jesus divine as well.
The Old Testament canon entered into Christian use in the Septuagint, a Greek translation with a few books in Greek originally.
In the gospel of John, the account of the Last Supper has no mention of Jesus taking bread and wine and speaking of them as his body and blood; instead it recounts his humble act of washing the disciples' feet, the prophecy of the betrayal, which set in motion the events that would lead to the cross, and his long discourse in response to some questions posed by his followers, in which he went on to speak of the importance of the unity of the disciples with him and each other.
In particular, Jesus teaches in Luke 16:19–31 (Lazarus and Dives) that ''hades'' consists of two separate "sections", one for the righteous and one for the unrighteous.
In the Christian Bible, the ''Prophets'' constitute the last of the major divisions of the Old Testament, and include the books from Isaiah to Malachi.
While not neglecting the ''Paschal Mystery'', many Christians believe salvation is brought through the ''Incarnation'' itself, in which God took on human nature so that humans could partake in the divine nature (2 Peter 1.4).
This included Docetism, which said that Jesus was a divine being that took on human appearance but not flesh; Arianism, which held that Christ was a created being; and Nestorianism, which maintained that the Son of God and the man, Jesus, shared the same body but retained two separate natures.
Christian churches, denominations, and sects are divided regarding the number and operation of the sacraments.
Christians holding a view known as cessationism believe these gifts were given only in New Testament times.
As a starting point these options represent "diverse yet complementary" approaches; each poses its own difficulties.
Most commonly it refers to the field of church governance in the abstract, but it also can refer to the governance of a particular Christian body.
Scripture asserts that Jesus was conceived, by the Holy Spirit, and born of his virgin mother Mary without a human father.
Throughout much of the rest of the ancient history of Christianity, Christologies that denied Christ's divinity ceased to have a major impact on the life of the church.
The incarnation represents the belief that Jesus, who is the non-created second hypostasis of the triune God, took on a human body and nature and became both man and God.
"Wherefore, as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned" ().
Some emphasize, however, that the New Testament does repeatedly speak of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit to "compel a trinitarian understanding of God."
One was not converted into the other.
Jesus is called "Lord" over 230 times in Paul’s epistles alone, and is thus the principal confession of faith in the Pauline epistles.
See universal reconciliation, ''apocatastasis'' and the problem of Hell.
Also, episcopal polity is not usually a simple chain of command.
Even religion and philanthropy are wicked to God to the extent that these originate from a human imagination, passion, and will and are not done to the glory of God.
The Reformed churches, following the teachings of John Calvin, believe in a spiritual (or "pneumatic") real presence of Christ by the power of the Holy Spirit and received by faith.
all things were created through him and for him.
"Secondly, he was free from inherent sin ("original sin" or "ancestral sin")."
Christians have traditionally believed that the body will be resurrected at the end of the age.
As an example, some authors see arguments including demons or the fall of man as not logically impossible but not very plausible considering our knowledge about the world.
In contrast, Pelagius argued that humans enter life as essentially ''tabulae rasae''.
Christ was not half-God and half-human.
;How can he be both?
As such, Christology is generally less concerned with the details of Jesus' life (what he did) or teaching than with who or what he is.
* The question of whether an act must be intentional to be sinful.
The word is variously translated as ''Comforter, Counselor, Teacher, Advocate,'' guiding people in the way of the truth.
It is generally agreed that both sheol and hades do not typically refer to the place of eternal punishment, but to the underworld or temporary abode of the dead.
Hell is generally defined as the eternal fate of unrepentant sinners after this life.
The Achilles' heel of this approach is the loss of eschatological tension between this present age and the future divine rule that is yet to come.
Christ is the English term for the Greek  (''Khristós'') meaning "the anointed one".
Christian anthropology is the study of humanity, especially as it relates to the divine.
Legislation in the general convention requires the separate consent of the bishops and of the deputies.
In Christian theology pneumatology refers to the study of the Holy Spirit.
The Orthodox concept of life in heaven is described in one of the prayers for the dead: "...a place of light, a place of green pasture, a place of repose, whence all sickness, sorrow and sighing are fled away."
It came into use, although infrequently, later on from later encounters with the West and its Sacramental Theology.
The former, on the other hand, speaks of the Incarnation as a fulfilment of the Love of God, of his desire to be present and living amidst humanity, to "walk in the garden" with us.
The holy three are separate, yet the Son and the Holy Spirit are still seen as originating from God the Father.
Roman Catholicism uses the phrase special creation to refer to the doctrine of immediate or special creation of each human soul.
Judaism also believes in the possibility of after-death purification and may even use the word "purgatory" to present its understanding of the meaning of Gehenna.
This word never means an immortal soul or an incorporeal part of the human being that can survive death of the body as the spirit of dead.
Eventually, the Christian Church accepted the teaching of St. Athanasius and his allies, that Christ was the incarnation of the eternal second person of the Trinity, who was fully God and fully a man simultaneously.
In Russian variant of Eastern Christianity, sin sometimes is regarded as any mistake made by people in their life.
Nontrinitarians typically hold that God, the Father, is supreme; that Jesus, although still divine Lord and Savior, is the Son of God; and that the Holy Spirit is a phenomenon akin to God's will on Earth.
Therefore, evils and imperfections persist because the world is fallen.
The Holy Spirit dwells inside every Christian, each one's body being his temple.
Trinitarianism, belief in the Trinity, is a mark of Catholicism, Eastern and Oriental Orthodoxy as well as other prominent Christian sects arising from the Protestant Reformation, such as Anglicanism, Methodism, Lutheranism, Baptist, and Presbyterianism.
In the same way also the cup, after supper, saying, 'This cup is the new covenant in my blood.
The Old Testament speaks of a place called ''sheol'' where the spirits of the dead reside.
Jesus' unity with God is established by the Incarnation as the divine Logos assumes a human nature.
Members may be sent from the congregation to associations that are sometimes identified with the church bodies formed by Lutherans, Presbyterians, Anglicans, and other non-congregational Protestants.
Sacraments are generally held to have been instituted by Jesus Christ, although in some cases this point is debated.
Over the years a system of episcopal polity developed.
A non-virgin birth would seem to require some form of adoptionism.
To the ancients, personhood "was in some sense individual, but always in community as well."
Inherent immortality of the soul was accepted among western and eastern theologians throughout the middle ages, and after the Reformation, as evidenced by the Westminster Confession.
These councils declared that Jesus was both fully God: begotten from, but not created by the Father; and fully man: taking his flesh and human nature from the Virgin Mary.
Augustine of Hippo taught that original sin was both an act of foolishness (''insipientia'') and of pride and disobedience to the God of Adam and Eve.
They are frequently known by the Greek word for gift, ''Charisma'', from which the term charismatic derives.
The doctrine developed from the biblical language used in New Testament passages such as the baptismal formula in  and by the end of the 4th century it was widely held in its present form.
Most Christian churches teach the Trinity, as opposed to Unitarian monotheistic beliefs.
In Athenagoras of Athens (c. 133–190) writings we find a very developed trinitarian doctrine.
In Christian theology the atonement refers to the forgiving or pardoning of one's sin through the death of  Jesus Christ by crucifixion, which made possible the reconciliation between God and creation.
1:4) is received as a gift of God that cannot be merited by works done prior to one's conversion to Christianity ( Eph.
So in Roman Catholicism the church is viewed as a single polity headed by the pope, but in Eastern Orthodoxy the various churches retain formal autonomy but are held to be unified by shared doctrine and conciliarity—that is, the authority of councils, such as ecumenical councils, Holy Synods and the former standing council, the Endemusa Synod.
The Incarnation is the belief in Christianity that the second person in the Christian Godhead, also known as God the Son or the Logos (Word), "became flesh" when he was miraculously conceived in the womb of the Virgin Mary.
Another group, known as the Ebionites, taught that Jesus was not God, but the human Moshiach (messiah, anointed) prophet promised in the Hebrew Bible.
The incarnation is a fundamental theological teaching of orthodox (Nicene) Christianity, based on its understanding of the New Testament.
and , ''-logia'') is the study of the theological understanding of the Christian church, including the institutional structure, sacraments and practices (especially the worship of God) thereof.
Christian soteriology traditionally focuses on how God ends the separation people have from him due to sin by reconciling them with himself.
In a fuller sense, to come to salvation is to be reconciled to God through Christ and to be united with His divine Essence via Theosis in the beatific vision of the Godhead.
The gospels state that the disciples believed they witnessed Jesus’ resurrected body and that led to the beginning of the faith.
Heaven is the Realm of the Blessed Trinity, the angels and the saints.
Christianity considers the Bible as divinely or supernaturally revealed or inspired.
Spirit of Wisdom; 2.
*'''Cause of his birth'''.
Or is the Church's authority instead dependent on and derivative of a ''separate and prior divine revelation external to the organization'', with individual institutions being "the Church" only to the extent that they teach this message?
So, in Christian theology, Jesus was always God the Son, though not revealed as such until he also became the Son of God through incarnation.
For example, the Seventh-day Adventist Church teaches that the intermediate state is an unconscious sleep; this teaching is informally known as "soul sleep".
Both Catholics and Protestants have the same 27-book New Testament Canon.
Within mainstream (Trinitarian) Christian beliefs he is the third person of the Trinity.
The Christian theology of the Holy Spirit was the last piece of Trinitarian theology to be fully developed.
Therefore a sacrament is a religious symbol or often a rite which conveys divine grace, blessing, or sanctity upon the believer who participates in it, or a tangible symbol which represents an intangible reality.
(* JPII, also see eschatology, afterlife)
Must there be a policy-making board of "leaders" within a church and what are the qualifications for this position, and by what process do these members become official, ordained "leaders"?
A notable exception to this is the 'sola fide' belief of many mainstream Protestants, which teaches that one does not have to live a perfectly "good life," but that one must accept Jesus Christ as one's saviour, and then Jesus Christ will assume the guilt of one's sins; believers are believed to be forgiven regardless of any good or bad "works" one has participated in.
The doctrine of original sin was first developed in 2nd-century Bishop of Lyon Irenaeus's struggle against Gnosticism.
That is, what is the role of corporate worship in the spiritual lives of believers?
These two concepts are generally combined in the doctrine of the double judgement where the soul is judged once at death and goes to a temporary heaven, while awaiting a second and final physical judgement at the end of the world.
Is the organizational structure itself, either in a single corporate body, or generally within the range of formal church structures, an ''independent vehicle'' of revelation or of God's grace?
The language used was that the one God exists in three persons (Father, Son, and Holy Spirit); in particular it was affirmed that the Son was ''homoousios'' (of one substance) with the Father.
Certain biblical texts have led some theologians to the conclusion that punishment in Hell, though eternal and irrevocable, will be proportional to the deeds of each soul (e.g.
The Orthodox Churches (Eastern and Oriental) typically do not limit the number of sacraments, viewing all encounters with reality in life as sacramental in some sense, and their acknowledgement of the number of sacraments at seven as an innovation of convenience not found in the Church Fathers.
The doctrine of original sin, as articulated by  Augustine of Hippo's interpretation of Paul of Tarsus, provides that the fall caused a fundamental change in human nature, so that all descendants of Adam are born in sin, and can only be redeemed by divine grace.
The doctrine states that God is the Triune God, existing as three ''persons'', or in the Greek ''hypostases'', but one being.
William Barclay: states, "The supreme problem of the virgin birth is that it does quite undeniably differentiate Jesus from all men; it does leave us with an incomplete incarnation."
Teachings about Jesus and testimonies about what he accomplished during his three-year public ministry are found throughout the New Testament.
The lowest level council governs a single local church and is called the ''session'' or ''consistory''; its members are called ''elders''.
The true nature of an infinite God, however, is commonly described as beyond definition, and the word 'person' is an imperfect expression of the idea.
The best-known fallen angel is Lucifer.
Christians believe that the Holy Spirit leads people to faith in Jesus and gives them the ability to live a Christian lifestyle.
The Chalcedonian "in two natures" formula was seen as derived from and akin to a Nestorian Christology.
Some forms of Christianity believe Hell to be the termination of the soul.
Some answer that because of sin, the world has fallen from the grace of God, and is not perfect.
''See'' Christology.
;Intermediate state
The Christian doctrine of Hell derives from the teaching of the New Testament, where Hell is typically described using the Greek words ''Gehenna'' or ''Tartarus''.
Within mainstream (Trinitarian) Christianity the Holy Spirit is one of the three ''persons'' of the Trinity who make up the single substance of God.
The resurrection is perhaps the most controversial aspect of the life of Jesus Christ.
Most scholars date it to the early 2nd&nbsp;century, and distinguish in it two separate Eucharistic traditions, the earlier tradition in chapter 10 and the later one preceding it in chapter 9.
Jesus clarified the law by defining its foundation: "Jesus replied: 'Love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind.'
8:11), and salvation ( 1 Thess.
The King James Version has
A non-virgin birth would seem to support the full humanity of Jesus.
It has damaged, and completely severed, the relationship of humanity to God.
Personhood in the Trinity does not match the common Western understanding of "person" as used in the English language—it does not imply an "individual, self-actualized center of free will and conscious activity."
These views, which directly affected how one understood the Godhead, were declared heresies by the Council of Nicaea.
After Jesus had died, and was buried, the New Testament states that he appeared to others in bodily form.
Grace is irresistible, results in conversion, and leads to perseverance.
