Christian egalitarians have increasingly argued for equal roles for men and women in marriage, as well as for the ordination of women to the clergy.
The Assyrian Church of the East (Nestorians) and the Old Catholic churches are also distinct Christian bodies of historic importance, but much smaller in adherents and geographic scope.
The blossoming of renaissance humanism was made very much possible due to the universality of the institutions of Catholic Church and represented by personalities such as Pope Pius II, Nicolaus Copernicus, Leon Battista Alberti,  Desiderius Erasmus, sir Thomas More, Bartolomé de Las Casas, Leonardo da Vinci and Teresa of Ávila.
Developments in western philosophy and European events brought change to the notion of the ''Corpus Christianum''.
The Hundred Years' War accelerated the process of transforming France from a feudal monarchy to a centralized state.
The classical heritage flourished throughout the Middle Ages in both the Byzantine Greek East and the Latin West.
Many Christians not only live under, but also have an official status in, a state religion of the following nations: Armenia (Armenian Apostolic Church), Costa Rica (Roman Catholic Church), Denmark (Church of Denmark), El Salvador (Roman Catholic Church), England (Church of England), Georgia (Georgian Orthodox church), Greece (Church of Greece), Iceland (Church of Iceland), Liechtenstein (Roman Catholic Church), Malta (Roman Catholic Church), Monaco (Roman Catholic Church), Romania (Romanian Orthodox Church), Norway (Church of Norway), Vatican City (Roman Catholic Church), Switzerland (Roman Catholic Church, Swiss Reformed Church and Christian Catholic Church of Switzerland).
It during these intermediate times popes strove to make Rome the capital of Christendom while projecting it, through art, architecture, and literature, as the center of a Golden Age of unity, order, and peace.
Render unto Caesar… is the beginning of a phrase attributed to Jesus in the synoptic gospels which reads in full, "''Render unto Caesar the things which are Caesar’s, and unto God the things that are God’s''".
The European wars of religion are usually taken to have ended with the Treaty of Westphalia (1648), or arguably, including the Nine Years' War and the War of the Spanish Succession in this period, with the Treaty of Utrecht of 1713.
Draw-books of the Renaissance artist-engineers such as Taccola and Leonardo da Vinci give a deep insight into the mechanical technology then known and applied.
The study of these forms part of iconography in Art history.
Especially in the West, a system of attributes developed for identifying individual figures of saints by a standard appearance and symbolic objects held by them; in the East they were more likely to identified by text labels.
Some contemporary writers describe the role of women in the life of the church as having been downplayed, overlooked, or denied throughout much of Christian history.
As the Western Roman Empire disintegrated into feudal kingdoms and principalities, the concept of Christendom changed as the western church became one of five patriarchal of the Pentarchy and the Christians of the Eastern Roman Empire developed.
On Christmas Day 800 AD, Pope Leo III crowned Charlemagne resulting in the creation of another Christian king beside the christian emperor in the Byzantine state.
The current sense of the word of "lands where Christianity is the dominant religion" emerges in Late Middle English (by c. 1400).
They also were widely used in mining, as described by Georg Agricola in De Re Metallica for raising ore from shafts, crushing ore, and even powering bellows.
When Thomas F. Connolly said, "There isn't enough power in all Christendom to make that airplane what we want!
Islam accepts Jesus and his miracles and other aspects of Christianity as part of its faith - with some differences in interpretation, and rejects other aspects.
The Bible and Christianity historically have been interpreted as excluding women from church leadership and placing them in submissive roles in marriage.
During the Renaissance, great advances occurred in geography, astronomy, chemistry, physics, math, manufacturing, and engineering.
In both East and West, numerous iconic types of Christ, Mary and saints and other subjects were developed; the number of named types of icons of Mary, with or without the infant Christ, was especially large in the East, whereas Christ Pantocrator was much the commonest image of Christ.
''The enterprise of individuals or of small aristocratic bodies has meantime sown the world which we call civilised with some seeds and nuclei of order.
'''Christendom''' has several meanings.
Technically, divisions between one group and another are defined by church doctrine and church authority.
In practice, Christian democracy is often considered conservative on cultural, social and moral issues and progressive on fiscal and economic issues.
In places, where their opponents have traditionally been secularist socialists and social democrats, Christian democratic parties are moderately conservative, whereas in other cultural and political environments they can lean to the left.
The clergy, like Plato's guardians, were placed in authority... by their talent as shown in ecclesiastical studies and administration, by their disposition to a life of meditation and simplicity, and ... by the influence of their relatives with the powers of state and church.
By the end of the Hundred Years' War, both France and England were able to raise enough money through taxation to create independent standing armies.
Scholasticism is not a philosophy or theology in itself but a tool and method for learning which places emphasis on dialectical reasoning.
The Christian polity, embodying a less secular meaning, can be compatible with the idea of both a religious and a temporal body: ''Corpus Christianum''.
The declaration ''Nostra aetate'' officially established inter-religious dialogue between Catholics and Hindus.
Christian philosophy is a term to describe the fusion of various fields of philosophy with the theological doctrines of Christianity.
Medieval technology refers to the technology used in medieval Europe under Christian rule.
This constitutes a huge body of extremely varied writing.
There are scattered about a variety of churches, industries, academies, and governments.
* Apostolic succession,
In a contemporary sense it may refer to the worldwide community of Christians, adherents of Christianity; or the collectively of Christian majority countries, or countries in which Christianity dominates, or nations in which Christianity is the established religion.
In essence, the earliest vision of Christendom was a vision of a Christian theocracy, a government founded upon and upholding Christian values, whose institutions are spread through and over with Christian doctrine.
Before the East–West Schism which divided the Church religiously, there had been the notion of a ''universal Christendom'' that included the East and the West.
Christian literature is writing that deals with Christian themes and incorporates the Christian world view.
Christianity and Islam share their origins in the Abrahamic tradition, as well as Judaism.
Some listings include Anglicans among Protestants while others list the Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox together as one group, thus the number of distinct major branches can vary between three and five depending on the listing.
From the time Nero blamed Christians for setting Rome ablaze (64 AD) until Galarius (311 AD), persecutions against Christians erupted periodically.
The ''Corpus Christianum'' described the then current notion of the community of all Christians united under the Roman Catholic Church.
In the Late Antique period iconography began to be standardised, and to relate more closely to Biblical texts, although many gaps in the canonical Gospel narratives were plugged with matter from the apocryphal gospels.
A more secular meaning can denote that the term ''Christendom'' refers to Christians considered as a group, the "'''Political Christian World'''", as an informal cultural hegemony that Christianity has traditionally enjoyed in the West.
* Biblical criticism,
An unformulated conception, the prerational ethics of private privilege and national unity, fills the background of men's minds.
In the East, Christendom became more defined as the Byzantine Empire's gradual loss of territory to an expanding Islam and the muslim conquest of Persia.
Much of Humanism's life stance upholds human reason, ethics, and justice, and rejects supernaturalism (Christian mythology).
Buddhism originated in India about 500 years before the Apostolic Age and the origins of Christianity.
* In the Roman Catholic Church, religious institutes and secular institutes are the major forms of institutes of consecrated life, similar to which are societies of apostolic life.
Secularism, in one sense, may assert the right to be free to choose religious beliefs and non-beliefs.
Within the framework of Christianity, there are at least three possible definitions for Church law.
"Christendom" as a geopolitical term is thus meaningful in the context of the Middle Ages, and arguably during the European wars of religion and the Ottoman wars in Europe.
History records many examples of interfaith initiatives and dialogue throughout the ages.
In the east, Byzantine architecture was a continuation of Roman architecture.
Some Protestant movements grew up along lines of mysticism or renaissance humanism (cf.
Christianity and other religions appear to share some elements.
A third is canon law which is the internal ecclesiastical law governing the Roman Catholic Church, the Eastern Orthodox churches, and the Anglican Communion of churches.
The Avignon schism was ended by the Council of Constance.
The rise of strong, centralized monarchies denoted the European transition from feudalism to capitalism.
In the 20th century, the use of new materials, such as concrete, as well as simpler styles has had its effect upon the design of churches and arguably the flow of influence has been reversed.
* Anglican religious orders are communities of laity and/or clergy in the Anglican churches who live under a common rule of life.
Professor Frederick J. McGinness described Rome as essential in understanding the legacy the Church and its representatives encapsulated best by The Eternal City: ''No other city in Europe matches Rome in its traditions, history, legacies, and influence in the Western world.
Before the modern period, Christendom was in a general crisis at the time of the Renaissance Popes because of the moral laxity of these pontiffs and their willingness to seek and rely on temporal power as secular rulers did.
The faith represents approximately one-third of the world's population and is the largest religion in the world, with the three largest groups of Christians being the Catholic Church, Protestantism, and the Eastern Orthodox Church.
Although Christianity and Judaism share historical roots, these two religions diverge in fundamental ways.
After the Renaissance of the 12th century, medieval Europe saw a radical change in the rate of new inventions, innovations in the ways of managing traditional means of production, and economic growth.
The reason is the increasing fragmentation of Western Christianity at that time both in theological and in political respect.
Depictions of saints are also common, especially in Anglicanism, Roman Catholicism, and Eastern Orthodoxy.
His heir, the absolute king Henry VIII establishing the English church.
Those dark ages, from which our political practice is derived, had a political theory which we should do well to study; for their theory about a universal empire and a catholic church was in turn the echo of a former age of reason, when a few men conscious of ruling the world had for a moment sought to survey it as a whole and to rule it justly.''
Consequently, Early Christian ethics included discussions of how believers should relate to Roman authority and to the empire.
Paradigm shifts in gender roles in society and also many churches has inspired reevaluation by many Christians of some long-held attitudes to the contrary.
Regarding Christianity's relationship with other world beliefs, Christianity and other beliefs have differences and similarities in connection with each other.
In all three traditions, a canon was initially a rule adopted by a council (From Greek ''kanon'' / κανών, Hebrew kaneh / קנה, for rule, standard, or measure); these canons formed the foundation of canon law.
The community was to be guided by Christian values in its politics, economics and social life.
During the Renaissance the papacy was mainly run by the wealthy families and also had strong secular interests.
Religious symbolism is effective when it appeals to both the intellect and the emotions.
Emperor Theodosius I made Nicene Christianity the state church of the Roman Empire with the Edict of Thessalonica of 380.
Tensions between Pope Innocent III and secular rulers ran high, as the pontiff exerted control over their temporal counterparts in the west and vice versa.
Christianity has borrowed from the common stock of significant symbols known to most periods and to all regions of the world.
Irreligion is an absence, indifference or hostility to religion.
In contrast, the term Holy Orders is used by many Christian churches to refer to ordination or to a group of individuals who are set apart for a special role or ministry.
* Biblical inspiration,
The prominence of art and the media, style, and representations change; however, the unifying theme is ultimately the representation of the life and times of Jesus and in some cases the Old Testament.
There are over 17.3 million Catholics in India, which represents less than 2% of the total population and is the largest Christian Church within India.
But thanks to the Church scholars such as Aquinas and Buridan, the West carried on at least the spirit of scientific inquiry which would later lead to Europe's taking the lead in science during the Scientific Revolution using translations of medieval works.
Renaissance science spawned the Scientific Revolution; science and technology began a cycle of mutual advancement.
In the interaction between Christendom and other belief systems, men and women when not at war with their neighbors have always made an effort to understand the Other (not least because understanding is a strategy for defense, but also because for as long as there is dialogue wars are delayed).
* Biblical infallibility,
Composed of around 34,000 different denominations, Christianity is the world's largest religion.
Christian ethics in general has tended to stress the need for grace, mercy, and forgiveness because of human weakness and developed while Early Christians were subjects of the Roman Empire.
Humanism refers to a philosophy centered on humankind.
Christendom would take a turn with the rise of the Franks, a Germanic tribe who converted to the Christian faith and entered into communion with Rome.
The ''Scientific Renaissance'' was the early phase of the Scientific Revolution.
Thomas Aquinas thoroughly discussed that ''human law'' is positive law which means that it is natural law applied by governments to societies.
The Avignon Papacy developed a reputation of corruption that estranged major parts of Western Christendom.
Various organizations include:
This phrase has become a widely quoted summary of the relationship between Christianity and secular authority.
The pontificate of Innocent III is considered the height of temporal power of the papacy.
After the collapse of Charlemagne's empire, the southern remnants of the Holy Roman Empire became a collection of states loosely connected to the Holy See of Rome.
In the early 16th century, Baldassare Castiglione (The Book of the Courtier) laid out his vision of the ideal gentleman and lady, while Machiavelli cast a jaundiced eye on "la verità effetuale delle cose" — the actual truth of things — in The Prince, composed, humanist style, chiefly of parallel ancient and modern examples of Virtù.
It emerged in 19th-century Europe, largely under the influence of Catholic social teaching.
It has promoted common values between religions.
It represents feudal traditions rather than the tendency really involved in contemporary industry, science, or philanthropy.
An unjust law was in a sense no law at all.
The Church gradually became a defining institution of the Empire.
The post-apostolic period concerns the time roughly after the death of the apostles when bishops emerged as overseers of urban Christian populations.
But this authority was also sometimes abused, and fostered the Inquisition and anti-Jewish pogroms, to root out divergent elements and create a religiously uniform community.
An icon is a religious work of art, most commonly a painting, from Eastern Christianity.
Scholasticism originally started to reconcile the philosophy of the ancient classical philosophers with medieval Christian theology.
Centering on language of ''professed Christianity'' and ''true Christianity'', issues that separate one group of followers of Jesus from another include:
The latter advances made possible the dawn of the Age of Exploration.
Though Judeo-Christian tradition emphasizes continuities and convergences between the two religions, there are many other areas in which the faiths diverge.
Symbols have been used to tell these stories throughout the history of the Church.
The traditional division, carefully determined, in Christian thought is the state and church have separate spheres of influence.
The period saw major technological advances, including the adoption of gunpowder and the astrolabe, the invention of spectacles, and greatly improved water mills, building techniques, agriculture in general, clocks, and ships.
The European Miracle, the Age of Enlightenment and the formation of the great Colonial empire together with the beginning decline of the Ottoman Empire mark the end of the geopolitical "history of Christendom".
Christianity has used symbolism from its very beginnings.
The Italian Renaissance produced ideas or institutions by which men living in society could be held together in harmony.
The Carolingian Empire created a definition of ''Christendom'' in juxtaposition with the Byzantine Empire, that of a distributed versus centralized culture respectively.
''Denomination'' typically refers to one of the many Christian groupings including each of the multitude of Protestant subdivisions.
In a number of countries, the democracy's Christian ethos has been diluted by secularisation.
Clerical Celibacy was part of the psychological structure of the power of the clergy; for on the one hand they were unimpeded by the narrowing egoism of the family, and on the other their apparent superiority to the call of the flesh added to the awe in which lay sinners held them....'' ''In the latter half of the period in which they ruled, the clergy were as free from family cares as even Plato could desire''.
The development of water mills was impressive, and extended from agriculture to sawmills both for timber and stone, probably derived from Roman technology.
* Views of Jesus (Christology).
A religious order is a lineage of communities and organizations of people who live in some way set apart from society in accordance with their specific religious devotion, usually characterized by the principles of its founder's religious practice.
Subsequently, each government determined the religion of their own state.
The way that such church law is legislated, interpreted and at times adjudicated varies widely among these three bodies of churches.
In the latter half of the period in which they ruled 800 AD onwards, the clergy were as free from family cares as even Plato could desire for such guardians...
By the time of Theodosius I (379-395), Christianity had become the state religion of the empire.
Known as the Western Schism, western Christendom was a split between three men, who were driven by politics rather than any real theological disagreement for simultaneously claiming to be the true pope.
Another is the instructions of Jesus of Nazareth in the Gospel (sometimes referred to as the Law of Christ or the New Commandment or the New Covenant).
While some scholars debate whether Constantine's conversion to Christianity was authentic or simply matter of political expediency, Constantine's decree made the empire safe for Christian practice and belief.
A number of Christian saints are traditionally represented by a symbol or iconic motif associated with their life, termed an attribute or emblem, in order to identify them.
Most medieval manuscripts, illuminated or not, were written on parchment (most commonly of calf, sheep, or goat skin), but most manuscripts important enough to illuminate were written on the best quality of parchment, called vellum, traditionally made of unsplit calfskin, though high quality parchment from other skins was also called ''parchment''.
Scholasticism, which means "that which belongs to the school", and was a method of learning taught by the academics (or ''school people'') of medieval universities c. 1100–1500.
By the time of the Domesday Book, most large villages in Britain had mills.
The Byzantine Empire was the last bastion of Christendom.
The estimated number of Christians in the world ranges from 2.2 billion to 2.4 billion people.
In the two-phase model of early modern science: a ''Scientific Renaissance'' of the 15th and 16th centuries, focused on the restoration of the natural knowledge of the ancients; and a ''Scientific Revolution'' of the 17th century, when scientists shifted from recovery to innovation.
In context, therefore, a holy order is set apart for ministry in the Church.
It is also less geographically cohesive than the Muslim world, which stretches almost continuously from North Africa to South Asia.
Under the patronage of the popes, whose wealth and income were exceeded only by their ambitions, the city became a cultural center for master architects, sculptors, musicians, painters, and artisans of every kind...In its myth and message, Rome had become the sacred city of the popes, the prime symbol of a triumphant Catholicism, the center of orthodox Christianity, a new Jerusalem.''
Instead the focus of western history shifts to the development of the nation-state, accompanied by increasing atheism and secularism, culminating with the French Revolution and the Napoleonic Wars at the turn of the 19th century.
The compass and astrolabe along with advances in shipbuilding, enabled the navigation of the World Oceans and thus domination of the worlds economic trade.
Christian art is art produced in an attempt to illustrate, supplement and portray in tangible form the principles of Christianity.
''... For a thousand years Europe was ruled by an order of guardians considerably like that which was visioned by our philosopher.
Christian poetry is any poetry that contains Christian teachings, themes, or references.
From the birth of Christianity to the present, the most significant period of transformation for Christian architecture in the west was the Gothic cathedral.
In its most prominent form, secularism is critical of religious orthodoxy and asserts that reason and the scientific method are better ways to understand reality than religious beliefs.
Because the Protestant subdivisions do not maintain a common theology or earthly leadership, they are far more distinct than the subdivisions of the other four groupings.
Christians have composed about 33 percent of the world's population for around 100 years.
Most illuminated manuscripts were created as codices, which had superseded scrolls; some isolated single sheets survive.
", he was simply using a figure of speech, although it is true that during the Cold War, just as the totalitarianism of the Communist Bloc presented a contrast with the liberty of the Free World, the state atheism of the Communist Bloc contrasted with religious freedom and powerful religious institutions in North America and Western Europe.
They are organisations of laity and/or clergy who live a common life under the guidance of a fixed rule and the leadership of a superior.
Such interactions have led to various interfaith dialogue events.
There is a common and nonliteral sense of the word that is much like the terms ''Western world'', ''known world'' or ''Free World''.
Rome in the Renaissance under the papacy not only acted as guardian and transmitter of these elements stemming from the Roman Empire but also assumed the role as artificer and interpreter of its myths and meanings for the peoples of Europe from the Middle Ages to modern times...
Christendom ultimately was led into specific crisis in the late Middle Ages, when the kings of France managed to establish a French national church during the 14th century and the papacy became ever more aligned with the Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation.
In a cultural sense, it refers to the religion itself.
The largest Christian denomination is the Catholic Church, with 1.09 billion adherents.
Traditional models evolved for narrative paintings, including large cycles covering the events of the Life of Christ, the Life of the Virgin, parts of the Old Testament, and, increasingly, the lives of popular saints.
Religious orders are composed of initiates (laity) and, in some traditions, ordained clergies.
This could result in some tension.
The majority of surviving manuscripts are from the Middle Ages, although many illuminated manuscripts survive from the 15th century Renaissance, along with a very limited number from Late Antiquity.
Christian art began, about two centuries after Christ, by borrowing motifs from Roman Imperial imagery, classical Greek and Roman religion and popular art.
''Renaissance technology'' is the set of artifacts and customs, spanning roughly the 14th through the 16th century.
(ed., see :Category:Anglican organizations for a particular listing)
An illuminated manuscript is a manuscript in which the text is supplemented by the addition of decoration.
One is the Torah/Mosaic Law (from what Christians consider to be the Old Testament) also called Divine Law or Biblical law.
Unlike the Muslim world, which has a geo-political and cultural definition that provides a primary identifier for a large swath of the world, Christendom is more complex.
In modern history, the Reformation and rise of modernity in the early 16th century entailed a change in the ''Corpus Christianum''.
In the Greek philosopher Plato's ideal state there are three major classes, which was representative of the idea of the “tripartite soul”, which is expressive of three functions or capacities of the human soul: “reason”, “the spirited element”, and “appetites” (or “passions”).
* Biblical inerrancy,
With the breakup of the Byzantine Empire into individual nations with nationalist Orthodox Churches, the term Christendom described Western Europe, Catholicism, Orthodox Byzantines, and other Eastern rites of the Church.
The rediscovery of ancient scientific texts was accelerated after the Fall of Constantinople, and the invention of printing which would democratize learning and allow a faster propagation of new ideas.
Christianity is composed of, but not limited to, five major branches of Churches: Catholicism, Eastern Orthodoxy, Oriental Orthodoxy, Anglicanism, and Protestantism.
There has been much speculation regarding a possible connection between both the Buddha and the Christ, and between Buddhism and Christianity.
Emperor Constantine issued the Edict of Milan in 313 proclaiming toleration for the Christian religion, and convoked the First Council of Nicaea in 325 whose Nicene Creed included belief in "one holy catholic and apostolic Church".
The Catholic Church fell partly into general neglect under the Renaissance Popes, whose inability to govern the Church by showing personal example of high moral standards set the climate for what would ultimately become the Protestant Reformation.
It may be a cultural notion, but has very little weight in international discourse; very few political observers really discuss Christendom, while the Muslim World tends to comprise a civilization in itself.
But the universal order once dreamt of and nominally almost established, the empire of universal peace, all-permeating rational art, and philosophical worship, is mentioned no more.
Late ecclesiastical writers followed in his footsteps.
Significant in this respect were advances within the fields of navigation.
In the traditional Roman Catholic sense of the word, it refers to the sum total of nations in which the Catholic Church is the established religion of the state, or which have ecclesiastical concordats with the Holy See.
The ''Corpus Christianum'' can be seen as a Christian equivalent of the Muslim ''Ummah''.
Attitudes and beliefs about the roles and responsibilities of women in Christianity vary considerably today as they have throughout the last two millennia — evolving along with or counter to the societies in which Christians have lived.
* Biblical interpretation,
Ultimately, the Inquisition was done away with by order of Pope Innocent III.
The principle of ''cuius regio, eius religio'' ("whose the region is, his religion") established the religious, political and geographic divisions of Christianity, and this was established with the Treaty of Westphalia in 1648, which legally ended the concept of a single Christian hegemony in the territories of the Holy Roman Empire, despite the Catholic Church's doctrine that it alone is the one true Church founded by Christ.
This caused Christianity to become important to the Byzantine identity.
Christian symbolism invests objects or actions with an inner meaning expressing Christian ideas.
This model of church-state relations was accepted by various Church leaders and political leaders in European history.
Each of the branches has important subdivisions.
During the Middle Ages it was customary to classify the population of Christendom into laboratores (workers), bellatores (soldiers), and oratores (clergy).
