Modern studies suggest that, as reported by the ''Washington Post'', "crew members may have included free black Africans who arrived in the New World about a decade before the slave trade began."
On 1 May 1486, permission having been granted, Columbus presented his plans to Queen Isabella, who, in turn, referred it to a committee.
A hurricane was brewing, so he continued on, hoping to find shelter on Hispaniola.
Additionally, he would also have the option of buying one-eighth interest in any commercial venture with the new lands and receive one-eighth of the profits.
Upon his recovery, Columbus organized his troops' efforts, forming a squadron of several hundred heavily armed men and more than twenty attack dogs.
Columbus kidnapped about 10 to 25 natives and took them back with him (only seven or eight of the natives arrived in Spain alive).
Columbus's refusal to accept that the lands he had visited and claimed for Spain were not part of Asia might explain, in part, why the American continent was named after the Florentine explorer Amerigo Vespucci and not after Columbus.
Columbus remarked that their lack of modern weaponry and metal-forged swords or pikes was a tactical vulnerability, writing, "I could conquer the whole of them with 50 men, and govern them as I pleased."
In this, he was influenced by the ideas of Florentine astronomer Toscanelli, who corresponded with Columbus before his death in 1482 and who also defended the feasibility of a westward route to Asia.
The wreck was used as a target for cannon fire to impress the native peoples.
Following his first voyage, Columbus was appointed Viceroy and Governor of the Indies under the terms of the Capitulations of Santa Fe.
When the first pandemic finally struck in 1519 it wiped out much of the remaining native population.
There, in turn, the winds curve southward towards the Iberian Peninsula.
He also speculated that the new continent might be the location of the biblical Garden of Eden.
Columbus himself saw his accomplishments primarily in the light of spreading the Christian religion.
According to historian Edmund Morgan,
The anniversary of Columbus's 1492 landing in the Americas is usually observed on 12 October in Spain and throughout the Americas, except Canada.
On 13 January 1493, Columbus made his last stop of this voyage in the New World, in the Bay of Rincón at the eastern end of the Samaná Peninsula in northeast Hispaniola.
He married Filipa Moniz Perestrelo, daughter of the Porto Santo governor and Portuguese nobleman of Lombard origin Bartolomeu Perestrello.
There the royal couple heard the brothers' pleas; restored their freedom and wealth; and, after much persuasion, agreed to fund Columbus's fourth voyage.
At the same time, the garrison was attacked by Quibían and the other ships were damaged.
On 6 April one of the ships became stranded in the river.
De las Casas records that when he first came to Hispaniola in 1508, "there were 60,000 people living on this island, including the Indians; so that from 1494 to 1508, over three million people had perished from war, slavery, and the mines.
Hearing of Columbus's discoveries, John told him that he believed the voyage to be in violation of the 1479 Treaty of Alcáçovas.
The king submitted Columbus's proposal to his experts, who rejected it.
In 1473, Columbus began his apprenticeship as business agent for the important Centurione, Di Negro and Spinola families of Genoa.
I myself writing it as a knowledgeable eyewitness can hardly believe it...." Modern estimates for the pre-Columbian population of Hispaniola are around 250,000–300,000.
Eventually we came to such terms, I assure you, that you would have thought that she had been brought up in a school for whores."
At the 1893 World's Columbian Exposition, 71 alleged portraits of Columbus were displayed; most did not match contemporary descriptions.
He restocked provisions and made repairs in Gran Canaria, then departed from San Sebastián de La Gomera on 6 September, for what turned out to be a five-week voyage across the ocean.
The troops went wild, stealing, killing, raping, and torturing natives, trying to force them to divulge the whereabouts of the imagined treasure-houses of gold."''
Bartolomeo, Giovanni Pellegrino, and Giacomo were his brothers.
Columbus left 39 men, including Luis de Torres, the Converso interpreter, who spoke Hebrew and Arabic, and founded the settlement of ''La Navidad'' at the site of present-day Bord de Mer de Limonade, Haiti.
The Catholic Monarchs, however, having completed an expensive war in the Iberian Peninsula, were eager to obtain a competitive edge over other European countries in the quest for trade with the Indies.
Throughout his life, Columbus also showed a keen interest in the Bible and in Biblical prophecies, often quoting biblical texts in his letters and logs.
Accounts consistently describe Columbus as a large and physically strong man of some  or more in height, easily taller than the average European of his day.
He then sailed to Madeira and spent some time there with the Portuguese captain João Gonçalves da Camara, before sailing to the Canary Islands and Cape Verde.
But—to cut a long story short—I then took a piece of rope and whipped her soundly, and she let forth such incredible screams that you would not have believed your ears.
Columbus then landed on Trinidad at Icacos Point (which he named ''Punta de Arenal'') on 2 August.
To lay to rest claims that the wrong relics had been moved to Havana and that Columbus's remains had been left buried in the cathedral at Santo Domingo, DNA samples of the corpse resting in Seville were taken in June 2003 (''History Today'' August 2003) as well as other DNA samples from the remains of his brother Diego and younger son Fernando Colón.
These competing hypotheses have generally been discounted by mainstream scholars.
Columbus, for his part, believed the even higher estimate of Marinus of Tyre, which put the longitudinal span of the Eurasian landmass at 225°, leaving only 135° of water.
Such evidence, together with anthropologic and historic analyses, led the researchers to conclude that the remains found in Seville belonged to Christopher Columbus.
Some records report that Filipa died in 1485.
The true figure is now known to be vastly larger: about 20,000&nbsp;km.
The precise first land sighting and landing point was San Salvador Island.
He read widely about astronomy, geography, and history, including the works of Claudius Ptolemy, Cardinal Pierre d'Ailly's ''Imago Mundi'', the travels of Marco Polo and Sir John Mandeville, Pliny's ''Natural History'', and Pope Pius II's ''Historia Rerum Ubique Gestarum''.
Exactly which island in the Bahamas this corresponds to is unresolved.
Among reasons for this criticism is the treatment and disappearance of the native Taino people of Hispaniola, where Columbus began a rudimentary tribute system for gold and cotton.
The corresponding technique for efficient travel in the Atlantic appears to have been exploited first by the Portuguese, who referred to it as the ''Volta do mar'' ("turn of the sea").
Over the course of three more voyages, he visited the Greater and Lesser Antilles, as well as the Caribbean coast of Venezuela and Central America, claiming all of it for the Crown of Castile.
Columbus, for his part, continued to the northern coast of Hispaniola, where he landed on 5 December.
The ship had a smaller topsail on the mainmast above the mainsail and on the foremast above the foresail.
The exact course of Columbus's voyage through the Lesser Antilles is debated, but it seems likely that he turned north, sighting and naming several islands, including:
A number of returning settlers and sailors lobbied against Columbus at the Spanish court, accusing him and his brothers of gross mismanagement.
Columbus never admitted that he had reached a continent previously unknown to Europeans, rather than the East Indies for which he had set course.
He proposed that the king equip three sturdy ships and grant Columbus one year's time to sail out into the Atlantic, search for a western route to the Orient, and return.
At about 2:00 in the morning of 12 October, a lookout on the ''Pinta'', Rodrigo de Triana (also known as Juan Rodríguez Bermeo), spotted land, and immediately alerted the rest of the crew with a shout.
Columbus named the small island of "Saona&nbsp;... to honor Michele da Cuneo, his friend from Savona."
It agrees with descriptions of Columbus in that it shows a large man with auburn hair, but the painting dates from 1519 and cannot, therefore, have been painted from life.
Reiter's syndrome is a common presentation of reactive arthritis, a joint inflammation caused by intestinal bacterial infections or after acquiring certain sexually transmitted diseases (primarily chlamydia or gonorrhea).
"Columbus's claim to fame isn't that he got there first," explains historian Martin Dugard, "it's that he stayed."
As far back as the 3rd century BC, Eratosthenes had correctly computed the circumference of the Earth by using simple geometry and studying the shadows cast by objects at two different locations: Alexandria and Syene (modern-day Aswan).
Instead, while Columbus's ships sheltered at the mouth of the Rio Jaina, the first Spanish treasure fleet sailed into the hurricane.
During his first voyage in 1492, the brisk trade winds from the east, commonly called "easterlies", propelled Columbus's fleet for five weeks, from the Canary Islands to The Bahamas.
* Saint Croix (from the Spanish ''Santa Cruz'', meaning "Holy Cross").
The ships sighted the land of Trinidad on 31 July approaching from the southeast.
In 1909, descendants of Columbus undertook to dismantle the Columbus family chapel in Spain and move it to Boalsburg near State College, Pennsylvania, where it may now be visited by the public.
In poor health, Columbus returned to Hispaniola on 19 August, only to find that many of the Spanish settlers of the new colony were in rebellion against his rule, claiming that Columbus had misled them about the supposedly bountiful riches of the New World.
Christian writers whose works clearly reflect the conviction that the Earth is spherical include Saint Bede the Venerable in his ''Reckoning of Time'', written around AD 723.
According to de Las Casas, 50,000 natives perished during this period.
Isabella then sent a royal guard to fetch him, and Ferdinand later claimed credit for being "the principal cause why those islands were discovered".
Furthermore, the inscription identifying the subject as Columbus was probably added later, and the face shown differs from other images, including that of the "Virgin of the Navigators."
The suspected attacks increased in duration and severity, sometimes leaving Columbus bedridden for months at a time, and culminated in his death 14 years later.
According to the report, Columbus once punished a man found guilty of stealing corn by having his ears and nose cut off and then selling him into slavery.
At the museum associated with the chapel, there are a number of Columbus relics worthy of note, including the armchair that the "Admiral of the Ocean Sea" used at his chart table.
Columbus was later arrested in 1500 and dismissed from his posts.
But the lasting significance of Columbus's voyages outshone that of his Viking predecessors, because he managed to bring word of the continent back to Europe.
Who in future generations will believe this?
Later, he allegedly made a trip to Chios, an Aegean island then ruled by Genoa.
The issues range in value from the 1-cent to the 5-dollar denominations.
From d'Ailly's ''Imago Mundi'' Columbus learned of Alfraganus's estimate that a degree of latitude (or a degree of longitude along the equator) spanned 56⅔ miles, but did not realize that this was expressed in the Arabic mile rather than the shorter Roman mile with which he was familiar (1,480 m).
After continually lobbying at the Spanish court and two years of negotiations, he finally had success in January 1492.
Columbus's treatment of the Hispaniola natives was brutal; his soldiers killed and enslaved with impunity at every landing.
In either case, he left Portugal for Castile in 1485, where he found a mistress in 1487, a 20-year-old orphan named Beatriz Enríquez de Arana.
He was born before 31 October 1451 in the territory of the Republic of Genoa (now part of modern Italy), though the exact location remains disputed.
In 1992, a second Columbian issue was released that was identical to the first to commemorate the 500th anniversary, except for the date in the upper right hand corner of each stamp.
Columbus went to meet with John at ''Vale do Paraíso''.
He continued to the Greater Antilles, and landed in Puerto Rico, which he named ''San Juan Bautista'' in honor of Saint John the Baptist (a name that was later retained only for the capital city of San Juan).
These voyages had, therefore, an enormous impact in the historical development of the modern Western world.
During his first voyage in 1492, he reached the New World instead of arriving at Japan as he had intended, landing on an island in the Bahamas archipelago which he named "San Salvador".
The people disappeared rapidly after contact with the Spanish because of atrocities, overwork, and the first pandemic of European diseases, which struck Hispaniola after 1519.
To the contrary, the spherical shape of the Earth had been known to scholars since antiquity, and was common knowledge among sailors.
Columbus also sighted the chain of the Virgin Islands, which he named ''Islas de Santa Úrsula y las Once Mil Vírgenes'', "Islands of Saint Ursula and the 11,000 Virgins" (shortened, both on maps of the time and in common parlance, to ''Islas Vírgenes'').
As in the first voyage, the fleet stopped at the Canary Islands, from which it departed on 13 October, following a more southerly course than on the previous expedition.
Columbus was leaving town by mule in despair when Ferdinand intervened.
After a two-day standoff, the prisoners were released, and Columbus again set sail for Spain.
The foresail and mainsail were square; the sail on the mizzen was a triangular sail known as a lateen mizzen.
In Spain it is called the ''Fiesta Nacional de España y Día de la Hispanidad'', while a number of countries in Latin America celebrate it as ''Día de la Raza''.
* Antigua (after a church in Seville, Spain, called Santa María la Antigua, meaning "Old St. Mary's"),
He instead estimates that the death toll was caused by diseases like smallpox, which according to some estimates had an 80–90% fatality rate in Native American populations.
The governor, Nicolás de Ovando y Cáceres, detested Columbus and obstructed all efforts to rescue him and his men.
In 1488, Columbus appealed to the court of Portugal once again and, once again, John II invited him to an audience.
On 22 November, Columbus returned to Hispaniola, where he intended to visit the fort of La Navidad, built during his first voyage and located on the northern coast of Haiti.
They pronounced the idea impractical and advised their Royal Highnesses to pass on the proposed venture.
In Columbus's time, the techniques of celestial navigation, which use the position of the sun and the stars in the sky, together with the understanding that the Earth is a sphere, had long been in use by astronomers and were beginning to be implemented by mariners.
He had an economic interest in the enslavement of the Hispaniola natives and for that reason was not eager to baptize them, which attracted criticism from some churchmen.
Afonso rejected his proposal.
Columbus left the port of Cádiz on 24 September 1493, with a fleet of 17 ships carrying 1,200 men and the supplies to establish permanent colonies in the New World.
Columbus traveled from Portugal to both Genoa and Venice, but he received encouragement from neither.
He also rationalized that the new continent of South America was the "Earthly Paradise" that was located "at the end of the Orient".
Under the Mongol Empire's hegemony over Asia (the ''Pax Mongolica'', or ''Mongol peace''), Europeans had long enjoyed a safe land passage, the Silk Road, to the Indies (then construed roughly as all of south and east Asia) and China, which were sources of valuable goods such as spices and silk.
These measurements were widely known among scholars, but confusion about the old-fashioned units of distance in which they were expressed had led, in Columbus's day, to some debate about the exact size of the Earth.
Shipworms also damaged the ships in tropical waters.
* Saba (after the Biblical Queen of Sheba),
He called the inhabitants of the lands that he visited ''indios'' (Spanish for "Indians").
Numerous cities, towns, counties, streets, and plazas (called Plaza Colón or Plaza de Colón throughout Latin America and Spain) have been named after him.
In addition, the ship carried a small square sail, a spritsail, on the bowsprit.
Columbus took more natives prisoner and continued his exploration.
Columbus correctly interpreted the enormous quantity of fresh water that the Orinoco delivered into the Atlantic Ocean as evidence that he had reached a continental landmass.
Furthermore, most scholars accepted Ptolemy's estimate that Eurasia spanned 180° longitude, rather than the actual 130° (to the Chinese mainland) or 150° (to Japan at the latitude of Spain).
Queen Isabella and King Ferdinand responded by removing Columbus from power and replacing him with Francisco de Bobadilla, a member of the Order of Calatrava.
Under Benjamin Harrison and his Postmaster General John Wanamaker the Columbian commemorative stamps were made available and were first issued at the World Columbian Exposition in Chicago, Illinois, in 1893.
His mother was Susanna Fontanarossa.
Historians have traditionally argued that Columbus remained convinced to the very end that his journeys had been along the east coast of Asia, but writer Kirkpatrick Sale argues that a document in the ''Book of Privileges'' indicates Columbus knew he found a new continent.
Historically, the British had downplayed Columbus and emphasized the role of the Venetian John Cabot as a pioneer explorer, but for the emerging United States, Cabot made for a poor national hero.
"It seems likely that Columbus acquired reactive arthritis from food poisoning on one of his ocean voyages because of poor sanitation and improper food preparation," writes Dr. Frank C. Arnett, a rheumatologist and professor of internal medicine, pathology and laboratory medicine the University of Texas Medical School at Houston.
The two main early biographies of Columbus have been taken as literal truth by hundreds of writers, in large part because they were written by individuals closely connected to Columbus or his writings.&nbsp;...
In 1485, Columbus presented his plans to King John II of Portugal.
The scholar Amerigo Vespucci, who sailed to America in the years following Columbus's first voyage, was the first to speculate that the land was not part of Asia but in fact constituted some wholly new continent previously unknown to Eurasians.
His travel journals, published 1502–04, convinced German cartographer Martin Waldseemüller to reach the same conclusion, and in 1507—a year after Columbus's death—Waldseemüller published a world map calling the new continent ''America'' from Vespucci's Latinized name "Americus".
In 1477, he was possibly in Iceland.
Under the auspices of the Catholic Monarchs of Spain, he completed four voyages across the Atlantic Ocean.
During a violent storm on his first return voyage, Columbus, then approximately 41, suffered an attack of what was believed at the time to be gout.
After resupplying with food and water, from 4 to 12 August Columbus explored the Gulf of Paria, which separates Trinidad from what is now Venezuela, near the delta of the Orinoco River.
No ship in the 15th century could have carried enough food and fresh water for such a long voyage, and the dangers involved in navigating through the uncharted ocean would have been formidable.
Relations between Portugal and Castile were poor at the time.
"''Even with less than a complete record, however, scholars can state with assurance that Columbus was born in the republic of Genoa in northern Italy, although perhaps not in the city itself, and that his family made a living in the wool business as weavers and merchants.&nbsp;...
To demonstrate his confidence in the new Columbian commemorative issues Wanamaker purchased $10,000 worth of stamps with his own money.
The use of Columbus as a founding figure of New World nations and the use of the word "Columbia", or simply the name "Columbus", spread rapidly after the American Revolution.
On 3 November, Columbus sighted a rugged island that he named Dominica (Latin for Sunday); later that day, he landed at Marie-Galante, which he named ''Santa María la Galante''.
One of the first skirmishes between Native Americans and Europeans since the time of the Vikings occurred when Columbus's men rescued two native boys who had just been castrated by their captors in another tribe.
DNA extraction proved difficult; only short fragments of mitochondrial DNA could be isolated.
After sailing past Les Saintes (''Los Santos'', "The Saints"), he arrived at the island of Guadeloupe, which he named ''Santa María de Guadalupe de Extremadura'', after the image of the Virgin Mary venerated at the Spanish monastery of Villuercas, in Guadalupe, Cáceres, Spain.
The Columbus family had some success in their first litigation, as a judgment of 1511 confirmed Diego's position as Viceroy, but reduced his powers.
It is also speculated that he may have simply left his first wife.
Instead, Columbus returned home by following the curving trade winds northeastward to the middle latitudes of the North Atlantic, where he was able to catch the "westerlies" that blow eastward to the coast of Western Europe.
It had a deep draft of .
Columbus headed for Spain on the ''Niña'', but a storm separated him from the ''Pinta,'' and forced the ''Niña'' to stop at the island of Santa Maria in the Azores.
The mtDNA fragments matched corresponding DNA from Columbus's brother, giving support that both individuals had shared the same mother.
The most iconic image of Columbus is a portrait by Sebastiano del Piombo, which has been reproduced in many textbooks.
Thereupon, the captain of the ''Pinta'', Martín Alonso Pinzón, verified the discovery and alerted Columbus by firing a lombard.
An entry in his journal from September 1498 reads: "From here one might send, in the name of the Holy Trinity, as many slaves as could be sold&nbsp;..."
On the evening of 3 August 1492, Columbus departed from Palos de la Frontera with three ships: a larger carrack, the ''Santa María'' ex-''Gallega'' ("Galician"), and two smaller caravels, the ''Pinta'' ("The Pint", "The Look", or "The Spotted One")  and the ''Santa Clara'', nicknamed the ''Niña'' ("Girl") after her owner Juan Niño of Moguer.
The Columbian Exposition lasted several months, and over $40&nbsp;million in commemorative postage stamps had been sold.
Michele da Cuneo, Columbus's childhood friend from Savona, sailed with Columbus during the second voyage and wrote: "In my opinion, since Genoa was Genoa, there was never born a man so well equipped and expert in the art of navigation as the said lord Admiral."
Many of the crew members who served on this voyage later joined the army of King Charles VIII in his invasion of Italy in 1495.
The vessel had three masts: a mainmast, a foremast, and a mizzenmast.
He therefore estimated the circumference of the Earth to be about 30,200&nbsp;km, whereas the correct value is .
Santa María'', the flagship of Columbus's fleet, was a carrack—a merchant ship of between 400 and 600 tons,  long, with a beam of , allowing it to carry more people and cargo.
On 5 December 1502, Columbus and his crew found themselves in a storm unlike any they had ever experienced.
Rather, the natives' numbers declined due to extreme overwork, other diseases, and a loss of will to live after the destruction of their culture by the invaders.
Help finally arrived, no thanks to the governor, on 29 June 1504, and Columbus and his men arrived in Sanlúcar, Spain, on 7 November.
As such it contains no sign of the Americas and yet demonstrates the common belief in a spherical Earth.
Not long after, the king and queen summoned the Columbus brothers to the Alhambra palace in Granada.
"Columbus's government was characterised by a form of tyranny," Consuelo Varela, a Spanish historian who has seen the document, told journalists.
In Panama, Columbus learned from the Ngobe of gold and a strait to another ocean, but was told by local leader Quibían not to go past a certain point down the river.
In 1470, the Columbus family moved to Savona, where Domenico took over a tavern.
In the April 1492 "Capitulations of Santa Fe", King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella promised Columbus that if he succeeded he would be given the rank of Admiral of the Ocean Sea and appointed Viceroy and Governor of all the new lands he could claim for Spain.
Testimony recorded in the report claims that Columbus congratulated his brother Bartolomé on "defending the family" when the latter ordered a woman paraded naked through the streets and then had her tongue cut out for suggesting that Columbus was of lowly birth.
His name in Italian is '''Cristoforo Colombo''' and, in Spanish, it is '''Cristóbal Colón'''.
The name ''Christopher Columbus'' is the Anglicisation of the Latin '''Christophorus Columbus'''.
* Redonda (''Santa María la Redonda'', Spanish for "St. Mary the Round", owing to the island's shape),
* Nevis (derived from the Spanish ''Nuestra Señora de las Nieves'', "Our Lady of the Snows", because Columbus thought the clouds over Nevis Peak made the island resemble a snow-capped mountain),
Though Christopher Columbus came to be considered the "discoverer of America" in US and European popular culture, his true historical legacy is more nuanced.
Wanamaker originally introduced the idea of issuing the nation's first commemorative stamp to Harrison, the Congress and the U.S. Post Office.
There, the ''Santa María'' ran aground on Christmas Day 1492 and had to be abandoned.
His ships next sustained more damage in a storm off the coast of Cuba.
However, a lead box bearing an inscription identifying "Don Christopher Columbus" and containing bone fragments and a bullet was discovered at Santo Domingo in 1877.
These issues were made from the original dies of which the first engraved issues of 1893 were produced.
These writings describe him as having reddish or blond hair, which turned to white early in his life, light colored eyes, as well as being a lighter-skinned person with too much sun exposure turning his face red.
Columbus's project, though far-fetched, held the promise of such an advantage.
However, La Isabela proved to be poorly located and the settlement was short-lived.
Based on Columbus's lifestyle and the described symptoms, modern doctors suspect that he suffered from Reiter's syndrome, rather than gout.
In the United States it is called Columbus Day and is observed annually on the second Monday in October.
After being becalmed for several days in the doldrums of the mid-Atlantic, Columbus's fleet regained its wind and, dangerously low on water, turned north in the direction of Dominica, which Columbus had visited in his previous voyage.
He also named the islands of Virgin Gorda ("Fat Virgin"), Tortola, and Peter Island (''San Pedro'').
Columbus's knowledge of the Atlantic wind patterns was, however, imperfect at the time of his first voyage.
The Dominican remains are located in "The Columbus Lighthouse" (''Faro a Colón''), in Santo Domingo.
However, Dias's discovery had shifted the interests of Portuguese seafaring to the southeast passage, which complicated Columbus's proposals significantly.
Noting their gold ear ornaments, Columbus took some of the Arawaks prisoner and insisted that they guide him to the source of the gold.
That meeting also proved unsuccessful, in part because not long afterwards Bartolomeu Dias returned to Portugal with news of his successful rounding of the southern tip of Africa (near the Cape of Good Hope).
A Spaniard, Diego Méndez, and some natives paddled a canoe to get help from Hispaniola.
Columbus always insisted, in the face of mounting evidence to the contrary, that the lands that he visited during those voyages were part of the Asian continent, as previously described by Marco Polo and other European travelers.
Columbus therefore estimated the distance from the Canary Islands to Japan to be about 3,000 Italian miles (3,700&nbsp;km, or 2,300 statute miles).
Outside the United States the name was used in 1819 for the Gran Colombia, a precursor of the modern Republic of Colombia.
Historian James W. Loewen asserts that "Columbus not only sent the first slaves across the Atlantic, he probably sent more slaves – about five thousand – than any other individual... other nations rushed to emulate Columbus."
Both biographies have serious shortcomings as evidence.''"
He also believed that Japan (which he called "Cipangu", following Marco Polo) was much larger, farther to the east from China ("Cathay"), and closer to the equator than it is, and that there were inhabited islands even farther to the east than Japan, including the mythical Antillia, which he thought might lie not much farther to the west than the Azores.
Because he had been relieved of his duties as governor, the crown did not feel bound by that contract and his demands were rejected.
