Some trees, frequently referred to as "living Christmas trees", are sold live with roots and soil, often from a plant nursery, to be stored at nurseries in planters or planted later outdoors and enjoyed (and often decorated) for years or decades.
Catherine S. Roskam of the Anglican Communion, has long had a ritual titled ''Blessing of a Christmas Tree'', as well as ''Blessing of a Crèche'', for use in the church and the home.
''Chrismon trees'' are a variety developed in 1957 by a Lutheran laywoman in Virginia, as a specifically religious version appropriate for a church's Christmas celebrations, although most Christian churches continue to display the traditional Christmas tree in their sanctuaries during Christmastide.
In Australia, the Christmas tree is usually put up on 1 December, which occurs about a 2 weeks before the school summer holidays (except for South Australia, where most people put up their tree after the Adelaide Christmas Pageant in late November) and is left up until it is taken down.
In many areas, it has become customary to set up one's Christmas tree at the beginning of the Advent season.
The life cycle of a Christmas tree from the seed to a  tree takes, depending on species and treatment in cultivation, between 8 and 12 years.
When Johnson was Vice President of the Edison Electric Light Company, a predecessor of Con Edison, he created the first known electrically illuminated Christmas tree at his home in New York City in 1882.
Less-traditional conifers are sometimes used, such as giant sequoia, Leyland cypress, Monterey cypress and eastern juniper.
In 1935 the tree was brought back as New Year tree and became a secular, not a religious holiday.
With the Christmas tree being prohibited in accordance with Soviet anti-religious legislation, people supplanted the former Christmas custom with New Year's trees.
By 2013 the number of trees grown in Britain for the Christmas market was approximately 8 million and their display in homes, shops and public spaces a normal part of the Christmas season.
Today, the lighting of the National Christmas Tree is part of what has become a major holiday event at the White House.
File:Weihnachtsbaum Römerberg.jpg|Christmas tree on the Römerberg in Frankfurt (2008)
Vatican Christmas Tree.jpg|Christmas tree in Vaticano, 2007
File:Christmas tree bauble.jpg|A golden bauble decorating a Christmas tree
A decisive factor in winning general popularity was the German army's decision to place Christmas trees in its barracks and military hospitals during the Franco-Prussian War.
In some cities, a Festival of Trees is organized around the decoration and display of multiple trees as charity events.
In Livonia (present-day Latvia and Estonia), in 1441, 1442, 1510 and 1514, the Brotherhood of Blackheads erected a tree for the holidays in their guild houses in Riga and Reval (now Tallinn).
On the last night of the celebrations leading up to the holidays, the tree was taken to the Town Hall Square where the members of the brotherhood danced around it.
German immigrant Charles Minnegerode accepted a position as a professor of humanities at the College of William & Mary in Williamsburg, Virginia, in 1842, where he taught Latin and Greek.
In 2009, Apple placed two Fraser fir trees in every one of its retail establishments.
In the 1940s and 1950s, popularized by Hollywood films in the late 1930s,  flocking was very popular on the West Coast of the United States.
Baubles are another common decoration, consisting of small hollow glass or plastic spheres coated with a thin metallic layer to make them reflective, with a further coating of a thin pigmented polymer in order to provide coloration.
In 1847, Imgard cut a blue spruce tree from a woods outside town, had the Wooster village tinsmith construct a star, and placed the tree in his house, decorating it with paper ornaments and candy canes.
Several other species are used to a lesser extent.
File:Boule de Noel.JPG|A transparent Christmas bauble
At the Bilbao airport 2005 displayed a Christmas tree and a Santa Claus and Christmas elf alongside the Basque Olentzero, as a way of syncretising traditions in Northern Spain.
The branches were decorated with apples, nuts, cookies, colored paper, stars made of straw, ribbons and colored wafers.
A boost to the trend was given in 1848 when ''The Illustrated London News'', in a report picked up by other papers, described the trees in Windsor Castle in detail and showed the main tree, surrounded by the royal family, on its cover.
Real trees are popular with high end visual merchandising displays  around the world.
Its 16th-century origins are sometimes associated with Protestant Christian reformer Martin Luther who is said to have first added lighted candles to an evergreen tree.
In Canada many families wait until after Remembrance Day, as to show respect to fallen soldiers.
File:005 Weihnachtsaltar und Krippe in der Sanoker Franziskanerkirche, 2013.jpg|Christmas Trees in church
Over the years, other styles of artificial Christmas trees have evolved and become popular.
Some traditions suggest that Christmas trees may be kept up until no later than 2 February, the feast of the Presentation of Jesus at the Temple (Candlemas), when the Christmas season effectively closes.
A Bremen guild chronicle of 1570 reports that a small tree decorated with "apples, nuts, dates, pretzels and paper flowers" was erected in the guild-house for the benefit of the guild members' children, who collected the dainties on Christmas Day.
It acquired popularity beyond Germany during the second half of the 19th century, at first among the upper classes.
In some cases management of Christmas tree crops can result in poor habitat since it sometimes involves heavy input of pesticides.
An angel or star might be placed at the top of the tree to represent the archangel Gabriel or the Star of Bethlehem from the Nativity.
The debate about the environmental impact of artificial trees is ongoing.
Each year, 33 to 36 million Christmas trees are produced in America, and 50 to 60 million are produced in Europe.
However, when done properly, replanting provides higher survival rates.
Living Christmas trees can be purchased or rented from local market growers.
August Imgard, a German immigrant living in Wooster, Ohio, is the first to popularize the practice of decorating a tree with candy canes.
An illustrated book, ''The Christmas Tree'', describing their use and origins in detail, was on sale in December 1844.
In her journal for Christmas Eve 1832, the delighted 13-year-old princess wrote: "After dinner... we then went into the drawing-room near the dining-room...
Other accounts credit Charles Follen, a German immigrant to Boston, for being the first to introduce to America the custom of decorating a Christmas tree.
Basil the Great, who is thought to visit people during Christmas similar to the Santa Claus tradition.
Concerns have been raised about people cutting down old and rare conifers, such as the ''Keteleeria evelyniana'', for Christmas trees.
Under the Marxist-Leninist doctrine of state atheism in the Soviet Union, after its foundation in 1917, Christmas celebrations—along with other religious holidays—were prohibited as a result of the Soviet anti-religious campaign.
The remaining development of the tree greatly depends on the climate, soil quality, as well as the cultivation and how the trees are tended by the Christmas tree farmer.
Silvered saran-based tinsel was introduced later.
Glass baubles were first made in Lauscha, Germany,  garlands of glass beads and tin figures that could be hung on trees.
In the late 1800s, home-made white Christmas trees were made by wrapping strips of cotton batting around leafless branches creating the appearance of a snow-laden tree.
In Italy and Argentina, along with many countries in Latin America, the Christmas tree is put up on 8 December (Immaculate Conception day) and left up until 6 January.
There were two large round tables on which were placed two trees hung with lights and sugar ornaments.
This tradition grew into one of the most spectacular and celebrated events in the history of southern Florida, but was discontinued on the death of the paper's founder in the late 1980s.
File:Y Christmas Tree 2.jpg|Artificial tree
The long-needled eastern white pine is also used there, though it is an unpopular Christmas tree in most parts of the country, owing also to its faded winter coloration and limp branches, making decorating difficult with all but the lightest ornaments.
Hemlock species are generally considered unsuitable as Christmas trees due to their poor needle retention and inability to support the weight of lights and ornaments.
Princess Henrietta of Nassau-Weilburg introduced the Christmas tree to Vienna in 1816, and the custom spread across Austria in the following years.
These pale-colored ornaments differ in height from  to .
It became a fully secular icon of the New Year holiday, for example, the crowning star was regarded not as a symbol of Bethlehem Star, but as the Red star.
In the past, Christmas trees were often harvested from wild forests, but now almost all are commercially grown on tree farms.
File:Aluminum christmas tree4.jpg|An artificial Aluminum Christmas tree
Only at the start of the 20th century did Christmas trees appear inside churches, this time in a new brightly lit form.
Professor David Albert Jones of Oxford University writes that in the 19th century, it became popular for people to also use an angel to top the Christmas tree in order to symbolize the angels mentioned in the accounts of the Nativity of Jesus.
The republished ''Godey's'' image became the first widely circulated picture of a decorated evergreen Christmas tree in America.
In the past, lead was often used as a stabilizer in PVC, but is now banned by Chinese laws.
A professional study on the life-cycle assessment of both real and artificial Christmas trees revealed that one must use an artificial Christmas tree at least 20 years to leave an environmental footprint as small as the natural Christmas tree.
Between 2001 and 2007 artificial Christmas tree sales in the U.S. jumped from 7.3 million to 17.4 million.
The first recorded Christmas tree can be found on the keystone sculpture of a private home in Turckheim, France dating 1576.
File:HK TST night Harbour City front entrance indoor stairs interior Xmas trees Nov-2013.JPG|Christmas trees in Ocean Terminal, Harbour City, Hong Kong
The popularity of these decorations grew into the production of glass figures made by highly skilled artisans with clay molds.
Delicate mold-blown and painted colored glass Christmas ornaments were a specialty of the glass factories in the Thuringian Forest, especially in Lauscha in the late 19th century, and have since become a large industry, complete with famous-name designers.
In 2006, the Seattle–Tacoma International Airport removed all of its Christmas trees in the middle of the night rather than allow a rabbi to put up a menorah near the largest tree display.
One Dallas-based company offers "holographic mylar" trees in many hues.
File:Xmastreenewyork06.jpg| Rockefeller Center Christmas Tree
File:Chrismon tree stalbans oviedo fl.jpg|A chrismon tree (St. Alban's Anglican Cathedral, Oviedo, Florida)
File:Christmas baubles 08 - 01.JPG|Fabergé egg as a Christmas decoration.
These seeds are then usually grown in nurseries and then sold to Christmas tree farms at an age of 3–4 years.
File:Governor's Living Room.jpg|Christmas Tree in the cozy room at the Wisconsin Governor's mansion.
Often Christmas trees are a large attraction for living animals, including mice and spiders.
File:1870 ChristmasTree byEhninger HarpersBazaar.jpeg|Illustration for ''Harper's Bazaar'', published 1 January 1870.
In 1933 a restriction on the importation of foreign trees led to the 'rapid growth of a new industry' as the growing of Christmas trees within Britain became commercially viable due to the size of demand.
The Christmas tree was first used by German Lutherans in the 16th Century, with records indicating that a Christmas tree was placed in the Cathedral of Strassburg in 1539, under the leadership of the Protestant Reformer, Martin Bucer.
It was the aging countess who told the story of the first Danish Christmas tree to the Danish writer Hans Christian Andersen in 1865.
File:Choinka plac Zamkowy 2011.jpg|Christmas tree in Warsaw
In Germany, traditionally the tree is put up on 24 December and taken down on 7 January, though many start one or two weeks earlier, and in Roman Catholic homes the tree may be kept until February 2 (Candlemas).
The Christmas tree has also been known as the "Yule-tree", especially in discussions of its folkloric origins.
Queen Victoria as a child was familiar with it and a tree was placed in her room every Christmas.
The custom did eventually gain wider acceptance beginning around 1815 by way of Prussian officials who emigrated there following the Congress of Vienna.
There were home flocking kits that could be used with vacuum cleaners.
This transition from the guild hall to the bourgeois family homes in the Protestant parts of Germany ultimately gives rise to the modern tradition as it developed in the 18th and 19th centuries.
Aluminum Christmas trees were popular during the early 1960s in the US.
In the previous year he said: "Beside the crib, the Christmas tree, with its twinkling lights, reminds us that with the birth of Jesus the tree of life has blossomed anew in the desert of humanity.
Feather Christmas trees ranged widely in size, from a small  tree to a large  tree sold in department stores during the 1920s.
Tree-shaped objects made from such materials as cardboard, glass, ceramic or other materials can be found in use as tabletop decorations.
However, trade groups such as the American Christmas Tree Association, continue to refute that artificial trees are more harmful to the environment, and maintain that the PVC used in Christmas trees has excellent recyclable properties.
The apples were replaced by round objects such as shiny red balls.
Optical fiber Christmas trees come in two major varieties; one resembles a traditional Christmas tree.
Norfolk Island pine is sometimes used, particularly in Oceania, and in Australia, some species of the genera ''Casuarina'' and ''Allocasuarina'' are also occasionally used as Christmas trees.
A woodcut of the British Royal family with their Christmas tree at Windsor Castle, initially published in ''The Illustrated London News'' December 1848, was copied in the United States at Christmas 1850, in ''Godey's Lady's Book''.
Entering into the social life of the Virginia Tidewater, Minnigerode introduced the German custom of decorating an evergreen tree at Christmas at the home of law professor St. George Tucker, thereby becoming another of many influences that prompted Americans to adopt the practice at about that time.
File:Christmas baubles 08 - 02.JPG|Christmas baubles
Real trees are carbon-neutral, they emit no more carbon dioxide by being cut down and disposed of than they absorb while growing.
In 2005, the city of Boston renamed the spruce tree used to decorate the Boston Common a "Holiday Tree" rather than a "Christmas Tree".
Upside-down artificial Christmas trees became popular for a short time and were originally introduced as a marketing gimmick; they allowed consumers to get closer to ornaments for sale in retail stores and opened up floor space for more products.
In 1930, the U.S.-based Addis Brush Company created the first artificial Christmas tree made from brush bristles.
In 2004, Pope John Paul called the Christmas tree a symbol of Christ.
File:Gezin bij de kerstboom.jpg|Christmas in the Netherlands, c. 1899
File:Christmas baubles 08 - 12.JPG|Christmas decorations
Anti-German sentiment after World War I briefly reduced their popularity but the effect was short-lived and by the mid-1920s the use of Christmas trees had spread to all classes.
In his diary, Matthew Zahm of Lancaster, Pennsylvania, recorded the use of a Christmas tree in 1821, leading Lancaster to also lay claim to the first Christmas tree in America.
These "trees" were made using goose feathers that were dyed green., as one response by Germans to continued deforestation.
However, when done improperly, the combination of root loss caused by digging, and the indoor environment of high temperature and low humidity is very detrimental to the tree's health; additionally, the warmth of an indoor climate will bring the tree out of its natural winter dormancy, leaving it little protection when put back outside into a cold outdoor climate.
File:Fiber-optic Christmas tree.jpg|A tree with fibre optic lights
The name change drew a poor response from the public and it was reversed after the city was threatened with several lawsuits.
The modern Christmas tree was developed in early modern Germany (where it is today called ''Weihnachtsbaum'' or ''Christbaum'')  with predecessors that can be traced to the 16th and possibly 15th century, in which devout Christians brought decorated trees into their homes.
File:South Coast Plaza (2013) 01.jpg|Christmas tree in South Coast Plaza, California
The Catholic Church's official ''Book of Blessings'' has a service for the blessing of the Christmas tree in a home.
A 2004 study found that while in general artificial trees pose little health risk from lead contamination, there do exist "worst-case scenarios" where major health risks to young children exist.
File:A baseball-shaped snowman decoration.jpg|A snowman-shaped decoration painted as a baseball
File:Christmas-bauble-on-gold-11289575412UeK.jpg|Red ornamented Christmas bauble
The article distinguishes between customs in different states however, claiming that in New England generally "Christmas is not much celebrated", whereas in Pennsylvania and New York it is.
Approximately 10% of artificial Christmas trees are using virgin suspension PVC resin; despite being plastic most artificial trees are not recyclable or biodegradable.
Rentals are picked up after the holidays, while purchased trees can be planted by the owner after use or donated to local tree adoption or urban reforestation services.
File:Елочное украшение "Космонавт" 1960е.JPG|A Soviet-era (1960s) New Year tree decoration depicting a cosmonaut
This very ancient custom, he said, exalts the value of life, as in winter what is evergreen becomes a sign of undying life, and it reminds Christians of the "tree of life" of , an image of Christ, the supreme gift of God to humanity.
The report determined that of the 50 million artificial trees in the United States approximately 20 million were 9 or more years old, the point where dangerous lead contamination levels are reached.
Edward H. Johnson became the Father of Electric Christmas Tree Lights.
The first evidence of decorated trees associated with Christmas Day are trees in guildhalls decorated with sweets to be enjoyed by the apprentices and children.
Christmas ornaments are decorations (usually made of glass, metal, wood, or ceramics) that are used to  decorate a Christmas tree.
The first artificial Christmas trees were developed in Germany during the 19th century, though earlier examples exist.
File:2010 Boston Halifax Christmas tree on Boston Common USA 5273771973.jpg|Boston's Christmas Tree.
Albero di Natale Milano dicembre 2008.jpg|Christmas tree in Milano, Italy, 2008
In such plays, a tree decorated with apples (to represent the forbidden fruit) and wafers (to represent the Eucharist and redemption) was used as a setting for the play.
The lyrics sung in the United States to the German tune '''' begin "O Christmas tree", giving rise to the mistaken idea that the German word '''' (fir tree) means "Christmas tree", the German word for which is instead ''''.
Like the Christmas crib, the Paradise tree was later placed in homes.
In that same year, it was estimated that Americans spent $1.5 billion on Christmas trees.
The United States' National Christmas Tree has been lit each year since 1923 on the South Lawn of the White House.
Pope John Paul II introduced the Christmas tree custom to the Vatican in 1982.
The League of Militant Atheists encouraged school pupils to campaign against Christmas traditions, among them being the Christmas tree, as well as other Christian holidays, including Easter; the League established an anti-religious holiday to be the 31st of each month as a replacement.
In the 1980s some trees were sprayed with fluffy white flocking to simulate snow.
Often, the tree branches were tipped with artificial red berries which acted as candle holders.
Several cities in the United States with German connections lay claim to that country's first Christmas tree: Windsor Locks, Connecticut, claims that a Hessian soldier put up a Christmas tree in 1777 while imprisoned at the Noden-Reed House, while the "First Christmas Tree in America" is also claimed by Easton, Pennsylvania, where German settlers purportedly erected a Christmas tree in 1816.
Along the lower Rhine, an area of Roman Catholic majority, the Christmas tree was largely regarded as a Protestant custom.
Norway also annually gifts a Christmas tree to Washington, D.C. as a symbol of friendship between Norway and the US and as an expression of gratitude from Norway for the help received from the US during World War II.
In the 18th century, it began to be illuminated by candles which were ultimately replaced by Christmas lights after the advent of electrification.
Art historian Karal Ann Marling called Prince Albert and Queen Victoria, shorn of their royal trappings, "the first influential American Christmas tree".
Users of artificial Christmas trees assert that they are more convenient, and, because they are reusable, much cheaper than their natural alternative.
Various types of spruce tree are also used for Christmas trees (including the blue spruce and, less commonly, the white spruce); but spruces begin to lose their needles rapidly upon being cut, and spruce needles are often sharp, making decorating uncomfortable.
In the early 19th century, the custom became popular among the nobility and spread to royal courts as far as Russia.
President Jimmy Carter lit only the crowning star atop the tree in 1979 in honor of the Americans being held hostage in Iran.
Although at first disapproved of by some as out of place at the centre of the Roman Catholic Church, the Vatican Christmas Tree has become an integral part of the Vatican Christmas celebrations, and in 2005 Pope Benedict XVI spoke of it as part of the normal Christmas decorations in Catholic homes.
File:Stockholm - NK.jpg|Christmas tree in Stockholm at NK shopping mall
A later folk version of the story adds the detail that an evergreen tree grew in place of the felled oak, telling them about how its triangular shape reminds humanity of the Trinity and how it points to heaven.
Superstitions say that it is a bad sign if Christmas greenery is not removed by Candlemas Eve.
Licensed applicants of fire retardant solution spray the tree, tag the tree, and provide a certificate for inspection.
Tinsel and several types of garland or ribbon are commonly used to decorate a Christmas tree.
''Godey's'' copied it exactly, except for the removal of the Queen's tiara and Prince Albert's moustache, to remake the engraving into an American scene.
File:Komissarzhevskaya Nora.jpgVera Komissarzhevskaya as Nora in Ibsen's ''A Doll's House'' ( 1904).
In the 19th century, the Christmas tree was taken to be an expression of German culture and of '''', especially among emigrants overseas.
Some families in the U.S. and Canada will put up a Christmas tree a week prior to American Thanksgiving (the fourth Thursday of November), and Christmas decorations can show up even earlier in retail stores, often the day after Halloween (31 October).
Most modern artificial Christmas trees are made from plastic recycled from used packaging materials, such as polyvinyl chloride (PVC).
Other trends have developed in the early 2000s as well.
Georgians believe that Chichilaki resembles the famous beard of St.
The use of fire retardant allows many indoor public areas to place real trees and be compliant with code.
Photo by Elena Mrozovskaya
Chichilakis are most common in the Guria and Samegrelo regions of Georgia near the Black Sea, but they can also be found in some stores around the capital of Tbilisi.
Generally, natural tree growers contend that artificial trees are more environmentally harmful than their natural counterparts.
After the Protestant Reformation, such trees are seen in the houses of upper-class Protestant families as a counterpart to the Catholic Christmas cribs.
The image was reprinted in 1860, and by the 1870s, putting up a Christmas tree had become common in America.
File:Christmas Tree Bear Decoration.png|A toy bear Christmas decoration.
The same was true in 1980, except that the tree was fully lit for 417 seconds, one second for each day the hostages had been in captivity.
By 1856 a northern provincial newspaper contained an advert alluding casually to them, as well as reporting the accidental death of a woman whose dress caught fire as she lit the tapers on a Christmas tree.
The TV special ''A Charlie Brown Christmas'' (1965) was influential on the pop culture surrounding the Christmas tree.
In 1998, there were about 15,000 growers in America (a third of them "choose and cut" farms).
Some households do not put up the tree until the second week of December, and leave it up until 6 January (Epiphany).
During most of the 1970s and 1980s, the largest decorated Christmas tree in the world was put up every year on the property of the ''National Enquirer'' in Lantana, Florida.
File:Christmas Lisbon 2005 b.JPG| in Lisbon (2005), at 75&nbsp;metres (246&nbsp;feet) the tallest Christmas tree in Europe.
The Georgians have their own traditional Christmas tree called Chichilaki, made from dried up hazelnut or walnut branches that are shaped to form a small coniferous tree.
File:Piazza Portanova Natale 2008.jpg|Christmas tree in Salerno old town, Italy, 2008.
The first decorated trees were adorned with apples, white candy canes and pastries in the shapes of stars, hearts and flowers.
Thus, the survival rate of these trees is low.
In 1842 a newspaper advert for Christmas trees makes clear their smart cachet, German origins and association with children and gift-giving.
The use of lead stabilizer in Chinese imported trees has been an issue of concern among politicians and scientists over recent years.
After the signing of the Armistice in 1918 the city of Manchester sent a tree, and £500 to buy chocolate and cakes, for the children of the much-bombarded town of Lille in northern France.
According to the United States Department of Agriculture's agriculture census for 2007, 21,537 farms were producing conifers for the cut Christmas tree market in America,  were planted in Christmas trees.
Alternately, live trees can be donated to livestock farmers of such animals like goats who find that such trees uncontaminated by chemical additives are excellent fodder.
File:Lodovico and Maria Angelica Calderara 12800u original.jpg| An Italian American family on Christmas 1924
The custom did not at first spread much beyond the royal family.
A '''Christmas tree''' is a decorated tree, usually an evergreen conifer such as spruce, pine, or fir or an artificial tree of similar appearance, associated with the celebration of Christmas.
As a result, it remained confined to the upper Rhineland for a relatively long period of time.
File:White christmas tree.jpg|White Christmas tree
Almost all Christmas trees in the United States are grown on Christmas tree farms where they are cut after about ten years of growth and new trees planted.
''Adenanthos sericeus'' or Albany woolly bush is commonly sold in southern Australia as a potted living Christmas tree.
First, the seed is extracted from cones harvested from older trees.
Leading global retailers such as Apple often place real trees in their window displays.
Today, there is a wide variety of traditional ornaments, such as garland, tinsel, and candy canes.
