In 1657 he contracted the construction of his designs to Salomon Coster in The Hague, with a local patent (''octroy'').
It was also in this book that Huygens published his method for estimating stellar distances.
Constantijn Huygens was a diplomat and advisor to the House of Orange, and also a poet and musician.
Exploiting the invention at sea proved troublesome, however.
Huygens taught him analytical geometry; an extensive correspondence ensued, in which Huygens showed reluctance to accept the advantages of infinitesimal calculus.
The new clock was potentially suitable for navigational uses (longitude by chronometer).
Some of Mersenne's concerns at the time, such as the cycloid (he sent Evangelista Torricelli's treatise on the curve), the centre of oscillation, and the gravitational constant, were matters Huygens only took seriously towards the end of the 17th century.
He then had a stint as a diplomat on a mission with Henry, Duke of Nassau.
Streete then debated the published record of the transit of Hevelius, a controversy mediated by Henry Oldenburg.
with ''m'' the mass of the object, ''v'' the velocity and ''r'' the radius.
Tome VIII: Correspondance 1676–1684 (1899).
He died in The Hague on 8 July 1695, and was buried in the Grote Kerk.
His father sent Huygens to study law and mathematics at the University of Leiden, where he studied from May 1645 to March 1647.
At this time Leibniz was working on a calculating machine, and he moved on to London in early 1673 with diplomats from Mainz; but from March 1673 Leibniz was tutored in mathematics by Huygens.
Traité des couronnes et des parhélies (1662 ou 1663) (1932).
A basic principle of Huygens is that the speed of light is finite, a point which had been the subject of an experimental demonstration by Olaus Roemer (1679 at the Paris Observatory), but which Huygens is presumed to have believed already.
Using his modern telescope he succeeded in subdividing the nebula into different stars.
Huygens generally wrote in French or Latin.
By his study of the oscillation period of compound pendulums Huygens made pivotal contributions to the development of the concept of moment of inertia.
He refers to Ignace-Gaston Pardies, whose manuscript on optics helped him on his wave theory.
:''Tome XVI: Mécanique jusqu’à 1666.
The interference experiments of Thomas Young vindicated a wave theory in 1801: the results could not be explained with light particles.
Christiaan Huygens was born on 14 April 1629 in The Hague, into a rich and influential Dutch family, the second son of Constantijn Huygens.
He used repeated observations of the movement of this feature over the course of a number of days to estimate the length of day on Mars, which he did quite accurately to 24 1/2 hours.
Such speculations were not uncommon at the time, justified by Copernicanism or the plenitude principle.
Visiting Paris in 1655, Huygens called on Ismael Boulliau to introduce himself.
He then calculated that the angle of this hole was th the diameter of the Sun, and thus it was about 30,000 times as far away, on the (incorrect) assumption that Sirius is as luminous as our sun.
In it he speculated on the existence of extraterrestrial life, on other planets, which he imagined was similar to that on Earth.
His work on pendulums came very close to the theory of simple harmonic motion; but the topic was covered fully for the first time by Newton, in Book II of his ''Principia Mathematica'' (1687).
Seeing the universe this way made the theory of collisions central to physics.
Huygens also observed coupled oscillations: two of his pendulum clocks mounted next to each other on the same support often became synchronized, swinging in opposite directions.
In 1659, Huygens was the first to observe a surface feature on another planet, Syrtis Major, a volcanic plain on Mars.
It deals with wave fronts and their normal rays, with propagation conceived by means of spherical waves emitted along the wave front (see also Huygens–Fresnel principle).
Persisting in trying to explain the errors Hobbes had fallen into, he made an international reputation.
Catalogue de la vente des livres de Chr.
While still a college student at Leiden he began a correspondence with the intelligencer Mersenne, who died quite soon afterwards in 1648.
He later explained it with his wave front theory and concept of evolutes.
At first he could not elucidate what he found.
There are others to whom such a lantern device has been attributed, such as Giambattista della Porta, and Cornelis Drebbel: the point at issue is the use of a lens for better projection.
In 1644 Huygens had as his mathematical tutor Jan Jansz de Jonge Stampioen, who set the 15-year-old a demanding reading list on contemporary science.
Athanasius Kircher has also been credited for that.
In 1647/8 they cover the claim of Grégoire de Saint-Vincent to squaring the circle; rectification of the ellipse; projectiles, and the vibrating string.
He liked to play with miniatures of mills and other machines.
:''Tome XIV: Calcul des probabilités.
England's part in it (1672–4) is thought to have damaged his relationship with the Royal Society.
The theory is kinematic and its scope largely restricted to geometric optics.
Lenses were also a common interest through which Huygens could meet socially in the 1660s with Baruch Spinoza, who ground them professionally.
Jean Richer suggested correction for the figure of the Earth.
Papin moved to England in 1678, and continued to work in this area.
Tome IX: Correspondance 1685–1690 (1901).
Frans van Schooten translated the original Dutch manuscript "Van Rekeningh in Spelen van Geluck" into Latin and published it in his ''Exercitationum mathematicarum''.
In 1666 he moved to Paris and a position at Louis XIV's new French Academy of Sciences.
The balance-spring priority controversy appears, by the evidence contained in those notes, to be settled in favour of Hooke's claim.
He passed them on in person to William Brouncker and Christopher Wren in London, in 1661.
His work included early telescopic studies of the rings of Saturn and the discovery of its moon Titan, the invention of the pendulum clock and other investigations in timekeeping.
The theory of Huygens was not accepted, by some, because longitudinal waves cannot show birefringence.
He reported the results by letter to the Royal Society, and it is referred to as "an odd kind of sympathy" in the Society's minutes.
Constantijn Huygens was closely involved in the new College, which lasted only to 1669; the rector was André Rivet.
What Spinoza wrote to Henry Oldenburg about them, in 1666 which was during the Second Anglo-Dutch War, was guarded.
While he was influenced by the Cartesian approach, he was less doctrinaire.
The oldest known Huygens-style pendulum clock is dated 1657 and can be seen at the Museum Boerhaave in Leiden.
Huygens wrote that availability of water in liquid form was essential for life and that the properties of water must vary from planet to planet to suit the temperature range.
On his third visit to England, in 1689, Huygens met Isaac Newton on 12 June.
with ''T'' the period, ''l'' the length of the pendulum and ''g'' the gravitational acceleration.
It has been said that Huygens finally accepted Boyle's view of the void, as against the Cartesian denial of it; and also (in ''Leviathan and the Air Pump'') that the replication of results trailed off messily.
His aim was to understand telescopes.
He published them in the ''Journal des sçavans'' in 1669.
Huygens concluded quite early that Descartes's laws for the elastic collision of two bodies must be wrong, and he formulated the correct laws.
the captain of Holmes' ship ''affirmed, that the vulgar reckoning proved as near as that of the watches, which'' the clocks, ''added he, had varied from one another unequally, sometimes backward, sometimes forward, to 4, 6, 7, 3, 5 minutes; as also that they had been corrected by the usual account.''
The publication of the general formula for this force in 1673 was a significant step in studying orbits in astronomy.
His friends included Galileo Galilei, Marin Mersenne and René Descartes.
One for the French Academy on an expedition to Cayenne ended badly.
The solution to the problem Huygens had faced was then resolved by a transverse wave theory.
Besides, Huygens was looking by then to apply mathematics, while Fermat's concerns ran to purer topics.
* 1888–1950 – ''Huygens, Christiaan.
It proved a long process, brought to the surface an experimental issue ("anomalous suspension") and the theoretical issue of ''horror vacui'', and ended in July 1663 as Huygens became a Fellow of the Royal Society.
He attempted to return to France in 1685 but the revocation of the Edict of Nantes precluded this move.
The war ended in 1667, and Huygens announced his results to the Royal Society in 1668.
The couple had five children: Constantijn (1628), Christiaan (1629), Lodewijk (1631), Philips (1632) and Suzanna (1637).
:''Tome XV: Observations astronomiques.
In the same year he observed and sketched the Orion Nebula.
II: Dioptrique 1685–1692 (1916). ''
Tome V: Correspondance 1664–1665 (1893).
In 1655, Huygens proposed that Saturn was surrounded by a solid ring, "a thin, flat ring, nowhere touching, and inclined to the ecliptic."
Descartes was impressed by his skills in geometry.
He had been told of recent work in the field by Fermat, Blaise Pascal and Girard Desargues two years earlier, in Paris.
After his first visit to England in 1661, when he attended a meeting of the Gresham College group in April and learned directly about Boyle's air pump experiments, Huygens spent time in late 1661 and early 1662 replicating the work.
Trials continued into the 1660s, the best news coming from a Royal Navy captain Robert Holmes operating against the Dutch possessions in 1664.
Question de l'existence et de la perceptibilité du mouvement absolu.
Christiaan was named after his paternal grandfather.
The work, translated into English in its year of publication, has been seen as in the fanciful tradition of Francis Godwin, John Wilkins and Cyrano de Bergerac, and fundamentally Utopian; and also to owe in its concept of planet to cosmography in the sense of Peter Heylin.
He encountered the work of Antoni van Leeuwenhoek, another lens grinder, in the field of microscopy which interested his father.
Huygens preferred meantone temperament; he innovated in 31 equal temperament, which was not itself a new idea but known to Francisco de Salinas, using logarithms to investigate it further and show its close relation to the meantone system.
After two years, from March 1647, Huygens continued his studies at the newly founded College of Orange, in Breda, where his father was a curator: the change occurred because of a duel between his brother Lodewijk and another student.
Huygens stated what is now known as the second of  Newton's laws of motion in a quadratic form.
He published major studies of mechanics and optics, and a pioneer work on games of chance.
Huygens had actually worked them out in a manuscript ''De motu corporum ex percussione'' in the period 1652–6.
Travaux astronomiques 1658–1666 (1925). ''
He began grinding his own lenses in 1655, collaborating with his brother Constantijn.
The interpretation of Newton's work on gravitation by Huygens differed, however, from that of Newtonians such as Roger Cotes; he did not insist on the ''a priori'' attitude of Descartes, but neither would he accept aspects of gravitational attractions that were not attributable in principle to contact of particles.
Huygens postulated that the great distance between the planets signified that God had not intended for beings on one to know about the beings on the others, and had not foreseen how much humans would advance in scientific knowledge.
His mother was Suzanna van Baerle.
Van Schooten brought his mathematical education up to date, in particular introducing him to the work of Fermat on differential geometry.
Huygens moved back to The Hague in 1681 after suffering serious depressive illness.
But Huygens went into greater detail.
Système de Saturne.
He was less successful elsewhere: Pierre Séguier refused him any French rights, Simon Douw of Rotterdam copied the design in 1658, and Ahasuerus Fromanteel also, in London.
The Hague'' Complete work, editors D. Bierens de Haan (tome=deel 1-5), J. Bosscha (6-10), D.J.
The nature of light was therefore a longitudinal wave.
While his father had wished Christiaan to be a diplomat, it also was not to be.
By the time of the Dutch East India Company expedition of 1686 to the Cape of Good Hope, Huygens was able to supply the correction retrospectively.
In 1684, he published ''Astroscopia Compendiaria'' on his new tubeless aerial telescope.
Travaux divers de physique, de mécanique et de technique de 1650 à 1666.
In 1659 he derived the now standard formula for the centripetal force, exerted by an object describing a circular motion, for instance on the string to which it is attached.
Huygens has been called the leading European natural philosopher between Descartes and Newton.
:''Tome XXII: Supplément à la correspondance.
It took him to Bentheim, then Flensburg.
:''Tome I: Correspondance 1638–1656 (1888).
In the same work, he analysed the conical pendulum, consisting of a weight on a cord moving in a circle, using the concept of centrifugal force.
Controversy over the priority persisted for centuries.
:''Tome XX: Musique et mathématique.
He took off for Denmark, visited Copenhagen and Helsingør, and hoped to cross the Øresund to visit Descartes in Stockholm.
In the analysis of the Scientific Revolution this appears as a mainstream position, at least from the founding of the Royal Society to the emergence of Newton, and was sometimes labelled "Baconian", while not being inductivist or identifying with the views of Francis Bacon in a simple-minded way.
Huygens à l'Académie royale des sciences (1937). ''
He adhered to the tenets of the mechanical philosophy of his time.
The letters show the early interests of Huygens in mathematics.
His views then took many years to be circulated.
Huygens took as intuitive his appeals to concepts of a "fair game" and equitable contract, and used them set up a theory of expected values.
The implication is that Huygens thought that his spiral spring would isochronise the balance, in the same way that he thought that the cycloidally shaped suspension curbs on his clocks would isochronise the pendulum.
Such springs were essential in modern watches with a detached lever escapement because they can be adjusted for isochronism.
The family had another house, not far away at Hofwijck, and he spent time there during the summer.
Watches in the time of Huygens and Hooke, however, employed the very undetached verge escapement.
This figure is only a few minutes off of the actual length of the Martian day of 24 hours, 37 minutes.
Force centrifuge (1929).
Tome XIX: Mécanique théorique et physique de 1666 à 1695.
Tome II: Correspondance 1657–1659 (1889).
By geometrical methods which were an early use of calculus, he showed it to be a cycloid, rather than the circular arc of a pendulum's bob, and therefore that pendulums are not isochronous.
In 1654, Huygens returned to his father's house in The Hague, and was able to devote himself entirely to research.
In February 2006, a long-lost copy of Hooke's handwritten notes from several decades of Royal Society meetings was discovered in a cupboard in Hampshire, England.
Matter in motion made up the universe, and only explanations in those terms could be truly intelligible.
Huygens observed the acoustical phenomenon now known as flanging in 1693.
She died in 1637, shortly after the birth of Huygens' sister.
Denis Papin was assistant to Huygens from 1671.
:''Tome XXI: Cosmologie (1944). ''
Huygens passed to Hevelius a manuscript of Jeremiah Horrocks on the transit of Venus, 1639, which thereby was printed for the first time in 1662.
In 1678 he introduced Nicolaas Hartsoeker to French scientists such as Nicolas Malebranche and Giovanni Cassini.
His father died in 1687, and he inherited Hofwijck, which he made his home the following year.
His relationship with the Academy was not always easy, however, and in 1670 Huygens, seriously ill, chose Francis Vernon to carry out a donation of his papers to the Royal Society in London, should he die.
In 1660 Lodewijk Huygens made a trial on a voyage to Spain, and reported that heavy weather made the clock useless.
For a view from modern physics see wave–particle duality.
He also solved a problem posed by Mersenne: how to calculate the period of a pendulum made of an arbitrarily shaped swinging rigid body.
Using a 50 power refracting telescope that he designed himself, Huygens also discovered the first of Saturn's moons, Titan.
This involved discovering the center of oscillation and its reciprocal relationship with the pivot point.
Huygens studied spherical lenses from a theoretical point of view in 1652–3, obtaining results that remained unpublished until Isaac Barrow (1669).
In common with Robert Boyle and Jacques Rohault, Huygens adhered to what has been called, more explicitly, "experimentally oriented corpuscular-mechanical" natural philosophy.
Quadrature was a live issue in the 1650s, and through Mylon, Huygens intervened in the discussion of the mathematics of Thomas Hobbes.
It was published in 1690 in his ''Traité de la lumière'' (Treatise on light), making it the first mathematical theory of light.
His drawing, the first such known of the Orion nebula, was published in ''Systema Saturnium'' in 1659.
It interfered with the isochronal properties of any form of balance spring, spiral or otherwise.
The approach used by Huygens also missed some central notions of mathematical physics, which were not lost on others.
He designed in 1662 what is now called the Huygenian eyepiece, with two lenses, as a telescope ocular.
Tome XVIII: L'horloge à pendule ou à balancier de 1666 à 1695.
A Huygens watch employed a spiral balance spring; but he used this form of spring initially only because the balance in his first watch rotated more than one and a half turns.
He argued that extraterrestrial life is neither confirmed nor denied by the Bible, and questioned why God would create the other planets if they were not to serve a greater purpose than that of being admired from Earth.
He also developed ideas on caustics.
Huygens developed a balance spring watch in the same period as, though independently of, Robert Hooke.
Shortly before his death in 1695, Huygens completed ''Cosmotheoros'', published posthumously in 1698.
Travaux de mathématiques pures 1655–1666 (1920). ''
Robert Hooke for the Royal Society lacked the urbanity to handle the situation, in 1673.
He took his observations of dark and bright spots on the surfaces of Mars and Jupiter to be evidence of water and ice on those planets.
It included material discussed with Mersenne some years before, such as the fallacious nature of the squaring of the circle by Grégoire de Saint-Vincent.
His scholarly life did not allow him to escape bouts of depression.
Huygens is remembered especially for his wave theory of light, which he first communicated in 1678 to the Paris Académie des sciences.
Through Pierre de Carcavi Huygens corresponded in 1656 with Pierre de Fermat, whom he admired greatly, though this side of idolatry.
I: Dioptrique 1653, 1666 (1916).
In particular he sought explanations of the force of gravity that avoided action at a distance.
It was in Paris, also, that Huygens met the young diplomat Gottfried Leibniz, there in 1672 on a vain mission to meet Arnauld de Pomponne, the French Foreign Minister.
Alexander Bruce elbowed into the field in 1662, and Huygens called in Sir Robert Moray and the Royal Society to mediate and preserve some of his rights.
Mersenne wrote to Constantijn on his son's talent for mathematics, and flatteringly compared him to Archimedes (3 January 1647).
The brighter interior now bears the name of the ''Huygenian region'' in his honour.
Then the Franco-Dutch War took place (1672−8).
Christiaan Huygens lived at the home of the jurist Johann Henryk Dauber, and had mathematics classes with the English lecturer John Pell.
:''Tome XI: Travaux mathématiques 1645–1651 (1908).
Lisa Jardine  doubts that Holmes reported the results of the trial accurately, and Samuel Pepys expressed his doubts at the time: ''The said master'' i.e.
He later used spiral springs in more conventional watches, made for him by Thuret in Paris from around 1675.
Tome VII: Correspondance 1670–1675 (1897).
Tome XII: Travaux mathématiques pures 1652–1656 (1910). ''
Mathématiques de 1666 à 1695 (1940). ''
The Montmor Academy was the form the old Mersenne circle took after the mid-1650s.
Newton in his ''Opticks'' of 1704 proposed instead a corpuscular theory of light.
Korteweg (11-15), A.A. Nijland (15), J.A.
Huygens was a leading scientist of his time.
Leibniz, his student in Paris, abandoned the theory.
He completed his studies in August 1649.
The general approach of the mechanical philosophers was to postulate theories of the kind now called "contact action".
He is credited as the inventor of the magic lantern, described in correspondence of 1659.
The experience was bittersweet and even puzzling, since it became clear that Fermat had dropped out of the research mainstream, and his priority claims could probably not be made good in some cases.
Tome VI: Correspondance 1666–1669 (1895).
His invention of the pendulum clock was a breakthrough in timekeeping, and he made a prototype by the end of 1656.
The Parisian group of savants that had gathered around Mersenne held together into the 1650s, and Mylon, who had assumed the secretarial role, took some trouble from then on to keep Huygens in touch.
