It was developed in 19th-century New England by Mary Baker Eddy, who argued in her book ''Science and Health'' (1875) that sickness is an illusion that can be corrected by prayer alone.
Stark writes that clusters of practitioners listed in the ''Christian Science Journal'' in 1998 were living in the same retirement communities.
The book was positively received by Amos Bronson Alcott, who in 1876 wrote to Eddy that she had "reaffirmed in modern phrase the Christian revelations," and that he was pleased it had been written by a woman.
The case was filed in the name of one of Spofford's patients, Lucretia Brown, who said that he had bewitched her, though Eddy appeared in court on Brown's behalf.
She was taken up in an insensible condition and carried into the residence of S. M. Bubier, Esq., near by, where she was kindly cared for during the night.
Of the 14 practitioners listed in the first edition of the ''Christian Science Journal'', 12 were women.
To the dismay of the Christian Scientists' Association (the secretary resigned), Eddy distanced herself from Corner, telling the ''Boston Globe'' that Corner had only attended the college for one term and had never entered the obstetrics class.
That means that there is no person to be healed, no material body, no patient, no matter, no illness, no one to heal, no substance, no person, no thing and no place that needs to be influenced.
Juries were nevertheless reluctant to convict when defendants believed they were helping the patient.
The church was struggling and her reputation had been damaged by the disputes.
On August 23, 1879, 26 members of the Christian Scientists' Association were granted a charter to form the Church of Christ (Scientist).
She believed that several students were using what she called "malicious animal magnetism," or evil thought, against her.
'''Christian Science''' is a set of beliefs and practices belonging to the metaphysical family of new religious movements.
Christian Science became the fastest growing religion in the United States, with nearly 270,000 members by 1936, a figure that had declined by 1990 to just over 100,000.
From it may be learned that either human faith or the divine Mind is the healer and that there is no efficacy in a drug.
It became the key source for most non-church histories of the religion.
71 South Common Street, Lynn, Mass.
She filed lawsuits against him and others for royalties or unpaid tuition fees.
There was also opposition to the AMA's effort to strengthen medical licensing laws.
The answer: "Principle, wisdom, love, and truth."
Eddy wrote in the ''New York Sun'' in December 1898, in an article called "To the Christian World," that she had personally healed tuberculosis, diphtheria and "at one visit a cancer that had eaten the flesh of the neck and exposed the jugular vein so that it stood out like a cord.
There was a temporary reconciliation, but he was unhappy about the abandonment of head rubbing, and after a dispute between Eddy and a student over a refund was played out in the local press, he decided to go his own way.
Despite the support, the resignations ended Eddy's time in Lynn.
In March 1907 several of Eddy's relatives filed an unsuccessful lawsuit, the "Next Friends suit," against members of Eddy's household, alleging that she was unable to manage her own affairs.
Eddy's biographers continued to disagree about his influence on Eddy.
His first article about Christian Science was published in ''Cosmopolitan'' in October 1899.
The bill was supported by two of President Richard Nixon's aides, Christian Scientists H. R. Haldeman  and John Ehrlichman.
The church is known for its newspaper, the ''Christian Science Monitor'', which won seven Pulitzer Prizes between 1950 and 2002, and for its Reading Rooms, which are open to the public in around 1,200 cities.
"Eddyism" was viewed as a cult; one of the first uses of the modern sense of the word was in A. H. Barrington's ''Anti-Christian Cults'' (1898), a book about Spiritualism, Theosophy and Christian Science.
The archway into the room was made of Italian marble, and the word ''Mother'' was engraved on the floor.
In the 1980s the church produced its own television programs, and in 1991 it founded a 24-hour news channel, which closed with heavy losses after 13 months.
It was dated February 1862, eight months before Eddy met Quimby.
There are key differences between Christian Science theology and that of other branches of Christianity.
Christian Science theology differs in several respects from that of traditional Christianity.
A year later, in October 1889, Eddy closed the Massachusetts Metaphysical College; according to Bates and Dittemore, the state attorney was investigating colleges that were fraudulently graduating medical students.
The church's administration is headquartered on Christian Science Center on the corner of Massachusetts Avenue and Huntington Avenue, Boston.
The church published 53,900 such accounts between 1900 and April 1989.
She at first taught them to rub patients' heads, to "lay their hands where the belief is to rub it out forever"; Kennedy would manipulate each student's head and solar plexus before class in preparation.
Stephen Gottschalk wrote that the occasion marked the "emergence of Christian Science into American religious life."
Because no negative accounts are published, the testimonials strengthen people's tendency to rely on anecdotes.
Evil was "like a bankrupt to whom credit is still granted," writes Wilson.
The following year she dissolved the National Christian Science Association.
The law was overturned as unconstitutional in 1987, after a challenge by United Christian Scientists, an independent group.
Churches began to appear in other countries too: 58 in England, 38 in Canada and 28 elsewhere by 1910.
Vaccination was another battleground.
By 1890 the Church of Christ (Scientist) had 8,724 members in the United States, having started 11 years earlier with just 26.
They offer no medical services; the nurses are Christian Scientists who have completed a course of religious study and training in basic skills, such as feeding and bathing.
The essence of the articles, which included court documents and affidavits from Eddy's associates, was that Eddy's chief concern was money, and that she had derived Christian Science from Quimby.
In 1977 16-month-old Matthew Swan died of bacterial meningitis in Detroit, Michigan, after his parents were persuaded not to seek timely medical care; they responded by founding Children's Healthcare is a Legal Duty (CHILD) in 1983.
A census at the height of the religion's popularity in 1936 counted c. 268,915 Christian Scientists in the United States (2,098 per million).
The church maintains that members are free to choose medical care, but several have said they fear ostracism.
Her third husband, Asa Gilbert Eddy, died five years after they married; she believed he had been killed by malicious animal magnetism.
The death in 1967 of five-year-old Lisa Sheridan of pneumonia, in Cape Cod, Massachusetts, was the first of several in the 20th century known within the church as the "child cases," according to Fraser.
In founding the Church of Christ, Scientist, in April 1879, she wrote that she wanted it to "reinstate primitive Christianity and its lost element of healing."
The supreme cause was referred to as Divine Mind, Truth, God, Love, Life, Spirit, Principle or Father–Mother, reflecting elements of Plato, Hinduism, Berkeley, Hegel, Swedenborg and transcendentalism.
The printer's proofreading had been poor.
The 14.5-acre site includes the Mother Church (1894), Mother Church Extension (1906), the Christian Science Publishing Society building (1934)&nbsp;– which houses the Mary Baker Eddy Library and the church's administrative staff&nbsp;– the Sunday School building (1971), and the Church Colonnade building (1972).
The Mother Church announced at the end of the Sunday morning service that Eddy had "passed from our sight."
By 1856 Quimby had 500 patients a year.
Spofford and seven other students agreed to form an association that would pay Eddy a certain amount a week if she would preach to them every Sunday.
For example, an open letter from Eddy to the church, dated September 1895 and published in Eddy's ''Miscellaneous Writings 1883–1896'' (1897), is almost identical to Hugh Blair's essay "The Man of Integrity," published in Lindley Murray's ''The English Reader'' (1799).
She returned to Amesbury to stay with Sally Bagley, where she resumed contact with Richard Kennedy.
The practice became popular.
Those raised by Christian Scientist parents include jurist Helmuth James Graf von Moltke, military analyst Daniel Ellsberg, Ellen DeGeneres, Henry Fonda, Audrey Hepburn, Elizabeth Taylor and Robin Williams.
Christian Science practitioners are certified by the Church of Christ, Scientist, to charge a fee for Christian Science prayer.
Christian Science did not have missionaries, so it relied on internal growth, but the conversion rate within families was not high.
Written and privately printed in 1943 by Bliss Knapp, former president of the Mother Church, the book suggested that Eddy was the Woman of the Apocalypse of the New Testament.
In April she gave a public lecture in Warren, contrasting mental healing with Spiritualism, entitled: "P. P. Quimby's Spiritual Science healing disease, as opposed to Deism or Rochester Rapping Spiritualism."
They called themselves the Christian Scientists' Association.
He can't hurt you, even if he doesn't help you."
Its main religious texts are the Bible and ''Science and Health''.
In a study cited by Stark, of 80 people raised within Christian Science just 26 (33 percent) became Scientists themselves.
The main criticism Christian Scientists face is that their children are denied equal protection under the law.
In 1879 Eddy sued two of the students (unsuccessfully) for royalties from their practices.
– ''Lynn Semi-Weekly Reporter'', August 13, 1870.
Stark charts the use of sulfonamide to kill bacteria, the availability of penicillin in the 1940s and breakthroughs in immunology.
Wilson writes that Christian Science healing is "not curative&nbsp;... on its own premises, but rather preventative of ill health, accident and misfortune, since it claims to lead to a state of consciousness where these things do not exist.
Against this, Lyman P. Powell, one of Eddy's biographers, wrote in 1907 that Quimby's son held an almost identical copy, in Quimby's wife's handwriting, of the Quimby manuscript that Eddy had used when teaching Sally Wentworth.
Gardner argued in 1993 that Eddy had taken "huge chunks" from Quimby, and Gill in 1998 that there were only general similarities.
Kennedy decided toward the end of 1871 to end his business partnership with Eddy.
Medical practice was in its infancy, and patients regularly fared better without it.
The college's prospectus, published in 1884, offered three diplomas: Christian Scientist (C.S.)
The boy's father sued the mother, stepfather, practitioner, nurse, nursing home and church.
Eddy apart, Twain felt ambivalent toward mind-cure, arguing that "the thing back of it is wholly gracious and beautiful."
After attending a lecture in Maine in 1837 by the French mesmerist Charles Poyen, Quimby began to practise mesmerism himself.
Eddy already believed that her former student and business partner Richard Kennedy was plotting against her.
The printer began work in September 1874, but stopped whenever the advance payment ran out, so progress was slow.
Others were arrested in 1899 for avoiding vaccination during a smallpox epidemic in Georgia.
Wilson writes that the concept of malicious animal magnetism was an important one in Christian Science.
Christian Science went on to become the fastest-growing American religion in the early 20th century.
In 1906 72 percent of Christian Scientists in the United States were female, against 49 percent of the population.
The movement traced its roots in the United States to Phineas Parkhurst Quimby (1802–1866), a New England clockmaker turned mental healer, whose motto was "the truth is the cure."
In 1895, in the ''Manual of the Mother Church'', she ordained the Bible and ''Science and Health'' as "Pastor over the Mother Church."
Eddy changed printers for the second edition, which was also poorly proofread, and for the third edition in 1881 switched again, this time to John Wilson & Sons, University Press, Cambridge, MA.
She wrote to him regularly, and composed a sonnet for him, "Mid light of science sits the sage profound."
They believe it is a Christianity that is in the New Testament; that it has always been there, that in the drift of ages it was lost through disuse and neglect, and that this benefactor has found it and given it back to men, turning the night of life into day, its terrors into myths, its lamentations into songs of emancipation and rejoicing.
The church was attractive to women because it offered professional opportunities when it was difficult for women to find work outside the home.
The increased efficacy of medicine around World War II heralded the religion's decline.
He agreed to pay her $1,000 for the previous two years' tuition.
The book became Christian Science's central text, along with the Bible, and by 2001 had sold over nine million copies.
''I'' discovered the art in a ''moment's time'', and he acknowledged it to me; he died shortly after and since then, eight years, I have been founding and demonstrating the science.
In June that year the Mayor of Lynn told the city Eddy had sent them a letter "in which she states that owing to the unsafe condition of the streets&nbsp;... she slipped and fell, causing serious personal injuries, from which she has little prospect of recovering, and asking for pecuniary recompense for the injuries received."
Founded in April 1879, the Church of Christ, Scientist is led by a president and five-person board of directors.
In 1887 Eddy started teaching a "metaphysical obstetrics" course, two one-week classes.
She saw Jesus as a Christian Scientist, a "Way-shower" between humanity and God, and distinguished between Jesus the man and the concept of Christ, the latter a synonym for Truth and Jesus the first person fully to manifest it.
In January 1877 Eddy spurned an approach from Daniel Spofford, and to everyone's surprise married another of her students, Asa Gilbert Eddy.
Her theology is nontrinitarian; she viewed the Trinity as suggestive of polytheism.
Mary Baker Eddy had been a patient of his, leading to debate about how much of Christian Science was based on his ideas.
In March 1875 she purchased it for $5,650, taking in students to pay the mortgage.
In the latter half of the 19th century these included what came to be known as the metaphysical family: groups such as Christian Science, Divine Science, the Unity School of Christianity and (later) the United Church of Religious Science.
This includes the view that disease is a mental error rather than physical disorder, and that the sick should be treated not by medicine, but by a form of prayer that seeks to correct the beliefs responsible for the illusion of ill health.
This became an issue, from 1883 onwards, when Eddy was accused of having based Christian Science on his work.
The church also publishes the weekly ''Christian Science Sentinel'', the monthly ''Christian Science Journal'', and the ''Herald of Christian Science'', a non-English publication.
The fall in Lynn in 1866 was one of several experiences Eddy associated with the development of mental healing.
From then until the 1990s around 50 parents and practitioners were prosecuted, and often acquitted, after adults and children died without medical care; charges ranged from neglect to second-degree murder.
Sally Wentworth, another Spiritualist, offered Eddy $300-worth of bed and board in Stoughton if Eddy would treat her daughter's lung condition and teach Wentworth the healing method.
In 2009 the church said that for the first time more new members had been admitted from Africa than from the United States, although it offered no numbers.
Her views on life after death were vague and, according to Wilson, "there is no doctrine of the soul" in Christian Science: "After death, the individual continues his probationary state until he has worked out his own salvation by proving the truths of Christian Science."
She turned to the student at the end of the first row of seats and took direct mental cognizance of this one, plainly knocked at the door of this individual consciousness.&nbsp;...
In 1890 there were seven Christian Science churches in the United States, a figure that had risen to 1,104 by 1910.
The charge that Christian Science came from Quimby, not divine revelation, stemmed in part from Eddy's use of Quimby's manuscript ''(right)'' when teaching Sally Wentworth and others in 1868–1870.
After the death the body had turned black.
According to Peel, there was gossip about the attractive woman, the men who came and went, and whether she was engaged in witchcraft.
Other factors were increased career opportunities for women, and that much of the membership was elderly.
The first church building was erected in 1886 in Oconto, Wisconsin, by local women who believed Christian Science had helped them.
The editor-in-chief assigned five writers to work on the series, including the novelist Willa Cather as the principal author.
He wrote in ''McClure'''s in 1908 that the claims were based on self-diagnosis or secondhand reports from doctors, and attributed them to the placebo effect.
In 1907 Mark Twain described the appeal of the new religion:
According to former students, Eddy would tell them to say (often with Richard Kennedy in mind): "You are affected as you wish to affect me.
He would sit next to them and explain that the disease was something their minds could control; sometimes he would wet his hands and rub their heads, but it was the talking that helped them, he said, not the manipulation.
It includes "The Golden Rule": "A member of The Mother Church shall not haunt Mrs. Eddy's drive when she goes out, continually stroll by her house, or make a summer resort near her for such a purpose."
Eddy described Christian Science as a return to "primitive Christianity and its lost element of healing."
In preparation for the hearing, Eddy organized a 24-hour watch at 8 Broad Street, during which she asked 12 students to think about Spofford for two hours each and block malicious mesmerism from him.
She wore an imported black satin dress heavily beaded with tiny black jet beads, black satin slippers, beaded, and had on her rarely beautiful diamonds.&nbsp;... She stood before us, seemingly slight, graceful of carriage, and exquisitely beautiful even to critical eyes.
It also published Eddy's handwritten notes on Quimby's manuscript to show what the newspaper alleged was the transition from his words to hers.
(Per the legal doctrine of coverture, women in the United States could not then be their own children's guardians.)
There were over 400 editions (the final ran to 18 chapters and 600 pages), seven of them major revisions, according to Gottschalk, and members were encouraged to buy them all.
In 1988 12-year-old Ashley King died in Phoenix, Arizona, after living for months with a tumor on her leg that had a   circumference; her parents pleaded guilty to reckless endangerment.
Weeks after the wedding Spofford was suspected too.
Philosopher Margaret P. Battin writes that the seriousness with which these are treated by Christian Scientists ignores factors such as false positives caused by self-limiting conditions.
Peel writes that at this point she had already written 60 pages of ''Science and Health''.
In Australia the church was the only group with a religious exemption for vaccination as of April 2015; the government said that it planned to remove it.
In the 1890s Richard Cabot of Harvard Medical School studied the healing testimonies published by the ''Christian Science Journal'', which Eddy founded in 1883, for his senior thesis.
''McClure's'' wrote that Eddy required "absolute and unquestioning conformity" from her students.
This was called "taking up the enemy in thought."
She was hurt, he wrote, but made light of it: "Of course I believe in free love; I love everyone."
The Minnesota State Court of Appeals overturned the award against the church and nursing home in 1995, finding that a judgment that forced the church to "abandon teaching its central tenet" was unconstitutional, and that, while the individuals had a duty of care toward the boy, the church and nursing home did not.
Christian Science leaders place their religion within mainstream Christian teaching, according to J. Gordon Melton, and reject any identification with the New Thought movement.
Eddy was strongly influenced by her Congregationalist upbringing.
This provided fertile soil for the mind-cure groups, who argued that sickness was an absence of "right thinking" or failure to connect to Divine Mind.
In the first edition of ''Science and Health'' (1875), she wrote that she had "made our first discovery that science mentally applied would heal the sick" in 1864, while she was seeing Quimby, and in 1883 told the ''Boston Post'' that she had "laid the foundations of mental healing" in 1853, when she was practising homeopathy.
Adherents believed that material phenomena were the result of mental states, a view expressed as "life is consciousness" and "God is mind."
In a few cases Christian Scientists were expelled from Christian congregations, but ministers also worried that their parishioners were choosing to leave.
James Henry Wiggin, as an editor and literary adviser.
Wilson writes that the dissolutions allowed her to create a central church controlled by a five-person board of directors that answered only to her, which gave the church a stability that helped it survive her death.
Eddy was by all accounts charismatic and able to inspire great loyalty, although Gillian Gill writes that she could also be irrational and unkind.
Her father, Mark Baker, was a deeply religious man, although, according to one account, "Christianity to him was warfare against sin, not a religion of human brotherhood."
Later she drew a distinction between their methods, arguing that Quimby's involved one mind healing another, while hers depended on a connection with Divine Mind.
Self-styled Dr. P. P. Quimby, a practitioner of the "Science of Health," Quimby had become interested in healing after recovering suddenly from a condition he believed was consumption (tuberculosis).
It appeared in November that year, with the motto "To injure no man, but to bless all mankind," and went on to win seven Pulitzer Prizes between 1950 and 2002.
The highest attenuation of homœopathy and the most potent rises above matter into mind.
The author has attenuated ''Natrum muriaticum'' (common table-salt) until there was not a single saline property left&nbsp;... and yet, with one drop of that attenuation in a goblet of water, and a teaspoonful of the water administered at intervals of three hours, she has cured a patient sinking in the last stage of typhoid fever.
The report offered no evidence of the medical follow-up.
Several periods of Protestant Christian revival nurtured a proliferation of new religious movements in the United States.
In 2009 it moved to a largely online presence with a weekly print run.
There is a public-relations department, known as the Committee on Publication, with representatives around the world; this was set up by Eddy in 1898 to protect her own and the church's reputation.
At the core of Eddy's theology is the view that the spiritual world is the only reality and is entirely good, and that the material world, with its evil, sickness and death, is an illusion.
By the end of 1886 Christian Science teaching institutes had sprung up around the United States.
To explain how individuals could be harmed by poison without holding beliefs about it, she referred to the power of majority opinion.
Fraser wrote that the articles made Eddy a household name, a real-life version of the charismatic and beautiful Verena Tarrant in Henry James's ''The Bostonians'' (1885–1886), with her interest in spiritualism, women's rights and the mind cure.
The Holy Ghost is Christian Science, and heaven and hell are states of mind.
In 1902 she added a chapter, "Fruitage," recounting healing testimonies from the ''Christian Science Journal'' and ''Christian Science Sentinel''.
I have demonstrated on myself in an injury occasioned by a fall, that it her healing method did for me what surgeons could not do.
In the hierarchy of the Church of Christ, Scientist, only the Mother Church in Boston, The First Church of Christ, Scientist, uses the definite article in its name.
Their training is a two-week, 12-lesson course called "primary class," based on the Recapitulation chapter of ''Science and Health''.
I have physically restored sight to the blind, hearing to the deaf, speech to the dumb, and have made the lame walk."
In common with most women at the time Eddy was given little formal education, but said she had read widely at home.
In 1861 Eddy heard of a healing method developed by Phineas Parkhurst Quimby, a former clockmaker in Portland, Maine.
Another three appeared in 1902–1903 in ''North American Review'', then a book, ''Christian Science'' (1907).
Eddy placed a sign on 8 Broad Street, Mary B. Glover's Christian Scientists' Home.
The issue went to court in September 1883, when Eddy complained that her student Edward Arens had copied parts of ''Science and Health'' in a pamphlet, and Arens counter-claimed that Eddy had copied it from Quimby in the first place.
There are Sunday morning and Wednesday evening services.
After the conviction for manslaughter in 1967 of the Christian Scientist mother of five-year-old Lisa Sheridan, who died without medical care in Cape Cod, Massachusetts, the church lobbied the United States Department of Health, Education, and Welfare (HEW) to add a religious exemption to the Code of Federal Regulations.
for C.M.s whose "life and character conform to Divine science."
In October 1902, after seven-year-old Esther Quimby, the daughter of Christian Scientists, died of diphtheria in White Plains, New York (she had received no medical care and had not been quarantined), the authorities pursued manslaughter charges.
While Eddy argued that reality was entirely spiritual (and therefore entirely good), it remained true that human beings were affected by their belief in evil, which meant it had power, even if the power was an illusion.
He also wrote "The Secret History of Eddypus, the World Empire" (1901–1902), in which Christian Science replaces Christianity and Eddy becomes the Pope.
He appears to have returned briefly&nbsp;– they moved to a boarding house in July, and in August he paid Dr. Cushing's bill from the fall&nbsp;– but the marriage was over.
The mother and stepfather were charged with manslaughter, but the charges were dismissed.
In February 1867 Eddy and her husband, Daniel Patterson, a dentist, filed a lawsuit against the city to recover damages.
Other income derived from the sale of rings and brooches, pictures of Eddy, and in 1889 the Mary Baker Eddy souvenir spoon; Eddy asked every Christian Scientist to buy at least one, or a dozen if they could afford to.
In December 1887 Eddy moved to a $40,000, 20-room house at 385 Commonwealth Avenue, Boston.
He had been steadily growing worse ever since, but still had hoped to overcome the trouble until the last.
Historian Shawn Peters writes that, in the courts and public debate, Christian Scientists and Jehovah's Witnesses linked their healing claims to early Christianity to gain support from other Christians.
The conviction was overturned; the appellate court ruled that the couple had "reasonably believed" they could rely on Christian Science prayer without being prosecuted.
This consists of silently arguing with oneself; there are no appeals to a personal god, and no set words.
In 2004 it sold the First Church of Christ, Scientist, Manhattan, to the Crenshaw Christian Center for $14 million.
Reality for Eddy was purely spiritual.
Eddy's husband, Asa Gilbert Eddy, died of heart disease on June 4, 1882, shortly after the move to Boston.
The defense argued that they might have died even with medical attention, and Corner was acquitted.
