This trip is often regarded as one of the ten great train journeys in the world for the amazing scenery through which it passes.
In recent movements, hip hop has effectively landed in Christchurch.
The tramway reopened in November 2013 on a limited route, with plans to extend the tram route in 2014, first to reopen the complete pre-earthquake circuit, and then to open the extension travelling through the Re:Start Mall and High Street, which was being constructed when the 2011 Earthquake struck.
Widespread damage across Christchurch resulted in loss of homes, major buildings and infrastructure.
Later came Savannah and Adelaide, before Christchurch.
Now manufacturing is mainly of light products and the key market is Australia, with firms such as those pioneered by the Stewart family among the larger employers.
Christchurch has one full-time professional theatre, the Court Theatre, founded in 1971.
The Christchurch Arts Centre includes two art house cinemas, Cloisters and The Academy, screening a wide selection of contemporary, classic and foreign language films.
Bus services are also available leaving Christchurch, daily passenger bus services operates between Dunedin and Christchurch on the State Highway 1.
That firm helped take deer farming techniques abroad.
Refurbished in 2008/09 the mall featured especially designed seating, flower and garden boxes, more trees, paving, and an extension to the central city tram route.
The usual Māori name for Christchurch is '''Ōtautahi''' ("the place of Tautahi").
Christchurch lies in Canterbury, near the centre of the east coast of the South Island, east of the Canterbury Plains.
Archaeological evidence found in a cave at Redcliffs in 1876 has indicated that the Christchurch area was first settled by moa-hunting tribes about 1250 CE.
The Isaac Theatre Royal reopened to the public on 17 November 2014.
To the north the city is bounded by the braided Waimakariri River.
The Arts Centre, the Canterbury Museum and the Art Gallery are located in the Cultural Precinct.
In 2009 Metro Cinemas opened in Worcester Street with three screens.
The Canterbury Pilgrims had aspirations of building a city around a cathedral and college, on the model of Christ Church in Oxford.
The city also had five footwear manufacturers, but these have been replaced by imports.
There are on average 80 days of ground frost per year.
In 2006, Banks Peninsula was incorporated into the city, in effect tripling the city's land area while adding only about 8,000 people to the city's population.
4,558 earthquakes were recorded in the Canterbury region above a magnitude 3.0, from 4 September 2010 to 3 September 2014.
In late 2014 it was announced that a 284 million dollar project was underway to build a convention centre located on the block defined by Armagh Street, Oxford Terrace, Worcester Street and Colombo Street.
By December 1849 he had commissioned the construction of a road from Port Cooper, later Lyttelton, to Christchurch via Sumner.
Within the city, the Canterbury Museum preserves and exhibits many historic artefacts and stories of Antarctic exploration.
Gloucester Street will become part of the Centre itself, but will allow for retail use and public access.
Christchurch has a history of involvement in Antarctic exploration–both Robert Falcon Scott and Ernest Shackleton used the port of Lyttelton as a departure point for expeditions, and in the central city there is a statue of Scott sculpted by his widow, Kathleen Scott.
Nearly all bus routes travelled through the central city Bus Exchange before the earthquake but due to reduced passenger numbers since the earthquakes, especially in the central city, the bus network was reorganised to direct more localised services to 'hubs', such as major shopping centres, where they connect to the central station via core bus routes.
The Christchurch City Council has committed NZ$68.5&nbsp;million to build a network of modern cycleways over the next five years.
The United States Navy and latterly the United States Air National Guard, augmented by the New Zealand and Australian air forces, use Christchurch Airport as take-off for the main supply route to McMurdo and Scott Bases in Antarctica.
The Lyttelton road tunnel between Lyttelton and Christchurch was opened in 1964.
Hoyts in Riccarton opened in 2005 with one of its screens for a time holding the record for the largest in New Zealand.
The coldest temperature recorded was  on 18 July 1945, the third lowest recorded temperature of New Zealand's major cities.
The central city has very flat terrain and the Christchurch City Council has established a network of cycle lanes and paths, such as the Railway Cycleway.
The town hall is currently closed for repair after the significant damage caused by the February 2011 Christchurch earthquake.
VTV, a Korean TV channel airs in Christchurch (also Auckland).
Following the earthquakes over 1500 buildings in the city had been demolished or partly demolished by September 2013.
Before the 2011 earthquakes, in addition to normal bus services, Christchurch also had a pioneering zero-fare hybrid bus service, the ''Shuttle'', in the inner city.
It was suggested by John Robert Godley, who had attended Christ Church, Oxford.
Since the February 2011 Christchurch earthquake Wellington architect Ian Athfield has been selected to re-plan, although many varied suggestions have been promoted for rebuilding the central city
And in 2003, Christchurch's own Scribe released his debut album in New Zealand and has received five times platinum in that country, in addition to achieving two number one singles.
Locally and nationally, the IT sector is known not for its size (the third largest in New Zealand) but for producing innovative and entrepreneurial solutions, products and concepts.
The International Antarctic Centre provides both base facilities and a museum and visitor centre focused upon current Antarctic activities.
Christchurch is home to the fourth largest school in New Zealand, co-educational state school Burnside High School, with  pupils.
This was originally the name of a specific site by the Avon River near present-day Kilmore Street and the Christchurch Central Fire Station.
The city has been experiencing rapid growth following the earthquakes, with the central city rebuild, which is outlined in the Christchurch Central Recovery Plan, starting to ramp up, and massive growth in the residential sector, with around 50,000 new houses expected to be constructed in the Greater Christchurch area by 2028, as outlined in the Land Use Recovery Plan (LURP).
These include St Thomas of Canterbury College, St Margaret's College, Christ's College, St Bede's College, Marian College, St Andrew's College, Villa Maria College and Rangi Ruru Girls' School.
Christchurch was again rattled awake on 2 January 2012; the first; a magnitude 5.1 struck at 01:27 followed five minutes later by a magnitude 4.2 aftershock; a second larger earthquake struck at 05:45 with a magnitude of 5.5.
After the reduction in services a new Christchurch railway station was established at Addington Junction.
Captain Joseph Thomas, the Canterbury Association's Chief Surveyor, surveyed the surrounding area.
Although lower on the moment magnitude scale than the previous earthquake, the intensity and violence of the ground shaking was measured to be IX (''Violent''), among the strongest ever recorded globally in an urban area and in total 185 people were killed.
The service has been suspended following the earthquakes and it is unclear whether it will resume again in the future.
The Rialto was closed following the February 2011 earthquake.
Christchurch has an extensive bus network with bus routes serving most areas of the city and satellite towns.
The city is popular with Japanese tourists, with signage around Cathedral Square in Japanese.
These have all created processing businesses in Christchurch.
Following tribal warfare, the Waitaha (made of three peoples) were dispossessed by the Ngati Mamoe tribe.
PGG Wrightson, New Zealand's leading agribusiness, is based in Christchurch.
There are still some streets closed off due to earthquake damage, infrastructure repair work, and damaged buildings.
The area around this square and within the Four Avenues of Christchurch (Bealey Avenue, Fitzgerald Avenue, Moorhouse Avenue and Deans Avenue) is considered to be the central business district (CBD) of the city.
In recent years, regional agriculture has diversified, with a thriving wine industry springing up at Waipara, and beginnings of new horticulture industries such as olive production and processing.
However this proved more difficult than expected and road construction was stopped while a steep foot and pack horse track was constructed over the hill between the port and the Heathcote valley, where access to the site of the proposed settlement could be gained.
The car, however, remains the dominant form of transport in the city, as with the rest of New Zealand.
In the last few decades, technology-based industries have sprung up in Christchurch.
There areas are slowly being reopened follow earthquake repair and strengthening work.
Summer in the city is mostly warm but is often moderated by a sea breeze from the Northeast.
It offers English content about Korea, from arirang World, and Korean-speaking content in SBS.
The Clothing Distribution Center (CDC) in Christchurch, had more than 140,000 pieces of extreme cold weather (ECW) gear for issue to nearly 2,000 US Antarctic Program (USAP) participants in the 2007–08 season.
The river that flows through the centre of the city (its banks now largely forming an urban park) was named Avon at the request of the pioneering Deans brothers after the Scottish River Avon, which rises in the Ayrshire hills near what was their grandfather's farm and flows into the Clyde.
Before clothing manufacture largely moved to Asia, Christchurch was the centre of the New Zealand clothing industry, with firms such as LWR Industries.
The city has long had industry based on the surrounding farming country – part of the original "package" New Zealand was sold to immigrants as.
Goods that were too heavy or bulky to be transported by pack horse over the Bridle Path were shipped by small sailing vessels some eight miles (13&nbsp;km) by water around the coast and up the estuary to Ferrymead.
Angus Tait founded Tait Electronics, a mobile-radio manufacturer, and other firms spun off from this, such as Dennis Chapman's Swichtec.
The TranzAlpine service is primarily a tourist service and carries no significant commuter traffic.
Christchurch is the second largest manufacturing centre in New Zealand behind Auckland, the sector being the second largest contributor to the local economy, with firms such as Anderson's making steel work for bridges, tunnels, and hydro-electric dams in the early days of infrastructure work.
There is also an active recreational theatre scene with community based theatre companies, such as the Christchurch Repertory Society, Elmwood Players, Riccarton Players, and Canterbury Children's Theatre, producing many quality shows.
2010 when UK Dubstep DJ Doctor P with Crushington was playing at The Bedford, while simultaneously Concord Dawn featuring Trei and Bulletproof was playing at Ministry).
The governing National Party holds four of the general electorates, while the opposing Labour Party holds the remainder.
The local bus service, known as Metro, is provided by Environment Canterbury.
The ''First Four Ships'' were chartered by the Canterbury Association and brought the first 792 of the ''Canterbury Pilgrims'' to Lyttelton Harbour.
It is located near the southern end of Pegasus Bay, and is bounded to the east by the Pacific Ocean coast and the estuary of the Avon and Heathcote Rivers.
Especially noted was the increased efficiency of communal services in competition with private enterprises.
The name of Christchurch was agreed on at the first meeting of the association on 27 March 1848.
The Main North Line railway travels northwards via Kaikoura to Picton and is served by the TranzCoastal passenger train, while the Main South Line heads to Invercargill via Dunedin and was used by the Southerner until its cancellation in 2002.
Deer farming has led to new processing using antlers for Asian medicine and aphrodisiacs.
A magnitude 5.6 quake at a depth of  hit at 1:00&nbsp;pm in the general location of Sumner, Christchurch.
The site was a seasonal dwelling of Ngāi Tahu chief Te Potiki Tautahi, whose main home was Port Levy on Banks Peninsula.
The Horncastle Arena is New Zealand's second largest permanent multipurpose arena, seating between 5000 and 8000, depending on configuration.
The city's main television transmitter is located atop Sugarloaf, in the Port Hills due south of the city centre, and broadcasts all major national television channels as well as the two local channels.
In 1993, Christchurch was selected as the "Best Run City in the World", also known as the 'Carl Bertelsmann Prize: Local Government', by the Bertelsmann Foundation of Germany.
Christchurch is one of a group of only four cities in the world to have been carefully planned following the same layout of a central city square, four complementing city squares surrounding it and a parklands area that embrace the city centre.
PGG Wrightson's overseas diversification includes dairy farming in Uruguay.
it is expected that activities in Cathedral Square will increase as the rebuild progresses.
Cathedral Square, the heart of the city, hosted attractions such as (until the February 2011 Earthquake) the Wizard of New Zealand, Ian Brackenbury Channell, and evangelist Ray Comfort; regular market days; free standing food and coffee carts; an aquarium, pubs and restaurants and the city's chief tourist information centre.
The matricidal Peter Jackson film ''Heavenly Creatures'' (1994), starring Melanie Lynskey and Kate Winslet, was set in Christchurch.
The agricultural industry has always been the economic core of Christchurch.
Post-quake public consultation on rebuilding the city expressed a strong desire for a more sustainable transport system, particularly greater use of cycling again, and this has been reflected in the Council's strategic transport plan.
Christchurch was the seat of provincial administration for the Province of Canterbury, which was abolished in 1876.
It was the venue for the 1999 World Netball championships and has been host to many concerts in recent years.
In 2000, First Aotearoa Hip Hop Summit was held there.
The Rialto also hosted the majority of the city's various film festivals and was home to the local film society.
It is home to  residents, making it New Zealand's third most-populous urban area behind Auckland and Wellington.
Wheat and barley and various strains of clover and other grasses for seed exporting have been the main crops.
The Christchurch urban area lies on the South Island's east coast, just north of Banks Peninsula.
A primary action was to reduce the impact of motorised private vehicles and increase the comfort of pedestrians and cyclists.
The most famous train to depart Christchurch is the TranzAlpine, which travels along the Main South Line to Rolleston and then turns onto the Midland Line, passes through the Southern Alps via the Otira Tunnel, and terminates in Greymouth on the West Coast.
Under the Köppen climate classification, Christchurch has an oceanic climate (''Cfb'').
Its local roots go back to Pyne Gould Guinness, an old stock and station agency serving the South Island.
It has mean daily maximum air temperatures of  in January and  in July.
The close proximity of the ski fields and other attractions of the Southern Alps, and hotels, a casino, and an airport that meet international standards make Christchurch a stopover destination for many tourists.
Rail services, both long-distance and commuter, used to focus on the former railway station on Moorhouse avenue.
Christchurch experiences the urban heat island phenomenon, similar to cities such as Tokyo, London and New York City, making temperatures feel warmer than they actually are within the inner city regions.
It airs both local, national and international content, namely DW-TV and Aljazeera World.
Travis Wetland, an ecological restoration programme to create a wetland, is to the east of the city centre in the suburb of Burwood.
A record temperature of  was reached in February 1973.
The exact basis for the name is not known.
Classical music concerts are held at the Christchurch Music Centre.
It is still recognised as a model example of concert-hall design with an excellent modern pipe organ.
To the south and south-east the urban portion of the city is limited by the volcanic slopes of the Port Hills separating it from Banks Peninsula.
The first city built with this pattern was Philadelphia.
There have also been spin-offs from the electrical department of the University of Canterbury engineering school.
This was followed by another quake at magnitude 6.3 with a depth of  at 2:20&nbsp;pm again in the general location of Sumner, Christchurch.
The plan was based on a report prepared for the council by renowned Danish design firm Gehl Architects.
Christchurch shared the award honour with Phoenix, Arizona, USA.
Independent Christchurch based radio station Pulzar FM is one of the few radio stations in New Zealand that plays Drum and Bass during the day.
St John Ambulance reported after the two quakes that there were minor injuries at homes and businesses but no serious injuries and few indications of building collapses at the time.
The largest multiplexes were the Hoyts 8 in the old railway station on Moorhouse Avenue (now demolished) and Reading Cinemas (also eight screens) in the Palms shopping centre in Shirley.
In addition, there are a varying number of Christchurch-based list MPs, who are elected via party lists.
Cropping has always been important in the surrounding countryside.
The Christchurch Town Hall auditorium (2500 seats, opened 1972) was the first major auditorium design by architects Warren and Mahoney and acousticians Marshall Day.
However, following the February 2011 Earthquake, the system was damaged and within the cordoned off 'Red Zone' of the central city.
Less conventional schools in the city include Unlimited Paenga Tawhiti and Hagley Community College.
Commuter trains were progressively cancelled in the 1960s and 1970s.
Untreated, naturally filtered water is sourced, via more than 50 pumping stations surrounding the city, from aquifers emanating from the foothills of the Southern Alps.
It has been suggested that it is named for Christchurch, in Dorset, England; for Canterbury Cathedral; or in honour of Christ Church, Oxford.
Christchurch Airport was briefly closed.
Hagley Park and the 30-hectare (75 acre) Christchurch Botanic Gardens, founded in 1863, are in the central city, with Hagley Park being a site for sports such as golf, cricket, netball, and rugby, and for open-air concerts by local bands and orchestras.
In 2010, the Christchurch City Council released "A City For People Action Plan", a programme of work through to 2022 to improve public spaces within the central city to entice more inner city residents and visitors.
It features many public open spaces and parks, river beds and cafes and restaurants situated in the city centre and surrounding suburbs.
On 13 June 2011 Christchurch was hit by two more large aftershocks.
Significant liquefaction affected the eastern suburbs, and the total cost to insurers of rebuilding has been estimated at NZ$20–30&nbsp;billion.
On cold winter nights, the surrounding hills, clear skies, and frosty calm conditions often combine to form a stable inversion layer above the city that traps vehicle exhausts and smoke from domestic fires to cause smog.
New Zealand's first public railway line, the Ferrymead Railway, opened from Ferrymead to Christchurch in 1863.
Following the earthquakes, most buildings in Cashel Mall were demolished.
The central city also includes the pedestrianised sections of Cashel and High streets commonly known pre-earthquakes as 'City Mall'.
These first inhabitants were thought to have been followed by the Waitaha tribe, who are said to have migrated from the East coast of the North Island in the 16th century.
The Central City, which was fully closed off following 22 February Earthquake, opened in stages and was fully reopened in June 2013.
Christchurch is also well-known for several independent schools and church schools, some of them of the traditional English public school type.
Cashmere High School, Papanui High School and Riccarton High School are other large schools.
There is a functioning Christchurch tramway system in Christchurch, but as a tourist attraction; its loop is restricted to a circuit of the central city.
They were in turn subjugated by the Ngāi Tahu tribe, who remained in control until the arrival of European settlers.
In software, Gil Simpson founded a company that made LINC and Jade programming languages and a management buyout spawned local firm ''Wynyard Group''.
The trams were originally introduced in 1905 as a form of public transport, and ceased operating in 1954, but returned to the inner city (as a tourist attraction) in 1995.
The Canterbury Film Society is active in the city.
The Ngaio Marsh Theatre, located at the University of Canterbury, hosts a range of student drama groups, as well as other theatre groups.
Christchurch is covered by seven general electorates and one Māori electorate, each returning one member to the New Zealand House of Representatives.
This caused power outages to the eastern suburbs of Parklands, New Brighton, Shirley, Dallington, Burwood, Spencerville and Richmond; this affected around 10,000 homes.
Many cropping and sheep farms have been converted to dairying.
With its higher labour use this has helped stop declines in rural population.
The convention centre will be able to host several events at the same time; starting with space for up to 2,000 people, this will complement facilities in Auckland and Queenstown.
Alongside the Court, the co-operative and experimental Free Theatre Christchurch was established in 1979 and based in the Arts Centre from 1982.
A notable feature of the weather is the ''nor'wester'', a hot föhn wind that occasionally reaches storm force, causing widespread minor damage to property.
This track became known as the Bridle Path, because the path was so steep that pack horses needed to be led by the bridle.
In winter it is common for the temperature to fall below  at night.
This channel broadcast many of the latest dramas airing in Korea.
At the city's centre is Cathedral Square, surrounding the now-earthquake-damaged – landmark Anglican cathedral, Christ Church.
Christchurch hosted the 1974 British Commonwealth Games.
It is home of the Canterbury Tactix netball side.
The Regent complex was rebuilt as 'Regent on Worcester' in 1996.
The ''Charlotte Jane'' was the first to arrive on 16 December 1850.
A shopping area called Re:START opened on Cashel Street adjacent to Ballantyne's Department Store in October 2011.
Dairying has grown strongly in the surrounding areas with high world prices for milk products and the use of irrigation to lift grass growth on dry land.
Snowfalls occur on average three times per year, although in some years no snowfall is recorded.
Following the purchase of land at Putaringamotu (modern Riccarton) by the Weller brothers, whalers of Otago and Sydney, a party of European settlers led by Herriott and McGillivray established themselves in what is now Christchurch, early in 1840.
The high quality local wine in particular has increased the appeal of Canterbury and Christchurch to tourists.
As of December 2015, there are seven list MPs in the House who contested Christchurch-based electorates at the : two each from the National, Green and New Zealand First parties, and one from the Labour Party.
Half of these antipodal pairs are in New Zealand and Spain/Morocco–with A Coruña, Spain as Christchurch's antipode.
Christchurch also has a casino, and there are also a wide range of live music venues—some short-lived, others with decades of history.
Christchurch is a distinctly English city, however it contains various European elements, with strong Gothic Revival architecture.
While historically most cinemas were grouped around Cathedral Square, only two cinemas remain there.
The majority of the activities were free and a printable map was provided.
The scheduled opening of the convention centre is uncertain.
There were power and water outages at New Brighton and severe damage to the Parklands region, including roads and footpaths.
Christchurch has one of the highest-quality water supplies in the world, with its water rated among the purest and cleanest in the world.
The firms that remain mostly design and market, and manufacture in Asia.
The last such service, between Christchurch and Rangiora, ceased in 1976.
The Ōtautahi name was adopted in the 1930s.
Tourism is also a significant factor of the local economy.
In 1947, New Zealand's worst fire disaster occurred at Ballantyne's Department Store in the inner city, with 41 people killed in a blaze which razed the rambling collection of buildings.
Christchurch became a city by Royal Charter on 31 July 1856, making it officially the oldest established city in New Zealand.
The Pulse Data founders had moved from the Canterbury University engineering school to work for Wormald Inc. when they set up Pulse Data through a Management buyout of their division.
There were further earthquakes on 23 December 2011; the first, of magnitude 5.8 according to the US Geological Survey,  north-east of the city at a depth of , at 13:58, followed by several aftershocks and another earthquake of magnitude 6.0 and similar location 80 minutes later, with more aftershocks expected.
The last explanation is the one generally accepted.
While not as bad as smog in Los Angeles or Mexico City, Christchurch smog has often exceeded World Health Organisation recommendations for air pollution.
Many of the city's Gothic Revival buildings by architect Benjamin Mountfort date from this period.
Historically, Christchurch has been known as New Zealand's cycling city and currently still attracts about 7% of commuters cycling.
Christchurch is one of only eight pairs of cities in the world that have near-exact antipodal cities.
Prior to that the Ngāi Tahu generally referred to the Christchurch area as Karaitiana, a transliteration of the English word Christian.
The Rialto Cinemas on Moorhouse avenue specialised in international films and art house productions.
