Adventist, Baptist, Methodist, Pentecostal and other Protestant confessions arose in the following centuries.
File:Skondals kyrka 2005.jpg|Baptism, specifically infant baptism, in the Lutheran tradition
Notable early Fathers include Ignatius of Antioch, Polycarp, Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, Tertullian, Clement of Alexandria, and Origen.
In many churches today, adults and children will separate for all or some of the service to receive age-appropriate teaching.
Although the words "Trinity" and "Triune" do not appear in the Bible, theologians beginning in the 3rd&nbsp;century developed the term and concept to facilitate comprehension of the New Testament teachings of God as being Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
From earlier than the times of the Nicene Creed, 325, Christianity advocated the triune mystery-nature of God as a normative profession of faith.
The Chalcedonian Definition, or Creed of Chalcedon, developed at the Council of Chalcedon in 451, though rejected by the Oriental Orthodox churches, taught Christ "to be acknowledged in two natures, inconfusedly, unchangeably, indivisibly, inseparably": one divine and one human, and that both natures, while perfect in themselves, are nevertheless also perfectly united into one person.
While there have been many theological disputes over the nature of Jesus over the earliest centuries of Christian history, generally Christians believe that Jesus is God incarnate and "true God and true man" (or both fully divine and fully human).
The cross, which is today one of the most widely recognized symbols in the world, was used as a Christian symbol from the earliest times.
Finally, separation between religion (again, specifically Catholicism) and the state is found to a great degree in France and Italy, countries where the state actively opposed itself to the authority of the Catholic Church.
Tertullian, in his book ''De Corona'', tells how it was already a tradition for Christians to trace repeatedly on their foreheads the sign of the cross.
The Apostles' Creed is the most widely accepted statement of the articles of Christian faith.
Criticism of Christianity and Christians goes back to the Apostolic age, with the New Testament recording friction between the followers of Jesus and the Pharisees and scribes (e.g.
Zwingli and Calvin's heirs are far broader denominationally, and are broadly referred to as the Reformed tradition.
The oldest Protestant groups separated from the Catholic Church in the Protestant Reformation, often followed by further divisions.
Christians differ in their views on the extent to which individuals' salvation is pre-ordained by God.
The books of the Bible accepted by the Orthodox, Catholic and Protestant churches vary somewhat, with Jews accepting only the Hebrew Bible as canonical; there is however substantial overlap.
The moment we neglect this principle we drift out upon a sea of uncertainty and conjecture."
Other Christian religions including Unitarian Universalism, Jehovah's Witnesses, Mormonism and others do not share those views on the Trinity.
Christians consider the resurrection of Jesus to be the cornerstone of their faith (see 1 Corinthians 15) and the most important event in history.
Beginning in the 8th&nbsp;century, with the rise of Carolingian leaders, the papacy began to find greater political support in the Frankish Kingdom.
Christianity is the predominant religion in Europe, the Americas and Southern Africa.
The community emphasizes the reconciliation of all denominations and its main church, located in Taizé, Saône-et-Loire, France, is named the "Church of Reconciliation".
Its earliest development took place under the leadership of the remaining Twelve Apostles, particularly Saint Peter, and Paul the Apostle, followed by the early bishops, whom Christians consider the successors of the Apostles.
These two churches disagree on a number of administrative, liturgical, and doctrinal issues, most notably papal primacy of jurisdiction.
These variations are a reflection of the range of traditions, and of the councils that have convened on the subject.
Many clerics throughout history have made significant contributions to science and Jesuits in particular have made numerous significant contributions to the development of science.
Afterwards it appears in Tertullian.
Elsewhere in the New Testament this same freedom of access to God is also emphasized.
Calendars set aside holy days, such as solemnities which commemorate an event in the life of Jesus or Mary, the saints, periods of fasting such as Lent, and other pious events such as memoria or lesser festivals commemorating saints.
With around 2.4&nbsp;billion adherents, split into three main branches of Catholic, Protestant and Eastern Orthodox, Christianity is the world's largest religion.
Monasticism became a powerful force throughout Europe, and gave rise to many early centers of learning, most famously in Ireland, Scotland and Gaul, contributing to the Carolingian Renaissance of the 9th&nbsp;century.
Adventists, Anglicans, Baptists, Reformed (Calvinists), Lutherans, Methodists and Pentecostals.
Important Africans who influenced the early development of Christianity includes Tertullian, Clement of Alexandria, Origen of Alexandria, Cyprian, Athanasius and Augustine of Hippo.
Worship can be varied for special events like baptisms or weddings in the service or significant feast days.
The later rise of Islam in North Africa reduced the size and numbers of Christian congregations, leaving only the Coptic Church in Egypt, the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church in the Horn of Africa, and the Nubian Church in the Sudan (Nobatia, Makuria, and Alodia).
It blends elements of religious Jewish practice with evangelical Christianity.
The Oriental Orthodox communion consists of six groups: Syriac Orthodox, Coptic Orthodox, Ethiopian Orthodox, Eritrean Orthodox, Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church (India) and Armenian Apostolic churches.
There is a diversity of doctrines and practices among groups calling themselves Christian.
The Christian population is not decreasing in Brazil, the Southern United States and the province of Alberta, Canada, but the percentage is decreasing.
The presence of Christianity in Africa began in the middle of the 1st&nbsp;century in Egypt, and by the end of the 2nd&nbsp;century in the region around Carthage.
There are a variety of congregational prayers, including thanksgiving, confession, and intercession, which occur throughout the service and take a variety of forms including recited, responsive, silent, or sung.
Almost all Christian denominations and churches hold Trinitarian beliefs.
The philosopher Thomas Aquinas presented five arguments for God's existence in the ''Summa Theologica'', while his ''Summa contra Gentiles'' was a major apologetic work.
A concern with the techniques of prayer is condemned as 'pagan', and instead a simple trust in God's fatherly goodness is encouraged.
The traditional view of inspiration is that God worked through human authors so that what they produced was what God wished to communicate.
Byzantine art and literature held a pre-eminent place in Europe, and the cultural impact of Byzantine art on the west during this period was enormous and of long lasting significance.
As Milton S. Terry said: "A fundamental principle in grammatico-historical exposition is that the words and sentences can have but one significance in one and the same connection.
Christians believe that Jesus, as the Messiah, was anointed by God as savior of humanity, and hold that Jesus' coming was the fulfillment of messianic prophecies of the Old Testament.
In the Epistle of James, no distinction is made between the intercessory prayer offered by ordinary believers and the prominent Old Testament prophet Elijah.
Christianity regards the biblical canon, the Old Testament and the New Testament, as the inspired word of God.
Around 500, St. Benedict set out his Monastic Rule, establishing a system of regulations for the foundation and running of monasteries.
His incarnation, earthly ministry, crucifixion, and resurrection are often referred to as "the gospel", meaning "good news".
These methods are: by ''immersion''; if immersion is total, by ''submersion''; by affusion (pouring); and by aspersion (sprinkling).
Thomas Müntzer, Andreas Karlstadt and other theologians perceived both the Roman Catholic Church and the confessions of the Magisterial Reformation as corrupted.
Other reformers like Zwingli, Calvin, Knox and Arminius further criticized Roman Catholic teaching and worship.
The injunction that women "be silent and submissive" in 1 Timothy 12 is thought by many to be a forgery by a follower of Paul, a similar phrase in 1 Corinthians 14, which is thought to be by Paul, appears in different places in different manuscripts and is thought to originally be a margin note by a copyist.
The Catholic faith is detailed in the ''Catechism of the Catholic Church''.
Those who hold the first view may also adhere to the tradition of infant baptism;"As an initiatory rite into membership of the Family of God, baptismal candidates are symbolically purified or washed as their sins have been forgiven and washed away" (William H. Brackney,  Doing Baptism Baptist Style Believer's Baptism) the Orthodox Churches all practice infant baptism and always baptize by total immersion repeated three times in the name of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit.
The original passage is seen as having only a single meaning or sense.
Christian churches accept and teach the New Testament account of the resurrection of Jesus with very few exceptions.
In all European countries, different Christian denominations found themselves in competition, to greater or lesser extents, with each other and with the state.
Another major schism, the Reformation, resulted in the splintering of the Western Christendom into several branches.
The 2,834 sees are grouped into 24 particular rites, the largest being the Latin Church, each with distinct traditions regarding the liturgy and the administering the sacraments.
File:Methodistcommunion3.jpg|A Methodist minister celebrating the Eucharist
Christianity, in one form or another, is the sole state religion of the following nations: Argentina (Roman Catholic), Tuvalu (Reformed), Tonga (Methodist), Norway (Lutheran), Costa Rica (Roman Catholic), Kingdom of Denmark (Lutheran), England (Anglican), Georgia (Georgian Orthodox), Greece (Greek Orthodox), Iceland (Lutheran), Liechtenstein (Roman Catholic), Malta (Roman Catholic), Monaco (Roman Catholic), and Vatican City (Roman Catholic).
Some of the esoteric Christian institutions include the Rosicrucian Fellowship, the Anthroposophical Society and the Martinism.
Part of the Muslims' success was due to the exhaustion of the Byzantine empire in its decades long conflict with Persia.
There was a renewed interest in classical Greek philosophy, as well as an increase in literary output in vernacular Greek.
Taken together, both define the term (Biblical) hermeneutics.
The combined factors of the formation of nation states and ultramontanism, especially in Germany and the Netherlands but also in England (to a much lesser extent), often forced Catholic churches, organizations, and believers to choose between the national demands of the state and the authority of the Church, specifically the papacy.
Several Pentecostal and non-denominational churches, which emphasize the cleansing power of the Holy Spirit, in turn grew out of Methodism.
Some liberal Christians do not accept a literal bodily resurrection, seeing the story as richly symbolic and spiritually nourishing myth.
Another frequent application of the term is to distinguish political groups in areas of mixed religious backgrounds.
Christianity has played a prominent role in the shaping of Western civilization.
Most Christians (Roman Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox, and Protestant alike) accept the use of creeds, and subscribe to at least one of the creeds mentioned above.
Quakers sit quietly until moved by the Holy Spirit to speak.
Their activity brought about the Radical Reformation, which gave birth to various Anabaptist denominations.
File:Crowning in Syro-Malabar Nasrani Wedding by Mar Gregory Karotemprel.jpg|thumb|A wedding in the Syro-Malabar tradition
Taken together, these are the Seven Sacraments as recognized by churches in the High Church tradition—notably Roman Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox, Independent Catholic, Old Catholic, many Anglicans, and some Lutherans.
In the 2nd&nbsp;century, Christianity was criticized by the Jews on various grounds, e.g.
American Millennialism and Adventism, which arose from Evangelical Protestantism, influenced the Jehovah's Witnesses movement and, as a reaction specifically to William Miller, the Seventh-day Adventists.
Others view baptism as a purely symbolic act, an external public declaration of the inward change which has taken place in the person, but not as spiritually efficacious.
File:Oriental Orthodoxy by country.png|Distribution of Oriental Orthodox
The effectiveness of prayer in Christianity derives from the power of God rather than the status of the one praying.
In terms of prosperity and cultural life, the Byzantine Empire was one of the peaks in Christian history and Orthodox civilization, and Constantinople remained the leading city of the Christian world in size, wealth, and culture.
The university is generally regarded as an institution that has its origin in the Medieval Christian setting.
These professions of faith state that Jesus suffered, died, was buried, descended into hell, and rose from the dead, in order to grant eternal life to those who believe in him and trust in him for the remission of their sins.
Prof. Walter Rüegg, editor of ''A History of the University in Europe'', reports that universities then only trained students to become clerics, lawyers, civil servants, and physicians.
The Thirty Years' War, the English Civil War, and the French Wars of Religion are prominent examples.
Christians believe that Jesus is the Son of God and the savior of humanity whose coming as the Messiah (the Christ) was prophesied in the Old Testament.
:Protestant Christians believe that the Bible is a self-sufficient revelation, the final authority on all Christian doctrine, and revealed all truth necessary for salvation.
Some churches use only a cappella music, either on principle (for example, many Churches of Christ object to the use of instruments in worship) or by tradition (as in Orthodoxy).
Urs Altermatt of the University of Fribourg, looking specifically at Catholicisms in Europe, identifies four models for the European nations.
Some Anglicans consider their church a branch of the "One Holy Catholic Church" alongside of the Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox churches, a concept rejected by the Roman Catholic Church and some Eastern Orthodox.
These six churches, while being in communion with each other are completely independent hierarchically.
A special grouping are the Anglican churches descended from the Church of England and organized in the Anglican Communion.
* belief in God the Father, Jesus Christ as the Son of God and the Holy Spirit
Differences occur firstly on whether the act has any spiritual significance.
This involved punishments, including death, for Christians such as Stephen and James, son of Zebedee.
Kneeling, bowing and prostrations (see also poklon) are often practiced in more traditional branches of Christianity.
Then we all rise together and pray, and, as we before said, when our prayer is ended, bread and wine and water are brought, and the president in like manner offers prayers and thanksgivings, according to his ability, and the people assent, saying Amen; and there is a distribution to each, and a participation of that over which thanks have been given, and to those who are absent a portion is sent by the deacons.
In Christian belief and practice, a ''sacrament'' is a rite, instituted by Christ, that confers grace, constituting a sacred mystery.
Mark the Evangelist started the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria in about AD 43.
John Calvin wrote, "all who refuse not to follow the Holy Spirit as their guide, find in the Scripture a clear light."
The Catholic Church teaches that salvation does not occur without faithfulness on the part of Christians; converts must live in accordance with principles of love and ordinarily must be baptized.
During the following centuries, competition between Roman Catholicism and Protestantism became deeply entangled with political struggles among European states.
Some believe that divine inspiration makes our present Bibles inerrant.
Also rejecting creeds are groups with roots in the Restoration Movement, such as the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ), the Evangelical Christian Church in Canada, and the Churches of Christ.
Many evangelical Protestants reject creeds as definitive statements of faith, even while agreeing with some or all of the substance of the creeds.
King Trdat IV made Christianity the state religion in Armenia between 301 and 314, it was not an entirely new religion in Armenia.
Ultimately, these differences led to the outbreak of conflicts in which religion played a key factor.
Charismatic or Pentecostal congregations may spontaneously feel led by the Holy Spirit to action rather than follow a formal order of service, including spontaneous prayer.
''Postchristianity'' is the term for the decline of Christianity, particularly in Europe, Canada, Australia and to a minor degree the Southern Cone, in the 20th and 21st&nbsp;centuries, considered in terms of postmodernism.
These were a series of military campaigns in the Holy Land and elsewhere, initiated in response to pleas from the Byzantine Emperor Alexios I for aid against Turkish expansion.
Cultural Christians are secular people with a Christian heritage who may not believe in the religious claims of Christianity, but who retain an affinity for the popular culture, art, music, and so on related to it.
Another issue is that several books are considered to be forgeries.
Instruction is given based on these readings, called a sermon, or homily.
These churches are generally not in communion with Eastern Orthodox Churches with whom they are in dialogue for erecting a communion.
Cultural symbiosis and separation are found in Poland, Ireland, and Switzerland, all countries with competing denominations.
Christianity began as a Jewish sect in the Levant of the middle east in the mid-1st&nbsp;century.
Secondly, there are differences of opinion on the methodology of the act.
Others, including the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ), Evangelical Christian Church in Canada, Churches of Christ, and the Christian churches and churches of Christ, have their roots in the contemporaneous Stone-Campbell Restoration Movement, which was centered in Kentucky and Tennessee.
For groups which do not recognize a priesthood distinct from ordinary believers the services are generally led by a minister, preacher, or pastor.
Since that time, Christian theologians have been careful to emphasize that Trinity does not imply that there are three gods (the antitrinitarian heresy of hritism), nor that each hypostasis of the Trinity is one-third of an infinite God (partialism), nor that the Son and the Holy Spirit are beings created by and subordinate to the Father (Arianism).
''Trinity'' refers to the teaching that the one God comprises three distinct, eternally co-existing persons; the ''Father'', the ''Son'' (incarnate in Jesus Christ), and the ''Holy Spirit''.
Both orders made significant contributions to the development of the great universities of Europe.
Christian groups that do not follow a liturgical tradition often retain certain celebrations, such as Christmas, Easter and Pentecost: these are the celebrations of Christ's birth, resurrection and the descent of the Holy Spirit upon the Church, respectively.
These groups are sometimes classified under denominations, though for theological reasons many groups reject this classification system.
The Oriental Orthodox churches (also called "Old Oriental" churches) are those eastern churches that recognize the first three ecumenical councils—Nicaea, Constantinople and Ephesus—but reject the dogmatic definitions of the Council of Chalcedon and instead espouse a Miaphysite christology.
Often founded by individual pastors, they have little affiliation with historic denominations.
In Asia, Iglesia ni Cristo is a known restorationist religion that was established during the early 1900s.
The Civilizing influence of Christianity includes social welfare, founding hospitals, economics (as the Protestant work ethic), politics, architecture, literature and family life.
It is the world's largest religion, with over 2.4&nbsp;billion followers, or 32% of the global population, known as Christians.
The Crusades ultimately failed to stifle Islamic aggression and even contributed to Christian enmity with the sacking of Constantinople during the Fourth Crusade.
Other major Christian symbols include the chi-rho monogram, the dove (symbolic of the Holy Spirit), the sacrificial lamb (symbolic of Christ's sacrifice), the vine (symbolizing the necessary connectedness of the Christian with Christ) and many others.
From monumental sources such as tombs it is known that the symbolic fish was familiar to Christians from the earliest times.
Europe's Christian population, though in decline, still constitutes the largest geographical component of the religion.
Nearly all forms of churchmanship celebrate the Eucharist (Holy Communion), which consists of a consecrated meal.
Arminianism gained followers in the Netherlands and Frisia.
The three primary divisions of Christianity are Roman Catholicism, Eastern Orthodoxy, and Protestantism.
According to Church tradition, it was under Nero's persecution that early Church leaders Peter and Paul of Tarsus were each martyred in Rome.
The late 20th&nbsp;century has shown the shift of Christian adherence to the Third World and southern hemisphere in general, with the western civilization no longer the chief standard bearer of Christianity.
Following the Age of Discovery, Christianity spread to the Americas, Australasia, sub-Saharan Africa, and the rest of the world through missionary work and colonization.
Protestants characteristically believe that ordinary believers may reach an adequate understanding of Scripture because Scripture itself is clear (or "perspicuous"), because of the help of the Holy Spirit, or both.
In countries such as Australia and New Zealand, the Christian population are declining in both numbers and percentage.
Competition is found in Germany, the Netherlands, and again Switzerland, all countries with minority Catholic populations who to a greater or lesser extent did identify with the nation.
As a percentage of Christians, the Catholic Church and Orthodoxy (both Eastern and Oriental) are declining, while Protestants and other Christians are on the rise.
The Second Ecumenical Council of Nicaea (787) finally pronounced in favor of icons.
Approximately 7.1 to 10% of Arabs are Christians, most prevalent in Egypt, Syria and Lebanon.
The Christian concept of the Messiah differs significantly from the contemporary Jewish concept.
Such children's worship is often called Sunday school or Sabbath school (Sunday schools are often held before rather than during services).
Some Christian groups, such as Seventh-day Adventists, hold to mortalism, the belief that the human soul is not naturally immortal, and is unconscious during the intermediate state between bodily death and resurrection.
The 15th-century Renaissance brought about a renewed interest in ancient and classical learning.
A broader distinction that is sometimes drawn is between Eastern Christianity and Western Christianity, which has its origins in the East–West Schism (Great Schism) of the 11th&nbsp;century.
It is found in many passages of Origen.
Jesus' teaching on prayer in the Sermon on the Mount displays a distinct lack of interest in the external aspects of prayer.
The Catholic and Orthodox canons, in addition to the Tanakh, also include the Deuterocanonical Books as part of the Old Testament.
Like the Eastern Orthodox, the Roman Catholic Church through apostolic succession traces its origins to the Christian community founded by Jesus Christ.
The Church of South India was formed in 1947 by the union of Anglican, Baptist, Methodist, Congregationalist, and Presbyterian churches.
Churches of the Protestant Reformation, however, rejected prayer to the saints, largely on the basis of the sole mediatorship of Christ.
According to Roger E. Olson and Christopher Hall, through prayer, meditation, study and practice, the Christian community concluded "that God must exist as both a unity and trinity", codifying this in ecumenical council at the end of the 4th century.
A few denominations make no use of a liturgical calendar.
The Greek word referring to inspiration in  is ''theopneustos'', which literally means "God-breathed".
Prior to the establishment of universities, European higher education took place for hundreds of years in Christian cathedral schools or monastic schools (''Scholae monasticae''), in which monks and nuns taught classes; evidence of these immediate forerunners of the later university at many places dates back to the 6th&nbsp;century&nbsp;AD.
A 2011 Pew Research Center survey found that 76.2% of Europeans, 73.3% in Oceania, and about 86.0% in the Americas (90.0% in Latin America and 77.4% in North America) described themselves as Christians.
Little of Jesus' childhood is recorded in the canonical gospels, although infancy gospels were popular in antiquity.
The ancient church, in both Eastern Christianity and Western Christianity, developed a tradition of asking for the intercession of (deceased) saints, and this remains the practice of most Eastern Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox, Roman Catholic, and some Anglican churches.
All who have died will be resurrected bodily from the dead for the Last Judgment.
* Christ's second coming, the Day of Judgement and salvation of the faithful.
Most other denominations and traditions typically affirm only Baptism and Eucharist as sacraments, while some Protestant groups, such as the Quakers, reject sacramental theology.
According to a 2015 Pew Research Center study, by 2050, the Christian population is expected to exceed 3 billion.
Martin Luther believed that without God's help Scripture would be "enveloped in darkness".
The physicist and priest John Polkinghorne, in his ''Questions of Truth'' discusses the subject of religion and science, a topic that other Christian apologists such as Ravi Zacharias, John Lennox and William Lane Craig have engaged, with the latter two men opining that the inflationary Big Bang model is evidence for the existence of God.
By the 12th century, the Mishneh Torah (i.e., Rabbi Moses Maimonides) was criticizing Christianity on the grounds of idol worship, in that Christians attributed divinity to Jesus who had a physical body.
Throughout Europe, the divides caused by the Reformation led to outbreaks of religious violence and the establishment of separate state churches in Europe.
According to the Catechism of the Catholic Church: "Prayer is the raising of one's mind and heart to God or the requesting of good things from God."
''Intercessory prayer'' is prayer offered for the benefit of other people.
Regardless of this apparent difference, the three "persons" are each eternal and omnipotent.
Christian apologetics aims to present a rational basis for Christianity.
Other verses in 1 Corinthians, such as 1 Corinthians 11:2–16 where women are instructed to wear a covering over their hair "when they pray or prophesies", contradict this verse.
The significance of the text includes the ensuing use of the text or application.
Still others may lack any formal leaders, either in principle or by local necessity.
Some Anglican churches consider themselves both Protestant and Catholic.
Beliefs on baptism vary among denominations.
Other Gospels have now been recovered, such as those found near Nag Hammadi in 1945, and while some of these texts are quite different from what Christians have been used to, it should be understood that some of this newly recovered Gospel material is quite possibly contemporaneous with, or even earlier than, the New Testament Gospels.
Every version of the Old Testament always includes the books of the Tanakh, the canon of the Hebrew Bible.
Constantine was also instrumental in the convocation of the First Council of Nicaea in 325, which sought to address the Arian heresy and formulated the Nicene Creed, which is still used by the Catholic Church, Eastern Orthodoxy, Anglican Communion, and many Protestant churches.
There are numerous other countries, such as Cyprus, which although do not have an established church, still give official recognition and support to a specific Christian denomination.
Eastern Christians (particularly Nestorian Christians) contributed to the Arab Islamic Civilization during the Ummayad and the Abbasid periods by translating works of Greek philosophers to Syriac and afterwards to Arabic.
Still others maintain that only a particular translation is inerrant, such as the King James Version.
These books appear in the Septuagint, but are regarded by Protestants to be apocryphal.
Christian disciplines of the respective arts have subsequently developed into Christian philosophy, Christian art, Christian music, Christian literature etc.
However, there are many charismatic movements that have become well established over large parts of the world, especially Africa, Latin America and Asia.
The Nicene Creed was formulated, largely in response to Arianism, at the Councils of Nicaea and Constantinople in 325 and 381 respectively  and ratified as the universal creed of Christendom by the First Council of Ephesus in 431.
From 1095 under the pontificate of Urban II, the Crusades were launched.
Hebraism, like Hellenism, has been an all-important factor in the development of Western Civilization; Judaism, as the precursor of Christianity, has indirectly had had much to do with shaping the ideals and morality of western nations since the Christian era.
File:Catholic population.svg|Distribution of Roman Catholics
The Christian share of the world's population has stood at around 33% for the last hundred years, which says that one in three persons on earth are Christians.
New Testament scholar Robert M. Price has outlined the possibility that some Bible stories are based partly on myth in "The Christ Myth Theory and its problems".
