"Thomas Talley has shown that, although the Emperor Aurelian's dedication of a temple to the sun god in the Campus Martius (C.E.
In Old English, ''Gēola'' (''Yule'') referred to the period corresponding to December and January, which was eventually equated with Christian Christmas.
The US Supreme Court declined to hear an appeal.
240) identified December 25, later to become the most widely accepted date of celebration, as the date of Jesus' birth in 221.
Following the Protestant Reformation, many of the new denominations, including the Anglican Church and Lutheran Church, continued to celebrate Christmas.
Hippolytus of Rome (170–235) may also have identified December 25 for the birth of Jesus and March 25 for the conception.
With regard to a December religious feast of the sun as a god (Sol), as distinct from a solstice feast of the (re)birth of the astronomical sun, one scholar has commented that, "while the winter solstice on or around December 25 was well established in the Roman imperial calendar, there is no evidence that a religious celebration of Sol on that day antedated the celebration of Christmas".
Christmas fell out of favor in the United States after the American Revolution, when it was considered an English custom.
An image of the British royal family with their Christmas tree at Windsor Castle created a sensation when it was published in the ''Illustrated London News'' in 1848.
The transformation was accomplished with the aid of notable contributors including Washington Irving and the German-American cartoonist Thomas Nast (1840–1902).
Countries in which Christmas is not a formal public holiday include Afghanistan, Algeria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bhutan, Cambodia, China (excepting Hong Kong and Macao), Comoros, Iran, Israel, Japan, Kuwait, Laos, Libya, Maldives, Mauritania, Mongolia, Morocco, North Korea, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Tajikistan, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, United Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan, Vietnam, and Yemen.
Christmas gift-giving during the Middle Ages was usually between people with legal relationships, such as tenant and landlord.
Even in the West, the January 6 celebration of the nativity of Jesus seems to have continued until after 380.
the Herald Angels Sing".
This anonymous tract also states: "But Our Lord, too, is born in the month of December&nbsp;... the eight before the calends of January 25 December&nbsp;..., But they call it the 'Birthday of the Unconquered'.
The mass of the population had not adopted many of the Christmas rituals that later became general.
Greek children get their presents from Saint Basil on New Year's Eve, the eve of that saint's liturgical feast.
St. Nikolaus wears a bishop's dress and still brings small gifts (usually candies, nuts, and fruits) on December 6 and is accompanied by Knecht Ruprecht.
The canonical gospels of Luke and Matthew both describe Jesus as being born in Bethlehem in Judea, to a virgin mother.
Many biblical scholars view the discussion of historicity as secondary, given that gospels were primarily written as theological documents rather than historical accounts.
Film studios release many high-budget movies during the holiday season (e.g.
The exchanging of gifts is one of the core aspects of the modern Christmas celebration, making it the most profitable time of year for retailers and businesses throughout the world.
Groups such as the American Civil Liberties Union have initiated court cases to bar the display of images and other material referring to Christmas from public property, including schools.
In other sectors, the pre-Christmas increase in spending was even greater, there being a November–December buying surge of 100 percent in bookstores and 170 percent in jewelry stores.
dismissive of the festive spirit.
The first commercially produced decorations appeared in Germany in the 1860s, inspired by paper chains made by children.
"Adeste Fideles" (O Come all ye faithful) appears in its current form in the mid-18th century, although the words may have originated in the 13th century.
When celebration on a particular date began, January 6 prevailed at least in the East; but, except among Armenians (the Armenian Apostolic Church and the Armenian Evangelical Church), who continue to celebrate the birth on January 6, December 25 eventually won acceptance everywhere.
For Christians, participating in a religious service plays an important part in the recognition of the season.
In contrast, the established Anglican Church "pressed for a more elaborate observance of feasts, penitential seasons, and saints' days.
The Lord of the Rings film trilogy, Avatar), including Christmas films, fantasy movies or high-tone dramas with high production values to hopes of maximizing the chance of nominations for the Academy Awards.
In the early 19th century, writers imagined Tudor Christmas as a time of heartfelt celebration.
His wife is referred to as Mrs. Claus.
In 1843, the first commercial Christmas card was produced by Sir Henry Cole.
In the 12th century the Parisian monk Adam of St. Victor began to derive music from popular songs, introducing something closer to the traditional Christmas carol.
Irenaeus (c. 130–202) viewed Christ's conception as March 25 in association with the Passion, with the nativity nine months after on December 25.
'''Christmas''' or '''Christmas Day''' (, meaning "Christ's Mass") is an annual festival commemorating the birth of Jesus Christ, Archived 2009-10-31. observed most commonly on December 25 as a religious and cultural celebration among billions of people around the world.
This was in Rome, while in Eastern Christianity the birth of Jesus was already celebrated in connection with the Epiphany on January 6.
A prominent phrase from the tale, "Merry Christmas", was popularized following the appearance of the story.
In the 15th century, it was recorded that in London it was the custom at Christmas for every house and all the parish churches to be "decked with holm, ivy, bays, and whatsoever the season of the year afforded to be green".
Many modern Christmas customs have been directly influenced by such festivals, including gift-giving and merrymaking from the Roman Saturnalia, greenery, lights, and charity from the Roman New Year, and Yule logs and various foods from Germanic feasts.
''Crīst'' (genitive ''Crīstes'') is from Greek ''Khrīstos'' (Χριστός), a translation of Hebrew ''Māšîaḥ'' (מָשִׁיחַ), "Messiah", meaning "anointed"; and ''mæsse'' is from Latin ''missa'', the celebration of the Eucharist.
In the East, early Christians celebrated the birth of Christ as part of Epiphany (January 6), although this festival emphasized celebration of the baptism of Jesus.
Some carols like "Personent hodie", "Good King Wenceslas", and "The Holly and the Ivy" can be traced directly back to the Middle Ages.
However, other Orthodox Christians, such as those belonging to the jurisdictions of Bulgaria, Greece, Romania, Constantinople, Antioch, Alexandria, Albania, Cyprus, Finland, and the Orthodox Church in America, among others, began using the Revised Julian calendar in the early 20th century, which at present corresponds exactly to the Gregorian calendar.
Up to the 1950s, in the UK, many Christmas customs were restricted to the upper classes and better-off families.
While the celebration of Christmas was not yet customary in some regions in the U.S., Henry Wadsworth Longfellow detected "a transition state about Christmas here in New England" in 1856.
There has been some opposition to the narrative of the American evolution of Saint Nicholas into the modern Santa.
By the High Middle Ages, the holiday had become so prominent that chroniclers routinely noted where various magnates celebrated Christmas.
However, some Eastern churches celebrate Christmas on the December 25 of the older Julian calendar, which currently corresponds to January 7 in the Gregorian calendar, the day after the Western Christian Church celebrates the Epiphany.
Other Christmas cards are more secular and can depict Christmas traditions, mythical figures such as Santa Claus, objects directly associated with Christmas such as candles, holly and baubles, or a variety of images associated with the season, such as Christmastide activities, snow scenes and the wildlife of the northern winter.
In England and Wales, the Christmas Day (Trading) Act 2004 prevents all large shops from trading on Christmas Day.
Postal customers will often use these stamps to mail Christmas cards, and they are popular with philatelists.
Its instant popularity played a major role in portraying Christmas as a holiday emphasizing family, goodwill, and compassion.
Some jurisdictions of the Eastern Orthodox Church, including those of Russia, Georgia, Ukraine, Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia, and Jerusalem, mark feasts using the older Julian calendar.
Therefore, these Orthodox Christians mark December 25 (and thus Christmas) on the same day that is internationally considered to be December 25, and which is also the date of Christmas among Western Christians.
Saint Nicholas traditionally appeared in bishop's attire, accompanied by helpers, inquiring about the behaviour of children during the past year before deciding whether they deserved a gift or not.
The Moravians in Bethlehem had the first Christmas trees in America as well as the first Nativity Scenes.
Slovaks prepare the traditional Christmas bread potica, ''bûche de Noël'' in France, ''panettone'' in Italy, and elaborate tarts and cakes.
"Christmas" is a compound word originating in the term "Christ's Mass".
Completely secular Christmas seasonal songs emerged in the late 18th century.
Because of complicating factors, this analysis is sometimes used to discuss possible flaws in current microeconomic theory.
It is common in many parts of the world for town squares and consumer shopping areas to sponsor and display decorations.
This alternative view is considered academically to be "a thoroughly viable hypothesis", though not certain.
Within some families, the pieces used to make the representation are considered a valuable family heirloom.
Non-Puritans in New England deplored the loss of the holidays enjoyed by the laboring classes in England.
In Victorian Britain, his image was remade to match that of Santa.
In Britain, the Christmas tree was introduced in the early 19th century following the personal union with the Kingdom of Hanover by Charlotte of Mecklenburg-Strelitz, wife of King George III.
He is first recorded in early 17th century England, but was associated with holiday merrymaking and drunkenness rather than the bringing of gifts.
In America, interest in Christmas had been revived in the 1820s by several short stories by Washington Irving which appear in his ''The Sketch Book of Geoffrey Crayon, Gent.''
At the same time, Christian residents of Virginia and New York observed the holiday freely.
The book, ''The Vindication of Christmas'' (London, 1652), argued against the Puritans, and makes note of Old English Christmas traditions, dinner, roast apples on the fire, card playing, dances with "plow-boys" and "maidservants", old Father Christmas and carol singing.
Latin hymns such as "Veni redemptor gentium", written by Ambrose, Archbishop of Milan, were austere statements of the theological doctrine of the Incarnation in opposition to Arianism.
It was a traditional Jewish belief that great men lived a whole number of years, without fractions, so that Jesus was considered to have been conceived on March 25, as he died on March 25, which was calculated to have coincided with 14&nbsp;Nisan.
Father Christmas, a jolly, well nourished, bearded man who typified the spirit of good cheer at Christmas, predates the Santa Claus character.
Other popular holiday plants include holly, mistletoe, red amaryllis, and Christmas cactus.
The English language phrase "Christmas tree" is first recorded in 1835 and represents an importation from the German language.
Although many parents around the world routinely teach their children about Santa Claus and other gift bringers, some have come to reject this practice, considering it deceptive.
In the U.S., the "Christmas shopping season" starts as early as October.
"Corde natus ex Parentis" ("Of the Father's love begotten") by the Spanish poet Prudentius (d. 413) is still sung in some churches today.
Family reunions and the exchange of gifts are a widespread feature of the season.
Various dates were speculated: May 20, April 18 or 19, March 25, January 2, November 17 or 20.
Among other saintly attributes, he was noted for the care of children, generosity, and the giving of gifts.
While the month and date of Jesus' birth are unknown, by the early-to-mid 4th century, the Western Christian Church had placed Christmas on December 25, a date later adopted in the East.
The Chronography of 354 AD contains early evidence of the celebration on December 25 of a Christian liturgical feast of the birth of Jesus.
In 1889, Louis Duchesne proposed that the date of Christmas was calculated as nine months after the Annunciation, the traditional date of the conception of Jesus.Duchesne, Louis, ''Les Origines du Culte Chrétien,'' Paris, 1902, 262 ff.
It was during the Reformation in 16th–17th-century Europe that many Protestants changed the gift bringer to the Christ Child or ''Christkindl'', and the date of giving gifts changed from December 6 to Christmas Eve.
King Charles I of England directed his noblemen and gentry to return to their landed estates in midwinter to keep up their old-style Christmas generosity.
The form ''Christenmas'' was also historically used, but is now considered archaic and dialectal; it derives from Middle English ''Cristenmasse'', literally "Christian mass".
Following the Restoration of Charles II, ''Poor Robin's Almanack'' contained the lines: "Now thanks to God for Charles return, / Whose absence made old Christmas mourn.
The Restoration of King Charles II in 1660 ended the ban, but many Calvinist clergymen still disapproved of Christmas celebration.
Superimposing his humanitarian vision of the holiday, in what has been termed "Carol Philosophy", Dickens influenced many aspects of Christmas that are celebrated today in Western culture, such as family gatherings, seasonal food and drink, dancing, games, and a festive generosity of spirit.
In other versions, elves make the toys.
Christmas observance was outlawed in Boston in 1659.
The best known of these figures today is red-dressed Santa Claus, of diverse origins.
Other deadweight losses include the effects of Christmas on the environment and the fact that material gifts are often perceived as white elephants, imposing cost for upkeep and storage and contributing to clutter.
In the early 4th century, the church calendar in Rome contained Christmas on December 25 and other holidays placed on solar dates.
The heart-shaped leaves of ivy were said to symbolize the coming to earth of Jesus, while holly was seen as protection against pagans and witches, its thorns and red berries held to represent the Crown of Thorns worn by Jesus at the crucifixion and the blood he shed.
The Christmas tree was rare.
Now, she brings gifts to all children.
The belief that God came into the world in the form of man to atone for the sins of humanity, rather than the exact birth date, is considered to be the primary purpose in celebrating Christmas.
In addition, several closely related and often interchangeable figures, known as Santa Claus, Father Christmas, Saint Nicholas, and Christkind, are associated with bringing gifts to children during the Christmas season and have their own body of traditions and lore.
The term Scrooge became a synonym for miser, with "Bah!
The Egyptian deity Horus, son to goddess Isis, was celebrated at the winter solstice.
Figures from the U.S. Census Bureau reveal that expenditure in department stores nationwide rose from $20.8 billion in November 2004 to $31.9 billion in December 2004, an increase of 54 percent.
In the UK in 2010, up to £8 billion was expected to be spent online at Christmas, approximately a quarter of total retail festive sales.
Traditionally, carols have often been based on medieval chord patterns, and it is this that gives them their uniquely characteristic musical sound.
The traditional greeting reads "wishing you a Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year", much like that of the first commercial Christmas card, produced by Sir Henry Cole in London in 1843.
The calendar reform became a major point of tension between the Anglican party and the Puritan party."
It was not until the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991 that the persecution ended and Orthodox Christmas became a state holiday again for the first time in Russia after seven decades.
Christmas has at times been the subject of controversy and attacks from various sources.
Historically it was prohibited by Puritans when they briefly held power in England during the English Interregnum (1649–1660), and In Colonial America where the Puritans outlawed the celebration of Christmas in 1659.
These elements, including the Yule log from Yule and gift giving from Saturnalia, became syncretized into Christmas over the centuries.
Additionally, the celebration of Christmas was banned on more than one occasion within certain Protestant groups, such as the Puritans, due to concerns that it was too pagan or unbiblical.
Donald Heinz, a professor at California State University, states that Martin Luther "inaugurated a period in which Germany would produce a unique culture of Christmas, much copied in North America."
The Plymouth Pilgrims put their loathing for the day into practice in 1620 when they spent their first Christmas Day in the New World working – thus demonstrating their complete contempt for the day.
The Maltese traditionally serve ''Imbuljuta tal-Qastan'', a chocolate and chestnuts beverage, after Midnight Mass and throughout the Christmas season.
The modern popular image of Santa Claus, however, was created in the United States, and in particular in New York.
Post was still delivered on Christmas Day until 1961.
The prominence of Christmas Day increased gradually after Charlemagne was crowned Emperor on Christmas Day in 800.
The stamp features a map of the globe and bears an inscription "XMAS 1898" at the bottom.
There are even humorous cards and genres depicting nostalgic scenes of the past such as crinolined shoppers in idealized 19th century streetscapes.
/ For then we scarcely did it know, / Whether it Christmas were or no."
In 1607, King James I insisted that a play be acted on Christmas night and that the court indulge in games.
274) probably took place on the 'Birthday of the Invincible Sun' on December 25, the cult of the sun in pagan Rome ironically did not celebrate the winter solstice nor any of the other quarter-tense days, as one might expect."
These stamps are regular postage stamps, unlike Christmas seals, and are valid for postage year-round.
But the medieval calendar was dominated by Christmas-related holidays.
The Scandinavian tomte is sometimes depicted as a gnome instead of Santa Claus.
That shepherds watched the flocks by night in the fields in the winter time is supported by the phrase "frost by night" in .
Nativity scenes are known from 10th-century Rome.
Tertullian (d. 220) did not mention Christmas as a major feast day in the Church of Roman Africa.
Both the US Postal Service and the United Kingdom's Royal Mail regularly issue Christmas-themed stamps each year.
In Germany, France, and Austria, goose and pork are favored.
The eating of sweets and chocolates has become popular worldwide, and sweeter Christmas delicacies include the German ''stollen'', marzipan cake or candy, and Jamaican rum fruit cake.
The Parliament of Scotland officially abolished the observance of Christmas in 1640, claiming that the church had been "purged of all superstitious observation of days".
The finished serving is often garnished with a sprinkling of ground cinnamon or nutmeg.
The diary of James Woodforde, from the latter half of the 18th century, details the observance of Christmas and celebrations associated with the season over a number of years.
In the 19th and 20th century, African American spirituals and songs about Christmas, based in their tradition of spirituals, became more widely known.
Sextus Julius Africanus (c. 160–c.
Current tradition in several Latin American countries (such as Venezuela and Colombia) holds that while Santa makes the toys, he then gives them to the Baby Jesus, who is the one who actually delivers them to the children's homes, a reconciliation between traditional religious beliefs and the iconography of Santa Claus imported from the United States.
League football matches continued in Scotland until the 1970s while in England they ceased at the end of the 1950s.
Isaac Newton argued that the date of Christmas, celebrating the birth of him whom Christians consider to be the "Sun of righteousness" prophesied in , was selected to correspond with the southern solstice, which the Romans called ''bruma'', celebrated on December 25.Pliny the Elder, Natural History,  18:59 In 1743, German Protestant Paul Ernst Jablonski argued Christmas was placed on December 25 to correspond with the Roman solar holiday ''Dies Natalis Solis Invicti'' and was therefore a "paganization" that debased the true church.
The 18th-century English reformer Charles Wesley understood the importance of music to worship.
The traditional colors of Christmas decorations are red, green, and gold.
Moreover, a study of the "children's books, periodicals and journals" of New Amsterdam by Charles Jones revealed no references to Saint Nicholas or Sinterklaas.
In some countries, Christmas decorations are traditionally taken down on Twelfth Night, the evening of January 5.
The French Père Noël evolved along similar lines, eventually adopting the Santa image.
A special group known as the shepherds of Migdal Eder (, ) watched the flocks by night year round pastured for Temple Sacrifice near Bethlehem.
"Deck the Halls" dates from 1784, and the American "Jingle Bells" was copyrighted in 1857.
Some prefer cards with a poem, prayer, or Biblical verse; while others distance themselves from religion with an all-inclusive "Season's greetings".
Special desserts are also prepared, such as Christmas pudding, mince pies, fruit cake and Yule log cake.
It was only later that carols began to be sung in church.
In the United Kingdom and countries influenced by its traditions, a standard Christmas meal includes turkey, goose or other large bird, gravy, potatoes, vegetables, sometimes bread and cider.
In addition to setting many psalms to melodies, which were influential in the Great Awakening in the United States, he wrote texts for at least three Christmas carols.
Red symbolizes the blood of Jesus, which was shed in his crucifixion, while green symbolizes eternal life, and in particular the evergreen tree, which does not lose its leaves in the winter, and gold is the first color associated with Christmas, as one of the three gifts of the Magi, symbolizing royalty.
Or, if they say that it is the birthday of the Sun, He is the Sun of Justice."
In the U.S. there has been a tendency to replace the greeting ''Merry Christmas'' with ''Happy Holidays'', which is considered inclusive at the time of the Jewish celebration of Hanukkah.
Candles in each window are meant to demonstrate the fact that Christians believe that Jesus Christ is the ultimate light of the world.
Modern scholar S. E. Hijmans, however, states that "While they were aware that pagans called this day the 'birthday' of Sol Invictus, this did not concern them and it did not play any role in their choice of date for Christmas."
It is estimated that in 2001, Christmas resulted in a $4 billion deadweight loss in the U.S. alone.
Such groups claim that any specific mention of the term "Christmas" or its religious aspects is being increasingly censored, avoided, or discouraged by a number of advertisers, retailers, government (prominently schools), and other public and private organizations.
This coincided with the appearance of the Oxford Movement and the growth of Anglo-Catholicism, which led a revival in traditional rituals and religious observances.
Singing of carols initially suffered a decline in popularity after the Protestant Reformation in northern Europe, although some Reformers, like Martin Luther, wrote carols and encouraged their use in worship.
The date of Christmas may have initially been chosen to correspond with the day exactly nine months after the day on which early Christians believed that Jesus was conceived, or with one or more ancient polytheistic festivals that occurred near southern solstice (i.e., the Roman winter solstice); a further solar connection has been suggested because of a biblical verse identifying Jesus as the "Sun of righteousness".
Christmas celebrations have also been prohibited by atheist states such as the Soviet Union and more recently majority Muslim states such as Somalia, Tajikistan and Brunei.
As a result, December 25 on the Julian calendar currently corresponds to January 7 on the calendar used by most governments and people in everyday life.
This idea became popular especially in the 18th and 19th centuries.
The scribe who added it wrote: "It was a custom of the Pagans to celebrate on the same 25&nbsp;December the birthday of the Sun, at which they kindled lights in token of festivity.
An explicit expression of this theory appears in an annotation of uncertain date added to a manuscript of a work by 12th-century Syrian bishop Jacob Bar-Salibi.
The prevailing atmosphere of Christmas has also continually evolved since the holiday's inception, ranging from a sometimes raucous, drunken, carnival-like state in the Middle Ages, to a tamer family-oriented and children-centered theme introduced in a 19th-century transformation.
In his work ''Adversus Haereses'', Irenaeus (c.&nbsp;130–202) identified the conception of Jesus as March 25 and linked it to the crucifixion at the time of the equinox, with the birth of Jesus nine months after on December 25 at the time of the solstice.
How All the Welkin Rings", later renamed "Hark!
The celebratory customs associated in various countries with Christmas have a mix of pre-Christian, Christian, and secular themes and origins.
Christmas cards are purchased in considerable quantities, and feature artwork, commercially designed and relevant to the season.
In the U.S. and Canada, where the use of the term "Holidays" is most prevalent, opponents have denounced its usage and avoidance of using the term "Christmas" as being politically correct.
In 1939, Brazil issued four semi-postal stamps with designs featuring the three kings and a star of Bethlehem, an angel and child, the Southern Cross and a child, and a mother and child.
Industries completely dependent on Christmas include Christmas cards, of which 1.9 billion are sent in the United States each year, and live Christmas Trees, of which 20.8 million were cut in the U.S. in 2002.
The Yule boar was a common feature of medieval Christmas feasts.
Others practice gift giving on December 6, Saint Nicholas Day, and January 6, Epiphany.
In 245, Origen of Alexandria, writing about , commented that Scripture mentions only sinners as ''celebrating'' their birthdays, namely Pharaoh, who then had his chief baker hanged (), and Herod, who then had John the Baptist beheaded (), and mentions saints as ''cursing'' the day of their birth, namely Jeremiah () and Job ().partially quoted in " Natal Day", ''The Catholic Encyclopedia'', 1911.
Carols largely survived in rural communities until the revival of interest in popular songs in the 19th century.
The group was composed of a lead singer and a ring of dancers that provided the chorus.
A feast central to the Christian liturgical year, it is prepared for by the season of Advent or the Nativity Fast and initiates the season of Christmastide, which historically in the West lasts twelve days and culminates on Twelfth Night; in some traditions, Christmastide includes an Octave.
Sales increase dramatically as people purchase gifts, decorations, and supplies to celebrate.
Some Christians and organizations such as Pat Robertson's American Center for Law and Justice cite alleged attacks on Christmas (dubbing them a "war on Christmas").
Christmas cards are illustrated messages of greeting exchanged between friends and family members during the weeks preceding Christmas Day.
After the Christianisation of Scandinavia the celebration was allowed as long as it was in the name of Christ instead.
By the 13th century, in France, Germany, and particularly, Italy, under the influence of Francis of Asissi, a strong tradition of popular Christmas songs in the native language developed.
The earliest extant specifically Christmas hymns appear in 4th-century Rome.
In some cultures Santa Claus is accompanied by Knecht Ruprecht, or Black Peter.
Spirits such as brandy, rum or bourbon are often added.
Therefore, the aforementioned Orthodox Christians mark December 25 (and thus Christmas) on the day that is internationally considered to be January 7.
The image was standardized by advertisers in the 1920s and continues through the present day.
The Christmas tree is considered by some as Christianisation of pagan tradition and ritual surrounding the Winter Solstice, which included the use of evergreen boughs, and an adaptation of pagan tree worship; according to eighth-century biographer Æddi Stephanus, Saint Boniface (634–709), who was a missionary in Germany, took an axe to an oak tree dedicated to Thor and pointed out a fir tree, which he stated was a more fitting object of reverence because it pointed to heaven and it had a triangular shape, which he said was symbolic of the Trinity.
In other countries, secular processions or parades featuring Santa Claus and other seasonal figures are often held.
By the 13th century, Saint Nicholas was well known in the Netherlands, and the practice of gift-giving in his name spread to other parts of central and southern Europe.
In addition to "Christmas", the holiday has been known by various other names throughout its history.
By 1860, fourteen states including several from New England had adopted Christmas as a legal holiday.
The equinox was March 25 on the Roman calendar, so this implied a birth in December.Roll p. 87.
The best known was originally entitled "Hark!
