The diagnosis of COPD should be considered in anyone over the age of 35 to 40 who has shortness of breath, a chronic cough, sputum production, or frequent winter colds and a history of exposure to risk factors for the disease.
Women who smoke during pregnancy may increase the risk of COPD in their child.
Two main components are measured to make the diagnosis: the forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1), which is the greatest volume of air that can be breathed out in the first second of a breath, and the forced vital capacity (FVC), which is the greatest volume of air that can be breathed out in a single large breath.
In those with normal or mildly low oxygen levels, oxygen supplementation may improve shortness of breath.
This risk is particularly high if someone deficient in alpha 1-antitrypsin also smokes.
It typically occurs in people over the age of 40.
These symptoms are present for a prolonged period of time and typically worsen over time.
Acute exacerbations are typically treated by increasing the usage of short-acting bronchodilators.
An acute exacerbation of COPD is defined as increased shortness of breath, increased sputum production, a change in the color of the sputum from clear to green or yellow, or an increase in cough in someone with COPD.
While both may be used at the same time, any benefit is of questionable significance.
Signs of PE in COPD include pleuritic chest pain and heart failure without signs of infection.
There is no clear evidence for those with less severe cases.
The number of deaths is projected to increase further because of higher smoking rates and an aging population in many countries.
In COPD, it may take longer to breathe out than to breathe in.
In contrast to asthma, the airflow reduction does not improve much with the use of a bronchodilator.
In the advanced stages, it occurs during rest and may be always present.
Roflumilast shows promise in decreasing the rate of exacerbations but does not appear to change quality of life.
Those with many exacerbations have a faster rate of deterioration of their lung function.
Some also have a degree of airway hyperresponsiveness to irritants similar to those found in asthma.
The relative contributions of these two factors vary between people.
Further bronchodilators, such as salbutamol, were developed in the 1970s, and the use of LABAs began in the mid-1990s.
They work equally well as intravenous steroids but appear to have fewer side effects.
The most common symptoms of COPD are sputum production, shortness of breath, and a productive cough.
Smoking bans in public areas and places of work are important measures to decrease exposure to secondhand smoke and while many places have instituted bans more are recommended.
Treatment with stem cells is under study.
Significant weight loss is a bad sign.
'''Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease''' ('''COPD''') is a type of obstructive lung disease characterized by long-term poor airflow.
The destruction of the connective tissue of the lungs is what leads to emphysema, which then contributes to the poor airflow and, finally, poor absorption and release of respiratory gases.
Other types of smoke, such as marijuana, cigar, and water pipe smoke, also confer a risk.
In those who have had a recent exacerbation, pulmonary rehabilitation appears to improve the overall quality of life and the ability to exercise, and reduce mortality.
Often several attempts are required before long-term abstinence is achieved.
In those who smoke, stopping smoking is the only measure shown to slow down the worsening of COPD.
The chance of quitting is improved with social support, engagement in a smoking cessation program and the use of medications such as nicotine replacement therapy, bupropion or varenicline.
This condition can occur before COPD fully develops.
If long-acting bronchodilators are insufficient, then inhaled corticosteroids are typically added.
They are also associated with increased risk of heart disease and stroke.
The term "chronic bronchitis" is still used to define a productive cough that is present for at least three months each year for two years.
Many people with COPD mistakenly think they have asthma.
'''Chronic bronchitis''' and '''emphysema''' are older terms used for different types of COPD.
Many health systems have difficulty ensuring appropriate identification, diagnosis and care of people with COPD; Britain's Department of Health has identified this as a major issue for the National Health Service and has introduced a specific strategy to tackle these problems.
1 expressed as a percentage of the predicted "normal" for the person's age, gender, height and weight.
Pulmonary emboli (blood clots in the lungs) can worsen symptoms in those with pre-existing COPD.
People who live in large cities have a higher rate of COPD compared to people who live in rural areas.
A number of other factors are less closely linked to COPD.
The FDA recommends against the use of fluoroquinolones when other options are available due to higher risks of serious side effects.
Most cases of the disease, however, are relatively mild.
Supplemental nutrition may be useful in those who are malnourished.
A chest X-ray and complete blood count may be useful to exclude other conditions at the time of diagnosis.
The diagnosis is based on poor airflow as measured by lung function tests.
During exacerbations, airway inflammation is also increased, resulting in increased hyperinflation, reduced expiratory airflow and worsening of gas transfer.
Early treatments included garlic, cinnamon and ipecac, among others.
In those with mild disease, short-acting agents are recommended on an as needed basis.
Respiratory infections such as pneumonia do not appear to increase the risk of COPD, at least in adults.
Exposure to personal smoke and secondhand smoke increases the risk.
The major goals of management are to reduce risk factors, manage stable COPD, prevent and treat acute exacerbations, and manage associated illnesses.
Tripod positioning may occur as the disease worsens.
Inhaled bronchodilators are the primary medications used and result in a small overall benefit.
Tuberculosis may also present with a chronic cough and should be considered in locations where it is common.
They reduce shortness of breath, wheeze and exercise limitation, resulting in an improved quality of life.
In non-smokers, secondhand smoke is the cause of about 20% of cases.
Based on these measurements, spirometry would lead to over-diagnosis of COPD in the elderly.
File:COPD.JPG|alt=A black and white image, with a small white heart in the middle and large black lungs around it|Chest X-ray demonstrating severe COPD.
The policies of governments, public health agencies, and anti-smoking organizations can reduce smoking rates by discouraging people from starting and encouraging people to stop smoking.
In 1814 Charles Badham used "catarrh" to describe the cough and excess mucus in chronic bronchitis.
There are two main anticholinergics used in COPD, ipratropium and tiotropium.
A barrel chest is a characteristic sign of COPD, but is relatively uncommon.
Long-term antibiotics, specifically those from the macrolide class such as erythromycin, reduce the frequency of exacerbations in those who have two or more a year.
As of 2013 COPD affects 329&nbsp;million people or nearly 5 percent of the global population.
Annual influenza vaccinations in those with COPD reduce exacerbations, hospitalizations and death.
Medical X-Ray imaging WFH07 nevit.jpg|A severe case of bullous emphysema
Water pipe smoke appears to be as harmful as smoking cigarettes.
It resulted in an estimated economic cost of $2.1&nbsp;trillion in 2010.
Other genetic factors are being investigated, of which there are likely to be many.
COPD is also commonly found in old dogs.
Globally, as of 2010, COPD is estimated to result in economic costs of $2.1&nbsp;trillion, half of which occurring in the developing world.
These fires are a method of cooking and heating for nearly 3&nbsp;billion people with their health effects being greater among women due to more exposure.
Ipratropium is a short-acting agent while tiotropium is long-acting.
Low oxygen levels, if present for a prolonged period, can result in narrowing of the arteries in the lungs, while emphysema leads to breakdown of capillaries in the lungs.
It is responsible for about 1–5% of cases and the condition is present in about 3–4 in 10,000 people.
Using alternative energy sources such as solar cooking and electrical heating is also effective.
Concerns include that of antibiotic resistance and hearing problems with azithromycin.
Both these changes result in increased blood pressure in the pulmonary arteries, which may cause cor pulmonale.
In 2013 it resulted in 2.9 million deaths, up from 2.4 million deaths in 1990.
COPD has been referred to as "smoker's lung".
However, his spirometer could only measure volume, not airflow.
Severe destruction of small airways can lead to the formation of large air pockets—known as bullae—that replace lung tissue.
This includes decreasing rates of smoking and improving indoor and outdoor air quality.
Aclidinium, another long acting agent which came to market in 2012, has been used as an alternative to tiotropium.
Using fuels such as kerosene or coal might be less bad than traditional biomass such as wood or dung.
In those at high risk of high carbon dioxide levels, oxygen saturations of 88–92% are recommended, while for those without this risk recommended levels are 94–98%.
Inhaled steroids are associated with increased rates of pneumonia.
COPD is more common than any other lung disease as a cause of cor pulmonale.
This contributes to the inability to breathe out fully.
These conditions include ischemic heart disease, high blood pressure, diabetes mellitus, muscle wasting, osteoporosis, lung cancer, anxiety disorder and depression.
Chest tightness may occur but is not common and may be caused by another problem.
Even at a late stage of the disease, it can reduce the rate of worsening lung function and delay the onset of disability and death.
In this situation some recommend against its use.
Working in agriculture is also a risk.
René Laennec, the physician who invented the stethoscope, used the term "emphysema" in his book ''A Treatise on the Diseases of the Chest and of Mediate Auscultation'' (1837) to describe lungs that did not collapse when he opened the chest during an autopsy.
There is no known cure for COPD, but the symptoms are treatable and its progression can be delayed.
In the United States approximately 6.3% of the adult population, totaling approximately 15&nbsp;million people, have been diagnosed with COPD.
Previously it has been known by a number of different names, including chronic obstructive bronchopulmonary disease, chronic obstructive respiratory disease, chronic airflow obstruction, chronic airflow limitation, chronic obstructive lung disease, nonspecific chronic pulmonary disease, and diffuse obstructive pulmonary syndrome.
Vigorous coughing may lead to rib fractures or a brief loss of consciousness.
The distinction between asthma and COPD is made on the basis of the symptoms, smoking history, and whether airflow limitation is reversible with bronchodilators at spirometry.
In horses it is known as recurrent airway obstruction, can be quite severe, and most often is linked to an allergic reaction to a fungus contained in contaminated hay or straw.
In those without acidosis from respiratory failure, home care ("hospital at home") may be able to help avoid some admissions.
A peak expiratory flow (the maximum speed of expiration), commonly used in asthma, is not sufficient for the diagnosis of COPD.
A number of developed countries have successfully improved outdoor air quality through regulations.
Five days of steroids work as well as ten or fourteen.
In 1721 the first drawings of emphysema were made by Ruysh.
This was the first association between tobacco smoking and chronic respiratory disease.
COPD is more common in older people; it affects 34–200 out of 1000 people older than 65&nbsp;years, depending on the population under review.
Some people with COPD attribute the symptoms to a "smoker's cough".
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease may occur in a number of other animals and may be caused by exposure to tobacco smoke.
With respect to long-acting agents, it is unclear if tiotropium (a long-acting anticholinergic) or long-acting beta agonists (LABAs) are better, and it may be worth trying each and continuing the one that worked best.
The disease affects men and women almost equally, as there has been increased tobacco use among women in the developed world.
The overall effect in relation to smoking, however, is believed to be small.
The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence criteria additionally require a FEV1 of less than 80% of predicted.
In Europe, COPD represents 3% of healthcare spending.
It is commonly described as: "my breathing requires effort," "I feel out of breath," or "I can't get enough air in".
A number of measures have been taken to reduce the likelihood that workers in at-risk industries—such as coal mining, construction and stonemasonry—will develop COPD.
A procedure known as target lung denervation, which involves decreases the parasympathetic nervous system supply of the lungs, is being studied but does not yet have sufficient data to determine its use.
Spirometry measures the amount of airflow obstruction present and is generally carried out after the use of a bronchodilator, a medication to open up the airways.
The rate at which COPD worsens varies with the presence of factors that predict a poor outcome, including severe airflow obstruction, little ability to exercise, shortness of breath, significantly underweight or overweight, congestive heart failure, continued smoking, and frequent exacerbations.
There are several short-acting β2 agonists available including salbutamol (Ventolin) and terbutaline.
Those who smoke additionally have Tc1 lymphocyte involvement and some people with COPD have eosinophil involvement similar to that in asthma.
Most cases of COPD are potentially preventable through decreasing exposure to smoke and improving air quality.
Poorly ventilated cooking fires, often fueled by coal or biomass fuels such as wood and animal dung, lead to indoor air pollution and are one of the most common causes of COPD in developing countries.
File:Bullus emphasemaCT.png|Axial CT image of the lung of a person with end-stage bullous emphysema.
The proportion of disability from COPD globally has decreased from 1990 to 2010 due to improved indoor air quality primarily in Asia.
Some developed countries have seen increased rates, some have remained stable and some have seen a decrease in COPD prevalence.
Part of this cell response is brought on by inflammatory mediators such as chemotactic factors.
In those with more severe disease, long-acting agents are recommended.
In 1953, Dr. George L. Waldbott, an American allergist, first described a new disease he named "smoker's respiratory syndrome" in the 1953 ''Journal of the American Medical Association''.
In those with a severe exacerbation, antibiotics improve outcomes.
Mucolytics may help to reduce exacerbations in some people with chronic bronchitis.
Long-term treatment with steroid tablets is associated with significant side effects.
Supplemental oxygen is recommended in those with low oxygen levels at rest (a partial pressure of oxygen of less than 50–55&nbsp;mmHg or oxygen saturations of less than 88%).
Smoking cessation starts with the decision to stop smoking, leading to an attempt at quitting.
Early descriptions of probable emphysema include: in 1679 by T. Bonet of a condition of "voluminous lungs" and in 1769 by Giovanni Morgagni of lungs which were "turgid particularly from air".
In 2011, there were approximately 730,000 hospitalizations in the United States for COPD.
He noted that they did not collapse as usual because they were full of air and the airways were filled with mucus.
It is estimated that 3% of all disability is related to COPD.
This is expected to more than double by the year 2030.
Birth factors such as low birth weight may also play a role as do a number of infectious diseases including HIV/AIDS and tuberculosis.
Areas with poor outdoor air quality, including that from exhaust gas, generally have higher rates of COPD.
The main symptoms include shortness of breath and cough with sputum production.
Stopping smoking decreases the risk of death by 18%.
COPD may need to be differentiated from other causes of shortness of breath such as congestive heart failure, pulmonary embolism, pneumonia or pneumothorax.
When used with inhaled steroids they increase the risk of pneumonia.
The GOLD guidelines suggest dividing people into four categories based on symptoms assessment and airflow limitation.
A high-resolution computed tomography scan of the chest may show the distribution of emphysema throughout the lungs and can also be useful to exclude other lung diseases.
Effective dust control can be achieved by improving ventilation, using water sprays and by using mining techniques that minimize dust generation.
Oral corticosteroids improve the chance of recovery and decrease the overall duration of symptoms.
In 2012 it became the third leading cause as the number of deaths rose again to 3.1 million.
Evidence supporting the use of steroids in COPD were published in the late 1950s.
In the United States and United Kingdom, of those with COPD, 80–95% are either current smokers or previously smoked.
While treatment can slow worsening, there is no cure.
Those with obstructed airflow may have wheezing or decreased sounds with air entry on examination of the chest with a stethoscope.
In the United State, COPD, is estimated to be the third leading cause of death in 2011.
These were followed with pictures by Matthew Baillie in 1789 and descriptions of the destructive nature of the condition.
Hyperinflation from exercise is linked to shortness of breath in COPD, as it is less comfortable to breathe in when the lungs are already partly full.
Of those who smoke about 20% will get COPD, and of those who are lifelong smokers about half will get COPD.
Anticholinergics can cause dry mouth and urinary tract symptoms.
Noninvasive ventilation may be used to support breathing.
Those with COPD often have a history of "common colds" that last a long time.
The primary cause of COPD is tobacco smoke, with occupational exposure and pollution from indoor fires being significant causes in some countries.
Infections appear to be the cause of 50 to 75% of cases, with bacteria in 25%, viruses in 25%, and both in 25%.
General muscle wasting that often occurs in COPD may be partly due to inflammatory mediators released by the lungs into the blood.
While steroids and LABAs may work better together, it is unclear if this slight benefit outweighs the increased risks.
Additionally, women are more susceptible to the harmful effects of smoke than men.
25&nbsp;million people may have COPD if currently undiagnosed cases are included.
The likelihood of developing COPD increases with the total smoke exposure.
Problems from marijuana smoke may only be with heavy use.
This situation is referred to as cor pulmonale, and leads to symptoms of leg swelling and bulging neck veins.
While inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) have not shown benefit for people with mild COPD, they decrease acute exacerbations in those with either moderate or severe disease.
This can also lead to insufficient ventilation and, eventually, low blood oxygen levels.
Screening those without symptoms is not recommended.
If a worker develops COPD, further lung damage can be reduced by avoiding ongoing dust exposure, for example by changing the work role.
COPD typically worsens over time.
One key effort is to reduce exposure to smoke from cooking and heating fuels through improved ventilation of homes and better stoves and chimneys.
In some cases, the cough may not be present or may only occur occasionally and may not be productive.
Hyperinflation may also worsen during an exacerbation.
This terminology is no longer accepted as useful as most people with COPD have a combination of both emphysema and chronic bronchitis.
Some of the human data that is available has found poor results.
Keeping people from starting smoking is a key aspect of preventing COPD.
Pulmonary rehabilitation is a program of exercise, disease management and counseling, coordinated to benefit the individual.
Genetics play a role in the development of COPD.
The overall number of years lived with disability from COPD, however, has increased.
Breathing exercises in and of themselves appear to have a limited role.
In those who have periods of acute worsening, increased use of medications and hospitalization may be needed.
A chronic cough is often the first symptom to develop.
The only measures that have been shown to reduce mortality are smoking cessation and supplemental oxygen.
Fewer than 20% of exacerbations require hospital admission.
The global numbers are expected to continue increasing as risk factors remain common and the population continues to get older.
Normally, 75–80% of the FVC comes out in the first second and a FEV1/FVC ratio of less than 70% in someone with symptoms of COPD defines a person as having the disease.
This form of disease is called bullous emphysema.
Nebulization may be easier for those who are more unwell.
In areas of the world where alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency is common, people with COPD (particularly those below the age of 45 and with emphysema affecting the lower parts of the lungs) should be considered for testing.
Males and females are affected equally commonly.
