For the production of ferrochromium, the chromite ore (FeCr2O4) is reduced in large scale in electric arc furnace or in smaller smelters with either aluminium or silicon in an aluminothermic reaction.
Collectively the EARs, RDAs, AIs and ULs are referred to as Dietary Reference Intakes.
Chromium metal is of high value for its high corrosion resistance and hardness.
:2 Na2CrO4 + H2SO4 → Na2Cr2O7 + Na2SO4 + H2O
Most are derivatives of chromium hexacarbonyl or bis(benzene)chromium.
It can be produced by mixing sulfuric acid with dichromate, and is a strong oxidizing agent.
A thin layer of about 10–15&nbsp;µm was applied, which turned from yellow to dark green when it was cured.
Both methods normally use acidic chromate or dichromate solutions.
Chromium content of food varies widely due to differences in soil mineral content, growing season, plant cultivar, and contamination during processing.
Chromium(III) can be obtained by dissolving elemental chromium in acids like hydrochloric acid or sulfuric acid.
Chromium(0) has an electronic configuration of 4s13d5, owing to the lower energy of the high spin configuration.
:Na2Cr2O7 + 2 C → Cr2O3 + Na2CO3 + CO
If wear-resistant surfaces are needed then thicker chromium layers are deposited.
For chromium there was not sufficient information to set EARs and RDAs, so needs are described as estimates for Adequate Intakes (AIs).
He produced chromium trioxide (CrO3) by mixing crocoite with hydrochloric acid.
: + 4  + 3 e− →  + 5  (ε0 = −0.13&nbsp;V)
For example, the Phillips catalyst, prepared from chromium oxides, is used for the production of about half the world's polyethylene.
Stainless steel and chrome plating (electroplating with chromium) together comprise 85% of the commercial use.
The mineral crocoite (lead chromate PbCrO4) was used as a yellow pigment shortly after its discovery.
Abandoned chromium production sites often require environmental cleanup.
Qin Dynasty of the Terracotta Army near Xi'an, China have been analyzed by archaeologists.
The use is declining because of the environmental regulations due to the possibility of the formation of chromium(VI).
Mangenese-chromium isotope ratios reinforce the evidence from 26Al and 107Pd concerning the early history of the solar system.
Trivalent chromium occurs in trace amounts in foods, wine and water.
For example, Inconel 718 contains 18.6% chromium.
Chromium salts (chromates) are also the cause of allergic reactions in some people.
A very important chromate pigment, which was used widely in metal primer formulations, was zinc chromate, now replaced by zinc phosphate.
In 1798, Vauquelin discovered that he could isolate metallic chromium by heating the oxide in a charcoal oven, for which he is credited as the discoverer of the element.
Chromium tanned leather can contain between 4 and 5% of chromium, which is tightly bound to the proteins.
In these applications, the refractory materials are made from mixtures of chromite and magnesite.
For men ages 14 and up 35 μg/day up to age 50 and 30 μg/day for older.
In the case of chromium there is not yet enough information and hence no UL.
Chromium oxides are also used as a green color in glassmaking and as a glaze in ceramics.
There is still a question as to the correct mechanism.
Commercially available chromium(III) chloride hydrate is the dark green complex CrCl2(H2O)4Cl.
The two main products of chromium ore refining are ferrochromium and metallic chromium.
53Cr is the radiogenic decay product of 53Mn (half-life = 3.74 million years), and chromium isotopes are typically collocated (and compounded) with manganese isotopes.
In 1770, Peter Simon Pallas visited the same site as Lehmann and found a red lead mineral that had useful properties as a pigment in paints.
Chrome green is a mixture of Prussian blue and chrome yellow, while the chrome oxide green is chromium(III) oxide.
Chromite is now the principal source of chromium for pigments.
The chromium(III) is excreted from the body, whereas the chromate ion is transferred into the cell by a transport mechanism, by which also sulfate and phosphate ions enter the cell.
For those products the ore smelter process differs considerably.
The chromium is oxidized to the hexavalent form, while the iron forms the stable Fe2O3.
Chromium is mined as chromite (FeCr2O4) ore. About two-fifths of the chromite ores and concentrates in the world are produced in South Africa, while Kazakhstan, India, Russia, and Turkey are also substantial producers.
Because of their toxicity, chromium(VI) salts are used for the preservation of wood.
The use of chromic acid, instead of the normally used sulfuric acid, leads to a slight difference of these oxide layers.
Also nickel-based alloys increase in strength due to the formation of discrete, stable metal carbide particles at the grain boundaries.
The isotopes of chromium range in atomic mass from 43&nbsp;u (43Cr) to 67&nbsp;u (67Cr).
In the United States, 65,300 metric tons of CCA solution were used in 1996.
Food and supplement companies have until July 28, 2018 to comply with the change.
: + 14  + 6 e− → 2  + 21  (ε0 = 1.33&nbsp;V)
In addition, large amounts of chromium (and nickel) leach into food cooked in stainless steel.
The IDLH (immediately dangerous to life and health) value is 250&nbsp;mg/m3.
The subsequent leaching at higher elevated temperatures dissolves the chromates and leaves the insoluble iron oxide.
Closely related compounds have different colors: pale green CrCl(H2O)5Cl2 and violet Cr(H2O)6Cl3.
As verified by X-ray diffraction, a Cr-Cr quintuple bond (length 183.51(4) &nbsp;pm) has also been described.
The relation between Cr(III) and Cr(VI) strongly depends on pH and oxidative properties of the location.
A bright yellow pigment made from crocoite also became popular.
The strengthening effect of forming stable metal carbides at the grain boundaries and the strong increase in corrosion resistance made chromium an important alloying material for steel.
The tetrahalides, CrF4, CrCl4, and CrBr4, can be produced by treating the trihalides () with the corresponding halogen at elevated temperatures.
The resulting bright blue solution is only stable at neutral pH.
Cr(VI) has not been established as a carcinogen when in solution, although it may cause allergic contact dermatitis (ACD).
This is different from the oxide that forms on iron and carbon steel, through which elemental oxygen continues to migrate, reaching the underlying material to cause incessant rusting.
Because of the excellent high-temperature properties of these nickel superalloys, they are used in jet engines and gas turbines in lieu of common structural materials.
Chromic acid anodizing (or Type I anodizing) of aluminium is another electrochemical process, which does not lead to the deposition of chromium, but uses chromic acid as electrolyte in the solution.
The acute toxicity of chromium(VI) is due to its strong oxidational properties.
In 2014, the European Food Safety Authority published a report stating that the intake of chromium(III) has no beneficial effect on healthy people, thus the Panel removed chromium from the list of nutrients and essential elements.
Many chromium(0) compounds are known.
The carcinogenity of chromate dust has been known for a long time, and in 1890 the first publication described the elevated cancer risk of workers in a chromate dye company.
There are two deposition methods: Thin, below 1&nbsp;µm thickness, layers are deposited by chrome plating, and are used for decorative surfaces.
In the body, chromium(VI) is reduced by several mechanisms to chromium(III) already in the blood before it enters the cells.
In the United States many dietary supplement companies offer chromium products at 200 to 800 μg/day.
It is a steely-grey, lustrous, hard and brittle metal which takes a high polish, resists tarnishing, and has a high melting point.
The use of chrome yellow declined due to environmental and safety concerns and was replaced by organic pigments or alternatives free from lead and chromium.
Although rare, deposits of native chromium exist.
It was found that an easily oxidized alcohol was an essential ingredient.
If water-free green chromium(III) chloride is dissolved in water, the green solution turns violet after some time as the chloride in the inner coordination sphere is replace by water.
In 1797, Louis Nicolas Vauquelin received samples of crocoite ore.
Variations in 53Cr/52Cr and Mn/Cr ratios from several meteorites indicate an initial 53Mn/55Mn ratio that suggests Mn-Cr isotopic composition must result from in-situ decay of 53Mn in differentiated planetary bodies.
Extremely bulky monodentate ligands stabilize this compound by shielding the quintuple bond from further reactions.
For its formation, ferrochromium is added to the molten iron.
It is very dense, and prevents the diffusion of oxygen into the underlying metal.
Chromium was discovered as an element after it came to the attention of the Western world in the red crystalline mineral crocoite (lead(II) chromate), discovered in 1761 and initially used as a pigment.
Concentrations of Cr(VI) in US municipal drinking water supplies reported by EWG are within likely, natural background levels for the areas tested and not necessarily indicative of industrial pollution, as asserted by EWG.
The name of the element is derived from the Greek word χρῶμα, ''chrōma'', meaning color, because many of the compounds are intensely colored.
Chromium(III) hydroxide (Cr(OH)3) is amphoteric, dissolving in acidic solutions to form Cr(H2O)63+, and in basic solutions to form .
The color of these complexes is determined by the ligands attached to the Cr center.
In the chromate conversion coating process, the strong oxidative properties of chromates are used to deposit a protective oxide layer on metals like aluminium, zinc and cadmium.
This circumstance is useful in isotope geology.
Three mechanisms have been proposed to describe the genotoxicity of chromium(VI).
It is dehydrated by heating to form the green chromium(III) oxide (Cr2O3), a stable oxide with a crystal structure identical to that of corundum.
Chromium metal treated in this way readily dissolves in weak acids.
Passivation can be removed with a strong reducing agent that destroys the protective oxide layer on the metal.
Potassium peroxochromate (K3Cr(O2)4) is made by reacting potassium chromate with hydrogen peroxide at low temperatures.
The remainder is used in the chemical, refractory, and foundry industries.
A red-colored artificial ruby may also be achieved by doping chromium(III) into artificial corundum crystals, thus making chromium a requirement for making synthetic rubies.
This mine is a kimberlite pipe, rich in diamonds, and the reducing environment helped produce both elemental chromium and diamond.
The chromite ore is heated with a mixture of calcium carbonate and sodium carbonate in the presence of air.
The  ion has a similar radius (63&nbsp;pm) to  (radius 50&nbsp;pm), and they can replace each other in some compounds, such as in chrome alum and alum.
This kind of reaction is also observed with solutions of chrome alum and other water-soluble chromium(III) salts.
After a synthesis method became available starting from the more abundant chromite, chrome yellow was, together with cadmium yellow, one of the most used yellow pigments.
The Udachnaya Pipe in Russia produces samples of the native metal.
Green chromium oxide is extremely light-fast and as such is used in cladding coatings.
The first mechanism includes highly reactive hydroxyl radicals and other reactive radicals which are by products of the reduction of chromium(VI) to chromium(III).
Multi-vitamin/mineral products tend to have chromium at 120 μg per tablet because until recently that was the 100% Daily Value (see below).
Chromium compounds are found in the environment from the erosion of chromium-containing rocks, and can be redistributed by volcanic eruptions.
Stainless steel, the main corrosion-proof metal alloy, is formed when chromium is added to iron in sufficient concentrations, usually above 11%.
The last mechanism attributed the genotoxicity to the binding to the DNA of the end product of the chromium(III) reduction.
The World Health Organization has tentatively set UL at 250 μg/day.
All of the remaining radioactive isotopes have half-lives that are less than 24 hours and the majority less than 1 minute.
This condition is often found in workers that have been exposed to strong chromate solutions in electroplating, tanning and chrome-producing manufacturers.
It has a strong color, and was used for school buses in the US and for Postal Service (for example Deutsche Post) in Europe.
For example, chromated copper arsenate (CCA) is used in timber treatment to protect wood from decay fungi, wood-attacking insects, including termites, and marine borers.
Chromium exhibits a wide range of oxidation states, with +3 the most stable; the +3 and +6 states are the most common in chromium compounds, while +1, +4 and +5 are rare.
As for safety, the Food and Nutrition Board also sets Tolerable Upper Intake Levels (known as ULs) for vitamins and minerals when evidence is sufficient.
However, this oxide layer was not chromium metal or chrome plating as we know it.
Above 38&nbsp;°C, it changes to paramagnetic.
For U.S. food and dietary supplement labeling purposes the amount in a serving is expressed as a percent of Daily Value (%DV).
It is the first element in Group 6.
This element also has 2 meta states.
The Food and Nutrition Board of the U.S. Institute of Medicine updated Estimated Average Requirements (EARs) and Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs) in 2001.
In the US, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has designated a permissible exposure limit (PEL) in the workplace as a time-weighted average (TWA) of 1&nbsp;mg/m3.
Chromium metal left standing in air is passivated by oxidation, forming a thin, protective, surface layer.
The dichromate is converted to the chromium(III) oxide by reduction with carbon and then reduced in an aluminothermic reaction to chromium.
Passivation can be enhanced by short contact with oxidizing acids like nitric acid.
At first, crocoite from Russia was the main source, but in 1827, a larger chromite deposit was discovered near Baltimore, United States.
A table of the pre-change adult Daily Values is provided at Reference Daily Intake.
'''Chromium''' is a chemical element with symbol '''Cr''' and atomic number 24.
This passivation and the self-healing properties by the chromate stored in the chromate conversion coating, which is able to migrate to local defects, are the benefits of this coating method.
This red solid has a melting point of 30&nbsp;°C and a boiling point of 117&nbsp;°C.
They are, however, only moderately oxidizing at high pH:
Chromium is also known for its luster when polished.
Hemolysis, renal, and liver failure result.
:4 FeCr2O4 + 8 Na2CO3 + 7 O2 → 8 Na2CrO4 + 2 Fe2O3 + 8 CO2
A major development was the discovery that steel could be made highly resistant to corrosion and discoloration by adding metallic chromium to form stainless steel.
Chromium was used for electroplating as early as 1848, but this use only became widespread with the development of an improved process in 1924.
Nearly all chromium is commercially extracted from the single commercially viable ore chromite, which is iron chromium oxide (FeCr2O4).
Such compounds are susceptible to disproportionation reactions and are not stable in water.
While chromium metal and Cr(III) ions are not considered toxic, hexavalent chromium (Cr(VI)) is toxic and carcinogenic.
This layer is a spinel structure only a few molecules thick.
The high-speed tool steels contain between 3 and 5% chromium.
An 8% solution of phosphoric acid in solvent was added just before application.
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) has set a recommended exposure limit (REL) of 0.5&nbsp;mg/m3, time-weighted average.
The following is the Pourbaix diagram for chromium in pure water, perchloric acid or sodium hydroxide:
AI for pregnancy is 30 μg/day.
Compounds of chromium(IV) (in the +4 oxidation state) are slightly more common than those of chromium(V).
Chromium deficiency, involving a lack of Cr(III) in the body, or perhaps some complex of it, such as glucose tolerance factor is controversial.
Other pigments based on chromium are, for example, the bright red pigment chrome red, which is a basic lead chromate (PbCrO4·Pb(OH)2).
The high toxicity of Cr(VI) compounds, used in the established chromium electroplating process, and the strengthening of safety and environmental regulations demand a search for substitutes for chromium or at least a change to less toxic chromium(III) compounds.
Chromium is a member of Group 6, of the transition metals.
The peroxochromate(V) is another example of the +5 oxidation state.
A large number of chromium(III) compounds are known.
Most Cr(I) compounds are obtained by oxidation of electron-rich, octahedral Cr(0) complexes.
Metal alloys now account for 85% of the use of chromium.
To prevent the energy-consuming change in oxidation state, the use of chromium(III) sulfate is under development, but for most applications, the established process is used.
The primary decay mode before the most abundant stable isotope, 52Cr, is electron capture and the primary mode after is beta decay.
Vauquelin was also able to detect traces of chromium in precious gemstones, such as ruby or emerald.
In 2010, the Environmental Working Group studied the drinking water in 35 American cities in the first nationwide study.
This made the United States the largest producer of chromium products till 1848 when large deposits of chromite were found near Bursa, Turkey.
In the United States, the dietary guidelines for daily chromium intake were lowered in 2001 from 50–200 µg for an adult to 35&nbsp;µg (adult male) and to 25&nbsp;µg (adult female).
Natural rubies are corundum (aluminum oxide) crystals that are colored red (the rarest type) due to chromium (III) ions (other colors of corundum gems are termed sapphires).
This factor was not taken into consideration in the EWG report.
The benefit of supplements has not been proven.
RDA for lactation is 45 μg/day.
A thin layer of chromium is deposited on pretreated metallic surfaces by electroplating techniques.
The high heat resistivity and high melting point makes chromite and chromium(III) oxide a material for high temperature refractory applications, like blast furnaces, cement kilns, molds for the firing of bricks and as foundry sands for the casting of metals.
The formulations contain chromium based on the oxide CrO3 between 35.3% and 65.5%.
Because of environmental and health regulations on chromates, alternative coating methods are under development.
The second process includes the direct binding of chromium(V), produced by reduction in the cell, and chromium(IV) compounds to the DNA.
Many chromium(II) compounds are known, including the water-stable chromium(II) chloride, , which can be made by reducing chromium(III) chloride with zinc.
For infants to children ages 1–13 years the AI increases with age from 0.2 to 25 μg/day.
At yet lower pH values, further condensation to more complex oxyanions of chromium is possible.
It is also the main ingredient in infrared reflecting paints, used by the armed forces, to paint vehicles, to give them the same IR reflectance as green leaves.
Water-insoluble chromium(III) compounds and chromium metal are not considered a health hazard, while the toxicity and carcinogenic properties of chromium(VI) have been known for a long time.
The European Food Safety Authority reviewed the same safety question and did not set a UL.
A 2008 review suggested that moderate uptake of chromium(III) through dietary supplements poses no genetic-toxic risk.
After it reaches the blood stream, it damages the kidneys, the liver and blood cells through oxidation reactions.
Several chromium compounds are used as catalysts for processing hydrocarbons.
The study found measurable hexavalent chromium in the tap water of 31 of the cities sampled, with Norman, Oklahoma, at the top of list; 25 cities had levels that exceeded California's proposed limit.
Several ''in vitro'' studies indicated that high concentrations of chromium(III) in the cell can lead to DNA damage.
Aggressive dialysis can be therapeutic.
Other Cr(I) complexes contain cyclopentadienyl ligands.
Acute oral toxicity ranges between 1.5 and 3.3&nbsp;mg/kg.
The acute oral toxicity for chromium(VI) ranges between 50 and 150&nbsp;µg/kg.
Passivated chromium is stable against acids.
However, it does suffer from nitrogen embrittlement, reacting with nitrogen from air and forming brittle nitrides at the high temperatures necessary to work the metal parts.
Although buried more than 2,000 years ago, the ancient bronze tips of crossbow bolts and swords found at the site showed unexpectedly little corrosion, possibly because the bronze was deliberately coated with a thin layer of chromium oxide.
Though misidentified as a lead compound with selenium and iron components, the mineral was in fact crocoite (''lead chromate'') with a formula of PbCrO4.
Because of the specific transport mechanisms, only limited amounts of '''chromium(III)''' enter the cells.
For the production of pure chromium, the iron must be separated from the chromium in a two step roasting and leaching process.
Weapons found in burial pits dating from the late 3rd century B.C.
Although the form of chromium used for tanning is not the toxic hexavalent variety, there remains interest in management of chromium in the tanning industry such as recovery and reuse, direct/indirect recycling, use of less chromium or "chrome-less" tanning are practiced to better manage chromium in tanning.
Chromium, unlike such metals as iron and nickel, does not suffer from hydrogen embrittlement.
The current AIs for chromium for women ages 14 and up is 25 μg/day up to age 50 and 20 μg/day for older.
The chromate is converted by sulfuric acid into the dichromate.
The dark red chromium(VI) oxide , the acid anhydride of chromic acid, is sold industrially as "chromic acid".
53Cr has been posited as a proxy for atmospheric oxygen concentration.
Fe-Cr mixed oxides are employed as high-temperature catalysts for the water gas shift reaction.
Chromium minerals as pigments came to the attention of the west in the 18th century.
It can be prepared by treating chromium metal with fluorine at 400&nbsp;°C and 200 bar pressure.
