The House of Laity voted 152 for, 45 against with five abstentions.
Some consider it essential, while others feel it is needed for the proper ordering of the church.
I would encourage people to explore those kinds of images.
After the consecration of the first women as bishops, Women and the Church (WATCH), a group supporting the ministries of  women in the Church of England, called for language referring to God as "Mother".
After same-sex marriage became legal Archbishop Welby commented that the church has "to accept, and quite rightly, that the Same-Sex Marriage Act is law, and that it’s right and proper, it’s the law of the land, and that’s great.” In clarification of this comment Lambeth Palace stated that the Archbishop remained "opposed in principle to same-sex marriage".
'', the Bishops of Durham, Guildford and St Albans, and will have a cathedral.
Nationally the Church of England baptises one child in eight.
The process of appointing diocesan bishops is complex and is handled by the Crown Nominations Committee which submits names to the Prime Minister (acting on behalf of the Crown) for consideration.
All rectors and vicars are appointed by patrons, who may be private individuals, corporate bodies such as cathedrals, colleges or trusts, or by the bishop or directly by the Crown.
A later archbishop, the Greek Theodore of Tarsus, also contributed to the organisation of Christianity in England.
'', Lewisham or Runnymede.
The Church of Ireland and the Church in Wales separated from the Church of England in 1869 and 1920 respectively and are autonomous churches in the Anglican Communion; Scotland's national church, the Church of Scotland, is Presbyterian but the Scottish Episcopal Church is in the Anglican Communion.
The canon law of the Church of England identifies the Christian scriptures as the source of its doctrine.
In parts of Liverpool, Manchester and Newcastle two-thirds of babies are born to poverty and have poorer life chances, also life expectancy 15 years lower than babies born in most fortunate communities.
In some very large dioceses a legal measure has been enacted to create "episcopal areas", where the diocesan bishop runs one such area himself and appoints "area bishops" to run the other areas as mini-dioceses, legally delegating many of his powers to the area bishops.
In 2011, 504 new clergy were ordained, including 264 to paid ministry, and 349 lay readers were admitted to ministry; and the mode age-range of those recommended for ordination training had remained 40–49 since 1999.
Just as the Church of England has a large conservative or "traditionalist" wing, it also has many liberal members and clergy.
In 2016, a blessings for same-sex unions will again be considered.
During the First World War, some women were appointed as lay readers, known as "bishop's messengers", who also led missions and ran churches in the absence of men.
Bishop Peter Ball is, as of 2016, serving a prison sentence for serious sex abuse against young adult men and there were possibly also offenses against juveniles.
These were based on the older liturgy but influenced by Protestant principles.
Within each diocese are local parishes.
These churches now adopt a contemporary worship form of service, with minimal liturgical or ritual elements, and incorporating contemporary worship music.
Continuing official suspicion and legal restrictions continued well into the 19th century.
The high church party places importance on the Church of England's continuity with the pre-Reformation Catholic Church, adherence to ancient liturgical usages and the sacerdotal nature of the priesthood.
Others attended the Council of Sardica in 347 and that of Ariminum in 360, and a number of references to the church in Roman Britain are found in the writings of 4th century Christian fathers.
The Church of England has been discussing same-sex marriages and LGBT clergy.
Under the leadership of the Archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas Cranmer, a more radical reformation proceeded.
In the latter half of the 20th century, the influence of the Charismatic Movement significantly altered the worship traditions of numerous Church of England parishes, primarily affecting those of evangelical persuasion.
There were nearly 900 religious houses in England, around 260 for monks, 300 for regular canons, 142 nunneries and 183 friaries; some 12,000 people in total, 4,000 monks, 3,000 canons, 3,000 friars and 2,000 nuns....one adult man in fifty was in religious orders.
According to tradition, Christianity arrived in Britain in the 1st or 2nd century, during which time southern Britain became part of the Roman Empire.
The campaign to end hunger considers this "truly shocking" and calls for a national day of fasting on 4 April 2014.
'', Church of England.
Actual ordinations of women to the episcopate required further legislation, which was narrowly rejected in a vote at General Synod in November 2012.
Although clerics can still be banned for life from ministry, they remain ordained as priests.
For the next century, through the reigns of James I, who ordered the creation of what became known as the King James Bible, and Charles I, culminating in the English Civil War and the Protectorate of Oliver Cromwell, there were significant swings back and forth between two factions: the Puritans (and other radicals) who sought more far-reaching Protestant reforms, and the more conservative churchmen who aimed to keep closer to traditional beliefs and Catholic practices.
Although an established church, the Church of England does not receive any direct government support.
While Christianity was long established as the religion of the Britons at the time of the Anglo-Saxon invasion, Christian Britons made little progress in converting the newcomers from their native paganism.
However, Sarah Mullally, the fourth woman chosen to become a bishop in the Church of England, insisted in June 2015 that declining numbers at services should not necessarily be a cause of despair for churches because people will still "encounter God" without ever taking their place in a pew, saying that people might hear the Christian message through social media sites such as Facebook or in a café run as a community project.
Its measures must be approved by both Houses of Parliament.
The church had decided in 2013 that gay clergy in civil partnerships could become bishops.
However, George Carey, a former Archbishop of Canterbury, announced that he had changed his stance on euthanasia in 2014 and now advocated legalising "assisted dying".
Unlike other traditions, the Church of England has no single theologian that it can look to as a founder.
Although this union was declared "an essential and fundamental Part of the Union", the Irish Church Act 1869 separated the Irish part of the church again and disestablished it, the Act coming into effect on 1 January 1871.
Measures have to be approved but cannot be amended by the British Parliament before receiving the Royal Assent and becoming part of the law of England.
''The Independent'' reported in 2014 that, according to a YouGov survey of Church of England clergy, "as many as 16 per cent are unclear about God and two per cent think it is no more than a human construct."
(This is a revision of the BCP service, altering some words and allowing the insertion of some other liturgical texts such as the ''Agnus Dei'' before communion.)
The three "parties" (see Churchmanship) in the Church of England are sometimes called high church (or Anglo-Catholic), low church (or Evangelical) and broad church (or liberal).
Like its predecessor, the 1980 ''Alternative Service Book'', it differs from the ''Book of Common Prayer'' in providing a range of alternative services, mostly in modern language, although it does include some BCP-based forms as well, for example Order Two for Holy Communion.
Queen Bertha of Kent was among the Christians in England who recognised papal authority before Augustine arrived and Celtic Christians were carrying out missionary work with papal approval long before the Synod of Whitby.
He was excommunicated by Pope Paul III.
For historical reasons (relating to the time of York's control by the Danes) he is referred to as the Primate of England.
Women have been lay readers for a long time.
The style of psalm chanting harks back to the Church of England's pre-reformation roots.
The liturgies are organised according to the traditional liturgical year and the calendar of saints.
The Diocese of London provided guidelines for dedication services for same-sex partnerships.
The General Synod of the Church of England is the legislative body for the church and comprises bishops, other clergy and laity.
The Church of England is generally opposed to abortion but recognises that "there can be - strictly limited - conditions under which it may be morally preferable to any available alternative".
The directory enables parishes to maintain accurate location, contact and event information which is shared with other websites and mobile apps.
Queen Mary I, who succeeded him, returned England again to the authority of the papacy, thereby ending the first attempt at an independent Church of England.
More than half of those ordained (193 men and 116 women) were appointed to full-time paid ministry.
This meeting of the ecclesiastics with Roman customs with local bishops was summoned in 664 at Saint Hilda's double monastery of Streonshalh (Streanæshalch), later called Whitby Abbey.
Thus, some congregations invite same-sex couples to receive "services of thanksgiving" after a civil marriage.
In February 2006, the synod voted overwhelmingly for the "further exploration" of possible arrangements for parishes that did not want to be directly under the authority of a bishop who is a woman.
For example, one report from the Church Mission Society suggested that the church open up "a pagan church where Christianity is very much in the centre" to reach out to spiritual people.
The settlement under Queen Elizabeth I (from 1558), known as the Elizabethan Settlement, developed the ''via media'' (middle way) character of the Church of England, a church moderately Reformed in doctrine, as expressed in the Thirty-Nine Articles, but also emphasising continuity with the Catholic and Apostolic traditions of the Church Fathers.
In 2014, the Bishops released guidelines that permit "more informal kind of prayer" for couples.
The church contains several doctrinal strands, the main three known as Anglo-Catholic, Evangelical and Broad Church.
They see poverty as trapping individuals and communities with some people in urgent need.
There may be one or more assisting bishops, usually called suffragan bishops, within the diocese who assist the diocesan bishop in his ministry, ''e.g.
The Diocese of Gibraltar in Europe is not formally divided into parishes.
Britain was the home of Pelagius, who opposed Augustine of Hippo's doctrine of original sin.
The English church renounced papal authority when Henry&nbsp;VIII sought to secure an annulment from Catherine of Aragon in the 1530s.
The Supreme Governor of the Church of England is the British monarch, currently Elizabeth II, whose role is largely ceremonial.
This is the area for which a Rural Dean (or area dean) is responsible.
As the British Empire expanded, British colonists and colonial administrators took the established church doctrines and practices together with ordained ministry and formed overseas branches of the Church of England.
The archbishop acknowledged it was not the only area where the church "fell short of its standards".
Additionally, there are Diocesan Synods and deanery synods, which are the governing bodies of the divisions of the Church.
A diocese is subdivided into a number of archdeaconries.
Benefit cuts, failures and "punitive sanctions" force thousands of UK citizens to use food banks.
The House of Bishops recorded 37 votes in favour, two against with one abstention.
The Church of England has, as one of its distinguishing marks, a breadth and "open-mindedness".
* ''Catholic'' in that it views itself as a part of the universal church of Jesus Christ in unbroken continuity with the early apostolic church.
In the earlier phase of the English Reformation there were Catholic martyrs but some radical Protestants were martyred as well.
The parishes each elect lay (non-ordained) representatives to the deanery synod.
Justin Welby has been Archbishop of Canterbury since the confirmation of his election on 4 February 2013.
The Bishop of London, the Bishop of Durham and the Bishop of Winchester are ranked in the next three positions.
Additionally, the church's own statistics reveal that 9.7 million people visit an Anglican church every year and 1 million students are educated at Anglican schools.
John Sentamu became Archbishop of York in 2005.
The Order One rite follows the pattern of more modern liturgical scholarship.
'', Canterbury or York.
In 2010, for the first time in the history of the Church of England, more women than men were ordained as priests (290 women and 273 men).
In urban areas there are a number of proprietary chapels (mostly built in the 19th century to cope with urbanisation and growth in population).
The church is structured as follows (from the lowest level upwards):
Treweek later made headlines by calling for gender-inclusive language, saying that "God is not to be seen as male.
This doctrine is expressed in the Thirty-Nine Articles of Religion, the Book of Common Prayer, and the Ordinal containing the rites for the ordination of deacons, priests, and the consecration of bishops.
In 2012, the directory formed the data backbone of Christmas Near You and in 2014 was used to promote the church's Harvest Near You initiative.
In 2015, the Rev Jody Stowell, from WATCH, expressed her support for female images saying "we're not restricted to understanding God with one gender.
In 1534, King Henry VIII separated the English Church from Rome.
He has the status of Primate of All England.
The later phases saw the Penal Laws punish both Catholic and nonconforming Protestants.
One study published in 2008 suggested that if current trends were to continue, Sunday attendances could fall to 350,000 in 2030 and just 87,800 in 2050.
* There are a number of local churches that do not have a parish.
The Church of England's official book of liturgy as established in English Law is the ''Book of Common Prayer''.
She and Sarah Mullally, Bishop of Crediton, were the first women to be ordained as bishops at Canterbury Cathedral.
The General Synod has voted in favour of extending pensions and other employee rights to gay and lesbian priests in civil partnerships.
On embryonic stem-cell research, the church has announced "cautious acceptance to the proposal to produce cytoplasmic hybrid embryos for research".
On 14 July 2014, the General Synod approved the ordination of women as bishops.
It was also an established church (constitutionally established by the state with the head of state as its supreme governor).
Mary also died childless and so it was left to the new regime of her half-sister Elizabeth to resolve the direction of the church.
the Archbishops of Canterbury and York.
* Royal Peculiar, a small number of churches more closely associated with the Crown, and a very few with the law and are outside the usual church hierarchy though conforming to the rite.
Regarding transgender issues, the General Synod will discuss proposals submitted to offer naming ceremonies for transgender members in their transitions.
In July 2005, the synod voted to "set in train" the process of allowing the consecration of women as bishops.
This is the area under the jurisdiction of a diocesan bishop, ''e.g.
The low church party is more Protestant in both ceremony and theology.
:The dissolution of the monasteries in the late 1530s was one of the most revolutionary events in English history.
The church also opposes euthanasia.
No clergy can be instituted and inducted into a parish without swearing the Oath of Allegiance to Her Majesty, and taking the Oath of Canonical Obedience "in all things lawful and honest" to the bishop.
The most senior bishop of the Church of England is the Archbishop of Canterbury, who is the metropolitan of the southern province of England, the Province of Canterbury.
There are allegations of large-scale earlier cover-ups involving the then Archbishop of Canterbury, George Carey, and many other British establishment figures which prevented Ball's earlier prosecution.
The official position, although not allowing same-sex marriage, is that "Same-sex relationships often embody genuine mutuality and fidelity".
After that no more lay readers were appointed until 1969.
* Parish is the most local level, often consisting of one church building and community, although many parishes are joining forces in a variety of ways for financial reasons.
This call for more gender inclusive language has receive the outspoken support of the Rt Rev Alan Wilson, the Bishop of Buckingham.
At a later age, individuals baptised as infants receive confirmation by a bishop, at which time they reaffirm the baptismal promises made by their parents or sponsors.
Other congregations have published "Prayers for a Same Sex Commitment".
While some Celtic Christian practices were changed at the Synod of Whitby, the Christian Church in the British Isles was under papal authority from earliest times.
In the 17th century, political and religious disputes raised the Puritan and Presbyterian faction to control of the church, but this ended with the Restoration.
The Thirty-nine Articles are the church's only official confessional statement.
In 2014, a transgender and lesbian priest was appointed as a minor canon at Manchester Cathedral.
Also in more recent years there are increasingly church plants and fresh expressions of church, whereby new congregations are planted in locations such as schools or pubs to spread the Gospel of Christ in non-traditional ways.
It was presided over by King Oswiu, who did not engage in the debate but made the final ruling.
With the help of Christians already residing in Kent, Augustine established his church at Canterbury, the capital of the Kingdom of Kent, and became the first in the series of Archbishops of Canterbury in 598.
This event is known as the Gregorian mission and is the date the Church of England generally marks as the beginning of its formal history.
Moreover, many congregations are seeker-friendly environments.
The British monarch has the constitutional title of Supreme Governor of the Church of England.
The Church of England set up the Church Urban Fund in the 1980s to tackle poverty and deprivation.
The canon law of the Church of England states, "We acknowledge that the Queen's most excellent Majesty, acting according to the laws of the realm, is the highest power under God in this kingdom, and has supreme authority over all persons in all causes, as well ecclesiastical as civil."
During her co-reign with her husband, King Philip, many leaders and common people were burnt for their refusal to recant of their reformed faith.
By the Fifth Article of the Union with Ireland 1800, the Church of England and Church of Ireland were united into "one Protestant Episcopal church, to be called, the United Church of England and Ireland".
With the Restoration of Charles II, Parliament restored the Church of England to a form not far removed from the Elizabethan version.
The clergy union argued that the penalty was unfair to victims of hypothetical miscarriages of criminal justice, because the ecclesiastical penalty is considered irreversible.
Papal recognition of George&nbsp;III in 1766 led to greater religious tolerance.
The Bishop of Grantham, the Rt Rev Nicholas Chamberlain, announced he is gay, in a same-sex partnership and celibate; becoming the first bishop to do so in the church.
This is the area under the jurisdiction of an archbishop, ''i.e.''
In addition, doctrine is also derived from the teachings of the Church Fathers and ecumenical councils (as well as the ecumenical creeds) in so far as these agree with scripture.
Three Romano-British bishops, including Restitutus, are known to have been present at the Council of Arles in 314.
South Shore, Blackpool has lowest life expectancy at 66 years for men.
A complainant, known only as "Joe", tried for decades to have action taken over sadistic sex abuse which Garth Moore perpetrated against him in 1976 when "Joe" was 15 years old.
A new pattern of worship was set out in the Book of Common Prayer (1549 and 1552).
In addition to this book the General Synod has also legislated for a modern liturgical book, ''Common Worship'', dating from 2000, which can be used as an alternative to the BCP.
The religious landscape of England assumed its present form, with the Anglican established church occupying the middle ground, and those Puritans and Protestants who dissented from the Anglican establishment, and Roman Catholics, too strong to be suppressed altogether, having to continue their existence outside the National Church rather than controlling it.
In 1536–40 Henry VIII engaged in the Dissolution of the Monasteries, which controlled much of the richest land.
The Church of England affirms the Protestant Reformation principle that scripture contains all things necessary to salvation and is the final arbiter in doctrinal matters.
This tolerance has allowed Anglicans who emphasise the Catholic tradition and others who emphasise the Reformed tradition to coexist.
The Church of England has a legislative body, the General Synod.
Donations comprise its largest source of income, and it also relies heavily on the income from its various historic endowments.
Pope Clement VII, considering that the earlier marriage had been entered under a papal dispensation and how Catherine's nephew, Emperor Charles V, might react to such a move, refused the annulment.
The Diocese of Blackburn has already begun recognising the ceremony.
Tensions between theological conservatives and progressives find expression in debates over the ordination of women and homosexuality.
The governing structure of the church is based on dioceses, each presided over by a bishop.
The parish is looked after by a parish priest who for historical or legal reasons may be called by one of the following offices: vicar, rector, priest in charge, team rector, team vicar.
The earliest historical evidence of Christianity among the native Britons is found in the writings of such early Christian Fathers as Tertullian and Origen in the first years of the 3rd century.
Another assembly is the Convocation of the English Clergy, which is older than the General Synod and its predecessor the Church Assembly.
The Church of England supports A Church Near You, an online directory of churches A user-edited resource, it currently lists 16,400 churches and has 7,000 editors in 42 dioceses.
Approximately one third of clergy "doubt or disbelieve in the physical resurrection".
During the 18th century, clergy such as Charles Wesley introduced their own styles of worship with poetic hymns.
He disbanded monasteries, priories, convents and friaries in England, Wales and Ireland, appropriated their income, disposed of their assets, and provided pensions for the former residents.
A theological separation had been foreshadowed by various movements within the English Church, such as Lollardy, but the English Reformation gained political support when Henry VIII wanted an annulment of his marriage to Catherine of Aragon so he could marry Anne Boleyn.
Others, such as the Revd Giles Fraser, a contributor to ''The Guardian'', have argued for an allegorical interpretation of the virgin birth of Jesus.
It also states that "Equally, the Church shares the desire to alleviate physical and psychological suffering, but believes that assisted dying/suicide and voluntary euthanasia are not acceptable means of achieving these laudable goals."
'', the seven in the Diocese of Gibraltar in Europe.
The Church of England manages an investment portfolio which is worth more than £8000&nbsp;million.
In practice this power is often exercised through Parliament and the Prime Minister.
In addition to England, the jurisdiction of the Church of England extends to the Isle of Man, the Channel Islands and a few parishes in Flintshire, Monmouthshire, Powys and Radnorshire in Wales which voted to remain with the Church of England rather than joining the Church in Wales.
Though not a complete system of doctrine, the articles highlight areas of agreement with Lutheran and Reformed positions, while differentiating Anglicanism from Roman Catholicism and Anabaptism.
Indeed, this part of Henry's reign saw the trial for heresy of Protestants as well as Roman Catholics.
However, Richard Hooker's appeal to scripture, church tradition, and reason as sources of authority continue to inform Anglican identity.
Expatriate congregations on the continent of Europe have become the Diocese of Gibraltar in Europe.
She was consecrated as a bishop in January 2015.
This is the area under the jurisdiction of an archdeacon.
Under his son, King Edward VI, more Protestant-influenced forms of worship were adopted.
Legislation authorising the ordination of women as deacons was passed in 1986 and they were first ordained in 1987.
The Archbishop of Canterbury is the Primate of All England, leading the Church of England and acting as a focus of unity for the wider Anglican Communion.
The ordination of women as priests was passed by the General Synod in 1992 and began in 1994.
The bishops work with an elected body of lay and ordained representatives, known as the Diocesan Synod, to run the diocese.
In 2005, David Jenkins, a former Bishop of Durham, offered a blessing for a vicar entering into a same-sex partnership, and other churches offer a blessing for those in a civil partnership.
In 2005, the Church of England had estimated total outgoings of around £900&nbsp;million.
The Bishop of Sodor and Man and the Bishop of Gibraltar in Europe are not eligible to sit in the House of Lords as their dioceses lie outside the United Kingdom.
Since the English Reformation, the Church of England has used a liturgy in English.
Of the 42 diocesan archbishops and bishops in the Church of England, 26 are permitted to sit in the House of Lords.
These are known as the Marian martyrs and the persecution led to her nickname of "Bloody Mary".
Cathedral clergy (normally a dean and a varying number of residentiary canons who constitute the cathedral chapter) are appointed either by the Crown, the bishop, or by the dean and chapter themselves.
The Eucharist, consecrated by a thanksgiving prayer including Christ's Words of Institution, is believed to be "a memorial of Christ's once-for-all redemptive acts in which Christ is objectively present and effectually received in faith".
Henry maintained a strong preference for traditional Catholic practices and, during his reign, Protestant reformers were unable to make many changes to the practices of the Church of England.
The House of Clergy had 162 in favour, 25 against and four abstentions.
The Church of England also preserves Catholic order by adhering to episcopal polity, with ordained orders of bishops, priests and deacons.
In 2015 the Church of England admitted that it was embarrassed to be paying staff under the living wage.
Usually they are instituted to the benefice by the bishop and then inducted by the archdeacon into the possession of the benefice property—church and parsonage.
