He bowed to his captors, leaning his head out of the litter in a gladiatorial gesture to ease the task.
He was viewed with sympathy by a large segment of the public and many people refused to report that they had seen him.
On Antony's instructions his hands, which had penned the Philippics against Antony, were cut off as well; these were nailed along with his head on the Rostra in the Forum Romanum according to the tradition of Marius and Sulla, both of whom had displayed the heads of their enemies in the Forum.
The ''optimates'' faction never truly accepted Cicero; and this undermined his efforts to reform the Republic while preserving the constitution.
Michael Parenti admits Cicero's abilities as an orator, but finds him a vain, pompous and hypocritical personality who, when it suited him, could show public support for popular causes that he privately despised.
* ''Epistulae ad Quintum Fratrem'' (''Letters to brother Quintus''; 60/59–54&nbsp;BC)
Cicero was neither a patrician nor a plebeian noble; his rise to political office despite his relatively humble origins has traditionally been attributed to his brilliance as an orator.
Cicero's letters to and from various public and private figures are considered some of the most reliable sources of information for the people and events surrounding the fall of the Roman Republic.
Cicero and all of his contacts and supporters were numbered among the enemies of the state, and reportedly, Octavian argued for two days against Cicero being added to the list.
Most recently, Cicero was portrayed by David Bamber in the HBO series ''Rome'' (2005–2007) and appeared in both seasons.
He served as proconsul of Cilicia from May 51 to November 50&nbsp;BC.
Cicero tried to re-enter politics, but his attack on a bill of Caesar's proved unsuccessful.
Medieval philosophers were influenced by Cicero's writings on natural law and innate rights.
John Adams said of him "As all the ages of the world have not produced a greater statesman and philosopher united than Cicero, his authority should have great weight."
In exchange for amnesty for the assassins, he arranged for the Senate to agree not to declare Caesar to have been a tyrant, which allowed the Caesarians to have lawful support and kept Caesar's reforms and policies intact.
Later he was appointed proconsul of Syria and the province of Asia.
He was proscribed as an enemy of the state by the Second Triumvirate and consequently executed by soldiers operating on their behalf in 43 BC after having been intercepted during attempted flight from the Italian peninsula.
"Would that he had been able to endure prosperity with greater self-control, and adversity with more fortitude!"
Taking this case was a courageous move for Cicero; patricide was considered an appalling crime, and the people whom Cicero accused of the murder, the most notorious being Chrysogonus, were favorites of Sulla.
He became an augur, and was nominated consul in 30 BC together with Augustus.
Cicero himself accompanied the former consul Publius Cornelius Lentulus Sura, one of the conspirators, to the Tullianum.
During this period in Roman history, to be considered "cultured" meant being able to speak both Latin and Greek.
Cicero surmised that it showed what kind of a person he was and that something like murder was not beneath him.
According to Plutarch, Cicero was an extremely talented student, whose learning attracted attention from all over Rome, affording him the opportunity to study Roman law under Quintus Mucius Scaevola.
After Cicero's murder he joined the army of the ''Liberatores'' but was later pardoned by Augustus.
During his year in office, he thwarted a conspiracy centered on assassinating him and overthrowing the Roman Republic with the help of foreign armed forces, led by Lucius Sergius Catilina.
This made the cities better off.
He then spent some time in Athens, where he caught up with an old friend from his previous stay there and met men of great learning.
Even though Chrysogonus may not have been what Cicero said he was, through rhetoric, Cicero successfully made him appear to be a foreign freed man who was devious enough to take advantage of the aftermath of the civil war, and to prosper.
This marriage did not last long.
Friedrich Engels referred to him as "the most contemptible scoundrel in history" for upholding republican "democracy" while at the same time denouncing land and class reforms.
His father was a well-to-do member of the equestrian order and possessed good connections in Rome.
Cicero received the honorific "''Pater Patriae''" for his efforts to suppress the conspiracy, but lived thereafter in fear of trial or exile for having put Roman citizens to death without trial.
The Orations listed Catiline and his followers' debaucheries, and denounced Catiline's senatorial sympathizers as roguish and dissolute debtors clinging to Catiline as a final and desperate hope.
His influence on the Latin language was so immense that the subsequent history of prose in not only Latin but European languages up to the 19th century was said to be either a reaction against or a return to his style.
The divorce appears to have taken place in 51 BC or shortly before.
According to Polish historian Tadeusz Zieliński, "the Renaissance was above all things a revival of Cicero, and only after him and through him of the rest of Classical antiquity."
Cicero supported Decimus Junius Brutus Albinus as governor of Cisalpine Gaul (''Gallia Cisalpina'') and urged the Senate to name Antony an enemy of the state.
He discovered that much of public property had been embezzled   and restored it.
His commitment to the values of the Republic accommodated a hatred of the poor and persistent opposition to the advocates and mechanisms of popular representation.
In 58 BC, Publius Clodius Pulcher, the tribune of the plebs, introduced a law (the ''Leges Clodiae'') threatening exile to anyone who executed a Roman citizen without a trial.
As a result, the grateful Sicilians asked Cicero to prosecute Gaius Verres, a governor of Sicily, who had badly plundered the province.
Cicero was elected consul for the year 63 BC.
The English words ''Ciceronian'' (meaning "eloquent") and ''cicerone'' (meaning "local guide") derive from his name.
Clodius cast the single vote against the decree.
Cicero is portrayed as a hero in the novel ''A Pillar of Iron'' by Taylor Caldwell (1965).
Cicero had the conspirators taken to the Tullianum, the notorious Roman prison, where they were strangled.
Although his marriage to Terentia was one of convenience, it is commonly known that Cicero held great love for his daughter Tullia.
Don't blame me for complaining.
In Atticus's large library, Cicero read everything that the Greek philosophers had written about overcoming grief, "but my sorrow defeats all consolation."
At this time it would have been easy for Sulla to have the unknown Cicero murdered.
Cicero and Antony now became the two leading men in Rome—Cicero as spokesman for the Senate; Antony as consul, leader of the Caesarian faction, and unofficial executor of Caesar's public will.
He arrived at Thessalonica, on May&nbsp;23, 58&nbsp;BC.
As such, he was responsible for revoking the honors of Mark Antony, who was responsible for the proscription, and could in this way take revenge.
Cicero was also an energetic writer with an interest in a wide variety of subjects, in keeping with the Hellenistic philosophical and rhetorical traditions in which he was trained.
Cicero was greatly admired by influential Church Fathers such as Augustine of Hippo, who credited Cicero's lost ''Hortensius'' for his eventual conversion to Christianity and St. Jerome, who had a feverish vision in which he was accused of being "follower of Cicero and not of Christ" before the judgment seat.
He is credited with transforming Latin from a modest utilitarian language into a versatile literary medium capable of expressing abstract and complicated thoughts with clarity.
Marcus Junius Brutus called out Cicero's name, asking him to restore the republic when he lifted the bloodstained dagger after the assassination.
His prosecution of Gaius Verres was a great forensic success for Cicero.
The Bogomils considered him to be a rare exception of a pagan saint.
Subsequently, Cicero came to be synonymous with classical Latin to such an extent that a number of humanist scholars began to assert that no Latin word or phrase was to be used unless it could be found in Cicero's works, a stance criticized by Erasmus.
Though he was an accomplished orator and successful lawyer, Cicero believed his political career was his most important achievement.
Camille Desmoulins said of the French republicans in 1789 that they were "mostly young people who, nourished by the reading of Cicero at school, had become passionate enthusiasts for liberty".
He overestimated his popularity again several years later after being exiled from Italy and then allowed back from exile.
He reluctantly accepted a promagistracy in Cilicia for 51&nbsp;BC, because there were few other eligible governors available as a result of a legislative requirement enacted by Pompey in 52&nbsp;BC, specifying an interval of five years between a consulship or praetorship and a provincial command.
At the time Cicero's popularity as a public figure was unrivalled.
Cicero's last words are said to have been, "There is nothing proper about what you are doing, soldier, but do try to kill me properly."
Governor Gaius Verres hired the prominent lawyer of a noble family Quintus Hortensius Hortalus.
One such example is found in the speech ''Against Verres I'', where he states "with you on this bench, gentlemen, with Marcus Acilius Glabrio as your president, I do not understand what Verres can hope to achieve".
However, it was the acquiescence of Augustus that had allowed Cicero to be killed, as Cicero was proscribed by the new triumvirate.
Cicero argued that the ''senatus consultum ultimum'' indemnified him from punishment, and he attempted to gain the support of the senators and consuls, especially of Pompey.
Cicero's career as a statesman was marked by inconsistencies and a tendency to shift his position in response to changes in the political climate.
Cicero’s plan to drive out Antony failed.
After Caesar's victory at Pharsalus, Cicero returned to Rome only very cautiously.
Octavian was Caesar's adopted son and heir; after he returned to Italy, Cicero began to play him against Antony.
Cicero's interest in philosophy figured heavily in his later career and led to him providing a comprehensive account of Greek philosophy for a Roman audience, including creating a philosophical vocabulary in Latin.
By baring his neck and throat to the soldiers, he was indicating that he wouldn't resist.
Cicero introduced the Romans to the chief schools of Greek philosophy and created a Latin philosophical vocabulary (with neologisms such as ''evidentia'', ''humanitas'', ''qualitas'', ''quantitas'', and ''essentia'') distinguishing himself as a translator and philosopher.
He was then elected consul at age 43.
Cicero's son, Marcus Tullius Cicero Minor, during his year as a consul in 30&nbsp;BC, avenged his father's death, to a certain extent, when he announced to the Senate Mark Antony's naval defeat at Actium in 31&nbsp;BC by Octavian and his capable commander-in-chief, Agrippa.
Terentia was a strong willed woman and (citing Plutarch) "she took more interest in her husband's political career than she allowed him to take in household affairs."
Cicero was the only victim of the proscriptions to be displayed in that manner.
Although little is known about Cicero's mother, Helvia, it was common for the wives of important Roman citizens to be responsible for the management of the household.
Cicero, however, was taken completely by surprise when the ''Liberatores'' assassinated Caesar on the ides of March, 44 BC.
Cicero, "inspired by an extraordinary zeal for philosophy", sat enthusiastically at his feet and absorbed Plato's philosophy.
His first office was as one of the twenty annual quaestors, a training post for serious public administration in a diversity of areas, but with a traditional emphasis on administration and rigorous accounting of public monies under the guidance of a senior magistrate or provincial commander.
Octavian (or Augustus, as he was later called) is reported to have praised Cicero as a patriot and a scholar of meaning in later times, within the circle of his family.
Cicero also had an influence on modern astronomy.
His severed hands and head were then, as a final revenge of Mark Antony, displayed in the Roman Forum.
In the  historical  novel series ''Masters of Rome'', Colleen McCullough presents an unflattering depiction of Cicero's career, showing him struggling with an inferiority complex and vanity, morally flexible and fatally indiscreet, while his rival Julius Caesar is shown in a more approving light.
Sulla's victory in the first of a series of civil wars led to a new constitutional framework that undermined ''libertas'' (liberty), the fundamental value of the Roman Republic.
Catiline had attempted to involve the Allobroges, a tribe of Transalpine Gaul, in their plot, but Cicero, working with the Gauls, was able to seize letters which incriminated the five conspirators and forced them to confess their crimes in front of the Senate.
The latter two became Cicero's friends for life, and Pomponius (who later received the nickname "Atticus", and whose sister married Cicero's brother) would become, in Cicero's own words, "as a second brother", with both maintaining a lifelong correspondence.
He attacked Antony in a series of speeches he called the Philippics, after Demosthenes's denunciations of Philip&nbsp;II of Macedon.
When his killers – Herennius (a centurion) and Popilius (a tribune) – arrived, Cicero's own slaves said they had not seen him, but he was given away by Philologus, a freed slave of his brother Quintus Cicero.
Romans often chose down-to-earth personal surnames: the famous family names of Fabius, Lentulus, and Piso come from the Latin names of beans, lentils, and peas.
Terentia's family was wealthy, probably the plebeian noble house of Terenti Varrones, thus meeting the needs of Cicero's political ambitions in both economic and social terms.
Cicero returned to Italy on August&nbsp;5, 57&nbsp;BC, landing at Brundisium.
Cicero has been traditionally considered the master of Latin prose, with Quintilian declaring that Cicero was "not the name of a man, but of eloquence itself."
However, it is more likely that Cicero's ancestors prospered through the cultivation and sale of chickpeas.
Scholars note Cicero's influence on the rebirth of religious toleration in the 17th century.
Cicero has faced criticism for exaggerating the democratic qualities of republican Rome, and for defending the Roman oligarchy against the popular reforms of Caesar.
He was caught December&nbsp;7, 43&nbsp;BC leaving his villa in Formiae in a litter going to the seaside where he hoped to embark on a ship destined for Macedonia.
Cornelius Nepos, the 1st century BC biographer of Atticus, remarked that Cicero's letters contained such a wealth of detail "concerning the inclinations of leading men, the faults of the generals, and the revolutions in the government" that their reader had little need for a history of the period.
Cicero was one of the most viciously and doggedly hunted among the proscribed.
Cicero hoped that his son Marcus would become a philosopher like him, but Marcus himself wished for a military career.
By these speeches, Cicero wanted to prepare the Senate for the worst possible case; he also delivered more evidence against Catiline.
Antony and Octavian reconciled and allied with Lepidus to form the Second Triumvirate after the successive battles of Forum Gallorum and Mutina.
Among Cicero's admirers were Desiderius Erasmus, Martin Luther, and John Locke.
Cicero became a popular leader during the period of instability following the assassination.
Cicero was declared a righteous pagan by the Early Church, and therefore many of his works were deemed worthy of preservation.
Following Julius Caesar's death, Cicero became an enemy of Mark Antony in the ensuing power struggle, attacking him in a series of speeches.
He wrote to Atticus: "Your pleas have prevented me from committing suicide.
His indecision may be attributed to his sensitive and impressionable personality; he was prone to overreaction in the face of political and private change.
He was greeted by a cheering crowd, and, to his delight, his beloved daughter Tullia.
Some of his political enemies argued that though the act gained Cicero popularity, he exaggerated the extent of his success.
However, being a semi-invalid, he could not enter public life and studied extensively to compensate.
Cicero was therefore educated in the teachings of the ancient Greek philosophers, poets and historians; he obtained much of his understanding of the theory and practice of rhetoric from the Greek poet Archias.
Nevertheless, he successfully ascended the ''cursus honorum'', holding each magistracy at or near the youngest possible age: quaestor in 75 BC (age 31), aedile in 69 BC (age 37), and praetor in 66 BC (age 40), when he served as president of the "Reclamation" (or extortion) Court.
He retained the civil rights of, and did not impose penalties on, the men who gave the property back.
Parenti presents Cicero's prosecution of the Catiline conspiracy as legally flawed at least, and possibly unlawful.
It was during his consulship that the second Catilinarian conspiracy attempted to overthrow the government through an attack on the city by outside forces, and Cicero suppressed the revolt by executing five conspirators without due process.
During the chaotic latter half of the 1st century BC marked by civil wars and the dictatorship of Gaius Julius Caesar, Cicero championed a return to the traditional republican government.
wrote C. Asinius Pollio, a contemporary Roman statesman and historian.
Cicero explained how a rustic son of a farmer, who lives off the pleasures of his own land, would not have gained anything from committing patricide because he would have eventually inherited his father's land anyway.
Jefferson names Cicero as one of a handful of major figures who contributed to a tradition “of public right” that informed his draft of the Declaration of Independence and shaped American understandings of "the common sense" basis for the right of revolution.
The peak of Cicero's authority and prestige came during the 18th-century Enlightenment, and his impact on leading Enlightenment thinkers and political theorists such as John Locke, David Hume, Montesquieu and Edmund Burke was substantial.
The conference at Luca in 56&nbsp;BC forced Cicero to recant and support the triumvirate.
After the conspirators were put to death, Cicero was proud of his accomplishment.
Cicero was born in 106 BC in Arpinum, a hill town  southeast of Rome.
These included letters to Caesar, to Pompey, to Octavian, and to his son Marcus.
He had no respect for Mark Antony, who was scheming to take revenge upon Caesar's murderers.
* ''Epistulae ad Familiares'' (''Letters to friends''; 62–43&nbsp;BC)
Cicero also articulated an early, abstract conceptualization of rights, based on ancient law and custom.
This influence further increased after the Early Middle Ages in Europe, which more of his writings survived than any other Latin author.
Cicero procured a ''senatus consultum ultimum'' (a&nbsp;declaration of martial law) and drove Catiline from the city with four vehement speeches (the Catiline Orations), which to this day remain outstanding examples of his rhetorical style.
While 37 books of his letters have survived into modern times, 35 more books were known to antiquity that have since been lost.
Cicero said of Plato's Dialogues, that if Zeus were to speak, he would use their language.
The quality and ready accessibility of Ciceronian texts favored very wide distribution and inclusion in teaching curricula, as suggested by an amusing graffito at Pompeii, admonishing: "You will like Cicero, or you will be whipped".
The view that Cicero may have taken the case for reasons of his own is viable.
Likewise, no other ancient personality has inspired as much venomous dislike as Cicero, especially in more modern times.
"I have lost the one thing that bound me to life" he wrote to Atticus.
Cicero maintained the situation calm though his mild government.
A letter Cicero wrote in February 43 BC to Trebonius, one of the conspirators, began, "How I could wish that you had invited me to that most glorious banquet on the Ides of March"!
Jim Powell starts his book on the history of liberty with the sentence: "Marcus Tullius Cicero expressed principles that became the bedrock of liberty in the modern world."
The second part concerned the boldness and greed of two of the accusers, Magnus and Capito.
He has also been played by such noted actors as Michael Hordern (in ''Cleopatra''), and André Morell (in the 1970 ''Julius Caesar'').
* ''Epistulae ad Brutum'' (''Letters to Brutus''; 43&nbsp;BC)
In his following speeches, Cicero did not directly address Catiline.
Cicero's oratorical skill is shown in his character assassination of Verres and various other techniques of persuasion used on the jury.
His works rank among the most influential in European culture, and today still constitute one of the most important bodies of primary material for the writing and revision of Roman history, especially the last days of the Roman Republic.
He complained to his friends that Terentia had betrayed him but did not specify in which sense.
At the conclusion of his first speech, Catiline hurriedly left the Senate, (which was being held in the Temple of Jupiter Stator).
In 46 or 45 BC, Cicero married a young girl, Publilia, who had been his ward.
Cicero's brother Quintus wrote in a letter that she was a thrifty housewife.
Subsequent Roman and medieval Christian writers quoted liberally from his works ''De Re Publica'' (''On the Commonwealth'') and ''De Legibus'' (''On the Laws''), and much of his work has been recreated from these surviving fragments.
Cicero was both an Italian ''eques'' and a ''novus homo'', but more importantly he was a Roman constitutionalist.
Cicero’s case was divided into three parts.
At this time, he claimed that the Republic would be restored along with him.
Cicero told the jury that they were the more likely perpetrators of murder because the two were greedy, both for conspiring together against a fellow kinsman and Magnus, for his boldness and for being unashamed to appear in court to support the false charges.
Julius Caesar praised Cicero's achievement by saying "it is more important to have greatly extended the frontiers of the Roman spirit (''ingenium'') than the frontiers of the Roman empire" According to John William Mackail, "Cicero's unique and imperishable glory is that he created the language of the civilized world, and used that language to create a style which nineteen centuries have not replaced, and in some respects have hardly altered."
Cicero is a major recurring character in the ''Roma Sub Rosa'' series of mystery novels by Steven Saylor.
Caesar and Brutus as well as Servius Sulpicius Rufus sent him letters of condolence.
Upon the conclusion of this case, Cicero came to be considered the greatest orator in Rome.
Cato the Younger then rose in defence of the death penalty and all the Senate finally agreed on the matter.
The protagonist, Decius Metellus, admires Cicero for his erudition, but is disappointed by his lack of real opposition to Caesar, as well as puzzled by his relentless fawning on the ''Optimates'', who secretly despise Cicero as a parvenu.
Cicero favoured Pompey, seeing him as a defender of the senate and Republican tradition, but at that time avoided openly alienating Caesar.
Charting a middle path between the competing Attic and Asiatic styles, he would ultimately become considered second only to Demosthenes among history's orators.
He praised Octavian, declaring he would not make the same mistakes as his father.
The third part explained that Chrysogonus had immense political power, and the accusation was successfully made due to that power.
My afflictions surpass any you ever heard of earlier".
He was given instructions to keep nearby Cappadocia loyal to they King, Ariobarzanes III, which he achieved ‘satisfactorily without war.’ Rome’s defeat by the Parthians and an uprising in Syria caused disquiet in Cilicia.
Cicero wanted to pursue a public career in politics along the steps of the Cursus honorum.
It was precisely his broad education that tied him to the traditional Roman elite.
Robert Harris' novels ''Imperium'', ''Lustrum'' (published under the name ''Conspirata'' in the United States) and ''Dictator'' is the three-part novel series based upon the life of Cicero.
His co-consul for the year, Gaius Antonius Hybrida, played a minor role.
She had a half-sister named Fabia, who as a child had become a Vestal Virgin, a very great honour.
The Senate then deliberated upon the conspirators' punishment.
Of his speeches, 88 were recorded, but only 58 survive.
Petrarch's rediscovery of Cicero's letters provided impetus for searches for ancient Greek and Latin writings scattered throughout European monasteries, and the subsequent rediscovery of Classical Antiquity led to the Renaissance.
Caesar, seeking the legitimacy an endorsement by a senior senator would provide, courted Cicero's favour, but even so Cicero slipped out of Italy and traveled to Dyrrachium (Epidamnos), Illyria, where Pompey's staff was situated.
Cicero defeated some robbers who were based on Mount Amanus and his soldiers hailed him as imperator.
According to Cassius Dio (in a story often mistakenly attributed to Plutarch), Antony's wife Fulvia took Cicero's head, pulled out his tongue, and jabbed it repeatedly with her hairpin in final revenge against Cicero's power of speech.
Cicero was portrayed on the motion picture screen by British actor Alan Napier in the 1953 film ''Julius Caesar'', based on Shakespeare's play.
The first part detailed exactly the charge brought by Ericius.
Following the invention of Johannes Gutenberg's printing press, ''De Officiis'' was the second book to be printed in Europe, after the Gutenberg Bible.
Augustus' bad conscience for not having objected to Cicero's being put on the proscription list during the Second Triumvirate led him to aid considerably Marcus Minor's career.
His first major case, of which a written record is still extant, was his 80 BC defense of Sextus Roscius on the charge of patricide.
According to Michael Grant, "the influence of Cicero upon the history of European literature and ideas greatly exceeds that of any other prose writer in any language".
It is thought that Cicero needed her money, particularly after having to repay the dowry of Terentia, who came from a wealthy family.
The struggle between Pompey and Julius Caesar grew more intense in 50 BC.
According to Plutarch, Herennius first slew him, then cut off his head.
When she suddenly became ill in February 45 BC and died after having seemingly recovered from giving birth to a son in January, Cicero was stunned.
Cicero traveled with the Pompeian forces to Pharsalus in 48 BC, though he was quickly losing faith in the competence and righteousness of the Pompeian side.
Perhaps the marriage simply could not outlast the strain of the political upheaval in Rome, Cicero's involvement in it, and various other disputes between the two.
Plutarch explains that the name was originally given to one of Cicero's ancestors who had a cleft in the tip of his nose resembling a chickpea.
Nonetheless, Sulla's reforms strengthened the position of the equestrian class, contributing to that class's growing political power.
Cicero's cognomen, or personal surname, comes from the Latin for chickpea, ''cicer''.
In the 50s BC, Cicero's letters to Terentia became shorter and colder.
In these novels Cicero's character is depicted in a more balanced way than in those of McCullough, with his positive traits equaling or outweighing his weaknesses (while conversely Caesar is depicted as more sinister than in McCullough).
