Severe thunderstorms are common in the warmer months, and tornadoes, while infrequent, are not unknown, with such events striking the Greater Cincinnati area most recently in 1974, 1999, and 2012.
The city is served by Cincinnati/Northern Kentucky International Airport (IATA: '''CVG''') which is actually located in Hebron, Kentucky.
The University of Cincinnati is the second largest, with 15,162 employees.
Also located in Cincinnati are Cincinnati Christian University and Chatfield College, a Catholic two-year college, located in Downtown.
An element of German culture remains audible in the local vernacular: some residents use the word ''please'' when asking a speaker to repeat a statement.
The University of Cincinnati Medical Center is highly regarded, as well as the College Conservatory of Music, which has many notable alumni, including Kathleen Battle, Al Hirt and Faith Prince.
American Girl's ''Kit Kittredge'' sub-series also took place in the city, although the film based on it was shot in Toronto.
In the mid to late nineteenth century, Cincinnati became a major destination for German and Irish immigrants.
By 1842 blacks had become better established in the city; they defended their persons and property in the riot, and worked politically as well.
Various parts of Cincinnati flood at different points: Riverbend Music Center in the California neighborhood floods at , while Sayler Park floods at  and the Freeman Avenue flood gate closes at .
The Cincinnati Inclined Plane Company began transporting people to the top of Mount Auburn that year.
FC Cincinnati is a soccer team that plays in the USL.
FC Cincinnati made its home debut on April 9, 2016, before a crowd of more than 14,000 fans.
Cincinnati's Jewish community was developed by immigrants from England and Germany.
National Football League
Cincinnati had numerous stations on the Underground Railroad, but there were also slave catchers active in the city, who put escaping slaves at risk of recapture.
General David Ziegler succeeded General St. Clair in command at Fort Washington.
The city manager's role in government was reduced.
According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which  is land and  is water.
The mayor was elected by the council.
Afterward the city built protective flood walls.
Three enclaves lie within Cincinnati's city limits: Norwood, Elmwood Place, and Saint Bernard.
The riots ended the regime of political bosses John Roll McLean and Thomas C. Campbell in Cincinnati.
Extremes range from  on January 18, 1977 up to  on July 21 and 22, 1934.
Procter & Gamble, the show's producer, is based in Cincinnati.
Founded in 1990, the team play at U.S. Bank Arena.
The Riverfront Transit Center, built under 2nd Street, is about the size of eight football fields.
WCET channel 48, now known as CET, is the nation's oldest licensed public television station (License #1, issued in 1951).
Seasongood founded the Charter Committee, which used ballot initiatives in 1924 to replace the ward system with the current at-large system.
However, the most distinctive local features have gradually diminished among younger speakers in favor of Midland American.
The Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Cincinnati operates 10 high schools in Cincinnati; six of which are single-sex: there are four all-female schools and two all-male high schools in the city, with additional schools in the metro areas.
Oktoberfest Zinzinnati, Bockfest, and the Taste of Cincinnati that feature local restaurateurs.
Cincinnati was incorporated as a city in 1819.
Annually, the two teams face off in one of the fiercest college basketball rivalries known as the Crosstown Shootout.
Like many other midwestern cities, however, bicycle use is growing fairly rapidly in the 2000s and 2010s.
In addition, ''Wild Hogs'' is set, though not filmed, in Cincinnati.
Cincinnati is home to the University of Cincinnati and Xavier University.
The May Festival Chorus is the mainstay of the oldest continuous choral festival in the Western Hemisphere.
The city lies opposite the mouth of the Licking River, an important factor in its being sited where it is.
Cincinnati has two major league teams, seven minor league teams, five college institutions with sports teams, and seven major sports venues.
At this depth, the pumping station at the mouth of Mill Creek is activated.
Cincinnati belongs to a climatic transition zone, at the northern limit of the humid subtropical climate and the southern limit of the humid continental climate zone (Köppen: ''Cfa/Dfa'', respectively).
Parts of Cincinnati also experience flooding from the Little Miami River and Mill Creek.
Many restaurants specialize in schnitzels and in Bavarian cooking, as many immigrants originated in southern Germany.
Blacks, fleeing the oppression of the Jim Crow South in hopes of better socioeconomic opportunity, had filled these older city neighborhoods in their Great Migration to the industrial North.
Starting in 1999, the mayor was elected separately in a general at-large election for the first time.
By the end of the 19th century, with the shift from steamboats to railroads drawing off freight shipping, trade patterns had altered and Cincinnati's growth slowed considerably.
By 1872, Cincinnatians could travel on the streetcars within the city and transfer to rail cars for travel to the hill communities.
The mile-long Cincinnati Skywalk, which was completed in 1997, remains a viable way to traverse downtown on foot in an indoor environment, despite the removal of several segments based on modern urban-development initiatives.
In 1790, Arthur St. Clair, the governor of the Northwest Territory, changed the name of the settlement to "Cincinnati" in honor of the Society of the Cincinnati, made up of Revolutionary War veterans, of which he was a member.
The University of Cincinnati, often referred to as "UC", is one of the United States' major graduate research institutions in engineering, music, architecture, classical archaeology, and psychology.
More than three decades later, in April 2001, racially charged riots occurred after police fatally shot a young unarmed black man, Timothy Thomas during a foot pursuit to arrest him, mostly for outstanding traffic warrants.
A major city of the Ohio Valley, Cincinnati is situated on the north bank of the Ohio River in Hamilton County, which is the extreme southwestern county of the state of Ohio.
Cincinnati developed with less European immigration or influence than eastern cities attracted in the same period; however, it received a significant number of German immigrants, who founded many of the city's cultural institutions.
The Maisonette in Cincinnati had the distinction of being Mobil Travel Guide's longest-running five-star restaurant in the United States of America, holding that distinction for 41 consecutive years until it closed in 2005.
Kroger, the largest employer in the city, has 17,000 employees.
In 1916 the mayor of Cincinnati and its citizens voted to spend $6 million to build the Cincinnati Subway.
By the early 21st century, the city was 40 percent black.
The city has an outer-belt, Interstate 275 (which is the longest circle highway in the country at 85 miles) and a spur, Interstate 471, to Kentucky.
Cincinnati's Music Hall was built specifically to house the May Festival.
Tensions increased after congressional passage in 1850 of the Fugitive Slave Act, which required cooperation by citizens in free states and increased penalties for failing to try to recapture escaped slaves.
The city of Cincinnati's emergency services for fire, rescue, EMS, hazardous materials and explosive ordnance disposal is handled by the Cincinnati Fire Department.
The current mayor of Cincinnati is John Cranley.
The building is the tallest in Cincinnati (surpassing the Carew Tower), and is the third tallest in Ohio, reaching a height of 665 feet.
As of the 2010 census, the racial demographics for the city of Cincinnati were: 49.3% white (48.1% non-Hispanic white), 44.8% black or African-American, 0.3% American Indian or Alaskan Native, 1.8% Asian, 0.1% Hawaiian or Pacific Islander, 2.5% two or more races, and 2.8% Hispanic (of any race).
July is the warmest month, with a daily average temperature of .
Summers are warm to hot and humid, with significant rainfall in each month and highs reaching  or above on 21 days per year, often with high dew points and humidity.
The city grew rapidly over the next two decades, reaching 115,000 persons by 1850.
It is the only municipality-owned interstate railway in the United States.
Prior to 1924, city council members were elected through a system of wards.
Throughout much of the 19th century, it was listed among the top 10 U.S. cities by population, surpassed only by New Orleans and the older, established settlements of the Eastern Seaboard; at one point holding the position of America's sixth-largest city for a period spanning consecutive census reports from 1840 until 1860.
Previously, the Cincinnati Royals competed in the National Basketball Association from 1957 to 1972.
White-led riots against blacks occurred in 1836, when an abolitionist press was twice destroyed; and in 1842.
Also, ''Harry's Law'', the NBC legal dramedy created by David E. Kelley and starring Kathy Bates, was set in Cincinnati.
The nine-member city council is composed of Vice-Mayor David Mann and Councilmembers Yvette Simpson (President Pro-Tem), Kevin Flynn, Amy Murray, Chris Seelbach, P.G.
Goetta is a German-inspired meat-and-grain sausage made of ground pork and pinhead oatmeal, usually fried and eaten as a breakfast food.
Several chains serve it, including Skyline Chili, Gold Star Chili, and Dixie Chili and Deli, plus independent chili-parlors including Camp Washington Chili.
In 1827, the canal connected Cincinnati to nearby Middletown; by 1840, it had reached Toledo.
World War I delayed the construction in 1920 and inflation raised the costs causing the Oakley portion never to be built.
Given its southern Ohio location, Cincinnati had also attracted settlers from the Upper South, who traveled along the Ohio River into the territory.
In 1841 26 percent of whites were from the South and 57 percent from the eastern states, primarily Pennsylvania.
Downtown Cincinnati is protected from flooding by the Serpentine Wall at Yeatman's Cove and another flood wall built into Fort Washington Way.
The city had a labor shortage until large waves of immigration by Irish and Germans in the late 1840s.
It is only used for sports games and school field trips.
Winters tend to be cold and snowy, with January, the coldest month, averaging at .
Isaac M. Wise Temple was the first Reform Judaism temple to be built, breaking away from Conservative and Orthodox Judaism.
During this period of rapid expansion and prominence, residents of Cincinnati began referring to the city as the "Queen City".
The PR/STV system had enabled minorities to enter local politics and gain seats on the city council more than they had before, in proportion to their share of the population.
From 1810 to 1830 its population nearly tripled, from 9,642 to 24,831.
Frequent flooding has hampered the growth of Cincinnati's municipal airport at Lunken Field and the Coney Island amusement park.
Phase 1A is already complete and 100 percent occupied as of early 2013.
Cincinnati does not have an exclave, but the city government does own several properties outside the corporation limits: French Park in Amberley Village, the disused runway at the former Blue Ash Airport in Blue Ash, and the  Cincinnati Southern Railway, which runs between Cincinnati and Chattanooga, Tennessee.
After the conclusion of the Northwest Indian Wars and removal of Native Americans to the west, he was elected as the mayor of Cincinnati in 1802.
In addition, Cincinnati Municipal Lunken Airport (IATA: LUK), has daily service on commercial charter flights, and is located in Ohio.
Cincinnati is known for its historic architecture.
In 1859, Cincinnati laid out six streetcar lines; the cars were pulled by horses and the lines made it easier for people to get around the city.
Cincinnati State is a community college that includes the Midwest Culinary School.
Cincinnati Public Schools' top-rated school is Walnut Hills High School, ranked 34th on the national list of best public schools by ''Newsweek''.
In 2012–16, Cincinnati constructed a streetcar line in Downtown and Over-the-Rhine.
A reform movement arose in 1923, led by another Republican, Murray Seasongood.
Unlike the rest of the Midwest, Southwest Ohio shares some aspects of its vowel system with northern New Jersey English.
Many children in Cincinnati skip school on Opening Day, which is commonly thought of as a city holiday.
Hebrew Union College- Jewish Institute of Religion (HUC-JIR), founded by Isaac Mayer Wise, is a seminary for training of Reform rabbis and others religious.
It is also served by Interstate 71, Interstate 74, Interstate 75 and numerous U.S. highways: US 22, US 25, US 27, US 42, US 50, US 52, and US 127.
The table below shows sports teams in the Cincinnati area that average more than 5,000 fans per game:
Fountain Square was renovated in 2006.
The Cincinnati area has one of the highest private school attendance rates in the United States; Hamilton County ranks second only to St. Louis County, Missouri among the country's 100 largest counties.
Cincinnati is also home to the first American based Australian Rules Football Team, The Cincinnati Dockers established in 1996.
and six all-female high schools
Major League Baseball
Cincinnati is home to two major sports teams, the Cincinnati Reds, the oldest franchise in Major League Baseball, and the Cincinnati Bengals of the National Football League.
In addition, Mayor Mark Mallory has repeatedly argued that the city's population is 378,259, after a drill-down study was performed by an independent, non-profit group based in Washington, D.C.
The Cincinnati Fire Department is organized into 4 bureaus: Operations, Personnel and Training, Administrative Services, and Fire Prevention.
The Cincinnati Reds have won 5 World Series titles and had one of the most successful baseball teams of all time in the early 1970s, known as The Big Red Machine.
Not long after on May 14, 2016, it broke its own record, bringing in an audience of 23,375 on its 1-0 victory against the Pittsburgh Riverhounds.
Predominantly white, working-class families who had filled the urban core during the European immigration boom in the 19th and early 20th centuries, moved to newly constructed suburbs before and after World War II.
Music-related events include the Cincinnati May Festival, MidPoint Music Festival, and Cincinnati Bell/WEBN Riverfest.
Keeping college graduates is an important goal of the city, on which it bases its future.
Music Director James Conlon and Chorus Director Robert Porco lead the Chorus through an extensive repertoire of classical music.
Cincinnati hosts a number of large annual events.
The flood of 1937 was one of the worst in the nation's history and destroyed many areas along the Ohio Valley.
In 2012, the rivalry game erupted in an on-court brawl at the end of the game that saw multiple suspensions follow.
Cincinnati is geographically located within the Midwest and is on the far northern periphery of the Upland South.
The Musketeers have made 10 of the last 11 NCAA tournaments while the Bearcats have made six consecutive appearances.
Cincinnati is also home to the first Kindergarten – 12th grade Arts School in the country, The School for Creative and Performing Arts.
In 1884, outrage over a manslaughter verdict in what many observers thought was a clear case of murder triggered the Courthouse riots, one of the most destructive riots in American history.
White riots against blacks took place again in Cincinnati in 1836 and 1842.
The city was surpassed in population by other inland cities, particularly Chicago, which developed based on commodity exploitation and the railroads, and St. Louis, for decades after the Civil War the gateway to westward migration.
Cincinnati also has its own chapter (or "Tent") of ''The Sons of the Desert (The Laurel and Hardy Appreciation Society)'', which meets several times per year.
Queen City Square opened in January 2011.
Since April 1, 1922, the Ohio River's flood stage at Cincinnati has officially been set at , as measured from the John A. Roebling Suspension Bridge.
In 1836, a mob of 700 pro-slavery men attacked black neighborhoods, as well as a press run by James M. Birney, publisher of the anti-slavery weekly ''The Philanthropist.''
Cincinnati is served by ''The Cincinnati Enquirer'', a daily newspaper.
This made the government more representative of the residents of the city.
The top nine vote-getters were elected (the "9-X system"), which favored candidates who could appeal to the entire geographic area of the city and reach its residents with campaign materials.
Many fugitive slaves used the Ohio River at Cincinnati to escape to the North.
In 2013 the Horseshoe Casino Cincinnati opened, the first casino in the city and fourth in the state of Ohio.
Cincinnati's food specialities reflect the city's German heritage.
The collaborative agreement has been used as a model across the country for building positive relationships between police and the communities they serve.
Over the course of three days, 56 people were killed and over 300 were injured.
Cincinnati is also home to two very successful men's college basketball teams: the Xavier Musketeers and the Cincinnati Bearcats.
Two annual festivals focus on traditional German foods: Oktoberfest Zinzinnati, billed as the largest Oktoberfest celebration outside Munich, and Bockfest, the oldest German-style bock-beer festival in the United States.
This usage is taken from the German practice, when ''bitte'' (a shortening of the formal, "Wie bitte?"
Cincinnati lies at the periphery of a region that speaks Midland American English, a dialect closely associated with General American.
Sittenfeld, Christopher Smitherman, Charlie Winburn, and Wendell Young.
The city is also home to Cincinnati Playhouse in the Park, which hosts regional premieres, and the Aronoff Center, which hosts touring Broadway shows each year via Broadway Across America.
Cincinnati is noted for two unique foods common in the area but seldom found outside Greater Cincinnati: Cincinnati chili, and Goetta.
In 1889, the Cincinnati streetcar system began converting its horsecar lines to electric streetcars.
Cincinnati's two major league teams are Major League Baseball's Reds, who were named for America's first professional baseball team, the Cincinnati Red Stockings; and the Bengals of the National Football League.
Cincinnati has given rise to popular musicians and singers Doris Day, Dinah Shore, Fats Waller, Rosemary Clooney, Bootsy Collins, The Isley Brothers, Merle Travis, Hank Ballard, Otis Williams, Mood, Midnight Star, The Afghan Whigs, Over the Rhine, Blessid Union of Souls, Freddie Meyer, 98 Degrees, The Greenhornes, The Deele, Enduser, Heartless Bastards, The Dopamines, Adrian Belew, The National, Foxy Shazam, Why?, Wussy, and Walk the Moon, and alternative hip hop producer Hi-Tek calls the Greater Cincinnati region home.
Tall Stacks, held every three or four years, celebrates the city's riverboat heritage.
Settled in 1788, the city is located on the north side of the confluence of the Licking with the Ohio River.
Among the professional companies based in the city are Ensemble Theatre Cincinnati, Cincinnati Shakespeare Company, the Know Theatre of Cincinnati, Stage First Cincinnati, Cincinnati Public Theatre, Cincinnati Opera, The Performance Gallery and Clear Stage Cincinnati.
From 1873 to 1898, the flood stage was .
A new streetcar system opened in September 2016.
Cincinnati is the third-largest city in Ohio and the 65th-largest city in the United States with a population of 298,165 people (2014), making it the 28th-largest Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) in the United States and the largest centered in Ohio.
The city is home to the Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra, Cincinnati Opera, Cincinnati Boychoir and Cincinnati Ballet.
In the late 1800s, Cincinnati was commonly referred to as "Paris of America", due mainly to such ambitious architectural projects as the Music Hall, Cincinnatian Hotel, and Shillito Department Store.
It includes the Ohio counties of Hamilton, Butler, Warren, Clermont, and Brown, as well as the Kentucky counties of Boone, Bracken, Campbell, Gallatin, Grant, Kenton, and Pendleton, and the Indiana counties of Dearborn, Franklin, and Ohio.
The Cincinnati Fire Department operates out of 26 fire stations, located throughout the city in 4 districts, each commanded by a district chief.
The city has an extensive library system, both the city's public one and university facilities.
In 2015, Cincinnati held the USITT 2015 Conference and Stage Expo at the Duke Energy Convention Center, bringing 5,000+ students, university educators, theatrical designers and performers, and other personnel to the city.
The National Underground Railroad Freedom Center, which opened in 2004 on the Cincinnati riverfront in the middle of "The Banks" area between Great American Ballpark and Paul Brown Stadium, commemorates the volunteers who aided refugee slaves and their drive for freedom, as well as others who have been leaders for social justice.
The Cincinnati Masters, a historic international men's and women's tennis tournament that is part of the ATP World Tour Masters 1000 Series, was established in the city in 1899, and has been held in suburban Mason since 1979.
Completion of the Miami and Erie Canal in 1827 to Middletown, Ohio further stimulated businesses, and employers struggled to hire enough people to fill positions.
Harriet Beecher Stowe lived in Cincinnati for a time, met escaped slaves, and used their stories as a basis for her watershed novel ''Uncle Tom's Cabin'' (1852).
Much has been done by 3CDC.
The city is undergoing significant changes due to new development and private investment.
Residents continued to work to improve their system.
The Cincinnati Zoo in Avondale is the second oldest zoo in the United States.
The Cincinnati Public School (CPS) district includes 16 high schools accepting students on a city-wide basis.
Exporting pork products and hay, it became a center of pork processing in the region.
Great American Ball Park
This modern version of the streetcar opened in September 2016.
From 1899 to March 31, 1922, it was .
A century later, the Cincinnati Bell Connector streetcar line, which opened for service on September 9, 2016, crosses directly above the unfinished subway on Central Parkway downtown.
When it was built, it was designed for public transit buses, charter buses, school buses, inter-city coach buses, light rail, and possibly commuter rail.
In 2015, there were 71 homicides.
On Major League Baseball Opening Day, Cincinnati has the distinction of holding the "traditional opener" in baseball each year, due to its baseball history.
On days it is not in use for sports games, it is closed off and rented to a private parking vendor.
The city is governed by a nine-member city council, whose members are elected at-large.
''A Rage in Harlem'' was filmed entirely in the Cincinnati neighborhood of Over the Rhine because of its similarity to 1950s Harlem.
Levi Coffin made the Cincinnati area the center of his anti-slavery efforts in 1847.
Xavier, a Jesuit university, was at one time affiliated with The Athenaeum of Ohio, the seminary of the Cincinnati Archdiocese.
More than one thousand blacks abandoned the city after the 1829 riots.
An early rejuvenation of downtown began in the 1920s and continued into the next decade with the construction of Union Terminal, the post office, and the large Cincinnati and Suburban Telephone Company Building.
In the antebellum years, the majority of native-born whites in the city came from northern states, primarily Pennsylvania.
The Cincinnati Police Department was featured on TLC's ''Police Women of Cincinnati'' and on A&E's reality show ''The First 48''.
In 1998, The Public Library of Cincinnati and Hamilton County was the third-largest public library nationally.
To have their votes count more, starting in 1987, the top vote-getter in the city council election was automatically selected as mayor.
Located in a free state and attracting many European immigrants, Cincinnati has historically had a predominantly white population.
An average winter will see around  of snowfall, contributing to the annual  of precipitation, with rainfall peaking in spring.
In addition, industrial restructuring cost a loss of jobs in the late 20th century.
Cincinnati Bearcats
Starting with Ashtabula in 1915, several major cities in Ohio adopted this electoral system, which had the practical effect of reducing ward boss and political party power.
Cincinnati has been called the "Chili Capital of America" and "of the World" because it has more chili restaurants per capita than any other city in the United States or in the world.
The Flying Pig Marathon is an annual event attracting many serious and amateur runners.
A system of public staircases known as the Steps of Cincinnati guides pedestrians up and down the many hills in the city.
Each bureau is commanded by an assistant chief, who in turn reports to the chief of department.
Cincinnati weathered the Great Depression better than most American cities of its size, largely because of a resurgence in river trade, which was less expensive than transporting goods by rail.
