In the Philippines, circumcision known as "tuli" is sometimes viewed as a rite of passage.
Important risk factors for penile cancer include phimosis and HPV infection, both of which are mitigated by circumcision.
The origin of circumcision is not known with certainty; the oldest documented evidence for it comes from ancient Egypt.
No strong evidence indicates that it reduces the rate of new HPV infection, but the procedure is associated with increased clearance of the virus by the body, which can account for the finding of reduced prevalence.
The practice of circumcision is thought to have been brought to the Bantu-speaking tribes of Africa by either the Jews after one of their many expulsions from European countries, or by Muslim Moors escaping after the 1492 conquest of Spain.
In considering such a request, the physician may consider (in addition to any potential medical benefits and harms) such non-medical factors in determining the child's best interests and may ethically perform the procedure.
A few countries have passed legislation on the procedure:  Germany allows non-therapeutic circumcision, while non-religious routine circumcision is illegal in South Africa and Sweden.
When an uncircumcised penis is erect during intercourse, any small tears on the inner surface of the foreskin come into direct contact with the vaginal walls, providing a pathway for transmission.
Some parents request to have their newborn or older child circumcised for non-therapeutic reasons, such as the parents' desires to adhere to family tradition, cultural norms or religious beliefs.
The German Academy for Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine (Deutsche Akademie für Kinder- und Jugendmedizin e.V., DAKJ) recommend against routine non-medical infant circumcision.
Circumcision is one of the world's most widely performed procedures.
Pinto (2012) writes "sober proponents and detractors of circumcision agree that there is no overwhelming medical evidence to support either side."
Over time the foreskin naturally separates from the glans, and a majority of boys are able to retract the foreskin by age three.
For adults, circumcision is often performed without clamps, and non-surgical alternatives such as the elastic ring controlled radial compression device or the Shang ring are available.
Those involved must weigh the factors of what is in the best interest of the minor against the potential harms of the procedure.
Circumcision may be used to treat pathological phimosis, refractory balanoposthitis and chronic, recurrent urinary tract infections (UTIs).
Several analyses have concluded that circumcision programs for adult men in Africa are cost-effective and in some cases are cost-saving.
In 1855, motivated in part by an interest in promoting circumcision to reduce masturbation, English physician Jonathan Hutchinson published his findings that Jews had a lower prevalence of certain venereal diseases.
Topical creams have been found to irritate the skin of low birth weight infants, so penile nerve block techniques are recommended in this group.
Non-religious circumcision in Asia, outside of the Republic of Korea and the Philippines, is fairly rare, and prevalence is generally low (less than 20%) across Europe.
The superficial skin layers of the penis contain Langerhans cells, which are targeted by HIV; removing the foreskin reduces the number of these cells.
Genital warts and cervical cancer are the two most common problems resulting from HPV.
The Greeks abhorred circumcision, making life for circumcised Jews living among the Greeks (and later the Romans) very difficult.
Finally, the foreskin is amputated.
This ceremony of ''brit shalom'' is not officially approved of by the Reform or Reconstructionist rabbinical organizations, who make the recommendation that male infants should be circumcised, though the issue of converts remains controversial and circumcision of converts is not mandatory in either movement.
Changes to policy are driven by the results of new research, and moderated by the politics, demographics, and culture of the communities.
Policies that require the costs to be paid by the parents yield lower neonatal circumcision rates.
Approximately 37% to 39% of males worldwide are circumcised, about half for religious or cultural reasons.
Ethical and legal questions regarding informed consent and human rights have been raised over the circumcision of babies and children for non-medical reasons, and for that reason the procedure is controversial.
Antiochus Epiphanes outlawed circumcision, as did Hadrian, which helped cause the Bar Kokhba revolt.
This pathological phimosis may be due to scarring from the skin disease balanitis xerotica obliterans (BXO), repeated episodes of balanoposthitis or forced retraction of the foreskin.
Studies evaluating the effect of circumcision on the incidence of other sexually transmitted infections have reached conflicting conclusions.
This argument to keep the procedure within the purview of medical professionals is found across all major medical organizations.
The New Testament chapter Acts 15 records that Christianity does not require circumcision; Christianity does not forbid it either.
Trials took place in South Africa, Kenya and Uganda.
Some men who were circumcised as an infant involuntary, described their feelings about the procedure using the terms "violation, torture, mutilation and sexual assault".
Ordinary procedural pain may be managed in pharmacological and non-pharmacological ways.
The WHO and the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) state that male circumcision is an efficacious intervention for HIV prevention, but should be carried out by well-trained medical professionals and under conditions of informed consent (parents' consent for their infant boys).
Coptic Christians practice circumcision as a rite of passage.
Circumcision removes the foreskin at its attachment to the base of the glans.
Bleeding, infection and the removal of either too much or too little foreskin are the most common complications cited.
A 2014 review that considered reported benefits of circumcision such as reduced risks from HIV, HPV, and HSV-2 stated that circumcision is cost effective in both the United States and Africa and may result in health care savings.
Jewish circumcision is part of the ''brit milah'' ritual, to be performed by a specialist ritual circumciser (a ''mohel'') on the eighth day of a newborn son's life (with certain exceptions for poor health).
After the end of World War II, Britain moved to a nationalized health care system, and so looked to ensure that each medical procedure covered by the new system was cost-effective and the procedure for non medical reasons was not covered by the national health care system.
It was also practiced by the Incas, Aztecs, and Mayans.
There are plausible explanations based on human biology for how circumcision can decrease the likelihood of female-to-male HIV transmission.
Circumcision rates dropped in Britain and in the rest of Europe.
The mitigating effect circumcision has on the risk factor introduced by the possibility of phimosis is secondary, in that the removal of the foreskin eliminates the possibility of phimosis.
The most common acute complications are bleeding, infection and the removal of either too much or too little foreskin.
Paul the Apostle reinterpreted circumcision as a spiritual concept, arguing the physical one to be no longer necessary.
The orifice through which urine passes at the tip of the penis (the urinary meatus) hosts more urinary system disease-causing bacteria in uncircumcised boys than in circumcised boys, especially in those under six months of age.
Subsequently, the World Health Organization promoted circumcision in high-risk populations as part of an overall program to reduce the spread of HIV, although some have challenged the validity of the African randomized controlled trials, prompting a number of researchers to question the effectiveness of circumcision as an HIV prevention strategy.
Newborns that experience pain due to being circumcised have different responses to vaccines given afterwards, with higher pain scores observed.
Behavioral effects have been observed following infant circumcision including changes in sleep patterns, irritability, changes in feeding, and parental bonding.
Although there is some debate within Islam over whether it is a religious requirement, circumcision (called ''khitan'') is practiced nearly universally by Muslim males.
A narrative in the Christian Gospel of Luke makes a brief mention of the circumcision of Jesus, but the subject of physical circumcision itself is not part of the received teachings of Jesus.
Though secular scholars consider the story to be literary and not historical, circumcision features prominently in the Hebrew Bible.
There is no firm consensus as to how it came to be practiced worldwide.
In the lands south and east of the Mediterranean, starting with Sudan and Ethiopia, the procedure was practiced by the ancient Egyptians and the Semites, and then by the Jews and Muslims, with whom the practice travelled to and was adopted by the Bantu Africans.
One theory is that it began in one geographic area and spread from there; another is that several different cultural groups began its practice independently.
For infants, non-pharmacological methods such as the use of a comfortable, padded chair and a sucrose or non-sucrose pacifier are more effective at reducing pain than a placebo, but the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) states that such methods are insufficient alone and should be used to supplement more effective techniques.
The moist, warm space underneath the foreskin is thought to facilitate the growth of pathogens, particularly when hygiene is poor.
Penile cancer is rare, with about 1 new case per 100,000 people per year in developed countries, and higher incidence rates per 100,000 in sub-Saharan Africa (for example, 1.6 in Zimbabwe, 2.7 in Uganda and 3.2 in Swaziland).
Minor complications are reported to occur in three percent of procedures.
In the United States, hospital discharge surveys estimated rates at 64.7% in the year 1980, 59.0% in the year 1990, 62.4% in the year 2000, and 58.3% in the year 2010.
However, the study found that the existing evidence is not very good.
The procedure is most common in the Muslim world and Israel (where it is near-universal for religious reasons), the United States, and parts of Southeast Asia and Africa.
Most cases of these conditions occur in uncircumcised males, affecting 411% of that group.
The ring block and dorsal penile nerve block (DPNB) are the most effective at reducing pain, and the ring block may be more effective than the DPNB.
The overall prevalence of circumcision in South Korea has increased markedly in the second half of the 20th century, rising from near zero around 1950 to about 60% in 2000, with the most significant jumps in the last two decades of that time period.
Throughout society, circumcision is often considered for reasons other than medical need.
At birth, the foreskin cannot be retracted due to adhesions between the foreskin and glans, and this is considered normal (physiological phimosis).
Where circumcision is the chosen intervention, the physician has an ethical responsibility to ensure the procedure is performed competently and safely to minimize potential harms.
The earliest historical record of circumcision comes from Egypt, in the form of an image of the circumcision of an adult carved into the tomb of Ankh-Mahor at Saqqara, dating to about 24002300 BCE.
Circumcision is most likely to benefit boys who have a high risk of UTIs due to anatomical defects, and may be used to treat recurrent UTIs.
Significant acute complications happen rarely, occurring in about 1 in 500 newborn procedures in the United States.
For infant circumcision, devices such as the Gomco clamp, Plastibell and Mogen clamp are commonly used in the USA.
He thought the procedure ameliorated such problems based on a "reflex neurosis" theory of disease, which held that excessive stimulation of the genitals was a disturbance to the equilibrium of the nervous system and a cause of systemic problems.
The American Academy of Pediatrics (2012) recommends that neonatal circumcision in the United States be covered by third-party payers such as Medicaid and insurance.
Complication rates are higher when the procedure is performed by an inexperienced operator, in unsterile conditions, or when the child is at an older age.
A 2006 meta-analysis found that circumcision was associated with lower rates of syphilis, chancroid and possibly genital herpes.
Other possible complications include buried penis, chordee, phimosis, skin bridges, urethral fistulas, and meatal stenosis.
With a newborn involved, the decision is made more complex due to the principles of respect for autonomy and consent, as a newborn cannot understand or engage in a logical discussion of his own values and best interests.
Both conditions are usually treated with topical antibiotics (metronidazole cream) and antifungals (clotrimazole cream) or low-potency steroid creams.
In some cultures, males are generally required to be circumcised shortly after birth, during childhood or around puberty as part of a rite of passage.
A 2010 review found that circumcision reduced the incidence of HSV-2 (herpes simplex virus, type 2) infections by 28%.
No major medical organization recommends either universal circumcision for all males (aside from the recommendations of the World Health Organization (WHO) for areas with high rates of HIV), or banning the procedure.
In America, one of the first modern physicians to advocate the procedure was Lewis Sayre, a founder of the American Medical Association.
An inflammation of the glans penis and foreskin is called balanoposthitis, and the condition affecting the glans alone is called balanitis.
Childhood or adolescent circumcision is associated with a reduced risk of invasive squamous cell carcinoma in particular.
There is a plausible biological explanation for the reduction in UTI risk after circumcision.
Alexander the Great conquered the Middle East in the 4th century BCE, and in the following centuries ancient Greek cultures and values came to the Middle East.
It may have been a mark of distinction for the elite:  the Egyptian ''Book of the Dead'' describes the sun god Ra as having circumcised himself.
In the 1970s, national medical associations in Australia and Canada issued recommendations against routine infant circumcision, leading to drops in the rates of both of those countries.
This can be inferred from study results that show uncircumcised men with no history of phimosis are equally likely to have penile cancer as circumcised men.
There is strong evidence that circumcision reduces the risk of HIV infection in heterosexual men in high-risk populations.
The circumcision procedure may carry the risks of heightened pain response for newborns and dissatisfaction with the result.
Prevalence in Africa varies from less than 20% in some southern African countries to near universal in North and West Africa.
Prior to the 20th century, masturbation was believed to be the cause of a wide range of physical and mental illnesses including epilepsy, paralysis, impotence, gonorrhea, tuberculosis, feeblemindedness, and insanity.
Severe complications are rare.
In addition to proposing that circumcision was taken up by the Israelites purely as a religious mandate, scholars have suggested that Judaism's patriarchs and their followers adopted circumcision to make penile hygiene easier in hot, sandy climates; as a rite of passage into adulthood; or as a form of blood sacrifice.
However, most streams of non-Orthodox Judaism allow female mohels, called ''mohalot'' (, plural of  ''mohelet'', feminine of ''mohel''), without restriction.
Severe to catastrophic complications, including death, are so rare that they are reported only as individual case reports.
Evidence suggests that circumcision was practiced in the Arabian Peninsula by the 4th millennium BCE, when the Sumerians and the Semites moved into the area that is modern-day Iraq.
Penile cancer development can be detected in the carcinoma ''in situ'' (CIS) cancerous precursor stage and at the more advanced invasive squamous cell carcinoma stage.
No well-accepted theory explains the significance of circumcision to the Egyptians, but it appears to have been endowed with great honor and importance as a rite of passage into adulthood, performed in a public ceremony emphasizing the continuation of family generations and fertility.
This led Chinese Muslims to eventually take an active part in rebelling against the Mongols and installing the more tolerant Ming Dynasty.
They are assisted by a small number of Reform and Reconstructionist rabbis, and have developed a welcoming ceremony that they call the ''brit shalom'' ("Covenant of Peace") for such children, also accepted by Humanistic Judaism.
It may be accompanied by body scarification and the removal of teeth, and may be followed later by penile subincision.
Additionally, the effectiveness of using circumcision to prevent HIV in the developed world is also unclear.
A specific complication rate is difficult to determine due to scant data on complications and inconsistencies in their classification.
Among men who have sex with men, reviews have found poor evidence for protection against sexually transmitted infections other than HIV, with the possible exception of syphilis.
Practically, however, many parents come to a decision about circumcising the child before he is born, and a discussion of the benefits and risks of the procedure with a physician has not been shown to have a significant effect on the decision.
There are three parties involved in the decision to circumcise a minor: the minor as the patient, the parents (or other guardians) and the physician.
This is probably due to the influence of the United States, which established a trusteeship for the country following World War II.
Topical or locally injected anesthesia is occasionally used to reduce pain and physiologic stress.
Estimates for individual countries include Taiwan at 9% and Australia 58.7%.
There is about a one percent risk of UTIs in boys under two years of age, and the majority of incidents occur in the first year of life.
The circumcision procedure causes pain, and for neonates this pain may interfere with mother-infant interaction or cause other behavioral changes, so the use of analgesia is advocated.
Ethicists and legal theorists also state that it is questionable for parents to make a decision for the child that precludes the child from making a different decision for himself later.
The procedure is not explicitly mentioned in the Quran, however it is a tradition established by Islam's prophet Muhammad directly (following Abraham), and so its practice is considered a ''sunnah'' (prophet's tradition) and is very important in Islam.
Since then they have amended their policy statements several times with the current recommendation being that the benefits outweigh the risks, but they do not recommend it routinely.
In South Africa, some Christian churches disapprove of the practice, while others require it of their members.
For Muslims, circumcision is also a matter of cleanliness, purification and control over one's baser self (''nafs'').
For adults and children, general anesthesia is an option, and the procedure may be performed without a specialized circumcision device.
Circumcision for the prevention of HIV transmission in adults has also been found to be cost-effective in South Africa, Kenya and Uganda, with cost savings estimated in the billions of US dollars over 20 years.
Medical organization such as the British Medical Association state that their member physicians are not obliged to perform the procedure in such situations.
The United States made similar statements in the 1970s, but stopped short of recommending against it — simply stating that it has no medical benefit.
Parents are assumed to have the child's best interests in mind.
Circumcision is recommended for, but is not required of, converts to Islam.
Although genital warts are caused by a type of HPV, there is no statistically significant relationship between being circumcised and the presence of genital warts.
Circumcision  does not appear to have a negative impact on sexual function.
Because penile cancer is rare (and may get more rare with increasing HPV vaccination rates), and circumcision has risks, the practice is not considered to be valuable solely as a prophylactic measure against penile cancer in the United States.
The practice of circumcision spread across the Middle East, North Africa and Southern Europe with Islam.
Complication rates are greater when the procedure is performed by an inexperienced operator, in unsterile conditions, or when the child is at an older age.
In other cases it may be done as a treatment for a condition or for preventative reasons.
However, evidence for a health benefit against HIV for men who have sex with men is less clear.
These estimates are lower than the overall circumcision rates, as they do not account for non-hospital circumcisions, or for procedures performed for medical or cosmetic reasons later in life; community surveys have reported higher neonatal circumcision.
During this period in history, Jewish circumcision called for the removal of only a part of the prepuce, and some Hellenized Jews attempted to look uncircumcised by stretching the extant parts of their foreskins.
The foreskin extends out from the base of the glans and covers the glans when the penis is flaccid.
The highest quality evidence indicates that circumcision does not decrease the sensitivity of the penis, harm sexual function or reduce sexual satisfaction.
The positions of the world's major medical organizations range from considering elective circumcision of babies and children as having no benefit and significant risks to having a modest health benefit that outweighs small risks.
The practitioner then places the circumcision device (this sometimes requires a dorsal slit), which remains until blood flow has stopped.
Medical organizations can affect the neonatal circumcision rate of a country by influencing whether the costs of the procedure are borne by the parents or are covered by insurance or a national health care system.
Circumcision is the world's oldest planned surgical procedure, suggested by anatomist and hyperdiffusionist historian Grafton Elliot Smith to be over 15,000 years old, pre-dating recorded history.
These complications occur in approximately 0.12% of procedures, and constitute the vast majority of all acute circumcision complications in the United States.
Although it is not explicitly mentioned in the Quran (early 7th century CE), circumcision is considered essential to Islam, and it is nearly universally performed among Muslims.
A study by the CDC suggests that newborn circumcision would be societally cost-effective in the United States based on circumcision's efficacy against the heterosexual transmission of HIV alone, without considering any other cost benefits.
Circumcision was done by the Egyptians possibly for hygienic reasons, but also was part of their obsession with purity and was associated with spiritual and intellectual development.
There is also evidence that circumcision was practiced among the Aztec and Mayan civilizations in the Americas, but little detail is available about its history.
At that time, British and American doctors began recommending it primarily as a deterrent to masturbation.
The history of the migration and evolution of the practice of circumcision is followed mainly through the cultures and peoples in two separate regions.
It is contraindicated in cases of certain genital structure abnormalities or poor general health.
Bantu tribes were observed to be upholding what was described as Jewish law, including circumcision, in the 16th century.
Circumcision and elements of Jewish dietary restrictions are still found among Bantu tribes.
Phimosis is the inability to retract the foreskin over the glans penis.
Circumcision is also recommended for HIV prevention by the International Antiviral Society-USA for all sexually active heterosexual males and is recommended that it be discussed with MSM who engage in primarily insertive anal sex with other men, especially in areas where HIV is common.
The Danish College of General Practitioners states that circumcision should "only be done when medically needed, otherwise it is a case of mutilation."
As HIV/AIDS is an incurable disease that is expensive to manage, significant effort has been spent studying the cost-effectiveness of circumcision to reduce its spread in parts of Africa that have a relatively high infection rate and low circumcision prevalence.
Its popularity spread with publications such as Peter Charles Remondino's ''History of Circumcision''.
Proposed theories for the purpose of the foreskin are that it serves to protect the penis as the fetus develops in the mother's womb, that it helps to preserve moisture in the glans, and that it improves sexual pleasure.
Circumcision is also strongly associated with a man's family, and it is part of the process required to prepare a man to take a wife and produce his own family.
A 2013 systematic review found that circumcision did not appear to adversely affect sexual desire, pain with intercourse, premature ejaculation, time until ejaculation, erectile dysfunction or difficulties with orgasm.
Such a question can be raised for the decision by the parents either to circumcise or not to circumcise the child.
Penile cancer has been observed to be nearly eliminated in populations of males circumcised neonatally.
The physician is bound under the ethical principles of beneficence (promoting well-being) and non-maleficence ("first, do no harm"), and so is charged with the responsibility to promote the best interests of the patient while minimizing unnecessary harms.
Circumcision is commonly practiced in the Jewish and Islamic faiths.
The Ethiopian Orthodox Church calls for circumcision, with near-universal prevalence among Orthodox men in Ethiopia.
For adults, general anesthesia is an option, and the procedure requires four to six weeks of abstinence from masturbation or intercourse to allow the wound to heal.
Neonatal circumcision is usually elected by the parents for non-medical reasons, such as religious beliefs or personal preferences, possibly driven by societal norms.
In 1870, Sayre began using circumcision as a purported cure for several cases of young boys diagnosed with paralysis or significant motor problems.
When an uncircumcised penis is flaccid, the pocket between the inside of the foreskin and the head of the penis provides an environment conducive to pathogen survival; circumcision eliminates this pocket.
Circumcision is one of many trials and ceremonies required before a youth is considered to have become knowledgeable enough to maintain and pass on the cultural traditions.
The World Health Organization (WHO) and UNAIDS (2007) recommend circumcision as part of a comprehensive program for prevention of HIV transmission in areas with high endemic rates of HIV, as long as the program includes "informed consent, confidentiality, and absence of coercion".
Sayre published works on the subject and promoted it energetically in speeches.
Phimosis is also a complication that can result from circumcision.
The foreskin may also be a pathway of infection for certain diseases.
Islam bases its practice of circumcision on the Genesis 17 narrative, the same Biblical chapter referred to by Jews.
In Oceania, circumcision is practiced by the Australian Aborigines and Polynesians.
This was considered by the Jewish leaders to be a serious problem, and during the 2nd century CE they changed the requirements of Jewish circumcision to call for the complete removal of the foreskin, emphasizing the Jewish view of circumcision as intended to be not just the fulfillment of a Biblical commandment but also an essential and permanent mark of membership in a people.
As these bacteria are a risk factor for UTIs, circumcision may reduce the risk of UTIs through a decrease in the bacteria population.
Circumcision is contraindicated in infants with certain genital structure abnormalities, such as a misplaced urethral opening (as in hypospadias and epispadias), curvature of the head of the penis (chordee), or ambiguous genitalia, because the foreskin may be needed for reconstructive surgery.
It probably started among South American tribes as a blood sacrifice or ritual mutilation to test bravery and endurance, and its use later evolved into a rite of initiation.
Circumcision did not become a common medical procedure in the Anglophone world until the late 19th century.
Public health advocates of circumcision consider it to have a net benefit, and therefore feel that increasing the circumcision rate is an ethical imperative.
The cost-effectiveness of circumcision has been studied to determine whether a policy of circumcising all newborns or a policy of promoting and providing inexpensive or free access to circumcision for all adult men who choose it would result in lower overall societal healthcare costs.
An estimated one-third of males worldwide are circumcised.
Less than one percent are still having problems at age 18.
The procedure is most often an elective surgery performed on babies and children for religious and cultural reasons.
While most infections are asymptomatic and are cleared by the immune system, some types of the virus cause genital warts, and other types, if untreated, cause various forms of cancer, including cervical cancer and penile cancer.
The narrative in Genesis chapter 17 describes the circumcision of Abraham and his relatives and slaves.
The procedure may also be used to prevent the development of phimosis.
The finding that circumcision significantly reduces female-to-male HIV transmission has prompted medical organizations serving the affected communities to promote circumcision as an additional method of controlling the spread of HIV.
Circumcision has a protective effect against the risks of penile cancer in men, and cervical cancer in the female sexual partners of heterosexual men.
The joint WHO/UNAIDS recommendation also notes that circumcision only provides partial protection from HIV and should not replace known methods of HIV prevention.
They are more effective than EMLA (eutectic mixture of local anesthetics) cream, which is more effective than a placebo.
They recommend performing the procedure during the neonatal period, when it is less expensive and has a lower risk of complications.
Ethically, it is imperative that the medical practitioner inform the parents about the benefits and risks of the procedure and obtain informed consent before performing it.
A 2015 meta-analysis found a non-statistically significant reduced risk of prostate cancer associated with circumcision, but that this reduction was significant among blacks and in studies looking at post-PSA and -testing groups.
The WHO estimated in 2007 that 664,500,000 males aged 15 and over were circumcised (30–33% global prevalence), almost 70% of whom were Muslim.
