He deeded monks from the Ebrach Abbey in Bavaria land just north of what is today the provincial capital of Graz.
Eugene was an Italian of humble background, who had first been drawn to monasticism at Clairvaux by the magnetism of Bernard.
Over time, as the Reconquista neared completion, the canonical bond between Calatrava and Morimond relaxed more and more, and the knights of the order became virtually secularized, finally undergoing dissolution in the 18th-19th centuries.
Another important offshoot of Rievaulx was Revesby Abbey in Lincolnshire.
Between these meetings the Abbot General and his Council, who reside in Rome, are in charge of the Order's affairs.
Some Cistercian abbeys did contain later medieval wall paintings, two examples being found in Ireland: Archaeological evidence indicates the presence of murals in Tintern Abbey, and traces still survive in the presbytery of Abbeyknockmoy.
He rebuked the moderate and conciliatory Abbot Peter the Venerable for the pleasant life of the Benedictine monks of Cluny.
In breadth and depth, his instructions constituted a radical reform programme:
Nearly half of these houses had been founded, directly or indirectly, from Clairvaux, so great was St Bernard's influence and prestige.
Firstly, there was the permanent difficulty of maintaining the initial fervour of a body embracing hundreds of monasteries and thousands of monks, spread all over Europe.
Since 2010 there is also a branch of Anglican Cistercians in England.
The same "rational, integrated scheme" was used across Europe to meet the largely homogeneous needs of the order.
St Bernard had established the unique position as mentor of popes and kings, and in 1145, King Louis VII's brother, Henry of France, entered Clairvaux.
He found his life threatened, his representatives attacked and his party harassed, while the three key houses of Mellifont, Suir and Maigue had been fortified by their monks to hold out against him.
However, with the help of his assistants, the core of obedient Irish monks and the aid of both English and Irish secular powers, he was able to envisage the reconstruction of the Cistercian province in Ireland.
It was as agriculturists and horse and cattle breeders that the Cistercians exercised their chief influence on the progress of civilisation in the Middle Ages.
The murals in Abbeyknockmoy depict Saint Sebastian, the Crucifixion, the Trinity and the three living and three dead,  and the abbey also contains a fine example of a sculptured royal head on a capital in the nave, with carefully defined eyes, an elaborate crown and long curly hair.
Additionally, the Cistercian monks of Our Lady of Dallas monastery run the Cistercian Preparatory School, a Catholic school for boys in Irving, Texas.
In Germany the Cistercians were instrumental in the spread of Christianity east of the Elbe.
Including those in monastic formation and oblates there are 2,132.
The Cistercians became the leading iron producers in Champagne, from the mid-13th century to the 17th century, also using the phosphate-rich slag from their furnaces as an agricultural fertiliser.
The Order enjoys an ecumenical link with the Order of Cistercians of the Strict Observance.
Located in Roxburghshire, it was built in 1136 by King David I of Scotland, and completed in less than ten years.
Bernard died in 1153, one month after his pupil Eugene III.
That same year, Bernard saw one of his monks ascend the papal chair as Pope Eugene III.
Benedict was shy of personal power and was devoted exclusively to restoring the authority of the Church.
However, some of the reasons of Cistercian decline were internal.
Thirteen Cistercian monasteries, all in remote sites, were founded in Wales between 1131 and 1226.
The Cistercians are known to have been skilled metallurgists, and knowledge of their technological advances was transmitted by the order.
Any wall paintings that may have existed were presumably destroyed.
The principle was that Cîteaux should always be the model to which all the other houses had to conform.
The monks of New Melleray Abbey, rural Peosta, Iowa produce caskets for both themselves and sale to the public.
The Cistercian Constitutions attached particular importance to attendance at this meeting, which was compulsory, and absence without leave was severely punished.
Nevertheless, the Bernardine concept of Catholic warrior asceticism predominated in Christendom and exerted multiple influences culturally and otherwise, notably forming the metaphysical background of the otherworldly, pure-hearted Arthurian knight Sir Galahad, Cistercian spirituality permeating and underlying the medieval "anti-romance" and climactic sublimation of the Grail Quest, the ''Queste del Saint Graal''—indeed, direct Cistercian authorship of the work is academically considered highly probable.
Overall, there were 333&nbsp;Cistercian abbeys in Europe – so many that a halt was put to this expansion.
Here they founded Rein Abbey.
Although St Bernard saw much of church decoration as a distraction from piety, and the builders of the Cistercian monasteries had to adopt a style that observed the numerous rules inspired by his austere aesthetics, the order itself was receptive to the technical improvements of Gothic principles of construction and played an important role in its spread across Europe.
A supremely eloquent, strong-willed mystic, Bernard was to become the most admired churchman of his age.
They developed this land by their own labour, or by that of illiterate peasant lay brothers known as ''conversi''.
They developed grants of territories of 180,000 acres where they would drain land, build monasteies and plan villages.
It was in this village that a group of Benedictine monks from the monastery of Molesme founded Cîteaux Abbey in 1098, with the goal of following more closely the Rule of Saint Benedict.
After that the followers of the older pattern of life became known as the '''Cistercians of the Original Observance'''.
On March 21, 1098, Robert's small group acquired a plot of marshland just south of Dijon called Cîteaux (''Latin:'' "Cistercium".
All these efforts at a reform of the great body of the order proved unavailing; but local reforms, producing various semi-independent offshoots and congregations, were successfully carried out in many parts in the course of the 15th and 16th centuries.
He perceived the attraction of evil not simply as lying in the obvious lure of wealth and worldly power, but in the "subtler and ultimately more pernicious attraction of false ideas".
Other French daughter houses of Cîteaux would include Preuilly, La Cour-Dieu, Bouras, Cadouin and Fontenay.
The abbey soon attracted a strong flow of zealous young men.
In 1892, the Trappist Observance left the Cistercians and founded a new Order.
The first of these was Tintern Abbey, which was sited in a remote river valley, and depended largely on its agricultural and pastoral activities for survival.
The fortified Maulbronn Abbey in Germany is considered "the most complete and best-preserved medieval monastic complex north of the Alps".
However, as Bernard of Clairvaux, who had a personal violent hostility to imagery, increased in influence in the order, painting and decoration gradually diminished in Cistercian manuscripts, and they were finally banned altogether in the order, probably from the revised rules approved in 1154.
He promulgated a series of regulations to restore the primitive spirit of the Cistercian Order.
Robert's followers included Alberic, a former hermit from the nearby forest of Colan, and Stephen Harding, a member of an Anglo-Saxon noble family which had been ruined as a result of the Norman conquest of England.
He left four of his companions to be trained as Cistercians, and returned to Ireland to introduce Cistercianism there.
From one point of view, it may be regarded as a compromise between the primitive Benedictine system, in which each abbey was autonomous and isolated, and the complete centralization of Cluny, where the Abbot of Cluny was the only true superior in the entire congregation.
Robert had been the idealist of the order, and Alberic was their builder.
The abbeys of 12th century England were stark and undecorated – a dramatic contrast with the elaborate churches of the wealthier Benedictine houses – yet to quote Warren Hollister, "even now the simple beauty of Cistercian ruins such as Fountains and Rievaulx, set in the wilderness of Yorkshire, is deeply moving".
The mother house of the order, Cîteaux, had developed the most advanced style of painting in France, at least in illuminated manuscripts, during the first decades of the 12th century, playing an important part in the development of the image of the Tree of Jesse.
For a long time, the General Chapter continued to battle bravely against the invasion of relaxations and abuses.
The outlines of the Cistercian reform were adumbrated by Alberic, but it received its final form in the ''Carta caritatis'', which was the defining guide on how the reform was to be lived.
By the end of the 12th century, the order had spread throughout France and into England, Wales, Scotland, Ireland, Spain, Portugal, Italy, and Eastern Europe.
The Cistercians were officially formed in 1112.
By the 15th century, however, of all the orders in Ireland, the Cistercians had most comprehensively fallen on evil days.
Today, there are two Cistercian Orders:
Malachy's intensive pastoral activity was highly successful:
Now there are 13 in Central and South America, 17 in Africa, and 23 in Asia and the Pacific.
This is because the Order’s lifestyle and their pursuit of wealth were early manifestations of “the Protestant ethic”, which has also been associated with city growth.
Stephen dissolved the Mellifont filiation altogether, and subjected 15 monasteries to houses outside Ireland.
Bernard's outburst in a letter against the fantastical decorative motifs in Romanesque art is famous:
On January 26, 1108, Alberic died and was soon succeeded by Stephen Harding, the man responsible for carrying the order into its crucial phase.
The present Abbot General is Dom Eamonn Fitzgerald of Mount Melleray, Waterford, Ireland.
In Dublin, the two Savigniac houses of Erenagh and St Mary's became Cistercian.
In the 17th century another great effort at a general reform was made, promoted by the pope and the king of France; the general chapter elected Richelieu (commendatory) abbot of Cîteaux, thinking he would protect them from the threatened reform.
One of the more famous Cistercians was Roger, the writer of the Chronicle of the Priest of Duklja.
Cistercian abbeys also refused to admit children, allowing adults to choose their religious vocation for themselves – a practice later emulated by many of the older Benedictine houses.
These have become quite famous and are considered by many beer critics to be among the finest in the world.
The largest Cistercian complex, the Abbatia Lubensis (Lubiąż, Poland), is a masterpiece of baroque architecture and the second largest Christian architectural complex in the world.
Furthermore, many Cistercian abbey churches housed the tombs of royal or noble patrons, and these were often as elaborately carved and painted as in other churches.
Visitors were appointed to reform Mellifont in its head and members on account of the ''multa enormia'' that had arisen there, but in 1217 the abbot refused their admission and barred the abbey gate with a crowd of lay brothers.
Many monasteries in Belgium and the Netherlands, such as Orval Abbey, Westvleteren Abbey and Westmalle Abbey, brew beer both for the monks and for sale to the general public.
By the Baroque period, decoration could be very elaborate, as at Alcobaça in Portugal, which has carved and gilded retables and walls of azulejo tiles.
In case of any divergence of view at the chapter, the side taken by the Abbot of Cîteaux was always to prevail.
In particular, the number of Trappist monasteries throughout the world has more than doubled over the past 60 years: from 82 in 1940 to 127 in 1970, and 169 at the beginning of the 21st century.
Laskill, an outstation of Rievaulx Abbey and the only medieval blast furnace so far identified in Great Britain, was one of the most efficient blast furnaces of its time.
In 1115, Count Hugh of Champagne gave a tract of wild, afforested land known as a refuge for robbers, forty miles east of Troyes, to the order.
The Norman invasion of Wales opened the church in Wales to fresh, invigorating streams of continental reform, as well as the new monastic orders.
Many towns near Berlin owe their origins to this order, including Heiligengarbe, Chorin,  which was the first Brick Monastery in the area.
There are approximately 2500 Trappist monks and 1800 Trappist nuns in the world today.
Two further building phases followed in order to complete the nave, leading to the final consecration of the medieval church building in 1252.
In Poland, the former Cistercian monastery of Pelplin Cathedral is an important example of Brick Gothic.
They were never ordained, and never held any office of superiority.
At this point, Cîteaux had four daughter houses, being Pontigny, Morimond, La Ferté and Clairvaux.
In 1496, there were efforts to establish a strong national congregation to assume this role in Ireland, but monks of the English and Irish "nations" found themselves unable to cooperate for the good of the order.
The English Reformation was disastrous for the Cistercians in England, as Henry VIII's Dissolution of the Monasteries saw the confiscation of church land throughout the country.
On one occasion the Abbot of La Trinité at Vendôme loaned a monk named John to the Bishop of Le Mans, Hildebert de Lavardin, for the building of a cathedral; after the project was completed, John refused to return to his monastery.
It often happened that the number of lay brothers became excessive and out of proportion to the resources of the monasteries, there being sometimes as many as 200, or even 300, in a single abbey.
This has actually never been the case, although silence is an implicit part of an outlook shared by Cistercian and Benedictine monasteries.
The Benedictine houses were established in the Normanised fringes and in the shadow of Norman castles, and because they were seen as instruments of conquest, they failed to make any real impression on the local Welsh population.
According to the historian Piers Paul Read, his vocation to the order, by deciding "to choose the narrowest gate and steepest path to the Kingdom of Heaven at Citeaux demonstrates the purity of his vocation".
St Bernard's own brother, Achard, is known to have supervised the construction of many abbeys, such as Himmerod Abbey in the Rhineland.
According to the medievalist Jean Gimpel, their high level of industrial technology facilitated the diffusion of new techniques: "Every monastery had a model factory, often as large as the church and only several feet away, and waterpower drove the machinery of the various industries located on its floor."
In a Cistercian monastery, there are three reasons for speaking:
In 1269, the Archbishop of Cashel joined the order and established a Cistercian house at the foot of the Rock of Cashel in 1272.
This new Cistercian architecture embodied the ideals of the order, and was in theory at least utilitarian and without superfluous ornament.
As the historian Alain Erlande-Brandenburg writes:
In the purity of architectural style, the beauty of materials and the care with which the Alcobaça Monastery was built, Portugal possesses one of the most outstanding and best preserved examples of Early Gothic.
Bernard of Clairvaux entered the monastery in the early 1110s with 30 companions and helped the rapid proliferation of the order.
It was in the latter case that medieval Dublin acquired a Cistercian monastery in the very unusual suburban location of Oxmantown, with its own private harbour called The Pill.
Although Bernard's ''De laude novae militiae'' was in favour of the Knights Templar, a Cistercian was also one of the few scholars of the Middle Ages to question the existence of the military orders during the Crusades.
The nuns were devoted to contemplation and also did field-work.
One such reformer, Abbot John Troy of Mellifont, despaired of finding any solution to the ruin of the order.
This document arranged the relations between the various houses of the Cistercian order, and exercised a great influence also upon the future course of western monachism.
In Robert's absence from Molesme, however, the abbey had gone into decline, and Pope Urban II, a former Cluniac monk, ordered him to return.
Many Cistercian monasteries produce goods such as cheese, bread and other foodstuffs.
The later history of the Cistercians is largely one of attempted revivals and reforms.
The most striking feature in the reform was the return to manual labour, especially field-work, a special characteristic of Cistercian life.
They are variously called the '''Bernardines''', after the highly influential St. Bernard of Clairvaux (though the term is also used of the Franciscan Order in Poland and Lithuania), or the '''White Monks''', in reference to the colour of the "cuccula" or white choir robe worn by the Cistercians over their habits, as opposed to the black cucculas worn by the Benedictine monks.
The monastery church of Cluny Abbey, the largest in Europe, had become wealthy from rents, tithes, feudal rights and pilgrims who passed through Cluniac houses on the Way of St. James.
The abbots and abbesses of each branch meet every three years at the Mixed General Meeting, chaired by the Abbot General, to make decisions concerning the welfare of the Order.
In Asia they run farms, and in other parts of the world they work in schools and parishes.
The Cistercians were adversely affected in England by the Protestant Reformation, the Dissolution of the Monasteries under King Henry VIII, the French Revolution in continental Europe, and the revolutions of the 18th century, but some survived and the order recovered in the 19th century.
Crucifixes were allowed, and later some painting and decoration crept back in.
Alberic also forged an alliance with the Dukes of Burgundy, working out a deal with Duke Odo of Burgundy concerning the donation of a vineyard (Meursault) as well as stones with which they built their church.
After many struggles and great hardships, St Bernard agreed to send a monk from Clairvaux to instruct them, and in the end they prospered exceedingly.
St Bernard viewed the Irish at this time as being in the "depth of barbarism":
The English science historian James Burke examines the impact of Cistercian waterpower, derived from Roman watermill technology such as that of Barbegal aqueduct and mill near Arles in the fourth of his ten-series ''Connections (TV series)'', called "Faith in Numbers."
Before 1152, Fountains had many offshoots, of which Newminster Abbey (1137) and Meaux Abbey (1151) are the most famous.
This is a dispersed and uncloistered order of single, celibate, and married men officially recognized by the Church of England.
To the wool and cloth trade, which was especially fostered by the Cistercians, England was largely indebted for the beginnings of her commercial prosperity.
Poblet Monastery, one of the largest in Spain, is considered similarly impressive for its austerity, majesty, and the fortified royal residence within.
The order was fortunate that Stephen was an abbot of extraordinary gifts, and he framed the original version of the Cistercian "Constitution" or regulations:  the ''Carta caritatis'' (''Charter of Charity'').
According to his detailed report to the General Chapter, the monks of only two communities, Dublin and Mellifont, kept the rule or even wore the habit.
Some historians believe that the suppression of the English monasteries may have stamped out an industrial revolution.
Until the Industrial Revolution, most of the technological advances in Europe were made in the monasteries.
Cistercian College, Roscrea, a boys' boarding secondary/high school in Ireland, is the only Trappist school left in the world, and one of only two remaining monastic secondary schools in Ireland.
Usually Cistercian churches were cruciform, with a short presbytery to meet the liturgical needs of the brethren, small chapels in the transepts for private prayer, and an aisled nave that was divided roughly in the middle by a screen to separate the monks from the lay brothers.
At the time, it was the 38th Cistercian monastery founded but, due to the dissolution of the previous 37 abbeys throughout the centuries, today it is the oldest surviving Cistercian community in the world.
Corcomroe in Ireland contains one of only two surviving examples of Gaelic royal effigies from 13th and 14th century Ireland: the sarcophagal tomb of Conchobar na Siudaine Ua Briain (d. 1268).
The first tracing in Byland illustrates a west rose window, while the second depicts the central part of that same window.
He identified the causes of this decline as the ceaseless wars and hatred between the two nations; a lack of leadership; and the control of many of the monasteries by secular dynasties who appointed their own relatives to positions.
This apparently came at the suggestion of Diego Valasquez, a monk and former knight who was "well acquainted with military matters", and proposed that the lay brothers of the abbey were to be employed as "soldiers of the Cross" to defend Calatrava.
By the end of the 13th century, the Cistercian houses numbered 500.
The massive endowments, powers and responsibilities of the Cluniac abbots had drawn them into the affairs of the secular world, and their monks had abandoned manual labour to serfs to serve as scholars and exclusively "choir monks".
Mellifont Abbey was founded in County Louth in 1142.
He had a predominant influence and the power of enforcing everywhere exact conformity to Cîteaux in all details of the exterior life observance, chant, and customs.
The Transitional Gothic style of its church had a major influence in the spread of Gothic architecture over much of northern and central Europe, and the abbey's elaborate network of drains, irrigation canals and reservoirs has since been recognised as having "exceptional" cultural interest.
There has also always been a large number of Cistercian nuns; the first community was founded in the Diocese of Langres in 1125; at the period of their widest extension there are said to have been 900 monasteries, and the communities were very large.
Various buildings, including the chapter-house to the east and the dormitories above, were grouped around a cloister, and were sometimes linked to the transept of the church itself by a night stair.
The monks may have been on the verge of building dedicated furnaces for the production of cast iron, but the furnace did not survive Henry's Dissolution in the late 1530s, and the type of blast furnace pioneered there did not spread outside Rievaulx.
The first abbey in the present day Romania was founded on 1179, at Igris (Egres), and the second on 1204, the Cârţa Monastery.
They developed an organised system for selling their farm produce, cattle and horses, and notably contributed to the commercial progress of the countries of western Europe.
In the 12th and 13th centuries, Cistercian barns consisted of a stone exterior, divided into nave and aisles either by wooden posts or by stone piers.
A 2016 study finds that "English counties that were more exposed to Cistercian monasteries experienced faster productivity growth from the 13th century onwards" and that this influence lasts beyond the dissolution of the monasteries in the 1530s.
The abbey's church was consecrated in 1223.
This land was donated by Walter Espec, with the support of Thurstan, Archbishop of York.
The arrangement lasted almost half a century, and in 1274, the filiation of Mellifont was reconstituted.
At the order's height in the 15th century, it would have nearly 750&nbsp;houses.
That same year, a charismatic young Burgundinian nobleman named Bernard arrived at Cîteaux with 35 of his relatives and friends to join the monastery.
The maxim attributed to him, "the pope must be like Melchizedech who had no father, no mother, nor even a family tree", is revealing of his character.
In 1153, the first King of Portugal, D. Afonso Henriques (Afonso, I), founded the Cistercian Alcobaça Monastery.
The Cistercians "made it a point of honour to recruit the best stonecutters", and as early as 1133, St Bernard was hiring workers to help the monks erect new buildings at Clairvaux.
In the spring of 1140, Saint Malachy, Archbishop of Armagh, visited Clairvaux, becoming a personal friend of St Bernard and an admirer of the Cistercian rule.
Cistercian-Bernardine chivalrous mysticism is especially exhibited in how the celibate, sacred warrior Galahad, due to interior purity of the heart (''cardiognosis'' in Desert Father terminology), is alone in being granted the beatific vision of the eucharistic Holy Grail (Pauline Matarasso, ''The Redemption of Chivalry'', Geneva, 1979).
Their incorporation into the order represents a compassionate outreach to the illiterate peasantry, as well as a source of labour on "unmanorialized" Cistercian lands.
Of these, there are twelve monasteries of monks and five of nuns in the United States.
Following the Anglo-Norman invasion of Ireland in the 1170s, the English improved the standing of the Cistercian Order in Ireland with nine foundations:  Dunbrody Abbey, Inch Abbey, Grey Abbey, Comber Abbey, Duiske Abbey, Abington, Abbeylara and Tracton.
Others were Raoul at Saint-Jouin-de-Marnes, who later became abbot there; Geoffrey d'Aignay, sent to Fountains Abbey in 1133; and Robert, sent to Mellifont Abbey in 1142.
Later, an illustration from the latter half of the 16th century would show monks working alongside other craftsmen in the construction of Schönau Abbey.
Over the centuries, however, education and academic pursuits came to dominate the life of their monasteries.
A graduate of both Oxford and Paris, and a future Abbot of Clairvaux (to be appointed in 1243), Stephen was one of the outstanding figures in 13th-century Cistercian history.
Merton's most widely read work remains his autobiography, ''The Seven Storey Mountain'', followed by ''New Seeds of Contemplation'' and ''No Man is an Island.''
Slag from contemporary furnaces contained a substantial concentration of iron, whereas the slag of Laskill was low in iron content, and is believed to have produced cast iron with efficiency similar to a modern blast furnace.
By 1152, there were 54 Cistercian monasteries in England, some few of which, had been founded directly from the Continent.
Cistercian architecture has made an important contribution to European civilisation.
Cistercian monks and nuns, in particular Trappists, have a reputation of being silent, which has led to the public idea that they take a Vow of silence.
On the other hand, all the abbeys were subjected to the General Chapter, the constitutional body which exercised vigilance over the order.
In 1228, the General Chapter sent the Abbot of Stanley in Wiltshire, Stephen of Lexington, on a well-documented visitation to reform the Irish houses.
Those who follow the reform of De Rancé are called '''Trappistines.'''
The French congregation of Sept-Fontaines (1654) also deserves mention.
The nuns have also followed the split in observances followed by the monks.
The original emphasis of Cistercian life was on manual labour and self-sufficiency, and many abbeys have traditionally supported themselves through activities such as agriculture and brewing ales.
Wąchock Abbey is one of the most valuable examples of Polish Romanesque architecture.
On the one hand, Citeaux maintained the independent organic life of the houses: each abbey had its own abbot elected by its own monks, its own community belonging to itself and not to the order in general, and its own property and finances administered without interference from outside.
The duties of the lay brothers, recruited from the peasantry, consisted in carrying out the various fieldworks and plying all sorts of useful trades.
With Saint Bernard's membership, the Cistercian order began a notable epoch of international expansion; and as his fame grew, the Cistercian movement grew with it.
Other abbeys, such as at Neath, Strata Florida, Conwy and Valle Crucis became among the most hallowed names in the history of religion in medieval Wales.
The east end of Corcomroe Abbey in County Clare is similarly distinguished by high-quality carvings, several of which "demonstrate precociously naturalistic renderings of plants".
In Ireland, the information on the Cistercian Order after the Anglo-Norman invasion gives a rather gloomy impression.
Additionally, in relation to fields such as agriculture, hydraulic engineering and metallurgy, the Cistercians became the main force of technological diffusion in medieval Europe.
From Rievaulx was founded Melrose Abbey, the earliest Cistercian monastery in Scotland.
Although this was revised on several occasions to meet contemporary needs, from the outset it emphasised a simple life of work, love, prayer and self-denial.
Bernard led twelve other monks to found the Abbey of Clairvaux, and began clearing the ground and building a church and dwelling.
As the great farmers of those days, many of the improvements in the various farming operations were introduced and propagated by them, and this is where the importance of their extension in northern Europe is to be estimated.
By the end of the 13th century, it had become a major autonomous power within the Castilian state, subject only to Morimond and the Pope; with abundant resources of men and wealth, lands and castles scattered along the borders of Castile, and feudal lordship over thousands of peasants and vassals.
By 1111 the ranks had grown sufficiently at Cîteaux, and Stephen sent a group of 12 monks to start a "daughter house", a new community dedicated to the same ideals of the strict observance of Saint Benedict.
This chronicle was written by Otto and Peter of Zittau, abbots of the Zbraslav abbey (Latin: ''Aula Regia'', "Royal Hall"), founded in 1292 by the King of Bohemia and Poland, Wenceslas II.
In this they were disappointed, for he threw himself wholly on the side of reform.
Trappist beers contain residual sugars and living yeast, and, unlike conventional beers, will improve with age.
In the 15th century, various popes endeavoured to promote reforms.
Membership of the Cistercian Order had included a large number of men from knightly families, and when King Alfonso VII began looking for a military order to defend the Calatrava, which had been recovered from the Moors a decade before, the Cistercian Abbot Raymond of Fitero offered his help.
