The maximum is , set on 10 August 2003.
The sword is often erroneously supposed to commemorate the killing of Peasants' Revolt leader Wat Tyler by Lord Mayor of London William Walworth.
Most of the wall has disappeared, but several sections remain visible.
Many historians now believe London was founded some time before the Roman conquest of Britain in 43 AD.
The Tower of London is not in the City, but is a notable visitor attraction which brings tourists to the southeast of the City.
And after his father (Beli Mawr) was dead he took the government of the island.
Founded in 1123, it is located at Smithfield, and is undergoing a long-awaited regeneration after doubts as to its continuing use during the 1990s.
The Corporation owns Old Spitalfields Market and Billingsgate Fish Market, in the neighbouring London Borough of Tower Hamlets.
About 1130, Henry I granted a sheriff to the people of London, along with control of the county of Middlesex: this meant that the two entities were regarded as one administratively (not that the county was a dependency of the City) until the Local Government Act 1888.
The historian Asser said that "Alfred, king of the Anglo-Saxons, restored the city of London splendidly&nbsp;... and made it habitable once more."
The Museum of London holds many of the Roman finds, has permanent Roman exhibitions and holds research collections.
Extract of census 'wards' where approximate to underlying legal wards
Bede records that in 604 AD St Augustine consecrated Mellitus as the first bishop to the Anglo-Saxon kingdom of the East Saxons and their king, Sæberht.
The City is made up of 25 wards.
The insurance industry is focused around the eastern side of the City, around Lloyd's building.
This generally causes higher night-time minima than outlying areas.
The Royal Exchange was founded in 1565 by Sir Thomas Gresham as a centre of commerce for London's merchants, and gained Royal patronage in 1571.
The City suffered terrorist attacks including the 1993 Bishopsgate bombing and the 7 July 2005 London bombings.
The Romans have left no record of when or how the city was founded and the very first time they mention the city is in the annals of Tacitus (in 61 AD) when he relates how Londinium was among a group of important cities sacked by the Iceni, led by their queen, Boudica.
It is also the smallest English city by population (and in Britain, only two cities in Wales are smaller).
The station holds the record for the highest British mean monthly temperature,  (mean maximum , mean minimum  during July 2006).
But the destruction of the older historic fabric allowed the construction of modern and larger-scale developments, whereas in those parts not so badly affected by bomb damage the City retains its older character of smaller buildings.
However the boundaries of the City of London no longer coincide with the old city wall, as the City expanded its jurisdiction slightly over time.
A banner of the arms (the design on the shield) is flown as a flag.
Uniquely for city or borough elections, its elections remain independent-dominated.
As it crosses Farringdon Road it becomes the boundary with Islington.
The arrival of the railways and the Tube meant that London could expand over a much greater area.
The wards are ancient and their number has changed three times since time immemorial
The name survives today as Aldwych (the "old market-place"), a name of a street and an area of the City of Westminster between Westminster and the City of London.
The City is England's smallest ceremonial county by area and population, and the fourth most densely populated.
London came top in the Worldwide Centres of Commerce Index, published in 2008.
The centre of trade and population moved away from the walled Londinium to Lundenwic ("London market"), a settlement to the west, roughly in the modern day Strand/Aldwych/Covent Garden area.
Sæberht's uncle and overlord, Æthelberht, king of Kent, built a church dedicated to St Paul in London, as the seat of the new bishop.
The only section not running along the river is a short stretch at Queenhithe.
Of the 326 English districts, it is the second smallest by population, after the Isles of Scilly, and the smallest by area.
Unusually, this temperature was during a windy and snowy cold spell (mid-January 1987), rather than a cold clear night—cold air drainage is arrested due to the vast urban area surrounding the city.
They can be described as electoral/political divisions; ceremonial, geographic and administrative entities; sub-divisions of the City.
The elevation of the City ranges from sea level at the Thames to  at the junction of High Holborn and Chancery Lane.
Some of the extra accommodation is in small pre-World War II listed buildings, which are not suitable for occupation by the large companies which now provide much of the City's employment.
The City was not covered by the Domesday Book.
The City's position as the United Kingdom's financial centre and a critical part of the country's economy, contributing about 2.5% of the UK's gross national product, has resulted in it becoming a target for political violence.
They are independent extra-parochial areas, historically not governed by the City of London Corporation (and are today regarded as local authorities for most purposes) and equally outside the ecclesiastical jurisdiction of the Bishop of London.
They are survivors of the medieval government system that allowed a very local area to exist as a self-governing unit within the wider city.
Many of the medieval offices and traditions continue to the present day, demonstrating the unique nature of the City and its Corporation.
The Corporation is headed by the Lord Mayor of the City of London, an office separate from (and much older than) the Mayor of London.
The River Fleet was canalised after the Great Fire of 1666 and then in stages was bricked up and has been since the 18th century one of London's "lost rivers or streams", today underground as a storm drain.
It owns and helps fund the Old Bailey, the Central Criminal Court for England and Wales, as a gift to the nation, having begun as the City and Middlesex Sessions.
* Montfichet's Tower
:—''Ystorya Brenhined y Brytanyeit'', Jesus MS. LXI.
They combine the emblems of the patron saints of England and London: the Cross of St George with the symbol of the martyrdom of Saint Paul.
The City controls three independent schools, City of London School (a boys' school) and City of London School for Girls in the City, and the City of London Freemen's School (co-educational day and boarding) in Ashtead, Surrey.
This wider usage of ''London'' is documented as far back as 1888, when the County of London was created.
It then runs up the centre of the Thames, with the exception that Blackfriars Bridge falls within the City; the City controls London Bridge (as part of Bridge ward) but only half of the river underneath it, a feature which is unique in British local administration.
All figures refer to the observation period 1971–2000.
In 1708, Christopher Wren's masterpiece, St Paul's Cathedral, was completed on his birthday.
Southwark, to the south of the City on the other side of the Thames, was within the City between 1550 and 1899 as the ''Ward of Bridge Without'', a situation connected with the Guildable Manor.
London's insurance sector continues to be based in the area, particularly in Lime Street.
Most of its voters are representatives of businesses and other bodies that occupy premises in the City.
In response to the 1993 bombing, a system of road barriers, checkpoints and surveillance cameras referred to as the "ring of steel" has been maintained to control entry points to the City.
The Romans built a bridge across the river, as early as 50 AD, near to today's London Bridge.
They are within the boundaries and liberties of the City, but can be thought of as independent enclaves.
It is administered by the City of London Corporation, headed by the Lord Mayor of London (''not the same as the more recent Mayor of London''), which is responsible for a number of functions and has interests in land beyond the City's boundaries.
Previously disenfranchised firms (and other organisations) are entitled to nominate voters, in addition to those already represented, and all such bodies are now required to choose their voters in a representative fashion.
He further claims that the assistance provided to the institutions based within it, many of which help their rich clients with offshore tax arrangements, mean that the City is "a tax haven in its own right".
He eventually crossed the River Thames at Wallingford, pillaging the land as he went.
It continues to Aldersgate, goes north, and turns east into some back streets soon after Aldersgate becomes Goswell Road, since 1994 embracing all of the Corporation's Golden Lane Estate.
The City has fire risks in many historic buildings, including St Paul's Cathedral, Old Bailey, Mansion House, Smithfield Market, the Guildhall, and also in numerous high-rise buildings.
It appears to have been adopted in the 17th century, as the earliest record of it is in 1633.
While London, and indeed England, were afterwards subjected to further periods of Viking and Danish raids and occupation, the establishment of the City of London and the Kingdom of England prevailed.
It oversees the Barbican Centre and subsidises several important performing arts companies.
The Roman Empire entered a long period of instability and decline, including the Carausian Revolt in Britain.
Author and journalist Nicholas Shaxson argued that, in return for raising loans and finance for the British government, the City "has extracted privileges and freedoms from rules and laws to which the rest of Britain must submit".
Most notably, the changes placed the (then recently developed) Broadgate estate entirely in the City.
The boundary includes all of the Barbican Estate and continues east along Ropemaker Street and its continuation on the other side of Moorgate, becomes South Place.
Portsoken contains Aldgate tube station
In 2009, the City of London accounted for 2.4% of UK GDP.
Being subject to renaming and definition at any time, these census 'wards' are notable in that four of the eight wards accounted for 67% of the 'square mile' and held 86% of the population, and these were in fact similar to and named after four City of London wards:
By the mid-19th century, with London still rapidly expanding in population and area, the City had already become only a small part of the wider metropolis.
In the 10th century, Athelstan permitted eight mints to be established, compared with six in his capital, Winchester, indicating the wealth of the city.
Another example of a bomb-damaged place having been restored is Staple Inn on Holborn.
Wards continue to have a Beadle, an ancient position which is now largely ceremonial whose main remaining function is the running of an annual Wardmote of electors, representatives and officials.
By the late 16th century, London increasingly became a major centre for banking, international trade and commerce.
As the City of London Corporation has not been affected by other municipal legislation over the period of time since then, its electoral practice has become increasingly anomalous.
Each ward also has a Ward Club, which is similar to a residents' association.
Each ward has an Alderman, who until the mid-1960s held office for life but since put themselves up for re-election at least every 6 years.
The London Port Health Authority, which is the responsibility of the Corporation, is responsible for all port health functions on the tidal part of the Thames, including various seaports and London City Airport.
*in 1550 the ward of Bridge Without, south of the river, was created, the ward of Bridge becoming Bridge Within;
''London'' most often denotes the sprawling London metropolis, or the 32 London boroughs, in addition to the City of London itself.
The 1970s saw the construction of tall office buildings including the 600-foot (183 m), 47-storey Natwest Tower, the first skyscraper in the UK.
Particular churches, livery company halls and other historic buildings and structures are associated with a ward, such as St Paul's Cathedral with Castle Baynard, and London Bridge with Bridge; boundary changes in 2003 removed some of these historic connections.
The "Ring of Steel" is a particularly notable measure, established in the wake of the IRA bombings, that has been taken against terrorist threats.
These were the important entrances to the City and their control was vital in maintaining the City's special privileges over certain trades.
2003 and 2013 boundary changes have increased the residential emphasis of the mentioned four wards.
London Bridge, which had fallen into ruin following the Roman evacuation and abandonment of Londinium, was rebuilt by the Saxons, but was periodically destroyed by Viking raids and storms.
The main residential section of the City today is the Barbican Estate, constructed between 1965 and 1976.
For example, several hotels and the first department store opened in the 2000s.
Census data provides eight nominal rather than 25 real wards, all of varying size and population.
The Honourable The Irish Society, a body closely linked with the Corporation, also owns many public spaces in Northern Ireland.
There was a major rebuilding programme in the decades following the war, in some parts (such as at the Barbican) dramatically altering the urban landscape.
It is also unusual in having responsibilities and ownerships beyond its boundaries.
The City has a number of visitor attractions, mainly based on its historic heritage as well as the Barbican Centre and adjacent Museum of London, though tourism is not at present a major contributor to the City's economy or character.
After the city had been destroyed by Boudica in 60 AD it was entirely rebuilt as a planned settlement (a ''civitas''), and the new walled town was prosperous and grew to become the largest settlement in Roman Britain by the end of the 1st century.
The local authority for the City, namely the City of London Corporation, is unique in the UK and has some unusual responsibilities for a local council, such as being the police authority.
Many of the Roman public buildings in Londinium by this time had fallen into decay and disuse, and gradually after the formal withdrawal the city became almost (if not, at times, entirely) uninhabited.
The City also took in the other "City bars" which were situated just beyond the old walled area, such as at Holborn, Aldersgate, Bishopsgate and Aldgate.
The force has unique red and white chequered cap bands and red and white striped duty arm bands on the sleeve of the tunics of constables and sergeants (red and white being the colours of the City), which in most other British police forces are black and white.
It owns land beyond its boundaries, including open spaces (parks, forests and commons) in and around Greater London, including most of Epping Forest, Hampstead Heath.
Retail businesses were once important, but have gradually moved to the West End of London, though it is now Corporation policy to encourage retailing in some locations, for example at Cheapside near St Paul's.
The business or "non-residential vote" was abolished in other UK local council elections by the Representation of the People Act 1969, but was preserved in the City of London.
In the 3rd and 4th centuries, the city was under attack from Picts, Scots, and Saxon raiders.
Other landmark buildings with historical significance include the Bank of England, the Old Bailey, the Custom House, Smithfield Market, Leadenhall Market and St Bartholomew's Hospital.
The City relies upon stations in the surrounding London boroughs to support it at some incidents.
The City as a distinct polity survived despite its position within the London conurbation and numerous local government reforms.
Since then the City is a minority (in terms of population and area) of the Cities of London and Westminster.
% of the City of London
Another skyscraper, 22 Bishopsgate, is under construction.
There were 1,814 incidents attended in the City in 2006/2007—the lowest in Greater London.
the Underground, trams, etc.
The area is also spoken of as a possible target for al-Qaeda.
Immediately to the south of Cornhill, Lombard Street was the location from 1691 of Lloyd's Coffee House, which became the world-leading insurance market.
Of the $3.98&nbsp;trillion daily global turnover, as measured in 2009, trading in London accounted for around $1.85&nbsp;trillion, or 46.7% of the total.
This 'commune' was the origin of the City of London Corporation and the citizens gained the right to appoint, with the king's consent, a Mayor in 1189—and to directly elect the Mayor from 1215.
And he called it Kaer Lvdd; and in the end it was called Kaer Lvndain.
They base this notion on evidence provided by both archaeology and Welsh literary legend.
Under the new system, the number of non-resident voters has doubled from 16,000 to 32,000.
Since the 2003 review it has been agreed that the four more residential wards: Portsoken, Queenhithe, Aldersgate and Cripplegate together elect 20 of the 100 Commoners, whereas the business-dominated remainder elect the remaining 80 Commoners.
By the time the London Wall was constructed, the City's fortunes were in decline, and it faced problems of plague and fire.
The Tower of London has always been outside the City and comes under the London Borough of Tower Hamlets.
A Folkmoot, for the whole of the City held at the outdoor cross of St Paul's Cathedral, was formerly also held.
The Romans built the London Wall some time between 190 and 225 AD.
They are both part of Farringdon Without.
Within the City, the Corporation owns and runs both Smithfield Market and Leadenhall Market.
The City was burned severely on a number of occasions, the worst being in 1123 and (more famously) in the Great Fire of London in 1666.
The City has a target of 90 additional dwellings per year.
The first service had been held on 2 December 1697, more than 10 years earlier.
Although no longer used for its original purpose, its location at the corner of Cornhill and Threadneedle Street continues to be the geographical centre of the City's core of banking and financial services, with the Bank of England moving to its present site in 1734, opposite the Royal Exchange on Threadneedle Street.
Between them ran the Walbrook, one of the many "lost" rivers or streams of London (another is the Fleet).
The Office for National Statistics recorded the population in 2011 as 7,000; approximately the same as that in the last census, 2001.
Two bus stations are in the City, at Aldgate on the eastern boundary with Tower Hamlets, and at Liverpool Street by the railway station.
Rather than continuing the war, Edgar the Ætheling, Edwin of Mercia and Morcar of Northumbria surrendered at Berkhamsted.
Alfred's "restoration" entailed reoccupying and refurbishing the nearly deserted Roman walled city, building quays along the Thames, and laying a new city street plan.
In 1801, the City had a population of about 130,000, but increasing development of the City as a central business district led to this falling to below 5,000 after the Second World War.
Like many areas of London and other British cities, the City fell victim to large scale and highly destructive aerial bombing during World War II, especially in the Blitz.
And, after the coming of the alien nation into it, it was called Kaer Lwndwn.
At the Wardmote the ward's Alderman appoints at least one Deputy for the year ahead.
The pound sterling, the currency of the United Kingdom, is globally the fourth most traded currency and the third most held reserve currency.
The chief executive of the Corporation holds the ancient office of Town Clerk of London.
The principal reason given by successive UK governments for retaining this mechanism for giving businesses representation, is that the City is "primarily a place for doing business".
*in 1978 these Bridge wards were merged as Bridge ward.
There are approximately 28 Barclays Cycle Hire docking stations in the City.
A secondary financial district exists outside of the City, at Canary Wharf,  to the east.
The legal profession has a strong presence, especially in the west and north (i.e., towards the Inns of Court).
One of the Port of London's 25 safeguarded wharves, Walbrook Wharf, is adjacent to Cannon Street station, and is used by the Corporation to transfer waste via the river.
Its ancient wards have very unequal numbers of voters.
*in 1394 Farringdon was divided into Farringdon Within and Farringdon Without
Today it is part of the London Borough of Southwark.
The meat market at Smithfield, wholly within the City, continues to be one of London's main markets (the only one remaining in central London) and the country's largest meat market.
Accordingly, the weather station holds the record for the UK's warmest overnight minimum temperature, , recorded on 4 August 1990.
For instance, when in May 2004 the BBC's ''Panorama'' programme examined the preparedness of Britain's emergency services for a terrorist attack on the scale of September 11, 2001 attacks, they simulated a chemical explosion on Bishopsgate in the east of the City.
In 2009, the business vote was about 24,000, greatly exceeding residential voters.
In 1381, the Peasants' Revolt affected London.
The City of London is widely referred to simply as ''the City'' (differentiated from the phrase "the city of London" by capitalising ''City'') and is also colloquially known as the ''Square Mile'', as it is  in area.
According to a survey conducted in March 2011, the methods by which employed residents 16-74 get to work varied widely: 48.4% go on foot; 19.5% via light rail, (i.e.
The absolute minimum for the weather station is a mere , compared to readings around  towards the edges of London.
In the east is Leadenhall Market, a fresh food market that is also a visitor attraction.
A few small sections of the Roman London Wall exist, for example near the Tower of London and in the Barbican area.
The City Police have three police stations, at Snow Hill, Wood Street and Bishopsgate, and has 813 police officers, 85 Special Constables and 48 PCSOs.
Noteworthy contemporary buildings include a number of modern high-rise buildings (see section below) as well as the Lloyd's building.
Since the 1990s, the City has diversified away from near exclusive office use in other ways.
Over 500 banks have offices in the City, and the City is an established leader in trading in Eurobonds, foreign exchange, energy futures and global insurance.
The City is now only a tiny part of the metropolis of London, though it remains a notable part of central London.
Only electors who are Freemen of the City of London are eligible to stand.
Whilst the financial sector, and related businesses and institutions, continue to dominate, the economy is not limited to that sector.
A number of Roman sites and artefacts can be seen in the City, including the Temple of Mithras, sections of the London Wall (at the Barbican and near Tower Hill), the London Stone and remains of the amphitheatre beneath the Guildhall.
The City of London School for Girls has its own preparatory department for entrance at age seven.
The City's flag flies over Tower Bridge, although neither footing is in the City.
There is a public riverside walk along the river bank, opened in stages over recent years.
The arms consist of a silver shield bearing a red cross with a red upright sword in the first quarter.
William granted the citizens of London a charter in 1075; the City was one of a few examples of the English retaining some authority.
Llydd was the eldest son.
The rebels took the City and the Tower of London, but the rebellion ended after its leader, Wat Tyler, was killed during a confrontation that included Lord Mayor William Walworth.
However, in terms of daytime maximum temperatures, Cambridge NIAB and Botanical Gardens with a mean maximum of , and Heathrow with  all exceeded this.
The City is a ceremonial county which has a Commission of Lieutenancy headed by the Lord Mayor instead of a Lord-Lieutenant and has two Sheriffs instead of a High Sheriff (see list of Sheriffs of London), quasi-judicial offices appointed by the Livery Companies, an ancient political system based on the representation and protection of trades (Guilds).
The City has one hospital, St Bartholomew's Hospital, also known as 'Barts'.
Throughout the 19th century, the City was the world's primary business centre, and it continues to be a major meeting point for businesses.
The first fire engine is in attendance in roughly five minutes on average, the second when required in a little over five and a half minutes.
And he had built within the city walls splendid buildings the like of which were not seen in all countries.
It used to be widely held that ''Londinium'' was first established by merchants as a trading port on the tidal Thames in around 47 AD, during the early years of the Roman occupation of Britain.
Other visible sections are at St Alphage, and there are two sections near the Tower of London.
At its height, the Roman city had a population of approximately 45,000–60,000 inhabitants.
An attempt was made in 1894 with the Royal Commission on the Amalgamation of the City and County of London to end the distinction between the City and the surrounding County of London, but a change of government at Westminster meant the option was not taken up.
The current Lord Mayor, as at June 2016, is Jeffrey Evans, 4th Baron Mountevans.
It is the smallest territorial police force in England and Wales, in both geographic area and the number of police officers.
Office space development has intensified especially in the central, northern and eastern parts, with skyscrapers including 30 St. Mary Axe ("the Gherkin"'), Leadenhall Building ("the Cheesegrater"), 20 Fenchurch Street ("the Walkie-Talkie"), the Broadgate Tower and the Heron Tower, the tallest in the City.
It turns east along Holborn to Holborn Circus, and then goes north east to Charterhouse Street.
For example, the August mean minimum of  compares to a figure of  for Greenwich and Heathrow whereas is  at Wisley in the middle of several square miles of Metropolitan Green Belt.
% of built-upon land: commercial
However the arms were in use some months before Tyler's death, and the tradition that Walworth's dagger is depicted may date from the late 17th century.
Aldersgate west half of Barbican neighbourhood
The Latin motto of the City is "''Domine dirige nos''", which translates as "''Lord, direct (guide) us''".
