Newspaper reports the following day listed his condition as satisfactory.
Portraitist Al Hirschfeld created a drawing, and then a lithograph, portraying the film's stars Clift, Monroe, and Gable with screenwriter Miller, in what is suggested as a typical "on-the-set" scene during the troubled production.
He was very mechanically inclined and loved to strip down and repair cars with his father.
"His ears are too big and he looks like an ape", said executive Darryl F. Zanuck, then at Warner Bros., about Gable after testing him for the lead in the studio's gangster drama ''Little Caesar'' (1931).
Mario Toti and Robert Boles, and the sound man Lt. Howard Voss to complete his crew.
A very public and brief romance with Paulette Goddard occurred after that.
But he died that evening, age 59, from an arterial blood clot.
Medical staff did not perform CPR for fear that the procedure would rupture Gable's heart, and a defibrillator was not available.
She went by the name Judy Lewis after Miss Young married Tom Lewis when Judy was four years old.
Gable made three pictures with Spencer Tracy, which boosted Tracy's career and cemented them in the public mind as a team.
In 1917, when Gable was in high school, his father had financial difficulties.
He also appeared as a bit player in a series of shorts.
Young hid the pregnancy in an elaborate scheme.
Each pairing was a box-office phenomenon.
Filmed mostly on location in Italy, it was Gable's last film released in color.
Monroe said that she and Kay had become close during the filming and would refer to Clark as "Our Man", while Arthur Miller, observing Gable on location, noted, "no hint of affront ever showed on his face".
Will Gable agreed to buy a 72-volume set of ''The World's Greatest Literature'' to improve his son's education, but claimed he never saw his son use it.
Among Gable's ancestors were Pennsylvania Dutch (German), Rhinelanders, and Bavarians.
As his speech habits improved, his facial expressions became more natural and convincing.
Lewis finally confronted her mother about her true parentage when she was 31, and Gable had been dead for five years.
We had done it without him weeping several times and then we had one last try.
Niven also states that Arthur Miller, the author of ''The Misfits'', had described Gable as "the man who did not know how to hate".
Tierney was a favorite of Gable and he was very disappointed when she was replaced in ''Mogambo'' (because of her mental health problems) by Grace Kelly.
He'd get so angry that he'd just go ahead and do anything to keep occupied."
Gable ordered the scene removed because he felt that his character would never steal a woman from another man.
Eli Wallach, in his autobiography, also states that Wallach's most dramatic scene in ''The Misfits'' was cut from the movie after it had been filmed over several takes.
At 57, Gable finally acknowledged, "Now it's time I acted my age".
Gable is mentioned in the lyrics, "Between our quests we sequin vests/And impersonate Clark Gable," in the musical number, "Knights of the Round Table" from ''Monty Python and the Holy Grail''.
The  Gable weighed about  at the time of ''Gone with the Wind'', but by his late 50s, he weighed .
You made me love you, I didn't want to do it, I didn't want to do it..."
She paid to have his teeth repaired and his hair styled.
He waited around forever, for everybody.
Despite his father's insistence that he work the farm, Gable soon left to work in Akron for the Firestone Tire and Rubber Co.
Gable's first movie after World War II was ''Adventure'' (1945), with his ill-matched co-star Greer Garson.
He also starred with Lana Turner in four features, and with Norma Shearer and Ava Gardner in three each.
Both completed training on October 28, 1942, commissioned as second lieutenants.
Louis B. Mayer threatened to terminate both their contracts, and for a while they kept apart.
By then, Selznick had become determined to hire Gable, and set about finding a way to borrow him from MGM.
Since Selznick had no male stars under long-term contract, though, he needed to go through the process of negotiating to borrow an actor from another studio.
Gable was a tall, shy child with a loud voice.
20 years later, Crews played Aunt Pittypat alongside Gable's Rhett Butler in ''Gone With the Wind'' (1939).
By then, his stepmother had died, and his father moved to Tulsa, Oklahoma to go back to the oil business.
The same year, in ''Night Nurse'', Gable played a villainous chauffeur who was gradually starving two adorable little girls to death, then knocked Barbara Stanwyck's character unconscious with his fist, a supporting role originally slated for James Cagney until the release of ''The Public Enemy'' abruptly made Cagney a leading man.
He appeared as an extra in Fox's ''The Johnstown Flood'' (1926).
Gable won an Academy Award for Best Actor for ''It Happened One Night'' (1934), and was nominated for leading roles in ''Mutiny on the Bounty'' (1935) and for his arguably best-known role as Rhett Butler in the epic ''Gone with the Wind'' (1939).
Young never publicly acknowledged the fact while she was alive, which she said would be admitting to a "mortal sin".
Young and her mother both denied sending the telegram; Loretta believed that Carter Hermann (her sister Polly's husband, who was also Judy's godfather) had sent it.
In 1955, Gable married his fifth wife, Kay Spreckels (née Kathleen Williams), a thrice-married former fashion model and actress who had previously been married to sugar-refining heir Adolph B. Spreckels, Jr. Gable became stepfather to her son Bunker Spreckels, who went on to live a notorious celebrity lifestyle in the late 1960s and early 1970s surfing scene, ultimately leading to his early death in 1977.
This scene depicts Wallach's character (who secretly loves the character played by Marilyn Monroe), being emotionally crushed when he visits her, hoping to propose to her, and instead sees her with Gable's character.
Gable tried to boycott the premiere of ''Gone with the Wind'' in Atlanta, Georgia, because the African American McDaniel was not permitted to attend.
The last one, despite an icy critical reception, was a good box-office success and was nominated for an Academy award and two Golden Globes.
He made two pictures in 1931 with Wallace Beery, a supporting role in ''The Secret Six'', then with his part increasing in size to almost match Beery's in the naval aviation film ''Hell Divers''.
He was allowed to complete the film anyway, joining the First Motion Picture Unit in Hollywood.
Co-starring with Gable were Marilyn Monroe, her last completed film; Montgomery Clift; Eli Wallach; and Thelma Ritter.
The relationship was profoundly unsuccessful; they divorced in 1952.
Next, he paired with Doris Day in ''Teacher's Pet'' (1958), shot in black and white to better hide his aging face and overweight body.
Gable flew five combat missions, including one to Germany, as an observer-gunner in B-17 Flying Fortresses between May 4 and September 23, 1943, earning the Air Medal and the Distinguished Flying Cross for his efforts.
Gable was mentioned along with Cary Grant and Tyrone Power by Etta Candy in a 1977 Hollywood-themed episode of ''Wonder Woman''.
Gable's on-location affair with Grace Kelly (1929–1982), who was young enough to be his daughter, gradually ended after filming was completed.
When he was six months old, his mother had him baptized as a Roman Catholic.
The 2003 album ''Give Up'' by electronic music group The Postal Service includes a song titled "Clark Gable".
Gable first worked mainly in supporting roles, often as the villain.
''Test Pilot'' (1938) gave Tracy a larger supporting part as the agonizing friend of Gable's glamorous pilot while ''Boom Town'' (1940) depicted an epic rivalry between Gable and Tracy's characters and their oil businesses.
Among trusted company, he would recite Shakespeare, particularly the sonnets.
Gary Cooper was Selznick's first choice.
On March 29, during a production break on ''Gone with the Wind'', Gable and Lombard were married in Kingman, Arizona, They purchased a  ranch previously owned by director Raoul Walsh in Encino, California, and made it their home.
When Cooper turned down the role of Butler, he was quoted as saying, "''Gone With the Wind'' is going to be the biggest flop in Hollywood history.
Gable remained friends with McDaniel, and he always attended her Hollywood parties, especially when she was raising funds during World War II.
Gable shifted his attentions to Marion Davies.
Arnold then informed Gable of his special assignment: to make a recruiting film in combat with the Eighth Air Force to recruit aerial gunners.
At 17, Clark Gable was inspired to be an actor after seeing the play ''The Bird of Paradise'', but he was not able to make a real start until he turned 21 and inherited some money.
In an interview with Louella Parsons, published soon after Gable's death, Kay Gable said, "It wasn't the physical exertion that killed him.
Victor (Fleming) tried everything with him.
Gable and McIntyre were immediately sent to Flexible Gunnery School at Tyndall Field, Florida, followed by a photography course at Fort George Wright, Washington State and promoted to first lieutenants upon its completion.
Gable started to receive television offers, but rejected them outright.
Studio chiefs struggled to cut costs.
In an episode of ''I Love Lucy'' entitled, "Harpo Marx" that was originally aired in 1955, Lucy Ricardo, portrayed by Lucille Ball, dressed-up as Gable to impress her friend, Carolyn Appleby, portrayed by Doris Singleton.
He put his whole heart into it."
It was the horrible tension, the eternal waiting, waiting, waiting.
His stepmother raised him to be well-dressed and well-groomed.
Marilyn Monroe attended his son's baptism.
Gable completed editing of the film ''Combat America'' in September 1944, giving the narration himself and making use of numerous interviews with enlisted gunners as focus of the film.
However, shortly after his enlistment, McIntyre and he were sent to Miami Beach, Florida, where they entered USAAF OCS Class 42-E on August 17, 1942.
Filming began in a tense atmosphere, but both Gable and director Frank Capra enjoyed making the movie.
Gable thrived being around Lombard's youthful, charming, and frank personality, once stating, "You can trust that little screwball with your life or your hopes or your weaknesses, and she wouldn't even know how to think about letting you down."
Butler's last line in ''Gone with the Wind'', "Frankly, my dear, I don't give a damn," is one of the most famous lines in movie history.
Screenwriter Larry Gelbart, as quoted by James Garner  once stated that Gable, "...would not go down with the submarine (referring to ''Run Silent, Run Deep'', where the movie ended differently from the book on which it was based), because Gable doesn't sink."
Gable spent most of 1943 in England at RAF Polebrook with the 351st Bomb Group.
Soon followed ''Never Let Me Go'' (1953), opposite Gene Tierney.
William Clark Gable was born in Cadiz, Ohio, to William Henry "Will" Gable (1870–1948), an oil-well driller, and his wife, Adeline (née Hershelman; 1869–1901).
However, she finally gave her biographer permission to include it, on the condition that the book not be published until after her death.
Studio head Louis B. Mayer lent him to Columbia for $2,500 per week, making a $500 per week profit.
Because his motion picture production schedule made it impossible for him to fulfill reserve officer duties, he resigned his commission on September 26, 1947, a week after the Air Force became an independent service branch.
Gable's military awards were the Distinguished Flying Cross, Air Medal, American Campaign Medal, European-African-Middle Eastern Campaign Medal, and World War II Victory Medal.
He did not tell her that he was her biological father.
She died when he was ten months old, possibly from a brain tumor.
Immediately after his discharge from the service, Gable returned to his ranch and rested.
His discharge papers were signed by Captain (later U.S. President) Ronald Reagan.
Will decided to settle his debts and try his hand at farming, and the family moved to Ravenna, Ohio, near Akron.
Gable also found success commercially and critically with films such as ''Red Dust'' (1932), ''Manhattan Melodrama'' (1934), ''San Francisco'' (1936), ''Saratoga'' (1937) ''Boom Town'' (1940), ''The Hucksters'' (1947), ''Homecoming'' (1948), and ''The Misfits'' (1961), which was his final screen appearance.
By all accounts, Gable got along well with his co-stars during filming.
She then returned to the United States to give birth to their daughter in Venice, California.
The dispute was resolved when Will Gable agreed to allow his son to spend time with his maternal uncle, Charles Hershelman, and his wife on their farm in Vernon Township, Pennsylvania.
She taught herself how to hunt and fish and accompanied Gable on trips with his hunting companions.
In 1924, with Dillon's financing, they went to Hollywood, where she became Gable's manager and first wife.
He found producing and acting to be too taxing on his health, and he was beginning to manifest a noticeable tremor, particularly in long takes.
Gable, along with Ava Gardner, appeared on the cover of Robin Gibb's second album ''How Old Are You?''
After a long period of training, Dillon considered him ready to attempt a film career.
By the morning of November 16 he seemed to be improving.
Neither Gable nor Young would ever publicly acknowledge their daughter's real parentage, but many people in Hollywood and in the general public believed that Gable was her father because of their very strong resemblance and the timing of her birth.
In 1930, Gable and Josephine Dillon were divorced.
His first two films in this new situation were ''Soldier of Fortune'' and ''The Tall Men'' (both 1955), which were profitable, although only modest successes.
The opening lines are: "Dear Mr. Gable, I am writing this to you, and I hope that you will read it so you'll know, my heart beats like a hammer, and I stutter and I stammer, every time I see you at the picture show, I guess I'm just another fan of yours, and I thought I'd write and tell you so.
In February 1952, he attended a televised rally in New York where he enthusiastically urged General Dwight D. Eisenhower to run for president.
Later he took up brass instruments.
He hoped for another combat assignment, but when the invasion of Normandy came and went in June without any further orders, Gable was relieved from active duty as a major on June 12, 1944, at his request, since he was over-age for combat.
MGM's publicity manager Howard Strickling developed Gable's studio image, playing up his he-man experiences and his 'lumberjack in evening clothes' persona.
He built his fame and public visibility in such movies as ''A Free Soul'' (1931), in which he played a gangster who shoved the character played by Norma Shearer; Gable never played a supporting role again.
After moving to California, they were married again in 1931, possibly due to differences in state legal requirements.
A few days later, he married Texas socialite Maria Franklin Prentiss Lucas Langham, nicknamed "Rhea".
His acting coach was a theater manager in Portland, Josephine Dillon, who was 17 years his senior.
She had just finished her 57th movie, ''To Be or Not to Be'', and was on her way home from a successful war bond selling tour when the flight's DC-3 airliner crashed into a mountain near Las Vegas, Nevada, killing all 22 passengers aboard, including 15 servicemen en route to training in California.
In 1942, following Lombard's death, Gable joined the U.S. Army Air Forces.
Wallach, however, refrains from criticizing Gable, noting that he was professional and considerate in his behavior.
However, Gable and Garbo disliked each other.
Though his father insisted on Gable doing "manly" things, like hunting and hard physical work, Gable loved language.
Others have blamed Gable's crash diet before filming began.
Adolf Hitler favored Gable above all other actors.
The start of talking pictures and the beginning of the Great Depression caused cancellation of many plays in the 1929–30 season, and acting work became harder to get.
Gable has been portrayed in films by James Brolin in ''Gable and Lombard'' (1976), Larry Pennell in ''Marilyn: The Untold Story'' (1980), Edward Winter in ''Moviola: The Scarlett O'Hara War'' (1980), Boyd Holister in ''Grace Kelly'' (1983), Gary Wayne in ''Malice in Wonderland'' (1985), Gene Daily in ''The Rocketeer'' (1991), Bruce Hughes and Shayne Greenman in ''Blonde'' (2001), Charles Unwin in ''Lucy'' (2003), and Kyle MacLachlan in "Touch of Pink" (2004).
He tried to attack him on a professional level.
His salary from ''Gone with the Wind'' enabled him to reach a divorce settlement with Langham, however, on March 7, 1939.
In 1949, Gable married Sylvia Ashley, a British model and actress who was previously married to Douglas Fairbanks.
Studio head Louis B. Mayer was fired in 1951 amid slumping Hollywood production and revenue, due primarily to the rising popularity of television.
I said, 'You can do it, I know you can do it and you will be wonderful...' Well, by heaven, just before the cameras rolled, you could see the tears come up at his eyes and he played the scene unforgettably well.
In the ''Star Trek'' episode "The City on the Edge of Forever", Edith Keeler suggests that  she and James T. Kirk see the latest Clark Gable movie.
According to Lewis, Gable visited her home once, when she was 15, asked about her life, and kissed her on her forehead upon leaving.
MGM did not have a project ready for Gable and was paying him $2,000 per week, under his contract, to do nothing.
He received good reviews in Machinal; "He's young, vigorous and brutally masculine", wrote the critic at the The Morning Telegraph.
The next year, he landed his first leading Hollywood role and became a leading man in more than 60 motion pictures over the next three decades.
Despite being onscreen for only 17 minutes, the appearance immediately catapulted Tracy, whose career had floundered for years despite delivering superb performances in quality films, into major stardom in the wake of the picture becoming the year's biggest box-office attraction.
Gable was acclaimed for his performance in ''The Hucksters'' (1947), a satire of postwar Madison Avenue corruption and immorality.
He introduced his golf caddie Robert Wagner to MGM casting.
Gable was wary of potentially disappointing an audience that had decided that no one else could play the part.
This scene was well known while the film was popular, and viewers at the time likely recognized Bugs Bunny's behavior as satire.
After Joan Crawford's third divorce, Gable and she resumed their affair and lived together for a brief time.
His next two films were light comedies for Paramount: ''But Not for Me'' (1959) with Carroll Baker and ''It Started in Naples'' (1960) with Sophia Loren.
Gable was great friends with actress Hattie McDaniel, and he even slipped her a real alcoholic drink during the scene in which they were supposed to be celebrating the birth of Scarlett and Rhett's daughter.
In the raid on Germany, one crewman was killed and two others were wounded, and flak went through Gable's boot and narrowly missed his head.
Kayley is an actress, while Clark James is currently host of the nationally syndicated reality show ''Cheaters''.
He was named the seventh-greatest male star of classic American cinema by the American Film Institute.
Gable made a public statement after Lombard's death that prompted the Commanding General of the U.S. Army Air Forces Henry H. "Hap" Arnold to offer Gable a "special assignment" in aerial gunnery.
They raised chickens and horses, and had a menagerie of cats and dogs.
Ninety percent completed, the remaining scenes were filmed with long shots or the use of doubles like Mary Dees; Gable said that he felt as if he were "in the arms of a ghost".
She guided him in building up his chronically undernourished body, and taught him better body control and posture.
When word of this reached MGM, studio executives began to badger the Army Air Forces to reassign its most valuable screen actor to noncombat duty.
On November 6, 1960, Gable was sent to Hollywood Presbyterian Medical Center in Los Angeles, California, where doctors found that he had suffered a heart attack.
Harlow died during production of ''Saratoga''.
Gable was promoted to captain while he was with the 351st Bomb Group at Pueblo Army Air Base, Colorado, a rank commensurate with his position as a unit commander.
In 1955, Gable formed a production company with Jane Russell and her husband Bob Waterfield, and they produced ''The King and Four Queens'' (1956), Gable's only production.
She died on August 12, 2000, at the age of 87 of ovarian cancer.
Gable returned to their Encino ranch and carried out her funeral wishes as she had requested in her will.
"He had been devastated by Carole's death."
After several failed screen tests for Barrymore and Zanuck, Gable was signed in 1930 by MGM's Irving Thalberg.
He found work as an extra in such silent films as Erich von Stroheim's ''The Merry Widow'' (1925), ''The Plastic Age'' (1925), which starred Clara Bow, ''Forbidden Paradise'' (1924), starring Pola Negri, plus a series of two-reel comedies called ''The Pacemakers''.
Bugs Bunny's nonchalant carrot-chewing standing position, as explained by Chuck Jones, Friz Freleng, and Bob Clampett, originated in a scene in the film ''It Happened One Night'', in which Clark Gable's character leans against a fence, eating carrots rapidly and talking with his mouth full to Claudette Colbert's character.
Nineteen months after the birth, Young claimed to have adopted Judy.
Among those who knew of Gable's paternity, the pregnancy was widely assumed to be the result of an affair; however, in 2015, Linda Lewis, Young's daughter-in-law, stated publicly that Young had confided to her before her death that Gable had raped Young, and that, though the two had flirted on-set, there had been no affair.
In November 1943, Gable returned to the United States to edit his film, only to find that the personnel shortage of aerial gunners had already been rectified.
In 1930, after his impressive appearance as the seething and desperate character Killer Mears in the Los Angeles stage production of The Last Mile, Gable was offered a contract with MGM.
17-year-old Carole Lombard, later his third wife, also appeared as an extra in that film, although they were not in the same scene.
Olivia de Havilland made him cry, later commenting, "...Oh, he would not do it.
He then moved to New York City, and Dillon sought work for him on Broadway.
Gable reported to Biggs Army Air Base, Texas, on January 27, 1943, to train with and accompany the 351st Bomb Group to England as head of a six-man motion picture unit.
Having lost 20 pounds since the tragedy, Gable evidently was emotionally and physically devastated by it, but Turner stated that Gable remained a professional for the duration of filming.
Gable was not the first choice to play the lead role of Peter Warne in ''It Happened One Night'' (1934).
Gable became increasingly unhappy with what he considered mediocre roles offered him by MGM, while the studio regarded his salary as excessive.
The film was good enough to bring Gable more movie offers, including ''Run Silent, Run Deep'' (also 1958), with co-star and producer Burt Lancaster, which featured his first on-screen death since 1937, and which garnered good reviews.
He followed that with ''Susan Lenox (Her Fall and Rise)'' (1931) with Greta Garbo, and ''Possessed'' (1931), in which Crawford (then married to Douglas Fairbanks, Jr.) and he steamed up the screen.
Gable appeared opposite some of the most popular actresses of the time: Joan Crawford, who was his favorite actress to work with, was partnered with Gable in eight films, Myrna Loy worked with him seven times, and he was paired with Jean Harlow in six productions.
Gable's marriage in 1939 to his third wife, actress Carole Lombard (1908–1942), was the happiest period of his personal life.
'''William Clark Gable''' (February 1, 1901 – November 16, 1960) was an American film actor, often referred to as "The King of Hollywood" or just simply as "The King".
During one of the missions, Gable's aircraft was damaged by flak and attacked by fighters, which knocked out one of the engines and shot up the stabilizer.
"But he was never the same," said Esther Williams.
There was speculation that Gable's physically demanding role in ''The Misfits'' contributed to his sudden death soon after filming was completed.
Lombard, for her part, seemed to gain personal stability and a contented home life that she had previously lacked.
During the 1927–28 theater season, he acted with the Laskin Brothers Stock Company in Houston, Texas, where he played many roles, gained considerable experience, and became a local matinee idol.
Many critics regard Gable's performance to be his finest, and Gable, after seeing the rough cuts, agreed.
He also qualified for and received aerial gunner wings.
Loretta confirmed that she was her biological mother and Gable was her father.
John Clark had two children: Kayley Gable (born in 1986) and Clark James Gable (born September 20, 1988).
Joan Crawford asked for him as her co-star in ''Dance, Fools, Dance'' (1931).
Gable's timing in arriving in Hollywood was excellent, as MGM was looking to expand its stable of male stars and he fitted the bill.
Lombard had suggested that Gable enlist as part of the war effort, but MGM was reluctant to let him go, and he resisted the suggestion.
MGM had teamed Tracy with Gable every two years until Tracy finally insisted upon a star billing clause in his contract, ending any further Gable-Tracy collaborations.
In 1944, he became an early member of the conservative Motion Picture Alliance for the Preservation of American Ideals, alongside Ronald Reagan, John Wayne, Gary Cooper, and other conservative actors and filmmakers.
Examples include ''Have You Got Any Castles?''
Gable won the Academy Award for Best Actor for his performance in the film, and the movie won the Academy Award for Best Picture.
Gable has been criticized for altering critical aspects of a script when he felt that the script would not fit in with his image.
Jennie played the piano and gave her stepson lessons at home.
