The instruments currently used in most classical music were largely invented before the mid-19th century (often much earlier) and codified in the 18th and 19th centuries.
Students who listened to rock-and-roll or Country music had moderately lower scores.
From at least as early as the 13th century through the 15th century there was a division of instruments into ''haut'' (loud, shrill, outdoor instruments) and ''bas'' (quieter, more intimate instruments).
Yet the opposite trend—admiration of performers for new "interpretations" of the composer's work—can be seen, and it is not unknown for a composer to praise a performer for achieving a better realization of the original intent than the composer was able to imagine.
That said, the score does not provide complete and exact instructions on how to perform a historical work.
During the 1990s, several research papers and popular books wrote on what came to be called the "Mozart effect": an observed temporary, small elevation of scores on certain tests as a result of listening to Mozart's works.
In heavy metal, a number of lead guitarists (playing electric guitar) modeled their playing styles on Baroque or Classical era instrumental music, including Ritchie Blackmore and Randy Rhoads.
The 20th century calendar period (1901–2000) includes most of the early modern musical era (1890–1930), the entire high modern (mid 20th-century), and the first 25 years of the contemporary or postmodern musical era (1975–current).
The approach has been popularized in a book by Don Campbell, and is based on an experiment published in ''Nature'' suggesting that listening to Mozart temporarily boosted students' IQ by 8 to 9 points.
The modernist views hold that classical music is considered primarily a ''written'' musical tradition, preserved in music notation, as opposed to being transmitted orally, by rote, or by recordings of particular performances.
Contemporary classical music is the period that started in the mid-1970s to early 1990s, which includes different variations of modernist, postmodern, neoromantic, and pluralist music.
Some of the earliest cases of women being hired in professional orchestras was in the position of harpist.
The Renaissance era was from 1400 to 1600.
In the orchestra, the existing Classical instruments and sections were retained (string section, woodwinds, brass and percussion), but these sections were typically expanded to make a fuller, bigger sound.
The performer and the conductor have a range of options for musical expression and interpretation of a scored piece, including the phrasing of melodies, the time taken during fermatas (held notes) or pauses, and the use (or choice not to use) of effects such as vibrato or glissando (these effects are possible on various stringed, brass and woodwind instruments and with the human voice).
While double reeded instruments like the oboe and bassoon became somewhat standardized in the Baroque, the clarinet family of single reeds was not widely used until Mozart expanded its role in orchestral, chamber, and concerto settings.
These movements can then be further broken down into a hierarchy of smaller units: first sections, then periods, and finally phrases.
Some quotes that highlight this criticism of modernist overvaluing of the score:
Percussion instruments include the triangle, the Jew's harp, the tambourine, the bells, the rumble-pot, and various kinds of drums.
The key characteristic of classical music that distinguishes it from popular music and folk music is that the repertoire tends to be written down in musical notation, creating a musical part or score.
One major difference between Baroque music and the classical era that followed it is that the types of instruments used in ensembles were much less standardized.
'''Classical music''' is art music produced or rooted in the traditions of Western music, including both liturgical (religious) and secular music.
For example, the use of counterpoint and fugue, which is considered characteristic of the Baroque era (or period), was continued by Haydn, who is classified as typical of the Classical era.
Any sensitive musician going around the World has noted the same thing.
The major time divisions of classical music up to 1900 are the early music period, which includes Medieval (500–1400) and Renaissance (1400–1600) eras, and the Common practice period, which includes the Baroque (1600–1750), Classical (1750–1830) and Romantic (1804–1910) eras.
The symphony came into its own as a musical form, and the concerto was developed as a vehicle for displays of virtuoso playing skill.
Both classical and popular musicians have experimented in recent decades with electronic instruments such as the synthesizer, electric and digital techniques such as the use of sampled or computer-generated sounds, and instruments from other cultures such as the gamelan.
Many instruments originated during the Renaissance; others were variations of, or improvements upon, instruments that had existed previously.
Woodwinds included the Baroque flute, Baroque oboe, rackett, recorder and the bassoon.
*"... one of the most stubborn modern misconceptions concerning baroque music is that a metronomic regularity was intended" (Baroque Interpretation in ''Grove'' 5th edition by Robert Donington)
Keyboard instruments included the clavichord, tangent piano, the fortepiano (an early version of the piano), the harpsichord and the pipe organ.
The third horn in the "Eroica" Symphony arrives to provide not only some harmonic flexibility, but also the effect of "choral" brass in the Trio.
On the other hand, instruments such as the acoustic guitar, once associated mainly with popular music, gained prominence in classical music in the 19th and 20th centuries in the form of the classical guitar.
The music became more chromatic, dissonant, and tonally colorful, with tensions (with respect to accepted norms of the older forms) about key signatures increasing.
The study further indicated that students who used classical music during the course of study had a significant leap in their academic performance; whereas, those who listened to other types of music had significantly lowered academic scores.
Gustav Mahler's 1906 ''Symphony No.
While some Baroque instruments fell into disuse (e.g., the theorbo and rackett), many Baroque instruments were changed into the versions that are still in use today, such as the Baroque violin (which became the violin), the Baroque oboe (which became the oboe) and the Baroque trumpet, which transitioned to the regular valved trumpet.
The central norms of this tradition became codified between 1550 and 1900, which is known as the common practice period.
In 1996/97, a research study was conducted on a large population of middle age students in the Cherry Creek School District in Denver, Colorado, USA.
Ancient Greek instruments such as the aulos (a reed instrument) and the lyre (a stringed instrument similar to a small harp) eventually led to the modern-day instruments of a classical orchestra.
Generally however, it is the composers who are remembered more than the performers.
*"Too many teachers, conditioned to 20th Century ideas, teach Bach and other Baroque music exactly the wrong way.
While a more accurate term is also used to refer to the period from 1750 to 1820 (the Classical period), this article is about the broad span of time from roughly the 11th century to the present day, which includes the Classical period and various other periods.
The operative word most associated with it is "innovation" .
The size of the orchestra (typically around 40 in the Classical era) grew to be over 100.
Stringed instruments such as the viol had emerged by the 16th century, as had a wider variety of brass and reed instruments.
This popularized version of the theory was expressed succinctly by the ''New York Times'' music columnist Alex Ross: "researchers... have determined that listening to Mozart actually makes you smarter."
During the earlier medieval period, the vocal music from the liturgical genre, predominantly Gregorian chant, was monophonic, using a single, unaccompanied vocal melody line.
It was characterized by greater use of instrumentation, multiple interweaving melodic lines, and the use of the first bass instruments.
In 2012, women still made up just 6% of the orchestra's membership.
The same passages are often used by telephone call centres to induce a sense of calm in customers waiting in a queue.
Yet, even with the score providing the key elements of the music, there is considerable controversy about how to perform the works.
The "standard complement" of double winds and brass in the orchestra from the first half of the 19th century is generally attributed to Beethoven.
The invention of the movable-type printing press in the 15th century had far-reaching consequences on the preservation and transmission of music.
The ''opera buffa'', a form of comic opera, rose in popularity.
The last major orchestra to appoint a woman to a permanent position was the Berlin Philharmonic.
A 2014 BBC article stated that the "...introduction of 'blind' auditions, where a prospective instrumentalist performs behind a screen so that the judging panel can exercise no gender or racial prejudice, has seen the gender balance of traditionally male-dominated symphony orchestras gradually shift."
Electric instruments such as the amplified electric guitar, the electric bass and the ondes Martenot appear occasionally in the classical music of the 20th and 21st centuries.
Vocal music in the Renaissance is noted for the flourishing of an increasingly elaborate polyphonic style.
Some musicians and composers were the stars of the day; some, like Franz Liszt and Niccolò Paganini, fulfilled both roles.
Musical forms began to break from the Classical era forms (even as those were being codified), with free-form pieces like nocturnes, fantasias, and preludes being written where accepted ideas about the exposition and development of themes were ignored or minimized.
Baroque instruments included some instruments from the earlier periods (e.g., the hurdy-gurdy and recorder) and a number of new instruments (e.g, the cello, contrabass and fortepiano).
For instance, symphonies written during the Classical period are usually divided into four movements: (1) an opening Allegro in sonata form, (2) a slow movement, (3) a minuet or scherzo (in a triple meter, such as 3/4), and (4) a final Allegro.
They consist of the instruments found in an orchestra or in a concert band, together with several other solo instruments (such as the piano, harpsichord, and organ).
The tonalities of major and minor as means for managing dissonance and chromaticism in music took full shape.
The term "classical music" did not appear until the early 19th century, in an attempt to distinctly canonize the period from Johann Sebastian Bach to Beethoven as a golden age.
New woodwind instruments were added, such as the contrabassoon, bass clarinet and piccolo and new percussion instruments were added, including xylophones, snare drums, celestes (a bell-like keyboard instrument), bells, and triangles, large orchestral harps, and even wind machines for sound effects.
by Harold C. Schonberg)
The Medieval period includes music from after the fall of Rome to about 1400.
Another difference is that whereas most popular styles adopt the song (strophic) form, classical music has been noted for its development of highly sophisticated forms of instrumental music such as the concerto, symphony, sonata, and mixed vocal and instrumental styles such as opera which, since they are written down, can sustain larger forms and attain a high level of complexity.
Increasing interest in music by the growing middle classes throughout western Europe spurred the creation of organizations for the teaching, performance, and preservation of music.
The dates are generalizations, since the periods and eras overlap and the categories are somewhat arbitrary, to the point that some authorities reverse terminologies and refer to a common practice "era" comprising baroque, classical, and romantic "periods".
The concerto as a vehicle for solo performance accompanied by an orchestra became widespread, although the relationship between soloist and orchestra was relatively simple.
Similarly, movies and television often revert to standard, clichéd excerpts of classical music to convey refinement or opulence: some of the most-often heard pieces in this category include Bach´s Cello Suite No.
Many instruments that in the 2010s are associated with popular music filled important roles in early classical music, such as bagpipes, vihuelas, hurdy-gurdies (hand-cranked string instruments), and some woodwind instruments.
Monophonic chant, also called plainsong or Gregorian chant, was the dominant form until about 1100.
Towards the end of the period, the early dramatic precursors of opera such as monody, the madrigal comedy, and the intermedio are seen.
Medieval instruments included the wood flute (which in the 21st century is made of metal), the recorder and plucked string instruments like the lute.
The written quality of the music has enabled a high level of complexity within them: J.S.
Opera as a staged musical drama began to differentiate itself from earlier musical and dramatic forms, and vocal forms like the cantata and oratorio became more common.
In television commercials, several passages have become clichéd, particularly the opening of Richard Strauss' ''Also sprach Zarathustra'' (made famous in the film ''2001: A Space Odyssey'') and the opening section "O Fortuna" of Carl Orff's ''Carmina Burana'', often used in the horror genre; other examples include the ''Dies Irae'' from the Verdi Requiem, Edvard Grieg's ''In the Hall of the Mountain King'' from ''Peer Gynt'', the opening bars of Beethoven's Symphony No.
should play the chords, which are not notated in the part (only a figured bass symbol beneath the bass part is used to guide the chord-playing performer).
This is left to the discretion of the performers, who are guided by their personal experience and musical education, their knowledge of the work's idiom, their personal artistic tastes, and the accumulated body of historic performance practices.
Mike Manthei and Steve N. Kelly of the University of Nebraska at Omaha; Donald A. Hodges and Debra S. O'Connell of the University of North Carolina at Greensboro; etc.)
The Ninth asks for a second pair of horns, for reasons similar to the "Eroica" (four horns has since become standard); Beethoven's use of piccolo, contrabassoon, trombones, and untuned percussion—plus chorus and vocal soloists—in his finale, are his earliest suggestion that the timbral boundaries of symphony should be expanded.
It is in this time that the notation of music on a staff and other elements of musical notation began to take shape.
Some instruments from previous eras fell into disuse, such as the shawm and the wooden cornet.
The use of written notation also preserves a record of the works and enables Classical musicians to perform music from many centuries ago.
Baroque-era stringed instruments such as fretted, bowed viols were phased out.
Many of the instruments used to perform medieval music still exist, but in different forms.
During the classical era, Mozart and Beethoven often improvised the cadenzas to their piano concertos (and thereby encouraged others to do so), but they also provided written cadenzas for use by other soloists.
The music of the Romantic era, from roughly the first decade of the 19th century to the early 20th century, was characterized by increased attention to an extended melodic line, as well as expressive and emotional elements, paralleling romanticism in other art forms.
This training may be from private lessons from instrument or voice teachers or from completion of a formal program offered by a Conservatory, college or university, such as a B.mus.
The common practice period is when many of the ideas that make up western classical music took shape, standardized, or were codified.
The earliest reference to "classical music" recorded by the ''Oxford English Dictionary'' is from about 1836.
Vocal developments in the Baroque era included the development of opera types such as opera seria and opéra comique, oratorios, cantatas and chorale.
For more information, see Improvisation.
The exceptions to this are his Symphony No.
In opera, vocal soloists and choirs perform staged dramatic works with an orchestra providing accompaniment.
As in the modern day, instruments may be classified as brass, strings, percussion, and woodwind.
The Classical era, from about 1750 to 1820, established many of the norms of composition, presentation, and style, and was also when the piano became the predominant keyboard instrument.
The high-modern era saw the emergence of neo-classical and serial music.
Promoters marketed CDs claimed to induce the effect.
Although Bach did not use equal temperament, as a modern piano is generally tuned, changes in the temperaments from the meantone system, common at the time, to various temperaments that made modulation between all keys musically acceptable, made possible Bach's ''Well-Tempered Clavier''.
Brass instruments included the buccin, the ophicleide (a replacement for the bass serpent, which was the precursor of the tuba) and the natural horn.
This score typically determines details of rhythm, pitch, and, where two or more musicians (whether singers or instrumentalists) are involved, how the various parts are coordinated.
While appearing only as featured solo instruments in some works, for example Maurice Ravel's orchestration of Modest Mussorgsky's ''Pictures at an Exhibition'' and Sergei Rachmaninoff's ''Symphonic Dances'', the saxophone is included in other works, such as Ravel's ''Boléro'', Sergei Prokofiev's Romeo and Juliet Suites 1 and 2 and many other works as a member of the orchestral ensemble.
Previously, improvisation (in preludes, cadenzas and ornaments), rhythmic flexibility (e.g., tempo rubato), improvisatory deviation from the score and oral tradition of playing was integral to the style.
During the Classical era, the stringed instruments used in orchestra and chamber music such as string quartets were standardized as the four instruments which form the string section of the orchestra: the violin, viola, cello and double bass.
Abbey Philips states that "during the 20th century the women who were composing/playing gained far less attention than their male counterparts."
Brass instruments took on larger roles, as the introduction of rotary valves made it possible for them to play a wider range of notes.
and others who had significant results through the discourse of their work.
Some critics express the opinion that it is only from the mid-19th century, and especially in the 20th century, that the score began to hold such a high significance.
In April 1996, the orchestra's press secretary wrote that "compensating for the expected leaves of absence" of maternity leave would be a problem.
It is high time these misconceptions are addressed with academic rigour."
Beethoven carefully calculated the expansion of this particular timbral "palette" in Symphonies 3, 5, 6, and 9 for an innovative effect.
Certain staples of classical music are often used commercially (either in advertising or in movie soundtracks).
Modern music is a philosophical and aesthetic stance underlying the period of change and development in musical language that occurred from 1890 to 1930, a period of diverse reactions in challenging and reinterpreting older categories of music, innovations that lead to new ways of organizing and approaching harmonic, melodic, sonic, and rhythmic aspects of music, and changes in aesthetic worldviews in close relation to the larger identifiable period of modernism in the arts of the time.
The ''basic'' forces required for an orchestra became somewhat standardized (although they would grow as the potential of a wider array of instruments was developed in the following centuries).
Its written transmission, along with the veneration bestowed on certain classical works, has led to the expectation that performers will play a work in a way that realizes in detail the original intentions of the composer.
Its leading feature is a "linguistic plurality", which is to say that no single music genre ever assumed a dominant position .
Citron "examines the practices and attitudes that have led to the exclusion of women composers from the received 'canon' of performed musical works."
Moreover, formal training is not unique to the classical genre.
Very little music survives from this time, most of it from ancient Greece.
Bach's fugues, for instance, achieve a remarkable marriage of boldly distinctive melodic lines weaving in counterpoint yet creating a coherent harmonic logic that would be impossible in the heat of live improvisation.
This section is about the more specific meaning.
Many rock and pop musicians have completed degrees in commercial music programs such as those offered by the Berklee College of Music and many jazz musicians have completed degrees in music from universities with jazz programs, such as the Manhattan School of Music and McGill University.
Others have more or less equated postmodern music with the "contemporary music" composed from the late 20th century through to the early 21st century.
As well, early versions of the organ, fiddle (or vielle), and trombone (called the sackbut) existed.
Improvisation is also an important aspect in authentic performances of operas of Baroque era and of bel canto (especially operas of Vincenzo Bellini), and is best exemplified by the ''da capo aria'', a form by which famous singers typically perform variations of the thematic matter of the aria in the recapitulation section ('B section' / the 'da capo' part).
A wider array of percussion instruments began to appear.
During the Classical era, some virtuoso soloists would improvise the cadenza sections of a concerto.
The written score, however, does not usually contain explicit instructions as to how to interpret the piece in terms of production or performance, apart from directions for dynamics, tempo and expression (to a certain extent).
A remnant of this improvisatory tradition in classical music can be heard in the cadenza, a passage found mostly in concertos and solo works, designed to allow skilled performers to exhibit their virtuoso skills on the instrument.
The term "classical music" has two meanings: the broader meaning includes all Western art music from the Medieval era to the 2000s, and the specific meaning refers to the art music from the 1750s to the early 1830s—the era of Mozart and Haydn.
Simple pipe organs existed, but were largely confined to churches, although there were portable varieties.
Pythagoras created a tuning system and helped to codify musical notation.
Wind instruments became more refined in the Classical era.
Florida passed a law requiring toddlers in state-run schools to listen to classical music every day, and in 1998 the governor of Georgia budgeted $105,000 per year to provide every child born in Georgia with a tape or CD of classical music.
Musical notation enables 2000s-era performers to sing a choral work from the 1300s Renaissance era or a 1700s Baroque concerto with many of the features of the music (the melodies, lyrics, forms, and rhythms) being reproduced.
The major time divisions of Western art music are as follows: the early music period, which includes the Medieval (500–1400) and the Renaissance (1400–1600) eras; the Common practice period, which includes the Baroque (1600–1750), Classical (1750–1820), and Romantic eras (1804–1910); and the 20th century (1901–2000) which includes the modern (1890–1930) that overlaps from the late 19th-century, the high modern (mid 20th-century), and contemporary or postmodern (1975–present) eras.
This leads to what musicologist Sol Babitz calls 'sewing machine Bach'."
In the "...''Concise Oxford History of Music'', Clara Shumann  is one of the only  female composers mentioned."
Improvisation once played an important role in classical music.
Instead, musicians tend to use just the score to play music.
The 21st century has so far been characterized by a continuation of the contemporary/postmodern musical era.
Western staff notation is used by composers to indicate to the performer the pitches (e.g., melodies, basslines, chords), tempo, meter and rhythms for a piece of music.
Social dancing became more widespread, so musical forms appropriate to accompanying dance began to standardize.
The Open Goldberg Variations project released a braille format into the public domain that can be used to produce paper or electronic scores, Braille e-books, for blind people.
In the 19th century, musical institutions emerged from the control of wealthy patrons, as composers and musicians could construct lives independent of the nobility.
The research further indicated that students who listened to the music prior to an examination also had positively elevated achievement scores.
The composer's instrumentation usually included paired flutes, oboes, clarinets, bassoons, horns and trumpets.
The principal liturgical forms which endured throughout the entire Renaissance period were masses and motets, with some other developments towards the end, especially as composers of sacred music began to adopt secular forms (such as the madrigal) for their own designs.
The vocal practices changed over the classical period, from the single line monophonic Gregorian chant done by monks in the Medieval period to the complex, polyphonic choral works of the Renaissance and subsequent periods, which used multiple independent vocal melodies at the same time.
Historically, major professional orchestras have been mostly or entirely composed of male musicians.
The study showed that students who actively listen to classical music before studying had higher academic scores.
VPO president Clemens Hellsberg said the VPO now uses completely screened blind auditions.
During the 19th century the details that composers put in their scores generally increased.
Whereas a classical era string quartet consists almost exclusively of two violins, a viola and a cello, a Baroque group accompanying a soloist or opera could include one of several different types of keyboard instruments (e.g., pipe organ, harpsichord, or clavichord), additional stringed chordal instruments (e.g., a lute) and an unspecified number of bass instruments performing the basso continuo bassline, including bowed strings, woodwinds and brass instruments (e.g., a cello, contrabass, viol, bassoon, serpent, etc.
Numerous examples show influence in the opposite direction, including popular songs based on classical music, the use to which ''Pachelbel's Canon'' has been put since the 1970s, and the musical crossover phenomenon, where classical musicians have achieved success in the popular music arena.
However, there are characteristics that classical music contains that few or no other genres of music contain, such as the use of a printed score and the performance of very complex instrumental works (e.g., the fugue).
As well, in the Baroque era, many works that were designed for basso continuo accompaniment do not specify which instruments should play the accompaniment or exactly how the chordal instrument (harpsichord, lute, etc.)
I'm all for exposing children to wonderful cultural experiences.
During the Baroque era, keyboard music played on the harpsichord and pipe organ became increasingly popular, and the violin family of stringed instruments took the form generally seen today.
5, Wagner's ''Ride of the Valkyries'' from ''Die Walküre'', Rimsky-Korsakov's ''Flight of the Bumblebee'', and excerpts of Aaron Copland's ''Rodeo''.
degree (which includes individual lessons from professors).
The use of musical notation is an effective method for transmitting classical music, since the written music contains the technical instructions for performing the work.
Stringed instruments included the viol, the harp-like lyre, the hurdy-gurdy, the cittern and the lute.
Composers of classical music have often made use of folk music (music created by musicians who are commonly not classically trained, often from a purely oral tradition).
Performance of classical music repertoire requires a proficiency in sight-reading and ensemble playing, harmonic principles, strong ear training (to correct and adjust pitches by ear), knowledge of performance practice (e.g., Baroque ornamentation), and a familiarity with the style/musical idiom expected for a given composer or musical work (e.g., a Brahms symphony or a Mozart concerto).
There was also a rise, especially toward the end of the era, of nationalism in music (echoing, in some cases, political sentiments of the time), as composers such as Edvard Grieg, Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov, and Antonín Dvořák echoed traditional music of their homelands in their compositions.
Printing enabled the standardization of descriptions and specifications of instruments, as well as instruction in their use.
Some of this controversy relates to the fact that this score-centric approach has led to performances that emphasize metrically strict block-rhythms (just as the music is notated in the score).
In opera, the practice of singing strictly by the score, i.e.
The conservatories, from Moscow and Leningrad to Juilliard, Curtis and Indiana, are producing a standardized product.... clarity, undeviating rhythm, easy technique, 'musicianship'.
Saxophones appear in some scores from the late 19th century onwards.
During the Classical era, the composer-performer Mozart was noted for his ability to improvise melodies in different styles.
For several decades after he died, symphonic instrumentation was faithful to Beethoven's well-established model, with few exceptions.
Given the wide range of styles in classical music, from Medieval plainchant sung by monks to Classical and Romantic symphonies for orchestra from the 1700s and 1800s to avant-garde atonal compositions for solo piano from the 1900s, it is difficult to list characteristics that can be attributed to all works of that type.
An example is Beverly Sills' complex, albeit pre-written, variation of ''Da tempeste il legno infranto'' from Händel's ''Giulio Cesare''.
Woodwinds included the basset clarinet, basset horn, clarinette d'amour, the Classical clarinet, the chalumeau, the flute, oboe and bassoon.
''History of Metaphysics'' by Andrew Pyle
As of 2013, the orchestra has six female members; one of them, violinist Albena Danailova became one of the orchestra's concertmasters in 2008, the first woman to hold that position.
Some have survived to the present day; others have disappeared, only to be recreated in order to perform music of the period on authentic instruments.
("Music Schools Turning out Robots?"
Piccolo, contrabassoon, and trombones add to the triumphal finale of his Symphony No.
The theories surrounding equal temperament began to be put in wider practice, especially as it enabled a wider range of chromatic possibilities in hard-to-tune keyboard instruments.
However, many concert bands use a double bass.
Many symphony orchestras date their founding to this era.
The key Baroque instruments for strings included the violin, viol, viola, viola d'amore, cello, contrabass, lute, theorbo (which often played the basso continuo parts), mandolin, cittern, Baroque guitar, harp and hurdy-gurdy.
Keyboard instruments included the clavichord and the fortepiano.
As well, while professional orchestras and pop bands all around the world tune to an A fixed at 440&nbsp;Hz in the 2010s, during the 17th and 18th century, there was a great variety in the tuning pitch, as attested to in historical pipe organs that still exist.
''come scritto'', was famously propagated by soprano Maria Callas, who called this practice 'straitjacketing' and implied that it allows the intention of the composer to be understood better, especially during studying the music for the first time.
The symphony orchestra is the most widely known medium for classical music and includes members of the string, woodwind, brass, and percussion families of instruments.
Musicologist Marcia Citron has asked "why is music composed by women so marginal to the standard 'classical' repertoire?"
As late as February 1996, the Vienna Philharmonic's principal flute, Dieter Flury, told ''Westdeutscher Rundfunk'' that accepting women would be "gambling with the emotional unity () that this organism currently has".
But I do think the money could be better spent on music education programs."
Shawn Vancour argues that the commercialization of classical music in the early 20th century may have harmed the music industry through inadequate representation.
The antecedent to the early period was the era of ancient music before the fall of the Roman Empire (476 AD).
Finally, "after being held up to increasing ridicule even in socially conservative Austria, members of the orchestra gathered on 28 February 1997 in an extraordinary meeting on the eve of their departure and agreed to admit a woman, Anna Lelkes, as harpist."
