He was also easily swayed.
Claudius' extant letters, speeches, and sayings were incorporated into the text (mostly in the second book, ''Claudius the God''), to add authenticity.
Besides which, he was the half-brother of Valeria Messalina and at this time those wounds were still fresh.
Polio does not explain many of the described symptoms, however, and a more recent theory implicates cerebral palsy as the cause, as outlined by Ernestine Leon.
He left after 16 days, but remained in the provinces for some time.
During his reign, Claudius revived the rumor that his father Drusus was actually the illegitimate son of Augustus, to give the appearance that Augustus was Claudius' paternal grandfather.
He proposed a reform of the Latin alphabet by the addition of three new letters, two of which served the function of the modern letters ''W'' and ''Y''.
They were in a position where they needed to shore up their legitimacy, but also justify the fall of the Julio-Claudians.
Antonia referred to him as a monster, and used him as a standard for stupidity.
A tunnel was dug through the lake bed, but the plan was a failure.
These were on a number of topics, everything from medical advice to moral judgments.
His state cult in Rome probably continued until the abolition of all such cults of dead Emperors by Maximinus Thrax in 237–238.
At the Circus Maximus, the turning posts and starting stalls were replaced in marble and embellished, and an embankment was probably added to prevent flooding of the track.
(He even jokes about how the Senate had admitted members from beyond Gallia Narbonensis (Lyons, France), i.e.
He later divorced her after the marriage became a political liability, although Leon (1948) suggests it may have been due to emotional and mental abuse by Paetina.
Several coup attempts were made during Claudius' reign, resulting in the deaths of many senators.
The draining of the lake was revisited many times in history, including by Emperors Trajan and Hadrian, and Holy Roman Emperor Frederick II in the Middle Ages.
This again suggests the political nature of his exclusion from public life.
He kept the honorific "Germanicus" to display the connection with his heroic brother.
Commemorative coins were issued of Claudius and his son Britannicus, who had been a friend of the Emperor Titus (Titus was born in 39, Britannicus was born in 41).
Despite his lack of experience, Claudius proved to be an able and efficient administrator.
The Stoic Seneca states in his ''Apocolocyntosis'' that Claudius' voice belonged to no land animal, and that his hands were weak as well.
Some modern scholars claim the near universality of the accusations in ancient texts lends credence to the crime.
Tacitus uses Claudius' arguments for the orthographical innovations mentioned above and may have used him for some of the more antiquarian passages in his annals.
In 46, Asinius Gallus, the grandson of Asinius Pollio, and Titus Statilius Taurus Corvinus were exiled for a plot hatched with several of Claudius' own freedmen.
Many of Claudius' less solid supporters quickly became Nero's men.
Suetonius states that a total of 35 senators and 300 knights were executed for offenses during Claudius' reign.
Some historians, particularly Josephus, claim that Claudius was directed in his actions by the Judaean King Herod Agrippa.
He expelled foreign astrologers, and at the same time rehabilitated the old Roman soothsayers (known as haruspices) as a replacement.
Expectations about his future began to increase.
Callistus became secretary of justice.
Claudius married four times, after two failed betrothals.
The secretariat was divided into bureaus, with each being placed under the leadership of one freedman.
He struck the names of many senators and equites who no longer met qualifications, but showed respect by allowing them to resign in advance.
Agrippina had motive in ensuring the succession of Nero before Britannicus could gain power.
Shortly after, a large rebellion was undertaken by the Senator Vinicianus and Scribonianus, the governor of Dalmatia and gained quite a few senatorial supporters.
Graves's two books were the basis for a British television adaptation ''I, Claudius'', produced by the BBC.
He was seen as vulnerable throughout his reign, particularly by elements of the nobility.
They took the side of the Senate in most conflicts with the Princeps, invariably viewing him as being in the wrong.
This carried on to the point where Claudius openly lamented his bad wives, and began to comment on Britannicus' approaching manhood with an eye towards restoring his status within the imperial family.
During their marriage she gave birth to a son, Claudius Drusus.
He had strong opinions about the proper form for state religion.
When the Arch of Pavia was erected to honor the Imperial clan in 8 BC, Claudius' name (now Tiberius Claudius Nero Germanicus after his elevation to paterfamilias of Claudii Nerones on the adoption of his brother) was inscribed on the edge—past the deceased princes, Gaius and Lucius, and Germanicus' children.
Modern historians have used this to determine the nature of his politics and of the aborted chapters of his civil war history.
He was granted the honorific "Britannicus" but only accepted it on behalf of his son, never using the title himself.
After the death of Tiberius the new emperor Caligula (the son of Claudius' brother Germanicus) recognized Claudius to be of some use.
In 1937, director Josef von Sternberg attempted a film version of ''I, Claudius'', with Charles Laughton as Claudius.
Claudius also reinforced or extended the seating rules that reserved front seating at the Circus for senators.
Since Claudius was the first Emperor proclaimed on the initiative of the Praetorian Guard instead of the Senate, his repute suffered at the hands of commentators (such as Seneca).
Agrippina and Claudius had become more combative in the months leading up to his death.
He expanded the Claudian tunnel to three times its original size.
The most far-reaching conquest was the conquest of Britannia''.
Soon after (possibly in 28), Claudius married Aelia Paetina, a relative of Sejanus, if not Sejanus's adoptive sister.
Claudius rebuilt Pompey's Theatre after it had been destroyed by fire, organising special fights at the re-dedication which he observed from a special platform in the orchestra box.
The surviving reels were featured in the BBC documentary ''The Epic That Never Was'' (1965).
His books were lost first, as their antiquarian subjects became unfashionable.
According to Cassius Dio Claudius became very sickly and thin by the end of Caligula's reign, most likely due to stress.
Regardless of the extent of their political power, the freedmen did manage to amass wealth through their positions.
Another plot involved the consulars Lusiius Saturninus, Cornelius Lupus, and Pompeius Pedo.
Some implicate either his taster Halotus, his doctor Xenophon, or the infamous poisoner Locusta as the administrator of the fatal substance.
He fled to the palace to hide.
He stammered and his speech was confused.
The Senate quickly met and began debating a change of government, but this eventually devolved into an argument over which of them would be the new ''princeps''.
Among these was a large canal leading from the Rhine to the sea, as well as a road from Italy to Germany&nbsp;– both begun by his father, Drusus.
He officially instituted the change during his censorship but they did not survive his reign.
Claudius himself travelled to the island after the completion of initial offensives, bringing with him reinforcements and elephants.
The ancient historians allege that Messalina was a nymphomaniac who was regularly unfaithful to Claudius — Tacitus states she went so far as to compete with a prostitute to see who could have the most sexual partners in a night — and manipulated his policies in order to amass wealth.
The series starred Derek Jacobi as Claudius and was broadcast in 1976 on BBC2.
Administration of many of the empire's financial concerns was turned over to Imperial appointees and freedmen.
The attempted coup d'état by Silius and Messalina had probably made Claudius realize the weakness of his position as a member of the Claudian but not the Julian family.
One of the more famous edicts concerned the status of sick slaves.
Claudius was constantly forced to shore up his position; this resulted in the deaths of many senators.
The best known fictional representation of the Emperor Claudius were the books ''I, Claudius'' and ''Claudius the God'' (published in 1934 and 1935) by Robert Graves, both written in the first-person to give the reader the impression that they are Claudius' autobiography.
There is no evidence that the character of Claudius' policies and edicts changed with the rise and fall of the various freedmen, suggesting that he was firmly in control throughout.
This was partly due to the ongoing hostility of the Senate, as mentioned above, but also due to his respect for the senators.
Agrippina had sent away Narcissus shortly before Claudius' death, and now murdered the freedman.
Tourette syndrome has also been considered a possibility.
Furthermore, masters who chose to kill slaves rather than take care of them were liable to be charged with murder.
It was finally achieved by the Prince Torlonia in the 19th century, producing over  of new arable land.
Claudius ruled that slaves who were thus abandoned and recovered after such treatment would be free.
Britain was an attractive target for Rome because of its material wealth&nbsp;– particularly mines and slaves.
The 1975 TV Special ''Further Up Pompeii!''
Claudius' infirmity probably saved him from the fate of many other nobles during the purges of Tiberius and Caligula's reigns; potential enemies did not see him as a serious threat.
He deified his paternal grandmother Livia to highlight her position as wife of the divine Augustus.
In 47 he assumed the office of ''censor'' with Lucius Vitellius, which had been allowed to lapse for some time.
Nevertheless, many in the Senate remained hostile to Claudius, and many plots were made on his life.
Sources disagree as to whether or not she divorced the Emperor first, and whether the intention was to usurp the throne.
Graves employed a fictive artifice to suggest that they were recently discovered, genuine translations of Claudius' writings.
This is when many of his religious reforms took effect, and his building efforts greatly increased during his tenure.
Eventually Nero stopped referring to his deified adoptive father at all, and realigned with his birth family.
This feud dated back to Agrippina's mother's actions against Tiberius after the death of her husband Germanicus (Claudius's brother), actions which Tiberius had gladly punished.
It ultimately failed because of the reluctance of Scribonianus' troops, which led to the suicide of the main conspirators.
As a person, ancient historians described Claudius as generous and lowbrow, a man who sometimes lunched with the plebeians.
His work as a budding historian damaged his prospects for advancement in public life.
The second was to Livia Medullina, which ended with Medullina's sudden death on their wedding day.
Adoption of adults or near adults was an old tradition in Rome, when a suitable natural adult heir was unavailable as was the case during Britannicus' minority.
In literature, Claudius and his contemporaries appear in the historical novel ''The Roman'' by Mika Waltari.
Under Claudius, the Empire underwent its first major expansion since the reign of Augustus.
Besides the history of Augustus' reign that caused him so much grief, his major works included an Etruscan history and eight volumes on Carthaginian history, as well as an Etruscan dictionary and a book on dice playing.
The influence of historical study on Claudius is obvious.
Claudius requested office once more and was snubbed.
The 1954 film ''Demetrius and the Gladiators'' also portrayed him sympathetically, played by Barry Jones.
He restored lost days to festivals and got rid of many extraneous celebrations added by Caligula.
On 24 January 41, Caligula was assassinated in a broad-based conspiracy involving the Praetorian commander Cassius Chaerea and several senators.
In the chaos following the murder, Claudius witnessed the German guard cut down several uninvolved noblemen, including many of his friends.
Since these were important positions, the senators were aghast at their being placed in the hands of former slaves.
The resultant flood washed out a large gladiatorial exhibition held to commemorate the opening, causing Claudius to run for his life along with the other spectators.
When angered or stressed, his symptoms became worse.
He allowed the Senate to issue its own bronze coinage for the first time since Augustus.
Plautia Urgulanilla was the granddaughter of Livia's confidant Urgulania.
Only members of the Imperial family were allowed such honours, but Claudius subsequently lifted this restriction for some of his conquering generals.
According to Vincent Scramuzza and others, Claudius began work on a history of the Civil Wars that was either too truthful or too critical of Octavian—then reigning as Augustus Caesar.
The historian Tacitus suggests that Claudius's ongoing term as Censor may have prevented him from noticing the affair before it reached such a critical point.
However, as this was also the period during which the power and terror of the commander of the Praetorian Guard, Sejanus, was at its peak, Claudius chose to downplay this possibility.
However, if they showed treasonous inclinations, the Emperor did punish them with just force, as in the case of Polybius and Pallas' brother, Felix.
Claudius himself claimed that he had exaggerated his ailments to save his life.
During his reign the Empire began the conquest of Britain (if the earlier invasions of Britain by Caesar and Caligula's aborted attempts are not counted).
Faustus Cornelius Sulla Felix, who was married to Claudius's daughter Claudia Antonia, was only descended from Octavia and Antony on one side&nbsp;– not close enough to the Imperial family to prevent doubts (although that did not stop others from making him the object of a coup attempt against Nero a few years later).
Needless to say, the responses to these conspiracies could not have helped Senate-emperor relations.
This indicates a deep knowledge of a variety of historical subjects that he could not help but share.
Claudius opposed proselytizing in any religion, even in those regions where he allowed natives to worship freely.
They also requested that Claudius be allowed to debate in the Senate.
According to Suetonius, Agrippina won out through her feminine wiles.
These colonies were often made out of existing communities, especially those with elites who could rally the populace to the Roman cause.
Because of the circumstances of his accession, Claudius took great pains to please the Senate.
Having a personal interest in law, he presided at public trials, and issued up to twenty edicts a day.
He emphasized the Eleusinian mysteries which had been practiced by so many during the Republic.
Despite this, Caligula relentlessly tormented his uncle: playing practical jokes, charging him enormous sums of money, humiliating him before the Senate, and the like.
The extant works of Claudius present a different view, painting a picture of an intelligent, scholarly, well-read, and conscientious administrator with an eye to detail and justice.
It was also a haven for Gallic rebels and the like, and so could not be left alone much longer.
He was also an ambitious builder, constructing many new roads, aqueducts, and canals across the Empire.
His maternal grandparents were Mark Antony and Octavia Minor, Augustus' sister, and he was therefore the great-great grandnephew of Gaius Julius Caesar.
At Augustus' death, the ''equites'', or knights, chose Claudius to head their delegation.
A member of the Julio-Claudian dynasty, he was the son of Drusus and Antonia Minor.
He re-instituted old observances and archaic language.
His mother and grandmother quickly put a stop to it, and this may have convinced them that Claudius was not fit for public office.
Seneca's Apocolocyntosis reinforces the view of Claudius as an unpleasant fool and this remained the official view for the duration of Nero's reign.
Augustus' excuse was that the interval for the games was 110 years, not 100, but his date actually did not qualify under either reasoning.
After his death in 54 AD (at age of 63), his grand-nephew and adopted son Nero succeeded him as Emperor.
Annual games were also held in honour of his accession, and took place at the Praetorian camp where Claudius had first been proclaimed Emperor.
Claudius was born on 1 August 10 BC at Lugdunum (modern Lyon, France).
Suetonius quotes Claudius' autobiography once and must have used it as a source numerous times.
Similarly, any freedmen found to be laying false claim to membership of the Roman equestrian order were sold back into slavery.
Since Claudius (like most of the members of his dynasty) harshly criticized his predecessors and relatives in surviving speeches, it is not hard to imagine the nature of Suetonius' charge.
When Nero's Golden House was burned, the Temple of Claudius was finally completed on the Caelian Hill.
Claudius also presided over many new and original events.
As a result, Claudius reduced the Senate's power for the sake of efficiency.
The speech is meticulous in details, a common mark of all his extant works, and he goes into long digressions on related matters.
The tunnel was crooked and not large enough to carry the water, which caused it to back up when opened.
He was born at Lugdunum in Gaul, the first Roman Emperor to be born outside Italy.
He could not be trusted to toe the existing party line.
There is also a reference to Claudius' suppression of a coup in the movie ''Gladiator'', though the incident is entirely fictional.
Anne Thomopoulos and Jane Tranter, producers of the popular HBO–BBC2 ''Rome'' miniseries, are attached to the new ''I, Claudius'' project.
When they heard of the Praetorians' claim, they demanded that Claudius be delivered to them for approval, but he refused, sensing the danger that would come with complying.
Dio was less biased, but seems to have used Suetonius and Tacitus as sources.
If freedmen had total control of money, letters, and law, it seemed it would not be hard for them to manipulate the Emperor.
Suetonius painted Claudius as a ridiculous figure, belittling many of his acts and attributing the objectively good works to his retinue.
He extended the summer court session, as well as the winter term, by shortening the traditional breaks.
One of Claudius's investigators discovered that many old Roman citizens based in the modern city of Trento were not in fact citizens.
The historian Suetonius describes the physical manifestations of Claudius' affliction in relatively good detail.
It has been suggested that the Senate may have pushed for the marriage, to end the feud between the Julian and Claudian branches.
When he returned to the narrative later in life, Claudius skipped over the wars of the second triumvirate altogether.
Pliny the Elder notes that several of them were richer than Crassus, the richest man of the Republican era.
Those who regard this homage as cynical should note that, cynical or not, such a move would hardly have benefited those involved, had Claudius been "hated", as some commentators, both modern and historic, characterize him.
Nero was married to Claudius' daughter Octavia, made joint heir with the underage Britannicus, and promoted; Augustus had similarly named his grandson Postumus Agrippa and his stepson Tiberius as joint heirs, and Tiberius had named Caligula joint heir with his grandson Tiberius Gemellus.
Caractacus lived out his days on land provided by the Roman state, an unusual end for an enemy commander.
Livia was a little kinder, but nevertheless often sent him short, angry letters of reproof.
Since the discovery of his " Letter to the Alexandrians" in the last century, much work has been done to rehabilitate Claudius and determine where the truth lies.
When Claudius' disability became evident, the relationship with his family turned sour.
featured Cyril Appleton as Claudius.
The first betrothal was to his distant cousin Aemilia Lepida, but was broken for political reasons.
While Claudius had never been formally adopted either by Augustus or his successors, he was nevertheless the grandson of his sister Octavia, and so he felt that he had the right of family.
In either case, it was far too early for such an account, and may have only served to remind Augustus that Claudius was Antony's descendant.
The last part of Claudius' plan was to increase the amount of arable land in Italy.
None of the works survive but live on as sources for the surviving histories of the Julio-Claudian dynasty.
This resulted in biases, both conscious and unconscious.
Claudius was concerned with the spread of eastern mysteries within the city and searched for more Roman replacements.
The administration of Ostia was turned over to an Imperial Procurator after construction of the port.
He chided the senators about their reluctance to debate bills introduced by himself, as noted in the fragments of a surviving speech:
He was a descendant of the Octavii Rufi (through Gaius Octavius), Julii Caesares (through Julia Minor and Julia Antonia), and the Claudii Nerones (through Nero Claudius Drusus); he was a great-nephew of Augustus through his full sister Octavia Minor, a nephew of Tiberius through his father Drusus, Tiberius' brother, an uncle of Caligula and finally a great-uncle of Nero through Caligula's father and Nero's grandfather Germanicus, his brother.
Claudius conducted a census in 48 that found 5,984,072 Roman citizens (adult males with Roman citizenship; women, children, slaves, and free adult males without Roman citizenship were not counted), an increase of around a million since the census conducted at Augustus' death.
In fact, his assumption of the office of Censor may have been motivated by a desire to see his academic labors bear fruit.
When his house burned down, the Senate demanded it be rebuilt at public expense.
He slobbered and his nose ran when he was excited.
Claudius was the rare scholar who covered both.
Agrippina was one of the few remaining descendants of Augustus, and her son Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus (the future Emperor Nero) was one of the last males of the Imperial family.
In the 1979 motion picture ''Caligula'', where the role was performed by Giancarlo Badessi, Claudius is depicted as an idiot, in contrast to Robert Graves' portrait of Claudius as a cunning and deeply intelligent man, who is perceived by others to be an idiot.
He was spirited away to the Praetorian camp and put under their protection.
Even his version of Claudius' Lyons tablet speech is edited to be devoid of the Emperor's personality.
Claudius is the source for numerous passages of Pliny's ''Natural History''.
It was a substantial critical success, and won several BAFTA awards.
The Senate granted him a triumph for his efforts.
Claudius later divorced Urgulanilla for adultery and on suspicion of murdering her sister-in-law Apronia.
Appius Silanus was executed early in Claudius' reign under questionable circumstances.
Prior to World War II, infantile paralysis (or polio) was widely accepted as the cause.
The event was witnessed by Pliny the Elder:
Pallas became the secretary of the treasury.
In 43 AD, Claudius sent Aulus Plautius with four legions to Britain (''Britannia'') after an appeal from an ousted tribal ally.
Arnaldo Momigliano states that during the reign of Tiberius&nbsp;– which covers the peak of Claudius' literary career&nbsp;– it became impolitic to speak of republican Rome.
He was put under the care of a "former mule-driver" to keep him disciplined, under the logic that his condition was due to laziness and a lack of will-power.
