Various other pieces of legislation provided for child benefit and support for people with no other source of income.
Later that year Stafford Cripps tried to persuade Attlee to stand aside for Bevin.
He has overturned the balance of power in Europe.
* Lady Felicity Ann (1925–2007), married John Harwood at Little Hampden in 1955
The inflation rate was also kept low during his term.
A number of regulations aimed at safeguarding the health and safety of people at work were also introduced during Attlee's time in office.
A large house-building programme was carried out with the intention of providing millions of people with high-quality homes.
Attlee returned to local politics in the immediate post-war period, becoming mayor of the Metropolitan Borough of Stepney, one of London's poorest inner-city boroughs, in 1919.
The Shops Act of 1950 consolidated previous legislation which provided that no one could be employed in a shop for more than six hours without having a break for at least 20 minutes.
We have been unable to go in for care-free rejoicing.
Without firing a shot, by the mere display of military force, he has achieved a dominating position in Europe which Germany failed to win after four years of war.
Attlee appointed Lord Louis Mountbatten to be the Viceroy of India when he first became Prime Minister, and agreed to Mountbatten's request for plenipotentiary powers for negotiating Indian independence.
Christopher Soames, Britain's Ambassador to France during the government of Edward Heath and cabinet minister under Margaret Thatcher, remarked that "Mrs. Thatcher was not really running a team.
A number of reforms were embarked upon to improve conditions for women and children.
From 9 July he assumed command of 30th Company of the same battalion however he did not deploy to France with it in December 1917.
Upon his death, the title passed to his son Martin Richard Attlee, 2nd Earl Attlee (1927–91).
In 1962 he spoke twice in the Lords against the British government's application for Britain to join the European Economic Community ("Common Market").
From 1945 to 1948, over 200 public Acts of Parliament were passed, with eight major pieces of legislation placed on the statute book in 1946 alone.
Conservatives would later criticise Labour for having been "too hasty" in introducing family allowances.
First elected to Parliament in 1922 from Limehouse, Attlee rose quickly to become a junior minister in the minority government led by Ramsay MacDonald in 1924, and then joined the Cabinet during MacDonald's second ministry of 1929-31.
That year, he was promoted to the rank of Major, leading him to be known as "Major Attlee" for the inter-war period.
The King replied "I know.
Although re-elected, the result was seen by Attlee as very disappointing, and was widely attributed to the effects of post-war austerity denting Labour's appeal to middle class voters.
Ernest Bevin was a passionate anti-communist, based largely on his experience of fighting communist influence in the trade union movement.
When Attlee went to see King George VI at Buckingham Palace to be appointed Prime Minister, the notoriously laconic Attlee and the famously tongue-tied King stood in silence; Attlee finally volunteered the remark, "I've won the election."
He was elderly and frail by that time, and had to remain seated in the freezing cold as the coffin was carried, having tired himself out by standing at the rehearsal the previous day.
Even if Attlee had personally been prepared to serve under Chamberlain in an emergency coalition government, he would never have been able to carry Labour with him.
Prefabricated classrooms were built and 928 new primary schools were constructed between 1945-50.
The 1950 election gave Labour a massively reduced majority of five seats compared to the triple-digit majority of 1945.
* Lady Alison Elizabeth (born 1930), married Richard Davis at Great Missenden in 1952.
The government set about implementing the wartime plans of Liberal William Beveridge for the creation of a 'cradle to grave' welfare state.
In the face of an armed revolt of Jewish militant groups and increasing violence of the local Arab population, Britain had found itself unable to control events.
Attlee was born in Putney, Surrey (now part of London), the seventh of eight children.
Increased Treasury funds were made available for education, particularly for upgrading school buildings suffering from years of neglect and war damage.
Wages for members of the police force were significantly increased.
All available resources are to be devoted to armaments."
To assist home ownership, the limit on the amount of money that people could borrow from their local authority in order to purchase or build a home was raised from £800 to £1,500 in 1945, and to £5,000 in 1949.
It did, however, bring about significant material gains for workers in the form of higher wages, reduced working hours, and improvements in working conditions, especially in regards to safety.
Using the Dominions of Canada, Australia, and New Zealand as a model, he continued the transformation of the Empire into the Commonwealth.
In addition, the 1947 Transport Act improved provision of rural bus services, while the Agriculture Act 1947 established a more generous subsidy system for farmers.
In foreign affairs, the Attlee Government was concerned with four main issues; post-war Europe, the onset of the Cold War, the establishment of the United Nations, and decolonisation.
Finding it increasingly impossible to govern Attlee called a snap election in October 1951, in the hope of achieving a more workable majority and to regain authority.
A housing bill passed in 1946 increased Treasury subsidies for the construction of local authority housing in England and Wales.
Attlee tendered his resignation as Prime Minister the following day, after six years and three months in office.
The terms have not been terms negotiated; they have been terms laid down as ultimata.
"Union leaders saw nationalisation as a means to pursue a more advantageous position within a framework of continued conflict, rather than as an opportunity to replace the old adversarial form of industrial relations.
In 1949, unemployment, sickness and maternity benefits were exempted from tax.
Attlee's modesty and quiet manner hid a great deal that has only come to light with historical reappraisal.
Only Attlee and Churchill would remain in the War Cabinet from the formation of the Government of National Unity in May 1940 through to the election in May 1945.
The Trades Disputes Act 1927 was repealed, and a Dock Labour Scheme was introduced in 1947 to put an end to the casual system of hiring labour in the docks.
The government maintained most of the wartime controls over the economy, including control over the allocation of materials and manpower, and unemployment rarely rose above 500,000, or 3% of the total workforce.
Attlee remained as Leader of the Opposition when the Second World War broke out in September 1939.
In public, Attlee was modest and unassuming; he was ineffective at public relations and lacked charisma.
He also claimed that if Britain was a member, EEC rules would prevent the British government from planning the economy and that Britain's traditional policy had been outward looking rather than Continental.
We do not think you can do it by national defence.
Moreover, most workers in nationalised industries exhibited an essentially instrumentalist attitude, favouring public ownership because it secured job security and improved wages rather than because it promised the creation of a new set of socialists relationships in the workplace."
Thatcher herself wrote in her 1995 memoirs, which charted her beginnings in Grantham to her victory in the 1979 General Election, that she admired Attlee, writing: "Of Clement Attlee, however, I was an admirer.
The London dock strike of July 1949, led by Communists, was suppressed when the Attlee government sent in 13,000 Army troops and passed special legislation to promptly end the strike.
After a period fighting in Gallipoli, he became ill with dysentery and was sent to a hospital in Malta to recover.
Under the Coal Industry Nationalisation (Superannuation) Regulations of 1950, a pension scheme for mineworkers was established.
Between 1945-51, the quality of rural life was improved by improvements in gas, electricity, and water services, as well as in leisure and public amenities.
A world of law, the abolition of national armaments with a world force and a world economic system.
The Labour Party had long attracted aspiring leaders from Africa and had developed elaborate plans before the war.
The Merchant Shipping Act of 1948 and the Merchant Shipping (Safety Convention) Act of 1949 were passed to improve conditions for seamen.
Labour campaigned on the theme of "Let Us Face the Future", positioning themselves as the party best placed to rebuild Britain after the war, while the Conservative campaign focused entirely around Churchill.
In April 2011, Limehouse Library having closed in 2003, the Attlee statue was unveiled in its new home at Queen Mary University of London.
We have seen the cause of democracy, which is, in our view, the cause of civilisation and humanity, receive a terrible defeat.
Consequently, Chamberlain tendered his resignation, and Labour and the Conservatives entered a coalition government led by Winston Churchill.
It had become too troublesome and much too expensive to handle.
His reputation among scholars in recent decades has been much higher than during his years as Prime Minister, thanks to his role in forging the welfare state and the coalition opposing Stalin in the Cold War.
In 1949 he promoted the NATO military alliance against the Soviet bloc.
Labour's ideology contrasted sharply with the contemporary Conservative Party's defence of individualism, inherited privileges, and income inequality.
In 2004 he was voted the most successful British Prime Minister of the 20th Century by a poll of 139 academics organised by Ipsos MORI.
Attlee met Violet Millar on a trip to Italy in 1921.
Improvements were also made in farmworkers' wages, and the Agricultural Wages Board in 1948 not only safeguarded wage levels, but also ensured that workers were provided with accommodation.
When the Attlee Government was voted out of office in 1951, the economy had been improved compared to 1945.
His strengths emerged behind the scenes, especially in committees where his depth of knowledge, quiet demeanour, objectivity and pragmatism proved decisive.
In view of implacable demands by the political leadership of, in particular, the Islamic community in British India for a separate Muslim homeland, Mountbatten conceded the notion of two nations consisting of a Hindu-majority India and a Muslim-majority Pakistan (which incorporated East Pakistan, now Bangladesh).
The decision was later reversed on appeal, but the financial problems caused by the episode almost forced Attlee out of politics.
Despite this, the results of the election came as a surprise to most, including Attlee himself, when they were announced on 26 July.
He served as MacDonald's Parliamentary Private Secretary for the brief 1922 parliament.
It has been a victory for brute force.
These benefits had been legislated for the previous year by Churchill's Family Allowances Act 1945, and was the first measure pushed through parliament by Attlee's government.
Lansbury had strongly opposed the policy, and felt unable to continue leading the party.
At the 1922 general election, Attlee became the Member of Parliament (MP) for the constituency of Limehouse in Stepney.
In 1948, a pension scheme was set up to provide pension benefits for employees of the new NHS, as well as their dependents.
Attlee's government, however, failed to introduce the comprehensive education for which many socialists had hoped (as a means of making the educational system based more on merit and less on hereditary privilege.)
By 1951, the Attlee Government was exhausted, with several of its most senior ministers ailing, ageing or deceased, and with a lack of new ideas.
Although the Attlee Government failed to meet its targets, primarily due to economic constraints, over a million new homes were built between 1945-51 (a significant achievement under the circumstances) which ensured that decent, affordable housing was available to many low-income families for the first time ever.
In an early "good-will" gesture that was later heavily criticised, the Attlee Government allowed the Soviets access, under the terms of a 1946 UK-USSR Trade Agreement, to several Rolls-Royce Nene jet engines.
It was Attlee's government that decided Britain should have an independent atomic weapons programme, and work began on it in 1947.
As a result of the Attlee Government's initiatives in agriculture, there was a 20% increase in output between 1947 and 1952, while Britain adopted one of the most mechanised and efficient farming industries in the world.
The government encouraged farmers via subsidies for modernisation, while the National Agricultural Advisory Service provided expertise and price guarantees.
The government was less successful in housing, which was the responsibility of Aneurin Bevan.
Churchill chaired the first two, the War Cabinet and the Defence Committee, with Attlee deputising for him in these, and answering for the government in Parliament when Churchill was absent.
In 1930, Labour MP Oswald Mosley left the party after its rejection of his proposals for solving the unemployment problem.
The newly established National Coal Board offered sick pay and holiday pay to miners.
British policies there were perceived by the Zionist movement and the Truman Administration as pro-Arab and anti-Jewish.
Attlee was narrowly defeated by the Conservatives under Churchill in the 1951 general election.
The Agricultural Holdings Act of 1948 enabled (in effect) tenant farmers to have lifelong tenancies and made provision for compensation in the event of cessations of tenancies.
It would come to be a devoted marriage, until her death in 1964.
A year later, he became a lecturer at the London School of Economics and remained there until he applied for an army officer commission following the outbreak of the First World War in August 1914.
The UK benefited from the American Marshall Aid program in 1948, and the economic situation improved significantly.
The Attlee government was committed to rebuilding British society as an ethical commonwealth, using public ownership and controls to abolish extremes of wealth and poverty.
At one time, Attlee had favoured Aneurin Bevan to succeed him as leader, but this became problematic after Bevan almost irrevocably split the party.
The Chancellor expressed great regret that he should have to spend so much on armaments, but said that it was absolutely necessary and was due only to the actions of other nations.
Although Chamberlain survived this, the reputation of his administration was so badly and publicly damaged, that it became clear a coalition government would be necessary.
He later served in the Mesopotamian Campaign where he was badly wounded at the Battle of Hanna, being hit in the leg by shrapnel while storming an enemy trench.
In 1946, universal family allowances were introduced to provide financial support to households for raising children.
The third earl (a member of the Conservative Party) retained his seat in the Lords as one of the hereditary peers to remain under an amendment to Labour's 1999 House of Lords Act.
A Married Women (Restraint Upon Anticipation) Act was passed in 1949 "to equalise, to render inoperative any restrictions upon anticipation or alienation attached to the enjoyment of property by a woman," while the Married Women (Maintenance) Act of 1949 was enacted with the intention of improving the adequacy and duration of financial benefits for married women.
He was a serious man and a patriot.
The drawing of borders was accomplished at the cost of large-scale population movements and heavy communal bloodshed on both sides.
Aneurin Bevan resigned to protest against the new charges for "teeth and spectacles" in the National Health Service introduced by that Budget, and was joined in this action by several senior ministers, including the future Prime Minister Harold Wilson, then the President of the Board of Trade.
The provision of free school meals was expanded, and opportunities for university entrants were increased.
In addition, the number of motor cars on the roads rose from 3&nbsp;million to 5&nbsp;million from 1945–51, and seaside holidays were taken by far more people than ever before.
In 1920, while mayor, he wrote his first book, ''The Social Worker'', which set out many of the principles that informed his political philosophy and that were to underpin the actions of his government in later years.
This mood was epitomised in the Beveridge Report of 1942, by the Liberal economist William Beveridge.
His response reveals Attlee's growing concern that Soviet expansionism, supported by the British Communist Party, was a genuine threat to national security, and that the docks were highly vulnerable to sabotage ordered by Moscow.
Attlee then trained as a barrister at the Inner Temple and was called to the Bar in 1906.
Attlee was given Mosley's post of Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster.
He became the first Labour Prime Minister ever to serve a full five-year term, as well as the first to command a Labour majority in Parliament and remains the longest-ever serving Leader of the Labour Party.
One firm, Scammell and Nephew Ltd, took a civil action against Attlee and the other Labour members of the committee (although not against the Conservative members who had also supported this).
Attlee's administration presided over the successful transition from a wartime economy to peacetime, tackling problems of demobilisation, shortages of foreign currency, and adverse deficits in trade balances and government expenditure.
After Stalin took political control of most of Eastern Europe, and began to subvert other governments in the Balkans, Attlee's and Bevin's worst fears of Soviet intentions were realized.
Throughout the 1920s and most of the 1930s, the Labour Party's official policy had been to oppose rearmament, instead supporting internationalism and collective security under the League of Nations.
The government had a target to build 400,000 new houses a year to replace those which had been destroyed in the war, but shortages of materials and manpower meant that less than half this number were built.
He put his trust in the United Nations, rejected notions that the Soviet Union was bent on world conquest, and warned that treating Moscow as an enemy would turn it into one.
A blue plaque unveiled in 1979 commemorates Attlee at 17 Monkhams Avenue, in Woodford Green in the London borough of Redbridge.
'Home help' therefore included the provision of home-helps for nursing and expectant mothers and for mothers with children under the age of five, and by 1952 some 20,000 women were engaged in this service.
By 1937, Labour had jettisoned its pacifist position and came to support rearmament and oppose Neville Chamberlain's policy of appeasement.
Attlee's estate was sworn for probate purposes at a value of £7,295, a relatively modest sum for so prominent a figure, and only a fraction of the £75,394 in his father's estate when he died in 1908.
I heard it on the Six O'Clock News."
As Churchill was most concerned with overseeing the war effort, this arrangement suited both men.
With such a small majority leaving him dependent on a small number of MPs to govern, Attlee's second term would prove to be much tamer compared with his first.
He sponsored as well the independence of Burma (Myanmar) and Ceylon (Sri Lanka).
Attlee and Churchill worked together very smoothly, with Attlee working backstage to handle much of the detail and organizational work in Parliament, as Churchill took centre stage with his attention on diplomacy, military policy, and broader issues.
Within this context, his government undertook the nationalisation of public utilities and major industries, as well as the creation of the National Health Service.
It set in place an entirely new system of social security.
This has not been a victory for reason and humanity.
Churchill made some costly errors during the campaign.
He continued as Labour leader but had lost his effectiveness by then.
Suddenly in January 1947, Attlee reversed his position and agreed with Bevin on a hard-line anti-Soviet policy.
The Minister of Fuel and Power, Emanuel Shinwell was widely blamed for failing to ensure adequate coal stocks, and soon resigned from his post.
During a debate on defence in Commons a year later, Attlee said "We are told (in the White Paper) that there is danger against which we have to guard ourselves.
With victory in Europe in May 1945, the coalition government was dissolved.
Attlee opposed the 1926 General Strike, believing that strike action should not be used as a political weapon.
The Attlee Government proved itself to be a radical, reforming government.
The Gallipoli Campaign had been proposed by the First Lord of the Admiralty, Winston Churchill.
The National Health Service Act of 1946 indicated that domestic help should be provided for households where that help is required "owing to the presence of any person who is ill, lying-in, an expectant mother, mentally defective, aged or a child not over compulsory school age".
From 1906 to 1909, Attlee worked as manager of Haileybury House, a charitable club for working-class boys in Stepney in the East End of London run by his old school.
The steel industry was nationalised in 1951.
The Bank of England and civil aviation were nationalised in 1946.
He saw himself as spokesman on behalf of his entire party, and successfully kept its multiple factions in harness.
We have seen something more.
Overseas investments had been used up to pay for the war.
In the immediate aftermath of the war, the Government faced the challenge of managing relations with Britain's former war-time ally, Stalin and the Soviet Union.
'''Clement Richard Attlee, 1st Earl Attlee''',  (3 January 1883 – 8 October 1967) was a British politician who was the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom from 1945 to 1951 and the Leader of the Labour Party from 1935 to 1955.
In April 1936, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Neville Chamberlain, introduced a Budget which increased the amount spent on the armed forces.
It is now held by Clement Attlee's grandson John Richard Attlee, 3rd Earl Attlee.
The Criminal Justice Act of 1948 restricted imprisonment for juveniles and brought improvements to the probation and remand centres systems, while the passage of the Justices of the Peace Act of 1949 led to extensive reforms of magistrates courts.
Salaries for teachers were also improved, and funds were allocated towards improving existing schools.
Attlee's record for settling internal differences in the Labour Party fell in April 1951, when there was a damaging split over an austerity Budget brought in by the Chancellor, Hugh Gaitskell, to pay for the cost of Britain's participation in the Korean War.
At every stage of the proceedings there have been time limits laid down by the owner and ruler of armed force.
One would think to listen to him that the Government had no responsibility for the state of world affairs...The Government has now resolved to enter upon an arms race, and the people will have to pay for their mistake in believing that it could be trusted to carry out a policy of peace.
The abrupt end of the American Lend-Lease program in August 1945 almost caused a crisis.
In an interview he described himself as "incapable of religious feeling", saying that he believed in "the ethics of Christianity" but not "the mumbo-jumbo".
The book attacked the idea that looking after the poor could be left to voluntary action.
Registered dockers laid off by employers within the Scheme had the right either to be taken on by another, or to generous compensation.
The Conservatives capitalised on the crisis with the slogan 'Starve with Strachey and shiver with Shinwell' (referring to the Minister of Food John Strachey).
An Emergency Training Scheme was also introduced which turned out an extra 25,000 teachers in 1945–51.
He was educated at Northaw School, a boys' preparatory school near Pluckley in Kent, Haileybury College, and University College, Oxford, where in 1904 he graduated BA with second-class honours in Modern History.
He proved a loyal ally of America at the onset of the cold war.
We think you can only do it by moving forward to a new world.
A Ministry of Education was established, and free County Colleges were set up for the compulsory part-time instruction of teenagers between the ages of 15 and 18 who were not in full-time education.
His remains were cremated and his ashes buried at Westminster Abbey.
Attlee also attended the later stages of the Potsdam Conference, where he negotiated with President Harry S. Truman and Stalin.
Bevan openly called for him to stand down in the summer of 1954.
The period from 1946 to 1951 saw continuous full employment and steadily rising living standards, which increased by about 10% each year.
In 1947, the Arts Council of Great Britain was set up to encourage the arts.
A Workers' Compensation (Supplementation) Act was passed in 1948 that introduced benefits for workers with certain asbestos-related diseases which had occurred before 1948.
There was hardly any increase allowed for the services which went to build up the life of the people, education and health.
Attlee was the first person to hold the office of Deputy Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, serving under Winston Churchill in the wartime coalition government.
By 1951 about 20% of the British economy had been taken into public ownership.
That's why he was so damn good."
In 1946, the government set up a National Institute of Houseworkers as a means of providing a social democratic variety of domestic service.
During the course of the second Labour government, Attlee had become increasingly disillusioned with MacDonald, whom he came to regard as vain and incompetent, and of whom he later wrote scathingly in his autobiography.
In 1927 he was appointed a member of the multi-party Simon Commission, a Royal Commission set up to examine the possibility of granting self-rule to India.
and went on to say at page 75:A right established by law, such as that to an old age pension, is less galling than an allowance made by a rich man to a poor one, dependent on his view of the recipient's character, and terminable at his caprice.
In 1947, Regional Advisory Councils were set up to bring together industry and education to find out the needs of young workers "and advise on the provision required, and to secure reasonable economy of provision."
His government ended the British Mandates of Palestine and Jordan.
Attlee was awarded an Honorary Fellowship of Queen Mary College on 15 December 1948.
There can be no doubt that it is a tremendous victory for Herr Hitler.
His wife had become ill, and at that time there was no separate salary for the Leader of the Opposition.
The first two were closely related, and Attlee was assisted by Foreign Secretary Ernest Bevin.
Attlee agreed with MI5 that he faced, "a very present menace."
He attended Churchill's funeral in January 1965.
It was during this period, however, that personal financial problems almost forced Attlee to quit politics altogether.
His father was Henry Attlee (1841–1908), a solicitor, and his mother was Ellen Bravery Watson (1847–1920), daughter of Thomas Simons Watson, secretary for the Art Union of London.
Security of tenure for farmers was introduced, while consumers were protected by food subsidies and the redistributive effects of deficiency payments.
