Eastern Catholic Churches either follow the same rules as the Latin Church or require celibacy only for bishops.
The Vedic priesthood of India is an early instance of a structured body of clergy organized as a separate and hereditary caste, one that occupied the highest social rung of its nation.
Both men and women may be rabbis or cantors.
A priesthood is a body of priests, shamans, or oracles who have special religious authority or function.
This distinction of a separate ministry was formed in the early times of Christianity; one early source reflecting this distinction, with the three ranks or orders of bishop, priest and deacon, is the writings of Saint Ignatius of Antioch.
Most shochetim are ordained rabbis.
In the Roman Catholic Church, only men are permitted to be clerics, although in antiquity women were ordained to the diaconate.
In these ways, manual labour was introduced to a practice where monks originally survived on alms; layers of garments were added where originally a single thin robe sufficed; etc.
In some denominations, however, licensure is a permanent, rather than a transitional state for ministers assigned to certain specialized ministries, such as music ministry or youth ministry.
There is no ordination as such; the only requirement for appointment as an ''imam khatib'' is recognition as someone of sufficient learning and virtue to perform both duties on a regular basis, and to instruct the congregation in the basics of Islam.
Several religious bodies in the United States (Methodist, Episcopal, Baptist and Lutheran) have implemented measures to address the issue, through wellness campaigns, for example - but also by simply ensuring that clergy take more time off.
Minor Orders are still given in the Eastern Catholic Churches, and those who receive those orders are 'minor clerics.'
The Code of Canon Law and the Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches prescribe that every cleric must be enrolled or "incardinated" in a diocese or its equivalent (an apostolic vicariate, territorial abbey, personal prelature, etc.)
Again, in response to various historic attempts to suppress Buddhism (most recently during the Meji Era), the practice of celibacy was relaxed and Japanese monks allowed to marry.
Local leaders serve in their positions until released by their supervising authorities.
The use of the word "cleric" is also appropriate for Eastern Orthodox minor clergy who are tonsured in order not to trivialise orders such as those of Reader in the Eastern Church, or for those who are tonsured yet have no minor or major orders.
The rabbi is not an occupation found in the Torah (Five books of Moses); the first time this word is mentioned is in the Mishnah.
This period typically is spent performing the duties of ministry under the guidance, supervision, and evaluation of a more senior, ordained minister.
Each of these ranks is ordained through the Sacred Mystery (sacrament) of the laying on of hands (called ''cheirotonia'') by bishops.
Traditionally, a man obtains one of three levels of Semicha (rabbinic ordination) after the completion of an arduous learning program in Torah, Tanakh (Hebrew Bible), Mishnah and Talmud, Midrash, Jewish ethics and lore, the codes of Jewish law and responsa, theology and philosophy.
Wards are led by a bishop and his counselors and branches by a president and his counselors.
In most national churches women may become deacons or priests, but while fifteen out of 38 national churches allow for the consecration of women as bishops, only five have ordained any.
Canon Law indicates (canon 207) that "by divine institution, there are among the Christian faithful in the Church sacred ministers who in law are also called clerics; the other members of the Christian faithful are called lay persons".
Some Protestant denominations, such as Methodism, Presbyterianism, and Lutheranism, are hierarchical in nature; and ordination and assignment to individual pastorates or other ministries are made by the parent denominations.
While female monastic (''bhikkhuni'') lineages existed in most Buddhist countries at one time, the Theravada lineages of Southeast Asia died out during the 14th-15th Century AD.
Although one does not need to be an ordained Rabbi to be a Rebbe, most Rebbes today are ordained Rabbis.
Among bishops, some are metropolitans, archbishops, or patriarchs.
Married clergy are considered as best-suited to staff parishes, as a priest with a family is thought better qualified to counsel his flock.
This diversity of monastic orders and styles was originally one community founded by Gautama Buddha during the 5th century BC living under a common set of rules (called the Vinaya).
According to scriptural records, these celibate monks and nuns in the time of the Buddha lived an austere life of meditation, living as wandering beggars for nine months out of the year and remaining in retreat during the rainy season (although such a unified condition of Pre-sectarian Buddhism is questioned by some scholars).
On several occasions, the ''Marja'iyyat'' (community of all ''maraji'&zwnj;'') has been limited to a single individual, in which case his rulings have been applicable to all those living in the Twelver Shi'ah world.
The interaction between Buddhism and Tibetan Bon led to a uniquely Tibetan Buddhism, within which various sects, based upon certain teacher-student lineages arose.
Since the 1960s some Anglican churches have reinstituted the diaconate as a permanent, rather than transitional, order of ministry focused on ministry that bridges the church and the world, especially ministry to those on the margins of society.
A scholar's opinions may be valuable to others because of his/her knowledge in religious matters; but such opinions should not generally be considered binding, infallible, or absolute, as the individual Muslim is directly responsible to God for his or her own religious beliefs and practice.
Locally, unpaid and part-time priesthood holders lead the church; the worldwide church is supervised by full-time general authorities, some of whom receive modest living allowances.
Since the early medieval era an additional communal role, the ''Hazzan'' (cantor) has existed as well.
In the Latin Church before 1972, tonsure admitted someone to the clerical state, after which he could receive the four minor orders (ostiary, lectorate, order of exorcists, order of acolytes) and then the major orders of subdiaconate, diaconate, presbyterate, and finally the episcopate, which according to Roman Catholic doctrine is "the fullness of Holy Orders".
of ''mohelet,'' f. of mohel)
Numerous members of the lower clergy may be ordained at the same service, and their blessing usually takes place during the Little Hours prior to Liturgy, or may take place as a separate service.
The title ''sheikh'' ("elder") is used similarly.
The stake is made up of several individual congregations, which are called "wards" or "branches."
In addition to these three orders of clerics, some  Eastern Catholic, or "Uniate", Churches have what are called "minor clerics".
Although the term "clergy" is not typically used in the LDS Church, it would most appropriately apply to local bishops and stake presidents.
Bishops are typically overseers, presiding over a diocese composed of many parishes, with an archbishop presiding over a province, which is a group of dioceses.
Clergy in Protestantism fill a wide variety of roles and functions.
Training is often focused on Jewish law, and some Orthodox Yeshivas forbid secular education.
The rabbinical seminaries of these movements hold that one must first earn a bachelor's degree before entering the rabbinate.
Subdeacons are ordained during the Little Hours, but the ceremonies surrounding his blessing continue through the Divine Liturgy, specifically during the Great Entrance.
#'''Right of Forum''': by this right clergy could be judged by ecclesiastical tribunals only.
Cantors do provide leadership of actual services, primarily because of their training and expertise in the music and prayer rituals pertaining to them, rather than because of any spiritual or "sacramental" distinction between them and the laity.
Types of clerics are distinguished from offices, even when the latter are commonly or exclusively occupied by clerics.
Kohanim, who must avoid contact with dead human body parts (such as the removed foreskin) for ritual purity, cannot act as mohels,  but some mohels are also either rabbis or cantors.
The term ultimately comes from the Greek "κλῆρος" - ''klēros'', "a lot", "that which is assigned by lot" (allotment) or metaphorically, "inheritance".
Sufi guides are commonly styled ''Shaikh'' in both speaking and writing; in North Africa they are sometimes called ''marabouts''.
He may be elected by the local community, or appointed by an outside authority – ''e.&thinsp;g.,'' the national government, or the waqf which sustains the mosque.
Those seeking to become priests are usually ordained priest after a year.
Different churches have different systems of clergy, though churches with similar polity have similar systems.
They are appropriately called ''mohelot'' (pl.
In the High Middle Ages, clergy in Western Europe had four privileges:
Reconstructionist Judaism and Reform Judaism do not maintain the traditional requirements for study as rooted in Jewish Law and traditionalist text.
Muslims who wish to learn Sufism dedicate themselves to a ''murshid''&zwnj;'s guidance by taking an oath called a ''bai'ah''.
Ordinarily, teaching elders are installed by a presbytery as pastor of a congregation.
In the United States, Pure Land priests of the Japanese diaspora serve a role very similar to Protestant ministers of the Christian tradition.
Within each of these three ranks there are found a number of titles.
Ruling elders, after receiving training, may be commissioned by a presbytery to serve as a pastor of a congregation, as well as preach and administer sacraments.
In Conservative Judaism, both men and women are ordained as rabbis and cantors.
The nearest analogue among Sunni Muslims to the parish priest or pastor, or to the "pulpit rabbi" of a synagogue, is called the ''imam khatib.''
Rabbis are given authority to make interpretations of Jewish law and custom.
It is unclear whether similar symptoms affect American Muslim clerics, though an anecdotal comment by one American imam suggested that leaders of mosques may also share these problems.
Some Mahayana sects, notably in the United States (such as San Francisco Zen Center) are working to reconstruct the female branches of what they consider a common, interwoven lineage.
Islam, like Judaism, has no clergy in the sacerdotal sense; there is no institution resembling the Christian priesthood.
In some cases they are forest dwelling monks of the Theravada tradition and in other cases they are married clergy of a Japanese Zen lineage and may work a secular job in addition to their role in the Buddhist community.
There are several specialist offices pertaining to the study and administration of Islamic law or ''shari`ah.''
The lower clergy are not ordained through ''cheirotonia'' (laying on of hands) but through a blessing known as ''cheirothesia'' (setting-aside).
Deacons may have the title of hierodeacon (a monk who has been ordained to the deaconate), archdeacon or protodeacon.
Often they refer to their leaders as pastors or ministers, titles that, if used, sometimes apply to the person only as long as he or she holds a particular office.
In Hasidic Judaism, generally understood as a branch of Orthodox Judaism, there are dynastic spiritual leaders known as ''Rebbes'', often translated in English as "Grand Rabbi".
This is all in keeping with Eastern Orthodox concepts of clergy, which still include those who have not yet received, or do not plan to receive, the diaconate.
In Latin Roman Catholicism, the tonsure was a prerequisite for receiving any of the minor orders or major orders before the tonsure, minor orders, and the subdiaconate were abolished following the Second Vatican Council.
Thus, unordained monks, friars, nuns, and religious brothers and sisters are not part of the clergy.
A ''murid'' who takes on special disciplines under the guide's instruction, ranging from an intensive spiritual retreat to voluntary poverty and homelessness, is sometimes known as a dervish.
This decree was issued in a Lateran Council of 1097 (requested by Pope Urban II), then renewed in the Lateran Council II (1139)
or in a religious institute, society of apostolic life or secular institute.
The aspirant is then known as a ''murid'' ("disciple" or "follower").
There is also a growing realization that traditional training in ritual and meditation as well as philosophy may not be sufficient to meet the needs and expectations of American lay people.
A Kohen may be a shochet.
The Pope is the Bishop of Rome, the supreme and universal hierarch of the Church, and his authorization is now required for the ordination of all Catholic bishops.
The Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) ordains two types of presbyters or elders, teaching (pastor) and ruling (leaders of the congregation which form a council with the pastors).
In the Zen traditions of China, Korea and Japan, manual labor is an important part of religious discipline; meanwhile, in the Theravada tradition, prohibitions against monks working as laborers and farmers continue to be generally observed.
All leaders in the church are called by revelation and the laying on of hands by one who holds authority.
The spiritual guidance function known in many Christian denominations as "pastoral care" is fulfilled for many Muslims by a ''murshid'' ("guide"), a master of the spiritual sciences and disciplines known as ''tasawuf'' or Sufism.
In modern Shi`ah Islam, scholars play a more prominent role in the daily lives of Muslims than in Sunni Islam; and there is a hierarchy of higher titles of scholastic authority, such as ''Ayatollah''.
Meanwhile, reclusive Theravada forest monks in Thailand live a life devoted to meditation and the practice of austerities in small communities in rural Thailand- a very different life from even their city-dwelling counterparts, who may be involved primarily in teaching, the study of scripture, and the administration of the nationally organized (and government sponsored) Sangha.
The process of being designated as a member of the Protestant clergy, as well as that of being assigned to a particular office, varies with the denomination or faith group.
Adult males are ordained to the Melchizedek priesthood, as elders, seventies, high priests, or patriarchs in that priesthood, which is concerned with spiritual leadership of the church.
The roles and functions of clergy vary in different religious traditions but these usually involve presiding over specific rituals and teaching their religion's doctrines and practices.
In general, the Mahayana schools of Buddhism tend to be more culturally adaptive and innovative with forms, while Theravada schools (the form generally practised in Thailand, Burma, Cambodia and Sri Lanka) tend to take a much more conservative view of monastic life, and continue to observe precepts that forbid monks from touching women or working in certain secular roles.
Priests and deacons are ordained by their own diocesan bishop, while bishops are consecrated through the laying on of hands of at least three other bishops.
'''Clergy''' are some of the formal leaders within certain religions.
It remains unclear whether American clergy in other religious traditions experience the same symptoms, or whether clergy outside the United States are similarly affected.
The leadership of a Jewish congregation is, in fact, in the hands of the laity: the president of a synagogue is its actual leader and any adult male Jew (or adult Jew in non-traditional congregations) can lead prayer services.
The highest office an Ahmadi can hold is that of ''Khalifatu l-Masih''.
During the Islamic Golden Age, it was common for scholars to attain recognized mastery of both the "exterior sciences" ''(`ulum az-zahir)'' of the madrasahs as well as the "interior sciences" ''(`ulum al-batin)'' of Sufism.
The blessing of readers and taper-bearers is usually combined into a single service.
(Similar patterns can also be observed in Tibet during various historic periods multiple forms of monasticism have co-existed such as "ngagpa" lamas, and times at which celibacy was relaxed).
The Orthodox Church has three ranks of holy orders: bishop, priest, and deacon.
The title ''mullah'' (a Persian variation of the Arabic ''maula'', "master"), commonly translated "cleric" in the West and thought to be analogous to "priest" or "rabbi", is a title of address for any educated or respected figure, not even necessarily (though frequently) religious.
Below these men in the hierarchy are quorums of seventy, which are assigned geographically over the areas of the church.
A Roman Catholic cardinal, for instance, is almost without exception a cleric, but a cardinal is not a type of cleric.
Usual titles are ''Your Holiness'' for a patriarch (with ''Your All-Holiness'' reserved for the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople), ''Your Beatitude'' for an archbishop/metropolitan overseeing an autocephalous Church, ''Your Eminence'' for an archbishop/metropolitan generally, ''Master'' or ''Your Grace'' for a bishop and ''Father'' for priests, deacons and monks, although there are variations between the various Orthodox Churches.
Clerical marriage is not allowed and therefore, if those for whom in some particular Church celibacy is optional (such as permanent deacons in the Latin Church) wish to marry, they must do so before ordination.
Their life expectancies have fallen in recent years and in the last decade their use of antidepressants has risen.
As the Jewish News Weekly of Northern California states, "...there is no halachic prescription against female mohels, but none exist in the Orthodox world, where the preference is that the task be undertaken by a Jewish man.
Ch'an, like the Tibetan style, further diversified into various sects based upon the transmission style of certain teachers (one of the most well known being the 'rapid enlightenment' style of Linji Yixuan), as well as in response to particular political developments such as the An Lushan Rebellion and the Buddhist persecutions of Emperor Wuzong.
For the forms of address for Anglican clergy, see Forms of address in the United Kingdom.
''Re''marriage of clergy following divorce or widowhood is forbidden.
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) has no dedicated clergy, and is governed instead by a system of lay priesthood leaders.
Conservative Judaism differs with Orthodoxy in that it sees Jewish Law as binding but also as subject to many interpretations, including more liberal interpretations.
This broad difference in approach led to a major schism among Buddhist monastics in about the 4th century BCE, creating the Early Buddhist Schools.
Since the time of the destruction of the Temple of Jerusalem, the religious leaders of Judaism have often been rabbis, who are technically scholars in Jewish law empowered to act as judges in a rabbinical court.
The term clerical work continues to this day to refer to such functions.
Thus a retired archbishop can only be considered a bishop (though it is possible to refer to 'Bishop John Smith, the former Archbishop of York'), a canon or archdeacon is a priest on retirement and does not hold any additional honorifics.
#'''Right of Competence''': a certain part of the income of clergy, necessary for sustenance, could not be sequestered by any action of creditors
Cantors have sometimes been the only functionaries of a synagogue, empowered to undertake religio-civil functions like witnessing marriages.
In recent years, studies have suggested that American clergy in certain Protestant, Evangelical and Jewish traditions are more at risk than the general population of obesity, hypertension and depression.
''`ulamah''), or "scholar".
''Canon'', ''archdeacon'', ''archbishop'' and the like are specific positions within these orders.
The term clerk derives from cleric, since in medieval times the clergy were one of the few groups who could read, and therefore were often employed to do bookkeeping and similar work.
As these varied styles of Buddhist monasticism are transmitted to Western cultures, still more new forms are being created.
Protestant ordination, therefore, can be viewed more as a public statement by the ordaining body that an individual possesses the theological knowledge, moral fitness, and practical skills required for service in that faith group's ministry.
Some Protestant denominations dislike the word ''clergy'' and do not use it of their own leaders.
Generally, all worthy males age 12 and above receive the priesthood.
In Jewish tradition, a religious leader is often a rabbi or hazzan (cantor).
Traditional Orthodox Judaism does not license women as mohels, but other types of Judaism do.
These clerical ranks are subdeacon, reader and altar server (also known as taper-bearer).
The modern form of the rabbi developed in the Talmudic era.
Since around the mid-19th century, a more complex title has been used in Twelver Shi`ism, namely ''marja' at-taqlid''.
Sikh clergy consists of five ''Jathedars'', one each from five ''takhts'' or sacred seats.
The term priest is derived from the Greek presbyter (πρεσβύτερος, ''presbýteros'', elder or senior), but is often used in the sense of sacerdos in particular, i.e., for clergy performing ritual within the sphere of the sacred or numinous communicating with the gods on behalf of the community.
The title ''hafiz'' (lit.
Cantors as much as rabbis have been recognized by civil authorities in the United States as clergy for legal purposes, mostly for awarding education degrees and their ability to perform weddings, and certify births and deaths.
The ''Jathedars'' are appointed by the  Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee (SGPC), an elected body of the Sikhs sometimes called the "Parliament of Sikhs."
Al-Ghazali and Rumi are two notable examples.
This adaptation of form and roles of Buddhist monastic practice continued after the transmission to Japan.
A parish (generally a single church) is looked after by one or more priests, although one priest may be responsible for several parishes.
Ordained clergy in the Roman Catholic Church are either deacons, priests, or bishops belonging to the diaconate, the presbyterate, or the episcopate, respectively.
Emperor Constantine I granted this right for bishops, which was subsequently extended to the rest of the clergy by Imperial Decree
When the functions of political ruler and religious leader are combined in this way, deification could be seen to be the next logical stage of his or her social advancement within his or her native environment, as is found in the case of the Egyptian Pharaohs.
Current canon law prescribes that to be ordained a priest, an education is required of two years of philosophy and four of theology, including study of dogmatic and moral theology, the Holy Scriptures, and canon law have to be studied within a seminary or an ecclesiastical faculty at a university.
With rare exceptions, cardinals are bishops, although it was not always so; formerly, some cardinals were people who had received clerical tonsure, but not Holy Orders.
This compound title is merely a common combination of two elementary offices: leader ''(imam)'' of the congregational prayer, which in most mosques is performed at the times of all daily prayers; and preacher ''(khatib)'' of the sermon or ''khutba'' of the obligatory congregational prayer at midday every Friday.
In addition studies are mandated in pastoral care and psychology, the historical development of Judaism; and academic biblical criticism.
Academic requirements for becoming a rabbi are rigorous.
#'''Right of Canon''': whoever committed real violence on the person of a cleric committed a sacrilege.
Emphasis is placed not on Jewish law, but rather on sociology, modern Jewish philosophy, Theology and Pastoral Care.
In other traditions, such as the Baptist and other Congregational groups, local churches are free to hire (and often ordain) their own clergy, although the parent denominations typically maintain lists of suitable candidates seeking appointment to local church ministries and encourage local churches to consider these individuals when filling available positions.
For a short period of history before the ordination of women as deacons, priests and bishops began within Anglicanism they could be "deaconesses".
Now, the clerical state is tied to reception of the diaconate.
A ''mufti'' is a scholar who has completed an advanced course of study which qualifies him to issue judicial opinions or ''fatawah''.
The office of Rebbe is generally a hereditary one, may also be passed from Rebbe to student, or recognized by a congregation conferring a sort of coronation to their new Rebbe.
National Anglican churches are presided over by one or more primates or metropolitans (archbishops or presiding bishops).
Buddhist clergy are often collectively referred to as the Sangha, and consist of various orders of male and female monks (originally called bhikshus and bhikshunis respectively).
Another licensed cleric in Judaism is the ''shochet'', who are trained and licensed by religious authorities for kosher slaughter according to ritual law.
Studies are mandated in pastoral care and psychology, the historical development of Judaism and most importantly the academic study of Bible, Talmud and Rabbinic Literature, Philosophy and Theology, Liturgy, Jewish History, and Hebrew Literature of all periods.
Some of the terms used for individual clergy are ''cleric'', ''clergyman'', ''clergywoman'', ''clergyperson'', and ''churchman''.
Such a person may appoint amirs who manage regional areas.
Exceptions are sometimes admitted for ordination to transitional diaconate and priesthood on a case-by-case basis for married clergymen of other churches or communities who become Catholics, but ordination of married men to the episcopacy is excluded (see personal ordinariate).
Conversely, a youth minister at a parish may or may not be a cleric.
This word describes someone engaged in advanced study of the traditional Islamic sciences ''(`ulum)'' at an Islamic university or ''madrasah jami`ah''.
Within Christianity, especially in Eastern Christianity and formerly in Western Roman Catholicism, the term ''cleric'' refers to any individual who has been ordained, including deacons, priests, and bishops.
Some churches have a separate service for the blessing of a cantor.
Although not a formal or canonical prerequisite, at present bishops are often required to have earned a university degree, typically but not necessarily in theology.
In Christianity the specific names and roles of clergy vary by denomination and there is a wide range of formal and informal clergy positions, including deacons, priests, reverends, bishops, preachers, pastors, ministers and the Pope.
Ordination of a bishop, priest, deacon or subdeacon must be conferred during the Divine Liturgy (Eucharist)—though in some churches it is permitted to ordain up through deacon during the Liturgy of the Presanctified Gifts—and no more than a single individual can be ordained to the same rank in any one service.
The most general such title is ''`alim'' (pl.
Many Protestant denominations reject the idea that the clergy are a separate category of people, but rather stress the ''priesthood of all believers''.
Others who have definite roles in worship but who are not ordained (e.g.
The senior archbishop of the Anglican Communion is the Archbishop of Canterbury, who acts as leader of the Church of England and 'first among equals' of the primates of all Anglican churches.
This form was then transmitted to Korea, during later Japanese occupation, where celibate and non-celibate monks today exist in the same sects.
Since one does not need to be an ordained Rabbi to be a Rebbe, at some points in history there were female Rebbes as well, particularly the Maiden of Ludmir.
Youth age 12 to 18 are ordained to the Aaronic priesthood as deacons, teachers, or priests, which authorizes them to perform certain ordinances and sacraments.
The need for this requirement arose because of the trouble caused from the earliest years of the Church by unattached or vagrant clergy subject to no ecclesiastical authority and often causing scandal wherever they went.
Merely holding an office in the priesthood does not imply authority over other church members or agency to act on behalf of the entire church.
''Marja'&zwnj;'' (pl.
It has been common practice in the Russian tradition for unmarried, non-monastic clergy to occupy academic posts.
One exception to the findings of these studies is the case of American Roman Catholic priests, who are required by canon law to take a spiritual retreat each year, and four weeks of vacation.
(The lineal succession of guides bears a superficial similarity to Christian ordination and apostolic succession, or to Buddhist dharma transmission; but a Sufi guide is regarded primarily as a specialized teacher and Islam denies the existence of an earthly hierarchy among believers.)
Priests (also called presbyters) may (or may not) have the title of archpriest, protopresbyter (also called "protopriest", or "protopope"), hieromonk (a monk who has been ordained to the priesthood) archimandrite (a senior hieromonk) and hegumen (abbot).
However, as Buddhism spread geographically over time - encountering different cultures, responding to new social, political, and physical environments - this single form of Buddhist monasticism diversified.
Roman Catholicism mandates clerical celibacy for all clergy in the predominant Latin Rite, with the exception of deacons who do not intend to become priests.
#'''Right of Immunity''': clergy could not be called for military service or other duties or charges incompatible with their role
File:SirGeorgeFlemingBt2.jpg| Sir George Fleming, 2nd Baronet,  British churchman.
Members of institutes of consecrated life and societies of apostolic life are clerics only if they have received Holy Orders.
In contemporary Orthodox Judaism, women are forbidden from becoming rabbis or cantors in the Orthodox world primarily because this would affect many aspects of communal observances and practices .
A scholar with a specialty in ''fiqh'' or jurisprudence is known as a ''faqih''.
Orthodox priests, deacons, and subdeacons must be either married or celibate (preferably monastic) prior to ordination, but may not marry after ordination.
Secular clergy are ministers, such as deacons and priests, who do not belong to a religious institute and live in the world at large, rather than a religious institute (''saeculum'').
First earn a bachelor's degree before entering rabbinical school.
Jesus Christ stands at the head of the church and leads the church through revelation given to the President of the Church, the First Presidency, and Twelve Apostles, all of whom are recognized as prophets, seers, and revelators and have lifetime tenure.
The consultative body for Ahmadiyya is called the ''Majlis-i-Shura'', which ranks second in importance to the ''Khalifatu l-Masih''.
