For every 100 females there were 90.0 males.
Another of Cleveland's architectural treasures is The Arcade (sometimes called the Old Arcade), a five-story arcade built in 1890 and renovated in 2001 as a Hyatt Regency Hotel.
Cleveland is served by the firefighters of the Cleveland Division of Fire.
In December 1978, Cleveland became the first major American city to enter into a financial default on federal loans since the Great Depression.
Cleveland is part of the larger Cleveland-Akron-Canton, OH Combined Statistical Area, which in 2013 had a population of 3,501,538, and ranked as the country's 15th largest CSA.
By the 1960s, the economy slowed, and residents sought new housing in the suburbs, reflecting the national trends of urban flight and suburban growth.
In 2014, the United States Department of Justice published a report that investigated the use of force by the Cleveland Police Department from 2010-2013.
Furthermore, a live-work zoning overlay for the city's near east side has facilitated the transformation of old industrial buildings into loft spaces for artists.
Cleveland's geographic location on the Cuyahoga River and Lake Erie has been key to its growth.
Additionally MetroHealth System, which operates the level one trauma center for northeast Ohio, has various locations throughout greater Cleveland.
There were 207,536 housing units at an average density of .
The Gordon Square Arts District on Detroit Ave., in the Detroit-Shoreway neighborhood, features a movie theater called the Capitol Theatre and an Off-Off-Broadway playhouse, the Cleveland Public Theatre.
News/talk station WTAM serves as the AM flagship for both the Cleveland Cavaliers and Cleveland Indians.
The Cavaliers won the Eastern Conference in 2007 and 2015, but were defeated in the NBA Finals by the San Antonio Spurs and then by the Golden State Warriors, respectively.
Cleveland is the only metropolitan area in the Western Hemisphere with its rail rapid transit system having only one center-city area rapid transit station (Tower City-Public Square).
The racial makeup of the city was 53.3%  African American,  37.3% White,   0.3% Native American, 1.8% Asian, 4.4% from other races, and 2.8% from two or more races.
Cleveland is generally considered an example of revitalization.
Players from the 1948 Cleveland Indians, winners of the World Series, appear in ''The Kid from Cleveland'' (1949).
In 1987, ''Playboy'' named WMMS DJ Kid Leo (Lawrence Travagliante) "The Best Disc Jockey in the Country".
Aside from factory work during the first world war, he served as reporter to ''The Plain Dealer'' for a short period, before achieving recognition in the Modernist literary scene.
Hispanic or Latino of any race were 10.0% of the population.
The population density was .
Sinai Medical Center, creating a research campus to stimulate biotech startup companies that can be spun off from research conducted in the city.
In addition, nationally distributed rock magazine ''Alternative Press'' was founded in Cleveland in 1985, and the publication's headquarters remain based in the city.
More recently, ''Jackass Presents: Bad Grandpa'' (2013), ''Miss Meadows'' (2014) and ''Captain America: The Winter Soldier'' (2014) each filmed in Cleveland.
The population density was .
A group of Cleveland teenagers try to scam their way into a Kiss concert in ''Detroit Rock City'' (1999), and several key scenes from director Cameron Crowe's ''Almost Famous'' (2000) are set in Cleveland.
Cleveland is also home to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame.
Vendors at the West Side Market in Ohio City offer many different ethnic foods for sale.
The Cleveland Open is currently held annually.
The Ohio and Erie Canal coupled with rail links helped establish the city as an important business center.
The agreement is not an admission or evidence of liability, nor is it an admission by the city, CDP, or its officers and employees that they have engaged in unconstitutional, illegal, or otherwise improper activities or conduct.
Relatively few crimes take place in downtown Cleveland's business district, but the perception of crime in the downtown has been pointed to by the Greater Cleveland Growth Association as damaging to the city's economy.
More affluent areas of Cleveland and its suburbs have lower rates of violent crime than areas of lower socioeconomic status.
Both are Democrats.
The city counted Progressive Era politicians such as the populist Mayor Tom L. Johnson among its leaders.
While other parts of Ohio, particularly Cincinnati and the southern portion of the state, have historically supported the Republican Party, Cleveland commonly breeds the strongest support in the state for the Democrats.
The number of downtown housing units in the form of condominiums, lofts, and apartments has been on the increase since 2000.
Cleveland is home to Playhouse Square Center, the second largest performing arts center in the United States behind New York City's Lincoln Center.
In the 1950s and 1960s, social and racial unrest occurred in Cleveland, resulting in the Hough Riots from July 18 to 23, 1966 and the Glenville Shootout from July 23 to 25, 1968.
As of the census of 2000, there were 478,403 people,  190,638  households, and 111,904  families residing in the city.
The 1921 and 1957 U.S. Open Chess Championship also took place in the city, and were won by Edward Lasker and Bobby Fischer, respectively.
Known as "Millionaire's Row", Euclid Avenue was world-renowned as the home of such internationally known names as Rockefeller, Hanna, and Hay.
During the 2004 Presidential election, although George W. Bush carried Ohio by 2.1%, John Kerry carried Cuyahoga County 66.6%–32.9%, his largest margin in any Ohio county.
From 2002 to 2014, Ariel Castro held three women as sex slaves in his home in Cleveland.
Residents of Cleveland are called "Clevelanders".
The area, which has been a part of the Shaker school district since the 1920s, permits these Cleveland residents to pay the same school taxes as the Shaker residents, as well as vote in the Shaker school board elections.
In addition to the cultural festivals, Cleveland hosted the CMJ Rock Hall Music Fest, which featured national and local acts, including both established artists and up-and-coming acts, but the festival was discontinued in 2007 due to financial and manpower costs to the Rock Hall.
Public Square, less than  inland, sits at an elevation of , and Hopkins Airport,  inland from the lake, is at an elevation of .
''Howard the Duck'' (1986), George Lucas' heavily criticized adaptation of the Marvel comic of the same name, begins with the title character crashing into Cleveland after drifting in outer space.
In addition to this Intel initiative, in January 2006 a New York-based think tank, the Intelligent Community Forum, selected Cleveland as the sole American city among its seven finalists for the "Intelligent Community of the Year" award.
26.3% of the population and 22.9% of families were below the poverty line.
Businesses proclaimed that Cleveland was the "best location in the nation".
The boxing-match-turned-riot near the start of ''Raging Bull'' (1980) takes place at the Cleveland Arena in 1941.
Cleveland is among the top recipients of investment for biotech start-ups and research.
Cleveland is the site of the Anisfield-Wolf Book Award, established by poet and philanthropist Edith Anisfield Wolf in 1935, which recognizes books that have made important contributions to understanding of racism and human diversity.
In University Circle, a historical marker sits at the location of his Cleveland childhood house on E. 115 near the Euclid Ave intersection.
The all-time record high in Cleveland of  was established on June 25, 1988, and the all-time record low of  was set on January 19, 1994.
Summers are warm to hot and humid while winters are cold and snowy.
Cleveland's older, inner-ring suburbs include Bedford, Bedford Heights, Brook Park, Brooklyn, Brooklyn Heights, Cleveland Heights, Cuyahoga Heights, East Cleveland, Euclid, Fairview Park, Garfield Heights, Lakewood, Linndale, Maple Heights, Newburgh Heights, Parma, Parma Heights, Shaker Heights, Solon, South Euclid, University Heights, and Warrensville Heights.
As a youngster, he published a series of short stories appearing in the ''Cleveland News''; he also performed in a number of productions for the Cleveland Play House.
In 2007, Ruhlman collaborated with Anthony Bourdain, to do an entire episode of his ''Anthony Bourdain: No Reservations'' focusing on Cleveland's restaurant scene.
Anderson both created and performed as the immensely popular Cleveland horror host Ghoulardi on WJW-TV's ''Shock Theater'', and was later succeeded by the long-running late night duo Big Chuck and Lil' John.
Case Western Reserve, the Clinic, and University Hospitals have recently announced plans to build a large biotechnology research center and incubator on the site of the former Mt.
Three two-digit Interstate highways serve Cleveland directly.
Males had a median income of $30,610 versus $24,214 for females.
On average, July is the warmest month with a mean temperature of , and January, with a mean temperature of , is the coldest.
Most prominent among these is Case Western Reserve University, a world-renowned research and teaching institution located in University Circle.
Afterwards, an estimated 1.3 million people attended a parade held in the Cavs honor.
Police became aware of the crime when one of the women escaped.
National intercity bus service is provided at a Greyhound station, located just behind the Playhouse Square theater district.
Pending approval from a federal judge, the consent decree will be implemented and the agreement is binding.
News/talk station WHK was one of the first radio stations to broadcast in the United States and the first in Ohio; its former sister station, rock station WMMS, dominated Cleveland radio in the 1970s and 1980s and was at that time one of the highest rated radio stations in the country.
Ohio City remained an independent municipality until its annexation by Cleveland in 1854.
The details of the settlement agreement, or consent decree, were released on May 26, 2015.
Much of ''The Rocker'' (2008) is set in the city, and Cleveland native Nathaniel Ayers' life story is told in ''The Soloist'' (2009).
The land rises quickly from the lakeshore.
With its blue-collar roots well intact, and plenty of Lake Erie perch available, the tradition of Friday night fish fries remains alive and thriving in Cleveland, particularly in church-based settings and during the season of Lent.
Interstate 71 begins just southwest of downtown and is the major route from downtown Cleveland to the airport.
The availability of jobs attracted African Americans from the South.
Interstate 77 begins in downtown Cleveland and runs almost due south through the southern suburbs.
Cleveland has been hailed by local media as the "Comeback City", while economic development of the inner-city neighborhoods and improvement of the school systems are municipal priorities.
Cleveland hosts several inter-modal freight railroad terminals.
The city is also home to the Cleveland Pops Orchestra.
Cleveland has an attraction for visitors and fans of ''A Christmas Story'': A Christmas Story House and Museum to see props, costumes, rooms, photos and other materials related to the Jean Shepherd film.
Levy wrote: "Cleveland: The Rectal Eye Visions".
Conceived as a way to energize a city after the Great Depression, it drew four million visitors in its first season, and seven million by the end of its second and final season in September 1937.
Cleveland is home to four of the parks in the countywide Cleveland Metroparks system, as well as the: Washington Park, Brookside Park and parts of the Rocky River and Washington Reservations.
City officials are currently negotiating with Cleveland Fire and EMS to form a new union contract that will merge the two systems entirely.
''Hot in Cleveland'', a comedy airing on TV Land, premiered on June 16, 2010.
Interstate 90 connects the two sides of Cleveland, and is the northern terminus for both I-71 and I-77.
It was founded in 1796 near the mouth of the Cuyahoga River, and became a manufacturing center owing to its location on the lake shore, as well as being connected to numerous canals and railroad lines.
The west side includes the neighborhoods of Brooklyn Centre, Clark-Fulton, Detroit-Shoreway, Cudell, Edgewater, Ohio City, Tremont, Old Brooklyn, Stockyards, West Boulevard, and the four neighborhoods colloquially known as West Park: Kamm's Corners, Jefferson, Puritas-Longmead, and Riverside.
Property crime from 2005 to 2006 was virtually unchanged across the country and in Cleveland, with larceny-theft down by 7% but burglaries up almost 14%.
The Port of Cleveland, located at the Cuyahoga River's mouth, is a major bulk freight terminal on Lake Erie, receiving much of the raw materials used by the region's manufacturing industries.
Cleveland residents geographically define themselves in terms of whether they live on the east or west side of the Cuyahoga River.
Paul Simon chose Cleveland as the opening for his only venture into filmmaking, ''One-Trick Pony'' (1980); Simon spent six weeks filming concert scenes at the Cleveland Agora.
His adolescence was divided between Cleveland and Akron before moving to New York City, finally in 1916.
However, Democrats still dominate every level of government.
A notable Cleveland athlete is Jesse Owens, who grew up in the city after moving from Alabama when he was nine.
As a result, Cleveland was often derided as "The Mistake on the Lake".
Cleveland hosts an annual parade on Saint Patrick's Day that brings hundreds of thousands to the streets of downtown.
The conference also stages both its men's and women's basketball tournaments at Quicken Loans Arena.
The Justice Department found a pattern of excessive force including the use of firearms, tasers, fists, and chemical spray that unnecessarily escalated nonviolent situations, including against the mentally ill and people who were already restrained.
NASA maintains a facility in Cleveland, the Glenn Research Center.
Cleveland's most walkable and transient areas can be found in the Downtown, Ohio City, Detroit-Shoreway, University Circle, and Buckeye-Shaker Square neighborhoods.
On November 11, 2007, Symon helped gain the spotlight when he was named "The Next Iron Chef" on the Food Network.
35.2% of all households were made up of individuals and 11.1% had someone living alone who is 65 years of age or older.
Other famed sandwiches include the Cleveland original, Polish Boy, a local favorite found at many BBQ and Soul food restaurants.
Known locally as the "Emerald Necklace", the Olmsted-inspired Metroparks encircle Cuyahoga county.
The bridges that make these connections are often called the Detroit–Superior Bridge and the Lorain–Carnegie Bridge.
The American modernist poet Hart Crane was born in nearby Garrettsville, Ohio in 1899.
Cleveland is noted in the world of celebrity food culture.
Suburbanization changed the city in the late 1960s and 1970s, when financial difficulties and a notorious 1969 fire on the Cuyahoga River challenged the city.
The new Greater Cleveland Aquarium is on the west bank of the Cuyahoga River near Downtown.
Cleveland's sole remaining daily newspaper is ''The Plain Dealer''.
Statistically speaking, higher incidences of violent crimes have been noted in some parts of Cleveland with higher populations of African Americans.
Cleveland also hosts an annual holiday display lighting and celebration, dubbed Winterfest, which is held downtown at the city's historic hub, Public Square.
Steel and many other manufactured goods emerged as leading industries.
Tim Conway and Ernie Anderson first established themselves in Cleveland while working together at KYW-TV and later WJW-TV (now WJW).
Cleveland has many nicknames, the oldest of which in contemporary use being "The Forest City".
From 1964 to 2016, the city's failure to win a trophy in any major professional sport earned the name, the Cleveland sports curse, where ESPN often proclaimed Cleveland as the "most tortured sports city."
Neither the Fire nor EMS unions have been able to come to an agreement with city officials on fair terms of merger as of yet.
Harlan Ellison, noted author of speculative fiction, was born in Cleveland in 1934; his family subsequently moved to the nearby suburb of Painesville, though Ellison moved back to Cleveland in 1949.
Cleveland incorporated as a city in 1836.
Commercial FM music stations are frequently the highest rated stations in the market: WAKS (contemporary hit radio), WDOK (adult contemporary), WENZ (mainstream urban), WHLK (adult hits), WGAR-FM (country), WMJI (classic hits), WMMS (active rock/hot talk; Indians and Cavaliers FM flagship), WNCX (classic rock; Browns co-flagship), WQAL (hot adult contemporary), and WZAK (urban adult contemporary).
The Lake Erie shoreline is very close to due east-west from the mouth of the Cuyahoga west to Sandusky, but at the mouth of the Cuyahoga it turns sharply northeast.
In 1999, Cleveland was identified as an emerging global city.
As of the 2013 Census Estimate, the city proper had a total population of 390,113, making Cleveland the 48th largest city in the United States, and the second-largest city in Ohio after Columbus.
The average household size was 2.44 and the average family size was 3.19.
Ohio City is home to a growing brewery district, which includes Great Lakes Brewing Company (Ohio's oldest microbrewery); Market Garden Brewery located next to the historic West Side Market and Platform Beer Company.
This key link between the Ohio River and the Great Lakes connected the city to the Atlantic Ocean via the Erie Canal and later via the St. Lawrence Seaway and the Gulf of Mexico via the Mississippi River.
On Case Western Reserve University campus, a statue of him stands immediately behind the Kelvin Smith Library.
Ranked 21st was in the vicinity of Quincy Avenue and E. 40th Streets, while an area near E. 55th and Scovill Avenue ranked 2nd in the nation, just behind a section of the Englewood neighborhood in Chicago, which ranked 1st.
Author and Ohio resident, James Renner set his debut novel, ''The Man from Primrose Lane'' in present-day Cleveland.
Cleveland also has plenty of corned beef, with nationally renowned Slyman's, on the near East Side, a perennial winner of various accolades from ''Esquire Magazine'', including being named the best corned beef sandwich in America in 2008.
(1968) is set in Cleveland immediately following the assassination of Martin Luther King, Jr.  Set in 1930s Cleveland, Sylvester Stallone leads a local labor union in ''F.I.S.T.''
The cult-classic mockumentary ''This Is Spinal Tap'' (1984) includes a memorable scene where the parody band gets lost backstage just before performing at a Cleveland rock concert (origin of the phrase "Hello, Cleveland!").
In television, the city is well known as the setting for the popular network sitcom ''The Drew Carey Show'', starring Cleveland native Drew Carey.
''A Christmas Story'' (1983) was set in Indiana, but drew many of its external shots—including the Parker family home—from Cleveland.
The city's goals include additional neighborhood revitalization and increased funding for public education.
OneCommunity collaborated with Cisco Systems to deploy a wireless network starting in September 2006.
A task force was formed and was partially successful at reducing gang activity by a combination of removing gang-related graffiti and educating news sources to not name gangs in news reporting.
Ethnic groups include Germans (15.2%), Irish (10.9%), English (8.7%), Italian (5.6%), Poles (3.2%), and French (3.0%).
Brothers Joe and Anthony Russo—native Clevelanders and Case Western Reserve University alumni—filmed their comedy ''Welcome to Collinwood'' (2002) entirely on location in the city.
The Cavs won the Conference again in 2016 and won their first NBA Championship, finally defeating the Golden State Warriors.
In early 2008, the ''Chicago Tribune'' ran a feature article in its 'Travel' section proclaiming Cleveland, America's "hot new dining city".
The two newer skyscrapers on Public Square, Key Tower (currently the tallest building in Ohio) and the 200 Public Square, combine elements of Art Deco architecture with postmodern designs.
Cleveland's downtown architecture is diverse.
He wrote for the school newspaper and started writing his earlier plays, poems and short stories while living in Cleveland.
Several chess championships have taken place in Cleveland.
Historically, the Browns have been among the winningest franchises in American football history winning eight titles during a short period of time—1946, 1947, 1948, 1949, 1950, 1954, 1955, and 1964.
Lakefront Trailways provides regional inter-city bus service to popular destinations from their terminal south of Cleveland in Brook Park.
In 2008, RTA completed the HealthLine, a bus rapid transit line, for which naming rights were purchased by the Cleveland Clinic and University Hospitals.
The second American Chess Congress, a predecessor the current U.S. Championship, was held in 1871, and won by George Henry Mackenzie.
As WJW&nbsp;(AM), WKNR was once the home of Alan Freed − the Cleveland disc jockey credited with first using and popularizing the term "rock and roll" to describe the music genre.
Downtown Cleveland is home to the traditional Financial District and Civic Center, as well as the distinct Cleveland Theater District, which is home to Playhouse Square Center.
Both attended Glenville High School, and their early collaborations resulted in the creation of "The Man of Steel".
Each Battalion is commanded by a Battalion Chief, who reports to an on-duty Assistant Chief.
Downtown's East 9th Street also doubled for New York in the climax of ''The Avengers'' (2012); in addition, the production shot on Cleveland's Public Square as a fill-in for Stuttgart, Germany.
A study of the relationship between employment access and crime in Cleveland found a strong inverse relationship, with the highest crime rates in areas of the city that had the lowest access to jobs.
Castro was sentenced to one thousand years in jail, but committed suicide.
Megabus provides service to Cleveland and has a stop at the Stephanie Tubbs Jones Transit Center on the east side of downtown.
Cleveland State University alum and area native, Stipe Miocic, won the UFC World Heavyweight Championship at UFC 198 in 2016.
The current Chief of Department is Patrick Kelly.
It is one of the "Big Five" major orchestras in the United States.
Museum of Contemporary Art Cleveland showcases established and emerging artists, particularly from the Cleveland area, through hosting and producing temporary exhibitions.
Based on the Morgan Quitno Press 2008 national crime rankings, Cleveland ranked as the 7th most dangerous city in the nation among US cities with a population of 100,000 to 500,000 and the 11th most dangerous overall.
Typical of the Great Lakes region, Cleveland exhibits a continental climate with four distinct seasons, which lies in the humid continental (Köppen ''Dfa'') zone.
east of downtown Cleveland is University Circle, a  concentration of cultural, educational, and medical institutions, including the Cleveland Botanical Garden, Case Western Reserve University, University Hospitals, Severance Hall, the Cleveland Museum of Art, the Cleveland Museum of Natural History, and the Western Reserve Historical Society.
The first settler in Cleaveland was Lorenzo Carter, who built a cabin on the banks of the Cuyahoga River.
Furthermore, this relationship was found to be strongest with respect to economic crimes.
The national food press—including publications ''Gourmet'', ''Food & Wine'', ''Esquire'' and ''Playboy''—has heaped praise on several Cleveland spots for awards including 'best new restaurant', 'best steakhouse', 'best farm-to-table programs' and 'great new neighborhood eateries'.
The median income for a household in the city was $25,928, and the median income for a family was $30,286.
News & World Report''.
This, along with the city's struggling professional sports teams, drew negative national press.
More recently, the teenage comedy ''Fun Size'' (2012) takes place in and around Cleveland on Halloween night, and the film ''Draft Day'' (2014) followed Kevin Costner as general manager for the Cleveland Browns.
This added about $12 million for marketing to expand regional technology partnerships, created a city-wide Wi-Fi network, and developed a tech economy.
The per capita income for the city was $14,291.
In 2007, the American Public Transportation Association named Cleveland's mass transit system the best in North America.
Two other limited-access highways serve Cleveland.
In sports, the Indians won the 1948 World Series and the Browns dominated professional football in the 1950s.
Neighboring attractions include Cleveland Browns Stadium, the Great Lakes Science Center, the Steamship Mather Museum, and the USS ''Cod'', a World War II submarine.
The annual Ingenuity Fest, Notacon and TEDxCLE conference focus on the combination of art and technology.
Between 1920 and 1960, the black population of Cleveland increased from 35,000 to 251,000.
While unemployment during the period peaked in 1983, Cleveland's rate of 13.8% was higher than the national average due to the closure of several production centers.
Approximately  of Cleveland, adjacent the Shaker Square neighborhood, is part of the Shaker Heights City School District.
It carries the distinction as being among America's best hospitals with top ratings published in ''U.S.
By the beginning of the 1980s, several factors, including changes in international free trade policies, inflation and the Savings and Loans Crisis contributed to the recession that impacted cities like Cleveland.
No set projection for a full merger has been established.
The Jennings Freeway (State Route 176) connects I-71 just south of I-90 to I-480 near the suburbs of Parma and Brooklyn Heights.
Cleveland Hopkins is a significant regional air freight hub hosting FedEx Express, UPS Airlines, United States Postal Service, and major commercial freight carriers.
Cleveland serves as the setting for fictitious insurance giant Great Benefit in ''The Rainmaker'' (1997); in the film, Key Tower doubles as the firm's main headquarters.
The Orchestra plays at Severance Hall in University Circle during the winter and at Blossom Music Center in Cuyahoga Falls during the summer.
Cleveland emerged in the early 20th Century as an important American manufacturing center, which included automotive companies such as Peerless, People's, Jordan, Chandler, and Winton, maker of the first car driven across the U.S. Other manufacturers located in Cleveland produced steam-powered cars, which included White and Gaeth, as well as the electric car company Baker.
The Terminal Tower, dedicated in 1930, was the tallest building in North America outside New York City until 1964 and the tallest in the city until 1991.
The state of Ohio lost two Congressional seats as a result of the 2010 Census, which affects Cleveland's districts in the northeast part of the state.
The Cleveland Clinic is the city's largest private employer with a workforce of over 37,000 .
In October 2010, Cleveland had two neighborhoods appear on ABC News's list of 'America's 25 Most Dangerous Neighborhoods': both in sections just blocks apart in the city's Central neighborhood on the East Side.
College radio stations include WBWC (Baldwin Wallace University), WCSB (Cleveland State University), WJCU (John Carroll University), and WRUW-FM (Case Western Reserve University).
