"Lloyd views female orgasm as an ontogenetic leftover; women have orgasms because the urogenital neurophysiology for orgasm is so strongly selected for in males that this developmental blueprint gets expressed in females without affecting fitness" and this is similar to "males having nipples that serve no fitness-related function," stated Meredith L. Chivers.
The clitoris is especially developed in apes, lemurs, and, like the penis, often contains a small bone, the os clitoridis.
Direct clitoral stimulation involves physical stimulation to the external anatomy of the clitoris&nbsp;– glans, hood and the external shaft.
Due to their higher levels of androgen exposure, the female hyenas are significantly more muscular and aggressive than their male counterparts; social-wise, they are of higher rank than the males, being dominant or dominant and alpha, and the females who have been exposed to higher levels of androgen than average become higher-ranking than their female peers.
Female bonobos often engage in the practice of genital-genital (GG) rubbing, which is the non-human form of tribadism that human females engage in.
The authors found that the students' belief that the inner portion of the vagina is the most sexually sensitive part of the female body correlated with negative attitudes toward masturbation and strong support for sexual myths.
Female genital mutilation is carried out in several countries, especially in Africa, with 85 percent of genital mutilations performed in Africa consisting of clitoridectomy or excision, and to a lesser extent in other parts of the Middle East and Southeast Asia, on girls from a few days old to mid-adolescent, often to reduce sexual desire in an effort to preserve vaginal virginity.
"It is a curious dilemma to observe the paradox that on the one hand the female body is the primary metaphor for sexuality, its use saturates advertising, art and the mainstream erotic imaginary," she said.
Knowledge of the clitoris is significantly impacted by cultural perceptions of the organ.
They looked at the terms used to describe genitalia in the PsycINFO database from 1887 to 2000 and found that ''penis'' was used in 1,482 sources, ''vagina'' in 409, while ''clitoris'' was only mentioned in 83.
A short time after stimulation has stopped, especially if orgasm has been achieved, the glans becomes visible again and returns to its normal state, with a few seconds (usually 5–10) to return to its normal position and 5–10 minutes to return to its original size.
Though the bulbs are considered the equivalent of the male spongiosum, they do not completely encircle the urethra.
Like Avicenna, Magnus also used the word ''virga'' for the clitoris, but employed it for the male and female genitals; despite his efforts to give equal ground to the clitoris, the cycle of suppression and rediscovery of the organ continued, and a 16th-century justification for clitoridectomy appears to have been confused by hermaphroditism and the imprecision created by the word ''nymphae'' substituted for the word ''clitoris''.
He suggests that the human clitoris "could have evolved to be much more conspicuous if males had preferred sexual partners with larger brighter clitorises" and that "its inconspicuous design combined with its exquisite sensitivity suggests that the clitoris is important not as an object of male mate choice, but as a mechanism of female choice."
said that the histological evaluation of the clitoris, "especially of the corpora cavernosa, is incomplete because for many years the clitoris was considered a rudimentary and nonfunctional organ."
Studies suggest that knowledge of its existence and anatomy is scant in comparison with that of other sexual organs, and that more education about it could help alleviate social stigmas associated with the female body and female sexual pleasure; for example, that the clitoris and vulva in general are visually unappealing, that female masturbation is taboo, or that men should be expected to master and control women's orgasms.
Scholar Alan F. Dixson stated that this urine "is voided at the bases of the clitoris, flows down the shallow groove on its perineal surface, and is held by the skin folds on each side of the groove".
The study concluded that the total clitoral length, including glans and body, is .
Approximately 15% of the females die during their first time giving birth, and over 60% of their species' firstborn young die.
Geoffrey Miller states that Helen Fisher, Meredith Small and Sarah Blaffer Hrdy "have viewed the clitoral orgasm as a legitimate adaptation in its own right, with major implications for female sexual behavior and sexual evolution".
Other research indicates that the clitoral body can measure  in length, while the clitoral body and crura together can be  or more in length.
The dorsal nerves penetrated the corporeal body and distally the glans in the hyena" and, in female hyenas, "the dorsal nerves fanned out laterally on the clitoral body.
In a study documenting the clitoral structure of mice, it was found that the mouse perineal urethra is surrounded by erectile tissue forming the bulbs of the clitoris, similar to the anatomy of human females: "In the mouse, as in human females, tissue organization in the corpora cavernosa of the clitoris is essentially similar to that of the penis except for the absence of a subalbugineal layer interposed between the tunica albuginea and the erectile tissue."
The male corpora cavernosa taper off internally on reaching the spongiosum head.
The trabeculated tissue has a spongy appearance; along with blood, it fills the large, dilated vascular spaces of the clitoris and the bulbs.
These corpora are separated incompletely from each other in the midline by a fibrous pectiniform septum&nbsp;– a comblike band of connective tissue extending between the corpora cavernosa.
While few animals urinate through the clitoris, the spotted hyena, which has an especially well-developed clitoris, urinates, mates and gives birth via the organ.
Concerning other beliefs about the clitoris, Hite (1976 and 1981) found that, during sexual intimacy with a partner, clitoral stimulation was more often described by women as foreplay than as a primary method of sexual activity, including orgasm.
The '''clitoris''' ( or ) is a female sex organ present in mammals, ostriches and a limited number of other animals.
It is not especially large, brightly colored, specifically shaped or selectively displayed during courtship."
The vestibular bulbs are more closely related to the clitoris than the vestibule because of the similarity of the trabecular and erectile tissue within the clitoris and bulbs, and the absence of trabecular tissue in other genital organs, with the erectile tissue's trabecular nature allowing engorgement and expansion during sexual arousal.
Her theory and proposal, though acknowledged in anatomical literature, did not materialize in anatomy books.
The clitoral glans's epithelium "has high cutaneous sensitivity, which is important in sexual responses" and it is because of this that "recession clitoroplasty was later devised as an alternative, but reduction clitoroplasty is the method currently performed."
She argued that "the male clitoris" is directly beneath the rim of the glans penis, where the frenulum of prepuce of the penis (a fold of the prepuce) is located, and proposed that this area be called the "Lownde's crown."
Parts of the clitoris may be partially or completely removed during FGM; this may be additionally known as a clitoridectomy, female circumcision, or female genital cutting (FGC).
Additionally, nefazodone is documented to have caused clitoral engorgement, as distinct from clitoral priapism, in one case, and clitoral priapism can sometimes start as a result of, or only after, the discontinuation of antipsychotics or selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs).
The vestibular bulbs lie close to the crura on either side of the vaginal opening; internally, they are beneath the labia majora.
The plural forms are ''clitorises'' in English and ''clitorides'' in Latin.
study concluded, "The basic anatomical structures of the corporeal bodies in both sexes of humans and spotted hyenas were similar.
Due to the glans's high sensitivity, direct stimulation to it is not always pleasurable; instead, direct stimulation to the hood or the areas near the glans are often more pleasurable, with the majority of females preferring to use the hood to stimulate the glans, or to have the glans rolled between the lips of the labia, for indirect touch.
The drug trazodone is known to cause male priapism as a side effect, but there is only one documented report that it may have caused clitoral priapism, in which case discontinuing the medication may be a remedy.
Associated are the urethral sponge, perineal sponge, a network of nerves and blood vessels, the suspensory ligament of the clitoris, muscles and the pelvic floor.
In reduction clitoroplasty, a common intersex operation, the glans is preserved and parts of the erectile bodies are excised.
Abnormal enlargement of the clitoris may also be referred to as ''clitoromegaly'', but clitoromegaly is more commonly seen as a congenital anomaly of the genitalia.
Social perceptions of the clitoris range from the significance of its role in female sexual pleasure, assumptions about its true size and depth, and varying beliefs regarding genital modification such as clitoris enlargement, clitoris piercing and clitoridectomy; genital modification may be for aesthetic, medical or cultural reasons.
The G-spot being analogous to the base of the male penis has additionally been theorized, with sentiment from researcher Amichai Kilchevsky that because female fetal development is the "default" state in the absence of substantial exposure to male hormones and therefore the penis is essentially a clitoris enlarged by such hormones, there is no evolutionary reason why females would have an entity in addition to the clitoris that can produce orgasms.
Clitoraid spokesperson Nadine Gary stated that the group's mission is to raise public awareness about the clitoris because it has "been ignored, vilified, made taboo, and considered sinful and shameful for centuries".
The clitoris of bonobos is larger and more externalized than in most mammals; Natalie Angier said that a young adolescent "female bonobo is maybe half the weight of a human teenager, but her clitoris is three times bigger than the human equivalent, and visible enough to waggle unmistakably as she walks".
Buisson and Foldès suggested "that the special sensitivity of the lower anterior vaginal wall could be explained by pressure and movement of clitoris's root during a vaginal penetration and subsequent perineal contraction".
Ending at the glans of the clitoris, the tip of the body bends anteriorly away from the pubis.
He considered the vagina to be "relatively unimportant" for sexual satisfaction, relaying that "few women inserted fingers or objects into their vaginas when they masturbated".
Despite the FFWHC's illustrations, Josephine Lowndes Sevely, in 1987, described the vagina as more of the counterpart of the penis.
The clitoris erects in squirrel monkeys during dominance displays, which indirectly influences the squirrel monkeys' reproductive success.
Because spider monkeys of South America have pendulous and erectile clitorises long enough to be mistaken for a penis, researchers and observers of the species look for a scrotum to determine the animal's sex; a similar approach is to identify scent-marking glands that may also be present on the clitoris.
The pseudo-penis can also be distinguished from the males' genitalia by its greater thickness and more rounded glans.
Researchers studying the peripheral and central afferent pathways from the feline clitoris concluded that "Afferent neurons projecting to the clitoris of the cat were identified by WGA-HRP tracing in the S1 and S2 dorsal root ganglia.
While some studies, using ultrasound, have found physiological evidence of the G-spot in women who report having orgasms during vaginal intercourse, O'Connell argues that this interconnected relationship is the physiological explanation for the conjectured G-Spot and experience of vaginal orgasms, taking into account the stimulation of the internal parts of the clitoris during vaginal penetration.
Supporting a distinct G-spot, however, is a study by Rutgers University, published in 2011, which was the first to map the female genitals onto the sensory portion of the brain; the scans indicated that the brain registered distinct feelings between stimulating the clitoris, the cervix and the vaginal wall&nbsp;– where the G-spot is reported to be&nbsp;– when several women stimulated themselves in a functional magnetic resonance (fMRI) machine.
are among the researchers who challenge the notion that the glans is not formed of erectile tissue, stating that their dissections clearly show glanular vascular spaces, although not as prominent as those in the clitoral body.
Upon anatomical study, the penis can be described as a clitoris that has been mostly pulled out of the body and grafted on top of a significantly smaller piece of spongiosum containing the urethra.
With regard to the Y-shape of the cavernosa&nbsp;– crown, body, and legs&nbsp;– the body accounts for much more of the structure in men, and the legs are stubbier; typically, the cavernosa are longer and thicker in males than in females.
In the females, this scrotum consists of soft adipose tissue.
Whether the clitoris is vestigial, an adaptation, or serves a reproductive function has also been debated.
The clitoris and penis are generally the same anatomical structure, although the distal portion (or opening) of the urethra is absent in the clitoris of humans and most other animals.
Knowledge of the clitoris by self-exploration was the least cited, but "respondents correctly answered, on average, three of the five clitoral knowledge measures".
The urogenital sinus persists as the vestibule of the vagina, the two urogenital folds form the labia minora, and the labioscrotal swellings enlarge to form the labia majora, completing the female genitalia.
On that basis, they argued that clitoral stimulation is the source of both kinds of orgasms, reasoning that the clitoris is stimulated during penetration by friction against its hood.
They stated that there is a thick layer of tissue that supports the tissue between the epithelium and vascular spaces and that "there is a dense distribution of nerves and sensory receptors" in the epithelium and supporting tissue.
"It's been a showstopper wherever it's been shown.
As in humans, the dorsal nerve distribution was unique in being devoid of nerves at the 12 o'clock position in the penis and clitoris of the spotted hyena" and that "dorsal nerves of the penis/clitoris in humans and male spotted hyenas tracked along both sides of the corporeal body to the corpus spongiosum at the 5 and 7 o'clock positions.
Often, a girl is not considered an adult in a FGM-practicing society unless she has undergone FGM, and the "removal of the clitoris and labia&nbsp;– viewed by some as the ''male parts'' of a woman's body&nbsp;– is thought to enhance the girl's femininity, often synonymous with docility and obedience".
Puppo's belief contrasts the general belief among researchers that vaginal orgasms are the result of clitoral stimulation; they reaffirm that clitoral tissue extends, or is at least stimulated by its bulbs, even in the area most commonly reported to be the G-spot.
"The first treatments for clitoromegaly were simply resection of the clitoris.
Lesbian couples may engage in tribadism for ample clitoral stimulation or for mutual clitoral stimulation during whole-body contact.
However, Albertus Magnus, one of the most prolific writers of the Middle Ages, felt that it was important to highlight "homologies between male and female structures and function" by adding "a psychology of sexual arousal" that Aristotle had not used to detail the clitoris.
The clitoral body is commonly referred to as the shaft (or internal shaft), while the length of the clitoris between the glans and the body may also be referred to as the shaft (or external shaft) because, like the shaft as a whole, it supports the glans, and its shape can be seen and felt through the clitoral hood.
Female spotted hyenas have a clitoris 90&nbsp;percent as long and the same diameter as a male penis (171 millimeters long and 22 millimeters in diameter), and this pseudo-penis's formation seems largely androgen-independent because it appears in the female fetus before differentiation of the fetal ovary and adrenal gland.
"If you lift the skin off the vagina on the side walls, you get the bulbs of the clitoris&nbsp;– triangular, crescental masses of erectile tissue."
Following this study, Realdo Colombo (also known as Matteo Renaldo Colombo), a lecturer in surgery at the University of Padua, Italy, published a book called ''De re anatomica'' in 1559, in which he describes the "seat of woman's delight".
She instead credits the work of Georg Ludwig Kobelt as the most comprehensive and accurate description of clitoral anatomy.
In 2012, New York artist Sophia Wallace started work on a multimedia project to challenge misconceptions about the clitoris.
The clitoris forms from the same tissues that become the glans and upper shaft of the penis, and this shared embryonic origin makes these two organs homologous (different versions of the same structure).
As such, some couples may engage in the woman-on-top position or the coital alignment technique, a technique combining the "riding high" variation of the missionary position with pressure-counterpressure movements performed by each partner in rhythm with sexual penetration, to maximize clitoral stimulation.
Masters and Johnson were the first researchers to determine that the clitoral structures surround and extend along and within the labia.
In an action similar to pushing up a shirtsleeve, the "female retracts the pseudo-penis on itself, and creates an opening into which the male inserts his own penis".
In mammals, sexual differentiation is determined by the sperm that carries either an X or a Y (male) chromosome.
Custom and tradition are the most frequently cited reasons for FGM, with some cultures believing that not performing it has the possibility of disrupting the cohesiveness of their social and political systems, such as FGM also being a part of a girl's initiation into adulthood.
The truth is that both are sexual and both are reproductive."
A 2005 study reported that, among a sample of undergraduate students, the most frequently cited sources for knowledge about the clitoris were school and friends, and that this was associated with the least amount of tested knowledge.
", in reference to the mythological Venus.
It partially contributes to erection, which are primarily caused by the two corpora cavernosa that comprise the bulk of the shaft; like the female cavernosa, the male cavernosa soak up blood and become erect when sexually excited.
Though these areas may also receive indirect physical stimulation during sexual activity, such as when in friction with the labia majora (outer lips), indirect clitoral stimulation is more commonly attributed to penile-vaginal penetration.
When engorged with blood, they cuff the vaginal opening and cause the vulva to expand outward.
We are living in a male society which has not sought change in women's role."
The most effective sexual stimulation of the organ is usually through manual or oral stimulation (cunnilingus), often referred to as direct clitoral stimulation; in cases involving sexual penetration, these activities may also be referred to as additional or assisted clitoral stimulation.
Like Falloppio and Bartholin, De Graaf criticized Colombo's claim of having discovered the clitoris; his work appears to have provided the first comprehensive account of clitoral anatomy.
He said that the "male biologists who fretted over the adaptionist questions simply assumed that a deeply vaginal site, nearer the region of fertilization, would offer greater selective benefit" due to their Darwinian, ''summum bonum'' beliefs about enhanced reproductive success.
She added, "There are, however, social reasons why this knowledge has not been popularized.
The female possesses no external vagina, as the labia are fused to form a pseudo-scrotum.
Concealed behind the labia minora, the crura end with attachment at or just below the middle of the pubic arch.
"Today, with extensive knowledge of anatomy, with C. Lombard Kelly, Kinsey, and Masters and Johnson, to mention just a few sources, there is no ignorance on the subject of the female orgasm," she stated in her 1970 article ''The Myth of the Vaginal Orgasm.''
It is also common for women to "enjoy a light caressing of the shaft of the clitoris" combined with the occasional circling of the clitoral glans, with or without manual penetration of the vagina, while other women enjoy having the entire area of the vulva caressed.
Gender assessment and surgical treatment are the two main steps in intersex operations.
Comfort Momoh, who specializes in the topic of FGM, states that FGM might have been "practiced in ancient Egypt as a sign of distinction among the aristocracy"; there are reports that traces of infibulation are on Egyptian mummies.
In the absence of testosterone, the genital tubercle allows for formation of the clitoris; the initially rapid growth of the phallus gradually slows and the clitoris is formed.
What is often referred to as "clit piercing" is actually the more common (and significantly less complicated) clitoral hood piercing.
In 2008, they published the first complete 3D sonography of the stimulated clitoris, and republished it in 2009 with new research, demonstrating the ways in which erectile tissue of the clitoris engorges and surrounds the vagina.
The clitoris, vestibular bulbs, labia minora, and urethra involve two histologically distinct types of vascular tissue (tissue related to blood vessels), the first of which is trabeculated, erectile tissue.
Though some texts state that they surround the vaginal opening, this does not appear to be the case and tunica albuginea does not envelop the erectile tissue of the bulbs.
As the clitoris's external location does not allow for direct stimulation by sexual penetration, any external clitoral stimulation while in the missionary position usually results from the pubic bone area, the movement of the groins when in contact.
The two corpora forming the clitoral body are surrounded by thick fibro-elastic tunica albuginea, literally meaning "white covering", connective tissue.
The clitoris is the human female's most sensitive erogenous zone and generally the primary anatomical source of human female sexual pleasure.
The clitoris develops from a phallic outgrowth in the embryo called the genital tubercle.
The clitoral body forms a wishbone-shaped structure containing the corpora cavernosa&nbsp;– a pair of sponge-like regions of erectile tissue which contain most of the blood in the clitoris during clitoral erection.
They last investigated terminology used by college students, ranging from Euro-American (76%/76%), Hispanic (18%/14%), and African American (4%/7%), regarding the students' beliefs about sexuality and knowledge on the subject.
With regard to historical and modern perceptions of the clitoris and associated sexual stimulation, for more than 2,500 years there were scholars who considered the clitoris and the penis equivalent in all respects except their arrangement.
By fusion of the urogenital folds&nbsp;– elongated spindle-shaped structures that contribute to the formation of the urethral groove on the belly aspect of the genital tubercle&nbsp;– the urogenital sinus closes completely and forms the spongy urethra, and the labioscrotal swellings unite to form the scrotum.
The research came at the time of the second-wave feminist movement, which inspired feminists to reject the distinction made between clitoral and vaginal orgasms.
's assessment of the bulbs' anatomy, they conclude that the bulbs "arch over the distal urethra, outlining what might be appropriately called the 'bulbar urethra' in women."
Drugs may cause or affect clitoral priapism.
A rare condition that can develop from higher than average androgen exposure is clitoromegaly.
The Latin genitive is ''clitoridis'', as in "glans clitoridis".
Other sources state that the glans is composed of erectile tissue and that erectile tissue is present within the labia minora; adipose tissue is absent in the labia minora, but the organ may be described as being made up of dense connective tissue, erectile tissue and elastic fibers.
O'Connell states, "It boils down to rivalry between the sexes: the idea that one sex is sexual and the other reproductive.
Feminist Anne Koedt argued that because men "have orgasms essentially by friction with the vagina" and not the clitoral area, this is why women's biology had not been properly analyzed.
A 1992 study gives clitoral glans widths of , with the average size smaller than a pencil-top eraser.
Research indicates that clitoral tissue extends into the vagina's anterior wall.
In another method, 50&nbsp;percent of the ventral clitoris is removed through the level base of the clitoral shaft, and it is reported that good sensation and clitoral function are observed in follow up"; additionally, it has "been reported that the complications are from the same as those in the older procedures for this method".
The clitoris exists in turtles, ostriches, crocodiles, and in species of birds in which the male counterpart has a penis.
There are intentional and unintentional modifications concerning the clitoris, including female genital mutilation (FGM), sex reassignment surgery, clitoris enlargement and genital piercings.
For example, use of anabolic steroids by bodybuilders and other athletes can result in significant enlargement of the clitoris in concert with other masculinizing effects on their bodies.
On the basis of their findings, they argued that women may be able to achieve vaginal orgasm via stimulation of the G-spot, because the highly innervated clitoris is pulled closely to the anterior wall of the vagina when the woman is sexually aroused and during vaginal penetration.
A surgery to add function to the clitoris, such as metoidioplasty, is an alternative to phalloplasty that permits retention of sexual sensation in the clitoris.
As opposed to use of dry fingers, stimulation from fingers that have been well-lubricated, either by vaginal lubrication or a personal lubricant, is usually more pleasurable for the external anatomy of the clitoris.
Because PGAD is relatively rare and, as its own concept apart from clitoral priapism, has only been researched since 2001, there is little research into what may cure or remedy the disorder.
Subordinate females lick the clitorises of higher-ranked females as a sign of submission and obedience, but females also lick each other's clitorises as a greeting or to strengthen social bonds; in contrast, while all males lick the clitorises of dominant females, the females will not lick the penises of males because males are considered to be of lowest rank.
Pressing the penis or a dildo in a gliding or circular motion against the clitoris (intercrural sex), or stimulating it by movement against another body part, during any number of sex positions, may also be practiced.
Some intersex female bears mate and give birth through the tip of the clitoris; these species are grizzly bears, brown bears, American black bears and polar bears.
Concerning other studies, researchers from the Elizabeth Garrett Anderson and Obstetric Hospital in London measured the labia and other genital structures of 50 women from the age of 18 to 50, with a mean age of 35.6., from 2003 to 2004, and the results given for the clitoral glans were 3–10&nbsp;mm for the range and 5.5 1.7 mm for the mean.
Centimeter (cm) and millimeter (mm) measurements of the clitoris show variations in its size.
A 2006 Baskin et al.
Supporting an anatomical relationship between the clitoris and vagina is a study published in 2005, which investigated the size of the clitoris; Australian urologist Helen O'Connell, described as having initiated discourse among mainstream medical professionals to refocus on and redefine the clitoris, noted a direct relationship between the legs or roots of the clitoris and the erectile tissue of the clitoral bulbs and corpora, and the distal urethra and vagina while using MRI technology.
Investigators have preferred different operations for different ages of patients".
In Bruce Bagemihl's survey of ''The Zoological Record'' (1978–1997)&nbsp;– which contains over a million documents from over 6,000 scientific journals&nbsp;– 539 articles focusing on the penis were found, while 7 were found focusing on the clitoris.
The general difficulty of achieving orgasms vaginally, which is a predicament that is likely due to nature easing the process of child bearing by drastically reducing the number of vaginal nerve endings, challenge arguments that vaginal orgasms help encourage sexual intercourse in order to facilitate reproduction.
Just like a penis, it is fully erectile, raising its head in hyena greeting ceremonies, social displays, games of rough and tumble or when sniffing out peers".
The ''Oxford English Dictionary'' also states that the shortened form "clit", the first occurrence of which was noted in the United States, has been used in print since 1958: until then, the common abbreviation was "clitty".
He "criticized Freud and other theorists for projecting male constructs of sexuality onto women" and "viewed the clitoris as the main center of sexual response".
In the majority of the books, ''penis'' was the most commonly discussed body part&nbsp;– mentioned more than ''clitoris'', ''vagina'', and ''uterus'' put together.
Masters and Johnson documented the sexual response cycle, which has four phases and is still the clinically accepted definition of the human orgasm.
Vasocongestion eventually "sets off a muscular reflex" which expels the blood that was trapped in surrounding tissues, and leads to an orgasm.
In 2000, researchers Shirley Ogletree and Harvey Ginsberg concluded that there is a general neglect of the word ''clitoris'' in common vernacular.
Sexual stimulation of the clitoris can produce female sexual arousal and orgasm, and may be achieved by masturbation or with a sexual partner.
Barry Komisaruk, head of the research findings, stated that he feels that "the bulk of the evidence shows that the G-spot is not a particular thing" and that it is "a region, it's a convergence of many different structures".
With regard to nerve endings, the human clitoris's estimated 8,000 or more (for its glans or clitoral body as a whole) is commonly cited as being twice as many as the nerve endings found in the human penis (for its glans or body as a whole), and as more than any other part of the human body.
Thus the parts are cut".
He explained that although he accepts that "clitoral orgasm plays a pleasurable and central role in female sexuality and its joys," "all these favorable attributes, however, emerge just as clearly and just as easily, whether the clitoral site of orgasm arose as a spandrel or an adaptation".
The average cross sectional area of clitoral afferent neuron profiles was 1.479±627 μm2."
The students were overwhelmingly educated to believe that the vagina is the female counterpart of the penis.
Through his observations of female masturbation and interviews with thousands of women, Kinsey found that most of the women he observed and surveyed could not have vaginal orgasms, a finding that was also supported by his knowledge of sex organ anatomy.
Modern anatomical texts instead show that the clitoris displays a hood that is the equivalent of the penis's foreskin, which covers the glans, and a shaft that is attached to the glans; the male corpora cavernosa are homologous to the corpus cavernosum clitoridis (the female cavernosa); the corpus spongiosum is homologous to the vestibular bulbs beneath the labia minora, and the scrotum is homologous to the labia minora and labia majora.
The clitoris is a complex structure, and its size and sensitivity can vary.
Some sources state that it continues until the twelfth week, while others state that it is clearly evident by the thirteenth week and that the sex organs are fully developed by the sixteenth week.
Extensive sociological, sexological and medical debate have focused on the clitoris, primarily concerning anatomical accuracy, orgasmic factors and their physiological explanation for the G-spot, and whether the clitoris is vestigial, an adaptation, or serves a reproductive function.
Some other mammals, such as lemurs and spider monkeys, also have a well-developed clitoris.
Masters and Johnson's research, as well as Shere Hite's, generally supported Kinsey's findings about the female orgasm.
Since clitoral piercing is difficult and very painful, piercing of the clitoral hood is more common than piercing the clitoral shaft, owing to the small percentage of people who are anatomically suited for it.
In their 2009 published study, the "coronal planes during perineal contraction and finger penetration demonstrated a close relationship between the root of the clitoris and the anterior vaginal wall".
The clitoral body extends up to several centimeters before reversing direction and branching, resulting in an inverted "V" shape that extends as a pair of crura ("legs").
The second type of vascular tissue is non-erectile.
The full extent of the clitoris was alluded to by Masters and Johnson in 1966, but in such a muddled fashion that the significance of their description became obscured; in 1981, the Federation of Feminist Women's Health Clinics (FFWHC) continued this process with anatomically precise illustrations identifying 18 structures of the clitoris.
It is this mechanism that "causes the stiffening and erection of the clitoris".
Removing the glans of the clitoris does not mean that the whole structure is lost, since the clitoris reaches deep into the genitals.
In 1561, Falloppio stated, "Modern anatomists have entirely neglected it&nbsp;... and do not say a word about it&nbsp;... and if others have spoken of it, know that they have taken it from me or my students."
Researcher Vincenzo Puppo, who, while agreeing that the clitoris is the center of female sexual pleasure and believing that there is no anatomical evidence of the vaginal orgasm, disagrees with O'Connell and other researchers' terminological and anatomical descriptions of the clitoris (such as referring to the vestibular bulbs as the "clitoral bulbs") and states that "the inner clitoris" does not exist because the penis cannot come in contact with the congregation of multiple nerves/veins situated until the angle of the clitoris, detailed by Kobelt, or with the roots of the clitoris, which do not have sensory receptors or erogenous sensitivity, during vaginal intercourse.
"In every cadaver we have so far dissected we have found it quite perceptible to sight and touch."
Nymphotomia was a medical operation to excise an unusually large clitoris, but what was considered "unusually large" was often a matter of perception.
MRI measurements, which provide a live and multi-planar method of examination, now complement the FFWHC's, as well as O'Connell's, research efforts regarding the clitoris, showing that the volume of clitoral erectile tissue is ten times that which is shown in doctors' offices and in anatomy text books.
The clitoris is a complex structure, containing external and internal components.
Significant controversy surrounds female genital mutilation (FGM), with the World Health Organization (WHO) being one of many health organizations that have campaigned against the procedures on behalf of human rights, stating that "FGM has no health benefits" and that it is "a violation of the human rights of girls and women" and "reflects deep-rooted inequality between the sexes".
The Y chromosome contains a sex-determining gene (SRY) that encodes a transcription factor for the protein tdf (testis determining factor) and triggers the creation of testosterone and Anti-Müllerian hormone for the embryo's development into a male.
In May 2013, humanitarian group Clitoraid launched the first annual International Clitoris Awareness Week, from May 6 to May 12.
Although the bears have been described as having "a birth canal that runs through the clitoris rather than forming a separate vagina" (a feature that is estimated to make up 10 to 20 percent of the bears' population), scientists state that female spotted hyenas are the only non-hermaphroditic female mammals devoid of an external vaginal opening, and whose sexual anatomy is distinct from usual intersex cases.
The glans (head) of the human clitoris is roughly the size and shape of a pea, and is estimated to have more than 8,000 sensory nerve endings.
The practice has existed at one point or another in almost all human civilizations, most commonly to exert control over the sexual behavior, including masturbation, of girls and women, but also to change the clitoris's appearance.
This trait makes mating more laborious for the male than in other mammals, and also makes attempts to sexually coerce (physically force sexual activity on) females futile.
They observed that both clitoral and vaginal orgasms have the same stages of physical response, and found that the majority of their subjects could only achieve clitoral orgasms, while a minority achieved vaginal orgasms.
The thin corpus spongiosum of the penis runs along the underside of the penile shaft, enveloping the urethra, and expands at the end to form the glans.
Believing that vaginal orgasms are "a physiological impossibility" because the vagina has insufficient nerve endings for sexual pleasure or climax, he "concluded that satisfaction from penile penetration is mainly psychological or perhaps the result of referred sensation".
"Yet, the clitoris, the true female sexual organ, is virtually invisible."
Stimulation of the labia minora (inner lips), due to its external connection with the glans and hood, may have the same effect as direct clitoral stimulation.
De Graaf stressed the need to distinguish ''nympha'' from ''clitoris'', choosing to "always give the clitoris the name clitoris" to avoid confusion; this resulted in frequent use of the correct name for the organ among anatomists, but considering that ''nympha'' was also varied in its use and eventually became the term specific to the labia minora, more confusion ensued.
They state that the clitoral glans and labia minora have blood vessels that are dispersed within a fibrous matrix and have only a minimal amount of smooth muscle, or that the clitoral glans is "a midline, densely neural, non-erectile structure".
With regard to females who have the condition congenital adrenal hyperplasia, the largest group requiring surgical genital correction, researcher Atilla Şenaylı stated, "The main expectations for the operations are to create a normal female anatomy, with minimal complications and improvement of life quality."
Each crus (singular form of crura) is attached to the corresponding ischial ramus&nbsp;– extensions of the copora beneath the descending pubic rami.
The clitoral glans doubles in diameter upon arousal, and, upon further stimulation, it becomes less visible as it is covered by the swelling of tissues of the clitoral hood.
While Miller states that male scientists such as Stephen Jay Gould and Donald Symons "have viewed the female clitoral orgasm as an evolutionary side-effect of the male capacity for penile orgasm" and that they "suggested that clitoral orgasm cannot be an adaptation because it is too hard to achieve", Gould acknowledged that "most female orgasms emanate from a clitoral, rather than vaginal (or some other), site" and that his nonadaptive belief "has been widely misunderstood as a denial of either the adaptive value of female orgasm in general, or even as a claim that female orgasms lack significance in some broader sense".
The idea that males have clitorises was suggested in 1987 by researcher Josephine Lowndes Sevely, who theorized that the male corpora cavernosa (a pair of sponge-like regions of erectile tissue which contain most of the blood in the penis during penile erection) are the true counterpart of the clitoris.
Şenaylı added that "cosmesis, structural integrity, and coital capacity of the vagina, and absence of pain during sexual activity are the parameters to be judged by the surgeon."
People are hungry to be able to talk about this," Wallace said.
