Cirrostratus ''nebulosus'' has a rather diffuse appearance lacking in structural detail.
It is composed of ice crystals or supercooled water droplets appearing as small unshaded round masses or flakes in groups or lines with ripples like sand on a beach.
The variety ''radiatus'' is associated with cloud rows of a particular type that appear to converge at the horizon.
Persistent contrails have been identified as candidates for possible inclusion in the genitus category as cirrus, cirrostratus, or cirrocumulus homogenitus
There is no stratiform type in this group because by definition, even very thick stratiform clouds cannot have towering vertical structure, although nimbostratus may be accompanied by embedded towering cumuliform or cumulonimbiform types.
Measurements taken by NASA indicate that on the whole, the effects of low and middle étage clouds that tend to promote cooling are outweighing the warming effects of high layers and the variable outcomes associated with multi-étage  or vertically developed clouds.
A newly formed or poorly organized column might be comparatively benign, but can quickly intensify into a funnel cloud or tornado.
The term ''vertical'' is often used in connection with this group and is useful for distinguishing between clouds of moderate, deep, and towering vertical extent.
*Genus cirrostratus (Cs):
Depending on their vertical size, clouds of the cumulus genus-type may be low or multi-étage.
A large arcus formation can have the appearance of a dark menacing arch.
This cloud type can produce moderate to heavy showers.
High-étage tropospheric genus-types, ''cirrus'', ''cirrocumulus'', and ''cirrostratus'', particularly show this duality with both short-wave albedo cooling and long-wave greenhouse warming effects.
All cloud varieties fall into one of two main groups.
Cloud types in the troposphere, the atmospheric layer closest to Earth's surface, have Latin names due to the universal adaptation of Luke Howard's nomenclature.
They are the product of localized but generally ''free-convective'' lift where there are no inversion layers in the atmosphere to limit vertical growth.
Most of the sunlight that reaches the ground is absorbed, warming the surface, which emits radiation upward at longer, ''infrared'', wavelengths.
Cirrocumulus (layered)
Cirrostratus often thickens into altostratus ahead of a warm front or low-pressure area.
Most genera can be divided into ''species'', some of which are common to more than one genus.
Cirriform clouds that form higher up in the stratosphere and mesosphere have common names for their main types, but are sub-classified ''alpha-numerically'' rather than with the elaborate system of Latin names given to cloud types in the troposphere.
''Non-convective'' stratiform clouds appear in ''stable'' airmass conditions and, in general, have flat sheet-like structures that can form at any altitude in the troposphere.
This results in the formation of cumuliform buildups arising from a common stratiform base.
Very high level (stratosphere)
This normally occurs with altostratus opacus, which can produce widespread but usually light precipitation, and with thicker clouds that show significant vertical development.
However, if the air becomes sufficiently moist and unstable, orographic showers or thunderstorms may appear.
Conductive, radiational, and evaporative cooling require no lifting mechanism and can cause condensation at surface level resulting in the formation of fog.
Clouds of this structure have both cumuliform and stratiform characteristics in the form of rolls or ripples.
It was defined as having cumuliform- and stratiform characteristics integrated into a single layer (in contrast to cumulostratus which was deemed to be composite in nature and could be structured into more than one layer).
Under conditions of strong atmospheric wind shear and instability, wave-like undulatus formations may break into regularly spaced crests.
If the visibility increases to 1 kilometer or higher in any kind of fog, the visible condensation is termed mist.
When wind driven clouds are forced through a mountain range, or when ocean wind driven clouds encounter a high elevation island, they can begin to circle the mountain or high land mass.
It has been recommended for formal classification as a supplementary feature using its suggested Latin name.
In addition, the stronger the updraft is, the more likely the storm is to undergo tornadogenesis and to produce large hail and high winds.
There are several main sources of water vapor that can be added to the air as a way of achieving saturation without any cooling process: Water or moist ground, precipitation or virga, and transpiration from plants
It has been formally suggested that this wave cloud be classified as a supplementary feature, possibly with the Latin name ''fluctus''.
Ancient cloud studies were not made in isolation, but were observed in combination with other weather elements and even other natural sciences.
Ns normally forms from middle-étage altostratus, and develops at least moderate vertical extent  when the base subsides into the low étage during precipitation that can reach moderate to heavy intensity.
Sightings are rare more than 45 degrees south of the north pole or north of the south pole.
With this addition, a canon of ten tropospheric cloud ''genera'' was established that came to be officially and universally accepted.
*Genus cumulus (Cu) – ''great vertical extent'':
Clouds initially form in clear air or become clouds when fog rises above surface level.
The stratiform group is cross-classified into the genera cirrostratus (high-étage), altostratus (middle-étage), stratus (low-étage), and nimbostratus (multi-étage).
Mid-level altostratus and multi-level nimbostratus always have a flat or diffuse appearance and are therefore not subdivided into species.
Nimbostratus and some cumulus in this group usually achieve moderate or deep vertical extent, but without towering structure.
When the sun is just below the horizon, low-etage clouds are gray, middle clouds appear rose-colored, and high-etage clouds are white or off-white.
It lacks towering structure and looks feebly illuminated from the inside.
Clouds with significant vertical extent occupy more than one étage and are commonly, but not always, treated as a separate group or sub-group, or given separate descriptions within the context of the standard étages.
Very low stratiform cloud results when advection fog is lifted above surface level during breezy conditions.
Another variety, ''duplicatus'' (closely spaced layers of the same type, one above the other), is sometimes found with cirrus of both the fibratus and uncinus species, and with altocumulus and stratocumulus of the species stratiformis and lenticularis.
Red, orange, and pink clouds occur almost entirely at sunrise/sunset and are the result of the scattering of sunlight by the atmosphere.
This process of reflection/absorption is what causes the range of cloud color from white to black.
Cirrocumulus occasionally forms alongside cirrus and may be accompanied or replaced by cirrostratus clouds at the very leading edge of an active weather system.
When comparatively low-resolution satellite images of high clouds are analized without supporting data from direct human observations, it becomes impossible to distinguish between individual genus types which are then collectively identified as cirrus-type.
This variant has no separate WMO Latin designation, but is sometimes known informally as a Kelvin–Helmholtz (wave) cloud.
In October 2013, the detection of high altitude optically thick clouds in the atmosphere of exoplanet Kepler-7b was announced, and, in December 2013, also in the atmospheres of GJ 436 b and GJ 1214 b.
:'''Towering vertical'''
The latter are sometimes referred to as the horse latitudes.
These larger droplets associated with vertically developed clouds are better able to trap the long-wave radiation thus mitigating the cooling effect to some degree.
The droplets or particles are suspended in the atmosphere above the surface of a planetary body.
There is also evidence that smoke particles from burnt-up meteors provide much of the condensation nuclei required for the formation of noctilucent cloud.
These species are subdivisions of genus types that occur in partly unstable air.
This led to the recognition of a ''stratocumuliform'' physical category that included rolled and rippled clouds classified separately from the more freely convective heaped cumuliform clouds.
The sun and moon are visible in clear outline.
It has been officially recommended that the genitus category be expanded to include certain types that do not originate from pre-existing clouds or as the result of any natural atmospheric processes.
The physical forms are cross-classified by altitude levels to produce ten basic genus-types or ''genera''.
Classifications that follow this approach usually show nimbostratus either as low-étage to denote its normal base height range, or as middle, based on the altitude range at which it normally forms.
In about 340 BC the Greek philosopher Aristotle wrote ''Meteorologica'', a work which represented the sum of knowledge of the time about natural science, including weather and climate.
A green colorization occurs mostly late in the day when the sun is comparatively low in the sky and the incident sunlight has a reddish tinge that appears green when illuminating a very tall bluish cloud.
Howard's original system established three physical categories or ''forms'' based on appearance and process of formation: ''cirriform'' (mainly detached and wispy), ''cumuliform'' or convective (mostly detached and heaped, rolled, or rippled), and non-convective ''stratiform'' (mainly continuous layers in sheets).
On comparatively rare occasions, convective lift can be powerful enough to penetrate the tropopause and push the cloud top into the stratosphere.
Fall streaks consisting of virga or wisps of cirrus are usually seen beneath the hole as ice crystals fall out to a lower altitude.
Associated with a powerful "ripple" in the atmosphere, the cloud may be "surfed" in glider aircraft.
:This is a flat or sometimes ragged non-convective stratiform type that sometimes resembles elevated fog.
They usually form in the low étage except during conditions of very low relative humidity when the clouds bases can rise into the middle altitude range.
Accessory clouds, by contrast, are generally detached from the main cloud.
A further modification of the genus classification system came when an IMC commission for the study of clouds put forward a refined and more restricted definition of the genus nimbus which was effectively reclassified as a stratiform cloud type.
However this term is sometimes restricted to upward-growing free-convective cumuliform and cumulonimbiform genera to the exclusion of deep stratiform clouds.
The ''mamma'' feature forms on the bases of clouds as downward-facing bubble-like protuberances caused by localized downdrafts within the cloud.
The origin of the term ''cloud'' can be found in the old English ''clud'' or ''clod'', meaning a hill or a mass of rock.
Stratocumuliform genus-types (cirrocumulus, altocumulus, and stratocumulus) that appear in mostly stable air have two species each that can form in the high, middle, or low étages of the troposphere.
Only very weak precipitation can fall from this cloud (usually drizzle or snow grains), although heavier rain or snow may fall through a stratus layer from a higher precipitating cloud deck.
Three years later, Henrik Mohn revealed a similar discovery of nacreous clouds in what is now considered the stratosphere.
The air may be cooled to its dew point by a variety of atmospheric processes or it may gain moisture (usually in the form of water vapor) from an adjacent source.
Although genus types with vertical extent are often considered a single group, the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) further distinguishes towering vertical clouds as a separate group or sub-group.
All three are associated with the stratiformis species of altocumulus and stratocumulus.
The species ''fractus'' shows ''variable'' instability because it can be a subdivision of genus-types of different physical forms that have different stability characteristics.
Polar stratospheric clouds form in the lowest part of the stratosphere during the winter, at the altitude and during the season that produces the coldest temperatures and therefore the best chances of triggering condensation caused by adiabatic cooling.
As difficult as it is to evaluate the effects of current cloud cover characteristics on climate change, it is even more problematic to predict the outcome of this change with respect to future cloud patterns and events.
They can form at any altitude in the troposphere and are not restricted to any particular cloud type.
This can create the illusion of continuous precipitation of more than very light intensity falling from stratocumulus.
Cirrus ''spissatus'' appear as opaque patches that can show light grey shading.
As a sign of the popularity of the naming scheme, the German dramatist and poet Johann Wolfgang von Goethe composed four poems about clouds, dedicating them to Howard.
The role of tropospheric clouds in regulating weather and climate remains a leading source of uncertainty in projections of global warming.
Opaque stratocumulus can produce very light intermittent precipitation.
Cirrus are generally non-convective except castellanus and floccus subtypes which show limited convection.
Tiny particles of water are densely packed and sunlight cannot penetrate far into the cloud before it is reflected out, giving a cloud its characteristic white color, especially when viewed from the top.
Cumulonimbus, the largest of all cloud genera, has the capacity to produce very heavy showers.
Extreme level (mesosphere)
Genus and species types are further subdivided into ''varieties'' whose names can appear after the species name to provide a fuller description of a cloud.
A cumulonimbus cloud that appears to have a greenish/bluish tint is a sign that it contains extremely high amounts of water; hail or rain which scatter light in a way that gives the cloud a blue color.
Meteorologica was based on intuition and simple observation, but not on what is now considered the scientific method.
Hence, interactions between the large-scale (synoptic meteorology) and clouds becomes difficult to represent in global models.
Small-droplet aerosols are not good at absorbing long-wave radiation reflected back from Earth, so there is a net cooling with almost no long-wave effect.
This left cumulonimbus as the only nimbiform type as indicated by its root-name.
Cirriform clouds were identified as always upper level and given the genus name cirrus from the Latin for 'fibre' or 'hair'.
Changes in aerosol burden can have indirect effects on clouds by changing the droplet size distribution, or the lifetime and precipitation characteristics of clouds.
They typically have a bluish or silvery white coloration that can resemble brightly illuminated cirrus.
Similar patterns also occur at higher latitudes in both hemispheres.
Supplementary features and accessory clouds are not further subdivisions of cloud types below the species and variety level.
Warm fronts associated with extratropical cyclones tend to generate mostly cirriform and stratiform clouds over a wide area unless the approaching warm airmass is unstable, in which case cumulus congestus or cumulonimbus clouds will usually be embedded in the main precipitating cloud layer.
The presence of a large-scale high-pressure subtropical ridge on each side of the equator reduces cloudiness at these low latitudes.
Polar mesospheric clouds form at a single extreme altitude range of about  and are consequently not classified into more than one  étage.
During its 78-day mission, it relayed thousands of pictures showing the structure of large-scale cloud regimes, and proved that satellites could provide useful surveillance of global weather conditions from space.
*Genus cirrus (Ci):
These clouds are sometimes classified separately from the other vertical or multi-étage types because of their ability to produce severe turbulence.
Distribution in the mesosphere is similar to the stratosphere except at much higher altitudes.
They often form along a high altitude jetstream and at the very leading edge of a frontal or low-pressure disturbance where they may merge into cirrostratus.
Tufted cirrocumulus forms in more isolated heaps than the layered varient and can therefore be considered a cumuliform cloud which retains its pure white coloration.
Some planets outside the solar system are known to have atmospheric clouds.
Noctilucent clouds may occasionally take on more of a red or orange hue.
Larger cumuliform types are a sign of moderate to strong atmospheric instability and convective activity.
Yellowish clouds may be seen in the troposphere in the late spring through early fall months during forest fire season.
If the cloud is sufficiently large and the droplets within are spaced far enough apart, a percentage of the light that enters the cloud is not reflected back out but is absorbed giving the cloud a darker look.
Some cloud varieties are not restricted to a specific étage or form, and can therefore be common to more than one genus or species.
Of the stratiform group, high-level cirrostratus comprises two species.
Tufted altocumulus and cirrocumulus genera in the middle and high étages are also considered cumuliform because they have a more detached heaped structure than their layered stratocumuliform variants.
It was formally proposed in December 1802 and published for the first time the following year.
They are relatively uncommon and are mostly seen in the polar regions of Earth.
*Genus stratus (St):
As a consequence, much research has focused on the response of low and vertical clouds to a changing climate.
The magazine ''De Mundo'' (attributed to Pseudo-Aristotle) noted:
:These are mostly fibrous wisps of delicate white cirriform ice crystal cloud that show up clearly against the blue sky.
He proposed the name ''noctilucent'' which is Latin for ''night shining''.
Of all these possible cumulonimbus-related events, lightning is the only one of these that requires a thunderstorm to be taking place since it is the lightning that creates the thunder.
Contrails formed from the exhaust of aircraft flying in the high étage can persist and spread into formations resembling any of the high cloud genus-types.
Additional proposals were made by Andre Poey (1863), Clemment Ley (1894), and H.H.
The adiabatic cooling processes that lead to the creation of clouds by way of lifting agents are all associated with convergence; a process that involves the horizontal inflow and accumulation of air at a given location, as well as the rate at which this happens.
:This genus type is a heavy towering cumulonimbiform mass of free convective cloud with a dark-grey to nearly black base and a very high top in the form of a mountain or huge tower.
They are arranged in three main layers at altitudes of 45 to 65&nbsp;km that obscure the planet's surface and can produce virga.
It has been officially suggested that roll clouds of this type that are not attached to a parent cloud be reclassified as a new species of stratocumulus, possibly with the Latin name ''volutus''.
They are sometimes seen with the genera cirrus, cirrocumulus, and altocumulus.
However, an increasing frequency of occurrence of noctilucent clouds since the 19th century may be the result of climate change.
As with cirrocumulus, tufted altocumulus in isolated heaps can be considered a cumuliform rather than a stratocumuliform cloud.
In 1840, German meteorologist Ludwig Kaemtz added stratocumulus to Howard's canon as a mostly detached low-étage genus of ''limited'' convection.
Over time, the metaphoric term replaced the original old English ''weolcan'' to refer to clouds in general.
They are given the Latin name noctilucent because of their illumination well after sunset and before sunrise.
Alternatives to Howard's classification system were proposed throughout the 19th century.
During the mid 1850s, Emilien Renou, director of the Parc Saint-Maur and Montsouris observatories, began work on an elaboration of Howard's classifications that would lead to the introduction during the 1870s of altocumulus (physically more closely related to stratocumulus than to cumulus) and altostratus.
The best-known is cumulonimbus with mammatus, but the mamma feature is also seen occasionally with cirrus, cirrocumulus, altocumulus, altostratus, and stratocumulus.
Similarly, these varieties are also not associated with moderate and towering vertical clouds because they are always opaque.
The stratocumuliform group is cross-classified into layered cirrocumulus (high-étage), layered altocumulus (middle-étage), and stratocumulus (low-étage).
Several years after Aristotle's book, his pupil Theophrastus put together a book on weather forecasting called ''The Book of Signs''.
Howard's cumulostratus was not included as a distinct type, having effectively been reclassified into its component cumuliform and stratiform genus types already included in the new canon.
These clouds can form as low as  above surface at any latitude, but may be based as high as  near the poles,  at mid latitudes, and  in the tropics.
Nacreous/non-nacreous
These varieties are not always present with the genera and species with which they are otherwise associated, but only appear when atmospheric conditions favor their formation.
They are typically very thin with an undulating cirriform appearance.
:This is most commonly a middle-étage stratocumuliform cloud layer of limited convection that is usually appears in the form of irregular patches or more extensive sheets arranges in groups, lines, or waves.
Frontal and cyclonic lift occur when stable air is forced aloft at weather fronts and around centers of low pressure.
In meteorology,a '''cloud''' is an aerosol comprising a visible mass of minute liquid droplets or frozen crystals, both of which are made of water or various chemicals.
The species ''castellanus'' appears when a mostly stable stratocumuliform or cirriform layer becomes disturbed by localized areas of airmass instability.
*Genus cirrocumulus (Cc):
The base-height range for each étage varies depending on the latitudinal geographical zone.
Clouds of the high étage form at altitudes of  in the polar regions,  in the temperate regions and  in the tropical region.
*Genus cumulonimbus (Cb):
Fractus clouds can form in precipitation at low altitudes, with or without brisk or gusty winds.
The details are not fully understood, but much of the global dimming (and subsequent reversal) is thought to be a consequence of changes in aerosol loading in the atmosphere, especially sulfur-based aerosol associated with biomass burning and urban pollution.
Water-ice fogs have also been detected on this planet.
Another wave-like cloud feature that is distinct from the variety undulatus has been given the Latin name ''asperatus''.
For the first time, precipitation and the clouds from which precipitation fell were called meteors, which originate from the Greek word ''meteoros'', meaning 'high in the sky'.
He believed that the changing cloud forms in the sky could unlock the key to weather forecasting.
Along with adiabatic cooling that requires a lifting agent, there are three major non-adiabatic mechanisms for lowering the temperature of the air to its dew point.
At these wavelengths, however, water in the clouds acts as an efficient absorber.
By this process of accumulation, the space between droplets becomes increasingly larger, permitting light to penetrate farther into the cloud.
Altocumulus (layered)
The combined works of Aristotle and Theophrastus had such authority they became the main influence in the study of clouds, weather and weather forecasting for nearly 2000 years.
Other convective severe weather may or may not be associated with thunderstorms and include heavy snow showers, hail, strong wind shear, downbursts, and tornadoes.
A third source of lift is wind circulation forcing air over a physical barrier such as a mountain (orographic lift).
It was then renamed nimbostratus and published with the new name in the 1932 edition of the ''International Atlas of Clouds and of States of the Sky''.
More general airmass instability in the troposphere tends to produce clouds of the more freely convective cumulus genus type, whose species are mainly indicators of degrees of atmospheric instability and resultant vertical development of the clouds.
If the mother cloud undergoes a complete change in genus, it is considered to be a ''mutatus'' cloud.
Cumuliform clouds generally appear in isolated heaps or tufts.
Some species can even be subtypes of genera that are each of different physical forms.
Opacity-based varieties are not applied to high-étage clouds because they are always translucent, or in the case of cirrus spissatus, always opaque.
Some of these basic types are common to more than one form or more than one level, as illustrated in the stratocumuliform  and cumuliform columns of the classification table below.
Cirriform clouds are generally of the genus cirrus and have the appearance of detached or semi-merged filaments.
This cloud often forms under a precipitating deck of altostratus or high-based nimbostratus associated with a well-developed warm front, slow-moving cold front, or low-pressure area.
In 1976, the United Kingdom Department of Industry published a modification of the international cloud classification system adapted for satellite cloud observations.
*Genus altostratus (As):
These maps are produced from information in the international synoptic code (or SYNOP) that is transmitted at regular intervals by professionally trained staff at major weather stations.
After centuries of speculative theories about the formation and behavior of clouds, the first truly scientific studies were undertaken by Luke Howard in England and Jean-Baptiste Lamarck in France.
If the air is cooled to its dew point and becomes saturated, it normally sheds vapor it can no longer retain, which condenses into cloud.
Since a green/blue tint signifies copious amounts of water, a strong updraft to support it, high winds from the storm raining out, and wet hail; all elements that improve the chance for it to become severe, can all be inferred from this.
This tends to produce the coldest temperatures in the entire atmosphere just below the mesopause.
Supplementary features, whether in the form of clouds or precipitation, are directly attached to the main genus-cloud.
Polar mesospheric clouds are the highest in the atmosphere and form near the top of the mesosphere at about ten times the altitude of tropospheric high clouds.
They may also reflect the colors of large fires, city lights, or auroras that might be present.
This uncertainty arises because of the delicate balance of processes related to clouds, spanning scales from millimeters to planetary.
They are closely associated with precipitating cloud systems of considerable vertical and sometimes horizontal extent, so they are also classified as ''accessory clouds'' under the name ''pannus'' (see section on supplementary features).
