In some species, the medusae remain attached to the polyp and are responsible for sexual reproduction; in extreme cases these reproductive zooids may not look much like medusae.
Modern cnidarians are generally classified into four main classes: sessile Anthozoa (sea anemones, corals, sea pens); swimming Scyphozoa (jellyfish) and Cubozoa (box jellies); and Hydrozoa, a diverse group that includes all the freshwater cnidarians as well as many marine forms, and has both sessile members such as ''Hydra'' and colonial swimmers such as the Portuguese Man o' War.
Most obtain the majority of their food from predation but some, including the corals ''Hetroxenia'' and ''Leptogorgia'', depend almost completely on their endosymbionts and on absorbing dissolved nutrients.
Many cnidarian species produce colonies that are single organisms composed of medusa-like or polyp-like zooids, or both (hence they are trimorphic).
Cnidarians form an animal phylum that are more complex than sponges, about as complex as ctenophores (comb jellies), and less complex than bilaterians, which include almost all other animals.
Seven other box jellies can cause a set of symptoms called Irukandji syndrome, which takes about 30&nbsp;minutes to develop, and from a few hours to two&nbsp;weeks to disappear.
In addition to both of these methods, Anthozoa can split horizontally just above the base.
Like sponges and ctenophores, cnidarians have two main layers of cells that sandwich a middle layer of jelly-like material, which is called the mesoglea in cnidarians; more complex animals have three main cell layers and no intermediate jelly-like layer.
To minimise wasteful firing, two types of stimulus are generally required to trigger cnidocytes: nearby sensory cells detect chemicals in the water, and their cilia respond to contact.
In Anthozoa (anemones, corals, etc.)
The fertilized eggs develop into larvae by dividing until there are enough cells to form a hollow sphere (blastula) and then a depression forms at one end (gastrulation) and eventually become the digestive cavity.
*Interstitial cells, which are unspecialized and can replace lost or damaged cells by transforming into the appropriate types.
Number of medusae produced per polyp
Predatory species use their cnidocytes to poison or entangle prey, and those with venomous nematocysts may start digestion by injecting digestive enzymes.
Stony corals secrete massive calcium carbonate exoskeletons.
This combination prevents them from firing at distant or non-living objects.
Some researchers classify the extinct conulariids as cnidarians, while others propose that they form a completely separate phylum.
Several free-swimming species of Cubozoa and Scyphozoa possess balance-sensing statocysts, and some have simple eyes.
Medusae and complex swimming colonies such as siphonophores and chondrophores sense tilt and acceleration by means of statocysts, chambers lined with hairs which detect the movements of internal mineral grains called statoliths.
Stauromedusae, small sessile cnidarians with stalks and no medusa stage, have traditionally been classified as members of the Scyphozoa, but recent research suggests they should be regarded as a separate class, Staurozoa.
The Myxozoa, microscopic parasites, were first classified as protozoans, but recently as heavily modified cnidarians, and more closely related to Hydrozoa and Scyphozoa than to Anthozoa.
Other polyps such as ''Tubularia'' use columns of water-filled cells for support.
Most stingings by ''C.
Coral, mainly from the Pacific Ocean has long been used in jewellery, and demand rose sharply in the 1980s.
These corals, which were wiped out in the Permian-Triassic extinction about , did not dominate reef construction since sponges and algae also played a major part.
Some cnidarians are parasites, mainly on jellyfish but a few are major pests of fish.
*The thread, which is an extension of the "finger" and coils round it until the cnidocyte fires.
For example, in Scyphozoa (jellyfish) and Cubozoa (box jellies) a larva swims until it finds a good site, and then becomes a polyp.
In Hydrozoans, colonial individuals arising from individuals zooids will take on separate tasks.
Fossils of cnidarians that do not build mineralized structures are very rare.
Not all cnidarians reproduce sexually, with many species having complex life cycles of asexual polyp stages and sexual medusae.
This mechanism has been observed in nematocysts of the class Hydrozoa, sometimes producing pressures as high as 140 atmospheres, similar to that of scuba air tanks, and fully extending the thread in as little as 2&nbsp;milliseconds (0.002&nbsp;second).
Reefs are an important food source for low-technology fishing, both on the reefs themselves and in the adjacent seas.
Sea anemones, corals, sea pens
The "sea wasp" ''Chironex fleckeri'' has been described as the world's most venomous jellyfish and is held responsible for 67&nbsp;deaths, although it is difficult to identify the animal as it is almost transparent.
In medusae the tentacles round the edge of the bell are often short and most of the prey capture is done by "oral arms", which are extensions of the edge of the mouth and are often frilled and sometimes branched to increase their surface area.
This improves respiration after feeding and allows these animals, which use the cavity as a hydrostatic skeleton, to control the water pressure in the cavity without expelling undigested food.
The thread is usually hollow and delivers chemicals from the cnida to the target.
A few mineralized fossils that resemble corals have been found in rocks from the Cambrian period, and corals diversified in the Early Ordovician.
Jellyfish stings killed about 1,500 people in the 20th century, and cubozoans are particularly dangerous.
Among anthozoans, a few scleractinian corals, sea pens and sea fans live in deep, cold waters, and some sea anemones inhabit polar seabeds while others live near hydrothermal vents over  below sea-level.
*Cnidocytes, the harpoon-like "nettle cells" that give the phylum Cnidaria its name.
However, both cnidarians and ctenophores are more complex than sponges as they have: cells bound by inter-cell connections and carpet-like basement membranes; muscles; nervous systems; and '''some''' have sensory organs.
'''Cnidaria''' () is a phylum containing over 10,000 species of animals found exclusively in aquatic (freshwater and marine) environments: they are predominantly marine species.
Cells in outer layers can move inwards and change functions
''Hydra'' and most sea anemones close their mouths when they are not feeding, and the water in the digestive cavity then acts as a hydrostatic skeleton, rather like a water-filled balloon.
The lid may be a single hinged flap or three flaps arranged like slices of pie.
Prey of cnidarians ranges from plankton to animals several times larger than themselves.
Their distinguishing feature is cnidocytes, specialized cells that they use mainly for capturing prey.
Jellyfish is very low in cholesterol and sugars, but cheap preparation can introduce undesirable amounts of heavy metals.
Shortened forms of this life cycle are common, for example some oceanic scyphozoans omit the polyp stage completely, and cubozoan polyps produce only one medusa.
The circulation of nutrients is driven by water currents produced by cilia in the gastroderm or by muscular movements or both, so that nutrients reach all parts of the digestive cavity.
Reef-building corals are limited to tropical seas between 30°N and 30°S with a maximum depth of , temperatures between  and  high salinity and low carbon dioxide levels.
Cnidarian sexual reproduction often involves a complex life cycle with both polyp and medusa stages.
Meanwhile, life cycle reversal, in which polyps are formed directly from medusae without the involvement of sexual reproduction process, was observed in both Hydrozoa (''Turritopsis dohrnii'' and ''Laodicea undulata'') and Scyphozoa (''Aurelia'' sp.1).
In some species it also contains low concentrations of cnidocytes, which are used to subdue prey that is still struggling.
Scyphozoan polyps can both bud and split down the middle.
Cnidaria have no brains or even central nervous systems.
and Scyphozoa (jellyfish), the mesoglea also contains some muscle cells.
The juveniles swim off and slowly grow to maturity, while the polyp re-grows and may continue strobilating periodically.
*Rapid contraction of fibers round the cnida may increase its internal pressure.
Scyphozoan and hydrozoan larvae have little yolk and most lack endosymbiotic algae, and therefore have to settle quickly and metamorphose into polyps.
A few can swim clumsily by waggling their bases.
During the Mesozoic era rudist bivalves were the main reef-builders, but they were wiped out in the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event , and since then the main reef-builders have been scleractinian corals.
Nevertheless, major cnidarian groups contain species that have escaped these limitations.
However, in 2005 Katja Seipel and Volker Schmid suggested that cnidarians and ctenophores are simplified descendants of triploblastic animals, since ctenophores and the medusa stage of some cnidarians have striated muscle, which in bilaterians arises from the mesoderm.
All cnidarians can regenerate, allowing them to recover from injury and to reproduce asexually.
Anthozoa have no medusa stage at all and the polyps are responsible for sexual reproduction.
They have two basic body forms: swimming medusae and sessile polyps, both of which are radially symmetrical with mouths surrounded by tentacles that bear cnidocytes.
However, it is unclear how the other groups acquired the medusa stage, since Hydrozoa form medusae by budding from the side of the polyp while the other Medusozoa do so by splitting them off from the tip of the polyp.
cell-adhesion molecules, but no basement membranes except Homoscleromorpha.
Cnidarians' activities are coordinated by a decentralized nerve net and simple receptors.
At least four hypotheses have been proposed:
Many scleractinian corals—which form the structural foundation for coral reefs—possess polyps that are filled with zooxanthellae.
The two main cell layers of cnidarians form epithelia that are mostly one cell thick, and are attached to a fibrous basement membrane, which they secrete.
Within the Cnidaria, the Anthozoa (sea anemones and corals) are regarded as the sister-group of the rest, which suggests that the earliest cnidarians were sessile polyps with no medusa stage.
This circulates through the digestive cavity and, in colonial cnidarians, through the connecting tunnels, so that gastroderm cells can absorb the nutrients.
The mesoglea contains small numbers of amoeba-like cells, and muscle cells in some species.
Hydrozoans have a worldwide range: some, such as ''Hydra'', live in freshwater; ''Obelia'' appears in the coastal waters of all the oceans; and ''Liriope'' can form large shoals near the surface in mid-ocean.
The mitochondrial genome in the medusozoan cnidarians, unlike those in other animals, is linear with fragmented genes.
Their presence implies that the cnidarian and bilaterian lineages had already diverged.
The "smell" of fluids from wounded prey makes the tentacles fold inwards and wipe the prey off into the mouth.
Hydras and some sea anemones can move slowly over rocks and sea or stream beds by various means: creeping like snails, crawling like inchworms, or by somersaulting.
Common coral reef cnidarians include both Anthozoans (hard corals, octocorals, anemones) and Hydrozoans (fire corals, lace corals).
Spawning is generally driven by environmental factors such as changes in the water temperature, and their release is triggered by lighting conditions such as sunrise, sunset or the phase of the moon.
Fringing reefs just below low-tide level also have a mutually beneficial relationship with mangrove forests at high-tide level and sea grass meadows in between: the reefs protect the mangroves and seagrass from strong currents and waves that would damage them or erode the sediments in which they are rooted, while the mangroves and seagrass protect the coral from large influxes of silt, fresh water and pollutants.
The adults have gonads in the gastroderm, and these release ova and sperm into the water in the breeding season.
In some species, cnidocytes can also be used as anchors.
This grouping of Cnidaria and Bilateria has been labelled "Planulozoa" because it suggests that the earliest Bilateria were similar to the planula larvae of Cnidaria.
In some colonial polyps, a chitinous periderm gives support and some protection to the connecting sections and to the lower parts of individual polyps.
Two, with jelly-like layer between them
Cnidaria give their symbiotic algae carbon dioxide, some nutrients, a place in the sun and protection against predators.
Digestive and circulatory organs
For example, in ''Obelia'' there are feeding individuals, the gastrozooids; the individuals capable of asexual reproduction only, the gonozooids, blastostyles and free-living or sexually reproducing individuals, the medusae.
They also secrete the jelly-like mesoglea that separates the layers.
As well as forming the "signal cables", intermediate neurons also form ganglia that act as local coordination centers.
Nematocysts in exodermis
Groups of cnidocytes are usually connected by nerves and, if one fires, the rest of the group requires a weaker minimum stimulus than the cells that fire first.
''Hydra'', siphonophores
This phenomenon of succession of differently organized generations (one asexually reproducing, sessile polyp, and one sexually reproducing, free-swimming medusa or sessile polyp) is sometimes called Alternation of asexual and sexual phases or metagenesis, but should not be confused with the alternation of generations as found in plants, characterized by an alternation of a multicellular spore-producing form and a multicellular gamete-producing form.
The main waste product of cells' internal processes is ammonia, which is removed by the external and internal water currents.
Some colonial sea anemones stiffen the mesoglea with sediment particles.
There are no respiratory organs, and both cell layers absorb oxygen from and expel carbon dioxide into the surrounding water.
Hospital treatment is usually required, and there have been a few deaths.
inter-cell connections; basement membranes
Coral reefs form some of the world's most productive ecosystems.
It is now generally thought that the Calcarea (sponges with calcium carbonate spicules) are more closely related to Cnidaria, Ctenophora (comb jellies) and Bilateria (all the more complex animals) than they are to the other groups of sponges.
The earliest widely accepted animal fossils are rather modern-looking cnidarians, possibly from around , although fossils from the Doushantuo Formation can only be dated approximately.
The commercial value of jellyfish food products depends on the skill with which they are prepared, and "Jellyfish Masters" guard their trade secrets carefully.
Most species have ocelli ("simple eyes"), which can detect sources of light.
All known cnidaria can reproduce asexually by various means, in addition to regenerating after being fragmented.
Their bodies consist of mesoglea, a non-living jelly-like substance, sandwiched between two layers of epithelium that are mostly one cell thick.
Number of main cell layers
In medusae the only supporting structure is the mesoglea.
Some have no polyp stages and some (e.g.
Predators of cnidarians include: sea slugs, which can incorporate nematocysts into their own bodies for self-defense; starfish, notably the crown of thorns starfish, which can devastate corals; butterfly fish and parrot fish, which eat corals; and marine turtles, which eat jellyfish.
This enables corals to recover even after apparently being destroyed by predators.
In molecular phylogenetics analyses from 2005 onwards, important groups of developmental genes show the same variety in cnidarians as in chordates.
The life cycles of most have polyp stages, which are limited to locations that offer stable substrates.
Scientists currently think that cnidarians, ctenophores and bilaterians are more closely related to calcareous sponges than these are to other sponges, and that anthozoans are the evolutionary "aunts" or "sisters" of other cnidarians, and the most closely related to bilaterians.
Used cnidocytes have to be replaced, which takes about 48&nbsp;hours.
Sea pens stiffen the mesoglea with calcium carbonate spicules and tough fibrous proteins, rather like sponges.
Medusa phase in life cycle
They are cigar-shaped but slightly broader at the "front" end, which is the aboral, vegetal-pole end and eventually attaches to a substrate if the species has a polyp stage.
In addition, reefs provide complex and varied habitats that support a wide range of other organisms.
Although the Ediacaran fossil ''Charnia'' used to be classified as a jellyfish or sea pen, more recent study of growth patterns in ''Charnia'' and modern cnidarians has cast doubt on this hypothesis, leaving only the Canadian polyp, ''Haootia'', as the only bona-fide cnidarian body fossil from the Ediacaran.
Anthozoan larvae either have large yolks or are capable of feeding on plankton, and some already have endosymbiotic algae that help to feed them.
*The thread may be like a coiled spring that extends rapidly when released.
Fossil cnidarians have been found in rocks formed about , and other fossils show that corals may have been present shortly before  and diversified a few million years later.
Many are preyed on by other animals including starfish, sea slugs, fish and turtles.
Both are radially symmetrical  , like a wheel and a tube respectively.
However, despite their great productivity, reefs are vulnerable to over-fishing, because much of the organic carbon they produce is exhaled as carbon dioxide by organisms at the middle levels of the food chain and never reaches the larger species that are of interest to fishermen.
Cnidarians are classified into four main groups: the almost wholly sessile Anthozoa (sea anemones, corals, sea pens); swimming Scyphozoa (jellyfish); Cubozoa (box jellies); and Hydrozoa, a diverse group that includes all the freshwater cnidarians as well as many marine forms, and has both sessile members, such as ''Hydra'', and colonial swimmers, such as the Portuguese Man o' War.
Medusae often trap prey or suspended food particles by swimming upwards, spreading their tentacles and oral arms and then sinking.
However the agile Box Jellyfish are unique among Medusae because they possess four kinds of true eyes that have retinas, corneas and lenses.
Cells found in mesoglea
Most of the communications between nerve cells are via chemical synapses, small gaps across which chemicals flow.
As this process is too slow to ensure that the muscles round the rim of a medusa's bell contract simultaneously in swimming the neurons which control this communicate by much faster electrical signals across gap junctions.
Most cnidarians prey on organisms ranging in size from plankton to animals several times larger than themselves, but many obtain much of their nutrition from dinoflagellates, and a few are parasites.
Some Anthozoa have ciliated grooves on their tentacles, allowing them to pump water out of and into the digestive cavity without opening the mouth.
Some, however, omit either the polyp or the medusa stage.
Sensory cells appear between or sometimes on top of the muscle cells, and communicate via synapses (gaps across which chemical signals flow) with motor nerve cells, which lie mostly between the bases of the muscle cells.
In 1866 it was proposed that Cnidaria and Ctenophora were more closely related to each other than to Bilateria and formed a group called Coelenterata ("hollow guts"), because Cnidaria and Ctenophora both rely on the flow of water in and out of a single cavity for feeding, excretion and respiration.
The larvae, called planulae, swim or crawl by means of cilia.
Once the food is in the digestive cavity, gland cells in the gastroderm release enzymes that reduce the prey to slurry, usually within a few hours.
fleckeri'' cause only mild symptoms.
However, human activities damage reefs in several ways: mining for construction materials; pollution, including large influxes of fresh water from storm drains; commercial fishing, including the use of dynamite to stun fish and the capture of young fish for aquariums; and tourist damage caused by boat anchors and the cumulative effect of walking on the reefs.
Absorption may take a few hours, and digestion within the cells may take a few days.
In parts of the range, fishing industry is restricted to daylight hours and calm conditions in two short seasons, from March to May and August to November.
Cnidarians range in size from ''Hydra'',  long, to the Lion's mane jellyfish, which may exceed  in diameter and  in length.
*In the case of ''Chironex'' (the "sea wasp"), chemical changes in the cnida's contents may cause them to expand rapidly by polymerization.
On the other hand, some large jellyfish are considered a delicacy in East and Southeast Asia.
A few polyps collect materials such as sand grains and shell fragments, which they attach to their outsides.
Polymorphism refers to the occurrence of structurally and functionally more than two different types of individuals within the same organism.
Hence, cnidarians and ctenophores have traditionally been labelled diploblastic, along with sponges.
Mostly myoepithelial
Cnidaria that carry photosynthetic symbionts may have the opposite problem, an excess of oxygen, which may prove toxic.
As a result, some recent text books classify ctenophores as triploblastic, and it has been suggested that cnidarians evolved from triploblastic ancestors.
Staurozoa have recently been recognised as a class in their own right rather than a sub-group of Scyphozoa, and there is debate about whether the parasitic Myxozoa and Polypodiozoa are cnidarians or whether they are more closely related to the bilaterians.
If the cell is a venomous nematocyte, the "finger"'s tip reveals a set of barbs that anchor it in the prey.
In addition to epitheliomuscular, nerve and interstitial cells, the inward-facing gastroderm ("stomach skin") contains gland cells that secrete digestive enzymes.
Tourism centered on reefs provides much of the income of some tropical islands, attracting photographers, divers and sports fishermen.
Instead they have decentralized nerve nets consisting of sensory neurons that generate signals in response to various types of stimulus, such as odors, motor neurons that tell muscles to contract, and "cobwebs" of intermediate neurons to connect them.
Instead, these species rely on their medusae to extend their ranges.
Both forms have a single orifice and body cavity that are used for digestion and respiration.
It is difficult to study the firing mechanisms of cnidocytes as these structures are small but very complex.
They did not commit themselves on whether bilaterians evolved from early cnidarians or from the hypothesized triploblastic ancestors of cnidarians.
Cnidarians are distinguished from all other animals by having cnidocytes that fire like harpoons and are used mainly to capture prey.
While reef-forming corals are almost entirely restricted to warm and shallow marine waters, other cnidarians can be found at great depths, in polar regions, and in freshwater.
Few fossils of cnidarians without mineralized skeletons are known from more recent rocks, except in lagerstätten that preserved soft-bodied animals.
Nerves inform cnidocytes when odors from prey or attackers are detected and when neighbouring cnidocytes fire.
Hydrozoa have a variety of life cycles.
Asexual reproduction makes the daughter Cnidaria clone the adult.
These appear between or sometimes on top of the muscle cells.
Some large jellyfish species of the Rhizostomae order are commonly consumed in Japan, Korea and Southeast Asia.
It is a characteristic feature of Cnidarians, particularly the polyp and medusa forms, or of zooids within colonial organisms like those in Hydrozoa.
Cnidarians were formerly grouped with ctenophores in the phylum Coelenterata, but increasing awareness of their differences caused them to be placed in separate phyla.
Cnidaria are diploblastic animals; in other words, they have two main cell layers, while more complex animals are triploblasts having three main layers.
Coral reefs have long been economically important as providers of fishing grounds, protectors of shore buildings against currents and tides, and more recently as centers of tourism.
Cnidarians feed in several ways: predation, absorbing dissolved organic chemicals, filtering food particles out of the water, and obtaining nutrients from symbiotic algae within their cells.
The fibers of the outward-facing cell layer generally run at right angles to the fibers of the inward-facing one.
The cilia of the cnidocytes detect physical contact.
However, both cnidarians and ctenophores have a type of muscle that, in more complex animals, arises from the middle cell layer.
Many cnidarians are limited to shallow waters because they depend on endosymbiotic algae for much of their nutrients.
The endosymbiotic algae of many cnidarian species are very effective primary producers, in other words converters of inorganic chemicals into organic ones that other organisms can use, and their coral hosts use these organic chemicals very efficiently.
These are found between the bases of muscle cells.
If the body tilts in the wrong direction, the animal rights itself by increasing the strength of the swimming movements on the side that is too low.
*Chemical changes in the liquid in the cnida make it a much more concentrated solution, so that osmotic pressure forces water in very rapidly to dilute it.
In 1881, it was proposed that Ctenophora and Bilateria were more closely related to each other, since they shared features that Cnidaria lack, for example muscles in the middle layer (mesoglea in Ctenophora, mesoderm in Bilateria).
The reason for this difference is unknown.
Although the eyes probably do not form images, Cubozoa can clearly distinguish the direction from which light is coming as well as negotiate around solid-colored objects.
Since these animals have no heads, their ends are described as "oral" (nearest the mouth) and "aboral" (furthest from the mouth).
Since the parents are immobile, these feeding capabilities extend the larvae's range and avoid overcrowding of sites.
When a cnidocyte fires, the finger pops out.
Their digestion is both intra and extracellular.
However, in cnidarians the depression forms at the end further from the yolk (at the animal pole), while in bilaterians it forms at the other end (vegetal pole).
Indigestible remains of prey are expelled through the mouth.
However, the number of middle-layer cells and types are much lower than in sponges.
Adult cnidarians appear as either swimming medusae or sessile polyps, and many hydrozoan species are known to alternate between the two forms.
Staurozoa have recently been recognised as a class in their own right rather than a sub-group of Scyphozoa, and there is debate about whether Myxozoa and Polypodiozoa are cnidarians or closer to bilaterians (more complex animals).
