: CO + H2O → CO2 + H2
In Centralia, Pennsylvania (a borough located in the Coal Region of the United States), an exposed vein of anthracite ignited in 1962 due to a trash fire in the borough landfill, located in an abandoned anthracite strip mine pit.
Some of the techniques that would be used to accomplish this include chemically washing minerals and impurities from the coal, gasification (see also IGCC), improved technology for treating flue gases to remove pollutants to increasingly stringent levels and at higher efficiency, carbon capture and storage technologies to capture the carbon dioxide from the flue gas and dewatering lower rank coals (brown coals) to improve the calorific value, and thus the efficiency of the conversion into electricity.
Huge amounts of coal ash and other waste is produced annually.
Those burning underground can be difficult to locate and many cannot be extinguished.
Due to natural processes such as flooding, these forests were buried underneath soil.
It is the world's largest energy consumer, and relies on coal to supply 69% of its energy needs.
If hydrogen is the desired end-product, however, the syngas is fed into the water gas shift reaction, where more hydrogen is liberated.
It details how the air pollution caused by the plume of coal smokestack emissions is a cause of asthma, strokes, reduced intelligence, artery blockages, heart attacks, congestive heart failure, cardiac arrhythmias, mercury poisoning, arterial occlusion, and lung cancer.
The coal tar is then further processed into fuels.
The bacteria Diplococcus has been found to degrade coal, raising its temperature.
The total monetary cost of these health impacts is over $100 billion annually.
More recently, the Chicago School of Public Health released a largely similar report, echoing many of the same findings.
Coal can also be converted into synthetic fuels equivalent to gasoline or diesel by several different direct processes (which do not intrinsically require gasification or indirect conversion).
Based on the ash percentage, the coking coal can be divided into various grades.
Vattenfall opines that this technology is considered not to be a final solution for CO2 reduction in the atmosphere, but provides an achievable solution in the near term while more desirable alternative solutions to power generation can be made economically practical.
Since 1983, the world's top coal producer has been China.
* Pre-combustion capture - This involves gasification of a feedstock (such as coal) to form synthesis gas, which may be shifted to produce a H2 and CO2-rich gas mixture, from which the CO2 can be efficiently captured and separated, transported, and ultimately sequestered, This technology is usually associated with Integrated Gasification Combined Cycle process configurations.
This involves biological and geological processes that take place over a long period of time.
Coke is a solid carbonaceous residue derived from low-ash, low-sulfur bituminous coal (metallurgical coal), from which the volatile constituents are driven off by baking in an oven without oxygen at temperatures as high as 1,000&nbsp;°C (1,832&nbsp;°F), so the fixed carbon and residual ash are fused together.
In Old Turkic languages, ''kül'' is "ash(es), cinders", ''öčür'' is "quench".
Breathing in coal dust causes coalworker's pneumoconiosis which is known colloquially as "black lung", so-called because the coal dust literally turns the lungs black from their usual pink color.
Coal to chemical processes do require substantial quantities of water.
It is also used as a conditioner for soil to make it more able to retain and slowly release water.
The classification of coal is generally based on the content of volatiles.
* Washery Grade I (Exceeding 18% but not exceeding 21%)
Similarly, Sasol has built and operated coal-to-chemicals facilities in South Africa.
* Graphite is one of the more difficult coals to ignite and is not commonly used as fuel — it is mostly used in pencils, and when powdered, as a lubricant.
The Saskatchewan Government's Boundary Dam Integrated Carbon Capture and Sequestration Demonstration Project will use post-combustion, amine-based scrubber technology to capture 90% of the CO2 emitted by Unit 3 of the power plant; this CO2 will be pipelined to and utilized for enhanced oil recovery in the Weyburn oil fields.
* Washery Grade II (Exceeding 21% but not exceeding 24%)
The overall plant efficiency with cogeneration of electricity and district heating can reach as much as 94%.
Germanic cognates include the Old Frisian ''kole'', Middle Dutch ''cole'', Dutch ''kool'', Old High German ''chol'', German ''Kohle'' and Old Norse ''kol'', and the Irish word ''gual'' is also a cognate via the Indo-European root.
Subsidence can occur above tunnels, causing damage to infrastructure or cropland.
It may be divided further into metamorphically altered bituminous coal and "petrified oil", as from the deposits in Pennsylvania.
Prices further declined to $71.25 as of October 2010.
The main route to these products is coal gasification to produce syngas.
The coke must be strong enough to resist the weight of overburden in the blast furnace, which is why coking coal is so important in making steel using the conventional route.
The abundance of coal combined with lack of natural gas resources in China is strong inducement for the coal to chemicals industry pursued there.
Coal gasification can be used to produce syngas, a mixture of carbon monoxide (CO) and hydrogen (H2) gas.
Spills of fly ash, such as the Kingston Fossil Plant coal fly ash slurry spill, can also contaminate land and waterways, and destroy homes.
Under high pressure and high temperature, dead vegetation was slowly converted to coal.
The Whyalla steelworks is one example of a coke producing facility where liquid ammonia is discharged to the marine environment.
Those technologies are being developed to remove or reduce pollutant emissions to the atmosphere.
its heating value, is roughly 24 megajoules per kilogram (approximately 6.7 kilowatt-hours per kg).
This beneficially masks some of the warming caused by increased greenhouse gases.
Some environmental impacts are modest, such as dust nuisance.
Use of coal on this scale generates hundreds of millions of tons of ash and other waste products every year.
English Designation
The temperature also rose as they sank deeper and deeper.
In 2011 other large producers were United States (993 million tonnes), India (589), European Union (576) and Australia (416).
High-sulfur coal mined in Illinois which was unsaleable in the United States found a ready market in Asia as exports reached 13 million tons in 2012.
In the United States coal-fired power plants were estimated in 2004 to cause nearly 24,000 premature deaths every year, including 2,800 from lung cancer.
This trapped the carbon in immense peat bogs that were eventually covered and deeply buried by sediments.
When heated, the coal decomposes and the bod becomes slightly friable, easing the process of breaking open holes for tapping the molten metal.
* Steel Grade I (Not exceeding 15%)
Sequestration adds to the cost of production.
The total known deposits recoverable by current technologies, including highly polluting, low-energy content types of coal (i.e., lignite, bituminous), is sufficient for many years.
The coking coal should be low in sulfur and phosphorus, so they do not migrate to the metal.
At Kuh i Malik in Yagnob Valley, Tajikistan, coal deposits have been burning for thousands of years, creating vast underground labyrinths full of unique minerals, some of them very beautiful.
From 2008 to 2010, 22% of new gasifier additions were to be for chemical production.
Release of SO2 also contributes to the widespread acidification of ecosystems.
Coke from coal is grey, hard, and porous and has a heating value of 24.8 million Btu/ton (29.6 MJ/kg).
The coal continues to burn slowly back into the seam until oxygen (air) can no longer reach the flame front.
Estimates of the cost of producing liquid fuels from coal suggest that domestic U.S. production of fuel from coal becomes cost-competitive with oil priced at around $35 per barrel, with the $35 being the break-even cost.
One of the earliest known impacts of coal on the water cycle was acid rain.
Historically, production of chemicals from coal has been used since the 1950s and has become established in the market.
The American Lung Association, the American Nurses' Association, and the Physicians for Social Responsibility released a report in 2009 which details in depth the detrimental impact of the coal industry on human health, including workers in the mines and individuals living in communities near plants burning coal as a power source.
In the United States alone, it is estimated that 1500 former employees of the coal industry die every year from the effects of breathing in coal mine dust.
The trading unit for these contracts is , and are also quoted in U.S. dollars and cents per ton.
Since coal is the principal fuel for generating electricity in the United States, coal futures contracts provide coal producers and the electric power industry an important tool for hedging and risk management.
Coal ash and other solid combustion byproducts are stored locally and escape in various ways that expose those living near coal plants to radiation and environmental toxics.
Often syngas is used to fire gas turbines to produce electricity, but the versatility of syngas also allows it to be converted into transportation fuels, such as gasoline and diesel, through the Fischer-Tropsch process; alternatively, syngas can be converted into methanol, which can be blended into fuel directly or converted to gasoline via the methanol to gasoline process.
Metallurgical coke is used as a fuel and as a reducing agent in smelting iron ore in a blast furnace.
As of October 2008, the price per short ton had declined to $111.50.
The production of coke from coal produces ammonia, coal tar, and gaseous compounds as by-products which if discharged to land, air or waterways can act as environmental pollutants.
Alternatively, the hydrogen obtained from gasification can be used for various purposes, such as powering a hydrogen economy, making ammonia, or upgrading fossil fuels.
However, perhaps the largest and most long term effect of coal use is the release of carbon dioxide, a greenhouse gas that causes climate change and global warming, according to the IPCC and the EPA.
As the process continued the plant matter was protected from biodegradation and oxidation, usually by mud or acidic water.
According to the German classification, coal is classified as follows:
* Lignite, or brown coal, is the lowest rank of coal and used almost exclusively as fuel for electric power generation.
Fires can cause the ground above to subside, their combustion gases are dangerous to life, and breaking out to the surface can initiate surface wildfires.
Coal ash contains the radioactive elements uranium and thorium.
It is one form of several precombustion treatments and processes for coal that alter coal's characteristics before it is burned.
Wild coal fires in the area were reported by the Lewis and Clark Expedition as well as explorers and settlers in the area.
Figures from the United States Environmental Protection Agency show that these technologies have made today's coal-based generating fleet 77 percent cleaner on the basis of regulated emissions per unit of energy produced.
Also, production of chemicals from coal is of much higher interest in countries like South Africa, China, India and the United States where there are abundant coal resources.
As coal contains mainly carbon, the conversion of dead vegetation into coal is called carbonization.
As oil prices were increasing during the first half of 2009, the coal liquefaction projects in China were again boosted, and these projects are profitable with an oil barrel price of $40.
In 2011 China produced 3,520 million tonnes of coal – 49.5% of 7,695 million tonnes world coal production.
The reddish siltstone rock that caps many ridges and buttes in the Powder River Basin in Wyoming and in western North Dakota is called ''porcelanite'', which resembles the coal burning waste "clinker" or volcanic "scoria".
If the refiner wants to produce gasoline, the syngas is collected at this state and routed into a Fischer-Tropsch reaction.
* Post-combustion capture - This refers to capture of CO2 from exhaust gases of combustion processes, typically using sorbents, solvents, or membrane separations to remove CO2 from the bulk gases.
The Kemper County IGCC Project, a 582 MW coal gasification-based power plant, will use pre-combustion capture of CO2 to capture 65% of the CO2 the plant produces, which will be utilized/geologically sequestered in enhanced oil recovery operations.
* Washery Grade IV (Exceeding 28% but not exceeding 35%)
This place has been well-known since the time of Herodotus, but European geographers misinterpreted the Ancient Greek descriptions as the evidence of active volcanism in Turkestan (up to the 19th century, when the Russian army invaded the area).
In early 2015, it was trading near $56/ton.
The facility captures CO2 and acid rain producing pollutants, separates them, and compresses the CO2 into a liquid.
In this specialized use, it is sometimes known as "sea coal" in the US.
Small steam coal (dry small steam nuts or DSSN) was used as a fuel for domestic water heating.
Coal pollution costs the EU €43 billion each year.
Petroleum coke is the solid residue obtained in oil refining, which resembles coke, but contains too many impurities to be useful in metallurgical applications.
The energy density of coal, i.e.
In 1999, world gross carbon dioxide emissions from coal usage were 8,666 million tonnes of carbon dioxide.
'''Coal''' (Old English ''col''; meaning "mineral of fossilized carbon" since the thirteenth century) is a combustible black or brownish-black sedimentary rock usually occurring in rock strata in layers or veins called '''coal beds''' or '''coal seams'''.
Plans are to inject the CO2 into depleted natural gas fields or other geological formations.
Coal is the largest source of energy for the generation of electricity worldwide, as well as one of the largest worldwide anthropogenic sources of carbon dioxide releases.
An alternative form of coal combustion is as coal-water slurry fuel (CWS), which was developed in the Soviet Union.
This occurs as part of First-Footing and represents warmth for the year to come.
If CCS technologies are employed, reductions of 5–12% can be achieved in Coal to Liquid (CTL) plants and up to a 75% reduction is achievable when co-gasifying coal with commercially demonstrated levels of biomass (30% biomass by weight) in coal/biomass-to-liquids plants.
This is probably because China prefers not to be dependent on foreign oil, instead utilizing its enormous domestic coal reserves.
The compound "charcoal" in Turkic is ''öčür(ülmüş) kül'', literally "quenched ashes, cinders, coals" with elided anlaut ''ö-'' and inflection affixes ''-ülmüş''.
In the past, coal was converted to make coal gas (town gas), which was piped to customers to burn for illumination, heating, and cooking.
Yet the disease and mortality burden of coal use today falls most heavily upon China.
Attempts to extinguish the fire were unsuccessful, and it continues to burn underground to this day.
Coal seams can be set on fire by spontaneous combustion or contact with a mine fire or surface fire.
Coal is extracted from the ground by coal mining.
As of 2012 coal production in the United States was falling at the rate of 7% annually with many power plants using coal shut down or converted to natural gas; however, some of the reduced domestic demand was taken up by increased exports with five coal export terminals being proposed in the Pacific Northwest to export coal from the Powder River Basin to China and other Asian markets; however, as of 2013, environmental opposition was increasing.
For example, mining affects with groundwater and water table levels and acidity.
As of 2013 much of the coal to chemical production was in the People's Republic of China where environmental regulation and water management was weak.
The Australian Burning Mountain was originally believed to be a volcano, but the smoke and ash come from a coal fire that has been burning for some 6,000 years.
47% has been obtained at the coal-fired Nordjyllandsværket CHP Plant and an overall plant efficiency of up to 91% with cogeneration of electricity and district heating.
During the reaction, oxygen and water molecules oxidize the coal into carbon monoxide (CO), while also releasing hydrogen gas (H2).
Other ways to use coal are combined heat and power cogeneration and an MHD topping cycle.
Throughout history, coal has been used as an energy resource, primarily burned for the production of electricity and/or heat, and is also used for industrial purposes, such as refining metals.
* Washery Grade III (Exceeding 24% but not exceeding 28%)
In its dehydrated form, peat is a highly effective absorbent for fuel and oil spills on land and water.
Power stations that burn coal also consume large quantities of water.
Around 10% of coal is ash, Coal ash is hazardous and toxic to human beings and other living things.
: C (''as Coal'') + O2 + H2O → H2 + CO
It is also customary and considered lucky in Scotland and the North of England to give coal as a gift on New Year's Day.
Clinker is rock that has been fused by the natural burning of coal.
Coal liquefaction methods involve carbon dioxide () emissions in the conversion process.
According to the 2010 Worldwide Gasification Database, a survey of current and planned gasifiers, from 2004 to 2007 chemical production increased its gasification product share from 37% to 45%.
* Oxy-fuel combustion - Fossil fuels such as coal are burned in a mixture of recirculated flue gas and oxygen, rather than in air, which largely eliminates nitrogen from the flue gas enabling efficient, low-cost CO2 capture.
An early example of a coal-based plant using (oxy-fuel) carbon-capture technology is Swedish company Vattenfall's Schwarze Pumpe power station located in Spremberg, Germany, built by German firm Siemens, which went on-line in September 2008.
In addition to the NYMEX contract, the Intercontinental Exchange (ICE) has European (Rotterdam) and South African (Richards Bay) coal futures available for trading.
Local people once used this method to mine ammoniac.
Because of this higher carbon efficiency of natural gas generation, as the market in the United States has changed to reduce coal and increase natural gas generation, carbon dioxide emissions may have fallen.
Lightning strikes are an important source of ignition.
During gasification, the coal is mixed with oxygen and steam while also being heated and pressurized.
* Sub-bituminous coal, whose properties range from those of lignite to those of bituminous coal, is used primarily as fuel for steam-electric power generation and is an important source of light aromatic hydrocarbons for the chemical synthesis industry.
However, consumption is increasing and maximal production could be reached within decades (see world coal reserves, below).
The goals of precombustion coal technologies are to increase efficiency and reduce emissions when the coal is burned.
Annual health costs in Europe from use of coal to generate electricity are €42.8 billion, or $55 billion.
Water systems are affected by coal mining coal.
Refined coal is the product of a coal-upgrading technology that removes moisture and certain pollutants from lower-rank coals such as sub-bituminous and lignite (brown) coals.
Hydrogenation processes are the Bergius process, the SRC-I and SRC-II (Solvent Refined Coal) processes, the NUS Corporation hydrogenation process and several other single-stage and two-stage processes.
Coal is composed primarily of carbon along with variable quantities of other elements, chiefly  hydrogen, sulfur, oxygen, and nitrogen.
The white rot fungus Trametes versicolor can grow on and metabolize naturally occurring coal.
The price of coal increased from around $30.00 per short ton in 2000 to around $150.00 per short ton as of September 2008.
Concerns exist regarding the economic viability of these technologies and the timeframe of delivery, potentially high hidden economic costs in terms of social and environmental damage, and the costs and viability of disposing of removed carbon and other toxic matter.
Finely ground bituminous coal, known in this application as sea coal, is a constituent of foundry sand.
If coal liquefaction is done without employing either carbon capture and storage (CCS) technologies or biomass blending, the result is lifecycle greenhouse gas footprints that are generally greater than those released in the extraction and refinement of liquid fuel production from crude oil.
* Peat, considered to be a precursor of coal, has industrial importance as a fuel in some regions, for example, Ireland and Finland.
The deadly London smog was caused primarily by the heavy use of coal.
An overview of coal liquefaction and its future potential is available.
The multifuel-fired Avedøreværket CHP Plant just outside Copenhagen can achieve a net electric efficiency as high as 49%.
However, the alternative route is direct reduced iron, where any carbonaceous fuel can be used to make sponge or pelletised iron.
In North America, Central Appalachian coal futures contracts are currently traded on the New York Mercantile Exchange (trading symbol ''QL'').
The wide, shallow seas of the Carboniferous Period provided ideal conditions for coal formation, although coal is known from most geological periods.
Because the slate of chemical products that can be made via coal gasification can in general also use feedstocks derived from natural gas and petroleum, the chemical industry tends to use whatever feedstocks are most cost-effective.
Coal is an important feedstock in production of a wide range of chemical fertilizers and other chemical products.
As more and more soil deposited over them, they were compressed.
In the direct liquefaction processes, the coal is either hydrogenated or carbonized.
With oil prices as low as around $40 per barrel in the U.S. as of December 2008, liquid coal lost some of its economic allure in the U.S., but will probably be re-vitalized, similar to oil sand projects, with an oil price around $70 per barrel.
It is also contained in 'mould wash', a paste or liquid with the same function applied to the mould before casting.
Coal (by liquefaction technology) is one of the backstop resources that could limit escalation of oil prices and mitigate the effects of transportation energy shortage that will occur under peak oil.
CWS significantly reduces emissions, improving the heating value of coal.
* Steel Grade II (Exceeding 15% but not exceeding 18%)
Several different technological methods are available for the purpose of carbon capture as demanded by  the clean coal concept:
The result is pig iron, and is too rich in dissolved carbon, so it must be treated further to make steel.
China is the largest producer of coal in the world.
Those measured in the first quarter of 2012 were the lowest of any recorded for the first quarter of any year since 1992.
A grass fire in a coal area can set dozens of coal seams on fire.
In 2013, the head of the UN climate agency advised that most of the world's coal reserves should be left in the ground to avoid catastrophic global warming.
A fossil fuel, coal forms when dead plant matter is converted into peat, which in turn is converted into lignite, then sub-bituminous coal, after that bituminous coal, and lastly anthracite.
Coal mining can also cause long lasting fires, and it has been estimated that around 1000 coal seam fires are burning at any given time .
The harder forms, such as anthracite coal, can be regarded as metamorphic rock because of later exposure to elevated temperature and pressure.
Clean coal technology usually addresses atmospheric problems resulting from burning coal.
After release, the sulfur dioxide is oxidized to gaseous H2SO2 which scatters solar radiation, hence its increase in the atmosphere exerts a cooling effect on climate.
An estimated 5 million people worked in China's coal-mining industry in 2007.
Gasification combined with Fischer-Tropsch technology is currently used by the Sasol chemical company of South Africa to make motor vehicle fuels from coal and natural gas.
Therefore, interest in using coal tends to increase for higher oil and natural gas prices and during periods of high global economic growth that may strain oil and gas production.
* Anthracite, the highest rank of coal, is a harder, glossy black coal used primarily for residential and commercial space heating.
For every megawatt-hour generated, coal-fired electric power generation emits around 2,000 pounds of carbon dioxide, which is almost double the approximately 1100 pounds of carbon dioxide released by a natural gas-fired electric plant.
German Classification
Jet, a compact form of lignite, is sometimes polished and has been used as an ornamental stone since the Upper Palaeolithic.
Disused coal mines can also cause issues.
The exception is the coal gap in the Permian–Triassic extinction event, where coal is rare.
The trading unit is  per contract, and is quoted in U.S. dollars and cents per ton.
However, the exact classification varies between countries.
Sea coal can be mixed with the clay lining (the "bod") used for the bottom of a cupola furnace.
The WHO classifies coal as a "dirty fuel" and encourages the movement away from such fuels towards cleaner alternatives.
Depending on the situation, precombustion technology can be used in place of or as a supplement to postcombustion technologies to control emissions from coal-fueled boilers.
In the Powder River Basin approximately 27 to 54 billion tons of coal burned within the past three million years.
This can affect the flows of rivers, and has consequential impacts on other land uses.
As of 2006, the average efficiency of electricity-generating power stations was 31%; in 2002, coal represented about 23% of total global energy supply, an equivalent of 3.4 billion tonnes of coal, of which 2.8 billion tonnes were used for electricity generation.
* "Steam coal" is a grade between bituminous coal and anthracite, once widely used as a fuel for steam locomotives.
In 2013, the US alone consumed on the order of 983 million short tonnes of coal per year.
The US Energy Information Agency's 1999 report on CO2 emissions for energy generation quotes an emission factor of 0.963&nbsp;kg CO2/kWh for coal power, compared to  0.881&nbsp;kg CO2/kWh (oil), or 0.569&nbsp;kg CO2/kWh (natural gas).
