05  the-month      PIC 99.
Early COBOL compilers were primitive and slow.
Method overloading was added in COBOL 2014.
The environment division specifies any program features that depend on the system running it, such as files and character sets.
03  COL 26                   PIC $$$$9.99 SOURCE sales-amount.
The COBOL specification was revised three times in the five years after its publication.
COBOL is still widely used in legacy applications deployed on mainframe computers, such as large-scale batch and transaction processing jobs.
Some vendors (including Micro Focus, Fujitsu, and IBM) introduced object-oriented syntax based on drafts of the full revision.
A 1959 survey had found that in any data processing installation, the programming cost US$800,000 on average and that translating programs to run on new hardware would cost $600,000.
In the above fragment, the ELSE associates with the &nbsp;&nbsp; statement instead of the &nbsp;&nbsp; statement, causing a bug.
Explicit file structure definitions preceded the development of database management systems and aggregated data was a significant advance over Fortran's arrays.
A  (or ) clause is a string of characters, each of which represents a portion of the data item and what it may contain.
* Locale-based processing
* Scope terminators (END-IF, END-PERFORM, END-READ, etc.)
PAGE LIMITS 60 LINES
The associated compiler listing generated over four pages of technical detail and job run information, for the single line of output from the 14 lines of COBOL.
The standard was adopted by ISO the same year.
The six computer manufacturers were Burroughs Corporation, IBM, Minneapolis-Honeywell (Honeywell Labs), RCA, Sperry Rand, and Sylvania Electric Products.
00000* VALIDATION OF BASE COBOL INSTALL                                00050000
//COB.SYSIN DD *                                                        00040000
03  COL 19                   PIC X(34) SOURCE sales-record.
//                                                                      00220000
The name "COBOL" was suggested by Bob Bemer.
For example, a condition can be expressed as &nbsp; or more concisely as &nbsp;&nbsp; or &nbsp;.
However, some committee members raised concerns about incompatibilities between implementations and frequent modifications of the standard.
The language's stated objectives were to allow efficient, portable programs to be easily written, to allow users to move to new systems with minimal effort and cost, and to be suitable for inexperienced programmers.
The CODASYL Executive Committee later created the COBOL Maintenance Committee to answer questions from users and vendors and to improve and expand the specifications.
PERFORM slow-down-machine
On the other hand, conversion to COBOL-85 was thought to increase productivity in future years, thus justifying the conversion costs.
Proponents say that this was intended to make the code self-documenting, easing program maintenance.
88  wage-is-yearly VALUE "S", "Y".
Efforts began to standardize COBOL to overcome incompatibilities between versions.
The final approved ISO standard was approved and published in late 2002.
and  call subprograms and methods, respectively.
Sales Report                                                            Page 12
COBOL does not provide a way to hide methods.
For the above sales report example, the procedure division might look like this:
//BASETEST EXEC COBUCLG                                                 00030000
Expansions include support for structured and object-oriented programming.
In 2006 and 2012, ''Computerworld'' surveys found that over 60% of organizations used COBOL (more than C++ and Visual Basic .NET) and that for half of those, COBOL was used for the majority of their internal software.
* User-defined functions
COBOL 2002 was five years late,
The vice-president, William Rinehuls, complained that two-thirds of the COBOL community did not know of the committee's existence.
* The first  statement
Their official mission, however, was to identify the strengths and weaknesses of existing programming languages and did not explicitly direct them to create a new language.
It soon became apparent that the committee was too large for any further progress to be made quickly.
03  COL 21                   VALUE "were".
s were largely replaced by the  statement and procedures, which promoted modular programming and gave easy access to powerful looping facilities.
A 77 level-number indicates the item is stand-alone, and in such situations is equivalent to the level-number 01.
The original (1959) COBOL specification supported the infamous &nbsp;&nbsp; statement, for which many compilers generated self-modifying code.
At a time when new programming languages were proliferating at an ever increasing rate, the same survey suggested that if a common business-oriented language were used, conversion would be far cheaper and faster.
ANSI produced ''USA Standard COBOL X3.23'' in August 1968, which became the cornerstone for later versions.
COBOL was also intended to be easy for programmers to learn and use, while still being readable to non-technical staff such as managers.
They are up to 31 characters long and may include letters, digits, hyphens and underscores.
Representatives included Grace Hopper, inventor of the English-like data processing language FLOW-MATIC, Jean Sammet and Saul Gorn.
Some felt the language was too complex; others, too simple.
COBOL's  facility, although considered "primitive",
* / – Comment line that will be printed on a new page of a source listing
Classes have factory objects, containing class methods and variables, and instance objects, containing instance methods and variables.
A sub-committee was formed to analyze existing languages and was made up of six individuals:
A majority agreed that the language should make maximal use of English, be capable of change, be machine-independent and be easy to use, even at the expense of power.
The desire for readability led to the use of English-like syntax and structural elements, such as nouns, verbs, clauses, sentences, sections, and divisions.
is used in a declarative to jump to the statement after the one that raised the exception or to a procedure outside the .
66  cust-all-details        RENAMES cust-name THRU cust-balance.
Some picture characters specify the type of the item and how many characters or digits it occupies in memory.
Yet by 1984, maintainers of COBOL programs were struggling to deal with "incomprehensible" code and the main changes in COBOL-85 were there to help ease maintenance.
At a mid-September meeting, the committee discussed the new language's name.
(This syntax is similar to the "dot notation" supported by most contemporary languages.)
However,  could only be used with procedures so loop bodies were not located where they were used, making programs harder to understand.
However, it is verbose and uses over 300 reserved words.
The mine is then triggered upon reaching the end of  and means control could return to one of two locations:
Specifically, mines occur when execution of a range of procedures would cause control flow to go past the last statement of a range of procedures already being performed.
COBOL was intended to be a highly portable, "common" language.
Seller: Howard Bromberg
CONTROLS seller-name.
'''COBOL''' (, an acronym for ''common business-oriented language'') is a compiled English-like computer programming language designed for business use.
The same poll also found that only 25% of academics had COBOL programming on their curriculum even though 60% thought they should teach it.
* , the default format, where data is stored as a string
This contains: DIVISION, SECTION and procedure headers; 01 and 77 level numbers and file/report descriptors
Exceptions are raised by a  statement and caught with a handler, or '''', defined in the  portion of the procedure division.
02100 CONFIGURATION SECTION.
IBM's COMTRAN language, invented by Bob Bemer, was regarded as a competitor to FLOW-MATIC by a short-range committee made up of colleagues of Grace Hopper.
This data level, also referred to by the associated , is rarely used and, circa 1988, was usually found in old programs.
unloads subprograms from memory.
It also lacked a demonstrable implementation, allowing supporters of a FLOW-MATIC-based COBOL to overturn the resolution.
INVALID RECORD: Howard Bromberg             XXXXYY
Other picture characters (called '''' and '''' characters) specify how an item should be formatted.
is a switch-like statement with the added capability of evaluating multiple values and conditions.
COBOL 2002 also introduced free-format code.
The first COBOL program ran on 17 August on an RCA 501.
In late 1962, IBM announced that COBOL would be their primary development language and that development of COMTRAN would cease.
Computer scientists at the time were more interested in fields like numerical analysis, physics and system programming than the commercial file-processing problems which COBOL development tackled.
But due to its declining popularity and the retirement of experienced COBOL programmers, programs are being migrated to new platforms, rewritten in modern languages or replaced with software packages.
WHEN lid-closed ALSO min-speed THRU max-speed ALSO LESS THAN desired-speed
The short-range committee was made up of members representing six computer manufacturers and three government agencies.
On December 6 and 7, the same COBOL program (albeit with minor changes) ran on an RCA computer and a Remington-Rand Univac computer, demonstrating that compatibility could be achieved.
Four statements control the report writer: , which prepares the report writer for printing; , which prints a report group; , which suppresses the printing of a report group; and , which terminates report processing.
FLOW-MATIC's major contributions to COBOL were long variable names, English words for commands and the separation of data descriptions and instructions.
EVALUATE TRUE ALSO desired-speed ALSO current-speed
Near the end of the 20th century, the year 2000 problem (Y2K) was the focus of significant COBOL programming effort, sometimes by the same programmers who had designed the systems decades before.
COBOL 2002 suffered from poor support: no compilers completely supported the standard.
INITIATE sales-report
Nevertheless, much important legacy COBOL software uses unstructured code, which has become unmaintainable.
The delegation impressed Charles A. Phillips, director of the Data System Research Staff at the DoD, who thought that they "thoroughly understood" the DoD's problems.
Data items in COBOL are declared hierarchically through the use of level-numbers which indicate if a data item is part of another.
Two amendments followed in 1989 and 1993, the first introducing intrinsic functions and the other providing corrections.
Academic computer scientists were generally uninterested in business applications when COBOL was created and were not involved in its design; it was (effectively) designed from the ground up as a computer language for businessmen, with an emphasis on inputs and outputs, whose only data types were numbers and strings of text.
Later that year, the Data Processing Management Association (DPMA) said it was "strongly opposed" to the new standard, citing "prohibitive" conversion costs and enhancements that were "forced on the user".
Sales on 10/12/2008 were $1000.00
One cause of spaghetti code was the  statement.
Mr. Brophy described previous conversions of their 40-million-line code base as "non-productive" and a "complete waste of our programmer resources".
66  cust-personal-details   RENAMES cust-name THRU cust-dob.
* Reference modification, which allows access to substrings
In sequential files, records are contiguous and must be traversed sequentially, similarly to a linked list.
This meant that control could jump to and return from any procedure, creating convoluted control flow and permitting a programmer to break the single-entry single-exit rule.
* Portable arithmetic results
Seller: Howard Discount
Sales on 13/12/2008 were   $31.47
While it can be used to declare pointers and object references, it is mostly geared towards specifying numeric types.
19.52.48 JOB    3  $HASP395 COBUCLG  ENDED
It was standardized in 1968 and has since been revised four times.
10  the-day    PIC 99.
The steering committee met on June 4 and agreed to name the entire activity as the ''Committee on Data Systems Languages'', or CODASYL, and to form an executive committee.
In fixed-format, code must be aligned to fit in certain areas.
Objects are stored as references which may be restricted to a certain type.
There were many other new features, many of which had been in the ''CODASYL COBOL Journal of Development'' since 1978 and had missed the opportunity to be included in COBOL-85.
The deadline was met with disbelief by the short-range committee.
Continuation lines are not present, and the >>PAGE directive replaces the / indicator.
01  sales-on-day TYPE DETAIL, LINE + 1.
Implementations of indexed files vary between vendors, although common implementations, such as C&#8209;ISAM and VSAM, are based on IBM's ISAM.
Sales on 30/05/2014 were    $0.00
By mid-1964, they had increased to 11–1000 statements per minute.
Despite being technically superior, FACT had not been created with portability in mind or through manufacturer and user consensus.
INVALID RECORD: William Selden      12O52014FOOFOO
Micro Focus found that it was due to a lack of user demand for the new features and due to the abolition of the NIST test suite, which had been used to test compiler conformance.
COBOL's conditional statements are  and .
03  COL 9                    PIC X(30) SOURCE seller-name.
GENERATE invalid-sales
Sequence number area
Controversial features included those some considered useless or too advanced for data processing users.
If the data item contains some other value, both of the condition-names are false.
When the – now famous – "Hello, World!"
Subordinate items can be disambiguated with the  (or ) keyword.
Each division is sub-divided into sections, which are made up of paragraphs.
Donald Nelson, chair of the CODASYL COBOL committee, said in 1984 that "academics ... hate COBOL" and that computer science graduates "had 'hate COBOL' drilled into them".
Features from COMTRAN incorporated into COBOL included formulas, the  clause, an improved IF statement, which obviated the need for GO TOs, and a more robust file management system.
FLOW-MATIC's inventor, Grace Hopper, also served as a technical adviser to the committee.
Control breaks occur when a key variable changes it value; for example, when creating a report detailing customers' orders, a control break could occur when the program reaches a different customer's orders.
In 1980, Grace Hopper commented that "COBOL 60 is 95% FLOW-MATIC" and that COMTRAN had had an "extremely small" influence.
19.52.48 JOB    3  COBUCLG    BASETEST  COB       IKFCBL00  RC= 0000
COBOL-74 added subprograms, giving programmers the ability to control the data each part of the program could access.
COBOL can be written in two formats: fixed (the default) or free.
MOVE my-class::"foo" TO var *> Inline method invocation
* Major features have been made optional, such as the VALIDATE facility, the report writer and the screen-handling facility.
19.52.48 JOB    3  COBUCLG    BASETEST  GO        PGM=*.DD  RC= 0000
Although context-sensitive keywords were rejected, the approach was later used in PL/I and partially in COBOL from 2002.
Here is an example report description for a report which gives a salesperson's sales and which warns of any invalid records:
Furthermore, she said that she would claim that work was influenced by both FLOW-MATIC and COMTRAN only to "keep other people happy so they wouldn't try to knock us out".
Literals include numerals (e.g. )
Instead, some businesses have migrated their systems from expensive mainframes to cheaper, more modern systems, while maintaining their COBOL programs.
X and Y are procedure labels, and the single &nbsp;&nbsp; statement in procedure X executed after such an  statement means &nbsp;&nbsp; instead.
The listing below, ''with an empty DATA DIVISION'', was tested using GNU/Linux and the System/370 Hercules emulator running MVS 3.8J.
GE and IBM planned to integrate COBOL into their own languages, GECOM and COMTRAN, respectively.
10  the-year   PIC 9(4).
On May 28 and 29 of 1959 (exactly one year after the Zürich ALGOL 58 meeting), a meeting was held at the Pentagon to discuss the creation of a common programming language for business.
* I/O status codes.
The  statement is used to define loops which are executed until a condition is true (not , unlike other languages).
* Floating-point and binary data types (until then, binary items were truncated based on their declaration's base-10 specification)
Some of its features were not incorporated into COBOL so that it would not look like IBM had dominated the design process, and Jean Sammet said in 1981 that there had been a "strong anti-IBM bias" from some committee members (herself included).
Representatives enthusiastically described a language that could work in a wide variety of environments, from banking and insurance to utilities and inventory control.
Depending on the data type, it can either complement or be used instead of a  clause.
19.52.48 JOB    3  IEFACTRT - Stepname  Procstep  Program   Retcode
Lacking a large standard library, the standard specifies 43 statements, 87 functions and just one class.
Separators include the space character and commas and semi-colons followed by a space.
(this is legal, but results in undefined behavior)
The report writer statements are covered in the report writer section.
COBOL was designed in 1959, by CODASYL and was partly based on previous programming language design work by Grace Hopper,  commonly referred to as "the (grand)mother of COBOL".
Until COBOL 2002, these were:
* Inline PERFORM loop bodies – previously, loop bodies had to be specified in a separate procedure
Exceptions can be names or objects.
Unusual control flow can trigger '''', which cause control in performed procedures to return at unexpected times to unexpected locations.
03  COL 12                   PIC 99/99/9999 SOURCE sales-date.
During 1960, the list of manufacturers planning to build COBOL compilers grew.
"&nbsp;&nbsp;-10" (note leading spaces)
Work began by investigating data description, statements, existing applications and user experiences.
Later, COBOL suffered from a shortage of material covering it; it took until 1963 for introductory books to appear (with Richard D. Irwin publishing a college textbook on COBOL in 1966).
By September, five more manufacturers had joined CODASYL (Bendix, Control Data Corporation, General Electric (GE), National Cash Register and Philco), and all represented manufacturers had announced COBOL compilers.
For example, the following code defines two 88-level condition-name items that are true or false depending on the current character data value of the  data item.
The meeting resulted in the creation of a steering committee and short-, intermediate- and long-range committees.
The specifications were presented to the Executive Committee on September 4.
OPEN INPUT sales, OUTPUT report-out
For example, a series of  characters define character positions as well as how a leading sign character is to be positioned within the final character data; the rightmost non-numeric character will contain the item's sign, while other character positions corresponding to a  to the left of this position will contain a space.
This means that creating a record with a key of 5 may require the creation of (empty) preceding records.
The second public review drew another 1,000 (mainly negative) responses, while the last drew just 25, by which time many concerns had been addressed.
FORTRAN, the only mainstream language at the time, lacked the features needed to write such programs.
In January 1981, Joseph T. Brophy, Senior Vice-President of Travelers Insurance, threatened to sue the standard committee because it was not upwards compatible with COBOL-74.
//LKED.SYSLIB DD DSNAME=SYS1.COBLIB,DISP=SHR                            00190000
Comments are specified using *>, which can be placed anywhere and can also be used in fixed-format source code.
WHEN lid-closed ALSO min-speed THRU max-speed ALSO GREATER THAN desired-speed
The committee was chaired by Joseph Wegstein of the US National Bureau of Standards.
