Subjective effects not commonly shared with other methods of administration include a ringing in the ears moments after injection (usually when in excess of 120&nbsp;milligrams) lasting 2 to 5&nbsp;minutes including tinnitus and audio distortion.
When inhaled or injected, it causes a numbing effect.
The efficiency of absorption of orally administered cocaine is limited by two additional factors.
Cocaine is also carried in small, concealed, kilogram quantities across the border by couriers known as "mules" (or "mulas"), who cross a border either legally, for example, through a port or airport, or illegally elsewhere.
Cocaine was first isolated from the leaves in 1860.
Since 1961 the international Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs has required countries to make recreational use of cocaine a crime.
This process occurs through an oxidation, which regenerates the pyrrolinium cation and formation of an enolate anion, and an intramolecular Mannich reaction.
It can also cause headaches and gastrointestinal complications such as abdominal pain and nausea.
In the biosynthesis of cocaine, however, only the (S)-enantiomer can cyclize to form the tropane ring system of cocaine.
Cocaine increases alertness, feelings of well-being and euphoria, energy and motor activity, feelings of competence and sexuality.
If consumed with alcohol, cocaine combines with alcohol in the liver to form cocaethylene.
Once powdered caustic soda was added to this, the cocaine precipitated and could be removed by filtration through a cloth.
Typically, only a third of an oral dose is absorbed, although absorption has been shown to reach 60% in controlled settings.
An interview with a coca farmer published in 2003 described a mode of production by acid-base extraction that has changed little since 1905.
The name comes from "coca" and the alkaloid suffix "-ine", forming "cocaine".
Cocaine’s status as a club drug shows its immense popularity among the "party crowd".
Crack is smoked by placing it at the end of the pipe; a flame held close to it produces vapor, which is then inhaled by the smoker.
Niemann named the alkaloid "cocaine" from "coca" (from Quechua "cuca") + suffix "ine".
In 1856, Friedrich Wöhler asked Dr. Carl Scherzer, a scientist aboard the ''Novara'' (an Austrian frigate sent by Emperor Franz Joseph to circle the globe), to bring him a large amount of coca leaves from South America.
Cocaine dependence is a form of psychological dependence that develops from regular cocaine use and produces a withdrawal state with emotional-motivational deficits upon cessation of cocaine use.
Because cocaine is hydrolyzed and rendered inactive in the acidic stomach, it is not readily absorbed when ingested alone.
In the sixth meeting of the B committee, the US representative threatened that "If World Health Organization activities relating to drugs failed to reinforce proven drug control approaches, funds for the relevant programs should be curtailed".
These are sometimes called "stems", "horns", "blasters" and "straight shooters".
If he or she is caught, however, gangs will sever all links and the mule will usually stand trial for trafficking alone.
A SAM-dependent ''N''-methylation of putrescine gives the ''N''-methylputrescine product, which then undergoes oxidative deamination by the action of diamine oxidase to yield the aminoaldehyde.
Physical side effects from chronic smoking of cocaine include coughing up blood, bronchospasm, itching, fever, diffuse alveolar infiltrates without effusions, pulmonary and systemic eosinophilia, chest pain, lung trauma, sore throat, asthma, hoarse voice, dyspnea (shortness of breath), and an aching, flu-like syndrome.
Cocaine is readily available in all major countries' metropolitan areas.
As tolerance builds rapidly in the short-term (hours), many lines are often snorted to produce greater effects.
It is estimated that the illegal market for cocaine is 100 to 500 billion USD each year.
Visitors to the city of Cuzco in Peru, and La Paz in Bolivia are greeted with the offering of coca leaf infusions (prepared in teapots with whole coca leaves) purportedly to help the newly arrived traveler overcome the malaise of high altitude sickness.
These plant species all contain two types of the reductase enzymes, tropinone reductase I and tropinone reductase II.
Cocaine sold on the street is commonly mixed with local anesthetics, cornstarch, quinine, or sugar which can result in additional toxicity.
The resulting material, when dried, was termed ''pasta'' and sold by the farmer.
Names like "synthetic cocaine" and "new cocaine" have been misapplied to phencyclidine (PCP) and various designer drugs.
Physical withdrawal is not dangerous.
Cocaine use is prevalent across all socioeconomic strata, including age, demographics, economic, social, political, religious, and livelihood.
Benzoylecgonine can be detected in urine within four hours after cocaine intake and remains detectable in concentrations greater than 150&nbsp;ng/mL typically for up to eight days after cocaine is used.
The 5-HT2 receptor (particularly the subtypes 5-HT2AR, 5-HT2BR and 5-HT2CR) are involved in the locomotor-activating effects of cocaine.
A common but untrue belief is that the smoking of cocaine chemically breaks down tooth enamel and causes tooth decay.
A chemist named Angelo Mariani who read Mantegazza's paper became immediately intrigued with coca and its economic potential.
In 1569, Nicolás Monardes described the indigenous peoples' practice of chewing a mixture of tobacco and coca leaves to induce "great contentment":
Willstätter's synthesis derived cocaine from tropinone.
This led to the decision to discontinue publication.
Although the vessels were once viewed as a quirky sideshow in the drug war, they are becoming faster, more seaworthy, and capable of carrying bigger loads of drugs than earlier models, according to those charged with catching them.
A 2001 study reported that the sharing of straws used to "snort" cocaine can spread blood diseases such as hepatitis C.
Dopamine transmitter released during neural signaling is normally recycled via the transporter; i.e., the transporter binds the transmitter and pumps it out of the synaptic cleft back into the presynaptic neuron, where it is taken up into storage vesicles.
Commercial fishing vessels are also used for smuggling operations.
When interpreting the results of a test, it is important to consider the cocaine usage history of the individual, since a chronic user can develop tolerance to doses that would incapacitate a cocaine-naive individual, and the chronic user often has high baseline values of the metabolites in his system.
Another oral method is to wrap up some cocaine in rolling paper and swallow (parachute) it.
The cocaine is then broken down into smaller loads for smuggling across the U.S.–Mexico border.
Crack cocaine is a smokeable form of cocaine made into small “rocks” by processing cocaine with sodium bicarbonate (baking soda) and water.
If the mule gets through without being caught, the gangs will reap most of the profits.
It is also popular amongst college students, as a party drug.
After a short period of use, there is a high risk that dependence will occur.
In addition to the amounts previously mentioned, cocaine can be sold in "bill sizes":  for example, $10 might purchase a "dime bag", a very small amount (0.1–0.15&nbsp;g) of cocaine.
'''Cocaine''', also known as '''coke''', is a strong stimulant mostly used as a recreational drug.
This is due to the extra chiral center at C-2.
It was the first biomimetic synthesis of an organic structure recorded in academic chemical literature.
Cocaine can be in the form of fine white powder, bitter to the taste.
However, its actual effectiveness has never been systematically studied.
However, cocaine does often cause involuntary tooth grinding, known as bruxism, which can deteriorate tooth enamel and lead to gingivitis.
Detection of accumulation of cocaine metabolites in hair is possible in regular users until the sections of hair grown during use are cut or fall out.
+ Estimated Andean region coca cultivation and potential pure cocaine production
Cocaine is a weakly alkaline compound (an "alkaloid"), and can, therefore, combine with acidic compounds to form various salts.
But after discovering that these claims were true, they legalized and taxed the leaf, taking 10% off the value of each crop.
The tea has often been recommended for travelers in the Andes to prevent altitude sickness.
These strains have also shown to be more potent than those previously grown, increasing profits for the drug cartels responsible for the exporting of cocaine.
The first addition is a Mannich-like reaction with the enolate anion from acetyl-CoA acting as a nucleophile towards the pyrrolinium cation.
The biosynthesis of the tropane alkaloid, however, is still uncertain.
The arid Bolivia–Chile border is easily crossed by 4×4 vehicles that then head to the seaports of Iquique and Antofagasta.
Due to the absorption of the cocaine from cocaine hydrochloride, the remaining hydrochloride forms a dilute hydrochloric acid.
In Australia it is currently prescribed for use as a local anesthetic for conditions such as mouth and lung ulcers.
Cocaine is commonly used in middle to upper-class communities and is known as a "rich man's drug".
The separate pathways of converting ornithine to putrescine in plants and animals have converged.
Mental effects may include loss of contact with reality, an intense feeling of happiness, or agitation.
Additionally, stimulants like cocaine, methamphetamine, and even caffeine cause dehydration and dry mouth.
These vessels are typically 150–250-foot (50–80&nbsp;m) coastal freighters that carry an average cocaine load of approximately 2.5 tonnes.
Coca tea, an infusion of coca leaves, is also a traditional method of consumption.
In 2004, according to the United Nations, 589 tonnes of cocaine were seized globally by law enforcement authorities.
In 1863, Mariani started marketing a wine called Vin Mariani, which had been treated with coca leaves, to become cocawine.
Aside from the toxic effects of cocaine, there is also danger of circulatory emboli from the insoluble substances that may be used to cut the drug.
Sixty-five percent of cocaine enters the United States through Mexico, and the vast majority of the rest enters through Florida.
In a study of cocaine users, the average time taken to reach peak subjective effects was 3.1&nbsp;minutes.
As with all injected illicit substances, there is a risk of the user contracting blood-borne infections if sterile injecting equipment is not available or used.
Cocaine can be dissolved in water and withdrawn into an oral syringe which may then be lubricated and inserted into the anus or vagina before the plunger is pushed.
Depression with suicidal ideation may develop in very heavy users.
The cocaine typically is poured onto a flat, hard surface (such as a mirror, CD case or book) and divided into "bumps", "lines" or "rails", and then insufflated.
Inhalation or smoking is one of the several means cocaine is administered.
Three-quarters of the world's annual yield of cocaine has been produced in Colombia, both from cocaine base imported from Peru (primarily the Huallaga Valley) and Bolivia, and from locally grown coca.
Chronic intranasal usage can degrade the cartilage separating the nostrils (the septum nasi), leading eventually to its complete disappearance.
Effects begin within seconds to minutes of use and last between five and ninety minutes.
Experimentally, cocaine injections can be delivered to animals such as fruit flies to study the mechanisms of cocaine addiction.
Cocaine was introduced into clinical use as a local anesthetic in Germany in 1884, about the same time as Sigmund Freud published his work ''Über Coca'', in which he wrote that cocaine causes:
This is sometimes called a "snow bomb."
1898 saw Heinrich Quincke use cocaine for spinal anesthesia.
Similar claims have been made in web forums on that topic.
In formation of tropinone from racemic ethyl 2,3-13C24(Nmethyl-2-pyrrolidinyl)-3-oxobutanoate there is no preference for either stereoisomer.
Use is highest in North America followed by Europe and South America.
Advocates of the consumption of the coca leaf state that coca leaf consumption should not be criminalized as it is not actual cocaine, and consequently it is not properly the illicit drug.
Smoking or vaporizing cocaine and inhaling it into the lungs produces an almost immediate "high" that can be very powerful (and addicting) quite rapidly – this initial crescendo of stimulation is known as a "rush".
The major contribution of L-ornithine and L-arginine as a precursor to the tropane ring was confirmed by Edward Leete.
Since then, Robert Robinson and Edward Leete have made significant contributions to the mechanism of the synthesis.
Little research has been focused on the suppository (anal or vaginal insertion) method of administration, also known as "plugging".
Condensation of ''N''-methylpyrrolinium and acetonedicarboxylate would generate the oxobutyrate.
While the price of cocaine is higher in Chile than in Peru and Bolivia, the final destination is usually Europe, especially Spain where drug dealing networks exist among South American immigrants.
However, a decision by an American representative in the World Health Assembly banned the publication of the study, because it seemed to make a case for the positive uses of cocaine.
The lack of normal amounts of serotonin and dopamine in the brain is the cause of the dysphoria and depression felt after the initial high.
Cocaine also causes vasoconstriction, thus reducing bleeding during minor surgical procedures.
Usage is particularly prevalent among this demographic: 4% to 7% of males have used cocaine in the last year in Spain, Denmark, Republic of Ireland, Italy, and the United Kingdom.
An alternative method of administration for ENT surgery is mixed with adrenaline and sodium bicarbonate, as Moffett's Solution.
Cocaine in its purest form is a white, pearly product.
The drugs may be strapped to the waist or legs or hidden in bags, or hidden in the body.
Several hundred pounds of this mixture were soaked in  of gasoline for a day, then the gasoline was removed and the leaves were pressed for remaining liquid, after which they could be discarded.
Thus, receptors disappear from the cell surface or reappear on it, resulting more or less in an "off" or "working mode" respectively, or they change their susceptibility for binding partners (ligands)mechanisms called downregulation and upregulation.
Powdered cocaine is also sometimes smoked, though heat destroys much of the chemical; smokers often sprinkle it on cannabis.
Further, cocaine binds in such a way as to inhibit a hydrogen bond innate to DAT.
, the Sinaloa Cartel is the most active drug cartel involved in smuggling illicit drugs like cocaine into the United States and trafficking them throughout the United States.
Cocaine also blocks sodium channels, thereby interfering with the propagation of action potentials; thus, like lignocaine and novocaine, it acts as a local anesthetic.
The ratio of male to female users is approximately 3.8:1, but this statistic varies from 1:1 to 13:1 depending on country.
It ranges from a crumbly texture, sometimes extremely oily, to a hard, almost crystalline nature.
Its use also increases the risk of stroke, myocardial infarction, lung problems in those who smoke it, blood infections, and sudden cardiac death.
Potential pure cocaine production (tonnes)
The adulterant of sugars allows the dealer to sell the product for a higher price because of the illusion of purity and allows to sell more of the product at that higher price, enabling dealers to significantly increase revenue with little additional cost for the adulterants.
Coca is grown for traditional purposes by indigenous communities, a use which is still present and is permitted by Colombian laws only makes up a small fragment of total coca production, most of which is used for the illegal drug trade.
L-ornithine is converted to L-arginine, which is then decarboxylated via PLP to form agmatine.
Cocaine traffickers from Colombia and Mexico have established a labyrinth of smuggling routes throughout the Caribbean, the Bahama Island chain, and South Florida.
Cocaine may also greatly increase this risk of developing rare autoimmune or connective tissue diseases such as lupus, Goodpasture syndrome, vasculitis, glomerulonephritis, Stevens–Johnson syndrome, and other diseases.
He wrote of the alkaloid's "colourless transparent prisms" and said that "Its solutions have an alkaline reaction, a bitter taste, promote the flow of saliva and leave a peculiar numbness, followed by a sense of cold when applied to the tongue."
Second, capillaries in the mouth and esophagus constrict after contact with the drug, reducing the surface area over which the drug can be absorbed.
In areas with a high volume of recreational traffic, smugglers use the same types of vessels, such as go-fast boats, as those used by the local populations.
First, the drug is partly catabolized by the liver.
Depending on liver and kidney function, cocaine metabolites are detectable in urine.
Only when mixed with a highly alkaline substance (such as lime) can it be absorbed into the bloodstream through the stomach.
The leaves of the ''coca'' plant have been used by Peruvians since ancient times.
121.3% of Colombia’s annual production according to the U.S. Department of State’s estimates.
For example, it was injected by Arthur Conan Doyle's fictional Sherlock Holmes, generally to offset the boredom he felt when he was not working on a case.
Pure cocaine is prepared by neutralizing its compounding salt with an alkaline solution which will precipitate to non-polar basic cocaine.
It can also cause a wide array of kidney diseases and kidney failure.
Hydrolysis of the imine derives ''N''-carbamoylputrescine followed with hydrolysis of the urea to form putrescine.
These include airdrops of  in the Bahama Islands or off the coast of Puerto Rico, mid-ocean boat-to-boat transfers of , and the commercial shipment of tonnes of cocaine through the port of Miami.
Drug injection provides the highest blood levels of drug in the shortest amount of time.
The cocaine metabolite benzoylecgonine can be detected in the urine of people a few hours after drinking one cup of coca leaf infusion.
A small piece of clean heavy copper or occasionally stainless steel scouring padoften called a "brillo" (actual Brillo Pads contain soap, and are not used) or "chore" (named for Chore Boy brand copper scouring pads)serves as a reduction base and flow modulator in which the "rock" can be melted and boiled to vapor.
In addition, some parts of Europe and Australia allow processed cocaine for medicinal uses only.
The effects, felt almost immediately after smoking, are very intense and do not last long usually 5 to 15 minutes.
Cocaine has been demonstrated to bind as to directly stabilize the DAT transporter on the open outward-facing conformation.
In the 1970s and 1980s, the drug became particularly popular in the disco culture as cocaine usage was very common and popular in many discos such as Studio 54.
The leg that had been immersed in the cocaine solution reacted very differently from the leg that had been immersed in salt water.
Use of the powder form has stayed relatively constant, experiencing a new height of use during the late 1990s and early 2000s in the U.S., and has become much more popular in the last few years in the UK.
Cocaine is addictive due to its effect on the reward pathway in the brain.
In many countries, cocaine is a popular recreational drug.
Studies have suggested cocaethylene is both more euphoric, and has a higher cardiovascular toxicity than cocaine by itself.
The tropane ring system undergoes hydrolysis, SAM-dependent methylation, and reduction via NADPH for the formation of methylecgonine.
In order to prevent the demonization of this product, its promoters publicize the unproven concept that much of the effect of the ingestion of coca leaf infusion would come from the secondary alkaloids, as being not only quantitatively different from pure cocaine but also qualitatively different.
with accepted paradigms, for example "that occasional cocaine use does not typically lead to severe or even minor physical or social problems."
The duration of abstinence increased from an average of 32&nbsp;days prior to treatment to 217&nbsp;days during treatment.
Cocaine addiction occurs through accumbal ΔFosB overexpression, which arises through transcriptional regulation and epigenetic remodeling of the nucleus accumbens.
It is further refined through aqueous-solvent liquid-liquid extraction.
The pharmacodynamics of cocaine involve the complex relationships of neurotransmitters (inhibiting monoamine uptake in rats with ratios of about: serotonin:dopamine = 2:3, serotonin:norepinephrine = 2:5) The most extensively studied effect of cocaine on the central nervous system is the blockade of the dopamine transporter protein.
In the United States, the development of "crack" cocaine introduced the substance to a generally poorer inner-city market.
He prepared two separate jars, one containing a cocaine-salt solution, with the other containing merely salt water.
The locomotor enhancing properties of cocaine may be attributable to its enhancement of dopaminergic transmission from the substantia nigra.
Typically, land vehicles are driven across the U.S.–Mexico border.
Research studies have suggested that the affinity for the transporter is not what is involved in habituation of the substance so much as the conformation and binding properties to where and how on the transporter the molecule binds.
Cocaine's affects certain serotonin (5-HT) receptors; in particular, it has been shown to antagonize the 5-HT3 receptor, which is a ligand-gated ion channel.
In 2014 London had the highest amount of cocaine in their sewage out of 50 European cities.
However, natural cocaine remains the lowest cost and highest quality supply of cocaine.
Cocaine is a powerful nervous system stimulant.
Actual full synthesis of cocaine is rarely done.
With excessive dosage, tremors, convulsions and increased body temperature are observed.
Sophisticated drug subs are the latest tool drug runners are using to bring cocaine north from Colombia, it was reported on 20 March 2008.
Hemscheidt proposes that Robinson's acetonedicarboxylate emerges as a potential intermediate for this reaction.
Finally, a loss of vesicular monoamine transporters, neurofilament proteins, and other morphological changes appear to indicate a long term damage of dopamine neurons.
He then submerged a frog's legs into the two jars, one leg in the treatment and one in the control solution, and proceeded to stimulate the legs in several different ways.
The overabundance of 5-HT3 receptors in cocaine conditioned rats display this trait, however the exact effect of 5-HT3 in this process is unclear.
Cocaine binds tightly at the dopamine transporter forming a complex that blocks the transporter's function.
High doses can result in very high blood pressure or body temperature.
With further processing crack cocaine can be produced from cocaine.
Nosebleeds after cocaine insufflation are due to irritation and damage of mucus membranes by foreign particles and adulterants and not the cocaine itself; as a vasoconstrictor, cocaine acts to reduce bleeding.
The Harrison Act did not recognize addiction as a treatable condition and therefore the therapeutic use of cocaine, heroin or morphine to such individuals was outlawed leading the Journal of American Medicine to remark, “the addict is denied the medical care he urgently needs, open, above-board sources from which he formerly obtained his drug supply are closed to him, and he is driven to the underworld where he can get his drug, but of course, surreptitiously and in violation of the law.” The Harrison Act left manufacturers of cocaine untouched so long as they met certain purity and labeling standards.
Schiff base formation confirms the biosynthesis of the ''N''-methyl-Δ1-pyrrolinium cation.
The hydrochloride (HCl) salt of cocaine is by far the most commonly encountered, although the sulfate (-SO4) and the nitrate (-NO3) are occasionally seen.
In a 2000 Brookhaven National Laboratory medical department study, based on self reports of 32 abusers who participated in the study,"peak high" was found at mean of 1.4min +/- 0.5&nbsp;minutes.
In animals, however, the urea cycle derives putrescine from ornithine.
In early 20th-century Memphis, Tennessee, cocaine was sold in neighborhood drugstores on Beale Street, costing five or ten cents for a small boxful.
Then battery acid (weak sulfuric acid) was used, one bucket per  of leaves, to create a phase separation in which the cocaine free base in the gasoline was acidified and extracted into a few buckets of "murky-looking smelly liquid".
Formation of inactive enantiomers (cocaine has 4 chiral centres – ''1R'', ''2R'', ''3S'', and ''5S'' – hence a total potential of 16 possible enantiomers and diastereoisomers) plus synthetic by-products limits the yield and purity.
The stereoselectivity of this reaction was further investigated through study of prochiral methylene hydrogen discrimination.
Recent research points to an important role of circadian mechanisms and clock genes in behavioral actions of cocaine.
Cocaine is the second most popular illegal recreational drug in Europe (behind cannabis).
One specific purpose of ancient coca leaf consumption was to increase energy and reduce fatigue in messengers who made multi-day quests to other settlements.
Legal cocaine quantities did not decrease until the Jones-Miller Act of 1922 put serious restrictions on cocaine manufactures.
Despite this, the DEA seized several shipments in Hawaii, Chicago, Georgia, and several locations on the East Coast of the United States, and the product was removed from the shelves.
Most commercial cocaine immunoassay screening tests cross-react appreciably with the major cocaine metabolites, but chromatographic techniques can easily distinguish and separately measure each of these substances.
Wöhler passed on the leaves to Albert Niemann, a Ph.D. student at the University of Göttingen in Germany, who then developed an improved purification process.
There was a 28% increase from the amount of potentially harvestable coca plants which were grown in Colombia in 1998.
The benzoyl moiety required for the formation of the cocaine diester is synthesized from phenylalanine via cinnamic acid.
The first synthesis and elucidation of the cocaine molecule was by Richard Willstätter in 1898.
The synthesis started from tropinone, a related natural product and took five steps.
Coca leaves are typically mixed with an alkaline substance (such as lime) and chewed into a wad that is retained in the mouth between gum and cheek (much in the same as chewing tobacco is chewed) and sucked of its juices.
