The female flower is much larger than the male flower.
Due to the porosity of the limestone, Bermuda's coconut trees do not generally have a sufficient supply of water with which they are able to support a large number of fruit as rain water quickly drains down through the limestone layer to the water table which is far too deep for a coconut's roots to reach.
He hypothesized that the coconut originated in the Americas, based on his belief that American coconut populations predated European contact and because he considered pan-tropical distribution by ocean currents improbable.
According to Losada, the name came from Portuguese explorers, the sailors of Vasco da Gama in India, who first brought them to Europe.
A long handle made from some other wood may be inserted into the base of the bundle and used as a two-handed broom.
A coconut can be hollowed out and used as a home for a rodent or small birds.
In Jakarta, ''soto babat'' or beef tripe soup also uses coconut milk.
Then they boil it and it becomes oil like butter.
This typically leads to a reduction in fruit yield (sometimes as few as one or two mature fruits), as well as a reduced milk content inside the coconut that often causes the fruit to be infertile.
And no coconut can float over the sea faster than a balsa raft moves with the wind behind it."
Per 100-gram serving with 354 calories, raw coconut meat supplies a high amount of total fat (33 grams), especially saturated fat (89% of total fat) and carbohydrates (24 g) (table).
Coconut juice and coconut milk are used, especially in Vietnam's southern style of cooking, including ''kho'', ''chè'', and curry (''cà ri'').
Dried half shells are used as the bodies of musical instruments, including the Chinese ''yehu'' and ''banhu'', along with the Vietnamese ''đàn gáo'' and Arabo-Turkic ''rebab''.
A coconut () is an essential element of rituals in Hindu tradition.
nucifera'' are also categorized as tall (var.
The Zulu Social Aid and Pleasure Club of New Orleans traditionally throws hand-decorated coconuts, the most valuable of Mardi Gras souvenirs, to parade revelers.
North of this latitude, coconuts are unable to survive unless given special care, such as in a greenhouse.
It is known as a ''bunot'' in the Philippines and simply a "coconut brush" in Jamaica.
The journal then details how on the following week, Magellan's expedition landed at Suluan east of Leyte Gulf in the Philippines.
In the United States, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration declared that coconut must be disclosed as an ingredient on package labels as a "tree nut" with potential allergenicity.
* Mean daily temperature above  every day of the year
There they were given gifts by the natives which included two coconuts ("dui cochi"), with indication that more coconuts would be brought later ("cochi et molta altra victuuaglia").
Coconut palms continue to produce roots from the base of the stem throughout their lives.
The smell of coconuts comes from the 6-pentyloxan-2-one molecule, known as δ-decalactone in the food and fragrance industries.
Though Kerala has the largest number of coconut trees, in terms of production per hectare, Tamil Nadu leads all other states.
It takes around 6,000 full-grown coconuts to produce a tonne of copra.
Before modern construction methods were introduced, coconut leaves were used as roofing material for many houses in the islands, while coconut timber was used to build houses and boats.
They can be sorted mainly into tall cultivars, dwarf cultivars, and hybrid cultivars (hybrids between talls and dwarfs).
CAPB may cause mild skin irritation, but allergic reactions to CAPB are rare and probably related to impurities rendered during the manufacturing process (which include amidoamine and dimethylaminopropylamine) rather than CAPB itself.
It has a total fat content of 24%, most of which (89%) is saturated fat, with lauric acid as a major fatty acid.
Coconuts are known for their great versatility, as evidenced by  many traditional uses, ranging from food to cosmetics.
Not only do these trees produce a significantly higher yield, but also the fruit itself tends to be far more fertile due to the higher milk content.
However, it can also be argued that the placement of the vulnerable eye of the nut (down when floating), and the site of the coir 'cushion' are better positioned to ensure that the water-filled nut doesn't fracture when dropping on rocky ground, rather than for floatation.
The coconut palm is grown throughout the tropics for decoration, as well as for its many culinary and nonculinary uses; virtually every part of the coconut palm can be used by humans in some manner and has significant economic value.
Drift models based on wind and ocean currents have shown that coconuts could not have drifted across the Pacific unaided.
The sap derived from incising the flower clusters of the coconut is drunk as ''neera'', also known as toddy or ''tuba'' (Philippines), ''tuak'' (Indonesia and Malaysia) or ''karewe'' (fresh and not fermented, collected twice a day, for breakfast and dinner) in Kiribati.
Coconut is an indispensable ingredient in Indonesian cooking.
The use of coconut branches in corporal punishment was revived in the Gilbertese community on Choiseul in the Solomon Islands in 2005.
Thor Heyerdahl later used this as one part of his hypothesis to support his theory that the Pacific Islanders originated as two migration streams from the Canadian Pacific coast (themselves recent migrants from Asia) to Hawaii, and on to Tahiti and New Zealand in a series of hops, and another migration from South America via sailing balsa-wood rafts.
That liquor is sweet but somewhat tart, and is gathered in canes of bamboo as thick as the leg and thicker.
The number of roots produced depends on the age of the tree and the environment, with more than 3,600 roots possible on a tree that is 60 to 70 years old.
mathesoni'' (feeds exclusively on ''C.
The 'know how' of coconut cultivation and necessary soil fixation and irrigation may have found its way into Omani, Hadrami and Al-Mahra culture by people who returned from those overseas areas.
But they do not draw the aforesaid wine always from one tree, but take it for a week from one, and so with the other, for otherwise the trees would dry up.
In cooler climates (but not less than USDA Zone 9), a similar palm, the queen palm (''Syagrus romanzoffiana''), is used in landscaping.
A dried half coconut shell with husk can be used to buff floors.
Due to growing sedentary lifestyles and heavy-handed landscaping, a decline in these traditional farming and soil-fixing techniques has occurred.
Coconut ground with spices is also mixed in ''sambar'' and other various lunch dishes for extra taste.
The discovery of this behavior was observed in Bali and North Sulawesi in Indonesia between 1998 and 2008.
This type of root system is known as fibrous or adventitious, and is a characteristic of grass species.
That palm bears a fruit, namely, the cocoanut, which is as large as the head or thereabouts.
The husks and leaves can be used as material to make a variety of products for furnishing and decorating.
In South Texas, they may also be grown in favored microclimates around the coastal areas of the Rio Grande Valley near Brownsville, but more severe cold stunts their growth and keeps them from producing viable fruit.
''Amphioctopus marginatus'' is the first invertebrate known to be able to use tools.'''''
They form a regular part of the  diets of many people in the tropics and subtropics.
The milk can be used to produce virgin coconut oil by controlled heating and removal of the oil fraction.
Coir (the fiber from the husk of the coconut) is used in ropes, mats, door mats, brushes, and sacks, as caulking for boats, and as stuffing fiber for mattresses.
On fertile soil, a tall coconut palm tree can yield up to 75 fruits per year, but more often yields less than 30, mainly due to poor cultural practices.
* No or very little overhead canopy, since even small trees require direct sun
There is a clear, sweet water in the middle of that marrowy substance which is very refreshing.
This kind of palm tree is like the palm that bears dates, but not so knotty.
The term '''coconut''' can refer to the entire '''coconut palm''', the seed, or the fruit, which, botanically, is a drupe, not a  nut.
The annual rainy season known locally as ''khareef'' or monsoon makes coconut cultivation easy on the Arabian east coast.
The tall variety is outcrossing while dwarf palms are incrossing, which has led to a much greater degree of genetic diversity within the tall group.
Coconuts can only be grown in temperatures above  and need a daily temperature above  to produce fruit.
Coconuts sold in the shops of nontropical countries often have had the exocarp (outermost layer) removed.
Its meat is sweetened, cut into strands, and sold in glass jars as coconut strings, sometimes labeled as "gelatinous mutant coconut".
namely 'Typica', 'Nana', and 'Aurantiaca'.
and early germination on the palm (vivipary) was important, rather than increasing the number or size of the edible parts of a fruit that was already large enough.
Some cultivars such as 'Fiji dwarf' form a large bulb at the lower stem and others are cultivated to produce very sweet coconut water with orange-coloured husks (king coconut) used entirely in fruit stalls for drinking (Sri Lanka, India).
It is spread by host insects, that thrive on heavy turf grasses.
The "branches" (leaf petioles) are strong and flexible enough to make a switch.
Omani people needed the coir rope from the coconut fiber to stitch together their traditional high seas-going dhow vessels in which nails were never used.
It prefers areas with abundant sunlight and regular rainfall (1500&nbsp;mm to 2500&nbsp;mm annually), which makes colonizing shorelines of the tropics relatively straightforward.
Coconut buttons are often used for Hawaiian aloha shirts.
Halved, drained coconuts can also be hung up as bird feeders, and after the flesh has gone, can be filled with fat in winter to attract tits.
Coconut palms are grown in more than 90 countries of the world, with a total production of 62&nbsp;million tonnes per year (table).
Every day, thousands of coconuts are broken, and some devotees break as many as 108 coconuts at a time as per the prayer.
''Cocos nucifera'' is a large palm, growing up to  tall, with pinnate leaves  long, and pinnae 60–90&nbsp;cm long; old leaves break away cleanly, leaving the trunk smooth.
In India, the woven coconut leaves are used as ''pandals'' (temporary sheds) for marriage functions especially in the states of Kerala, Karnataka, and Tamil Nadu.
The coconut's obscure origin in foreign lands led to the notion of using cups made from the shell to neutralise poisoned drinks.
Under that husk there is a hard shell, much thicker than the shell of the walnut, which they burn and make therefrom a powder that is useful to them.
The reasons why coconut are cultivated only in Yemen's Al Mahrah and Hadramaut governorates and in the Sultanate of Oman, but not in other suitable areas in the Arabian Peninsula, may originate from the fact that Oman and Hadramaut had long dhow trade relations with Burma, Malaysia, Indonesia, East Africa, and Zanzibar, as well as southern India and China.
When dried, the coconut flesh is called copra.
The leftover fiber from coconut oil and coconut milk production, coconut meal, is used as livestock feed.
Hindus often initiate the beginning of any new activity by breaking a coconut to ensure the blessings of the gods and successful completion of the activity.
A frayed piece of root can also be used as a toothbrush.
Coconut juice is also a popular drink in the country.
Coconut fruit in the wild are light, buoyant, and highly water resistant.
Coconut flowers are auspicious symbols and are fixtures at Hindu and Buddhist weddings and other important occasions.
Additionally, a genetically distinct subpopulation of coconut on the Pacific coast of Latin America has undergone a genetic bottleneck resulting from a founder effect; however, its ancestral population is the Pacific coconut.
Like other fruits, it has three layers: the exocarp, mesocarp, and endocarp.
The sap can be reduced by boiling to create a sweet syrup or candy such as ''te kamamai'' in Kiribati or ''dhiyaa hakuru'' and ''addu bondi'' in the Maldives.
The oldest fossils known of the modern coconut dating from the Eocene period from around 37 to 55 million years ago were found in Australia and India, but older palm fossils such as some of nipa fruit have been found in the Americas.
Coconut meat can be eaten as a snack sweetened with jaggery or molasses.
Coconut chips have been sold in the tourist regions of Hawaii and the Caribbean.
Every single one of these was ruined by the sea water.
One such variety of coconut is known as ''macapuno''.
Per 100-gram serving, coconut water contains 19 calories and no significant content of essential nutrients.
Coconut butter is often used to describe solidified coconut oil, but has also been adopted as a name by certain specialty products made of coconut milk solids or  puréed coconut meat and oil.
Hearts of palm are eaten in salads, sometimes called "millionaire's salad".
Under that shell there is a white marrowy substance one finger in thickness, which they eat fresh with meat and fish as we do bread; and it has a taste resembling the almond.
The coconut is also used as a target and prize in the traditional British fairground game "coconut shy".
Hawaiians hollowed the trunk to form drums, containers, or small canoes.
''Uruttu chammanthi'' (granulated chutney) is eaten with rice or ''kanji'' (rice gruel).
The nature of lauric acid as a fatty acid makes it particularly effective for creating detergents and surfactants.
The OED states: "Portuguese and Spanish authors of the 16th c. agree in identifying the word with Portuguese and Spanish ''coco'' "grinning face, grin, grimace", also "bugbear, scarecrow", cognate with ''cocar'' "to grin, make a grimace"; the name being said to refer to the face-like appearance of the base of the shell, with its three holes.
''Tempurung'', as the shell is called in the Malay language, can be used as a soup bowl and—if fixed with a handle—a ladle.
Some countries in Southeast Asia use special coconut mutant called Kopyor (in Indonesian) or macapuno (in Philippines) as dessert drinks.
When they wish to make vinegar, they allow only the water to putrefy, and then place it in the sun, and a vinegar results like that made from white wine.
Micronutrients in significant content include the dietary minerals manganese, iron, phosphorus, and zinc.
If they were naturally distributed and had been in the Pacific for a thousand years or so, then we would expect the eastern shore of Australia, with its own islands sheltered by the Great Barrier Reef, to have been thick with coconut palms: the currents were directly into, and down along this coast.
In March 1521, an extremely detailed description of the coconut was given by Antonio Pigafetta writing in Italian and using the words "cocho"/"cochi", as recorded in his journal after the first European crossing of the Pacific Ocean during the Magellan circumnavigation and meeting the inhabitants of what would become known as Guam and the Philippines.
It is offered during worship to a Hindu god or goddess.
Since 1978, the work on tracing the probable origin and dispersal of ''Cocos nucifera'' has only recently been augmented by a publication on the germination rate of the coconut seednut  and another on the importance of the coral atoll ecosystem.
This pattern coincides with the known trade routes of Austronesian sailors.
''Thenga'', its Malayalam and Tamil name, was used in the detailed description of coconut found in ''Itinerario'' by Ludovico di Varthema published in 1510 and also in the later ''Hortus Indicus Malabaricus''.
It could be dried and made into bread.
Coconut oil is also a main ingredient in Ayurvedic oils.
Roots are usually less than about 3 inches in diameter and uniformly thick from the tree trunk to the root tip.
The leaves also provide material for baskets that can draw well water and for roofing thatch; they can be woven into mats, cooking skewers, and kindling arrows, as well.
Newly germinated coconuts contain an edible fluff of marshmallow-like consistency called coconut sprout, produced as the endosperm nourishes the developing embryo.
According to an urban legend, more deaths are caused by falling coconuts than by sharks annually.
Similarly in Sri Lanka, coconut flowers, standing in brass urns, are placed in prominent positions.
This provides substantial circumstantial evidence that deliberate voyagers were involved in carrying coconuts across the Pacific ocean (possibly the Austronesian peoples) and that they could not have dispersed worldwide without human agency.
In Kerala, coconut flowers must be present during a marriage ceremony.
Just as we have bread, wine, oil, and milk, so those people get everything from that tree.
The white, fleshy part of the seed, the coconut meat, is used fresh or dried in cooking, especially in confections and desserts such as macaroons.
It is evident that the name 'coco' and 'coconut' came from these 1521 encounters with Pacific islanders, and not from the other regions where it was found as no name is similar in any of the languages of India, where the Portuguese first found the fruit; and indeed Barbosa, Barros, and Garcia, in mentioning the Tamil/Malayalam name ''tenga'', and Canarese ''narle'', expressly say, "we call these fruits ''quoquos''", "our people have given it the name of coco", and "that which we call coco, and the Malabars ''temga''".
Coconuts are commonly grown around the northern coast of Australia, and in some warmer parts of New South Wales.
The ancient coconut groves of Dhofar were mentioned by the medieval Moroccan traveller Ibn Battuta in his writings, known as ''Al Rihla''.
Palm wine is distilled to produce ''arrack''.
They are now almost ubiquitous between 26°N and 26°S except for the interiors of Africa and South America.
Most of the world production is in tropical Asia, with Indonesia, the Philippines, and India accounting collectively for 73% of the world total (table).
Other types of large trees produce a single downward-growing tap root with a number of feeder roots growing from it.
The Hindu goddess of well-being and wealth,  Lakshmi, is often shown holding a coconut.
We know from early Spanish documents that they deliberately planted coconuts shortly after first contact, and some nuts would certainly have self-seeded when they floated ashore following ship-wrecks.
The coconut palm thrives on sandy soils and is highly tolerant of salinity.
The decreased buoyancy and increased fragility of this spherical, thin-husked fruit would not matter for a species that had started to be dispersed by humans and grown in plantations.
However, both James Cook and William Bligh (put adrift after the Bounty Mutiny) found no sign of the nuts along this 2000&nbsp;km stretch when he needed water for his crew.
The coconut palm is damaged by the larvae of many Lepidoptera (butterfly and moth) species which feed on it, including ''Batrachedra'' spp.
Coconuts are distinct from other fruits for their large quantity of "water", and when immature, they are known as tender-nuts or jelly-nuts and may be harvested for their potable coconut water.
Tannin produces negative effects on sapling growth.
Copra is the dried meat of the seed and after processing produces coconut oil and coconut meal.
As per 2014-15 statistics from Coconut Development Board of Government of India, four southern states combined account for almost 90% of the total production in the country: Tamil Nadu (33.84%), Karnataka (25.15%), Kerala (23.96%), and Andhra Pradesh (7.16%).
Cook was one of the earliest modern researchers to draw conclusions about the location of origin of ''Cocos nucifera'' based on its current-day worldwide distribution.
By examining 10 microsatellite loci, researchers found two genetically distinct subpopulations of coconut—one originating in the Indian Ocean, the other in the Pacific Ocean.
For we scraped that marrow, then mixed it with its own water, and being passed through a cloth it became like goat's milk.
Only a few of the roots penetrate deep into the soil for stability.
The immature seeds are infested and desapped by larvae staying in the portion covered by the perianth of the immature seed; the seeds then drop off or survive deformed.
Coconut is also a source of lauric acid, which can be processed in a particular way to produce sodium lauryl sulfate, a detergent used in shower gels and shampoos.
Coconut water can be fermented to make a different product—''nata de coco'' (coconut gel).
The Middle East's hot, dry climate favors the development of coconut mites, which cause immature seed dropping and may cause brownish-gray discoloration on the coconut's outer green fiber.
The coconut also has cultural and religious significance in certain societies, particularly in India, where it is used in Hindu rituals.
Some of the dwarf cultivars such as 'Malayan dwarf' have shown some promising resistance to lethal yellowing, while other cultivars such as 'Jamaican tall' are highly affected by the same plant disease.
The mesocarp is composed of a fiber, called coir, which has many traditional and commercial uses.
The shell has three germination pores (micropyles) or "eyes" that are clearly visible on its outside surface once the husk is removed.
The process of husk extraction from the coir bypasses the retting process, using a custom-built coconut husk extractor designed by ASEAN–Canada Forest Tree Seed Centre  in 1986.
Traditional areas of coconut cultivation in India are the states of Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Puducherry, Andhra Pradesh, Goa, Maharashtra, Odisha, and West Bengal and the islands of Lakshadweep and Andaman and Nicobar.
The conditions required for coconut trees to grow without any care are:
But we had laid about half among the special provisions below deck, with the waves washing around them.
Coconut trees are grown on all the islands.
Coconut meat, coconut milk, and coconut water are often used in main courses, desserts, and soups throughout the archipelago.
A young, well-maintained tree can produce around  of toddy per year, while a 40-year-old tree may yield around .
The green of the leaves (lamina) are stripped away, leaving the veins (wood-like, thin, long strips) which are tied together to form a broom or brush.
He explained how at Guam "they eat coconuts" ("mangiano cochi") and that the natives there also "anoint the body and the hair with cocoanut and beneseed oil" ("ongieno eL corpo et li capili co oleo de cocho et de giongioli").
Coconut palms require warm conditions for successful growth, and are intolerant of cold weather.
The fresh husk of a brown coconut may serve as a dish sponge or body sponge.
It has generally been accepted that the coconut originated in the Indian-Indonesia region and float-distributed itself around the world by riding ocean currents.
This ritual, known as ''niniyogan'', is an offering made to the deceased and one's ancestors.
Coconuts also need high humidity (70–80%+) for optimum growth, which is why they are rarely seen in areas with low humidity.
Edwards exempting from insurance liability any decorated coconut "handed" from a Zulu float.
Coconut palms do not grow in California because of extended periods below  in the winter.
Other aspects such as seed size, shape and weight, and copra thickness are also important factors in the selection of new cultivars.
However, this should not be extrapolated to claims that one ocean's sub-genera possibly could have floated to interbreed with the other.
Coconuts could not reach inland locations without human intervention (to carry seednuts, plant seedlings, etc.)
Dried coconut is also used as the filling for many chocolate bars.
Given that coconuts are ideally suited for inter-island group ocean dispersal, obviously some natural distribution did take place.
A coconut tree is also included in the country's national emblem and coat of arms.
A ''coco chocolatero'' was a cup used to serve small quantities of beverages (such as chocolate drinks) between the 17th  and  19th centuries in countries such as Mexico, Guatemala, and Venezuela.
However, they can be found in humid areas with low annual precipitation such as in Karachi, Pakistan, which receives only about  of rainfall per year, but is consistently warm and humid.
In the foothills of the temple town of  Palani, before going to worship Murugan for the Ganesha, coconuts are broken at a place marked for the purpose.
Some dried coconut is purely coconut, but others are manufactured with other ingredients, such as sugar, propylene glycol, salt, and sodium metabisulfite.
Often it is decorated with bright metal foils and other symbols of auspiciousness.
atriloqua'' (feeds exclusively on ''C.
nucifera''), and ''B.
* Mean annual rainfall above
The oil and milk derived from it are commonly used in cooking and frying, as well as in soaps and cosmetics.
The spelling '''cocoanut''' is an archaic form of the word.
It can be reduced further to yield coconut sugar also referred to as palm sugar or jaggery.
Other states, such as Goa, Maharashtra, Odisha, West Bengal, and those in the northeast (Tripura and Assam) account for the remaining productions.
The dried calyx is used as fuel in wood-fired stoves.
Unlike the UAE, which grows mostly non-native dwarf or hybrid coconut cultivars imported from Florida for ornamental purposes, the slender, tall Omani coconut cultivars are relatively well-adapted to the Middle East's hot dry seasons, but need longer to reach maturity.
The UAE has, however, imposed strict laws on mature coconut tree imports from other countries to reduce the spread of pests to other native palm trees, as the mixing of date and coconut trees poses a risk of cross-species palm pests, such as rhinoceros beetles and red palm weevils.
Coconut timber comes from the trunk, and is increasingly being used as an ecologically sound substitute for endangered hardwoods.
In Goa, the coconut tree has been reclassified by the government as a palm (like a grass), enabling farmers and real estate developers to clear land with fewer restrictions.
A protein-rich powder can be processed from coconut milk following centrifugation, separation, and spray drying.
Flowering occurs continuously.
The term is derived from the 16th-century Portuguese and Spanish word ''coco'' meaning "head" or "skull", from the three indentations on the coconut shell that resemble facial features.
When refrigerated and left to set, coconut cream will rise to the top and separate from the milk.
