Criticism of cold fusion claims generally take one of two forms: either pointing out the theoretical implausibility that fusion reactions have occurred in electrolysis set-ups or criticizing the excess heat measurements as being spurious, erroneous, or due to poor methodology or controls.
But the 1986 discovery of high-temperature superconductivity had made the scientific community more open to revelations of unexpected scientific results that could have huge economic repercussions and that could be replicated reliably even if they had not been predicted by established theories.
On 22–25 March 2009, the American Chemical Society meeting included a four-day symposium in conjunction with the 20th anniversary of the announcement of cold fusion.
Esther Kepplinger, the deputy commissioner of patents in 2004, said that this was done using the same argument as with perpetual motion machines: that they do not work.
To avoid future problems, the teams appeared to agree to simultaneously publish their results, though their accounts of their 6 March meeting differ.
In support of their claim that nuclear reactions took place in their electrolytic cells, Fleischmann and Pons reported a neutron flux of 4,000 neutrons per second, as well as detection of tritium.
On 4 May, due to all this new criticism, the meetings with various representatives from Washington were cancelled.
However, the authors later retracted that report, saying that the helium they measured was due to background from the air.
Cold fusion reports continued to be published in a small cluster of specialized journals like ''Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry'' and ''Il Nuovo Cimento''.
The report was released in 2004.
Attendees at some of the early conferences were described as offering no criticism to papers and presentations for fear of giving ammunition to external critics; thus allowing the proliferation of crackpots and hampering the conduct of serious science.
By this point, however, academic consensus had moved decidedly toward labeling cold fusion as a kind of "pathological science".
Only about one in one million of the intermediaries decay along the third pathway, making its products comparatively rare when compared to the other paths.
The reported results received wide media attention, and raised hopes of a cheap and abundant source of energy.
The inventor of three such patents had his applications initially rejected when they were reviewed by experts in nuclear science; but then he rewrote the patents to focus more in the electrochemical parts so they would be reviewed instead by experts in electrochemistry, who approved them.
After 1991, cold fusion research only continued in relative obscurity, conducted by groups that had increasing difficulty securing public funding and keeping programs open.
In 1999 the Japan C-F Research Society was established to promote the independent research into cold fusion that continued in Japan.
In 1993, after their original report, Fleischmann reported "heat-after-death" experiments—where excess heat was measured after the electric current supplied to the electrolytic cell was turned off.
This type of report has also become part of subsequent cold fusion claims.
Various sources of energy input and output are continuously measured.
The ''Journal of Fusion Technology'' (FT) established a permanent feature in 1990 for cold fusion papers, publishing over a dozen papers per year and giving a mainstream outlet for cold fusion researchers.
Since the 1920s, there has been speculation that nuclear fusion might be possible at much lower temperatures by catalytically fusing hydrogen absorbed in a metal catalyst.
If the higher temperatures were real, and not an experimental artifact, the energy balance would show an unaccounted term.
For the next six weeks, competing claims, counterclaims, and suggested explanations kept what was referred to as "cold fusion" or "fusion confusion" in the news.
''The Boston Globe'' estimated in 2004 that there were only 100 to 200 researchers working in the field, most suffering damage to their reputation and career.
"Final Exam", the 16th episode of season 4 of ''The Outer Limits'', depicts a student named Todtman who has invented a cold fusion weapon, and attempts to use it as a tool for revenge on people who have wronged him over the years.
Since 2005, ''Naturwissenschaften'' has published cold fusion papers; in 2009, the journal named a cold fusion researcher to its editorial board.
Tandberg then tried the same experiment but used electrolysis to make palladium absorb more deuterium and force the deuterium further together inside the rods, thus anticipating the main elements of Fleischmann and Pons' experiment.
The reviewers were "split approximately evenly" on whether the experiments had produced energy in the form of heat, but "most reviewers, even those who accepted the evidence for excess power production, 'stated that the effects are not repeatable, the magnitude of the effect has not increased in over a decade of work, and that many of the reported experiments were not well documented.'"
The announcement of a new purported clean source of energy came at a crucial time: adults still remembered the 1973 oil crisis and the problems caused by oil dependence, anthropogenic global warming was starting to become notorious, the anti-nuclear movement was labeling nuclear power plants as dangerous and getting them closed, people had in mind the consequences of strip mining, acid rain, the greenhouse effect and the Exxon Valdez oil spill, which happened the day after the announcement.
Yet, in 2008, the National Institute of Advanced Studies recommended that the Indian government revive this research.
There is currently no accepted theoretical model that would allow cold fusion to occur.
In July and November 1989, ''Nature'' published papers critical of cold fusion claims.
In the accompanying press release Fleischmann was quoted saying: "What we have done is to open the door of a new research area, our indications are that the discovery will be relatively easy to make into a usable technology for generating heat and power, but continued work is needed, first, to further understand the science and secondly, to determine its value to energy economics."
In the 1990s, the groups that continued to research cold fusion and their supporters established (non-peer-reviewed) periodicals such as ''Fusion Facts'', ''Cold Fusion Magazine'', ''Infinite Energy Magazine'' and ''New Energy Times'' to cover developments in cold fusion and other fringe claims in energy production that were ignored in other venues.
Pons has made no public declarations since, and only Fleischmann continued giving talks and publishing papers.
In muon-catalyzed fusion there are more fusions because the presence of the muon causes deuterium nuclei to be 207 times closer than in ordinary deuterium gas.
The ''Times'' called it a circus the same day, and the ''Boston Herald'' attacked cold fusion the following day.
On 1 May 1989 the American Physical Society held a session on cold fusion in Baltimore, including many reports of experiments that failed to produce evidence of cold fusion.
This was thanks to an April 2003 letter sent by MIT's Peter L. Hagelstein, and the publication of many new papers, including the Italian ENEA and other researchers in the 2003 International Cold Fusion Conference, and a two-volume book by U.S. SPAWAR in 2002.
Considerable attention has been given to measuring 4He production.
The grant was intended to support research into the interactions of hydrogen with palladium, nickel or platinum under extreme conditions.
Fleischmann and Pons and co-workers met with Jones and co-workers on occasion in Utah to share research and techniques.
It was proposed that a higher density of hydrogen inside the palladium and a lower potential barrier could raise the possibility of fusion at lower temperatures than expected from a simple application of Coulomb's law.
Fleischmann and Pons were not aware of Tandberg's work.
Researchers in the field do not agree on a theory for cold fusion.
During this time, Fleischmann and Pons described their experiments as generating considerable "excess energy", in the sense that it could not be explained by chemical reactions alone.
These retractions, combined with negative results from some famous laboratories, led most scientists to conclude, as early as 1989, that no positive result should be attributed to cold fusion.
A much longer paper published a year later went into details of calorimetry but did not include any nuclear measurements.
In 2006–2007, the ENEA started a research program which claimed to have found excess power of up to 500 percent, and in 2009, ENEA hosted the 15th cold fusion conference.
But deuterium nuclei inside a palladium lattice are further apart than in deuterium gas, and there should be fewer fusion reactions, not more.
In open cell systems, the electrolysis products, which are gaseous, are allowed to leave the cell.
The number of papers sharply declined after 1990 because of two simultaneous phenomena: scientists abandoning the field and journal editors declining to review new papers, and cold fusion fell off the ISI charts.
United States Navy researchers at the Space and Naval Warfare Systems Center (SPAWAR) in San Diego have been studying cold fusion since 1989.
A patent only legally prevents others from using or benefiting from one's invention.
In general, pressure and chemical environment only cause small changes to fusion ratios.
Reproducibility is one of the main principles of the scientific method, and its lack led most physicists to believe that the few positive reports could be attributed to experimental error.
There are a couple of reasons why known fusion reactions are an unlikely explanation for the excess heat and associated cold fusion claims.
The most basic setup of a cold fusion cell consists of two electrodes submerged in a solution containing palladium and heavy water.
After deuterium was discovered in 1932, Tandberg continued his experiments with heavy water.
One proposal considers that hydrogen and its isotopes can be absorbed in certain solids, including palladium hydride, at high densities.
At the end of the session, eight of the nine leading speakers stated that they considered the initial Fleischmann and Pons claim dead, with the ninth, Johann Rafelski, abstaining.
If one watt (1 eV = 1.602 x 10−19 joule) of nuclear power were produced from deuteron fusion consistent with known branching ratios, the resulting neutron and tritium (3H) production would be easily measured.
Electron screening of the positive hydrogen nuclei by the negative electrons in the palladium lattice was suggested to the 2004 DOE commission, but the panel found the theoretical explanations not convincing and inconsistent with current physics theories.
He tried to publish his theoretical paper "Cold Fusion: A Hypothesis" in ''Physical Review Letters'', but the peer reviewers rejected it so harshly that he felt deeply insulted, and he resigned from the American Physical Society (publisher of ''PRL'') in protest.
Cold fusion researchers (McKubre since 1994, ENEA in 2011) have speculated that a cell that is loaded with a deuterium/palladium ratio lower than 100% (or 1:1) will not produce excess heat.
This and other published papers prompted a 2004 Department of Energy (DOE) review.
The ability of palladium to absorb hydrogen was recognized as early as the nineteenth century by Thomas Graham.
Several medium and heavy elements like calcium, titanium, chromium, manganese, iron, cobalt, copper and zinc have been reported as detected by several researchers, like Tadahiko Mizuno or George Miley.
Although details have not surfaced, it appears that the University of Utah forced the 23 March 1989 Fleischmann and Pons announcement to establish priority over the discovery and its patents before the joint publication with Jones.
On the basis of his work, he applied for a Swedish patent for "a method to produce helium and useful reaction energy".
Even those reporting success had difficulty reproducing Fleischmann and Pons' results.
In February 2012, millionaire Sidney Kimmel, convinced that cold fusion was worth investing in by a 19 April 2009 interview with physicist Robert Duncan on the US news-show ''60 Minutes'', made a grant of $5.5 million to the University of Missouri to establish the Sidney Kimmel Institute for Nuclear Renaissance (SKINR).
In 2002 they released a two-volume report, "Thermal and nuclear aspects of the Pd/D2O system," with a plea for funding.
The Fleischmann and Pons early findings regarding helium, neutron radiation and tritium were never replicated satisfactorily, and its levels were too low for the claimed heat production and inconsistent with each other.
A special section in the Indian multidisciplinary journal ''Current Science'' published 33 cold fusion papers in 2015 by major cold fusion researchers including several Indian researchers.
The sudden surge of supporters until roughly 50% of scientists support the theory, followed by a decline until there is only a very small number of supporters, has been described as a characteristic of pathological science.
These experiments generally strive for a steady state condition, with the electrolyte being replaced periodically.
They summarized its conclusions thus:
The 2004 DOE panel expressed concerns about the poor quality of the theoretical framework cold fusion proponents presented to account for the lack of gamma rays.
Nuclear fusion of the type postulated would be inconsistent with current understanding and, if verified, would require established conjecture, perhaps even theory itself, to be extended in an unexpected way.
The term "cold fusion" was used as early as 1956 in a ''New York Times'' article about Luis Alvarez's work on muon-catalyzed fusion.
Some researchers reported detecting 4He but without the expected neutron or tritium production; such a result would require branching ratios strongly favouring the third pathway, with the actual rates of the first two pathways lower by at least five orders of magnitude than observations from other experiments, directly contradicting both theoretically predicted and observed branching probabilities.
John R. Huizenga says they had misinterpreted the Nernst equation, leading them to believe that there was enough pressure to bring deuterons so close to each other that there would be spontaneous fusions.
Some researchers also claim to have found them using only light water and nickel cathodes.
Since cold fusion articles are rarely published in peer-reviewed mainstream scientific journals, they do not attract the level of scrutiny expected for mainstream scientific publications.
Such research is distributed across ENEA departments, CNR laboratories, INFN, universities and industrial laboratories in Italy, where the group continues to try to achieve reliable reproducibility (i.e.
Researchers who got negative results abandoned the field, while others kept publishing.
A second DOE review in 2004, which looked at new research, reached similar conclusions and did not result in DOE funding of cold fusion.
This has been cited as an example of the importance of sympathetic influential individuals to the publication of cold fusion papers in certain journals.
Paul Palmer and then Steven Jones of Brigham Young University used the term "cold fusion" in 1986 in an investigation of "geo-fusion", the possible existence of fusion involving hydrogen isotopes in a planetary core.
In 1992, Pons and Fleischman resumed research with Toyota Motor Corporation's IMRA lab in France.
In ''Undead Science'', sociologist Bart Simon gives some examples of cold fusion in popular culture, saying that some scientists use cold fusion as a synonym for outrageous claims made with no supporting proof, and courses of ethics in science give it as an example of pathological science.
The most famous cold fusion claims were made by Stanley Pons and Martin Fleischmann in 1989.
The remaining researchers often term their field '''Low Energy Nuclear Reactions''' ('''LENR'''), '''Chemically Assisted Nuclear Reactions''' ('''CANR'''), '''Lattice Assisted Nuclear Reactions''' ('''LANR'''), '''Condensed Matter Nuclear Science''' ('''CMNS''') or '''Lattice Enabled Nuclear Reactions'''; one of the reasons being to avoid the negative connotations associated with "cold fusion".
This result is consistent with the predictions of the Bohr model.
In 1994, David Goodstein, a professor of physics at Caltech, advocated for increased attention from mainstream researchers and described cold fusion as:
The grant proposal was turned over for peer review, and one of the reviewers was Steven Jones of Brigham Young University.
This assumption ceases to be accurate if the temperature distribution within the cell becomes significantly altered from the condition under which calibration measurements were made.
In May 2016, the United States House Committee on Armed Services, in its report on the 2017 National Defense Authorization Act, states that it is "aware of recent positive developments in developing low-energy nuclear reactions", and directed the Secretary of Defense to "provide a briefing on the military utility of recent U.S. industrial base LENR advancements to the House Committee on Armed Services by September 22, 2016."
But then, at some point (in some of the experiments), the temperature rose suddenly to about 50&nbsp;°C without changes in the input power.
In experiments such as those run by Fleischmann and Pons, an electrolysis cell operating steadily at one temperature transitions to operating at a higher temperature with no increase in applied current.
Known instances of nuclear reactions, aside from producing energy, also produce nucleons and particles on readily observable ballistic trajectories.
In June 1990 an article in ''Science'' by science writer Gary Taubes destroyed the public credibility of the A&M tritium results when it accused its group leader John Bockris and one of his graduate students of spiking the cells with tritium.
In closed cell experiments, the products are captured, for example by catalytically recombining the products in a separate part of the experimental system.
Since the initial announcement, cold fusion research has continued by a small community of researchers who believe that such reactions happen and hope to gain wider recognition for their experimental evidence.
They only recommended that agencies consider funding individual well-thought studies in specific areas where research "could be helpful in resolving some of the controversies in the field".
A few other research groups, however, reported successful reproductions of cold fusion during this time.
Since the main controversy over Pons and Fleischmann had ended, cold fusion research has been funded by private and small governmental scientific investment funds in the United States, Italy, Japan, and India.
In April 1989, Fleischmann and Pons published a "preliminary note" in the ''Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry''.
Even when anomalous heat is reported, it can take weeks for it to begin to appear—this is known as the "loading time," the time required to saturate the palladium electrode with hydrogen (see "Loading ratio" section).
An ACS program chair said that without a proper forum the matter would never be discussed and, "with the world facing an energy crisis, it is worth exploring all possibilities."
In general USPTO rejections on the sole grounds of the invention's being "inoperative" are rare, since such rejections need to demonstrate "proof of total incapacity", and cases where those rejections are upheld in a Federal Court are even rarer: nevertheless, in 2000, a rejection of a cold fusion patent was appealed in a Federal Court and it was upheld, in part on the grounds that the inventor was unable to establish the utility of the invention.
The IMRA laboratory stopped cold fusion research in 1998 after spending £12 million.
On 12 April Pons was acclaimed at an ACS meeting.
Recombination of hydrogen and oxygen within the calorimeter would also alter the heat distribution and invalidate the calibration.
Since the Fleischmann and Pons announcement, the Italian National agency for new technologies, Energy and sustainable economic development (ENEA) has funded Franco Scaramuzzi's research into whether excess heat can be measured from metals loaded with deuterium gas.
The small tabletop experiment involved electrolysis of heavy water on the surface of a palladium (Pd) electrode.
With the founding in 2004 of the International Society for Condensed Matter Nuclear Science (ISCMNS), the conference was renamed the International Conference on Condensed Matter Nuclear Science (the reasons are explained in the subsequent research section), but reverted to the old name in 2008.
Over the years, several books have appeared that defended them.
They all hoped that pairs of hydrogen nuclei would fuse together to form helium, which at the time was needed in Germany to fill zeppelins, but no evidence of helium or of increased fusion rate was ever found.
Normally, in the absence of a catalyst such as a muon, very high kinetic energies are required to overcome this charged repulsion.
Martin Fleischmann of the University of Southampton and Stanley Pons of the University of Utah hypothesized that the high compression ratio and mobility of deuterium that could be achieved within palladium metal using electrolysis might result in nuclear fusion.
In his original paper on this subject with Clinton Van Siclen, submitted in 1985, Jones had coined the term "piezonuclear fusion".
It has appeared as a joke in ''Murphy Brown'' and ''The Simpsons''.
Since 2006, the American Physical Society (APS) has included cold fusion sessions at their semiannual meetings, clarifying that this does not imply a softening of skepticism.
To investigate, they conducted electrolysis experiments using a palladium cathode and heavy water within a calorimeter, an insulated vessel designed to measure process heat.
In 1989 the United States Department of Energy (DOE) concluded that the reported results of excess heat did not present convincing evidence of a useful source of energy and decided against allocating funding specifically for cold fusion.
The ISI identified cold fusion as the scientific topic with the largest number of published papers in 1989, of all scientific disciplines.
This was also the belief of geologist Palmer, who convinced Steven Jones that the helium-3 occurring naturally in Earth perhaps came from fusion involving hydrogen isotopes inside catalysts like nickel and palladium.
In the report presented to the DOE in 2004, the reviewers' opinion was divided on the evidence for 4He; with the most negative reviews concluding that although the amounts detected were above background levels, they were very close to them and therefore could be caused by contamination from air.
One of the main criticisms of cold fusion was that deuteron-deuteron fusion into helium was expected to result in the production of gamma rays—which were not observed and were not observed in subsequent cold fusion experiments.
A small community of researchers continues to investigate cold fusion, now often preferring the designation '''low-energy nuclear reactions''' ('''LENR''') or '''condensed matter nuclear science''' ('''CMNS''').
Under normal conditions, the energy input can be matched to the energy output to within experimental error.
And many scientists were also reminded of the Mössbauer effect, a process involving nuclear transitions in a solid.
Also, experiments indicate that the ratios of deuterium fusion remain constant at different energies.
Projects were commenced at the Chennai's Indian Institute of Technology, the Bhabha Atomic Research Centre and the Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research.
However, there is still skepticism among scientists and, for all practical purposes, research has stalled since the 1990s.
One of the SKINR projects is to replicate a 1991 experiment in which Prelas says bursts of millions of neutrons a second were recorded, which was stopped because "his research account had been frozen".
Some deuterium was thought to be accumulating within the cathode, but most was allowed to bubble out of the cell, joining oxygen produced at the anode.
In October 1990 Wolf finally said that the results were explained by tritium contamination in the rods.
But Georgia Tech retracted their announcement on 13 April, explaining that their neutron detectors gave false positives when exposed to heat.
Electrolysis cells can be either open cell or closed cell.
Between 1992 and 1997, Japan's Ministry of International Trade and Industry sponsored a "New Hydrogen Energy (NHE)" program of US$20&nbsp;million to research cold fusion.
Cold fusion research continues today in a few specific venues, but the wider scientific community has generally marginalized the research being done and researchers have had difficulty publishing in mainstream journals.
In 1989, after Fleischmann and Pons had made their claims, many research groups tried to reproduce the Fleischmann-Pons experiment, without success.
In December 1990, professor Richard Oriani of the University of Minnesota reported excess heat.
By late 1989, most scientists considered cold fusion claims dead, and cold fusion subsequently gained a reputation as pathological science.
Due to Paneth and Peters's retraction and his inability to explain the physical process, his patent application was denied.
Cold fusion researchers were for many years unable to get papers accepted at scientific meetings, prompting the creation of their own conferences.
For most of the time, the power input to the cell was equal to the calculated power leaving the cell within measurement accuracy, and the cell temperature was stable at around 30&nbsp;°C.
On 10 April 1989, a group at Texas A&M University published results of excess heat and later that day a group at the Georgia Institute of Technology announced neutron production—the strongest replication announced up to that point due to the detection of neutrons and the reputation of the lab.
Jones, upset, faxed in his paper to ''Nature'' after the press conference.
However, the reported levels are very near to background, so contamination by trace amounts of helium normally present in the air cannot be ruled out.
Groups that did report successes found that some of their cells were producing the effect, while other cells that were built exactly the same and used the same materials were not producing the effect.
The University of Utah asked Congress to provide $25 million to pursue the research, and Pons was scheduled to meet with representatives of President Bush in early May.
The lack of a shared set of unifying concepts and techniques has prevented the creation of a dense network of collaboration in the field; researchers perform efforts in their own and in disparate directions, making the transition to "normal" science more difficult.
Current was applied continuously for many weeks, with the heavy water being renewed at intervals.
Since most of the negative replications from 1989–1990 did not report their ratios, this has been proposed as an explanation for failed replications.
Pons and Fleischmann never retracted their claims, but moved their research program to France after the controversy erupted.
In early May 1990 one of the two A&M researchers, Kevin Wolf, acknowledged the possibility of spiking, but said that the most likely explanation was tritium contamination in the palladium electrodes or simply contamination due to sloppy work.
Extrapolating from known fusion rates, the rate for uncatalyzed fusion at room-temperature energy would be 50 orders of magnitude lower than needed to account for the reported excess heat.
A group at Georgia Tech found problems with their neutron detector, and Texas A&M discovered bad wiring in their thermometers.
Jones, however, was measuring neutron flux, which was not of commercial interest.
This led their team in 1986 to independently make the same experimental setup as Fleischmann and Pons (a palladium cathode submerged in heavy water, absorbing deuterium via electrolysis).
The panel was against special funding for cold fusion research, but supported modest funding of "focused experiments within the general funding system."
Several researchers have described potential mechanisms by which this process could occur and thereby account for excess heat in electrolysis experiments.
The researchers who continue acknowledge that the flaws in the original announcement are the main cause of the subject's marginalization, and they complain of a chronic lack of funding and no possibilities of getting their work published in the highest impact journals.
getting the phenomena to happen in every cell, and inside a certain frame of time).
It has also appeared in advertising as a synonym for impossible science, for example a 1995 advertisement for Pepsi Max.
There are also "heat-after-death" experiments, where the evolution of heat is monitored after the electric current is turned off.
'''Cold fusion''' is a hypothesized type of nuclear reaction that would occur at, or near, room temperature.
In the press conference, Chase N. Peterson, Fleischmann and Pons, backed by the solidity of their scientific credentials, repeatedly assured the journalists that cold fusion would solve environmental problems, and would provide a limitless inexhaustible source of clean energy, using only seawater as fuel.
Some cold fusion researchers who claim that they can consistently measure an excess heat effect have argued that the apparent lack of reproducibility might be attributable to a lack of quality control in the electrode metal or the amount of hydrogen or deuterium loaded in the system.
Researcher Nathan Lewis discovered that the excess heat in Fleischmann and Pons's original paper was not measured, but estimated from measurements that didn't have any excess heat.
Some papers also appeared in ''Journal of Physical Chemistry'', ''Physics Letters A'', ''International Journal of Hydrogen Energy'', and a number of Japanese and Russian journals of physics, chemistry, and engineering.
The final experiments made by Tandberg with heavy water were similar to the original experiment by Fleischmann and Pons.
One assumption made by Fleischmann and Pons is that the efficiency of electrolysis is nearly 100%, meaning nearly all the electricity applied to the cell resulted in electrolysis of water, with negligible resistive heating and substantially all the electrolysis product leaving the cell unchanged.
Steven E. Koonin of Caltech called the Utah report a result of "''the incompetence and delusion of Pons and Fleischmann,''" which was met with a standing ovation.
It was adopted as a software product name Adobe ColdFusion and a brand of protein bars (Cold Fusion Foods).
In March 1990 Dr. Michael H. Salamon, a Utah physicist, and nine co-authors reported negative results.
At least one patent related to cold fusion has been granted by the European Patent Office.
Critics have further taken issue with what they describe as mistakes or errors of interpretation that cold fusion researchers have made in calorimetry analyses and energy budgets.
Jones had worked for some time on muon-catalyzed fusion, a known method of inducing nuclear fusion without high temperatures, and had written an article on the topic entitled "Cold nuclear fusion" that had been published in ''Scientific American'' in July 1987.
In 1989 Martin Fleischmann (then one of the world's leading electrochemists) and Stanley Pons reported that their apparatus had produced anomalous heat ("excess heat") of a magnitude they asserted would defy explanation except in terms of nuclear processes.
They further reported measuring small amounts of nuclear reaction byproducts, including neutrons and tritium.
University faculty were then "stunned" when a lawyer representing Pons and Fleischmann demanded the Salamon paper be retracted under threat of a lawsuit.
The authors claim that these neutrons are indicative of nuclear reactions; without quantitative analysis of the number, energy, and timing of the neutrons and exclusion of other potential sources, this interpretation is unlikely to find acceptance by the wider scientific community.
Some research groups initially reported that they had replicated the Fleischmann and Pons results but later retracted their reports and offered an alternative explanation for their original positive results.
But when he finally presented his results he reported an excess heat of only one degree celsius, a result that could be explained by chemical differences between heavy and light water in the presence of lithium.
This creates a high partial pressure, reducing the average separation of hydrogen isotopes, however, not enough by a factor of ten to create the fusion rates claimed in the original experiment.
Despite the secret being lost with his death at the end of the episode, it is implied that another student elsewhere is on a similar track, and may well repeat Todtman's efforts.
After a brief period of interest by the wider scientific community, their reports were called into question by nuclear physicists.
In summary, reviewers found that cold fusion evidence was still not convincing 15 years later, and they didn't recommend a federal research program.
The DOE 2004 report said among its conclusions and recommendations:
Hopes faded due to the large number of negative replications, the withdrawal of many reported positive replications, the discovery of flaws and sources of experimental error in the original experiment, and finally the discovery that Fleischmann and Pons had not actually detected nuclear reaction byproducts.
The report presented to the United States Department of Energy (DOE) in 2004 indicated that deuterium-loaded foils could be used to detect fusion reaction products and, although the reviewers found the evidence presented to them as inconclusive, they indicated that those experiments did not use state-of-the-art techniques.
Nuclear fusion is normally understood to occur at temperatures in the tens of millions of degrees.
The first paper submitted to ''Nature'' reproducing excess heat, although it passed peer-review, was rejected because most similar experiments were negative and there were no theories that could explain a positive result; this paper was later accepted for publication by the journal ''Fusion Technology''.
The Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) announced on 12 April 1989 that it had applied for its own patents based on theoretical work of one of its researchers, Peter L. Hagelstein, who had been sending papers to journals from the 5 to 12 April.
