Where the show was later made into a film, the year refers to the stage version.
In 1918, he met Linda Lee Thomas, a rich, Louisville, Kentucky-born divorcée eight years his senior.
His father, who was a shy and unassertive man, played a lesser role in Porter's upbringing, although as an amateur poet, he may have influenced his son's gifts for rhyme and meter.
'''Cole Albert Porter''' (June 9, 1891&nbsp;– October 15, 1964) was an American composer and songwriter.
He resumed work as soon as he could, finding it took his mind off his perpetual pain.
''Anything Goes'' was the first of five Porter shows featuring Merman.
Porter's new fame brought him offers from Hollywood, but because his score for Paramount's ''The Battle of Paris'' was undistinguished, and its star, Gertrude Lawrence, was miscast, the film was not a success.
Many artists have recorded Porter songs, and dozens have released entire albums of his songs.
One critic wrote, "the lyrics alone are enough to drive anyone but P. G. Wodehouse into retirement", but others dismissed the songs as "pleasant" and "not an outstanding hit song in the show".
In December 2010, his portrait was added to the Hoosier Heritage Gallery in the office of the Governor of Indiana.
Porter began the 1950s with ''Out Of This World'' (1950), which had some good numbers but too much camp and vulgarity, and was not greatly successful.
From this low spot, Porter made a conspicuous comeback, in 1948, with ''Kiss Me, Kate''.
Shows listed are stage musicals unless otherwise noted.
In 1980, Porter's music was used for the score of ''Happy New Year'', based on the Philip Barry play ''Holiday''.
Porter brought an upright piano with him to school and found that music, and his ability to entertain, made it easy for him to make friends.
Porter spent the next year in New York City before going overseas during World War I.
The work, written for the Swedish Ballet company, lasts about 16 minutes.
The Porter home on the rue Monsieur near Les Invalides was a palatial house with platinum wallpaper and chairs upholstered in zebra skin.
In 1972 she released another collection, ''Ella Loves Cole''.
At the end of 1939, Porter contributed six songs to the film ''Broadway Melody of 1940'' for Fred Astaire, George Murphy and Eleanor Powell.
The Porters did not attend the first night because Porter was in Paris supervising another show for which he had been commissioned, ''La Revue'', at a nightclub.
This saved the show, which ran for 254 performances, considered a successful run at the time.
His friend Noël Coward visited him in the hospital and wrote in his diary, "The lines of ceaseless pain have been wiped from his face....
Joel Grey and a large cast of singers, dancers and marching bands, performed a tribute to Porter in Miami, Florida, during the 57th King Orange Jamboree parade, whose theme was "Anything Goes".
He wrote the score of the short film ''Paree, Paree'', in 1935, using some of the songs from ''Fifty Million Frenchmen''.
* (1929) ''Fifty Million Frenchmen''&nbsp;– "You Do Something to Me"
On weekends he often visited an estate in the Berkshires, and he stayed in California during the summers.
Among the many album collections of Porter songs are the following: ''Oscar Peterson Plays the Cole Porter Songbook'' (1959); ''Anita O'Day Swings Cole Porter with Billy May'' (1959); ''All Through the Night: Julie London Sings the Choicest of Cole Porter'' (1965); ''Rosemary Clooney Sings the Music of Cole Porter'' (1982); and ''Anything Goes: Stephane Grappelli & Yo-Yo Ma Play (Mostly) Cole Porter'' (1989).
''Anything Goes'' was orchestrated by Robert Russell Bennett and Hans Spialek.
The Indianapolis Symphony Orchestra performed a program of Cole Porter music at the Circle Theatre in Indianapolis, which also featured clips of Porter's Hollywood films.
He continued to live in the Waldorf Towers in New York in his memorabilia-filled apartment.
Porter is a member of the American Theater Hall of Fame.
* (1942) ''Something for the Boys''&nbsp;– "Could It Be You"
* (1933) ''Nymph Errant''&nbsp;– "Experiment", "The Physician", "It's Bad for Me"
In 1923, Porter came into an inheritance from his grandfather, and the Porters began living in rented palaces in Venice.
In 1915, Porter's first song on Broadway, "Esmeralda", appeared in the revue ''Hands Up''.
Among the hit songs Porter composed for the show were "Experiment" and "The Physician" for Lawrence, and "Solomon" for Elizabeth Welch.
They were, moreover, genuinely devoted to each other and remained married from December 19, 1919, until her death in 1954.
He was an early member of the Whiffenpoofs ''a cappella'' singing group and participated in several other music clubs; in his senior year, he was elected president of the Yale Glee Club and was its principal soloist.
* (1955) ''High Society'' (film)&nbsp;– "Mind if I Make Love to You?
Porter's mother died in 1952, and his wife died from emphysema in 1954.
Porter's last show of the 1930s was ''DuBarry Was a Lady'' (1939), a particularly risqué show, starring Merman and Bert Lahr.
He loved her loud, brassy voice and wrote many numbers that featured her strengths.
became immensely popular.
Bing Crosby, The Andrews Sisters, and other artists also popularized it in the 1940s.
She had wanted Rodgers and Hart to write the songs, but they were unavailable, and Porter's agent persuaded Goetz to hire Porter instead.
Ray Goetz, producer of ''Paris'' and ''Fifty Million Frenchmen'', whose success had kept him solvent when other producers were bankrupted by the post-crash slump in Broadway business, invited Porter to write a musical show about the other city that he knew and loved: New York.
It was by far his most successful show, running for 1,077 performances in New York and 400 in London.
The couple married the following year.
His shows of the early 1940s did not contain the lasting hits of his best work of the 1920s and '30s, but in 1948 he made a triumphant comeback with his most successful musical, ''Kiss Me, Kate''.
Porter often referred to it as his favorite of his songs.
* (1937) ''Rosalie'' (film) &nbsp;– "In the Still of the Night"
* (1916) ''See America First''
Originally performed by Kathryn Crawford in a street setting, critical disapproval led Goetz to reassign the number to Elisabeth Welch in a nightclub scene.
Porter's Steinway piano is in the lobby of the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel in New York City.
Irving Berlin, who was an admirer and champion of Porter, took out a paid press advertisement calling the show "The best musical comedy I've heard in years.... One of the best collections of song numbers I have ever listened to".
(1941), starring Danny Kaye, had an even better run, with 547 performances in New York.
Porter died of kidney failure on October 15, 1964, in Santa Monica, California, at the age of 73.
Many events commemorated the centenary of Porter's birth, including the halftime show of the 1991 Orange Bowl.
In 1920, he contributed the music of several songs to the musical ''A Night Out''.
* (1935) ''Jubilee''&nbsp;– "Begin the Beguine", "Just One of Those Things"
''You're the Top: The Cole Porter Story'', a video of archival material and interviews, and ''Red, Hot and Blue'', a video of artists performing Porter's music, were released in 1990 to celebrate the one hundredth anniversary of Porter's birth.
Porter's last original Broadway production, ''Silk Stockings'' (1955), featuring "All of You", was also successful, with a run of 477 performances.
Between Broadway musicals, Porter continued to write for Hollywood.
The cast of the ''The Carol Burnett Show'' paid a tribute to Porter in a humorous sketch in their CBS television series.
Linda remained protective of her social position, and believing that classical music might be a more prestigious outlet than Broadway for her husband's talents, she tried to use her connections to find him suitable teachers, including Igor Stravinsky, but was unsuccessful.
In 1917, when the United States entered World War I, Porter moved to Paris to work with the Duryea Relief organization.
The film ''High Society'' (1956), starring Bing Crosby, Frank Sinatra and Grace Kelly, included Porter's last major hit song, "True Love".
Porter also composed the cowboy song "Don't Fence Me In" for ''Adios, Argentina'', an unproduced movie, in 1934, but it did not become a hit until Roy Rogers sang it in the 1944 film ''Hollywood Canteen''.
I am convinced that his whole life will cheer up and that his work will profit accordingly."
An obituary notice in ''The New York Times'' said that, while in the Legion, "he had a specially constructed portable piano made for him so that he could carry it on his back and entertain the troops in their bivouacs."
", "Night and Day" (adapted as ''The Gay Divorcee'', 1934)
After a pre-Broadway tour, during which it ran into trouble with the Boston censors, it achieved 408 performances, beginning at the 46th Street Theatre.
Porter wrote what is thought by many to be his greatest score of this period.
"A Gala Birthday Concert" was held at New York City's Carnegie Hall, with more than 40 entertainers and friends paying tribute to Porter's long career in theater and film.
* (1938) ''Leave It to Me!
He is also mentioned in the song "Tonite It Shows" by Mercury Rev on their 1998 album ''Deserter's Songs''.
He learned the violin at age six, the piano at eight, and wrote his first operetta (with help from his mother) at ten.
Born to a wealthy family in Indiana, he defied the wishes of his domineering grandfather and took up music as a profession.
His film scores of this period were ''You'll Never Get Rich'' (1941) with Astaire and Rita Hayworth, ''Something to Shout About'' (1943) with Don Ameche, Janet Blair and William Gaxton, and ''Mississippi Belle'' (1943–44), which was abandoned before filming began.
He once hired the entire Ballets Russes to entertain his house guests, and for a party at Ca' Rezzonico, which he rented for $4,000 a month ($ in current value), he hired 50 gondoliers to act as footmen and had a troupe of tight-rope walkers perform in a blaze of lights.
Meanwhile, as political unrest increased in Europe, Porter's wife closed their Paris house in 1939, and the following year, purchased a country home in the Berkshire mountains, near Williamstown, Massachusetts, which she decorated with elegant furnishings from their Paris home.
The soundtrack to ''De-Lovely'' includes Porter songs sung by Alanis Morissette, Sheryl Crow, Elvis Costello, Diana Krall and Natalie Cole, among others.
", "You're Sensational"
''Jubilee'' (1935), written with Moss Hart while on a cruise around the world, was not a major hit, running for only 169 performances, but it featured two songs that have since become standards, "Begin the Beguine" and "Just One of Those Things".
Some writers have been skeptical about Porter's claim to have served in the French Foreign Legion, although the Legion lists Porter as one of its soldiers and displays his portrait at its museum in Aubagne.
They were soon reunited by an accident suffered by Porter.
His numerous hit songs include "Night and Day", "Begin the Beguine", "I Get a Kick Out of You", "Well, Did You Evah!
Porter spent time in Hollywood, New York and their home in Williamstown.
* (1937) ''You Never Know''&nbsp;– "At Long Last Love", "From Alpha to Omega", "Let's Misbehave"
The show ran for 420 performances in New York (a particularly long run in the 1930s) and 261 in London.
* (1932) ''Gay Divorce''&nbsp;– "After You, Who?
* (1950) ''Out of This World''&nbsp;– "From This Moment On", "I Am Loved"
''Something for the Boys'' (1943), starring Merman, ran for 422 performances, and ''Mexican Hayride'' (1944), starring Bobby Clark, with June Havoc, ran for 481 performances.
By 1958, Porter's injuries caused a series of ulcers on his right leg.
''Red, Hot and Blue'' (1936), featuring Merman, Jimmy Durante and Bob Hope, ran for 183 performances and introduced "It's De-Lovely", "Down in the Depths (on the Ninetieth Floor)", and "Ridin' High".
Porter wrote 300 songs while at Yale, including student songs such as the football fight songs "Bulldog" and "Bingo Eli Yale" (aka "Bingo, That's The Lingo!")
These shows, too, are short of Porter standards.
Next came Fred Astaire's last stage show, ''Gay Divorce'' (1932).
''Panama Hattie'' (1940) was Porter's longest-running hit so far, running in New York for 501 performances, despite the absence of any enduring Porter songs.
He planned a story about a shipwreck and a desert island, and for the book he turned to P. G. Wodehouse and Guy Bolton.
In 1990 Dionne Warwick released ''Dionne Sings Cole Porter''.
The lyric was considered too explicit for radio at the time, though it was recorded and aired as an instrumental and rapidly became a standard.
In 1965, Judy Garland performed a medley of Porter's songs at the 37th Academy Awards shortly after Porter's death.
In contrast to the highly embellished 1946 screen biography ''Night and Day'', Porter's life was chronicled more realistically in ''De-Lovely'', a 2004 Irwin Winkler film starring Kevin Kline as Porter and Ashley Judd as Linda.
Russel Crouse commented, "Cole's opening-night behaviour is as indecent as that of a bridegroom who has a good time at his own wedding."
Costumed singers in the cabaret-style Cole Porter Room at the Indiana Historical Society's Eugene and Marilyn Glick Indiana History Center in Indianapolis take requests from visitors and perform Porter's hit songs.
* (1929) ''Wake Up and Dream''&nbsp;– "What Is This Thing Called Love?"
Frustrated by the public response to most of his work, Porter nearly gave up songwriting as a career, although he continued to compose songs for friends and perform at private parties.
A complete list of Porter's works is  in the Library of Congress (see also  the Cole Porter Collection).
Now at the height of his success, Porter was able to enjoy the opening night of his musicals; he would make a grand entrance and sit in front, apparently relishing the show as much as any audience member.
It was orchestrated by Charles Koechlin and shared the same opening night as Milhaud's ''La création du monde''.
On Broadway, business was badly affected by the 1929 Wall Street crash, and the production ran for only 136 performances.
''The New Yorker'' magazine said, "Mr. Porter is in class by himself", and Porter himself subsequently called it one of his two perfect shows, along with the later ''Kiss Me, Kate''.
", "True Love", "Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?
After a slow start, he began to achieve success in the 1920s, and by the 1930s he was one of the major songwriters for the Broadway musical stage.
* (1947) ''The Pirate'' (film)&nbsp;– "Be a Clown", "Mack the Black", "You Can Do No Wrong"
Porter followed this with a West End show for Gertrude Lawrence, ''Nymph Errant'' (1933), presented by Cochran at the Adelphi Theatre, where it ran for 154 performances.
''The New Yorkers'' (1930) acquired instant notoriety for including a song about a streetwalker, "Love for Sale".
He was a member of Scroll and Key and Delta Kappa Epsilon fraternity, and contributed to campus humor magazine ''The Yale Record''.
His final score was for a CBS television color special, ''Aladdin'' (1958).
During college, Porter became acquainted with New York City's vibrant nightlife, taking the train to New York City to enjoy dinner, theater, and a night on the town with his classmates, before returning to New Haven, Connecticut, early in the morning.
", "I've Got You Under My Skin", "My Heart Belongs to Daddy" and "You're the Top".
", "Well, Did You Evah!
The show received mixed notices.
For Porter, it brought a respectable heterosexual front in an era when homosexuality was not publicly acknowledged.
The Porters moved to Hollywood in December 1935, but Porter's wife did not like the movie environment, and Porter's homosexual peccadillos, formerly very discreet, became less so; she retreated to their Paris house.
The Indiana University Opera performed Porter's musical, ''Jubilee'', in Bloomington, Indiana.
that are still played at Yale today.
The critics scoffed, but the film was a huge success, chiefly because of the wealth of vintage Porter numbers in it.
He remained in the hospital for seven months and was then allowed to go home to his apartment at the Waldorf Towers.
The Cole Porter Festival is held every year in June in his hometown of Peru, Indiana, to foster music and art appreciation.
For the songs, he decided on Porter.
* (1939) ''Broadway Melody of 1940''&nbsp;– "Between You and Me", "I Concentrate on You", "I've Got My Eyes on You", "I Happen to Be in Love", "Begin the Beguine"
He returned to success with ''Leave It to Me!''
* (1956) ''Les Girls''&nbsp;– "Ça, C'est L'amour", "You're Just Too, Too"
After a successful New York performance the following month, the Swedish Ballet company toured the work in the U.S., performing it 69 times.
* (1939) ''Dubarry Was A Lady''&nbsp;– "But in the Morning No", "Do I Love You?
Porter's strong-willed mother doted on him and began his musical training at an early age.
Nevertheless, the show, ''Anything Goes'', was an immediate hit.
The songs for the show included "Let's Misbehave" and one of his best-known list songs, "Let's Do It", which was introduced by Bordoni and Arthur Margetson.
His mother, Kate, was the indulged daughter of James Omar "J.
* (1948) ''Kiss Me, Kate''&nbsp;– "Another Op'nin', Another Show", "Brush Up Your Shakespeare", "I Hate Men", "So in Love", "Tom, Dick or Harry", "Too Darn Hot"', "Wunderbar"
This, too, lacked any numbers that became standards, and Porter always counted it among his lesser efforts.
Marriage did not diminish Porter's taste for extravagant luxury.
Goetz offered the team with whom Porter had last worked: Herbert Fields writing the book and Porter's old friend Monty Woolley directing.
Finally, Porter enrolled at the Schola Cantorum in Paris where he studied orchestration and counterpoint with Vincent d'Indy.
* (1928) ''Paris''&nbsp;– "Let's Do It, Let's Fall in Love"
He had the occasional number interpolated into other writers' revues in Britain and the U.S. For a C. B. Cochran show in 1921, he had two successes with the comedy numbers "The Blue Boy Blues" and "Olga, Come Back to the Volga".
Porter, despite his lessons in orchestration from d'Indy, did not orchestrate his musicals.
The score included "But in the Morning, No" (which was banned from the airwaves), "Do I Love You?
* (1934) ''Anything Goes''&nbsp;– "All Through the Night", "Anything Goes", "Blow Gabriel, Blow", "I Get a Kick Out of You", "You're the Top"
J. O. Cole built the couple a home on his Peru-area property, known as Westleigh Farms.
He soon felt that he was not destined to be a lawyer, and, at the suggestion of the dean of the law school, Porter switched to Harvard's music faculty, where he studied harmony and counterpoint with Pietro Yon.
In the midst of this extravagant lifestyle, Porter continued to write songs with encouragement from his wife.
The show opened on Broadway on October 8, 1928.
''&nbsp;– "I Hate You, Darling"
''You Never Know'' (1938), starring Clifton Webb, Lupe Vélez and Libby Holman, ran for only 78 performances.
He wrote most of the original score, but his songs were gradually dropped during the Broadway run, and by the time of the post-Broadway tour in 1925, all his numbers had been deleted.
Cochran now wanted more from Porter than isolated extra songs; he planned a West End extravaganza similar to Ziegfeld's shows, with a Porter score and a large international cast led by Jessie Matthews, Sonnie Hale and Tilly Losch.
Porter's work was one of the earliest symphonic jazz-based compositions, predating George Gershwin's ''Rhapsody in Blue'' by four months, and was well received by both French and American reviewers after its premiere at the Théâtre des Champs-Élysées in October 1923.
He also composed scores for films from the 1930s to the 1950s, including ''Born to Dance'' (1936), which featured the song "You'd Be So Easy to Love"; ''Rosalie'' (1937), which featured "In the Still of the Night"; ''High Society'' (1956), which included "True Love"; and ''Les Girls'' (1957).
Porter wrote two more film scores and music for a television special before ending his Hollywood career.
In August 1928, Porter's work on the show was interrupted by the death of his father.
Though doctors told Porter's wife and mother that his right leg would have to be amputated, and possibly the left one as well, he refused to have the procedure.
She falsified his recorded birth year, changing it from 1891 to 1893 to make him appear more precocious.
", "Katie Went to Haiti" and another of Porter's up-tempo list songs, "Friendship".
* (1934) ''Adios Argentina'' (un-produced film)&nbsp;– "Don't Fence Me In"
She was in no doubt about Porter's homosexuality, but it was mutually advantageous for them to marry.
In addition, the U.S.
On October 24, 1937, Porter was riding with Countess Edith di Zoppola and Duke Fulco di Verdura at Piping Rock Club in Locust Valley, New York, when his horse rolled on him and crushed his legs, leaving him substantially crippled and in constant pain for the rest of his life.
By some accounts, he served in North Africa and was transferred to the French Officers School at Fontainebleau, teaching gunnery to American soldiers.
Porter also wrote numbers for the film ''Les Girls'' (1957), which starred Gene Kelly.
* (1941) ''Let's Face It!
* (1950) ''Stage Fright'' (film)&nbsp;– "The Laziest Gal in Town"
* (1942) ''Something to Shout About''&nbsp;– "You'd Be So Nice to Come Home To"
A more comprehensive list of Cole Porter songs, along with their date of composition and original show, is available online at the "Cole Porter Songlist Page".
Unlike many successful Broadway composers, Porter wrote the lyrics, as well as the music, for his songs.
''The New Yorkers'' also included the hit "I Happen to Like New York".
Porter had less success with his work on ''Greenwich Village Follies'' (1924).
He became class valedictorian and was rewarded by his grandfather with a tour of France, Switzerland and Germany.
The quick success was immediately followed by failure: his first Broadway production, in 1916, ''See America First'', a "patriotic comic opera" modeled on Gilbert and Sullivan, with a book by T. Lawrason Riggs, was a flop, closing after two weeks.
Polished, urbane and adult playwriting in the musical field is strictly a creative luxury."
He is interred in Mount Hope Cemetery in his native Peru, Indiana, between his wife and father.
In May 2007, a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame was dedicated to Cole Porter.
Other singers who have paid tribute to Porter include the Swedish pop music group Gyllene Tider, which recorded a song called "Flickan i en Cole Porter-sång" ("That Girl from the Cole Porter Song") in 1982.
From Porter's point of view, it was nonetheless a success, as his song "What Is This Thing Called Love?"
When his film assignment on ''Rosalie'' was finished in 1937, Porter hastened to Paris to make his peace with Linda, but she remained cool.
In an interview he said, "Sophisticated allusions are good for about six weeks ... more fun, but only for myself and about eighteen other people, all of whom are first-nighters anyway.
After two flops, ''Seven Lively Arts'' (1944) (which featured the standard "Ev'ry Time We Say Goodbye") and ''Around the World'' (1946), many thought that Porter's best period was over.
Another account, given by Porter, is that he joined the recruiting department of the American Aviation Headquarters, but, according to his biographer Stephen Citron, there is no record of his joining this or any other branch of the forces.
The stars he wanted were Ethel Merman, William Gaxton and comedian Victor Moore.
In that same year, ''Red Hot + Blue'' was released as a benefit CD for AIDS research and featured 20 Cole Porter songs recorded by artists such as U2, Annie Lennox, and Shane MacGowan.
Entering Yale University in 1909, Porter majored in English, minored in music, and also studied French.
In 1956 American jazz singer Ella Fitzgerald released ''Ella Fitzgerald Sings the Cole Porter Songbook''.
The critics did not pull their punches; they complained about the lack of hit tunes and the generally low standard of Porter's scores.
* (1958) ''Aladdin'' (television)&nbsp;– "Come to the Supermarket (In Old Peking)"
''&nbsp;– "From Now On", "Get Out of Town", "My Heart Belongs to Daddy"
Additional recording collections include ''Frank Sinatra Sings the Select Cole Porter'' (1996) and ''John Barrowman Swings Cole Porter'' (2004; Barrowman played "Jack" in the 2004 film ''De-Lovely''.
Porter also appears as a character in Woody Allen's 2011 film ''Midnight in Paris''.
