The state has 307 preschools, 510 primary schools, 131 middle schools and 57 high school and vocational level schools.
Just over half of these are located in the city of Colima, with about 19% in Villa de Alvarez and eleven percent in Tecomán.
The Comala site shows influence from Teotihuacan.
Most crafts and dances of the state are of indigenous origin although some originated after the Conquest.
However, it maintains a distinct identity, with a combination bullfighting and charreada event that is one of the oldest of its kind in northwestern Mexico.
Playa de Oro has flights to and from destinations in Mexico, the United States and Canada.
The most important festival in the state is Day of the Dead.
In the latter part of the 20th century, Colima had a very high population growth, expanding from 112,321 in 1950 to 567,996 in 2005.
Colima has a relatively short coastline, at 139&nbsp;km (1.2% of Mexico’s total).
This interpretation would then be "place where the waters bend."
The University of Colima was founded in 1940, following the educational philosophy of President Lázaro Cárdenas meant to provide higher education to the poorer classes.
The port infrastructure consists of two types of installations.
The most important transportation hub in the state is the port of Manzanillo, handling 91.3% of the shipping of the state and the immediate region.
Among the state’s rodents is the Xenomis nelson, a small rare animal little known outside Colima.
Colima is the fourth smallest state in Mexico and has the smallest population, but has one of Mexico’s highest standards of living and lowest unemployment.
It is held with street parties, dances, contests, and jaripeos.
Just under 90% of those who start middle school finish.
Comala celebrates the feast of the Virgin of Guadalupe from the first to the 12 of December with processions, bullfights, jaripeos, cockfights—and on the eighth with a dance to popular music, floats, and fireworks.
Villages on the sides of the Cerro Grande are the principal producers of baskets made from reeds and palm fronds.
It was founded in the very early colonial period and still maintains its narrow streets and old houses with large main doors of wood and balconies with simple ironwork.
The first incursion into the Colima area occurred under Juan Rodríguez de Villafuerte in 1522 but was defeated by the natives of the Tecomán Valley.
A popular one from that time is the ''Adoration of the Three Wise Men,'' though it has evolved to meet modern tastes.
It has called itself the "World Capital of the Sailfish" since 1957 when 336 species were caught off its shores.
It's on the Pacific coast, less than two hour’s drive from the capital.
Only three percent of these enterprises are modern facilities with twenty one traditional markets, forty five major tianguis and numerous corner stores still dominating the state.
He is best known for illustrating Christmas cards for UNICEF in the 1960s, but he did much other work and designed furniture in a style now called Rangeliano.
It extends from the Boca de Apiza to the Cerro de San Francisco in front of Barra de Navidad, Jalisco .
The principal markets for Colima’s agricultural products, especially produce is Guadalajara, Mexico City, Puebla and Monterrey .
Handcrafts in the state are mostly produced for local needs rather than the tourist market.
Dances with indigenous roots include ''sonajera india'' and ''morenos.''
The main rivers of the state are the Cihuatlán (also called the Chacala, Marabasco, or Paticajo—which forms the state’s border with Jalisco on the west; the Armería, which descends from the Sierra de Cacoma and crosses the state north-south into the Pacific, and the Coahuayana River.
Mainland Colima shares borders with the states of Jalisco and Michoacán.
In the 1940s, the Tecomán Valley began to be intensively cultivated, creating a new source income for the state, with limes as the principle crop, and leading to the development of agro-industry.
Higher education consists of a number of technological schools, universities and teachers’ colleges.
Sandoval then established the first Spanish settlement in the Colima Valley called Caxitlán in 1523, making it the third oldest functioning city government in Mexico and the second municipality of western New Spain .
This was opposed by many in the state who supported the Church’s formerly prominent role in political and social affairs.
Images of Huehueteotl and Tlaloc appear with this culture, which may indicate the origins of the cultures that ultimately settled central Mexico.
Its status as a state was reaffirmed by the 1857 Mexican Constitution and General Manuel Alvarez was declared its first constitutional governor.
There is one other site called Periquillo, which indicates one late migration into Colimas around the 10th century from the north.
Belonging to this culture was a number of smaller sites and most of the ones known and explored to date.
Natural geography divides the state into a northern and southern region.
Plants that lose leaves do so in the dry season.
It was originally made part of the diocese of Valladolid (Morelia) .
The last decades have seen a new wave of industrial construction with the building of facilities for businesses such as Cementos Apasco, Citrojugo, Brun Foods, Embotelladora de Tecomán, Consorcio Minero Benito Juárez-Peña Colorada, Grupo Agroindustrial de Occidente, AMTEX and others.
On the coast, the average temperature varies from between 24 and 26 C and inland, at the highest elevations, the temperature averages between 20 and 22 C.
Most of the visitors were at the state’s beaches with the busiest being Cuyutlán, El Real and Miramar.
With the outbreak of the Mexican War of Independence, authorities arrested the head of Indian communities along with suspected insurgents in October 1810.
The second consists of mountain chains parallel to the coast between the Marabasco and Armería Rivers, which include El Espinazo del Diablo, El Escorpión, El Tigre, El Aguacate, El Centinela, El Tora and La Vaca.
These pirates would include Francis Drake and Thomas Cavendish.
Archeological evidence dates human occupation of the area as far back as 1500 BCE, with sites here contemporary with San Lorenzo on the Gulf Coast and Tlatilco in the Valley of Mexico.
In 1861, the Revillagigedo Islands were added to Colima’s territory.
This glyph is still used in the state’s seal.
Cortés de San Buenaventura set out to conquer towards the north, covering the rest of the state and into what is now southern Sinaloa.
It was recognized as a town in 1860, with the name of Villa de Álvarez in honor of the first governor of the state.
In 1818, a strong earthquake sent many from nearby San Francisco to the area, and it was renamed San Francisco de Almoloyan.
Another important movement was the creation of workers’ unions and cooperatives such as the Unión de Estibadores in Manzanillo.
The Nevado de Colima is taller at 4,264 masl and gives its name to the national park that surrounds it.
In 1813, the city was in royalist hands with the city swearing allegiance to the monarchist constitution.
Much of the state’s tourism centeres on its beaches in Manzanillo, and in the municipalities of Armería and Tecomán.
The second most important connects Manzanillo with Guadalajara.
There is great diversity of wildlife species although a number of mammal species such as ocelots, pumas, wild boar and deer are disappearing.
However, Mexico’s struggles with drug traffickers have not skipped the state, which is along Pacific Coast drug smuggling routes.
The artificial structure is a tall dock with a length of 450 meters and 225 meters wide for a surface of 10,125m2.
Since then it has added majors in biotechnology, computer science, mechatronics  and architecture, offering six undergraduate degrees and one master's degree.
The state has a high level of socioeconomic development, with one of the highest standards of living in Mexico and lowest unemployment.
In 1919, President Venustiano Carranza created the Sociedad Cooperativa de Salineros in the city of Colima with the exclusive rights to extract salt from Cuyutlán Lake.
After Chanal the largest related site is La Campana but most contain pyramidal bases and plazas with structures often containing rounded edges.
A third interpretation is based on an interpretation of Colima’s glyph as it appears in the Nomina and Mendocino codices, which as a bend arm with the hand turned and water on the shoulder.
Most of the merchandise that passes through here is part of the trade between Mexico and Asia.
Inland, there are various fresh water lakes, with the larger ones near the coast and smaller ones in the Valley of Colima.
In the state, 96% have running water, 82% have sewerage and 98% have electricity.
Pastorelas are most commonly seen during December between the feast day of the Virgin of Guadalupe (12 December) and Christmas.
Cropland covers 27% of the state’s territory, with another 28% dedicated to pasture.
The formal name of the state is "Estado Libre y Soberano de Colima" (Free and Sovereign State of Colima).
The state is named after the capital city of Colima.
It was prompted mostly by road congestion due to port shipping in Manzanillo as well as the growing tourism sector.
Colima is the primary producer of limes in Mexico.
Most of the state’s recent economic development has been related to this port.
Most of the Colima airport flights go to Mexico City, with about 100,000 passengers going through the terminal in 2009.
Commercially productive forest stands at about 108,225 hectares with about sixty percent of the trees salable.
Agriculture, forestry and fishing employ 1.2% of the state’s population and contribute 8.45% to its GDP.
On this date the image returns to this village from Coquimatlán.
Colima’s most important tourism destination is the beaches of Manzanillo, which is popular among those in western Mexico as well as many sports fishermen.
Federal intervention from Mexico City continued into the 1920s, with a number of laws to reform schools, hospitals and other institutions, which before had been mostly operated by the Catholic Church.
Immediately after Independence, Colima was still a subdelegation of Guadalajara.
Forest covers 35% with the rest composed of bodies of water and urban areas.
Other noted artists from the state include Alfonso Michel, Gabriel Portillo del Toro, Mercedes Zamora, Jorge Chávez Carrillo, Pancha Magaña and Juan Soriano.
The Instituto Tecnológico de Colima was founded in 1976 with three majors in engineering and business with the aim of providing an alternative education focusing on preparing students for industry and service markets.
These forests are mostly rainforest, with some areas of holm oak.
Holy Week is a major event in many municipalities, which often hold passion plays during the week.
Commercial sales increase by about five percent per year.
For the weeks before and after, the state holds its Agricultural, Industrial, and Cultural Fair.
Most of Colima’s agriculture is based on perennial plants such as fruit trees, producing limes, coconuts, mangos and bananas accounting for ninety percent of the volume of agricultural production and 79% of its value.
These urban populations are concentrated in the municipalities of Colima, Manzanillo, Tecomán and Villa de Alvarez .
The fishing industry in the state supports a canning industry mostly for tuna, shrimp and octopus along with the freezing of fish filets.
Some oyster raising takes place as well.
Coastal lagoons include the Potrero Grande in Manzanillo along with the Miramar and the San Pedrito.
Telephone service covers the entire state but rural areas still use analog.
A number of ducks and other migratory birds pass through.
San Francisco de Almoloyan in the city of Colima is the ruins of an old Franciscan monastery from the 16th century.
In the 2000s, the city worked to renovate its downtown, with all buildings now showing white facades and many with red tile roofs.
In 1824, with Mexico’s first constitution, Colima was an independent territory of Mexico, However, it was integrated with Michoacán later in 1837.
As of 2005, only 2,880 people were counted with the ability to speak an indigenous language.
This roadway has broken Mexican records in the dimensions of its bridges.
Much of the history of the latter 20th century into the present revolves around economic development.
The Fiestas del Cristo de Caña in Quesería in May revolves around an 18th-century Christ image that came to the area from Pátzcuaro.
The upper floor contains murals with scenes depicting Mexico City and portraits of people from Mexico’s history.
Other items include huarache sandals, boots, bird cages, cold cuts and costumes and masks for traditional dance.
After the Conquest, the native population was reduced drastically.
The last major eruptions of the Colima Volcano occurred in 1998 and 1999.
At the very north of the state, the border is marked by two volcanoes.
Both the Periquillo and Chanal sites were occupied when the Spanish arrived in the 16th century.
The port area is not fully developed, with over 130 hectares reserved for expansion.
The north has a cooler climate due to the higher mountains.
Colima produces about half of Mexico’s lime crop, and is second in the production of coconut meat and tuna .
Similarly, the telephone service was added in 1883.
Despite this population growth, the state still ranks last of Mexico’s federal entities, with a total of 650,555 according to the 2010 census, only .6% of the country’s total.
The other interpretation is "place in the hands of the ancestors."
The Spanish contributed bullfighting and charreada.
The state system also has schools dedicated to special education, vocational training and early childhood centers for those needing various types of physical and educational therapy.
Three quarters of the state is covered by mountains and hills.
The Universidad (Popular) de Colima was founded in 1942.
The Colima Volcano is 3825 masl and has a pyramidal peak, in contrast to the other, which has been leveled somewhat.
Manzanillo is the state’s primary port and tourist destination.
The 2009 GDP of the state was 43,370,725,000 pesos; however, due to its small size and population, this is only .5% of Mexico’s total GDP.
This is about 7 out of 1,000 people, slightly higher than the nation’s average of 6 per 1,000 people.
In 1796, Colima was converted into a sub delegation of the province of Guadalajara.
The two main airports are the Playa de Oro International Airport in Manzanillo and the Lic.
The Manzanillo port has a dock for cruise ships, and an average of 58 ships visit per year.
Some estimations state that the population declines from 150,000 in 1523 to 15,000 in 1554, rebounding somewhat in the 17th century.
The Palacio Federal is near Jardín Núñez in the city of Colima and dates from the beginning of the 20th century.
In 1867, Republican troops under Ramon Corona retook the city.
It includes parades, dances, fireworks, and jaripeos.
Most of the general university education is provided by the University of Colima (over 93%) with the rest attending the Universidad Autónoma del Pacífico.
Most are in Colima and Manzanillo.
The main teachers’ colleges are the Instituto Superior de Educación Normal de Colima and the Universidad Pedagógica Nacional.
January 6 is the ''Los Chayacates de Ixtlahuacán''—a mix of indigenous and Catholic practices based on the pastorela and the cultivation cycle of corn.
Politically, the state is divided into ten municipalities.
Villa de Álvarez is part of the city of Colima’s metropolitan area.
Mining, construction,and utilities employ 18.5% of the population and generate 27.53% of the GDP.
About two thirds of the state’s GDP is from commerce and services which include transportation and storage, mostly linked with the Manzanillo port.
The Paspaques of Suchitlán—an agricultural ritual of pre-Hispanic origin—is celebrated by the Nahuas of this small village on 19 March.
70,249 visited during that period.
High school level education is available in all regions of the state, with just under sixty percent of those starting a program finishing it, with most that do not dropping out.
Bird species include wild turkeys, although these have mostly disappeared, and a bird called the chachalaca.
After conquering the Aztecs and the Purépecha, the Spanish made incursions into Colima.
Over 91% of the population over the age of 15 is literate.
Most population and employment growth has been in the main urban areas of the state such as Colima, Villa de Alvarez, Manzanillo and Tecomán.
The last is between the Salado and Naranjo or Coahuayana Rivers and contains small mountain chains such as the Piscila, Volcancillos, La Palmera, El Camichín and Copales.
French troops entered the city in 1864, dissolving the state congress, with Colima becoming a department in 1865.
One interpretation means "place in the hand of the grandfather" with "grandfather" possibly referring to the volcano.
Indigenous, Spanish, African and Philippine cultures have played a part in the shaping of the state, although traces can be hidden in modern local cultures and traditions.
The state is also known for the production of handcrafted furniture, especially those based on the designs of Alejandro Rangel Hidalgo, from Comala.
The second most important destination is the small town of Comala, a small traditional town near the capital of Colima.
The valley lakes are fed by the runoff from the Colima Volcano and include the Carrizalillo, Las Cuatas, El Jabalí, El Calaboso, La María and La Escondida.
They would be followed by  the Mercedarians and the Brothers of Saint John of the Cross.
The most important of these is the Cerro Grande and its related peaks of Jurípicho-Juluapan, Los Juanillos, La Astilla, El Ocote, El Peón, El Barrigón, San Diego, and La Media Luna.
Noted writers include Gregorio Torres Quintero, Fray Juan de Grijalva, Balbino Dávalos Balkin and Felipe Sevilla del Río .
However, a chief named Colimotl or Colliman defeated the P’urhépechas during the Salitre War (Guerra del Salitre).
It is a complex of pyramid platforms with stairs, a Mesoamerican ballcourt and a number of plazas.
Fish farming mostly concerns raising shrimp along lakes and lagoons, such as Cuyutlán, Chupadero, and Potrero Grande, with an annual production of about 5,000 tons.
Comala was named a "Pueblo Mágico" in 2002 because of its natural surroundings and traditional architecture, which its downtown declared a historic monument.
Other commercial species include huachinangos, red porgy, combers, wahoo, and mojarra.
This population reduction led to the introduction of African slaves and indigenous people from neighboring regions.
It also operates as an overflow port for the commercial and industrial zones of western Mexico, the Bajío area and the center of Mexico, but handles overflow from as far as Los Angeles.
However, it is not as well known or as well visited as other Pacific destinations such as Puerto Vallarta, despite long sandy beaches and docks for cruise ships.
This and earlier losses of territory would define the area’s modern borders.
The Salado is another important river, which flows entirely within Colima before emptying into the Coahuayana.
The main stairwell contains a mural by Colima painter Jorge Chávez Carrillo.
Manzanillo is the most popular in the state, and a major tourism destination for Mexico’s Pacific coast.
The city is one of Mexico’s important Pacific ports, handing regional merchandise and acting as an overflow port for other ports from Mexico to Los Angeles.
The former state government palace is located in the center of the city of Colima and dates from the 19th century.
Later the port would be a target for pirates as the Manila galleons would unload materials from the Spanish East Indies here.
For the first quarter of 2011, there were 52 registered homicides in the state, most linked to organized crime.
It centers on preparing corn in various ways, such as tortillas, tamales, pozole, and more.
Revillagigedo Archipelago was discovered 1533 by Hernando de Grijalva.
Hernán Cortés then sent Gonzalo de Sandoval to defeat the Tecos, which he did at the Paso de Alima and the Palenque de Tecomán.
Other important crops include corn, rice, melons, sorghum, chili peppers, coffee, tomatoes and tomatillos.
African influenced dialects such as guango and candingo still exists and giant costume/puppets called mojigangos are of African origin as well.
The Mesón de Caxitlán on the Colima Tecomán highway is the ruins of an old in on the former royal road from the 18th century.
Suchitlán in the municipality of Comala is distinguished by its production of masks and other accessories for festivals and ceremonies.
The state was home to a number of pre-Hispanic cultures as part of Western Mexico.
During the war, the city of Colima was taken by the insurgents Jose Antonio Torres at the end of 1810 without resistance and taken back by the royalist army in 1811.
In addition to bullfights and charreadas, mojigangas are featured.
Comala people perfected burnished red pottery and created representations of people and animals with skill and fluid lines.
The third is located between the Armería and Salado Rivers and includes the Alcomún y Partida, San Miguel y Comala and San Gabriel/Callejones peaks.
Most livestock production is in the north of the state due to climate, and also includes pigs, goats and sheep.
One colonial area industry in Colima was the production of "coconut wine" — an alcoholic beverage distilled from date palm fruit and coconut.
By 1980, the majority of the state’s population was living in urban centers.
After the war, social organizations that would mark Mexico’s development for much of the 20th century were created in Colima as well, especially ejidos, with the one in Suchitlán being the first.
Historically, the port was the point of departure for various maritime expeditions and received the annual Manila Galleon from the Philippines.
Villa de Álvarez celebrates its annual Fiestas Charro-Taurinas, originally the feast of the city’s patron saint, Philip of Jesus.
Fish production has increased considerably since the 1980s.
By the end of the 16th century, it lost the Motines region, now part of Michoacán and in the 19th century the Xilotlán region to Jalisco.
Over 95% of the state’s population is Catholic with small communities of other Christian groups making up the rest.
Colima has a number of important local festivals and other annual events.
Principle catches include tuna and squid, in which Colima ranks nationally at third and fourth place respectively.
In 1821, Colima lost the Zapotlán areas along with the towns of Tecalitlán and Xilotlán, but gained the town of Tonila.
Santiago in the municipality of Manzanillo is noted for crafts made of seashell and snail shells.
There are also about 3000 hectares dedicated to fish farming.
