He was also successful in persuading Bush to take the case of Iraq to the United Nations, and in moderating other initiatives.
He called on GOP leaders to publicly denounce such talk.
Put forth as a potential Democratic Vice Presidential nominee in the 1992 U.S. presidential election or even potentially replacing Vice President Dan Quayle as the Republican Vice Presidential nominee, Powell eventually declared himself a Republican and began to campaign for Republican candidates in 1995.
He wrote: "In direct refutation of this portrayal is the fact that relations between American soldiers and the Vietnamese people are excellent."
In August 2016, Powell accused the Clinton campaign of trying to pin Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton's email controversy on him.
Powell's experience in military matters made him a very popular figure with both American political parties.
Additionally, Powell has been critical of other instances of U.S. foreign policy in the past, such as its support for the 1973 Chilean coup d'état.
In a press statement on February 24, 2001, he had said that sanctions against Iraq had prevented the development of any weapons of mass destruction by Saddam Hussein.
As a hobby, Powell restores old Volvo and Saab cars.
He also added that he was "troubled" by the "false intimations that Obama was Muslim."
In a September 2006 letter to Sen. John McCain, General Powell expressed opposition to President Bush's push for military tribunals of those formerly and currently classified as enemy combatants.
On October 25, 2012, 12 days before the presidential election, he gave his endorsement to President Obama for re-election during a broadcast of CBS This Morning.
Some of the claims were taken out, but others were left in, such as claims based on the yellowcake forgery.
Because Powell was seen as more moderate than most figures in the administration, he was spared many of the attacks that have been leveled at more controversial advocates of the invasion, such as Donald Rumsfeld and Paul Wolfowitz.
I've never said I didn't support a decision to go to war."
A generation that you represent, and you're coming together to share; to debate; to decide; to connect with each other."
At age 52, he became the youngest officer, and first Afro-Caribbean American, to serve in this position.
After the September 11 attacks, Powell's job became of critical importance in managing America's relationships with foreign countries in order to secure a stable coalition in the War on Terrorism.
That's what you really have to look for in life, something that you like, and something that you think you're pretty good at.
Powell continued as chairman of the JCS into the Clinton presidency but as a dedicated "realist" he considered himself a bad fit for an administration largely made up of liberal internationalists.
Following his endorsement of Barack Obama in October 2008, however, Powell praised General David Petraeus and U.S. troops, as well as the Iraqi government, concluding that "it's starting to turn around."
In a July 2009 CNN interview with John King, Powell expressed concern over President Obama growing the size of the federal government and the size of the federal budget deficit.
He stated: "I am not persuaded that another surge of troops into Baghdad for the purposes of suppressing this communitarian violence, this civil war, will work."
Captain Powell served a tour in Vietnam as a South Vietnamese Army (ARVN) advisor from 1962 to 1963.
Powell's last military assignment, from October 1, 1989, to September 30, 1993, was as the 12th Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the highest military position in the Department of Defense.
Powell further questioned McCain's judgment in appointing Sarah Palin as the vice presidential candidate, stating that despite the fact that she is admired, "now that we have had a chance to watch her for some seven weeks, I don't believe she's ready to be president of the United States, which is the job of the vice president."
Powell was also instrumental in the 1993 implementation of the military's don't ask, don't tell policy, though he later supported its repeal as proposed by Robert Gates and Admiral Mike Mullen in January 2010, saying "circumstances had changed".
Powell described joining the Reserve Officers' Training Corps (ROTC) during college as one of the happiest experiences of his life; discovering something he loved and could do well, he felt he had "found himself."
A component of this approach is the use of overwhelming force, which he applied to Operation Desert Storm in 1991.
He rarely advocated military intervention as the first solution to an international crisis, and instead usually prescribed diplomacy and containment.
In 2007 he joined the Board of Directors of Steve Case's new company Revolution Health.
Powell said that thousands of people were not properly protected, but because they were poor rather than because they were black.
Bolton was put into the position via a recess appointment because of the strong opposition in the Senate.
Communism was a threat to the democracies in this part of the world.
The financial system was put back on a stable basis."
Powell has been the recipient of mild criticism for his role with ''Get Motivated'' which has been called a "get-rich-quick-without-much-effort, feel-good schemology."
He also served as a Shabbos goy, helping Orthodox families with needed tasks on the Sabbath.
Recently, Powell has encouraged young people to continue to use new technologies to their advantage in the future.
Blumenthal added that "The foreign relations committee has discovered that Bolton made a highly unusual request and gained access to 10 intercepts by the National Security Agency.
His approach has been dubbed the "Powell Doctrine".
Despite not standing in the race, Powell won the Republican New Hampshire Vice-Presidential primary on write-in votes.
I think we need a president who is a generational change and that's why I'm supporting Barack Obama, not out of any lack of respect or admiration for Sen. John McCain."
As a military strategist, Powell advocated an approach to military conflicts that maximizes the potential for success and minimizes casualties.
Powell was mentioned as a potential candidate in the 2000 U.S. presidential election, but decided against running.
He compared the race to a "reality show", and stated that the campaign had gone "into the mud".
News of Powell's leaving the Administration spurred mixed reactions from politicians around the world&nbsp;— some upset at the loss of a statesman seen as a moderating factor within the Bush administration, but others hoping for Powell's successor to wield more influence within the cabinet.
On April 28, 2005, an opinion piece in ''The Guardian'' by Sidney Blumenthal (a former top aide to President Bill Clinton) claimed that Powell was in fact "conducting a campaign" against Bolton because of the acrimonious battles they had had while working together, which among other things had resulted in Powell cutting Bolton out of talks with Iran and Libya after complaints about Bolton's involvement from the British.
During this time, he oversaw 28 crises, including the invasion of Panama in 1989 to remove General Manuel Noriega from power and Operation Desert Storm in the 1991 Persian Gulf War.
Powell's chief role was to garner international support for a multi-national coalition to mount the invasion.
Powell has been very vocal on the state of the Republican party.
In a 2008 interview on CNN, Powell reiterated his support for the 2003 decision to invade Iraq in the context of his endorsement of Barack Obama, stating: "My role has been very, very straightforward.
I look at these kind of approaches to the campaign, and they trouble me."
Powell was the subject of controversy in 2004 when, in a conversation with British Foreign Secretary Jack Straw, he reportedly referred to neoconservatives within the Bush administration as "fucking crazies."
The Powell Doctrine, as the views became known, was a central component of U.S. policy in the Persian Gulf War (the first U.S. war in Iraq) and U.S. invasion of Afghanistan (the overthrow of the Taliban regime in Afghanistan following the September 11 attacks).
However, on October 19, 2008, Powell announced his endorsement of Barack Obama during a ''Meet the Press'' interview, citing "his ability to inspire, because of the inclusive nature of his campaign, because he is reaching out all across America, because of who he is and his rhetorical abilities", in addition to his "style and substance."
It was a different time.
Powell stated that "The world is beginning to doubt the moral basis of America's fight against terrorism."
He was not nominated.
So, in war, these sorts of horrible things happen every now and again, but they are still to be deplored."
Commenting on Clinton in a general sense, Powell mused that "“Everything HRCClinton touches she kind of screws up with hubris," and in another email stated “I would rather not have to vote for her, although she is a friend I respect."
On September 11, 2001, Powell was in Lima, Peru, meeting with President Alejandro Toledo and US Ambassador John Hamilton, and attending the special session of the OAS General Assembly that subsequently adopted the Inter-American Democratic Charter.
While on patrol in a Viet Cong-held area, he was wounded by stepping on a punji stake.
Even after he had become a general, Powell kept on his desk a pen set he had won for a drill team competition.
He also asserted: "The world is beginning to doubt the moral basis of our fight against terrorism."
The president Bush agreed with me.
Staff members on the committee believe that Bolton was probably spying on Powell, his senior advisors and other officials reporting to him on diplomatic initiatives that Bolton opposed."
As was the case in the days leading up to the Persian Gulf War, Powell was initially opposed to a forcible overthrow of Saddam, preferring to continue a policy of containment.
He went on to say, "It will always be a part of my record.
He backed Senators John Warner, John McCain and Lindsey Graham in their statement that U.S. military and intelligence personnel in future wars will suffer for abuses committed in 2006 by the U.S. in the name of fighting terrorism.
These views are described in detail in the autobiography ''My American Journey''.
He was the 65th United States Secretary of State, serving under U.S. President George W. Bush from 2001 to 2005, the first African American to serve in that position.
Powell came under fire for his role in building the case for the 2003 Invasion of Iraq.
His parents were both of mixed African and Scots ancestry.
Also in 2006, Powell began appearing as a speaker at a series of motivational events called ''Get Motivated'', along with former New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani.
Powell was born on April 5, 1937, in Harlem, a neighborhood in the New York City borough of Manhattan, to Jamaican immigrant parents Maud Arial (née McKoy) and Luther Theophilus Powell.
At times, infighting among the Powell-led State Department, the Rumsfeld-led Defense Department, and Cheney's office had the effect of polarizing the administration on crucial issues, such as what actions to take regarding Iran and North Korea.
However, Britain's ''Channel 4 News'' reported soon afterwards that a UK intelligence dossier that Powell had referred to as a "fine paper" during his presentation had been based on old material and plagiarized an essay by American graduate student Ibrahim al-Marashi.
He had often clashed with others in the administration, who were reportedly planning an Iraq invasion even before the September 11 attacks, an insight supported by testimony by former terrorism czar Richard Clarke in front of the 9/11 Commission.
In another interview, however, he also simply stated "With respect to your earlier comment about Chile in the 1970s and what happened with Mr. Allende, it is not a part of American history that we're proud of."
The Vietnam War had a profound effect on Powell's views of the proper use of military force.
We couldn't get it through the U.N. and when the president made the decision, I supported that decision.
During the second tour in Vietnam he was decorated for bravery after he survived a helicopter crash, single-handedly rescuing three others, including division commander Major General Charles Martin Gettys, from the burning wreckage.
When asked why he is still a Republican on Meet the Press he said, "I’m still a Republican.
Wilkerson said that he inadvertently participated in a hoax on the American people in preparing Powell's erroneous testimony before the United Nations Security Council.
In an interview with ABC's Diane Sawyer and George Stephanopoulos during ABC's coverage of President Obama's second inauguration, Powell criticized members of the Republican Party who "demonized the president."
Powell's position on the Iraq War troop surge of 2007 has been less consistent.
The answer's no, that's not America."
That same year saw the establishment of The Colin L. Powell Center for Leadership and Service.
It was a threat to the United States."
According to ''The Washington Post'', he had been asked to resign by the president's chief of staff, Andrew Card.
Ambassador Susan Rice, "Benghazi is a stupid witch hunt."
Powell also stated that there was "no doubt in my mind" that Saddam was working to obtain key components to produce nuclear weapons.
Throughout this period, Powell consistently argued that Iraqi political progress was essential, not just military force.
In an interview with Charlie Rose, Powell contended that prior to his UN presentation, he had merely four days to review the data concerning WMD in Iraq.
As Secretary of State in the Bush administration, Powell was perceived as moderate.
The accusation came at the same time as the settlement of an agreement between Iran, the IAEA, and the European Union.
A liberal Republican, Powell is well known for his willingness to support liberal or centrist causes.
In his speeches for the tour, he openly criticized the Bush Administration on a number of issues.
As additional reason for his endorsement, Powell cited the changing positions and perceived lack of thoughtfulness of Mitt Romney on foreign affairs, and a concern for the validity of Romney's economic plans.
The following day, Bush nominated National Security Advisor Condoleezza Rice as Powell's successor.
He said that Obama's choice for vice-president, Joe Biden, was ready to be president.
He returned to Vietnam as a major in 1968, serving in the 23rd Infantry Division, then as assistant chief of staff of operations for the Americal Division.
In a video that aired on CNN.com in November 2011, Colin Powell said in reference to Barack Obama, "many of his decisions have been quite sound.
In September 2010, he criticized the Obama administration for not focusing "like a razor blade" on the economy and job creation.
Powell donated the maximum allowable amount to John McCain's campaign in the summer of 2007 and in early 2008, his name was listed as a possible running mate for Republican nominee McCain's bid during the 2008 U.S. presidential election.
After attending basic training at Fort Benning, Powell was assigned to the 48th Infantry, in West Germany, as a platoon leader.
Citing numerous anonymous Iraqi defectors, Powell asserted that "there can be no doubt that Saddam Hussein has biological weapons and the capability to rapidly produce more, many more."
In March 2016, Powell denounced the "nastiness" of the 2016 Republican primaries during an interview on CBS This Morning.
Powell was unanimously confirmed by the United States Senate.
In September 2005, Powell criticized the response to Hurricane Katrina.
Powell privately reiterated his comments regarding Clinton's email scandal, writing, "I have told Hillary's minions repeatedly that they are making a mistake trying to drag me in, yet they still try," and complaining that "Hillary’s mafia keeps trying to suck me into it" in another email.
His daughters are Linda Powell, an actress, and Annemarie Powell.
Powell concluded his Sunday morning talk show comments, "It isn't easy for me to disappoint Sen. McCain in the way that I have this morning, and I regret that ...
Their son, Michael Powell, was the chairman of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) from 2001 to 2005.
In mid-November, Powell stated that he had seen new evidence suggesting that Iran was adapting missiles for a nuclear delivery system.
He appeared on the networks that were broadcasting New Year's Eve specials and talked about this honor, as well as being a native of New York City.
Powell was charged with investigating a detailed letter by 11th Light Infantry Brigade soldier Tom Glen, which backed up rumored allegations of the My Lai Massacre.
Powell later recounted how Vice President Dick Cheney had joked with him before he gave the speech, telling him, "You've got high poll ratings; you can afford to lose a few points."
He is pro-choice regarding abortion, and in favor of "reasonable" gun control.
During his chairmanship of the JCS, there was discussion of awarding Powell a fifth star, granting him the rank of General of the Army.
I wanted to avoid a war.
Powell always professed that what set Emerson apart, was his great love of his soldiers and concern for their welfare.
On September 13, 2016, emails were obtained that revealed Powell's private communications regarding both Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton.
(This school has since closed.)
File:United States Army Staff Identification Badge.png|Army Staff Identification Badge
State Department analysts had found dozens of factual problems in drafts of the speech.
In September 2005, Powell was asked about the speech during an interview with Barbara Walters and responded that it was a "blot" on his record.
Many Democrats admired his moderate stance on military matters, while many Republicans saw him as a great asset associated with the successes of past Republican administrations.
I don’t think there's anything inconsistent with this."
During his military career, Powell also served as National Security Advisor (1987–1989), as Commander of the U.S. Army Forces Command (1989) and as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (1989–1993), holding the latter position during the Persian Gulf War.
But even in the wake of public and Congressional pressure to do so, Clinton-Gore presidential transition team staffers decided against it.
Powell referred to Donald Trump as a "national disgrace", with "no sense of shame".
Powell announced that he would stay on until the end of Bush's first term or until his replacement's confirmation by Congress.
And you can be a Republican and still feel strongly about issues such as immigration, and improving our education system, and doing something about some of the social problems that exist in our society and our country.
Is there something wrong with being a Muslim in this country?
In April 2005, he was privately telephoned by Republican senators Lincoln Chafee and Chuck Hagel, at which time Powell expressed reservations and mixed reviews about the nomination of John R. Bolton as ambassador to the United Nations, but refrained from advising the senators to oppose Bolton (Powell had clashed with Bolton during Bush's first term).
Writing on the 2012 Benghazi attack controversy surrounding Clinton, Powell said to then U.S.
On November 11, 2008, Powell again dropped the puck in recognition of Military Appreciation Day and Veterans Day.
In September 2006, Powell sided with more moderate Senate Republicans in supporting more rights for detainees and opposing President Bush's terrorism bill.
On January 5, 2006, he participated in a meeting at the White House of former Secretaries of Defense and State to discuss United States foreign policy with Bush administration officials.
Republic of Vietnam Gallantry Cross Unit Citation
But the really right answer is, what if he is?
Powell defeated Clinton 50–38 in a hypothetical match-up proposed to voters in the exit polls conducted on Election Day.
Cadet Powell joined the Pershing Rifles, the ROTC fraternal organization and drill team begun by General John Pershing.
At this event, he encouraged the next generation to involve themselves politically on the upcoming Next America Project, which uses online debate to provide policy recommendations for the upcoming administration.
The large infection made it difficult for him to walk, and caused his foot to swell for a short time, shortening his first tour.
The mission of the Center is to "prepare new generations of publicly engaged leaders from populations previously underrepresented in public service and policy circles, to build a strong culture of civic engagement at City College, and to mobilize campus resources to meet pressing community needs and serve the public good."
And I've never blinked from that.
Once Texas Governor George W. Bush secured the Republican nomination, Powell endorsed him for president and spoke at the 2000 Republican National Convention.
In addition to being reported in the press (although the expletive was generally censored in the U.S. press), the quotation was used by James Naughtie in his book, ''The Accidental American: Tony Blair and the Presidency'', and by Chris Patten in his book, ''Cousins and Strangers: America, Britain, and Europe in a New Century''.
A Senate report on intelligence failures would later detail the intense debate that went on behind the scenes on what to include in Powell's speech.
In a speech at the Center for Strategic and International Studies to a room of young professionals, he said, "That's your generation...a generation that is hard-wired digital, a generation that understands the power of the information revolution and how it is transforming the world.
I think we need a transformational figure.
A 2004 report by the Iraq Survey Group concluded that the evidence that Powell offered to support the allegation that the Iraqi government possessed weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) was inaccurate.
And I think the Republican Party needs me more than the Democratic Party needs me.
He was touted as a possible opponent of Bill Clinton in the 1996 U.S. presidential election, possibly capitalizing on a split conservative vote in Iowa and even leading New Hampshire polls for the GOP nomination, but Powell declined, citing a lack of passion for politics.
Powell then mentioned Kareem Rashad Sultan Khan, a Muslim American soldier in the U.S. Army who served and died in the Iraq War.
Soon after Barack Obama's 2008 election, Powell began being mentioned as a possible cabinet member.
To this end, Powell addressed a plenary session of the United Nations Security Council on February 5, 2003, to argue in favor of military action.
Powell was raised in the South Bronx and attended Morris High School, from which he graduated in 1954.
In September 2009, Powell advised President Obama against surging US forces in Afghanistan.
Claiming that he was unaware that some intelligence officials questioned the information prior to his presentation, Powell pushed for reform in the intelligence community, including the creation of a national intelligence director who would assure that "what one person knew, everyone else knew."
I got there after My Lai happened.
Speaking to People Magazine, Powell said, "The truth is, she was using the private email server for a year before I sent her a memo telling her what I did."
Later in a December 12, 2008, CNN interview with Fareed Zakaria, Powell reiterated his belief that during the last few months of the campaign, Palin pushed the Republican party further to the right and had a polarizing impact on it.
And I not only liked it, but I was pretty good at it.
From two separate interviews in 2003, Powell stated in one about the 1973 event "I can't justify or explain the actions and decisions that were made at that time.
Despite his parents' pronunciation of his name as , Powell has pronounced his name  since childhood, after the heroic World War II flyer Colin P. Kelly Jr.. Public officials and radio and television reporters have used Powell's preferred pronunciation.
On September 13, 2004, Powell testified before the Senate Governmental Affairs Committee, acknowledging that the sources who provided much of the information in his February 2003 UN presentation were "wrong" and that it was "unlikely" that any stockpiles of WMDs would be found.
There was a great deal of concern about communism in this part of the world.
Upon graduation, he received a commission as an Army second lieutenant.
He later stated, "Over the last seven weeks, the approach of the Republican Party has become narrower and narrower ...
In May 2004 Powell said to television and radio host Larry King, "I was in a unit that was responsible for My Lai.
Bush eventually won, and Powell was appointed Secretary of State.
The administration came under fire for having acted on faulty intelligence, particularly what was single-sourced to the informant known as Curveball.
In another email discussing Clinton's controversy, Powell noted that she should have told everyone what she did "two years ago", and said that she has not "been covering herself with glory."
Powell announced his resignation as Secretary of State on November 15, 2004.
Most observers praised Powell's oratorical skills.
The president announced the surge the following December.
After a race riot occurred, in which African-American soldiers almost killed a Caucasian officer, Powell was charged by Emerson to crackdown on black militants; Powell's efforts led to the discharge of one soldier, and other efforts to reduce racial tensions.
Fall on your damn sword and kill yourself, and I'll be happy, too."
He wrote candidly of Trump's role in the birther movement, which he referred to as "racist."
As a lieutenant colonel serving in South Korea, Powell was very close to General Henry "Gunfighter" Emerson.
He acknowledged a "very personal" email relationship but denied further involvement.
In December 2006, he expressed skepticism that the strategy would work and whether the U.S. military had enough troops to carry it out successfully.
On December 31, 2004, Powell rang in the New Year by pressing a button in Times Square with New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg to initiate the ball drop and 60 second countdown, ushering in the year 2005.
The main concession Powell wanted before he would offer his full support for the Iraq War was the involvement of the international community in the invasion, as opposed to a unilateral approach.
He also remarked on Republican presidential contender Donald Trump's statements regarding immigrants, noting that there were many immigrants working in Trump hotels.
The decision was viewed as potentially dealing significant damage to Bolton's chances of confirmation.
Powell also serves on the Council on Foreign Relations Board of directors.
In 2013, he faced questions about a relationship with a Romanian diplomat, after a hacked AOL email account had been made public.
After retiring from the role of Secretary of State, Powell returned to private life.
In 1997 Powell founded America's Promise with the objective of helping children from all socioeconomic sectors.
And if you can put those two things together, then you're on the right track, and just drive on.
He stated in his autobiography that he supports affirmative action that levels the playing field, without giving a leg up to undeserving persons because of racial issues.
Later that year, President George H. W. Bush selected him as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Later, Powell's assessment would be described as whitewashing the news of the massacre, and questions would continue to remain undisclosed to the public.
While at school, Powell worked at a local baby furniture store, where he picked up Yiddish from the eastern European Jewish shopkeepers and some of the customers.
On March 14, 2014, Salesforce.com announced that Powell had joined its Board of Directors.
Powell reiterated that Obama was a "transformational figure."
