Built of concrete and sand, it is the largest amphitheatre ever built.
The restoration is the first full cleaning and repair in the Colosseum's history.
The lake was filled in and the land reused as the location for the new Flavian Amphitheatre.
Also nearby were the ''Armamentarium'', comprising an armory to store weapons; the ''Summum Choragium'', where machinery was stored; the ''Sanitarium'', which had facilities to treat wounded gladiators; and the ''Spoliarium'', where bodies of dead gladiators were stripped of their armor and disposed of.
It came to be seen as an iconic symbol of the permanence of Rome.
File:Colosseum 0748 2013.jpg|Colosseum 2013
The ''Ludus Magnus'' had its own miniature training arena, which was itself a popular attraction for Roman spectators.
File:Weed Whacking the Colosseum (2883935844).jpg
He also added a gallery to the top of the Colosseum to increase its seating capacity.
''Sylvae'' or recreations of natural scenes were also held in the arena.
They accessed their seats via ''vomitoria'' (singular ''vomitorium''), passageways that opened into a tier of seats from below or behind.
Stone (and later marble) seating was provided for the citizens and nobles, who presumably would have brought their own cushions with them.
Each entrance and exit was numbered, as was each staircase.
The central arena is an oval 87&nbsp;m (287&nbsp;ft) long and 55&nbsp;m (180&nbsp;ft) wide, surrounded by a wall 5&nbsp;m (15&nbsp;ft) high, above which rose tiers of seating.
In 1671 Cardinal Altieri authorized its use for bullfights; a public outcry caused the idea to be hastily abandoned.
In antiquity, Romans may have referred to the Colosseum by the unofficial name ''Amphitheatrum Caesareum'' (with ''Caesareum'' an adjective pertaining to the title ''Caesar''), but this name may have been strictly poetic as it was not exclusive to the Colosseum; Vespasian and Titus, builders of the Colosseum, also constructed an amphitheater of the same name in Puteoli (modern Pozzuoli).
Most recently, the Colosseum was illuminated in gold in November 2012 following the abolishment of capital punishment in the American state of Connecticut in April 2012.
Martinelli's book evidently had an effect on public opinion; in response to Cardinal Altieri's proposal some years later to turn the Colosseum into a bullring, Carlo Tomassi published a pamphlet in protest against what he regarded as an act of desecration.
It was later reused for such purposes as housing, workshops, quarters for a religious order, a fortress, a quarry, and a Christian shrine.
Other performances would also take place by acrobats and magicians, typically during the intervals.
Accounts of the inaugural games held by Titus in AD 80 describe it being filled with water for a display of specially trained swimming horses and bulls.
By the 2nd century BC the area was densely inhabited.
Work was planned to begin at the end of 2011, taking up to two and a half years.
Gladiatorial schools and other support buildings were constructed nearby within the former grounds of the Domus Aurea.
Commemorative coinage was issued celebrating the inauguration.
Sailors, specially enlisted from the Roman naval headquarters at Misenum and housed in the nearby ''Castra Misenatium'', were used to work the ''velarium''.
The top level was finished by his son, Titus, in 80, and the inaugural games were held in A.D. 80 or 81.
The interior of the amphitheater was extensively stripped of stone, which was reused elsewhere, or (in the case of the marble façade) was burned to make quicklime.
These three emperors are known as the Flavian dynasty, and the amphitheatre was named in Latin for its association with their family name ''(Flavius)''.
The first stage is to clean and restore the Colosseum's arcaded façade and replace the metal enclosures that block the ground-level arches.
There is evidence for the existence of major hydraulic mechanisms and according to ancient accounts, it was possible to flood the arena rapidly, presumably via a connection to a nearby aqueduct.
It covered two-thirds of the arena, and sloped down towards the center to catch the wind and provide a breeze for the audience.
The height of the outer wall is 48 meters (157&nbsp;ft / 165 Roman feet).
In addition to the amphitheatre itself, many other buildings nearby were linked to the games.
Other Christian crosses stand in several points around the arena and every Good Friday the Pope leads a Via Crucis procession to the amphitheater.
Its architects adopted solutions very similar to those used in modern stadiums to deal with the same problem.
The '''Colosseum''' or '''Coliseum''' ( ), also known as the '''Flavian Amphitheatre''' (Latin: ''Amphitheatrum Flavium''; Italian: ''Anfiteatro Flavio''  or ''Colosseo'' ), is an oval amphitheatre in the centre of the city of Rome, Italy.
File:Colosseum 0771 2013.jpg|Colosseum 2013
Despite its pagan links, the statue remained standing well into the medieval era and was credited with magical powers.
The building was remodelled further under Vespasian's younger son, the newly designated Emperor Domitian, who constructed the ''hypogeum'', a series of underground tunnels used to house animals and slaves.
The façade was reinforced with triangular brick wedges in 1807 and 1827, and the interior was repaired in 1831, 1846 and in the 1930s.
Battles and hunts were often staged amid elaborate sets with movable trees and buildings.
Because of the ruined state of the interior, it is impractical to use the Colosseum to host large events; only a few hundred spectators can be accommodated in temporary seating.
Later popes initiated various stabilization and restoration projects, removing the extensive vegetation which had overgrown the structure and threatened to damage it further.
Each of the arches in the second- and third-floor arcades framed statues, probably honoring divinities and other figures from Classical mythology.
Construction began under the emperor Vespasian in AD 72, and was completed in AD 80 under his successor and heir Titus.
This consisted of a canvas-covered, net-like structure made of ropes, with a hole in the center.
During lunch intervals, executions ''ad bestias'' would be staged.
A century later Fioravante Martinelli listed the Colosseum at the head of a list of places sacred to the martyrs in his 1653 book ''Roma ex ethnica sacra''.
Various explanations have been advanced for their presence; they may have been a religious boundary, or an outer boundary for ticket checks, or an anchor for the ''velarium'' or awning.
The ''hypogeum'' was connected by underground tunnels to a number of points outside the Colosseum.
File:Exterior of the Colosseum.jpg|Colosseum 2012
According to Irenæus (died about 202), Ignatius of Antioch was fed to the lions in Rome around 107 A.D and although Irenaeus says nothing about this happening at the Colosseum, tradition ascribes it to that place.
Several 19th century popes funded repair and restoration work on the Colosseum, and it still retains its Christian connection today.
Along with this free source of unskilled labor, teams of professional Roman builders, engineers, artists, painters and decorators undertook the more specialized tasks necessary for building the Colosseum.
File:Colosseum 0732 2013.jpg|Colosseum 2013
Additionally, bird migration, flower blooming, and the growth of Rome that caused the Colosseum to become embedded within the modern city centre rather than on the outskirts of the ancient city, as well as deliberate transport of species, are also contributing causes.
It was not fully repaired until about 240 and underwent further repairs in 250 or 252 and again in 320.
Vespasian's decision to build the Colosseum on the site of Nero's lake can be seen as a populist gesture of returning to the people an area of the city which Nero had appropriated for his own use.
This name is still used in modern English, but generally the structure is better known as the Colosseum.
There is also an account of a re-enactment of a famous sea battle between the Corcyrean (Corfiot) Greeks and the Corinthians.
File:Colosseum 0762 2013.jpg|Colosseum 2013
This utilized a great variety of wild beasts, mainly imported from Africa and the Middle East, and included creatures such as rhinoceros, hippopotamuses, elephants, giraffes, aurochs, wisents, Barbary lions, panthers, leopards, bears, Caspian tigers, crocodiles and ostriches.
In 2011 Diego Della Valle, head of the shoe firm  Tod's, entered into an agreement with local officials to sponsor a €25&nbsp;million restoration of the Colosseum.
Animals and performers were brought through the tunnel from nearby stables, with the gladiators' barracks at the Ludus Magnus to the east also being connected by tunnels.
This fact is used to support the idea that, at a time when sites associated with martyrs were highly venerated the Colosseum was not being treated as a sacred site.
The Colosseum underwent several radical changes of use during the medieval period.
It comprised a wooden floor covered by sand (the Latin word for sand is ''harena'' or ''arena''), covering an elaborate underground structure called the ''hypogeum'' (literally meaning "underground").
They were also occasionally used for executions in which the hero of the story – played by a condemned person – was killed in one of various gruesome but mythologically authentic ways, such as being mauled by beasts or burned to death.
The arcades are framed by half-columns of the Doric, Ionic, and Corinthian orders, while the attic is decorated with Corinthian pilasters.
The amphitheatre was ringed by eighty entrances at ground level, 76 of which were used by ordinary spectators.
These scholars assert that "some Christians were executed as common criminals in the Colosseum—their crime being refusal to reverence the Roman gods", but most Christian martyrs of the early Church were executed for their faith at the Circus Maximus.
Another popular type of show was the animal hunt, or ''venatio''.
He forbade the use of the Colosseum as a quarry and consecrated the building to the Passion of Christ and installed Stations of the Cross, declaring it sanctified by the blood of the Christian martyrs who perished there (''see Significance in Christianity'').
The effects of pollution and general deterioration over time prompted a major restoration programme carried out between 1993 and 2000, at a cost of 40&nbsp;billion Italian lire ($19.3m / €20.6m at 2000 prices).
Two hundred and forty mast corbels were positioned around the top of the attic.
Further modifications were made during the reign of Domitian (81–96).
The arena itself was 83&nbsp;meters by 48&nbsp;meters (272&nbsp;ft by 157&nbsp;ft / 280 by 163&nbsp;Roman feet).
Benedict Joseph Labre spent the later years of his life within the walls of the Colosseum, living on alms, prior to his death in 1783.
The amphitheater, one consecrated to triumphs, entertainments, and the impious worship of pagan gods, is now dedicated to the sufferings of the martyrs purified from impious superstitions.
The Colosseum's original Latin name was ''Amphitheatrum Flavium'', often anglicized as ''Flavian Amphitheater''.
However, much larger concerts have been held just outside, using the Colosseum as a backdrop.
Animal hunts continued until at least 523, when Anicius Maximus celebrated his consulship with some ''venationes'', criticised by King Theodoric the Great for their high cost.
The outer wall is estimated to have required over  of travertine stone which were set without mortar; they were held together by 300 tons of iron clamps.
Several anti–death penalty demonstrations took place in front of the Colosseum in 2000.
Pope Pius V (1566–1572) is said to have recommended that pilgrims gather sand from the arena of the Colosseum to serve as a relic, on the grounds that it was impregnated with the blood of martyrs, although some of his contemporaries did not share his conviction.
For instance, Pope Benedict XVI led the Stations of the Cross called the Scriptural Way of the Cross (which calls for more meditation) at the Colosseum on Good Fridays.
The Colosseum is also depicted on the Italian version of the five-cent euro coin.
In contrast to many other amphitheatres, which were located on the outskirts of a city, the Colosseum was constructed in the city centre; in effect, placing it both symbolically and precisely at the heart of Rome.
Some groups were banned altogether from the Colosseum, notably gravediggers, actors and former gladiators.
The Colosseum is generally regarded by Christians as a site of the martyrdom of large numbers of believers during the persecution of Christians in the Roman Empire, as evidenced by Church history and tradition.
The Colosseum could hold, it is estimated, between 50,000 and 80,000 spectators, having an average audience of some 65,000; it was used for gladiatorial contests and public spectacles such as mock sea battles (for only a short time as the ''hypogeum'' was soon filled in with mechanisms to support the other activities), animal hunts, executions, re-enactments of famous battles, and dramas based on Classical mythology.
They were seated in a tiered arrangement that reflected the rigidly stratified nature of Roman society.
In recent years the Colosseum has become a symbol of the international campaign against capital punishment, which was abolished in Italy in 1948.
However, the construction of the hypogeum at Domitian's behest put an end to the practise of flooding, and thus also to naval battles, early in the Colosseum's existence.
According to the Codex-Calendar of 354, the Colosseum could accommodate 87,000 people, although modern estimates put the figure at around 50,000.
File:Colosseum 0731 2013.jpg|Colosseum 2013
This comprised a gallery for the common poor, slaves and women.
By the late 6th century a small chapel had been built into the structure of the amphitheater, though this apparently did not confer any particular religious significance on the building as a whole.
The next level up, the ''maenianum secundum'', was originally reserved for ordinary Roman citizens (''plebeians'') and was divided into two sections.
The name ''Colosseum'' has long been believed to be derived from a colossal statue of Nero nearby (the statue of Nero was named after the Colossus of Rhodes).
Although partially ruined because of damage caused by earthquakes and stone-robbers, the Colosseum is still an iconic symbol of Imperial Rome.
In the Middle Ages, the Colosseum was not regarded as a monument, and was used as what some modern sources label a "quarry," which is to say that stones from the Colosseum were taken for the building of other sacred sites.
Much of the tumbled stone was reused to build palaces, churches, hospitals and other buildings elsewhere in Rome.
The Colosseum's huge crowd capacity made it essential that the venue could be filled or evacuated quickly.
The arena was converted into a cemetery.
The Colossus did eventually fall, possibly being pulled down to reuse its bronze.
It is one of Rome's most popular tourist attractions and has also links to the Roman Catholic Church, as each Good Friday the Pope leads a torchlit "Way of the Cross" procession that starts in the area around the Colosseum.
Painters, technicians and architects would construct a simulation of a forest with real trees and bushes planted in the arena's floor, and animals would then be introduced.
Severe damage was inflicted on the Colosseum by the great earthquake in 1349, causing the outer south side, lying on a less stable alluvial terrain, to collapse.
Such events were occasionally on a huge scale; Trajan is said to have celebrated his victories in Dacia in 107 with contests involving 11,000 animals and 10,000 gladiators over the course of 123 days.
Special boxes were provided at the north and south ends respectively for the Emperor and the Vestal Virgins, providing the best views of the arena.
The Colosseum is today one of Rome's most popular tourist attractions, receiving millions of visitors annually.
A Christian cross stands in the Colosseum, with a plaque, stating:
These quickly dispersed people into their seats and, upon conclusion of the event or in an emergency evacuation, could permit their exit within only a few minutes.
Those condemned to death would be sent into the arena, naked and unarmed, to face the beasts of death which would literally tear them to pieces.
The Colosseum is situated just east of the Roman Forum.
The hypogeum was not part of the original construction but was ordered to be built by Emperor Domitian.
During the early days of the Colosseum, ancient writers recorded that the building was used for ''naumachiae'' (more properly known as ''navalia proelia'') or simulated sea battles.
Along with the spoils, estimated 100,000 Jewish prisoners were brought back to Rome after the war, and many contributed to the massive workforce needed for construction.
Dio Cassius recounts that over 9,000 wild animals were killed during the inaugural games of the amphitheatre.
The numerous vaulted spaces in the arcades under the seating were converted into housing and workshops, and are recorded as still being rented out as late as the 12th century.
It was restructured on numerous occasions; at least twelve different phases of construction can be seen.
Elevators and pulleys raised and lowered scenery and props, as well as lifting caged animals to the surface for release.
This statue was later remodeled by Nero's successors into the likeness of Helios (''Sol'') or Apollo, the sun god, by adding the appropriate solar crown.
Construction of the Colosseum began under the rule of Vespasian in around 70–72 AD (73-75 AD according to some sources) The Colosseum had been completed up to the third story by the time of Vespasian's death in 79.
242 species have been counted today and of the species first identified by Panaroli, 200 remain.
Immediately to the east is the remains of the ''Ludus Magnus'', a training school for gladiators.
This is often mistranslated to refer to the Colosseum rather than the Colossus (as in, for instance, Byron's poem ''Childe Harold's Pilgrimage'').
The arena continued to be used for contests well into the 6th century.
One other romantic reason often given is their seeds being unwittingly transported on the animals brought there from all corners of the empire.
It derives its basic exterior and interior architecture from that of two Roman theatres back to back.
File:Interior_of_the_Colloseum,_Rome.png|Colosseum 2014
Gladiatorial fights are last mentioned around 435.
Each tier was divided into sections (''maeniana'') by curved passages and low walls (''praecinctiones'' or ''baltei''), and were subdivided into ''cunei'', or wedges, by the steps and aisles from the vomitoria.
The Colosseum today is now a major tourist attraction in Rome with thousands of tourists each year paying to view the interior arena, though entrance for citizens of the European Union (EU) is partially subsidised, and entrance is free for EU citizens under eighteen or over sixty-five years of age.
In 217, the Colosseum was badly damaged by a major fire (caused by lightning, according to Dio Cassius) which destroyed the wooden upper levels of the amphitheatre's interior.
By the year 1000 the name "Colosseum" had been coined to refer to the amphitheatre.
Specific sectors were provided for other social groups: for instance, boys with their tutors, soldiers on leave, foreign dignitaries, scribes, heralds, priests and so on.
Inscriptions identified the areas reserved for specific groups.
Eighty vertical shafts provided instant access to the arena for caged animals and scenery pieces concealed underneath; larger hinged platforms, called ''hegmata'', provided access for elephants and the like.
All four axial entrances were richly decorated with painted stucco reliefs, of which fragments survive.
Part of the arena floor has been re-floored.
However, it has suffered extensive damage over the centuries, with large segments having collapsed following earthquakes.
Construction was funded by the opulent spoils taken from the Jewish Temple after the Great Jewish Revolt in 70 AD led to the Siege of Jerusalem.
The north side of the perimeter wall is still standing; the distinctive triangular brick wedges at each end are modern additions, having been constructed in the early 19th century to shore up the wall.
The project plans to create a services center and to restore the galleries and underground spaces inside the Colosseum, including recreating the wooden floor that once covered the underground spaces.
The ensuing controversy persuaded Pope Clement X to close the Colosseum's external arcades and declare it a sanctuary.
The slaves undertook manual labor such as working in the quarries at Tivoli where the travertine was quarried, along with lifting and transporting the quarried stones 20 miles from Tivoli to Rome.
Since that time, as a gesture against the death penalty, the local authorities of Rome change the color of the Colosseum's night time illumination from white to gold whenever a person condemned to the death penalty anywhere in the world gets their sentence commuted or is released, or if a jurisdiction abolishes the death penalty.
The northern main entrance was reserved for the Roman Emperor and his aides, whilst the other three axial entrances were most likely used by the elite.
They originally supported a retractable awning, known as the ''velarium'', that kept the sun and rain off spectators.
This has been the subject of some debate among historians; although providing the water would not have been a problem, it is unclear how the arena could have been waterproofed, nor would there have been enough space in the arena for the warships to move around.
The peak was in 1855 (420 species).
Another level, the ''maenianum secundum in legneis'', was added at the very top of the building during the reign of Domitian.
Beneath the Colosseum, a network of subterranean passageways once used to transport wild animals and gladiators to the arena opened to the public in summer 2010.
Separate tunnels were provided for the Emperor and the Vestal Virgins to permit them to enter and exit the Colosseum without needing to pass through the crowds.
In Italy, the amphitheatre is still known as ''il Colosseo'', and other Romance languages have come to use similar forms such as ''Coloseumul'' (Romanian), ''le Colisée'' (French), ''el Coliseo'' (Spanish) and ''o Coliseu'' (Portuguese).
In 1749, Pope Benedict XIV endorsed the view that the Colosseum was a sacred site where early Christians had been martyred.
The remainder of the present-day exterior of the Colosseum is in fact the original interior wall.
Flanking them at the same level was a broad platform or ''podium'' for the senatorial class, who were allowed to bring their own chairs.
The tier above the senators, known as the ''maenianum primum'', was occupied by the non-senatorial noble class or knights (''equites'').
They had a strong religious element but were also demonstrations of power and family prestige, and were immensely popular with the population.
Such scenes might be used simply to display a natural environment for the urban population, or could otherwise be used as the backdrop for hunts or dramas depicting episodes from mythology.
It was not included in the itineraries compiled for the use of pilgrims nor in works such as the 12th century ''Mirabilia Urbis Romae'' ("Marvels of the City of Rome"), which claims the Circus Flaminius – but not the Colosseum – as the site of martyrdoms.
The site chosen was a flat area on the floor of a low valley between the Caelian, Esquiline and Palatine Hills, through which a canalised stream ran.
Part of the structure was inhabited by a Christian religious order, but it is not known whether this was for any particular religious reason.
Since then, 684 species have been identified there.
Around 1200 the Frangipani family took over the Colosseum and fortified it, apparently using it as a castle.
Although the Colossus was preserved, much of the Domus Aurea was torn down.
Other training schools were in the same area, including the ''Ludus Matutinus'' (Morning School), where fighters of animals were trained, plus the Dacian and Gallic Schools.
Due to the controversial nature of using a public-private partnership to fund the restoration, work was delayed and began in 2013.  the restoration is estimated to be complete by 2016.
It would have been either standing room only, or would have had very steep wooden benches.
The name further evolved to ''Coliseum'' during the Middle Ages.
The existing ''Aqua Claudia'' aqueduct was extended to supply water to the area and the gigantic bronze Colossus of Nero was set up nearby at the entrance to the Domus Aurea.
The perimeter originally measured 545 meters (1,788&nbsp;ft / 1,835 Roman feet).
The shows, called ''munera'', were always given by private individuals rather than the state.
The variation of plants can be explained by the change of climate in Rome through the centuries.
The Colosseum has a wide and well-documented history of flora ever since Domenico Panaroli made the first catalogue of its plants in 1643.
Many of the original outer entrances have disappeared with the collapse of the perimeter wall, but entrances XXIII (23) to LIV (54) survive.
However, there is no historical evidence to support Benedict's claim, nor is there even any evidence that anyone prior to the 16th century suggested this might be the case; the ''Catholic Encyclopedia'' concludes that there are no historical grounds for the supposition, other than the reasonably plausible conjecture that some of the many martyrs may well have been.
Pope Sixtus V (1585–1590) planned to turn the building into a wool factory to provide employment for Rome's prostitutes, though this proposal fell through with his premature death.
Little now remains of the original arena floor, but the ''hypogeum'' is still clearly visible.
The Colosseum is also the site of Roman Catholic ceremonies in the 20th and 21st centuries.
It consisted of a two-level subterranean network of tunnels and cages beneath the arena where gladiators and animals were held before contests began.
The name ''vomitoria'' derived from the Latin word for a rapid discharge, from which English derives the word vomit.
It has been suggested that the reports either have the location wrong, or that the Colosseum originally featured a wide floodable channel down its central axis (which would later have been replaced by the hypogeum).
Nero's head was also replaced several times with the heads of succeeding emperors.
The names of some 5th century senators can still be seen carved into the stonework, presumably reserving areas for their use.
The lower part (the ''immum'') was for wealthy citizens, while the upper part (the ''summum'') was for poor citizens.
However, at the time that the Pseudo-Bede wrote, the masculine noun ''coliseus'' was applied to the statue rather than to what was still known as the Flavian amphitheatre.
The arena substructure was partly excavated in 1810–1814 and 1874 and was fully exposed under Benito Mussolini in the 1930s.
Around the perimeter of the Colosseum, at a distance of 18&nbsp;m (59&nbsp;ft) from the perimeter, was a series of tall stone posts, with five remaining on the eastern side.
Attempts were made in 1871 to eradicate the vegetation, because of concerns over the damage that was being caused to the masonry, but much of it has returned.
Right next to the Colosseum is also the Arch of Constantine.
He built the grandiose ''Domus Aurea'' on the site, in front of which he created an artificial lake surrounded by pavilions, gardens and porticoes.
File:Colosseum 0740 2013.jpg|Colosseum 2013
A religious order moved into the northern third of the Colosseum in the mid-14th century and continued to inhabit it until as late as the early 19th century.
There is now a museum dedicated to Eros located in the upper floor of the outer wall of the building.
Substantial quantities of machinery also existed in the ''hypogeum''.
