A movement was initiated by Antonio Nariño, who opposed Spanish centralism and led the opposition against the viceroyalty.
Important musical rhythms of the Andean Region are the danza (dance of Andean folklore arising from the transformation of the European contredance), the bambuco (it is played with guitar, tiple and mandolin, the rhythm is danced by couples), the pasillo (a rhythm inspired by the Austrian waltz and the Colombian "danza", the lyrics have been composed by well-known poets), the rajaleña (it is performed by people that play the queco flute, the tiple, the carangano and the drum), the sanjuanero (it originated in Tolima and Huila Departments, the rhythm is joyful and fast).
Colombians customarily describe their country in terms of the climatic zones.
But of all sports in Colombia, football is the most popular.
Modernism contributed with new construction technologies and new materials (steel, reinforced concrete, glass and synthetic materials) and the topology architecture and lightened slabs system also have a great influence.
Traditionally a rural society, movement to urban areas was very heavy in the mid-20th century, and Colombia is now one of the most urbanized countries in Latin America.
The most influential architects of the modern movement were Rogelio Salmona and Fernando Martínez Sanabria.
The National Police has a presence in all municipalities.
An extraofficial estimate considers that the 49% of the Colombian population is Mestizo or of mixed European and Amerindian ancestry, and that approximately 37% is White, mainly of Spanish lineage, but there is also a large population of Middle East descent; among the upper class there is a considerable input of Italian and German ancestry.
Apart from these traditional rhythms, salsa music has spread throughout the country, and the city of Cali is considered by many salsa singers to be 'The New Salsa Capital of the World'.
Santos won nearly 51% of the vote in second-round elections on 15 June 2014, beating right-wing rival Óscar Iván Zuluaga, who won 45%.
Important rhythms of this region are the joropo (a fast rhythm and there is also tapping as a result of its flamenco ancestry) and the galeron (it is heard a lot while cowboys are working).
Television in Colombia has two privately owned TV networks and three state-owned TV networks with national coverage, as well as six regional TV networks and dozens of local TV stations.
Caribbean music has many vibrant rhythms, such as cumbia (it is played by the maracas, the drums, the gaitas and guacharaca), porro (it is a monotonous but joyful rhythm), mapalé (with its fast rhythm and constant clapping) and the "vallenato", which originated in the northern part of the Caribbean coast (the rhythm is mainly played by the caja, the guacharaca, and accordion).
Simón Bolívar became the first President of Colombia, and Francisco de Paula Santander was made Vice President.
File:Paisaje rural en Tinjacá.jpg|Mediterranean climate in Boyacá Department
Colombia is one of the megadiverse countries in biodiversity, ranking first in bird species.
In Colombia, there is not an institution such as college; students go directly into a career program at a university or any other educational institution to obtain a professional, technical or technological title.
In 1872, Colombia established the Colombian Academy of Language, the first Spanish language academy in the Americas.
The National Front ended "La Violencia", and National Front administrations attempted to institute far-reaching social and economic reforms in cooperation with the Alliance for Progress.
Also there were people who defended human rights and freedom of oppressed peoples.
The name was later adopted by the Republic of Colombia of 1819, formed from the territories of the old Viceroyalty of New Granada (modern-day Colombia, Panama, Venezuela, Ecuador, and northwest Brazil).
Deco style, modern neoclassicism, eclecticism folklorist and art deco ornamental resources significantly influenced the architecture of Colombia, especially during the transition period.
The so-called "Department of Cundinamarca" adopted the name "New Granada", which it kept until 1858 when it became the "Confederación Granadina" (Granadine Confederation).
Most of these belong to the Chibchan, Tucanoan, Bora–Witoto, Guajiboan, Arawakan, Cariban, Barbacoan, and Saliban language families.
Churches, chapels, schools, and hospitals belonging to religious orders cause a great urban impact.
Mestizos include artisans and small tradesmen that have played a major part in the urban expansion of recent decades.
Christopher Columbus navigated near the Caribbean in 1502.
Colombia shows modest progress in the struggle to defend human rights, as expressed by HRW.
Typical sauces (salsas) are hogao (tomato and onion sauce) and Colombian-style ají.
Colombia has a diverse and dynamic musical environment.
About 10% of the species of the Earth live in Colombia, including over 1,900 species of bird, more than in Europe and North America combined, Colombia has 10% of the world’s mammals species, 14% of the amphibian species and 18% of the bird species of the world.
In addition, historical figures in the process of independence in New Granada emerged from the expedition as the astronomer Francisco José de Caldas, the scientist Francisco Antonio Zea, the zoologist Jorge Tadeo Lozano and the painter Salvador Rizo.
In the second half of the nineteenth century and early twentieth century the literary genre known as ''costumbrismo'' became popular; great writers of this period were Tomás Carrasquilla, Jorge Isaacs and Rafael Pombo (the latter of whom wrote notable works of children's literature).
Colombia has 466,713 active military personnel.
School-life expectancy was 13.5 years.
Colombia entered the Korean War when Laureano Gómez was elected as President.
As for plants, the country has between 40,000 and 45,000 plant species, equivalent to 10 or 20% of total global species, this is even more remarkable given that Colombia is considered a country of intermediate size.
Some prominent indigenous structures are the preceramic and ceramic archaeological site of Tequendama, Tierradentro (a park that contains the largest concentration of pre-Columbian monumental shaft tombs with side chambers), the largest collection of religious monuments and megalithic sculptures in South America, located in San Agustín, Huila.
Some of the largest indigenous groups are the Wayuu, the Paez, the Pastos, the Emberá and the Zenú.
The nine eastern lowland departments, comprising about 54% of Colombia's area, have less than 6% of the population.
Baseball is popular in the Caribbean, mainly in the cities Cartagena, Barranquilla and Santa Marta.
The Congress of Cúcuta in 1821 adopted a constitution for the new Republic.
Colombia has Free trade Zone (FTZ), such as Zona Franca del Pacifico, located in the Valle del Cauca, one of the most striking areas for foreign investment.
The territory of the Viceroyalty of New Granada became the Republic of Colombia, organized as a union of the current territories of Colombia, Panama, Ecuador, Venezuela, parts of Guyana and Brazil and north of Marañón River.
From 1953 to 1964 the violence between the two political parties decreased first when Gustavo Rojas deposed the President of Colombia in a coup d'état and negotiated with the guerrillas, and then under the military junta of General Gabriel París Gordillo.
The specific number of spoken languages varies slightly since some authors consider as different languages what others consider are varieties or dialects of the same language.
The indigenous peoples could not be enslaved because they were legally subjects of the Spanish Crown.
The conflict escalated in the 1990s.
Also invented in Colombia were the microkeratome and keratomileusis technique, which form the fundamental basis of what now is known as LASIK (one of the most important techniques for the correction of refractive errors of vision) and the Hakim valve for the treatment of Hydrocephalus, among others.
Principal trading partners are the United States, China, the European Union and some Latin American countries.
Recent economic growth has led to a considerable increase of new millionaires, including the new entrepreneurs, Colombians with a net worth exceeding US $1 billion.
The United States of America's intentions to influence the area (especially the Panama Canal construction and control) led to the separation of the Department of Panama in 1903 and the establishment of it as a nation.
Organizations such as the Corporation for biological research for the support of young people interested in scientific work has been successfully developed in Colombia.
It shares its maritime limits with Costa Rica, Nicaragua, Honduras, Jamaica, the Dominican Republic, and Haiti.
Colombia is ethnically diverse, its people descending from the original native inhabitants, Spanish colonists, Africans originally brought to the country as slaves, and 20th-century immigrants from Europe and the Middle East, all contributing to a diverse cultural heritage.
Urban migration, industrialization, globalization, and other political, social and economic changes have also left an impression.
Although this new system has widened population coverage by the social and health security system from 21% (pre-1993) to 96% in 2012, health disparities persist, with the poor continuing to suffer less attention in their medical procedures.
The departments of La Guajira, Cauca, Nariño, Córdoba and Sucre have the largest indigenous populations.
File:Tota Lake 1.JPG|Oceanic climate in Tota Lake
The viceroyalty was restored under the command of Juan Sámano, whose regime punished those who participated in the uprisings.
Colombia has begun to innovate in military technology for its army and other armies of the world; especially in the design and creation of personal ballistic protection products, military hardware, military robots, bombs, simulators and radar.
Colombian art has over 3,000 years of history.
Colombia is rich in natural resources, and its main exports include mineral fuels, oils, distillation products, precious stones, forest products, pulp and paper, coffee, meat, cereals and vegetable oils, cotton, oilseed, sugars and sugar confectionery, fruit and other agricultural products, food processing, processed fish products, beverages, machinery, electronics, military products, aircraft, ships, motor vehicles, metal products, ferro-alloys, home and office material, chemicals and health related products, petrochemicals, agrochemicals, inorganic salts and acids, perfumery and cosmetics, medicaments, plastics, animal fibers, textile and fabrics, clothing and footwear, leather, construction equipment and materials, cement, software, among others.
File:Cabo de La vela.JPG|Hot desert climate in the Guajira Peninsula
However, based on various studies and a survey, about 90% of the population adheres to Christianity, the majority of which (70.9%) are Roman Catholic, while a significant minority (16.7%) adhere to Protestantism (primarily Evangelicalism).
The pro-Spanish resistance was defeated in 1822 in the present territory of Colombia and in 1823 in Venezuela.
Colombian theater is supported by the Ministry of Culture and a number of private and state owned organizations.
Lost city (an archaeological site with a series of terraces carved into the mountainside, a net of tiled roads and several circular plazas) and also stand out the large villages mainly built with stone, wood, cane and mud.
After almost four years of peace negotiations, the Colombian state and the FARC announced consensus on a 6-point plan towards peace and reconciliation.
Internal political and territorial divisions led to the dissolution of Gran Colombia in 1830.
Some popular archipelago rhythms are the Schottische, the Calypso, the Polka  and the Mento.
Public spending on education as a proportion of gross domestic product in 2013 was 4.9%.
The Muisca inhabited mainly the area of what is now the Departments of Boyacá and Cundinamarca high plateau (''Altiplano Cundiboyacense'') where they formed the Muisca Confederation.
In 2005 over 30% of the population was under 15 years old, compared to just 6.3% aged 65 and over.
Annual inflation closed 2015 at 6.77% YoY (vs. 3.66% YoY in 2014).
In 1811 the United Provinces of New Granada were proclaimed, headed by Camilo Torres Tenorio.
There are currently about 850,000 speakers of native languages.
In 1991, Colombia signed and ratified the current international law concerning indigenous peoples, Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention, 1989.
It has two stages: Primary basic education (''Educación básica primaria'') which goes from first to fifth grade – children from six to ten years old, and Secondary basic education (''Educación básica secundaria''), which goes from sixth to ninth grade.
What is now Colombia and Panama emerged as the Republic of New Granada.
Some important national circulation newspapers are ''El Tiempo'' and ''El Espectador''.
The financial sector has grown favorably due to good liquidity in the economy, the growth of credit and in general to the positive performance of the Colombian economy.
The legislative branch of government is represented nationally by the Congress, a bicameral institution comprising a 166-seat Chamber of Representatives and a 102-seat Senate.
negotiations in 1989 –1994.
Alejandro Obregón is often considered as the father of modern Colombian painting, and one of the most influential artist in this period, due to his originality, the painting of Colombian landscapes with symbolic and expressionist use of animals, (specially the Andean condor).
It was conceived by the Venezuelan revolutionary Francisco de Miranda as a reference to all the New World, but especially to those portions under Spanish and Portuguese rule.
After Rojas' deposition, the Colombian Conservative Party and Colombian Liberal Party agreed to create the "National Front", a coalition which would jointly govern the country.
Indigenous Amerindians comprise 3.4% of the population.
According to International Monetary Fund estimates, in 2012 Colombia's GDP (PPP) was US$500&nbsp;billion (28th in the world and third in South America).
Some of the musical instruments used are the manguaré (a musical instrument of ceremonial type, consisting of a pair of large cylindrical drums), the quena (melodic instrument), the rondador, the congas, bells, and different types of flutes.
The president is elected by popular vote to serve four-year term (In 2015 the Colombia’s Congress approved the repeal of a 2004 constitutional amendment that eliminated the one-term limit for presidents).
The regional channels and regional newspapers cover a department or more and its content is made in these particular areas.
The Government also began a process of assistance and reparation for victims of conflict.
In the run-off elections on 20 June 2010 the former Minister of defense Juan Manuel Santos won with 69% of the vote against the second most popular candidate, Antanas Mockus.
Post-independence literature linked to Romanticism highlighted Antonio Nariño, José Fernández Madrid, Camilo Torres Tenorio and Francisco Antonio Zea.
Despite the successes of the rebellion, the emergence of two distinct ideological currents among the liberators (federalism and centralism) gave rise to an internal clash which contributed to the reconquest of territory by the Spanish.
The Organización Nacional Indígena de Colombia (ONIC), founded at the first National Indigenous Congress in 1982, is an organization representing the indigenous peoples of Colombia.
Colombia shares a border to the northwest with Panama, to the east with Venezuela and Brazil, to the south with Ecuador and Peru.
Slavery was abolished in the country in 1851.
70.35% is obtained from the hydroelectric generation.
Other leading contemporary authors are Fernando Vallejo (Rómulo Gallegos Prize) and Germán Castro Caycedo, the best-selling writer in Colombia after García Márquez.
However, the new republic was unstable and  three countries emerged from the collapse of Gran Colombia in 1830 (New Granada, Ecuador and Venezuela).
The target of Colombia’s government is to build 7,000&nbsp;km of roads for the 2016–2020 period and reduce travel times by 30 per cent and transport costs by 20 per cent.
Colombia is the sixth country in the world by magnitude of total renewable freshwater supply, and still has large reserves of freshwater.
Some 4.7% of the population is atheist or agnostic, while 3.5% claim to believe in God but do not follow a specific religion.
Members of both houses are elected to serve four-year terms two months before the president, also by popular vote.
For some professional career programs, students are required to take the Saber-Pro test, in their final year of undergraduate academic education.
Including Spanish, a total of 101 languages are listed for Colombia in the Ethnologue database.
Portuguese, French, English and Dutch traders supplied the Spanish America of African slaves.
Many hundreds of radio stations are registered with the Ministry of Information Technology and Communications.
The life expectancy is 74.8 years in 2015 and infant mortality is 13.6 per thousand in 2015.
Health standards in Colombia have improved very much since the 1980s, healthcare reforms have led to the massive improvements in the healthcare systems of the country.
Colombia also has excelled in sports such as BMX, judo, shooting sport, taekwondo, wrestling, high diving and athletics, also has a long tradition in weightlifting and bowling.
The name "Colombia" is derived from the last name of Christopher Columbus (, ).
Public debt equals 32 percent of gross domestic product.
The electricity production in Colombia comes mainly from renewable energy sources.
Colombia is a mecca for roller skaters.
Representative snacks and breads are pandebono, arepas (corn cakes), aborrajados (fried sweet plantains with cheese), torta de choclo, empanadas and almojábanas.
There is a major migration trend of Venezuelans, due to the political and economic situation in Venezuela.
Many musicians, composers and singers Colombians are recognized internationally such as Shakira, Juanes or Carlos Vives.
In 1863, the name was again changed, this time to United States of Colombia, before finally adopting its present name – the Republic of Colombia – in 1886.
Many national symbols, both objects and themes, have arisen from Colombia's diverse cultural traditions and aim to represent what Colombia, and the Colombian people, have in common.
With an estimated 48 million people in 2015, Colombia is the third-most populous country in Latin America, after Brazil and Mexico.
according to the curriculum adopted by each school.
During the early period of the Colombian republic, the national artists were focused in the production of sculptural portraits of politicians and public figures, in a plain neoclassicist trend.
The name soon acquired a suffix and was called Santa Fe de Bogotá.
By contrast the narrow and discontinuous Pacific coastal lowlands, backed by the Serranía de Baudó mountains, are sparsely populated and covered in dense vegetation.
The educational experience of many Colombian children begins with attendance at a preschool academy until age five (''Educación preescolar'').
There are also important communities of Chinese, Japanese, Romanis and Jews.
British and Jamaicans migrated mainly to the islands of San Andres and Providencia.
Colombia is now one of only three economies with a perfect score on the strength of legal rights index, according to the World Bank.
The Government has also been developing a process of financial inclusion within the country's most vulnerable population.
The main rivers of Colombia are Magdalena, Cauca, Guaviare, Atrato, Meta, Putumayo and Caquetá.
Below  in elevation is the tierra caliente (hot land), where temperatures are above .
Colombia has traditionally been very good in cycling and a large number of Colombian cyclists have triumphed in major competitions of cycling.
The Colombian sculpture from the sixteenth to 18th centuries was mostly devoted to religious depictions of ecclesiastic art, strongly influenced by the Spanish schools of sacred sculpture.
The national team is a perennial powerhouse at the World Roller Speed Skating Championships.
The total fertility rate was 1.9 births per woman in 2014.
The Colombian Stock Exchange through the Latin American Integrated Market (MILA) offers a regional market to trade equities.
The Ministry of Defence exercises day-to-day control of the military and the Colombian National Police.
Non-traditional exports have boosted the growth of Colombian foreign sales as well as the diversification of destinations of export thanks to new free trade agreements.
Barranquilla (the largest city of the Colombian Caribbean) and other Caribbean cities have the largest populations of Lebanese, Palestinian, and other Arabs.
Within that period, authors such as José Asunción Silva, José Eustasio Rivera, León de Greiff, Porfirio Barba-Jacob and José María Vargas Vila developed the modernist movement.
In the 16th century, Europeans began to bring slaves from Africa.
Colombia has more than 3,950 research groups in science and technology.
Colombia is the country in the planet more characterized by a high biodiversity, with the highest rate of species by area unit worldwide and it has the largest number of endemisms (species that are not found naturally anywhere else) of any country.
It may have different vocational training modalities or specialties (academic, technical, business, and so on.)
The Colombian military is divided into three branches: the National Army of Colombia; the Colombian Air Force; and the Colombian Navy.
During the boom in Latin American literature, successful writers emerged, led by Nobel laureate Gabriel García Márquez and his magnum opus, ''One Hundred Years of Solitude'', Eduardo Caballero Calderón, Manuel Mejía Vallejo, and Álvaro Mutis, a writer who was awarded the Cervantes Prize and the Prince of Asturias Award for Letters.
The National Administrative Department of Statistics (DANE) does not collect religious statistics, and accurate reports are difficult to obtain.
In 1717 the Viceroyalty of New Granada was originally created, and then it was temporarily removed, to finally be reestablished in 1739.
The principal Pacific port is Buenaventura.
A number of other Europeans and North Americans migrated to the country in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, including people from the former USSR during and after the Second World War.
The demographic distribution reflects a pattern that is influenced by colonial history.
The Senate is elected nationally and the Chamber of Representatives is elected in electoral districts.
1.8% of Colombians adhere to Jehovah's Witnesses and Adventism and less than 1% adhere to other religions, such as Islam, Judaism, Buddhism, Mormonism, Hinduism, Indigenous religions, Hare Krishna movement, Rastafari movement, Orthodox Catholic Church, and spiritual studies.
Candelario Obeso wrote the groundbreaking ''Cantos Populares de mi Tierra'' (1877), the first book of poetry by an Afro-Colombian author.
The Taironas inhabited northern Colombia in the isolated Andes mountain range of Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta.
The United States has been heavily involved in the conflict since its beginnings, when in the early 1960s the U.S. government encouraged the Colombian military to attack leftist militias in rural Colombia.
The population is concentrated in the Andean highlands and along the Caribbean coast, also the population densities are generally higher in the Andean region.
Under the deal, the presidency would alternate between conservatives and liberals every 4 years for 16 years; the two parties would have parity in all other elective offices.
The high-school graduate is known as a  ''bachiller'', because secondary basic school and middle education are traditionally considered together as a unit called ''bachillerato'' (sixth to eleventh grade).
The urban centres are mostly located in the highlands of the Andes mountains.
They erected raised ceremonial centres, sarcophagi, and large stone monoliths depicting anthropomorphic and zoomorphhic forms out of stone.
The 18th-century priest, botanist and mathematician José Celestino Mutis was delegated by Viceroy Antonio Caballero y Góngora to conduct an inventory of the nature of the New Granada.
Since the beginning of the armed conflict, human rights defenders have staged heroic acts that shows us the importance of standing up against injustice and fight for the respect for human rights, despite staggering opposition.
Baroque architecture is used in military buildings and public spaces.
Organic food is a current trend in big cities, although in general across the country the fruits and veggies are very natural and fresh.
Technical professional institutions of Higher Education are also opened to students holder of a qualification in Arts and Business.
The changes generated by the new constitution are viewed as positive by Colombian society.
iNNpulsa, a government body that promotes entrepreneurship and innovation in the country, provides grants to startups, in addition to other services it and institutions like Apps.co provide.
The earliest examples of gold craftsmanship have been attributed to the Tumaco people  of the Pacific coast and date to around 325 BCE.
After a two-year civil war in 1863, the "United States of Colombia" was created, lasting until 1886, when the country finally became known as the Republic of Colombia.
Co-working spaces have arisen to serve as communities for startups large and small.
Despite a number of controversies, the democratic security policy has ensured that former President Uribe remained popular among Colombian people, with his approval rating peaking at 76%, according to a poll in 2009.
The National Capitol is a great representative of romanticism.Wood is extensively used in doors, windows, railings and ceilings during the colonization of Antioquia.
Colombia lies at the crossroads of Latin America and the broader American continent, and as such has been hit by a wide range of cultural influences.
The birth rate remained at high levels until the early 1970s, but since then, Colombia has experienced steady declines in its fertility, mortality, and population growth rates.
So, Bogotá became one of the principal administrative centers of the Spanish possessions in the New World, along with Lima and Mexico City, though it remained somewhat backward compared to those two cities in several economic and logistical ways.
Cultural expressions in Colombia are promoted by the government through the Ministry of Culture.
On 4 July 1991, a new Constitution was promulgated.
Repopulation was achieved by allowing colonization by farmers and their families who came from Spain.
Together these lowlands comprise over half Colombia's territory, but they contain less than 6% of the population.
In 1858, New Granada officially changed its name to the Granadine Confederation.
Basic education (''Educación básica'') is compulsory by law.
Some of the most common ingredients are: cereals such as rice and maize; tubers such as potato and cassava; assorted legumes; meats, including beef, chicken, pork and goat; fish; and seafood.
Colombia has a diversified economy with macroeconomic stability and favorable growth prospects in the long run.
To protect and exploit the indigenous peoples, several forms of land ownership and regulation were established: ''resguardos'', ''encomiendas'' and ''haciendas''.
In the end, the contradictions between each successive Liberal and Conservative administration made the results decidedly mixed.
Between 1939 and 1940 seven books of poetry were published under the name ''Stone and Sky'' in the city of Bogotá that significantly impacted the country; they were edited by the poet Jorge Rojas.
Other important theater events are: The Festival of Puppet The Fanfare (Medellín), The Manizales Theater Festival, The Caribbean Theatre Festival (Santa Marta) and The Art Festival of Popular Culture "Cultural Invasion" (Bogotá).
In 1508, Vasco Núñez de Balboa accompanied an expedition to the territory through the region of Gulf of Urabá and they founded the town of Santa María la Antigua del Darién in 1510, the first stable settlement on the continent.
However, in recent years growth has been impressive, reaching 6.9% in 2007, one of the highest rates of growth in Latin America.
It is a unitary, constitutional republic comprising thirty-two departments.
The construction of forts was common throughout the Caribbean and in some cities of the interior, because of the dangers that represented the hostile indigenous groups and the pirates who roamed the seas.
In 1547, New Granada became the Captaincy-General of New Granada within the viceroyalty.
Life expectancy at birth in 2000 was 70.99 years; the life expectancy increased to 74.8 years by 2015.
Compared to neighboring countries, rates of deforestation in Colombia are still relatively low.
Students in their final year of middle education take the ICFES test (now renamed Saber 11) in order to gain access to higher education (''Educación superior'').
