The present-day Salton Sea can be considered the most recent incarnation of Lake Cahuilla, though on a much smaller scale.
Elevations range from sea level at the Gulf of California to  at the summit of Uncompahgre Peak in Colorado, with an average of  across the entire basin.
With those funds Johnson expected to provide the transportation for the expedition but was angry and disappointed when the commander of the expedition Lt. Joseph Christmas Ives rejected his offer of one of his steamboats.
The Gila River is the second longest and drains a greater area than the Green, but has a significantly lower flow because of a more arid climate and larger diversions for irrigation and cities.
George A. Johnson was instrumental in getting the support for Congressional funding a military expedition up the river.
In 1928, the ferry sank, resulting in the deaths of three men.
In Chaco Canyon and the surrounding lands, they built more than 150 multi-story pueblos or "great houses", the largest of which, Pueblo Bonito, is composed of more than 600 rooms.
The Colorado begins at La Poudre Pass in the Southern Rocky Mountains of Colorado, at just under  above sea level.
The Puebloans dominated the basin of the San Juan River, and the center of their civilization was in Chaco Canyon.
The Lower Basin states also sought to develop the Colorado for municipal supplies.
This location was the only section of river for hundreds of miles in both directions where the canyon walls dropped away, allowing for the development of a transport route.
It made many trips up and down the river, taking four months to finish carrying the supplies for the fort, improving its time up river to 12 days.
Subsequently, wagons again were sent from the fort to haul the balance of the supplies overland from the estuary through the marshes and woodlands of the Delta.
Historically, the delta with its large freshwater outflow and extensive salt marshes provided an important breeding ground for aquatic species in the Gulf.
The C-BT now delivers more than 11 times the Grand Ditch's flow from the Colorado River watershed to cities along the Front Range.
They soon established themselves as the dominant Native American tribe in the Colorado River basin, and their territory stretched over parts of present-day Arizona, New Mexico, Utah and Colorado – in the original homelands of the Puebloans.
The average flow rate of the Colorado at the northernmost point of the Mexico–United States border (NIB, or Northerly International Boundary) is about ,  per year – less than a 10th of the natural flow – due to upstream water use.
Below San Luis Río Colorado, the Colorado passes entirely into Mexico, defining the Baja California–Sonora border; in most years, the stretch of the Colorado between here and the Gulf of California is dry or a trickle formed by irrigation return flows.
Human development of the Colorado River has also helped to create new riparian zones by smoothing the river's seasonal flow, notably through the Grand Canyon.
The gradual influx of European and American explorers, fortune seekers and settlers into the region eventually led to conflicts that forced many Native Americans off their traditional lands.
Home to 11 U.S. National Parks, which include dramatic canyons and whitewater rapids, the Colorado River system is also a vital source of water for agriculture and urban areas in much of the southwestern desert lands of North America.
Over 29 major dams and hundreds of miles of canals serve to supply thirsty cities, provide irrigation water to some 4 million acres (1.6 million hectares), and meet peaking power demands in the Southwest, generating more than 12&nbsp;billion kWh of hydroelectricity each year.
It was intended to boost supplies for the Lower Basin states of Arizona, California and Nevada as well as Mexico, thus allowing the Upper Basin states to retain native Colorado River flows for their own use.
Steamboats quickly became the principal source of communication and trade along the river until competition from railroads began in the 1870s, and finally the construction of dams along the lower river in 1909, none of which had locks to allow the passage of ships.
An extensive system of irrigation canals was constructed on the Gila and Salt rivers, with various estimates of a total length ranging from  and capable of irrigating .
The Hardy River provides most of the flow into the Colorado River Delta, a vast alluvial floodplain covering about  of northwestern Mexico.
In late 2010, Lake Mead dropped to just  above the first "drought trigger" elevation, a level at which Arizona and Nevada would have to begin rationing water as delineated by the Colorado River Compact.
The Colorado's average temperature once ranged from  at the height of summer to near freezing in winter, but modern flows through the Grand Canyon, for example, rarely deviate significantly from .
By the early 1970s, there was also serious concern about salinity caused by salts leached from local soils by irrigation drainage water, which were estimated to add  of excess salt to the river per year.
''Explorer'', and traveled up the river as far as Black Canyon.
After leaving the confines of the Black Canyon, the river emerges from the Colorado Plateau into the Lower Colorado River Valley (LCRV), a desert region dependent on irrigation agriculture and tourism and also home to several major Indian reservations.
Equipped with only a 20-horsepower engine, the ''Uncle Sam'' could only carry 35 tons of supplies, taking 15 days to make the first 120-mile trip.
From 1879 to 1887, Rioville, Nevada was the high water Head of Navigation for the steamboats and the mining company sloop Sou'Wester that carried the salt needed for the reduction of silver ore from there to the mills at El Dorado Canyon.
Although riparian zones represent a relatively small proportion of the basin and have been affected by engineering projects and river diversion in many places, they have the greatest biodiversity of any habitat in the basin.
The upper Colorado also includes many of the river's most challenging rapids, including those in Gore Canyon, which is considered so dangerous that "boating is not recommended".
Reduction of the delta's size has also threatened animals such as jaguars and the vaquita porpoise, which is endemic to the gulf.
Before Ives could finish reassembling his steamer in the delta, George A. Johnson set off from Fort Yuma on December 31, 1857, conducting his own exploration of the river above the fort in his steamboat ''General Jesup''.
Other significant population centers in the basin include Tucson, Arizona; St. George, Utah; and Grand Junction, Colorado.
The U.S. government has taken some actions to help quantify and develop the water resources of Native American reservations.
Many of the tribes that inhabited the Colorado River basin at the time of European contact were descended from Puebloan and Hohokam survivors, while others already had a long history of living in the region or migrated in from bordering lands.
On August 9, the entire flow of the Colorado swerved into the canal and began to flood the bottom of the Imperial Valley.
More than 1,600 species of plants grow in the Colorado River watershed, ranging from the creosote bush, saguaro cactus, and Joshua trees of the Sonoran and Mojave Deserts to the forests of the Rocky Mountains and other uplands, composed mainly of ponderosa pine, subalpine fir, Douglas-fir and Engelmann spruce.
These early settlers were impressed by the extensive ruins of the Hohokam civilization that previously occupied the Gila River valley, and are said to have "envisioned their new agricultural civilization rising as the mythical ''phoenix'' bird from the ashes of Hohokam society".
The lake took about 50 years to evaporate after the Colorado resumed flowing to the Gulf.
On August&nbsp;28, 1869, three men deserted the expedition, convinced that they could not possibly survive the trip through the Grand Canyon.
In the lower Colorado mining was the primary spur to economic development, copper mining in southwestern New Mexico Territory the 1850s then the Mohave War and a gold rush on the Gila River in 1859, the El Dorado Canyon Rush in 1860 and Colorado River Gold Rush in 1862.
Engineer George Chaffey was hired to design the Alamo Canal, which split off from the Colorado River near Pilot Knob, curved south into Mexico, and dumped into the Alamo River, a dry arroyo which had historically carried flood flows of the Colorado into the Salton Sink.
It was assembled and launched in the estuary, 30 miles above the mouth of the Colorado River.
, among Mexico's most fertile agricultural lands.
Below the confluence with the Little Colorado River, the river swings west into Granite Gorge, the most dramatic portion of the Grand Canyon, where the river cuts up to  into the Colorado Plateau, exposing some of the oldest visible rocks on Earth, dating as long ago as 2&nbsp;billion years.
As the Colorado Plateau continued to rise between 5 and 2.5&nbsp;million years ago, the river maintained its ancestral course (as an antecedent stream) and began to cut the Grand Canyon.
Major reservoirs in the basin dropped to historic lows, with Lake Powell falling to just one-third of capacity in early 2005, the lowest level on record since 1969, when the reservoir was still in the process of filling.
Even though it was located along a major travel route, Lee's Ferry was very isolated, and there Lee and his family established the aptly named Lonely Dell Ranch.
They were fishermen – navigating the river on rafts made of reeds to catch Gila trout and Colorado pikeminnow – and farmers, relying on the annual floods of the river rather than irrigation to water their crops.
Water rights of Native Americans in the Colorado River basin were largely ignored during the extensive water resources development carried out on the river and its tributaries in the 19th and 20th&nbsp;centuries.
Further efforts have been made to combat the salt issue in the lower Colorado, including the construction of a desalination plant at Yuma.
The famed opposition to Glen Canyon Dam, the primary feature of the CRSP, did not build momentum until construction was well underway.
In 1859, a group of adventurers from Georgia discovered gold along the Blue River in Colorado and established the mining boomtown of Breckenridge.
Mormons founded the settlement of Vernal along the Green River in Utah in 1878, and populated the Little Colorado River valley later in the century, creating towns such as St. Johns, Arizona.
The river widens here to a broad, moderately deep waterway averaging  wide and reaching up to  across, with depths ranging from .
Colorado River recreation employs some 250,000 people and contributes $26&nbsp;billion each year to the Southwest economy.
In Arizona, the river passes Lee's Ferry, an important crossing for early explorers and settlers and since the early 20th&nbsp;century the principal point where Colorado River flows are measured for apportionment to the seven U.S. and two Mexican states in the basin.
The Colorado first formed as a west-flowing stream draining the southwestern portion of the range, and the uplift also diverted the Green River from its original course to the Mississippi River west towards the Colorado.
The Fremont were likely the first peoples of the Colorado River basin to domesticate crops and construct masonry dwellings; they also left behind a large amount of rock art and petroglyphs, many of which have survived to the present day.
Failure of the lava dams caused by erosion, leaks and cavitation caused catastrophic floods, which may have been some of the largest ever to occur in North America, rivaling the late-Pleistocene Missoula Floods of the northwestern United States.
The Ancient Puebloan (also known as Anasazi or Hisatsinom) people of the Four Corners region were descended from the Desert Archaic culture.
A 2004 study showed that a 1–6&nbsp;percent decrease of precipitation would lead to runoff declining by as much as 18&nbsp;percent by 2050.
Early contact between foreigners and natives was generally limited to the fur trade in the headwaters and sporadic trade interactions along the lower river.
It was not long before the Colorado River began to wreak havoc with its erratic flows.
Starting in the latter half of the 19th&nbsp;century, the lower Colorado below Black Canyon became an important waterway for steamboat commerce.
Below the dam the river passes under the Mike O'Callaghan–Pat Tillman Memorial Bridge – which at nearly  above the water is the highest concrete arch bridge in the Western Hemisphere – and then turns due south towards Mexico, defining the Arizona–Nevada and Arizona–California borders.
During the Manifest Destiny era of the mid-19th&nbsp;century, American pioneers settled many western states but generally avoided the Colorado River basin until the 1850s.
Fisheries have declined in many streams in the watershed, especially in the Rocky Mountains, because of polluted runoff from mining and agricultural activities.
Through the mid-1800s, the river between Green River and the Gunnison River was most commonly known as the Grand River.
For the first  of its course, the Colorado carves its way through the mountainous Western Slope, a sparsely populated region defined by the portion of the state west of the Continental Divide.
Several other sections of the river and its tributaries are popular whitewater runs, and many of these are also served by commercial outfitters.
They were killed by either Native Americans or Mormon settlers after making it to the rim of the canyon; two days later, the expedition ran the last of the Grand Canyon rapids and reached St. Thomas.
Behind the dam rose Lake Mead, the largest artificial lake in the U.S., capable of holding more than two years of the Colorado's flow.
Reservoir levels were low enough at the beginning of water year 2014 that the Bureau of Reclamation cut releases from Lake Powell by  – the first such reduction since the 1960s, when Lake Powell was being filled for the first time.
During 1875, even bigger strikes were made along the Uncompahgre and San Miguel rivers, also in Colorado, and these led to the creation of Ouray and Telluride, respectively.
The Green takes drainage from the Wind River Range of west-central Wyoming, from Utah's Uinta Mountains, and from the Rockies of northwestern Colorado.
Lesser numbers settled in the upper basin, which was the scene of major gold strikes in the 1860s and 1870s.
In the 21st&nbsp;century, they have filed legal claims against the governments of Arizona, New Mexico and Utah for increased water rights.
In 1852, the ''Uncle Sam'' was launched to provide supplies to the U.S. Army outpost at Fort Yuma.
Reduction in flow caused by dams, diversions, water for thermoelectric power stations, and evaporation losses from reservoirs – the latter of which consumes more than 15&nbsp;percent of the river's natural runoff – has had severe ecological consequences in the Colorado River Delta and the Gulf of California.
The use of horses spread through the basin via trade between the various tribes and greatly facilitated hunting, communications and travel for indigenous peoples.
He as he returned he encountered Lieutenant Ives, Whipple's assistant, who was leading an expedition to explore the feasibility of using the Colorado River as a navigation route in the Southwest.
The  of the river that flow through the Grand Canyon are largely encompassed by Grand Canyon National Park and are known for their difficult whitewater, separated by pools that reach up to  in depth.
Constructed primarily by Japanese and Mexican laborers, the ditch was considered an engineering marvel when completed in 1890, delivering  across the Continental Divide each year.
Running low on food he turned back.
Dams trapping sediment not only pose damage to river habitat but also threaten future operations of the Colorado River reservoir system.
Beginning in the 17th&nbsp;century, contact with Europeans brought significant changes to the lifestyles of Native Americans in the Colorado River basin.
Between 600 and 700 A.D. they began to employ irrigation on a large scale, and did so more prolifically than any other native group in the Colorado River basin.
Díaz named the Colorado River ''Rio del Tizon'' ("Firebrand River") after seeing a practice used by the local natives for warming themselves.
Both the Gunnison and San Juan rivers, which derive most of their water from Rocky Mountains snowmelt, contribute more water than the Gila did naturally.
In 1540, Hernando de Alarcón and his fleet reached the mouth of the river, intending to provide additional supplies to Coronado's expedition.
Both the Missouri and Arkansas rivers are part of the Mississippi River system.
In the 21st&nbsp;century, there has been renewed interest in restoring a limited water flow to the delta.
Although there was still a surplus of water in the Colorado Basin during the mid-20th century, the Bureau of Reclamation predicted, correctly, that eventually population growth would outstrip the available supply and require the transfer of water from other sources.
Near Tucson, Arizona, "where now there is only powder-dry desert, the grass once reached as high as the head of a man on horse back".
In 1860, anticipating the American Civil War, the Mormons established a number of settlements to grow cotton along the Virgin River in Washington County, Utah.
Cut off from the ocean, the portion of the gulf north of the delta eventually evaporated and formed the Salton Sink, which reached about  below sea level.
Salinity is one of the major issues.
Southwest of there, the northern divide of the Colorado watershed skirts the edge of the Great Basin, bordering on the closed drainage basins of the Great Salt Lake and the Sevier River in central Utah, and other closed basins in southern Utah and Nevada.
'''Native American names for the Colorado River'''
Several expeditions charted the Colorado in the mid-19th&nbsp;century, one of which, led by John Wesley Powell in 1869, was the first to run the rapids of the Grand Canyon.
Because the valley's warm and sunny climate lends to a year-round growing season in addition to the large water supply furnished by the Colorado, the Imperial Valley is now one of the most productive agricultural regions in North America.
Most of the basin is arid, defined by the Sonoran and Mojave deserts and the expanse of the Colorado Plateau, although significant expanses of forest are found in the Rocky Mountains; the Kaibab, Aquarius, and Markagunt plateaus in southern Utah and northern Arizona; the Mogollon Rim through central Arizona; and other smaller mountain ranges and sky islands.
Statistics of the Colorado's longest tributaries
Major engineering of the river basin began around the start of the 20th&nbsp;century, with many guidelines established in a series of domestic and international treaties known as the "Law of the River".
The LCRV is one of the most densely populated areas along the river, and there are numerous towns including Bullhead City, Arizona, Needles, California, and Lake Havasu City, Arizona.
For example, the Gila River – formerly one of the Colorado's largest tributaries – contributes little more than a trickle in most years due to use of its water by cities and farms in central Arizona.
Powell led a second expedition in 1871, this time with financial backing from the U.S. government.
The first humans of the Colorado River basin were likely Paleo-Indians of the Clovis and Folsom cultures, who first arrived on the Colorado Plateau about 12,000 years ago.
The All-American Canal, built as a permanent replacement for the Alamo Canal, is so named because it lies completely within the U.S., unlike its ill–fated predecessor.
As it flows southwest, it gains strength from many small tributaries, as well as larger ones including the Blue, Eagle and Roaring Fork rivers.
In 1922, six U.S. states in the Colorado River basin signed the Colorado River Compact, which divided half of the river's flow to both the Upper Basin (the drainage area above Lee's Ferry, comprising parts of Colorado, New Mexico, Utah, and Wyoming and a small portion of Arizona) and the Lower Basin (Arizona, California, Nevada, and parts of New Mexico and Utah).
In the Imperial Valley, Colorado River water used for irrigation overflows into the New and Alamo rivers and into the Salton Sea.
The river and its tributaries are controlled by an extensive system of dams, reservoirs, and aqueducts, which in most years divert its entire flow to furnish irrigation and municipal water supply for almost 40&nbsp;million people both inside and outside the watershed.
Taylor saw the fact that the Colorado River started outside the border of his state as an "abomination".
In a desperate gamble to close the breach, crews of the Southern Pacific Railroad, whose tracks ran through the valley, attempted to dam the Colorado above the canal, only to see their work demolished by a flash flood.
The river above the junction with the Gunnison River, however, was known variously as the Bunkara River, the North Fork of the Grand River, the Blue River, and the Grand River.
Here, the climate becomes significantly drier than that in the Rocky Mountains, and the river becomes entrenched in progressively deeper gorges of bare rock, beginning with Ruby Canyon and then Westwater Canyon as it enters Utah, now once again heading southwest.
The Colorado's Cataract Canyon and many reaches in the Colorado headwaters are even more heavily used than the Grand Canyon, and about 60,000 boaters run a single  section above Radium, Colorado, each year.
About 30 to 20&nbsp;million years ago, volcanic activity related to the orogeny led to the Mid-Tertiary ignimbrite flare-up, which created smaller formations such as the Chiricahua Mountains in Arizona and deposited massive amounts of volcanic ash and debris over the watershed.
The Spanish introduced sheep and goats to the Navajo, who came to rely heavily on them for meat, milk and wool.
As demands for Colorado River water continue to rise, the level of human development and control of the river continues to generate controversy.
First in November 1850 to January 1851, by its transport schooner, ''Invincible'' under Captain Alfred H. Wilcox and then by its longboat commanded by Lieutenant George Derby.
It is the largest Native American reservation in the United States, encompassing  with a population of over 180,000 as of 2000.
Arizona refused to ratify the Colorado River Compact in 1922 because it feared that California would take too much of the lower basin allotment; in 1944 a compromise was reached in which Arizona would get a firm allocation of , but only if California's  allocation was prioritized during drought years.
Some of these claims have been successful for the Navajo, such as a 2004 settlement in which they received a  allotment from New Mexico.
The Navajo continue to seek expansion of their water rights because of difficulties with the water supply on their reservation; about 40&nbsp;percent of its inhabitants must haul water by truck many miles to their homes.
The first known map to label the main stem as the Colorado was drawn by French cartographer Jacques-Nicolas Bellin in 1743.
In the 1940s, some Hopi and Navajo people were also relocated to this reservation.
Flows at the mouth have steadily declined since the beginning of the 20th&nbsp;century, and in most years after 1960 the Colorado River has run dry before reaching the sea.
This has resulted in more water being allocated to river users than actually flows through the Colorado.
Many later maps showed the headwaters of the Green and Colorado rivers connecting with the Sevier River (Rio San Ysabel) and Utah Lake (Lake Timpanogos) before flowing west through the Sierra Nevada into California.
In early 1905, heavy floods destroyed the headworks of the canal, and water began to flow uncontrolled down the canal towards the Salton Sink.
Downstream, the river enters Marble Canyon, the beginning of the Grand Canyon, passing under the Navajo Bridges on a now southward course.
Negligence caused it to sink at its dock below Fort Yuma, and was then washed away before it could be raised, in the spring flood of 1853.
The four tribes now form a geopolitical body known as the Colorado River Indian Tribes.
Between 1850 and 1854 the U. S. Army explored the lower reach of the Colorado River from the Gulf of California, looking for the river to provide a less expensive route to supply the remote post of Fort Yuma.
Modern studies of tree rings revealed that those three decades were probably the wettest in the past 500 to 1,200 years and that the natural long-term annual flow past Lee's Ferry is probably closer to , as compared to the natural flow at the mouth of .
By 1903, more than  in the valley were under cultivation, supporting a growing population of 4,000.
Four years later, the Navajo signed a treaty that moved them onto a reservation in the Four Corners region that is now known as the Navajo Nation.
Eleven U.S. national parks – Arches, Black Canyon of the Gunnison, Bryce Canyon, Canyonlands, Capitol Reef, Grand Canyon, Mesa Verde, Petrified Forest, Rocky Mountain, Saguaro, and Zion – are in the watershed, in addition to many national forests, state parks, and recreation areas.
Lake Powell and surrounding Glen Canyon National Recreation Area received more than two&nbsp;million visitors per year in 2007, while nearly 7.9&nbsp;million people visited Lake Mead and the Lake Mead National Recreation Area in 2008.
The name ''Tizon'' lasted for the next 200 years, while the name ''Rio Colorado'' ("Red River") was first applied to a tributary of the Gila River, possibly the Verde River, circa 1720.
Colorado River water allocations
It seems intended by nature that the Colorado River, along the greater portion of its lonely and majestic way, shall be forever unvisited and undisturbed."
Brower strongly believed that he was personally responsible for the failure to prevent Glen Canyon's flooding, calling it his "greatest mistake, greatest sin".
Smith called the Colorado the "Seedskeedee", as the Green River in Wyoming was known to fur trappers, correctly believing it to be a continuation of the Green and not a separate river as others believed under the Buenaventura myth.
The second was finally, after a long struggle poled up to Fort Yuma, but what little it carried was soon consumed by the garrison.
The original version of the plan proposed to divert water from the Trinity River in northern California to reduce Southern California's dependence on the Colorado, allowing more water to be pumped, by exchange, to central Arizona.
In contrast, the regulated discharge rates on the lower Colorado below Hoover Dam rarely exceed  or drop below .
After the immediate flooding threat passed, it was realized that a more permanent solution would be needed to rein in the Colorado.
Prior to the completion of Glen Canyon Dam in 1964, the average discharge recorded between 1912 and 1962 was ,  per year.
Most of the major dams in the river basin were built between 1910 and 1970, and the system keystone, Hoover Dam, was completed in 1935.
Since then the river has changed course into the Salton Sink at least three times, transforming it into Lake Cahuilla, which at maximum size flooded up the valley to present-day Indio, California.
The Colorado is joined by over 25 significant tributaries, of which the Green River is the largest by both length and discharge.
Controversy reached a nationwide scale, and the USBR dropped its plans for the Dinosaur dams in exchange for a dam at Flaming Gorge and a raise to an already-proposed dam at Glen Canyon.
Southern Nevada Water Authority called the Colorado River one of the "most controlled, controversial and litigated rivers in the world".
Another section of the river above Moab, known as the Colorado "Daily" or "Fisher Towers Section", is the most visited whitewater run in Utah, with more than 77,000 visitors in 2011 alone.
The Navajo were an Athabaskan people who migrated from the north into the Colorado River basin around 1025 A.D.
Annual precipitation averages , ranging from over  in some areas of the Rockies to just  along the Mexican reach of the river.
One reason Lee chose to run the ferry was to flee from Mormon leaders who held him responsible for the Mountain Meadows Massacre, in which 120 emigrants in a wagon train were killed by a local militia disguised as Native Americans.
At Topock, Arizona, about  upstream from the Gulf, a maximum historical discharge of  was recorded in 1884 and a minimum of  was recorded in 1935.
These sedentary peoples heavily exploited their surroundings, practicing logging and harvesting of other resources on a large scale.
The pesticide issue is even greater in streams and water bodies near agricultural lands irrigated by the Imperial Irrigation District with Colorado River water.
Francisco Vásquez de Coronado's 1540–1542 expedition began as a search for the fabled Cities of Gold, but after learning from natives in New Mexico of a large river to the west, he sent García López de Cárdenas to lead a small contingent to find it.
The Apache, Maricopa, Pima, Havasupai and Hualapai are among many other groups that lived along or had territories bordering on the Colorado River and its tributaries.
There was also the concern that drought could impair the upper basin's ability to deliver the required  past Lee's Ferry per year as stipulated by the compact.
Reduced flows have led to increases in the concentration of certain substances in the lower river that have impacted water quality.
The uplift of the Sierra Nevada mountains began about 4.5&nbsp;million years ago, diverting the Colorado southwards towards the Gulf.
Very little human activity occurred in the watershed until the rise of the Desert Archaic Culture, which from 8,000 to 2,000 years ago constituted most of the region's human population.
A further 40 species that occur in the river today, notably the brown trout, were introduced during the 19th and 20th&nbsp;centuries, mainly for sport fishing.
Beginning in the early centuries A.D., Colorado River basin peoples began to form large agriculture-based societies, some of which lasted hundreds of years and grew into well-organized civilizations encompassing tens of thousands of inhabitants.
The resulting Central Arizona Project (CAP) irrigates more than  and provides municipal supplies to over 5&nbsp;million people from Phoenix to Tucson using water from the Colorado River.
Meanwhile, large-scale development was also beginning on the opposite end of the Colorado River.
One of the earliest water projects in the Colorado River basin was the Grand Ditch, a  diversion canal that sends water from the Never Summer Mountains, which would naturally have drained into the headwaters of the Colorado River, to bolster supplies in Colorado's Front Range Urban Corridor.
In autumn, the river would drop below the level of the canal inlet, and temporary brush diversion dams had to be constructed.
Agricultural and urban growth in Arizona eventually outstripped the capacity of local rivers; these concerns were reflected in the creation of a Pacific Southwest Water Plan in the 1950s, which aimed to build a project that would permit Arizona to fully utilize its  allotment of the river.
After entering Mexico, the Colorado approaches the mostly dry Colorado River Delta at the tip of the Gulf of California between Baja California and Sonora.
In time, flash floods caused significant downcutting on irrigation canals, which in turn led to the entrenchment of the original streams into arroyos, making agriculture difficult.
A variety of methods were employed to combat these problems, including the construction of large dams, but when a megadrought hit the region in the 14th&nbsp;century A.D. the ancient civilizations of the Colorado River basin abruptly collapsed.
Below here, all of the remaining flow is diverted to irrigate the Mexicali Valley, leaving a dry riverbed from Morelos Dam to the sea that is supplemented by intermittent flows of irrigation drainage water.
Later Lieutenant Derby, in his expedition report, recommended that a shallow draft sternwheel steamboat would be the way to send supplies up river to the fort.
Some arid regions of the watershed, such as the upper Green River valley in Wyoming, Canyonlands National Park in Utah and the San Pedro River valley in Arizona and Sonora, supported extensive reaches of grassland roamed by large mammals such as buffalo and antelope as late as the 1860s.
When these plans were publicized, the environmental movement – still reeling from the Glen Canyon controversy – successfully lobbied against the project.
These and nine other decisions, compacts, federal acts and agreements made between 1922 and 1973 form what is now known as the Law of the River.
The United States Geological Survey (USGS) operates or has operated 46 stream gauges to measure the discharge of the Colorado River, ranging from the headwaters near Grand Lake to the Mexico–U.S.
The rapids of the Green River's Gray and Desolation Canyons and the less difficult "Goosenecks" section of the lower San Juan River are also frequently traversed by boaters.
The Mohave were expelled from their territory after a series of minor skirmishes and raids on wagon trains passing through the area in the late 1850s, culminating in an 1859 battle with American forces that concluded the Mohave War.
Joseph C. Ives, who surveyed the lower river in 1861, wrote that "the shifting of the channel, the banks, the islands, the bars is so continual and rapid that a detailed description, derived from the experiences of one trip, would be found incorrect, not only during the subsequent year, but perhaps in the course of a week, or even a day."
The construction of dams has often had negative impacts on tribal peoples, such as the Chemehuevi when their riverside lands were flooded after the completion of Parker Dam in 1938.
Arcing northwest, the Colorado begins to cut across the eponymous Colorado Plateau, a vast area of high desert centered at the Four Corners of the southwestern United States.
In 1870, the Mohave were relocated to a reservation at Fort Mojave, which spans the borders of Arizona, California and Nevada.
Sierra Club leader David Brower fought the dam both during the construction and for many years afterwards until his death in 2000.
Under Brigham Young's grand vision for a "vast empire in the desert", (the State of Deseret) Mormon settlers were among the first whites to establish a permanent presence in the watershed, Fort Clara or Fort Santa Clara, in the winter of 1855-1856 along the Santa Clara River, tributary of the Virgin River.
Missionaries sought to convert indigenous peoples to Christianity – an effort sometimes successful, such as in Father Eusebio Francisco Kino's 1694 encounter with the "docile Pimas of the Gila Valley who readily accepted Father Kino and his Christian teachings".
