In Colorado marijuana sales generate high amounts of tax money to be used for repairs, schools etc.
There are some street intersections in Colorado with a different sales tax rate on each corner, sometimes substantially different.
Between the 1880s and 1930s, Denver's floriculture industry developed into a major industry in Colorado.
The Lindenmeier Site in Larimer County contains artifacts dating from approximately 11200 BC to 3000 BC.
The present-day Swift packed meat of Greeley evolved from Monfort of Colorado, Inc., established in 1930.
In August 2014, Colorado began to issue driver licenses to aliens not lawfully in the United States who lived in Colorado.
The Colorado Mineral Belt, stretching from the San Juan Mountains in the southwest to Boulder and Central City on the front range, contains most of the historic gold- and silver-mining districts of Colorado.
The city of Grand Junction, Colorado is the largest city on the Western Slope.
The area is known for its abundant sunshine and cool, clear nights, which give this area a great average diurnal temperature range.
On November 6, 2012, voters amended the state constitution to protect "personal use" of marijuana for adults, establishing a framework to regulate marijuana in a manner similar to alcohol.
The summit of Mount Elbert at  elevation in Lake County is the highest point in Colorado and the Rocky Mountains of North America.
The average July temperature is 55&nbsp;°F (13&nbsp;°C) in the morning and 90&nbsp;°F (32&nbsp;°C) in the afternoon.
On March 28, the Coloradans and local New Mexico volunteers stopped the Texans at the Battle of Glorieta Pass, destroyed their cannon and supply wagons, and ran off 500 of their horses and mules.
Denver International Airport (DIA) is the fourth busiest domestic U.S. airport and thirteenth busiest world airport DIA handles by far the largest volume of commercial air traffic in Colorado, and is the busiest U.S. hub airport between Chicago and the Pacific coast, making Denver the most important airport for connecting passenger traffic in the western United States.
The TV Series, Good Luck Charlie was being filmed in Denver, Colorado.
The Eastern Plains are part of the extreme western portion of Tornado Alley; some damaging tornadoes in the Eastern Plains include the 1990 Limon F3 tornado and the 2008 Windsor EF3 tornado, which devastated the small town.
The northwestern corner of Colorado is a sparsely populated region, and it contains part of the noted Dinosaur National Monument, which is not only a paleontological area, but is also a scenic area of rocky hills, canyons, arid desert, and streambeds.
Instead, the Compromise of 1850 divided the Mexican Cession and the northwestern claims of Texas into a new state and two new territories, the state of California, the Territory of New Mexico, and the Territory of Utah.
In presidential politics, Colorado was considered a reliably Republican state during the post-World War II era, only voting for the Democratic candidate in 1948, 1964 and 1992.
The Apache and the Comanche also inhabited Eastern and Southeastern parts of the state.
Colorado, Wyoming and Utah are the only states which have boundaries defined solely by lines of latitude and longitude.
Grand Junction is located along Interstate 70, the only major highway in Western Colorado.
Extreme weather changes are common in Colorado, although the majority of extreme weather occurs in the least populated areas of the state.
West of the plains and foothills, the weather of Colorado is much less uniform.
There are also certain county and special district taxes that may apply.
A magnitude 5.7 earthquake was recorded in 1973.
The climate of the Eastern Plains is semiarid (Köppen climate classification: ''BSk'') with low humidity and moderate precipitation, usually from  annually.
Denver is the capital and the most populous city of Colorado.
** An 11-member board of directors oversees the distributions in accordance with the Colorado Revised Statutes.
* Local Improvement Districts (LID) within designated areas of southeast Jefferson and Boulder counties
Colorado's marijuana industry sold 996 million dollars worth of marijuana in 2015.
* Regional Transportation Authority (RTA) taxes at varying rates in Basalt, Carbondale, Glenwood Springs, Gunnison County
* 7.2% Some Other Race
The original boundaries of Colorado remain unchanged today.
Democrats are strongest in metropolitan Denver, the college towns of Fort Collins and Boulder, southern Colorado (including Pueblo), and a few western ski resort counties.
Drainage water west of the Continental Divide flows to the southwest via the Colorado River and the Green River into the Gulf of California.
The Territory of Colorado was organized on February 28, 1861, and on August 1, 1876, U.S. President Ulysses S. Grant signed Proclamation 230 admitting Colorado to the Union as the 38th state.
Unlike most other states, southern Colorado is not always warmer than northern Colorado.
Colorado suffered greatly through the Great Depression and the Dust Bowl of the 1930s, but a major wave of immigration following World War II boosted Colorado's fortune.
Uranium price increases from 2001 to 2007 prompted a number of companies to revive uranium mining in Colorado.
On April 12, 1861, South Carolina artillery opened fire on Fort Sumter to start the American Civil War.
Real estate and personal business property are taxable in Colorado.
* Colorado's 6th congressional district – Mike Coffman (Republican) 2009–
In 1867, the Union Pacific Railroad laid its tracks west to Weir, now Julesburg, in the northeast corner of the Territory.
Some 14.06% of those births involved a non-Hispanic white person and someone of a different race, most often with a couple including one Hispanic.
Colorado has a high proportion of Hispanic, mostly Mexican-American, citizens in Metropolitan Denver, Colorado Springs, as well as the smaller cities of Greeley and Pueblo, and elsewhere.
Colorado has the 5th largest population of Mexican-Americans behind California, Texas, Arizona, and Illinois.
In 1859, a U.S. Army topographic expedition led by Captain John Macomb located the confluence of the Green River with the Grand River in what is now Canyonlands National Park in Utah.
The point where the Arikaree River flows out of Yuma County, Colorado, and into Cheyenne County, Kansas, is the lowest point in Colorado at  elevation.
Denver is known for steak, but now has a diverse culinary scene with many top-tier restaurants.
Thunderstorms are common east of the Continental Divide in the spring and summer, yet are usually brief.
* Colorado's 3rd congressional district – Scott Tipton (Republican) 2011–
The plains are also susceptible to occasional floods, which are caused both by thunderstorms and by the rapid melting of snow in the mountains during warm weather.
The State of Colorado is divided into 64 counties.
After 11 years of war, Spain finally recognized the independence of Mexico with the Treaty of Córdoba signed on August 24, 1821.
* United States Senate Class 3 – Michael Bennet (Democratic) 2009–
'''55.47%''' ''619,205
These basins, particularly the San Luis Valley, lie along the Rio Grande Rift, a major geological formation of the Rocky Mountains, and its branches.
However, some of the mountainous regions of Colorado receive a huge amount of moisture from winter snowfalls.
Southwest and southern Colorado are a complex mixture of desert and mountain areas.
The Cherry Hills Country Club has hosted several professional golf tournaments, including the U.S. Open, U.S. Senior Open, U.S. Women's Open, PGA Championship and BMW Championship.
The mountain climate ensures warm summer days and cool nights.
Colorado's primary mode of transportation (in terms of passengers) is its highway system.
The area of northern Colorado near the between the cities of Denver, Boulder, and Fort Collins is known as the "Napa Valley of Beer" due to its high density of craft breweries.
However, price drops and financing problems in late 2008 forced these companies to cancel or scale back uranium-mining projects.
On September 14, 1864, James Huff discovered silver near Argentine Pass, the first of many silver strikes.
With the adoption of their 64th state amendment In 2013 Colorado became the first state in the union to legalize the medicinal (2000), industrial (2013), and recreational (2014) use of marijuana.
Interstate&nbsp;25 (I-25) is the primary north–south highway in the state, connecting Pueblo, Colorado Springs, Denver, and Fort Collins, and extending north to Wyoming and south to New Mexico.
This region with Denver at its center had an estimated population of 4,495,181 on July 1, 2012, an increase of +3.73% since the 2010 United States Census.
* Colorado's 1st congressional district – Diana DeGette (Democratic) 1997–
Boulder, and Colorado in general, is home to a number of national food and beverage companies, top-tier restaurants and farmers' markets.
This region is partially protected from prevailing storms that blow in from the Pacific Ocean region by the high Rockies in the middle of Colorado.
About 75% of the precipitation falls within the growing season, from April to September, but this area is very prone to droughts.
Denver's record in 1901 for the number of consecutive days above  90&nbsp;°F (32&nbsp;°C) was broken during the summer of 2008.
Colorado is part of the Western United States, the Southwestern United States, and the Mountain States.
On August 22, 2011, a 5.3 magnitude earthquake occurred nine miles west-southwest of the city of Trinidad.
** As directed by statute, SCFD recipient organizations are currently divided into three "tiers" among which receipts are allocated by percentage.
The object of this Western Campaign was to seize or disrupt the gold fields of Colorado and California and to seize ports on the Pacific Ocean for the Confederacy.
Southern, Southwestern, and Southeastern Colorado has a large number of Hispanos, the descendants of the early Mexican settlers of colonial Spanish origin.
The state was named for the Colorado River, which Spanish travelers named the ''Río Colorado'' for the ruddy () silt the river carried from the mountains.
Most American settlers traveling overland west to the Oregon Country, namely the new goldfields of California, or the new Mormon settlements of the State of Deseret in the Salt Lake Valley, avoided the rugged Southern Rocky Mountains, and instead followed the North Platte River and Sweetwater River to South Pass (Wyoming), the lowest crossing of the Continental Divide between the Southern Rocky Mountains and the Central Rocky Mountains.
Hail is a common sight in the mountains east of the divide and in the northwest part of the state.
Mexico eventually ratified the Adams-Onís Treaty in 1831.
Its isolated peak is visible from nearly the Kansas border on clear days, and also far to the north and the south.
Here, the Green River briefly crosses over into Colorado.
Colorado is the 8th most extensive and the 22nd most populous of the 50 United States.
The Union Pacific linked up with the Central Pacific Railroad at Promontory Summit, Utah, on May 10, 1869, to form the First Transcontinental Railroad.
Colorado has significant hydrocarbon resources.
The 30 highest major summits of the Rocky Mountains of North America all lie within the state.
Colorado is home to two designated American Viticultural Areas of the Grand Valley AVA and the West Elks AVA, where most of the vineyards in the state are located.
The Ute people were removed from the San Juans the following year.
Water flowing out of the Colorado Rocky Mountains is a very significant source of water for the farms, towns, and cities of the southwest states of New Mexico, Arizona, Utah, and Nevada, as well as the Midwest, such as Nebraska and Kansas, and the southern states of Oklahoma and Texas.
Notable peaks of the Rocky Mountains include Longs Peak, Mount Evans, Pikes Peak, and the Spanish Peaks near Walsenburg, in southern Colorado.
In 2011, 46% of Colorado's population younger than the age of one were minorities, meaning that they had at least one parent who was not non-Hispanic white.
Other industries include food processing, transportation equipment, machinery, chemical products, the extraction of metals such as gold (see Gold mining in Colorado), silver, and molybdenum.
This point, which holds the distinction of being the highest low elevation point of any state, is higher than the high elevation points of 18 states and the District of Columbia.
This tier receives 13.5%.
The gold seekers organized the Provisional Government of the Territory of Jefferson on August 24, 1859, but this new territory failed to secure approval from the Congress of the United States embroiled in the debate over slavery.
This period became known locally as the Carnation Gold Rush.
As a general rule, with an increase in elevation comes a decrease in temperature and an increase in precipitation.
The Regional Transportation District (RTD) operates the popular RTD Bus & Light Rail transit system in the Denver Metropolitan Area.
A hastily organized force of Colorado volunteers force-marched from Denver City, Colorado Territory, to Glorieta Pass, New Mexico Territory, in an attempt to block the Texans.
The state has sizable numbers of Asian-Americans of Mongolian, Chinese, Filipino, Korean, Southeast Asian and Japanese descent.
At times, the Arapaho Nation and the Cheyenne Nation moved west to hunt across the High Plains.
The Macomb party designated the confluence as the source of the Colorado River.
Spanish is the second-most-spoken language in Colorado, after English .
The famous Pikes Peak is located just west of Colorado Springs.
On April 9, 1851, Mexican American settlers from the area of Taos settled the village of San Luis, then in the New Mexico Territory, later to become Colorado's first permanent Euro-American settlement.
'''Colorado''' (, or ) (Spanish for "ruddy") is a state in the United States encompassing most of the Southern Rocky Mountains as well as the northeastern portion of the Colorado Plateau and the western edge of the Great Plains.
However, it became a competitive swing state by the turn of the century, and voted consecutively for Democrat Barack Obama in 2008 and 2012.
Colorado's most populous city, and capital, is Denver.
The center of population of Colorado is located just north of the village of Critchell in Jefferson County.
In 1806, Zebulon Pike led a U.S. Army reconnaissance expedition into the disputed region.
According to the 2010 United States Census, Colorado had a population of 5,029,196.
Colorado is one of four states in the United States that share a common geographic point the Four Corners together with Arizona, New Mexico, and Utah.
The North Park is drained by the North Platte River, which flows north into Wyoming and Nebraska.
Per capita personal income in 2010 was $51 940, ranking Colorado 11th in the nation.
The Eastern Plains have had some of the biggest hail storms in North America.
Colorado now also has the largest annual production of beer of any state.
The most populous extended metropolitan region in Rocky Mountain Region is the Front Range Urban Corridor along the northeast face of the Southern Rocky Mountains.
Three warships of the U.S. Navy have been named the USS ''Colorado''.
The state's senior property tax exemption was temporarily suspended by the Colorado Legislature in 2003.
A little less than one half of the area of Colorado is flat and rolling land.
A relatively large population of African Americans are also found in Colorado Springs on the east and southeast side of the city.
People of Hispanic and Latino American (of any race made) heritage, made up 20.7% of the population.
There are no currently producing uranium mines in Colorado.
* 4.0% Black or African American
A birth where at least one Hispanic person was involved counted for 43% of the births in Colorado.
In 2007, non-Hispanic whites were involved in 59.1% of all the births.
* 20.7% Hispanic and Latino American (of any race) heritage
The Confederacy made no further attempts to seize the Southwestern United States.
Colorado's grape growing regions contain the highest elevation vineyards in the United States, with most viticulture in the state practiced between  above sea level.
The average January temperature is 18&nbsp;°F (−8&nbsp;°C) in the morning and 48&nbsp;°F (9&nbsp;°C) in the afternoon, although variation between consecutive days can be 40&nbsp;°F (20&nbsp;°C).
The climate of Colorado is more complex than states outside of the Mountain States region.
The later two ships were named in honor of the state, including the battleship USS ''Colorado'' which served in World War II in the Pacific beginning in 1941.
Corn, wheat, hay, soybeans, and oats are all typical crops, and most of the villages and towns in this region boast both a water tower and a grain elevator.
Having lost the supplies for their campaign and finding little support in New Mexico, the Texans abandoned Santa Fe and returned to San Antonio in defeat.
To the west of the Great Plains of Colorado rises the eastern slope of the Rocky Mountains.
Some of these districts have authority to levy sales tax and well as property tax and use fees.
The "Front Range" includes Denver, Boulder, Fort Collins, Loveland, Colorado Springs, Pueblo, Greeley and other townships and municipalities in between.
Early industry was based on the extraction and processing of minerals and agricultural products.
Higher education in and near the Western Slope can be found at Colorado Mesa University in Grand Junction, Western State College of Colorado in Gunnison, Fort Lewis College in Durango, and Colorado Mountain College in Glenwood Springs and Steamboat Springs.
The Food & Wine Classic is held annually each June in Aspen, Colorado.
Thirty days later on February 28, 1861, outgoing U.S. President James Buchanan signed an Act of Congress organizing the free Territory of Colorado.
The United States Census Bureau estimated that the population of Colorado exceeded five million in 2009.
+ '''Colorado Racial Breakdown of Population'''
The Continental Divide of the Americas extends along the crest of the Rocky Mountains.
In 1940, the Census Bureau reported Colorado's population as 8.2% Hispanic and 90.3% non-Hispanic white.
Also prominent in or near the southern portion of the Western Slope are the Grand Mesa, which lies to the southeast of Grand Junction; the high San Juan Mountains, a rugged mountain range; and to the west of the San Juan Mountains, the Colorado Plateau, a high arid region that borders Southern Utah.
The borders of Colorado were originally defined to be lines of latitude and longitude, making its shape a latitude-longitude quadrangle which stretches from 37°N to 41°N latitude and from 102°03'W to 109°03'W longitude (25°W to 32°W from the Washington Meridian).
Humid microclimates also exist in some areas.
Colorado is considered a swing state in both state and federal elections.
The mountains have mild summers with many days of high temperatures between 60 and 85&nbsp;°F (16 and 29&nbsp;°C), although thunderstorms can cause sudden but brief drops in temperature.
The state legislative body is the Colorado General Assembly, which is made up of two houses, the House of Representatives and the Senate.
In 1862, a force of Texas cavalry invaded the Territory of New Mexico and captured Santa Fe on March 10.
Two of these counties, the City and County of Denver and the City and County of Broomfield, have consolidated city and county governments.
The name Colorado was chosen because it was commonly believed that the Colorado River originated in the territory.
The Denver Pacific Railway reached Denver in June the following year, and the Kansas Pacific arrived two months later to forge the second line across the continent.
Rocky Mountain Chocolate Factory made its first candy in Durango in 1981.
There are also a number of established film festivals in Colorado, including Aspen Shortsfest, Boulder International Film Festival, Castle Rock Film Festival, Denver Film Festival, Festivus film festival, Mile High Horror Film Festival, Moondance International Film Festival, Mountainfilm in Telluride, Rocky Mountain Women's Film Festival, and Telluride Film Festival.
Boulder, Colorado also has more Master Sommeliers per capita than any other city, including San Francisco and New York.
* 81.3% White American (70.0% Non-Hispanic White, 11.3% Hispanic white)
In September 2014, KCNC reported that 524 non-citizens were issued licenses issued to U.S. Citizens living in Colorado.
While many gold seekers held sympathies for the Confederacy, the vast majority remained fiercely loyal to the Union cause.
The winters bring abundant, powdery snowfall to the mountains with plenty of sunshine between major storms.
In 1864, Territorial Governor John Evans appointed the Reverend John Chivington as Colonel of the Colorado Volunteers with orders to protect white settlers from Cheyenne and Arapaho warriors who were accused of stealing cattle.
Aspen also has a reputation as the culinary capital of the Rocky Mountain region.
In 1854, Senator Stephen A. Douglas persuaded the U.S. Congress to divide the unorganized territory east of the Continental Divide into two new organized territories, the Territory of Kansas and the Territory of Nebraska, and an unorganized southern region known as the Indian territory.
Mountains and surrounding valleys greatly affect local climate.
From west to east, the land of Colorado consists of desert lands, desert plateaus, alpine mountains, National Forests, relatively flat grasslands, scattered forests, buttes, and canyons in the western edge of the Great Plains.
*** Tier II currently includes 26 regional organizations.
Celestial Seasonings herbal teas have been made in Boulder since 1969.
City and County of Denver
I-70 is the primary east–west corridor.
, creating the largest railroad network in the United States.
In 1776, Spanish priest Silvestre Vélez de Escalante recorded that Native Americans in the area knew the river as ''el Rio Colorado'' for the red-brown silt that the river carried from the mountains.
In 2015, Furious 7 to film driving sequences Pikes Peak Highway in Colorado.
In much of the region, March is the snowiest month.
* The Scientific and Cultural Facilities District (SCFD), a special regional tax district with physical boundaries contiguous with county boundaries of Adams, Arapahoe, Boulder, Broomfield, Denver, Douglas, and Jefferson Counties
By 2012, Hispanics made up 21% of Colorado's population, and Non-Hispanic Whites made up 69%.
*** Tier III has over 280 local organizations such as small theaters, orchestras, art centers, and natural history, cultural history, and community groups.
* Colorado's 7th congressional district – Ed Perlmutter (Democratic) 2007–
The treaty took effect February 22, 1821.
Generally, the wettest season in western Colorado is winter while June is the driest month.
There are also a number of scenic highways and mountain passes that helped to feature the open road in films such as ''Vanishing Point'', ''Bingo'' and ''Starman''.
Tier III organizations apply for funding to the county cultural councils via a grant process.
In southmost Colorado is the large San Luis Valley, where the headwaters of the Rio Grande are located.
** It is a 0.1% retail sales and use tax (one penny on every $10).
The Front Range urban corridor, where most of the population of Colorado resides, lies in a pronounced precipitation shadow as a result of being on the lee side of the Rocky Mountains.
* 3.4% Multiracial American
Grand Junction and Durango are the only major centers of television broadcasting west of the Continental Divide in Colorado, though most mountain resort communities publish daily newspapers.
'''49.06%''' ''648,202
White (includes White Hispanics)
The Bureau of Economic Analysis estimates that the total state product in 2010 was $257.6 billion.
Denver is an important financial center.
Seven board members are appointed by county commissioners (in Denver, the Denver City Council) and four members are appointed by the Governor of Colorado.
The United States Census Bureau estimates that the population of Colorado was 5,456,574 on July 1, 2015, a 8.5% increase since the 2010 United States Census.
Current agricultural products are cattle, wheat, dairy products, corn, and hay.
The Ancient Pueblo peoples lived in the valleys and mesas of the Colorado Plateau.
The Sherman Silver Purchase Act of 1890 invigorated silver mining, and Colorado's last, but greatest, gold strike at Cripple Creek a few months later lured a new generation of gold seekers.
