A third of all German TV productions are made in the Cologne region.
The airport is also the main hub of the airline Germanwings.
The Lord Mayor of Cologne is Henriette Reker.
** Cologne University of Applied Sciences (''Fachhochschule Köln'');
** European Astronaut Centre (''EAC'') of the European Space Agency;
Exhibitions range from local ancient Roman archeological sites to contemporary graphics and sculpture.
The archbishop nevertheless preserved the right of capital punishment.
During the 19th and 20th centuries, Cologne absorbed numerous surrounding towns, and by World War&nbsp;I had already grown to 700,000 inhabitants.
By the end of the war, essentially all of Cologne's pre-war Jewish population of 11,000 had been deported or killed by the Nazis.
Zülpicher Strasse and its surroundings, Neumarkt square, Heumarkt and all bars and pubs in the city are crowded with people in costumes dancing and drinking in the streets.
In 1965, Cologne became the first German city to be fully encircled by a motorway ringroad.
''Häfen und Güterverkehr Köln'' (Ports and Goods traffic Cologne, HGK) is one of the largest operators of inland ports in Germany.
Other large companies based in Cologne include the REWE Group, TÜV Rheinland, Deutz AG and a number of Kölsch breweries.
Cologne also hosts FC Viktoria Köln 1904 and SC Fortuna Köln, who play in the Regionalliga West (fourth division) respectively the 3.
File:Rheinenergiestadion Köln (23071187383).jpg|thumb|Rheinenergiestadion Cologne
ICE and TGV Thalys high-speed trains link Cologne with Amsterdam, Brussels (in 1h47, 9 departures/day) and Paris (in 3h14, 6 departures/day).
Since the second half of the 16th century the archbishops were drawn from the Bavaria Wittelsbach dynasty.
According to local statistics, in 2006 the population density in the city was 2,528 inhabitants per square kilometre.
The famous Roman-Germanic Museum features art and architecture from the city's distant past; the Museum Ludwig houses one of the most important collections of modern art in Europe, including a Picasso collection matched only by the museums in Barcelona and Paris.
Cologne is one of the warmest cities in Germany.
With the intention of restoring as many historic buildings as possible, the successful postwar rebuilding has resulted in a very mixed and unique cityscape.
Many art galleries in Collogne enjoy an worldwide reputation like e.g.
The synagogue on Roonstraße was rebuilt in 1959.
Thus, the city today is characterized by simple and modest post-war buildings, with a few interspersed pre-war buildings which were reconstructed due to their historical importance.
They are (from South to North): the Cologne Rodenkirchen Bridge, South Bridge (railway), Severin Bridge, Deutz Bridge, Hohenzollern Bridge (railway), Zoo Bridge (''Zoobrücke'') and Cologne Mülheim Bridge.
* Public and state universities:
The city was home to around 20,000 people in 1000&nbsp;AD, growing to 50,000 in 1200&nbsp;AD.
Generally, around a million people celebrate in the streets on the Thursday before Ash Wednesday.
The inner city of Cologne was completely destroyed during World War&nbsp;II.
Hundreds of thousands of visitors flock to Cologne during this time.
As members of an influential and powerful family, and supported by their outstanding status as electors, the archbishops of Cologne repeatedly challenged and threatened the free status of Cologne during the 17th and 18th centuries, resulting in complicated affairs, which were handled by diplomatic means and propaganda as well as by the supreme courts of the Holy Roman Empire.
In 2014 it ranked 36th out of 39 German cities with a population greater than 200,000.
The French modernised public life, for example by introducing the Napoleonic code and removing the old elites from power.
Schwarz designed the master plan for reconstruction in 1947, which included the construction of several new thoroughfares through the city centre, especially the ''Nord-Süd-Fahrt'' ("North-South-Drive").
Toyota Motorsport GmbH (TMG), Toyota's official motorsports team, responsible for Toyota rally cars, and then Formula One cars, has its headquarters and workshops in Cologne.
There are several centres of nightlife, among them the ''Kwartier Latäng'' (the student quarter around the Zülpicher Straße) and the nightclub-studded areas around Hohenzollernring, Friesenplatz and Rudolfplatz.
In 1919 the University of Cologne, closed by the French in 1798, was reopened.
The military demands on what became Germany's largest fortress presented a significant obstacle to urban development, with forts, bunkers, and wide defensive dugouts completely encircling the city and preventing expansion; this resulted in a very densely built-up area within the city itself.
Former colleges include:
Pigeons are the most often seen animals in Cologne, although the number of birds is augmented each year by a growing population of feral exotics, most visibly parrots such as the rose-ringed parakeet.
In 1945 architect and urban planner Rudolf Schwarz called Cologne the "world's greatest heap of rubble".
Today, this is the Bundesautobahn 555.
** Max Planck Institute for the Study of Societies (''Max-Planck-Institut für Gesellschaftsforschung'');
The city became - and still is - home to a number of federal agencies and organizations.
The bombing reduced the population by 95%, mainly due to evacuation, and destroyed almost the entire city.
** Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research (''Max-Planck-Institut für Züchtungsforschung'').
A city agency (''Stadtentwässerungsbetriebe Köln'', "Cologne Urban Drainage Operations") manages an extensive flood control system which includes both permanent and mobile flood walls, protection from rising waters for buildings close to the river banks, monitoring and forecasting systems, pumping stations and programmes to create or protect floodplains, and river embankments.
This has led to the common joke of Kölsch being the only language one can drink.
They play their home matches in RheinEnergieStadion which also hosted 5 matches of the 2006 FIFA World Cup.
Besides its economic and political significance Cologne also became an important centre of medieval pilgrimage, when Cologne's Archbishop Rainald of Dassel gave the relics of the Three Wise Men to Cologne's cathedral in 1164 (after they in fact had been captured from Milan).
They are based at the Lanxess Arena.
In Cologne, the carnival season officially starts on 11 November at 11 minutes past 11&nbsp;a.m. with the proclamation of the new Carnival Season, and continues until Ash Wednesday.
Cologne has a railway service with Deutsche Bahn InterCity and ICE-trains stopping at ''Köln Hauptbahnhof'' (Cologne Main Station), ''Köln Messe/Deutz'' and ''Cologne/Bonn Airport''.
By the end of 1945, however, the population had already recovered to approximately 500,000.
The same happened in many other German cities in the last two years of war.
The city's administration is headed by the mayor and the three deputy mayors.
Some of this urban growth occurred at the expense of the city's historic heritage with much being demolished (for example, the city walls or the area around the cathedral) and sometimes replaced by contemporary buildings.
In January, the mean temperature is , while the mean temperature in July is .
** Rhenish University of Applied Sciences (''Rheinische Fachhochschule Köln'')
Thus this region later became part of Napoleon's Empire.
The large annual literary festival Lit.
Galerie Karsten Greve, one of the leading galleries for postwar and contemporary art.
Among the insurance companies based in Cologne are Central, DEVK, DKV, Generali Deutschland, Mitsui Sumitomo Insurance Group, Gothaer, HDI Gerling and national headquarters of AXA Insurance and Zurich Financial Services.
The long tradition of a free imperial city, which long dominated an exclusively Catholic population and the age-old conflict between the church and the bourgeoisie (and within it between the patricians and craftsmen) has created its own political climate in Cologne.
Roman imperial governors resided in the city and it became one of the most important trade and production centres in the Roman Empire north of the Alps.
In 1803 Wilhelm Mülhens entered into a contract with an unrelated person from Italy named Carlo Francesco Farina who granted him the right to use his family name and Mühlens opened a small factory at Cologne's Glockengasse.
This was considered to be a replacement for the loss of the University of Strasbourg on the west bank of the Rhine, which reverted to France with the rest of Alsace.
Several clusters of media, arts and communications agencies, TV production studios, and state agencies work partly with private and government-funded cultural institutions.
The reconstruction lasted until the 1990s, when the Romanesque church of St.&nbsp;Kunibert was finished.
Parts of the original Roman sewers are preserved underneath the city, with the new sewerage system having opened in 1890.
Some buildings of the "Wiederaufbauzeit" (era of reconstruction), for example the opera house by Wilhelm Riphahn, are nowadays regarded as classics of modern architecture.
File:Luftbildaufnahme- Colonius Köln und Grüngürtel (23458864819).jpg|thumb|Colonius Cologne
The city has five Rhine ports, the second largest inland port in Germany and one of the largest in Europe.
The tradition of these troops is preserved as a military persiflage by Cologne's most outstanding carnival society, the ''Rote Funken''.
Several bridges cross the Rhine in Cologne.
* Public and state colleges:
Cologne is a major cultural centre for the Rhineland; it hosts more than thirty museums and hundreds of galleries.
Various interest groups often form networks beyond party boundaries.
At the same time the original buildings, which date back to the 1920s, were rented out to RTL, Germany's largest private broadcaster, as their new corporate headquarters.
Cologne has several museums.
Cologne competed to host the Olympics, and a modern sports stadium was erected at Müngersdorf.
FC Köln, who play in the Bundesliga.
In contrast with the harsh behaviour of the French occupation troops in Germany, the British forces were more lenient to the local population.
The public radio and TV station WDR was involved in promoting musical movements such as Krautrock in the 1970s; the influential Can was formed there in 1968.
Plans for new roads had already, to a certain degree, evolved under the Nazi administration, but the actual construction became easier when most of the city centre was in ruins.
* Private colleges:
The plumage of Cologne's green parrots is highly visible even from a distance, and contrasts starkly with the otherwise muted colours of the cityscape.
Precipitation is spread evenly throughout the year.
The first urban settlement on the grounds of modern-day Cologne was ''Oppidum Ubiorum'', founded in 38&nbsp;BC by the Ubii, a Cisrhenian Germanic tribe.
The last section south of ''Ebertplatz'' was completed in 1972.
This included torture, which sentence was only allowed to be handed down by the episcopal judge, the so-called "Greve".
In contrast to this the ''Nord-Süd-Fahrt'' ("North-South-Drive") was actually completed, a new four/six-lane city centre through-route, which had already been anticipated by planners such as Fritz Schumacher in the 1920s.
The rebuilding of those churches and other landmarks such as the Gürzenich event hall was not undisputed among leading architects and art historians at that time, but in most cases, civil intention prevailed.
The Cologne University of Music and Dance is the largest conservatory in Europe.
During World War&nbsp;I Cologne was the target of several minor air raids, but suffered no significant damage.
The Nazis then arrested the Communist and Social Democrats members of the city assembly, and Mayor Adenauer was dismissed.
There are also frequent buses covering most of the city and surrounding suburbs, and Eurolines coaches to London via Brussels.
The free city of Cologne must not be confused with the Archbishopric of Cologne which was a state of its own within the Holy Roman Empire.
Cologne was the focus of the 2015 New Year's Eve sexual assaults, with over 500 women reporting that they were sexually assaulted by persons of African and Arab appearance.
* The Cologne Art and Crafts Schools (''Kölner Werkschulen'');
The Cologne Trade Fair hosts a number of trade shows such as Art Cologne, imm Cologne, Gamescom, and the Photokina.
The rivalry has been described as a "love–hate relationship".
Düsseldorf is also linked by S-Bahn trains which are operated by Deutsche Bahn.
It is also called Konrad Adenauer Airport after Germany's first post-war Chancellor Konrad Adenauer, who was born in the city and was mayor of Cologne from 1917 until 1933.
Cologne is headquarters to the European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA).
Cologne's location on the river Rhine placed it at the intersection of the major trade routes between east and west as well as the main Western Europe trade route, South - North Northern Italy-Flanders.
The completed section became ''Bundesstraße ("Federal Road") B 55a'' which begins at the ''Zoobrücke'' ("Zoo Bridge") and meets with A&nbsp;4 and A&nbsp;3 at the interchange Cologne East.
Industrialisation changed the city and spurred its growth.
The permanent tensions between the Roman Catholic Rhineland and the overwhelmingly Protestant Prussian state repeatedly escalated with Cologne being in the focus of the conflict.
During the Bombing of Cologne in World War II, Cologne endured 262 air raids by the Western Allies, which caused approximately 20,000 civilian casualties and almost completely wiped out the central part of the city.
Cologne was a member of the Hanseatic League in 1475, when Frederick III confirmed the city's imperial immediacy.
31.4 per cent of the population had migrated there, and 17.2 per cent of Cologne's population was non-German.
She received 52.66% of the vote at the municipal election on 17 October 2015 and was appointed on 15 December 2015.
By 1300 the city population were 50,000-55,000.
As part of the demilitarisation of the Rhineland, the city's fortifications had to be dismantled.
The University of Cologne (''Universität zu Köln'') is one of Europe's oldest and largest universities.
A Rhine river crossing of a special kind is provided by the Cologne Cable Car (German: ''Kölner Seilbahn''), a cableway that runs across the Rhine between the Cologne Zoological Garden in Riehl and the Rheinpark in Deutz.
The city's famous Cologne Cathedral (''Kölner Dom'') is the seat of the Catholic Archbishop of Cologne.
The airport is shared with the neighbouring city of Bonn.
** German Sport University Cologne (''Deutsche Sporthochschule Köln'').
** Cologne Business School;
Cologne was home to the 211th Infantry Regiment and the 26th Artillery Regiment.
City Councillors are elected for a five-year term and the Mayor has a six-year term.
Among the largest media companies based in Cologne are Westdeutscher Rundfunk, RTL Television (with subsidiaries), n-tv, Deutschlandradio, Brainpool TV and publishing houses like J.&nbsp;P. Bachem, Taschen, Tandem Verlag, and M.&nbsp;DuMont Schauberg.
Waiters and patrons will "scorn" and make a "mockery" of people who order Alt beer in Cologne and Kölsch in Düsseldorf.
In the 1980s and 1990s Cologne's economy prospered for two main reasons.
With Bonn being chosen as the provisional federal capital (''provisorische Bundeshauptstadt'') and seat of the government of the Federal Republic of Germany (then informally West Germany), Cologne benefited by being sandwiched between two important political centres.
In addition, Cologne enjoys a thriving Christmas Market Weihnachtsmarkt presence with several locations in the city.
In 1874, during the Kulturkampf, Archbishop Paul Melchers was imprisoned before taking refuge in the Netherlands.
** Cologne University of Music and Dance (''Hochschule für Musik und Tanz Köln'');
This was not completed until 1933.
It evolved from the tram system.
However, the so-called "Tolle Tage" (crazy days) do not start until ''Weiberfastnacht'' (Women's Carnival) or, in dialect, ''Wieverfastelovend'', the Thursday before Ash Wednesday, which is the beginning of the street carnival.
Annual output ''in hectoliters''
** Academy of Media Arts Cologne (''Kunsthochschule für Medien Köln'');
Cologne has the country's highest density of pubs per capita.
These conflicts alienated the Catholic population from Berlin and contributed to a deeply felt anti-Prussian resentment, which was still significant after World War II, when the former mayor of Cologne, Konrad Adenauer, became the first West German chancellor.
** Köln International School of Design;
Several horse races per year are held at Cologne-Weidenpesch Racecourse since 1897, the annual Cologne Marathon was started in 1997.
Up until World War II the city had undergone several occupations by the French and also by the British (1918-1926).
The largest group, comprising 6.3 per cent of the total population, was Turkish.
The metropolitan area encompasses over , extending around a central point that lies at 50° 56' 33 latitude and 6° 57' 32 longitude.
During the Middle Ages it flourished on one of the most important major trade routes between east and west in Europe.
The system was redesigned after a 1993 flood, which resulted in heavy damage.
In 2005, the first stretch of an eight-lane motorway in North Rhine-Westphalia was opened to traffic on Bundesautobahn&nbsp;3, part of the eastern section of the Cologne Beltway between the interchanges Cologne East and Heumar.
The largest three Kölsch breweries are Reissdorf, Gaffel, and Früh.
** international filmschool cologne (''internationale filmschule köln'');
Road building had been a major issue in the 1920s under the leadership of mayor Konrad Adenauer.
The first German limited access road was constructed after 1929 between Cologne and Bonn.
Cologne was founded and established in Ubii territory in the first century AD as the Roman ''Colonia Claudia Ara Agrippinensium'', from which it gets its name.
The city was named "''Colonia Claudia Ara Agrippinensium''" in 50&nbsp;AD.
Cologne had 4.31&nbsp;million overnight stays booked and 2.38&nbsp;million arrivals in 2008.
The city has hosted several athletic events which includes the 2005 FIFA Confederations Cup, 2006 FIFA World Cup, 2007 World Men's Handball Championship, 2010 IIHF World Championship and 2010 Gay Games.
Cologne-Bonn Airport is the second largest freight terminal in Germany.
This was an opportunity to create two green belts (''Grüngürtel'') around the city by converting the fortifications and their fields of fire into large public parks.
Cologne is considered "the secret golf capital of Germany".
The Napoleonic code remained in use on the left bank of the Rhine until 1900, when a unified civil code (the ''Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch'') was introduced in the German Empire.
The city is "Germany's capital of TV crime stories".
In later years, and after various court battles, his grandson Ferdinand Mülhens was forced to abandon the name ''Farina'' for the company and their product.
Kölsch is also the name of the local dialect.
Other orchestras are the Musica Antiqua Köln and the WDR Rundfunkorchester Köln, as well as the Cologne Opera and several choirs, including the WDR Rundfunkchor Köln.
The master plan took into consideration the fact that even shortly after the war a large increase in automobile traffic could be anticipated.
It is also one of the cloudiest cities in Germany, with just 1427 hours of sun a year.
These soldiers were part of the Army of the Holy Roman Empire ("Reichskontingent") and fought in the wars of the 17th and 18th century, including the wars against revolutionary France, when the small force was almost completely wiped out in combat.
As they wore a red uniform, these troops were known as the ''Rote Funken'' (red sparks).
Historically, Cologne has always been an important trade city, with land, air, and sea connections.
** European College of Sport Science (''ECSS'');
There are frequent ICE trains to other German cities, including Frankfurt am Main and Berlin.
As of September 2007, there were about 120,000 Muslims living in Cologne, mostly of Turkish origin.
Due to the economic success of the Cologne Trade Fair, the city arranged a large extension to the fair site in 2005.
From 2002 to 2009, the Panasonic Toyota Racing Formula One team was based in the Marsdorf suburb, at the Toyota Motorsport GmbH facility.
Vehicle and engine manufacturing were especially successful, though heavy industry was less ubiquitous than in the Ruhr area.
Cölner Hofbräu Früh
Roughly at the same time a city centre bypass (''Stadtautobahn'') was planned, but only partially put into effect, due to opposition by environmental groups.
Cologne was occupied by the British Army of the Rhine until 1926, under the terms of the Armistice and the subsequent Versailles Peace Treaty.
In particular the iron tied arch Hohenzollern Bridge (''Hohenzollernbrücke'') is a dominant landmark along the river embankment.
The city has 70 clubs, "countless" bars, restaurants, and pubs.
'''Significant foreign born populations'''
** Max Planck Institute for Neurological Research (''Max-Planck-Institut für neurologische Forschung'');
Cologne was under the command of Lieutenant-General Freiherr Roeder von Diersburg, who was responsible for military operations in Bonn, Siegburg, Aachen, Jülich, Düren, and Monschau.
During World War II, Cologne was a Military Area Command Headquarters (''Militärbereichshauptkommandoquartier'') for the Military District (''Wehrkreis'') VI of Münster.
Compared to some other major cities, however, the Nazis never gained decisive support in Cologne.
As a free city, Cologne was a sovereign state within the Holy Roman Empire and as such had the right (and obligation) to maintain its own military force.
Green areas account for over a quarter of Cologne, which is approximately  of public green space for every inhabitant.
This loss was mainly caused by a massive evacuation of the people to more rural areas.
By the end of the war, the population of Cologne had been reduced by 95 per cent.
He decided to use the house number given to the factory at Glockengasse during the French occupation in the early 19th century, 4711.
Cologne prospered during the Weimar Republic (1919–33), and progress was made especially in public governance, city planning, housing and social affairs.
Cologne is located on both sides of the Rhine River, less than eighty kilometres from Belgium.
The German flag carrier Lufthansa and its subsidiary Lufthansa CityLine have their main corporate headquarters in Cologne.
Foreigners can have German lessons in the VHS (Adult Education Centre).
Despite Cologne's status as the largest city in the region, nearby Düsseldorf was chosen as the political capital of the federated state of North Rhine-Westphalia.
gave RheinEnergieStadion a bronze medal for "being one of the best sporting venues in the world".
The Renaissance style loggia and tower were added in the 15th century.
File:Köln gürzenich.jpg|Gürzenich
It then grew steadily, exceeding 1&nbsp;million for about one year from 1975.
Today, original Eau de Cologne is still produced in Cologne by both the Farina family, currently in the eighth generation, and by Mäurer & Wirtz who bought the 4711 brand in 2006.
The Cologne Stadtbahn operated by Kölner Verkehrsbetriebe (KVB) is an extensive light rail system that is partially underground and serves Cologne and a number of neighbouring cities.
The Cologne City Hall (''Kölner Rathaus''), founded in the 12th century, is the oldest city hall in Germany still in use.
In 310 under Constantine a bridge was built over the Rhine at Cologne.
