In some cases, this was a movement of settlers of European origin returning to the land of their birth, or to an ancestral birthplace.
This was caused by a number of reasons.
Colonialism is based on an imperial outlook, thereby creating a consequential relationship.
Therefore, given a more developed civilization and denser population, European colonists would rather keep the existing economic systems than introduce an entirely new system; while in places with little to extract, European colonists would rather establish new economic institutions to protect their interests.
Fox and William Ewart Gladstone.
He states it is, "connected with the intensification of the struggle for the partition of the world".
Following the Scramble for Africa, an early but secondary focus for most colonial regimes was the suppression of slavery and the slave trade.
The sleeping sickness epidemic in Africa was arrested due to mobile teams systematically screening millions of people at risk.
"Colonial Africa fell within that part of the international capitalist economy from which surplus was drawn to feed the metropolitan sector.
This, to Lenin, was the highest stage of capitalism.
The British, French and Dutch joined in the slave trade in subsequent centuries.
The ''European colonial period'' was the era from the 16th century to the mid-20th century when several European powers established colonies in Asia, Africa, and the Americas.
In fact, everywhere where colonial powers established a consistent and continued presence, hybrid communities existed.
A colony is a part of an empire and so colonialism is closely related to imperialism.
British people were by far the most numerous population to migrate to the colonies: 2.5 million settled in Canada; 1.5 million in Australia; 750,000 in New Zealand; 450,000 in the Union of South Africa; and 200,000 in India.
In 1875, measles killed over 40,000 Fijians, approximately one-third of the population.
Global travel and migration in general developed at an increasingly brisk pace throughout the era of European colonial expansion.
This period is also associated with the Commercial Revolution.
At the same time, these institutions are also consequences of political institutions - especially how de facto and de jure political power is allocated.
Maps played an extensive role in colonialism, as Bassett would put it "by providing geographical information in a convenient and standardized format, cartographers helped open West Africa to European conquest, commerce, and colonization".
Under their contract, the servant would work for an employer for a term of at least a year, while the employer agreed to pay for the servant's voyage to the colony, possibly pay for the return to the country of origin, and pay the employee a wage as well.
Non Russian marxists within the RSFSR and later the USSR, like Sultan Galiev and Vasyl Shakhrai,  meanwhile, between 1918 and 1923 and then after 1929, considered the Soviet Regime a renewed version of the Russian imperialism and colonialism.
Smallpox decimated the native population of Australia, killing around 50% of indigenous Australians in the early years of British colonisation.
In the 20th century, the world saw the biggest increase in its population in human history due to lessening of the mortality rate in many countries due to medical advances.
He goes on to state that this form of capitalism was doomed for war between the capitalists and the exploited nations with the former inevitably losing.
Between 1830 and 1930, around 30 million indentured servants migrated from India, and 24 million returned to India.
Political geographers explain how colonial/ imperial powers (countries, groups of people etc.)
Native populations were often relocated at the will of the colonial administrators.
A similar organization exists for former colonies of France, the Francophonie; the Community of Portuguese Language Countries plays a similar role for former Portuguese colonies, and the Dutch Language Union is the equivalent for former colonies of the Netherlands.
In the book, Osterhammel asks, "How can 'colonialism' be defined independently from 'colony?'"
After WWII 300,000 Dutchmen from the Dutch East Indies, of which the majority were people of Eurasian descent called Indo Europeans, repatriated to the Netherlands.
China sent more indentured servants to European colonies, and around the same proportion returned to China.
Eventually, the European powers—pressured by the United States and Soviets—resigned themselves to decolonization.
As early as 1803, the Spanish Crown organised a mission (the Balmis expedition) to transport the smallpox vaccine to the Spanish colonies, and establish mass vaccination programs there.
According to Lenin, the new imperialism emphasized the transition of capitalism from free trade to a stage of monopoly capitalism to finance capital.
As late as 1848–49, as many as 40,000 out of 150,000 Hawaiians are estimated to have died of measles, whooping cough and influenza.
Under Philip II of Macedon, they were able to organize thousands of soldiers into a formidable battle force, bringing together carefully trained infantry and cavalry regiments.
Francophone residents of Quebec, for example, were vocal in opposing conscription into the armed services to fight on behalf of Britain during World War I, resulting in the Conscription crisis of 1917.
During the colonial era, the global process of colonization served to spread and synthesize the social and political belief systems of the "mother-countries" which often included a belief in a certain natural racial superiority of the race of the mother-country.
The Ainu population decreased drastically in the 19th century, due in large part
This influenced the colonial powers as it sparked competition amongst them to explore and colonize these regions.
to infectious diseases brought by Japanese settlers pouring into Hokkaido.
David Livingstone stresses "that geography has meant different things at different times and in different places" and that we should keep an open mind in regards to the relationship between geography and colonialism instead of identifying boundaries.
This finding of relative cranial size difference was later simply attributed to the general typical size difference of the human male body versus that of the typical human female body.
The war in Europe and North Africa was caused partially by Germany and Italy's efforts to create colonial empires that sought to conquer existing British, French and Russian colonial empires in these areas.
However, many new colonies were established after this time, including the German colonial empire and Belgian colonial empire.
In a reversal of the migration patterns experienced during the modern colonial era, post-independence era migration followed a route back towards the imperial country.
The concept of precolonialism has also been applied to literary studies with respect to such works as Francis Bacon's ''New Atlantis''.
The word "colony" comes from the Latin ''colonia''—"a place for agriculture".
The term neocolonialism has been used to refer to a variety of contexts since decolonization that took place after World War II.
Smallpox epidemics in 1780–1782 and 1837–1838 brought devastation and drastic depopulation among the Plains Indians.
Settlers acted as the link between indigenous populations and the imperial hegemony, thus bridging the geographical, ideological and commercial gap between the colonizers and colonized.
Biologists, naturalists, anthropologists, and ethnologists of the 19th century were focused on the study of colonized indigenous women, as in the case of Georges Cuvier's study of Sarah Baartman.
Aztec civilization developed into an extensive empire that, much like the Roman Empire, had the goal of exacting tribute from the conquered colonial areas.
Over the centuries, the Europeans had developed high degrees of immunity to these diseases, while the indigenous peoples had no time to build such immunity.
The Russian Empire, Ottoman Empire and Austrian Empire existed at the same time as the above empires, but did not expand over oceans.
Portugal and Spain (initially the Crown of Castile) discovered new lands across the oceans and built trading posts or conquered large extensions of land.
The native cultures of the colonized peoples can also have a powerful influence on the imperial country.
Lenin regarded colonialism as the root cause of imperialism, as imperialism was distinguished by monopoly capitalism via colonialism and as Lyal S. Sunga explains: "Vladimir Lenin advocated forcefully the principle of self-determination of peoples in his "Theses on the Socialist Revolution and the Right of Nations to Self-Determination" as an integral plank in the programme of socialist internationalism" and he quotes Lenin who contended that "The right of nations to self-determination implies exclusively the right to independence in the political sense, the right to free political separation from the oppressor nation.
According to Strabo, by the time of emperor Augustus, up to 120 Roman ships would set sail every year from Myos Hormos in Roman Egypt to India.
Female inferiority across all cultures was emerging as an idea supposedly supported by craniology that led scientists to argue that the typical brain size of the female human was, on the average, slightly smaller than that of the male, thus inferring that therefore female humans must be less developed and less evolutionarily advanced than males.
Many practitioners take Edward Saïd's book ''Orientalism'' (1978) as the theory's founding work (although French theorists such as Aimé Césaire and Frantz Fanon made similar claims decades before Said).
A significant number later migrated to the US, Canada, Australia and New Zealand.
The search for raw materials and the current search for new investment opportunities is a result of inter-capitalist rivalry for capital accumulation.
Various effects, both immediate and protracted, include the spread of virulent diseases, unequal social relations, exploitation, enslavement, medical advances, the creation of new institutions, abolitionism, improved infrastructure, and technological progress.
Modern colonialism started with the Age of Discovery.
In the late 19th century, many European powers were involved in the Scramble for Africa.
Imperial expansion follows military conquest in most instances.
Some intended to remain in the colonies as temporary settlers, mainly as military personnel or on business.
Helena Norberg-Hodge has stated that, in order to do development studies, one has to first understand precolonialism.
There was, though, some Russian colonization of the Americas across the Bering Strait.
Assumptions are that colonialism and imperialism are interchangeable, however Robert J. C. Young suggests that imperialism is the concept while colonialism is the practice.
Those were undoubtedly major steps backwards&nbsp;... Colonialism was not merely a system of exploitation, but one whose essential purpose was to repatriate the profits to the so-called 'mother country'.
In 1962 the United Nations set up a Special Committee on Decolonization, often called the Committee of 24, to encourage this process.
India and China were the largest source of indentured servants during the colonial era.
Muslims fought for an independent country to be partitioned where they would not be a religious minority, resulting in the creation of Pakistan.
The late Middle Ages saw reforms in accountancy and banking in Italy and the eastern Mediterranean.
Furthermore, European cartographers were required to follow a set of rules which led to ethnocentrism; portraying one's own ethnicity in the center of the map.
Dutch and German colonies saw relatively scarce European migration, since Dutch and German colonial expansion focused on commercial goals rather than settlement.
The territorial boundaries imposed by European colonizers, notably in central Africa and South Asia, defied the existing boundaries of native populations that had previously interacted little with one another.
Through an empire, colonialism is established and capitalism is expanded, on the other hand a capitalist economy naturally enforces an empire.
The spread of colonial empires was reduced in the late 18th and early 19th centuries by the American Revolutionary War and the Latin American wars of independence.
Other European colonies had much more pronounced conflict between European settlers and the local population.
The first cholera pandemic began in Bengal, then spread across India by 1820.
Colonialism gave rise to culturally and ethnically mixed populations such as the mestizos of the Americas, as well as racially divided populations such as those found in French Algeria or in Southern Rhodesia.
During the rise of colonialism and after; post colonialism, the Western powers perspectives of the East as the "other," different and separate from the societal norm.
It meant the development of Europe as part of the same dialectical process in which Africa was underdeveloped."
The conquest of vast territories brings multitudes of diverse cultures under the central control of the imperial authorities.
In addition to what would now be viewed as pseudo-scientific studies of race, which tended to reinforce a belief in an inherent mother-country racial superiority, a new supposedly "science-based" ideology concerning gender roles also then emerged as an adjunct to the general body of beliefs of inherent superiority of the colonial era.
Colonizer's awareness of the Earth's surface and abundance of practical skills provided colonizers with a knowledge that, in turn, created power.
Introduced diseases, notably smallpox, nearly wiped out the native population of Easter Island.
In some cases, the former European imperial nations continue to foster close political and economic ties with former colonies.
After World War II, decolonization progressed rapidly.
The disease was more frequently fatal than it is today; syphilis was a major killer in Europe during the Renaissance.
The war in the Pacific was caused by Japan's efforts to create a colonial empire that sought to conquer the existing empires held by the British, French, Dutch and the United States.
With the development of trade routes under the Ottoman Empire,
The capitol, the metropole, was the source of ostensibly enlightened policies imposed throughout the distant colonies.
In ''A Critique of Postcolonial Reason'' (1999), Spivak argued that major works of European metaphysics (such as those of Kant and Hegel) not only tend to exclude the subaltern from their discussions, but actively prevent non-Europeans from occupying positions as fully human subjects.
Second, many colonial powers were significantly weakened by World War Two.
A significant number of these migrants were also of Algerian descent.
Two outgrowths of this imperial agenda were slavery and indentured servitude.
Hegel's ''Phenomenology of Spirit'' (1807), famous for its explicit ethnocentrism, considers Western civilization as the most accomplished of all, while Kant also had some traces of racialism in his work.
Cultural and religious conflict have often erupted in France in recent decades, between immigrants from the Maghreb countries of north Africa and the majority population of France.
After the First World War, the victorious allies divided up the German colonial empire and much of the Ottoman Empire between themselves as League of Nations mandates.
The rhetoric favored the view of the conquering Europeans; this is evident in the fact that any map created by a non-European was instantly regarded as inaccurate.
While most Greeks considered their own culture superior to all others (the word barbarian is derived from mutterings that sounded to Greek ears like "bar-bar"), Alexander was unique in promoting a campaign to win the hearts and minds of the Persians.
These new lands were divided between the Portuguese Empire and Spanish Empire (then still between Portugal and Castile - the Crown of Castile who had a dynastic union through the Catholic kings and their successors, but not of state, with the Crown of Aragon), first by the papal bull Inter caetera and then by the Treaty of Tordesillas and the Treaty of Zaragoza (1529).
Such seemingly flawed studies of race and gender coincided with the era of colonialism and the initial introduction of foreign cultures, appearances, and gender roles into the now gradually widening world-views of the scholars of the mother-countries.
It also killed many New Zealand Māori.
Nonetheless, immigration has changed the ethnic composition of France; by the 1980s, 25% of the total population of "inner Paris" and 14% of the metropolitan region were of foreign origin, mainly Algerian.
Dozens of independence movements and global political solidarity projects such as the Non-Aligned Movement were instrumental in the decolonization efforts of former colonies.
Marxism views colonialism as a form of capitalism, enforcing exploitation and social change.
Imperialists aggressively and passionately looked forward to filling these spaces for the glory of their respective countries.
Migration from former colonies has proven to be problematic for European countries, where the majority population may express hostility to ethnic minorities who have immigrated from former colonies.
In his preface to Jürgen Osterhammel's ''Colonialism: A Theoretical Overview'', Roger Tignor says, "For Osterhammel, the essence of colonialism is the existence of colonies, which are by definition governed differently from other territories such as protectorates or informal spheres of influence."
Others went to the colonies as immigrants.
Colonies are constructed into modes of production.
The Spanish Empire held a major advantage over Mesoamerican warriors through the use of weapons made of stronger metal, predominantly iron, which was able to shatter the blades of axes used by the Aztec civilization and others.
For example, rights to dual citizenship may be generous, or larger immigrant quotas may be extended to former colonies.
Usually also included within the colonial belief systems was a certain belief in the inherent superiority of male over female, however this particular belief was often pre-existing amongst the pre-colonial societies, prior to their colonization.
In the Dutch East Indies (later Indonesia) the vast majority of "Dutch" settlers were in fact Eurasians known as Indo-Europeans, formally belonging to the European legal class in the colony (see also Indos in Pre-Colonial History and Indos in Colonial History).
Classical liberals were generally in abstract opposition to colonialism (as opposed to colonization) and imperialism, including Adam Smith, Frédéric Bastiat, Richard Cobden, John Bright, Henry Richard, Herbert Spencer, H. R. Fox Bourne, Edward Morel, Josephine Butler, W. J.
From the beginning of the 20th century onwards, the elimination or control of disease in tropical countries became a driving force for all colonial powers.
Despite the general trend of economic expansion, the economic performance of former European colonies varies significantly.
As Harley would put it "The steps in making a map - selection, omission, simplification, classification, the creation of hierarchies, and 'symbolization' - are all inherently rhetorical."
The 17th century saw the creation of the French colonial empire and the Dutch Empire, as well as the English overseas possessions, which later became the British Empire.
The findings suggested Europeans could have carried the nonvenereal tropical bacteria home, where the organisms may have mutated into a more deadly form in the different conditions of Europe.
From an African view-point, that amounted to consistent expatriation of surplus produced by African labour out of African resources.
Roman law was imposed on both Roman citizens and colonial subjects.
Fighting erupted between Hindu, Sikh and Muslim communities as they fought for territorial dominance.
Of note is that he radically departed from earlier Greek attempts at colonization, characterized by the murder and enslavement of the local inhabitants and the settling of Greek citizens from the polis.
By 1914, Europeans had migrated to the colonies in the millions.
Popular political practices of the time reinforced colonial rule by legitimizing European (and/ or Japanese) male authority, and also legitimizing female and non-mother-country race inferiority through studies of Craniology, Comparative Anatomy, and Phrenology.
In practice, indentured servants were exploited through terrible working conditions and burdensome debts created by the employers, with whom the servants had no means of negotiating the debt once they arrived in the colony.
The word "metropole" comes from the Greek ''metropolis'' Greek: "μητρόπολις"—"mother city".
European colonizers disregarded native political and cultural animosities, imposing peace upon people under their military control.
Generally it does not refer to a type of direct colonization, rather, colonialism by other means.
War is stated to be the consequence of imperialism.
At first the countries followed mercantilism designed to strengthen the home economy at the expense of rivals, so the colonies were usually allowed to trade only with the mother country.
European nations entered their imperial projects with the goal of enriching the European metropole.
Their philosophies found the colonial enterprise, particularly mercantilism, in opposition to the principles of free trade and liberal policies.
Europeans brought transportation technology to the practise, bringing large numbers of African slaves to the Americas by sail.
Abolitionists in Europe and America protested the inhumane treatment of African slaves, which led to the elimination of the slave trade by the late 18th century.
Political institutions thus gave rise to different types of economic systems, which determined the colonial economic performance.
In "Institutions as a Fundamental Cause of Long-run Growth," economists Daron Acemoglu, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson compare the economic influences of the European colonists on different colonies and study what could explain the huge discrepancies in previous European colonies, for example, between West African colonies like Sierra Leone and Hong Kong and Singapore.
Ultimately, around 11 million Africans were taken to the Caribbean and North and South America as slaves by European colonizers.
A common practice by the European cartographers of the time was to map unexplored areas as "blank spaces".
As colonialism often played out in pre-populated areas, sociocultural evolution included the formation of various ethnically hybrid populations.
The world population has grown from 1.6 billion in 1900 to over seven billion today.
As seen earlier, exploitation of land and labour is essential for human social advance, but only on the assumption that the product is made available within the area where the exploitation takes place."
Roman universalism was characterized by cultural and religious tolerance and a focus on civil efficiency and the rule of law.
By 1832, the federal government of the United States established a smallpox vaccination program for Native Americans.
Waldemar Haffkine, who mainly worked in India, who developed and used vaccines against cholera and bubonic plague in the 1890s, is considered the first microbiologist.
Once independence from European control was achieved, civil war erupted in some former colonies, as native populations fought to capture territory for their own ethnic, cultural or political group.
The Empire of Japan modelled itself on European colonial empires.
The labour shortage that resulted inspired European colonizers to develop a new source of labour, using a system of indentured servitude.
The European development of firearms using gunpowder cemented their military advantage over the peoples they sought to subjugate in the Americas and elsewhere.
Post-colonialism (or post-colonial theory) can refer to a set of theories in philosophy and literature that grapple with the legacy of colonial rule.
It is an "instrument of wholesale destruction, dependency and systematic exploitation producing distorted economies, socio-psychological disorientation, massive poverty and neocolonial dependency."
These included significant wars of independence fought in Indonesia, Vietnam, Algeria, and Kenya.
Indentured servants from India travelled to British colonies in Asia, Africa and the Caribbean, and also to French and Portuguese colonies, while Chinese servants travelled to British and Dutch colonies.
Marx thought that working within the global capitalist system, colonialism is closely associated with uneven development.
In his critique of colonialism in Africa, the Guyanese historian and political activist Walter Rodney states:
For some people, it is this building of colonies across oceans that differentiates colonialism from other types of expansionism.
Anne Godlewska and Neil Smith argue that "empire was 'quintessentially a geographical project.'"
Specifically, this demand for political democracy implies complete freedom to agitate for secession and for a referendum on secession by the seceding nation."
The impacts of colonization are immense and pervasive.
Indentured servants consented to a contract with the European colonizers.
Historical geographical theories such as environmental determinism legitimized colonialism by positing the view that some parts of the world were underdeveloped, which created notions of skewed evolution.
For example, one interesting observation is "the Reversal of Fortune" - the less developed civilizations in 1500, like North America, Australia, and New Zealand, are now much richer than those countries who used to be in the prosperous civilizations in 1500 before the colonists came, like the Mughals in India and the Incas in the Americas.
By the mid-19th century, however, the powerful British Empire gave up mercantilism and trade restrictions and introduced the principle of free trade, with few restrictions or tariffs.
:"The decisiveness of the short period of colonialism and its negative consequences for Africa spring mainly from the fact that Africa lost power.
Colonialism also acted to reinforce these same racial belief systems within the "mother-countries" themselves.
In 1618–1619, smallpox wiped out 90% of the Massachusetts Bay Native Americans.
Roman law prohibited local leaders to wage war between themselves, which was responsible for the 200 year long Pax Romana, at the time the longest period of peace in history.
Citizens of the former colonies of European countries may have a privileged status in some respects with regard to immigration rights when settling in the former European imperial nation.
Specifically, neocolonialism refers to the theory that former or existing economic relationships, such as the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and the Central American Free Trade Agreement, created by former colonial powers were or are used to maintain control of their former colonies and dependencies after the colonial independence movements of the post–World War II period.
The Roman Empire was tolerant of diverse cultures and religious practises, even allowing them on a few occasions to threaten Roman authority.
However, because the relationship between colonialism and geography was not scientifically objective, cartography was often manipulated during the colonial era.
European studies along these lines gave rise to the perception that African women's anatomy, and especially genitalia, resembled those of mandrills, baboons, and monkeys, thus differentiating colonized Africans from what were viewed as the features of the evolutionarily superior, and thus rightfully authoritarian, European woman.
Colonial destination
Ten thousand British troops and countless Indians died during this pandemic.
"The Other," or "othering" is the process of creating a separate entity to persons or groups who are labelled as different or non-normal due to the repetition of characteristics.
The populations of some colonial territories, such as Canada, enjoyed relative peace and prosperity as part of a European power, at least among the majority; however, minority populations such as First Nations peoples and French-Canadians experienced marginalization and resented colonial practises.
While the extent in which geography as an academic study is implicated in colonialism is contentious, geographical tools such as cartography, shipbuilding, navigation, mining and agricultural productivity were instrumental in European colonial expansion.
Half the native population of Hispaniola in 1518 was killed by smallpox.
This viewpoint and separation of culture had divided the Eastern and Western culture creating a dominant/ subordinate dynamic, both being the "other" towards themselves.
Alexander the Great exploited this military foundation further during his conquests.
African slavery had existed long before Europeans discovered it as an exploitable means of creating an inexpensive labour force for the colonies.
900,000 French colonists (known as the ''Pied-Noirs'') resettled in France following Algeria's independence in 1962.
Imperial armies therefore have a long history of military innovation in order to gain an advantage over the armies of the people they aim to conquer.
Spain and Portugal had brought African slaves to work at African colonies such as Cape Verde and the Azores, and then Latin America, by the 16th century.
Rather, these empires expanded through the more traditional route of conquest of neighbouring territories.
British North America
The United States of America gained overseas territories after the Spanish–American War for which the term "American Empire" was coined.
Exploitation of non-Europeans and other Europeans to support imperial goals was acceptable to the colonizers.
To explain the different colonial cases, we thus need to look first into the political institutions that shaped the economic institutions.
Power is the ultimate determinant in human society, being basic to the relations within any group and between groups.
For the Aztecs, a significant tribute was the acquisition of sacrificial victims for their religious rituals.
Under the direction of Mountstuart Elphinstone a program was launched to propagate smallpox vaccination in India.
