Initially, they placed the administration of the city under a "Collector", and John Macdowell of the Madras Service was the first to hold the office.
Apart from that, many luxurious hotels, clubs and restaurants are in the city.
These include Independence Memorial Hall Square, Pettah Floating Market and Old Dutch Hospital among others.
Colombo is the home for two of the country's most popular international cricket stadiums, Sinhalese Sports Club's cricket stadium and R. Premadasa Stadium (named after late president Premadasa).
It remains a popular attraction, hosting regattas, and theatrical events on its shores.
The great majority of Sri Lankan corporations have their head offices in Colombo including Aitken Spence, Ceylinco Corporation, Stassen group of companies, John Keells Holdings, Cargills, Hemas Holdings, and Akbar Brothers.
Even today, the influence of the Portuguese, the Dutch and the British is clearly visible in Colombo's architecture, names, clothing, food, language and attitudes.
Much of the old buildings of the fort area and in other parts of the city date back to the British times, these include governmental, commercial buildings and private houses.
Changes in laws and customs, clothing styles, religions and proper names were a significant result of the colonial era.
There are several private higher education institutions in the city.
Like many cities, Colombo's urban area extends well beyond the boundaries of a single local authority, encompassing other municipal and urban councils such as Sri Jayawardenepura Kotte Municipal Council, Dehiwala Mount Lavinia Municipal Council, Kolonnawa Urban Council, Kaduwela  Municipal Council and Kotikawatte Mulleriyawa Pradeshiya Sabha.
This is done mainly to preserve the historic beauty of the Fort area.
* '''Kelani Valley Line''' – Colombo to Avissawella.
The author of the oldest Sinhalese grammar, ''Sidatsangarava,'' written in the 13th century wrote about a category of words that exclusively belonged to early Sinhalese.
In 1638 the Dutch signed a treaty with King Rajasinha II of Kandy which assured the king assistance in his war against the Portuguese in exchange for a monopoly of the island's major trade goods.
This is the time of year where heavy rains can be expected.
Despite the official capital of Sri Lanka moving to the adjacent Sri Jayawardanapura Kotte, most countries still maintain their diplomatic missions in Colombo.
The hotel has played host to distinguished guests including the British Royal Family and other royal guests and celebrities.
Colombo has many International Schools that have come up in the recent years.
Several old clubs of the city give a glimpse of the British equestrian life style; these include the Colombo Club, Orient Club, the 80 Club, the Colombo Cricket Club.
Although the Dutch (e.g., Rijcklof van Goens) initially restored the captured area back to the Sinhalese kings, they later refused to turn them over and gained control over the island's richest cinnamon lands including Colombo which then served as the capital of the Dutch maritime provinces under the control of the Dutch East India Company until 1796.
This part of Colombo is still known as Fort and houses the presidential palace and the majority of Colombo's five star hotels.
There are as well several private operators.
Several types of rail based options have been proposed to control to control the excessive traffic.Advanced stages of feasibility investigations into the Colombo Metro Rail, a Mass Rapid Transit railway system has begun.
Indeed, the corruption extends to the very top, US reports show.
Currently Sri Lanka is searching for possible investors for a Monorail or a subway system.
For the past 50 years the city had been ruled by the United National Party (UNP), a right leaning party, whose business friendly policies resonate with the population of Colombo.
Caroling and nativity plays are frequent sights during the season.
During this festival, much of the city is decorated with lanterns, lights and special displays of light (known as ''thoran'').
Colombo does not boast a very big art gallery.
Colombo Harbour is the largest and one of the busiest ports in Sri Lanka.
Policing in Colombo and its suburbs falls within the ''Metropolitan Range'' headed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police (Metropolitan), this also includes the Colombo Crime Division.
Colombo's geography is a mix of land and water.
Right outside the Fort area is Pettah which is derived from the Sinhalese word ''pita'' which means 'out' or 'outside'.
File:MansionSir296.jpg|The Sirimathipaya Mansion of Sir Ernest de Silva which is now the Prime Minister's Office is an example of architecture of the British era
The Western province contributes less than 40% to the GDP and about 80% of industrial value additions although it accounts for only 5.7% of the country’s geographic area and 25% of the national population.
Train transport in the city is limited since most trains are meant for transport to and from the city rather than within it and are often overcrowded.
From March to April the average high temperature is around .
The mosque is still one of the most visited tourist sites in Colombo.
Colombo has its own local football team Colombo FC and the sport is being developed as a part of the FIFA Goal program.
Education institutions in Colombo have a long history.
Although Colombo lost its status as the capital of Sri Lanka in the 1980s, it continues to be the island's commercial centre.
Colombo has an extensive public transport system based on buses operated both by private operators and the government owned Sri Lanka Transport Board (SLTB).
The Dutch expanded the fort thus creating a well old fortified harbour.
The green was recently given a makeover and since then has been even more popular with the local community.
The Portuguese were the first colonists to settle in Colombo; establishing a small trading post, they had laid the foundations for a small fort which in time became the largest colonial fort in the island.
Historically, Colombo referred to the area around the ''Fort'' and ''Pettah Market'' which is famous for the variety of products available as well as the Khan Clock Tower, a local landmark.
The President's House (formerly the Queen's House)was originally the Dutch governor's house, and successive British governors made it their office and residence.
Here one may find new towering skyscrapers as well as historic buildings dating far back as the 1700s.
Before long he annexed much of the Kotte kingdom and forced the Portuguese to retreat to Colombo, which was repeatedly besieged by Mayadunne and the later kings of Sitawaka, forcing them to seek reinforcement from their major base in Goa, India.
The festivities include many events and traditions that display a great deal of Sri Lankan culture.
Some of the prominent radio stations broadcasting in the Colombo area are Sirasa FM, FM Derana, Hiru FM, Shakthi FM, Vettri FM, Sooriyan FM, Kiss FM, Lite FM, Yes FM, Gold FM, and many more.
* '''Main Line''' – Colombo Fort to Veyangoda; onwards to Kandy, Badulla, Matale, Kurunegala, Anuradhapura,  Kankesanturai.Trincomalee, Batticaloa, Talaimannar (presently just Madhu Road).
As a primary step the Parliament was moved to a new complex in Kotte and several ministries and departments were also moved.
Following the fall of the kingdom in 1593, the Portuguese were able to establish complete control over the coastal area, with Colombo as their capital.
These include the oldest building in the fort area, the former Dutch Hospital, the Dutch House which is now the Colombo Dutch Museum and several churches.
Arabs, whose prime interests were trade, began to settle in Colombo around the 8th century AD mostly because the port helped their business by the way of controlling much of the trade between the Sinhalese kingdoms and the outside world.
Television networks operating in the Colombo metro area include the state-owned television broadcasting networks which are broadcast from the Rupavahini Corporation of Sri Lanka, broadcasting television in the official languages Sinhala and Tamil.
The main city is home to a majority of Sri Lanka's corporate offices, restaurants and entertainment venues.
It was the legislative capital of Sri Lanka until 1982.
The first step in the creation of a University in Colombo was taken in 1913 with the establishment of the University College Colombo which prepared students for the external examinations of the University of London.
This mile-long street is full of jewellery shops, including the former head office of SriLankan Airlines.
Most of these businesses are dominated by Muslim traders.
The area outside is Pettah or ''පිටකොටුව'' in Sinhalese which means outer fort.
Colombo has most of the amenities that a modern city has.
File:Millers.jpg|The historical Cargills & Millers building continues as the headquarters of Cargills (Ceylon) PLC
The green is especially busy on Fridays and Saturdays.
The Port of Colombo handled 3.75 million twenty-foot equivalent units in 2008, 10.6% up on 2007 (which itself was 9.7% up on 2006), bucking the global economic trend.
The Galle Face Green is the city's largest and most elegant promenade.
At present, it refers to the city limits of the Colombo Municipal Council.
An entire new culture took root.
From then until the 1980s the national capital of the island was Colombo.
According to Dr. Priyath Wickrama, the Chairman of the Sri Lanka Ports Authority, an eight lane F1 track will “definitely” be a part of the New Port City.
They were allowed to establish a trading post in Colombo.
The city and its people show an interesting mix of European clothing and lifestyles together with local customs.
Colombo sees little relative diurnal range of temperature, although this is more marked in the drier winter months, where minimum temperatures average .
Cannons that were once mounted on the rampart of the old fort of Colombo laid out for observance and prestige at the Green, giving a colonial touch to the city.
This era of colonialism ended peacefully in 1948 when Ceylon gained independence from Britain.
Eid Ul Fitr and Eid Ul Adha are two Islamic festivals that are celebrated in Colombo.
Lined with palm trees and adjacent to the coast, this mile-long stretch in the heart of the city is a constant beehive of activity.
Designed in the form of the Lotus Pond in Polonnaruwa, the theatre is a major theatre destination.
Before the skyscrapers were built it was the Old Parliament Building that stood majestically in the Fort district with the Old Colombo Lighthouse close to it.
Even before the parliament was built some claim that the Jami Ul-Alfar Mosque was recognized as the landmark of Colombo by sailors approaching the port.
It is also the administrative capital of Western Province, Sri Lanka and the district capital of Colombo District.
Pettah is more crowded than the Fort area.
Pettah's roads are always packed and pavements are full of small stalls selling items from delicious sharbat to shirts.
* A1 highway connects Colombo with Kandy.
Many Sri Lankans visit the city to see the lantern competitions and decorations.
Colombo has several performing arts centers which are popular for their musical and theatrical performances.
For example, the First Cross Street is mostly electronic goods shops, the Second cellular phones and fancy goods.
The religious alignments do not affect the curriculum of the school except for the demographics of the student population.
In the ICC World Twenty20 they became runners up in 2009 and 2012 and winners in 2014.
This would host The Sri Lankan Grand Prix.
The most famous performing arts centers are the Lionel Wendt Theatre, the Elphinstone, and Tower Hall, all of which have a very rich history and made for western style productions.
The Colombo Port City is to include a new Formula One track, constructed in the vicinity of the Colombo Harbour.
As in other large cities around the world, Colombo experiences certain levels of street crime and bribery.
In 1978, when administrative functions were moved to Sri Jayawardenepura Kotte, Colombo was designated as the commercial capital of Sri Lanka.
The three primary bus terminals &mdash; Bastian Mawatha, Central, and the Gunasinghapura Bus Terminals &mdash; are in Pettah.
The per capita income of Colombo Metro area stood at US$8623 and purchasing power per capita of $25,117, making it one of the most prosperous regions in South Asia considering Western Province contribute for 50% of GDP in Sri Lanka .
Rainfall in the city averages around  a year.
Welikada Prison is situated in Colombo and it is one of the largest maximum-security prisons in the country.
Some of the notable government building of British colonial architecture includes; the old Parliament building which is now the Presidential Secretariat, the Republic Building which houses the Ministry of Foreign affairs, but once housed the Ceylon Legislative council, the General Treasury Building, the old General Post Office an Edwardian style building opposite the President's House, the Prime Minister's Office, the Central Telegraph Office, the Mathematics department of the University of Colombo (formally the Royal College, Colombo).
The Sri Lanka Institute of Information Technology has a metropolitan campus in the city centre.
Colonial buildings influenced by the Portuguese, Dutch and British exist alongside structures built in Buddhist, Hindu, Islamic, Indian and Contemporary architectural styles.
* '''Coastal Line''' – Colombo to Panadura; onwards to Galle and Matara.
The project is carried out by NEB Rapid Infrastructure Projects Pvt.
Today many governmental institutions still remain in Colombo.
This came into the possession of the British in the late 1700s and by the late 19th century the seeing no threat to the Colombo Harbour, began demolishing the ramparts to make way for the development of the city.
The 40 story Twin Tower complex is the centre of important commercial establishments, in the Fort district, the city's nerve center.
Higher education in the city has a long history, beginning with the establishment of the Colombo Medical School (1870), the Colombo Law College (1875), School of Agriculture (1884) and the Government Technical College (1893).
Some of the industries include chemicals, textiles, glass, cement, leather goods, furniture, and jewellery.
Post-war development in the Colombo area also involves the construction of numerous expressway grade arterial road routes.
Currently with a capacity of 4.1 million TEUs and a dredged depth of over 15&nbsp;m (49&nbsp;ft),2 the Colombo Harbour is one of the busiest ports in the world, and ranks among the top 35 ports.
Colombo has many of the prominent public schools in the country, some of them government-owned and others private.
As with most metro areas, radio bands are highly utilised for radio communications.
The state media has its offices in Bullers Road and does carry out regional transmission from there.
During this week people distribute, rice, drinks and other food items for free in ''dunsal'' which means charity place.
Many businesses flourish during the eventual countdown for Eid Ul Fitr which is a major Islamic festival celebrated by Muslims after a month-long fasting.
Expressways under construction in the Colombo metropolitan area include the Colombo–Katunayake Expressway which was opened in October 2013 and the Colombo orbital bypass Outer Circular Highway (Arthur C. Clarke Expressway) which is due to be opened in 2014.
* A2 highway connects Colombo with Galle and Matara
The festival falls in mid May and lasts a week.
Many of the private broadcasting companies have their offices and transmission stations in or around Colombo.
Also facing Galle Face Green is the Ceylon Inter-Continental Hotel, Sri Lanka's first five-star hotel.
The first of these constructed is the Southern Expressway, which goes from Kottawa, a southern suburb of Colombo, to Matara in the south of the country.
In some parts of the city tram car tracks and granite flooring laid during the era are still visible today.
Ltd., an Indian and Singaporean collaboration.
Portuguese explorers led by Dom Lourenço de Almeida first arrived in Sri Lanka in 1505.
At the end of the Main Street further away from Fort is the Sea Street — Sri Lanka's gold market — dominated by Tamil interests.
The city government provides sewer, road management and waste management services, in case of water, electricity and telephone utility services the council liaises with the water supply and drainage board, the Ceylon electricity board and telephone service providers.
File:Bandaranaike Memorial International Conference Hall.jpg|The BMICH Conference Hall, is the largest such venue
The city has many canals and, in the heart of the city, the  Beira Lake.
Colombo is generally very busy during the eve of the festivals as people do their last minute shopping.
Today the University of Colombo and the University of the Visual & Performing Arts are state universities in the city.
This includes the Sri Lanka Broadcasting Corporation (SLBC), formerly known as Radio Ceylon and the Sri Lanka Rupavahini Corporation.
Colombo Marathon is an internationally recognised marathon established in 1998.
Bandaranaike International Airport and Ratmalana Airport are the city's airports.
Colombo was the capital of the Coastal areas controlled by the Portuguese, Dutch and the British from the 1700s to the 1815 when the British gained control of the entire island following the Kandian convention.
The Sinhala and Hindu Aluth Awurudda' is a cultural event that takes place on 13 and 14 April.
Then, in 1833, the Government Agent of the Western Province was charged with the administration of the city.
The Portuguese resisted the Dutch and the Kandyans but were gradually defeated in their strongholds beginning in 1639.
The Fort district has the famous Cargills & Millers complex that is protected by a special government law from demolition.
Centuries of colonial rule had meant a decline of indigenous administration of Colombo, and in 1865 the British conceived a Municipal Council as a means of training the local population in self-governance.
Main Street consists mostly of clothes shops and the cross roads, which are known as Cross Streets where each of the five streets specializes in a specific business.
As part of the treaty, the Portuguese were given full authority over the coastline in exchange for the promise of guarding the coast against invaders.
Colombo features a tropical monsoon climate under the Köppen climate classification, falling just short of a tropical rainforest climate.
Due to its large harbour and its strategic position along the East-West sea trade routes, Colombo was known to ancient traders 2,000 years ago.
It was made the capital of the island when Sri Lanka was ceded to the British Empire in 1815, and its status as capital was retained when the nation became independent in 1948.
The Sri Lanka Police the main law enforcement agency of the island liaise with the municipal council, but is under the control of the Ministry of Defence of the central government.
These include the President's House, Presidential Secretariat, Prime Minister's House (Temple Trees), Prime Minister's Office, the Supreme Court of Sri Lanka, Central Bank of Sri Lanka, important government ministries and departments; such as Finance (Treasury), Defence, Public Administration & Home affairs, Foreign affairs, Justice and the Military headquarters, Naval headquarters (SLNS Parakrama), Air Force headquarters (SLAF Colombo) and Police national and field force headquarters.
The LTTE has been linked to most of the bombings and assassinations in the city.
The Colombo Metropolitan (CM) area is the most important industrial, commercial and administrative centre in Sri Lanka.
Bottlenecks are preventing the Colombo metropolitan area from realizing its full economic potential.
Colombo has wildly varying architecture that span centuries and depict many styles.
The Northern and North-Eastern border of the city of Colombo is formed by the Kelani River, which meets the sea in a part of the city known as the Modera (''mōdara'' in Sinhala) which means river delta.
Other sporting clubs in Colombo include Colombo Swimming Club, Colombo Rowing Club and the Yachting Association of Sri Lanka.
The sport is played in parks, playgrounds, beaches and even in the streets.
The Colombo Metropolitan area has a GDP of $48 billion or 40% of the GDP, making it the most important aspect of the Sri Lankan economy.
The Portuguese soon realized that control of Sri Lanka was necessary for protection of their coastal establishments in India and they began to manipulate the rulers of the Kotte kingdom to gain control of the area.
Adjoining the President's House are the Gordon Gardens, now off limits to the public.
Famous landmarks in Colombo include Galle Face Green, Viharamahadevi Park, Beira Lake, Colombo Racecourse, Planetarium, University of Colombo, Mount Lavinia beach, Nelum Pokuna Theatre, Colombo Lotus Tower(is being constructed) as well as the National Museum.
Compared to other parts of the country, Colombo has the highest degree of infrastructure.
Since there is a large number of Muslims in Colombo.
Almost all major media businesses in Sri Lanka operate from Colombo.
Electricity, water and transport to street lamps, phone booths, etc.
An international ferry liner, the Scotia Prince, is conducting a ferry service to Tuticorin, India.
Situated in Colombo the Royal Colombo Golf Club is one of the oldest in Asia.
No other place is this more evident in the Fort area.
Up until the 1970s the city had tram services, which were discontinued.
To facilitate the transformation of Colombo, the government has to address these bottlenecks which have for long been obstructing economic and physical urban regeneration.
This is the celebration of the Sinhala and Hindu new year.
Another landmark is St.Paul's Church Milagiriya, one of the oldest churches in Sri Lanka, first built by the Portuguese and re-built by the British in 1848.
''Kolamba'' may also be the source of the name of the commercial capital Colombo.
Ferry services between the two countries have been revived after more than 20 years.
Most streets and commercial buildings light up from the beginning of December and festive sales begin at all shopping centres and department stores.
Although Sri Lanka's Christians make up only just over 7% of the population, Christmas is one of the island's biggest festivals.
During the time they were in control of the Colombo, the British were responsible for much of the planning of the present city.
More often, the name is used for the Conurbation known as Greater Colombo, which encompasses several Municipal councils including Kotte, Dehiwela and Colombo.
One of the most popular sports in Sri Lanka is cricket.
After skilfully exploiting rivalries within the royal family, they took control of a large area of the kingdom and the Sinhalese King Mayadunne established a new kingdom at Sitawaka, a domain in the Kotte kingdom.
The SLBC is the oldest radio station in South Asia and the second oldest in the world.
The majority of the major shopping malls in Sri Lanka are in the city, of which all are wi-fi enabled.
The Navarangahala found in the city is the country's first national theatre designed and build for Asian and local style musical and theatrical productions.
* '''Puttalam Line''' – Colombo to Ja Ela; onwards to Negombo and Puttalam.
As with most Sri Lankan cities, the magistrate court handles felony crimes, the district court handles civil cases.
The Sri Lanka Navy maintains a naval base, ''SLNS Rangalla'', within the harbour.
Most of the prominent schools in the city date back to the 1800s when they were established during the British colonial rule, such as the Royal College Colombo established in 1835.
Certain urban schools of Sri Lanka have some religious alignment; this is partly due to the influence of British who established Christian missionary schools.
These include the Anglican, Bishop's College(1875); the Methodist, Wesley College Colombo (1874); the Buddhist, Ananda College (1886); the Muslim, Zahira College (1892); the Catholic, St. Joseph's College (1896).
Colombo has the distinction of being the only city in the world to have four cricket test venues in the past: Paikiasothy Saravanamuttu Stadium, Sinhalese Sports Club Ground, Colombo Cricket Club Ground and Ranasinghe Premadasa Stadium.
Given its importance as the primary international gateway for Sri Lanka and as the main economic driver of the country, the government of Sri Lanka (GoSL) has launched an ambitious program to transform Colombo and its area into a metropolis of international standards.
Uvais Mohamed Imitiyas was subsequently appointed Mayor of Colombo.
Christmas is another major festival.
These ''dunsal'' are popular amongst visitors from the suburbs.
The lake is one of the most distinctive landmarks of Colombo, and was used for centuries by colonists to defend the city.
It lists ''naramba'' (to see) and ''kolamba'' (ford or harbour) as belonging to an indigenous source.
In the city centre is the World Trade Centre.
Alternatively a monorail system is planned too.
The only major change in the Colombo weather occurs during the monsoon seasons from May to August and October to January.
In recent times there's been an outpour of high rise condominiums, mainly due to the very high land prices.
However the UNP nomination list for the 2006 Municipal elections was rejected, and an Independent Group supported by the UNP won the elections.
