The crowns of the teeth became deeper in height and the skulls became taller to accommodate this.
In 2016, a genetic study of North American mammoth specimens confirmed that ''M.&nbsp;columbi'' and ''M.&nbsp;primigenius'' interbred extensively, were both descended from ''M.&nbsp;trogontherii'', and concluded that morphological differences between fossils may therefore not be reliable for determining taxonomy.
It did not live in Arctic Canada, which was inhabited by woolly mammoths.
Bones of juvenile Columbian mammoths, accumulated by ''Homotherium'' (the scimitar-toothed cat), have been found in Friesenhahn Cave in Texas.
Bones of larger specimens have also been found on the islands, but it is unknown whether these were stages in the dwarfing process, or later arrivals of Columbian mammoths.
The lifespan of the Columbian mammoth is thought to have been about 80 years.
Deep footprints of mammoths attempting to free themselves from the sinkhole's mud can be seen in vertically-excavated sections of the site.
A mammoth's molars were replaced five times over the animal's lifetime.
The dry conditions and stable temperature of Bechan Cave (''bechan'' is Navajo for "large faeces") has preserved 16,000- to 13,500-year-old elephant dung, most likely from Columbian mammoths.
The first known members of the genus ''Mammuthus'' are the African species ''M.
Similar rocks exist in Hueco Tanks, Texas, and on Cornudas Mountain in New Mexico.
The ranges of the two species may have overlapped, and genetic evidence suggests that they interbred.
About  of the crown was within the jaw, and  was above.
columbi'' (the Columbian mammoth) and ''M.
During this period, 40 mammal species disappeared from North America, almost all of which weighed over ; the extinction of the mammoths cannot be explained in isolation.
With each replacement, the molars grew larger and gained more ridges; the number of plates varied between individuals.
Only its molars are known, which show that it had 8–10 enamel ridges.
Isotope studies of growth rings have shown that most of the mammoths died during spring and summer, which may have correlated with vegetation near the sinkhole.
Its tail was intermediate in length between that of modern elephants and the woolly mammoth.
They are therefore considered to be the distinct species ''M.&nbsp;exilis'', the pygmy mammoth (or a subspecies, ''M.&nbsp;c.&nbsp;exilis'').
Other possible depictions of Columbian mammoths have been shown to be either misinterpretations or fraudulent.
"Archie" is currently on display at Elephant Hall in Lincoln, Nebraska, and is the largest mounted mammoth specimen in the United States.
It was about the same size as the earlier mammoth species ''M.
Apart from its larger size and more primitive molars, the Columbian mammoth also differed from the woolly mammoth by its more downturned mandibular symphysis; the dental alveoli (tooth sockets) of the tusks were directed more laterally away from the midline.
The latter assemblage includes 22 skeletons, with 15 individuals representing a herd of females and juveniles that died in a single event, probably a flash flood; the arrangement of some of the skeletons suggests that the females may have formed a defensive ring around the juveniles.
Scientists are divided over whether climate change, hunting, or a combination of the two, drove the extinction of the Columbian mammoths.
Humans entered the Americas through Beringia, and evidence documents their interactions with Columbian mammoths.
Like other mammoths, the Columbian mammoth had a high, single-domed head and a sloping back with a high shoulder hump; this shape resulted from the spinous processes (protrusions) of the back vertebrae decreasing in length from front to rear.
At six months of age calves developed milk tusks a few centimeters long, which were replaced by permanent tusks a year later.
Columbian mammoth tusks were usually not much larger than those of woolly mammoths, which reached .
The taxonomic situation was simplified by various researchers from the 1970s onwards: all species of mammoth were retained in the genus ''Mammuthus'', and many proposed differences between species were instead interpreted as intraspecific variation.
The '''Columbian mammoth''' (''Mammuthus columbi'') is an extinct species of mammoth that inhabited North America as far north as the northern United States and as far south as Costa Rica during the Pleistocene epoch.
According to the climate change hypothesis, warmer weather led to the shrinking of suitable habitat for Columbian mammoths, which turned from parkland to forest, grassland and semi-desert, with less diverse vegetation.
The distribution and density of fur on the living animal is unknown, but it was probably less dense than that of the woolly mammoth due to the warmer habitat.
The mammoths may have been lured to the hole by warm water or vegetation near the edges, slipping in and drowning or starving.
The tusks of females were much smaller and thinner.
A population of Columbian mammoths that lived between 80,000 and 13,000 years ago on the Channel Islands of California,  away from the mainland, evolved to be less than half the size of the mainland Columbian mammoths.
In modern experiments, replica spears have been able to penetrate the rib cages of African elephants with re-use causing little damage to the points.
The Bechan dung could have been produced by a small group of mammoths over a relatively short time, since adult African elephants drop an average of  of dung every two hours and  each day.
Growing  of ridge took about 10.6 years.
Columbian mammoths had four functional molar teeth at a time, two in the upper jaw and two in the lower.
A carving of a bison (possibly the extinct ''Bison antiquus'') is superimposed on one of the mammoth carvings and may be a later addition.
At Murray Springs, archaeologists discovered a 13,100-year-old object made from a mammoth femur; the object is thought to be a shaft wrench, a tool for straightening wood and bone to make spear-shafts (the Inuit use similar tools).
The tusks' curvature made them unsuitable for stabbing.
The dung consists of 95 percent grass and sedge, and varies from 0 to 25 percent of woody plants between dung boluses, including saltbush, sagebrush, water birch and blue spruce.
The Columbian mammoth is the state fossil of Washington and South Carolina.
Males were generally larger and more robust.
It most likely used its tusks and trunk like modern elephants—for manipulating objects, fighting, and foraging.
These findings were not expected by scientists; nuclear DNA and more specimens will have to be analysed to clarify the situation.
On Goat Rock Beach in Sonoma Coast State Park, blueschist and chert outcrops (nicknamed "Mammoth Rocks") show evidence of having been rubbed by Columbian mammoths or mastodons.
Juveniles, on the other hand, had convex backs like Asian elephants.
The study also suggested that the animals in the range where ''M.&nbsp;columbi'' and ''M.&nbsp;primigenius'' overlapped formed a metapopulation of hybrids with varying morphology.
The Columbian mammoth was first scientifically described in 1857 by Scottish naturalist Hugh Falconer, who named the species ''Elephas columbi'' after Christopher Columbus.
It is unknown whether the two species were sympatric and lived there simultaneously, or if the woolly mammoths entered southern areas when Columbian mammoth populations were absent.
Mired animals died from hunger or exhaustion; their corpses attracted predators, which sometimes became stuck themselves.
The study of tusk rings may aid further study of mammoth migration.
Most of their weight would have been close to the skull, with less torque than straight tusks would have provided.
Almost all vertebrae of the "Huntington mammoth", a very aged specimen, were deformed by arthritic disease, and four of its lumbar vertebrae were fused; some bones also indicate bacterial infection, such as osteomyelitis.
The earliest suggested evidence of Columbian mammoth-butchering in America (from Lovewell, Kansas) dates from 18,000 to 21,000 years ago.
Paleo-Indians of the Clovis culture, which arose 7,000 years later, may have been the first humans to hunt mammoths extensively.
The crown was pushed forward and up as it wore down, comparable to a conveyor belt.
The first molars were about the size of those of a human, ; the third were  long, and the sixth were about  long and weighed .
The ridges were wear-resistant, enabling the animal to chew large quantities of food which contained grit.
Other skeletal features include a short, deep rostrum (front part of the jaws), a rounded mandibular symphysis (central jaw ridge) and the coronoid process of the mandible (upper protrusion of the jaw bone) extending above the molar surfaces.
The Columbian mammoth preferred open areas, such as parkland landscapes, and fed on sedge, grass, and other plants.
Whatever the actual cause of extinction, large mammals are generally more vulnerable than smaller ones due to their smaller population size and low reproduction rates.
The lifespan of a mammal is related to its size; Columbian mammoths are larger than modern elephants, which have a lifespan of about 60 years.
The earliest European mammoth has been named ''M.&nbsp;rumanus''; it spread across Europe and China.
imperator'' and ''E.
More complete material that may be from the same quarry as Falconer's fragmentary holotype molar was reported in 2012, and could help shed more light on that specimen, since doubts about its adequacy as a holotype have been raised.
The tusks are short, which may indicate they are meant to be females.
The environment in these areas may have had more varied habitats than those inhabited by woolly mammoths in the north (the mammoth steppe).
Similar accumulations of mammoth bones have been found; it is thought these are the result of individuals dying near or in rivers over thousands of years and their bones being accumulated by the water (such as in the Aucilla River in Florida), or animals dying after becoming mired in mud.
The Columbian mammoth evolved from the steppe mammoth, which entered North America from Asia about 1.5 million years ago.
Although William Phipps Blake and Richard Owen believed that ''E.
Mammoths derived from ''M.&nbsp;trogontherii'' evolved molars with 26 ridges 400,000 years ago in Siberia and became the woolly mammoth (''M.&nbsp;primigenius'').
The largest known mammoth tusk,  long, belonged to a Columbian mammoth, and others range from  long.
The authors also questioned whether ''M.&nbsp;columbi'' and ''M.&nbsp;primigenius'' should be considered "good species", considering that they were able to interbreed after supposedly being separated for a million years, but cautioned that more specimens need to be sampled.
Columbian mammoth tusks were generally less twisted than those of woolly mammoths.
These mammoths presumably reached the islands by swimming there when sea levels were lower, and decreased in size due to the limited food provided by the islands' small areas.
The animal was brought to Falconer's attention in 1846 by Charles Lyell, who sent him molar fragments found during the 1838 excavation of the Brunswick–Altamaha Canal in Georgia, in the southeastern United States.
Microscopy showed that these chewed remains consisted of sedge, grass, fir twigs and needles, oak and maple.
jacksoni'', two other American elephants described from molars, were based on remains too fragmentary to classify properly.
Stomach contents from Columbian mammoths are rare, since no carcasses have been found, but plant remains were discovered between the pelvis and ribs of the "Huntington mammoth" when it was excavated in Utah.
Petroglyphs in the Colorado Plateau depict either Columbian mammoths or mastodons.
Dark bands correspond to summer, making it possible to determine the season in which a mammoth died.
The Columbian mammoth evolved from a population of ''M.&nbsp;trogontherii'' that had crossed the Bering Strait and entered North America about 1.5 million years ago; it retained a similar number of molar ridges.
It had long, curved tusks and four molars, which were replaced six times during the lifetime of an individual.
It was one of the last in a line of mammoth species, beginning with ''M.
The closest extant relative of the Columbian and other mammoths is the Asian elephant.
A 2011 study of the complete mitochondrial genome (inherited through the female line) showed that two examined Columbian mammoths, including the morphologically typical "Huntington mammoth", were grouped within a subclade of woolly mammoths.
subplanifrons'' from the Pliocene, and ''M.
Some of these sites are not closely associated with Clovis points.
Since many remains of each species of mammoth are known from several localities, it is possible to reconstruct the evolutionary history of the genus through morphological studies.
Columbian mammoths had six sets of molars in the course of a lifetime.
A large amount of mammoth dung has been found in two caves in Utah.
Columbian and woolly mammoths both disappeared during the late Pleistocene and early Holocene, alongside most of the Pleistocene megafauna.
A 2002 study concluded that the archaeological record did not support the overkill hypothesis, given that only 14 Clovis sites (12 with mammoth remains and two with mastodon remains) out of 76 examined provided strong evidence of hunting.
This extinction formed part of the Quaternary extinction event, which began 40,000 years ago and peaked between 14,000 and 11,500 years ago.
jeffersoni'' (Jefferson's mammoth) were either more primitive or advanced stages in Columbian mammoth evolution was largely dismissed, and they were regarded as synonyms.
It did not live in the Arctic regions of Canada, which were instead inhabited by woolly mammoths.
These people are thought to have hunted Columbian mammoths with Clovis pointed spears which were thrown or thrust.
The condition of the bones suggests the specimen died of old age and malnutrition.
The Columbian mammoth coexisted with the other extinct proboscideans ''Stegomastodon mirificus'' and ''Cuvieronius tropicus'' at sites in Texas and New Mexico during the early Irvingtonian.
Osborn also retained names for many regional and intermediate subspecies or "varieties", and created recombinations such as ''Parelephas columbi felicis'' and ''Archidiskodon imperator maibeni''.
The best indication of sex is the size of the pelvic girdle, since the opening that functions as the birth canal is always wider in females than in males.
Many specimens also accumulated in natural traps, such as sinkholes and tar pits.
A 13,000-year-old bone fragment from Vero Beach, Florida, the earliest example of art in the Americas, is engraved with either a mammoth or a mastodon.
Although it is unclear to what extent Columbian mammoths migrated, an isotope analysis of Blackwater Draw in New Mexico indicated that they spent part of the year in the Rocky Mountains,  away.
Falconer found that his specimens were distinct, confirming his conclusion by examining their internal structure and studying additional molars from Mexico.
The closest living relatives of the Proboscidea are the sirenians (dugongs and manatees) and the hyraxes (an order of small, herbivorous mammals).
Like modern elephants, Columbian mammoths were probably social and lived in matriarchal (female-led) family groups; most of their other social behavior was also similar to that of modern elephants.
The earliest known members of Proboscidea, the clade that contains the elephants, existed about 55 million years ago around the Tethys Sea area.
Mammoths may have had gestation periods of 21–22 months, like those of modern elephants.
Columbian mammoths had very long tusks (modified incisor teeth), which were more curved than those of modern elephants.
The mammoth may have made the trackway before it died, or another individual may have approached the dead or dying animal—similar to the way modern elephants guard dead relatives for several days.
They are also shown with two "fingers" on their trunks, a feature known from European depictions of mammoths.
Mammoths may have formed large herds more often than modern elephants, since animals living in open areas are more likely to do this than those in forested areas.
Some areas were covered by grass, herbaceous plants, trees and shrubs; their composition varied from region to region, and included grassland, savanna and aspen parkland habitats.
The most recent Columbian mammoth remains have been dated to around 11,500 years ago.
At 6–12 months the second set of molars would erupt, with the first set worn out at 18 months of age.
The cover of dung is  thick, and has a volume of 227&nbsp;m³ (8,000 cubic ft), with the largest boluses  in diameter.
Mammoths chewed their food by using their powerful jaw muscles to move the mandible forward and close the mouth, then backward while opening; the sharp enamel ridges thereby cut across each other, grinding the food.
The Asian elephant (''Elephas maximus'') is the closest extant relative of the mammoths.
Columbian mammoths inhabited the southern half of North America, ranging from the northern United States across Mexico as far south as Costa Rica.
The tusks were usually asymmetrical, with considerable variation; some tusks curved down, instead of outwards, or were shorter due to breakage.
At the same site another group, consisting of a bull and six females, also appears to have been killed by a flash flood; although both groups died between 64,000 and 73,000 years ago, whether they died in the same event is unknown.
Nebraska's state fossil is "Archie", a Columbian mammoth specimen found in the state in 1922.
This is similar to the diet documented for the woolly mammoth, although browsing seems to have been more important for the Columbian mammoth.
Among many now extinct clades, the mastodon (''Mammut'') is only a distant relative, and part of the distinct family Mammutidae, which diverged 25 million years before the mammoths evolved.
Digging is indicated on preserved tusks by flat, polished sections of the surface that would have reached the ground.
However, isotope studies have shown that the accumulations represent individual deaths at different seasons of the year, and therefore not herds killed in single incidents.
Introduced cattle and horses have since taken over this ecological role.
About a quarter of the tusks' length was inside the sockets; they grew spirally in opposite directions from the base, curving until the tips pointed towards each other, and sometimes crossed.
Mammoths entered Europe around 3&nbsp;million years ago.
The Columbian mammoth reached  tall at the shoulder, and weighed up to .
A female mammoth at the Naco-Mammoth Kill Site in Arizona, found with eight Clovis points near its skull, shoulder blade, ribs and other bones, is considered the most convincing evidence for hunting.
exilis'' (the pygmy mammoth) were the only species of mammoth endemic to the Americas (as other species lived both there and in Eurasia).
In turn, this species was replaced by the steppe mammoth (''M.
A population evolved 12–14 ridges, splitting off from and replacing the earlier type, becoming ''M.
It was used for manipulating objects and social interaction.
One individual, nicknamed "Murray", lies on its side, and probably died in this pose while struggling to get free.
The mammoths could use their tusks as weapons by thrusting, swiping or crashing them down, and used them in pushing contests by interlocking them, which sometimes resulted in breakage.
Many of the fossils are the remains of animals that became stuck in asphalt puddles which seeped to the surface of the pits, 40,000 to 11,500 years ago.
meridionalis'' about 2–1.7 million years ago.
The former is thought to be the ancestor of later forms.
The pygmy mammoths of the Channel Islands of California evolved from Columbian mammoths.
trogontherii'', and was larger than the modern African elephant and the woolly mammoth, both of which reached about .
Tusks may have been used in intra-species fighting for territory or mates and for display, to attract females and intimidate rivals.
Accumulations of modern elephant remains have been called "elephants' graveyards", because these sites were erroneously thought to be where old elephants went to die.
A similar situation has been documented in modern species of African elephant (''Loxodonta''), the African bush elephant (''L.&nbsp;africana'') and the African forest elephant (''L.&nbsp;cyclotis'').
The trunk could be used for pulling up large tufts of grass, picking buds and flowers or tearing leaves and branches from trees and shrubs, and the tusks were used to dig up plants and strip bark from trees.
Tusk growth slowed when foraging became more difficult, such as during illness or when a male mammoth was banished from the herd (male elephants live with their herds until about the age of ten).
Mammoths continued growing during adulthood, as do other elephants.
A 2015 study of mammoth molars confirmed that ''M.&nbsp;columbi'' evolved from Eurasian ''M.&nbsp;trogontherii'', not ''M.&nbsp;meridionalis'' as had been suggested earlier, and noted that ''M.&nbsp;columbi'' and ''M.&nbsp;trogontherii'' were so similar in morphology that their classification as separate species may be questionable.
When the last set of molars wore out the animal would be unable to chew, and would die of starvation.
There were also wooded areas; although mammoths would not have preferred forests, clearings could provide them with grass and herbs.
Columbian mammoth remains have been found in association with Clovis culture artifacts; these remains may have stemmed either from hunting or from scavenging.
In 1942, Henry Fairfield Osborn's posthumous monograph on the Proboscidea was published, wherein he used various genus and subgenus names that had previously been proposed for extinct elephant species, such as ''Archidiskodon'', ''Metarchidiskodon'', ''Parelephas'', and ''Mammonteus''.
The site is the opposite scenario of that in Waco; all but one of the at least 55 skeletons—additional skeletons are excavated each year—are male, and accumulated over time rather than in a single event.
At the Murray Springs Clovis Site in Arizona, where several Columbian mammoth skeletons have been excavated, a trackway similar to that left by modern elephants leads to one of the skeletons.
Males grew until age 40, and females until age 25.
texianus'' was more appropriate for the species, Falconer rejected the name; he also suggested that ''E.
The family Elephantidae existed six million years ago in Africa, and includes the living elephants and the mammoths.
meridionalis'' and ''M.
Several sites contain the skeletons of multiple Columbian mammoths, either because they died in a single incident such as a flash flood, or because these locations were natural traps in which individuals accumulated over time.
Annual tusk growth of  continued throughout life, slowing as the animal reached adulthood.
It is assumed that like modern male elephants, male mammoths primarily lived alone, were more adventurous (especially young males) and more likely to encounter dangerous situations than the females.
Woolly mammoths entered North America about 100,000 years ago.
One possible explanation is introgression of a haplogroup from woolly to Columbian mammoths, or vice versa.
It lived in warmer habitats than the woolly mammoth, and probably lacked many of the adaptations seen in that species.
Hair thought to be that of the Columbian mammoth has been discovered in Bechan Cave in Utah, where mammoth dung has also been found.
imperator'' (the imperial mammoth) and ''M.
At the Lange-Ferguson Site in South Dakota, the remains of two mammoths were found with two 12,800-year-old cleaver choppers made from a mammoth shoulder blade; the choppers had been used to butcher the mammoths.
Other sites show more circumstantial evidence of mammoth hunting, such as piled bones bearing butcher marks.
Some accumulations are thought to be the remains of herds which died at the same time, perhaps due to flooding.
The age of a mammoth can be roughly determined by counting the growth rings of its tusks when viewed in cross section.
The third set of molars lasted for ten years, and this process was repeated until the sixth set emerged at 30 years of age.
The Columbian mammoth shared its habitat with other now-extinct Pleistocene mammals (such as ''Glyptodon'', ''Smilodon'', ground sloths, ''Camelops'' and the American mastodon), horses and buffalos.
The teeth had separated ridges of enamel, which were covered in "prisms" directed towards the chewing surface.
Fossils of different animals are found stuck together when they are excavated from the pits.
Although Clovis points have been found with Columbian mammoth remains at several sites, archaeologists disagree about whether the finds represent hunting, scavenging dead mammoths, or are coincidental.
At the same time, the skulls became shorter from front to back to minimise the weight of the head.
An adult Columbian mammoth would have needed more than  of food per day, and may have foraged for twenty hours a day.
The Lehner Mammoth-Kill Site and the Dent Site, where multiple juvenile and adult mammoths have been found with butcher marks and in association with Clovis points, were once interpreted as the killing of entire herds by Clovis hunters.
This idea was first proposed by Paul S. Martin in 1967; more recent research on this subject have varied in their conclusions.
This suggests that the two populations interbred and produced fertile offspring.
Modern elephants can form large herds, sometimes consisting of multiple family groups, and these herds can include thousands of animals migrating together.
In contrast, a 2007 study found that the Clovis record indicated the highest frequency of prehistoric exploitation of proboscideans for subsistence in the world, and supported the overkill hypothesis.
Reaching  at the shoulders and  in weight, the Columbian mammoth was one of the largest species of mammoth.
Some of this hair is coarse, and identical to that known to belong to woolly mammoths; however, since this location is so far south it is unlikely to be woolly mammoth hair.
Like that of modern elephants, the mammoth's sensitive, muscular trunk was a limb-like organ with many functions.
This is supported by fossil assemblages such as the Dent Site in Colorado and the Waco Mammoth National Monument in Waco, Texas, where groups consisting entirely of female and juvenile Columbian mammoths have been found (implying female-led family groups).
Fossils of woolly and Columbian mammoths have been found in the same place in a few areas of North America where their ranges overlapped, including the Hot Springs Site.
Scientists do not know whether these extinctions happened abruptly or were drawn out.
Many other such assemblages of bones with butcher marks may also represent accumulations over time, and are therefore ambiguous as evidence for large scale hunting.
trogontherii'') with 18–20 ridges, which evolved in eastern Asia around 2–1.5 million years ago.
Mammoth species can be identified from the number of enamel ridges (or lamellar plates) on their molars: primitive species had few ridges, and the number increased gradually as new species evolved to feed on more abrasive food items.
africanavus'' from the Pleistocene.
The Columbian mammoth disappeared at the end of the Pleistocene around 11,000 years ago, most likely as a result of habitat loss caused by climate change, hunting by humans, or a combination of both.
