Low Memorial Library, a National Historic Landmark and the centerpiece of the campus, is listed for its architectural significance.
Biologist Martin Chalfie was the first to introduce the use of Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP) in labeling cells in intact organisms.
Both President George Washington and Vice President John Adams attended the college's commencement on May 6, 1789, as a tribute of honor to the many alumni of the school who had been involved in the American Revolution.
In 2007, Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad was one of those invited to speak on campus.
A fourth is the  Nevis Laboratories in Irvington, New York for the study of particle and motion physics.
The football program unfortunately is best known for its record of futility set during the 1980s: between 1983 and 1988, the team lost 44 games in a row, which is still the record for the NCAA Football Championship Subdivision.
A notable upsurge in the protests occurred in 1978, when following a celebration of the tenth anniversary of the student uprising in 1968, students marched and rallied in protest of university investments in South Africa.
"The Steps", alternatively known as "Low Steps" or the "Urban Beach", are a popular meeting area for Columbia students.
Students initiated a major demonstration in 1968 over two main issues.
Scholarships are also given to undergraduate students by the admissions committee.
Notable members of the Astor family attended Columbia, while some recent business graduates include investor Warren Buffett, former CEO of PBS and NBC Larry Grossman, and chairman of Wal-Mart S. Robson Walton.
Some notable Columbia alumni that have gone on to work in film include directors Sidney Lumet (''12 Angry Men'') and Kathryn Bigelow (''The Hurt Locker''), screenwriters Howard Koch (''Casablanca'') and Joseph L. Mankiewicz (''All About Eve''), and actors James Cagney and Ed Harris.
A popular myth states that the gym's plans were eventually used by Princeton University for the expansion of its athletic facilities, but as Jadwin Gymnasium was already 50% complete by 1966 (when the Columbia gym was announced) this was clearly not correct.
It is the oldest gay student organization in the world, founded as the Student Homophile League in 1967 by students including lifelong activist Stephen Donaldson.
Instruction was held in a new schoolhouse adjoining Trinity Church, located on what is now lower Broadway in Manhattan.
Four United States Poet Laureates received their degrees from Columbia.
Health-related schools are located at the Columbia University Medical Center, a  campus located in the neighborhood of Washington Heights, fifty blocks uptown.
Their website, hackny.org, is a gathering ground of ideas and discussions for New York's young entrepreneurial community, the Silicon Alley.
Teachers College publishes the ''Teachers College Record'', a journal of research, analysis, and commentary in the field of education, published continuously since 1900.
There is a third campus on the west bank of the Hudson River, the  Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory and Earth Institute in Palisades, New York.
The Varsity Show is an annual musical written by and for students and was established in 1894, making it one of Columbia's oldest traditions.
The U.S. Green Building Council selected the university's Manhattanville plan for the Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) Neighborhood Design pilot program.
In regular decision, 1,573 out of 32,772 applicants were admitted, for an acceptance rate of 4.79%.
Columbia has three official undergraduate colleges: Columbia College (CC), the liberal arts college offering the Bachelor of Arts degree, the Fu Foundation School of Engineering and Applied Science (also known as SEAS or Columbia Engineering) is the engineering and applied science school offering the Bachelor of Science degree, and The School of General Studies (GS), the liberal arts college offering the Bachelor of Arts degree to non-traditional students undertaking full- or part-time study.
focused largely on bonds and financial institutions directly involved with the South African regime.
Columbia has been rated "B+" by the 2011 College Sustainability Report Card for its environmental and sustainability initiatives.
In 1870, Columbia played against Rutgers University in the second football game in the history of the sport.
Columbia University was ranked 4th overall among U.S. national universities for 2016 by ''U.S.
The Loyalists, led by Bishop Charles Inglis fled to Windsor, Nova Scotia, where they founded King's Collegiate School.
During the spring semester, graduate students in the Journalism School publish ''The Bronx Beat'', a bi-weekly newspaper covering the South Bronx.
Columbia students, though, turned out en masse to listen to the speech on the South Lawn.
In 1751, the assembly appointed a commission of ten New York residents, seven of whom were members of the Church of England, to direct the funds accrued by the state lottery towards the foundation of a college.
The majority of Columbia's graduate and undergraduate studies are conducted in Morningside Heights on Seth Low's late-19th century vision of a university campus where all disciplines could be taught in one location.
Columbia disaffiliated from the IDA and scrapped the plans for the controversial gym, building a subterranean physical fitness center under the north end of campus instead.
Columbia scientists have been credited with about 175 new inventions in the health sciences each year.
After the Revolution, the college turned to the State of New York in order to restore its vitality, promising to make whatever changes to the school's charter the state might demand.
The lights remain on until February 28.
The basketball, fencing, swimming & diving, volleyball and wrestling programs are based at the Dodge Physical Fitness Center on the main campus.
Barnard, the institution rapidly assumed the shape of a modern university.
The university has also educated 26 foreign heads of state, including President of Georgia Mikheil Saakashvili, President of East Timor Jose Ramos Horta, President of Estonia Toomas Hendrik Ilves and other historical figures such as Wellington Koo, Radovan Karadžić, Gaston Eyskens, and T. V. Soong.
The University requires a minimum of Silver, but through its design and review process seeks to achieve higher levels.
The college's enrollment, structure, and academics stagnated for the majority of the 19th century, with many of the college presidents doing little to change the way that the college functioned.
University President Lee C. Bollinger tried to allay the controversy by letting Ahmadenijad speak, but with a negative introduction (given personally by Bollinger).
Alumni of Columbia have occupied top positions in Wall Street and the rest of the business world.
Columbia University is home to many fraternities, sororities, and co-educational Greek organizations.
Many of the Class of '68 walked out of their graduation and held a countercommencement on Low Plaza with a picnic following at Morningside Park, the place where the protests began.
Columbia University has an extensive underground tunnel system more than a century old, with the oldest portions predating the present campus.
It was completed in 1934 and renamed for Butler in 1946.
By 2006, CORE had awarded graduate and undergraduate students over $100,000 in seed capital.
The President of Columbia University, who is selected by the Trustees in consultation with the Executive Committee of the University Senate and who serves at the Trustees' pleasure, is the chief executive officer of the university.
The Trustees appoint the President and other senior administrative officers of the university, and review and confirm faculty appointments as required.
Students meet at the sun-dial for free hot chocolate, performances by ''a cappella'' groups, and speeches by the university president and a guest.
The InterGreek Council is the self-governing student organization that provides guidelines and support to its member organizations within each of the three councils at Columbia, the Interfraternity Council, Panhellenic Council, and Multicultural Greek Council.
Upperclassmen participate in a room selection process, wherein students can pick to live in a mix of either corridor- or apartment-style housing with their friends.
Some of these remain accessible to the public, while others have been cordoned off.
A new tradition has developed with the Liberty Cup.
According to the 2012 college selectivity ranking by U.S. News & World Report, which factors admission and yield rates among other criteria, Columbia was tied with Yale, Caltech and MIT as the most selective colleges in the country.
A satellite site in Paris, France holds classes at Reid Hall.
Further student protests, including hunger strike and more barricades of Hamilton Hall and the Business School during the late 1970s and early 1980s, were aimed at convincing the university trustees to divest all of the university's investments in companies that were seen as active or tacit supporters of the apartheid regime in South Africa.
Today, two United States Senators and 16 Chief Executives of Fortune 500 companies hold Columbia degrees, as do three of the 25 richest Americans and 20 living billionaires.
Columbia Technology Ventures (formerly Science and Technology Ventures), , manages some 600 patents and more than 250 active license agreements.
The tradition began in 2002, a year after the Fordham-Columbia game was postponed due to the September 11 attacks.
Columbia alumni have made an indelible mark in the field of American poetry and literature, with such people as Jack Kerouac and Allen Ginsberg, pioneers of the Beat Generation, and Langston Hughes, a seminal figure in the Harlem Renaissance, all having attended the university.
A book signifying knowledge, balances on her lap, and an owl, the attribute of wisdom, is hidden in the folds of her gown.
Professional journals published by academic departments at Columbia University include ''Current Musicology'' and ''The Journal of Philosophy''.
Immediately following the College Walk festivities is one of Columbia's older holiday traditions, the lighting of the Yule Log.
After a forty-five minutes or so of jokes and music, the procession then moves out to the lawn in front of Hartley, Wallach and John Jay residence halls to entertain the residents there.
Columbia is one of the fourteen founding members of the Association of American Universities, and was the first school in the United States to grant the M.D.
Draped in an academic gown, the female figure of Alma Mater wears a crown of laurels and sits on a throne.
In April of that same year, a new charter was adopted for the college, still in use today, granting power to a private board of 24 Trustees.
Diamond, and Herman Wouk.
It oversees the welfare and academic freedom of the faculty and the welfare of students.
Over the past 20 years, graduates of Columbia established over 100 technology companies.
A $250,000 grant from the New York City Economic Development Corporation was used to establish the NYC Media Lab.
The library design is neo-classical in style.
Secretary of the Navy Ray Mabus and Columbia University President Lee C. Bollinger signed an agreement to reinstate Naval Reserve Officers Training Corps (NROTC) program at Columbia for the first time in more than 40 years on May 26, 2011.
The university is organized into twenty schools, including Columbia College, the School of Engineering and Applied Science, and the School of General Studies.
Hundreds of demonstrators swarmed the campus on September 24 and the speech itself was televised worldwide.
Designations include John W. Kluge Scholars, John Jay Scholars, C. Prescott Davis Scholars, Global Scholars, Egleston Scholars, and Science Research Fellows.
Another six are nominated by the Board in consultation with the Executive Committee of the University Senate.
As membership grew, however, the nascent club turned its efforts to broadcasting.
Other more recent political figures educated at Columbia include U.S President Barack Obama, Associate Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court Ruth Bader Ginsburg, former U.S. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, former chairman of the U.S. Federal Reserve Bank Alan Greenspan, U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder, and U.S.
Mark Zuckerberg later asked Goldberg to join him in Palo Alto to work on Facebook, but Goldberg declined the offer.
The term of office for Trustees is six years.
I don't know who told you this."
Also listed is Pupin Hall, another National Historic Landmark, which houses the physics and astronomy departments.
Founded in 1961 under the auspices of Columbia University's Graduate School of Journalism, Columbia Journalism Review (CJR) examines day-to-day press performance as well as the forces that affect that performance.
The $7&nbsp;billion expansion plan includes demolishing all buildings, except three that are historically significant, eliminating the existing light industry and storage warehouses, and relocating tenants in 132&nbsp;apartments.
Six of the 24 are nominated from a pool of candidates recommended by the Columbia Alumni Association.
Classes were initially held in July 1754 and were presided over by the college's first president, Dr. Samuel Johnson.
Subsequent public hearings drew neighborhood opposition.
The protests achieved two of their stated goals.
Columbia was the first North American site where the uranium atom was split.
The Fu Foundation School of Engineering and Applied Science offers a minor in Technical Entrepreneurship through its Center for Technology, Innovation, and Community Engagement.
CIRCA hosts college and high school Model UN conferences, hosts speakers influential in international politics to speak on campus, trains students from underprivileged schools in New York in Model&nbsp;UN and oversees a competitive team, which travels to colleges around the country and to an international conference every year.
Additionally, 104 Nobel laureates have been affiliated with Columbia as students, researchers, faculty, or staff.
The uranium atom was split there ten days after the world's first atom-splitting in Copenhagen, Denmark.
A member institution of the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) in Division I FCS, Columbia fields varsity teams in 29 sports and is a member of the Ivy League.
In November 2008, Columbia's undergraduate student body held a referendum on the question of whether or not to invite ROTC back to campus, and the students who voted were almost evenly divided on the issue.
Columbia's medical school has a strategic partnership with New York State Psychiatric Institute, and is affiliated with 19 other hospitals in the U.S. and four hospitals overseas.
Eight years later, Columbia crew won the famed Henley Royal Regatta in the first-ever defeat for an English crew rowing in English waters.
These include Remicade (for arthritis), Reopro (for blood clot complications), Xalatan (for glaucoma), Benefix, Latanoprost (a glaucoma treatment), shoulder prosthesis, homocysteine (testing for cardiovascular disease), and Zolinza (for cancer therapy).
At the same time, university president Seth Low moved the campus again, from 49th&nbsp;Street to its present location, a more spacious campus in the developing neighborhood of Morningside Heights.
Here the first experiments on the fission of uranium were conducted by Enrico Fermi.
The author of India's constitution and Dalit leader Dr. B. R. Ambedkar was also an alumnus of Columbia.
Broadly backed by student groups and many faculty members the Committee Against Investment in South Africa held teach-ins and demonstrations through the year focused on the trustees ties to the corporations doing business with South Africa.
The magazine is published six times a year, and offers a reporting, analysis, criticism, and commentary.
Columbia University will coordinate the long-term direction of the media lab as well as the involvement of its faculty and those of other universities.
Columbia University athletics has a long history, with many accomplishments in athletic fields.
Columbia administers annually the Pulitzer Prize.
CampusNetwork, an on-campus social networking site called Campus Network that preceded Facebook, was created and popularized by Columbia engineering student Adam Goldberg in 2003.
The Columbia Parliamentary Debate Team competes in tournaments around the country as part of the American Parliamentary Debate Association, and hosts both high school and college tournaments on Columbia's campus, as well as public debates on issues affecting the university.
The Liberty Cup is awarded annually to the winner of the football game between Fordham and Columbia Universities, two of the only three NCAA Division I football teams in New York City.
Allan Bloom, a professor of philosophy at the University of Chicago,
WKCR, the student run radio station that broadcasts to the Tri-State area, claims to be the oldest FM radio station in the world, owing to the university's affiliation with Major Edwin Armstrong.
Annual gifts, fund-raising, and an increase in spending from the university's endowment have allowed Columbia to extend generous financial aid packages to qualifying students.
Lee C. Bollinger became the 19th President of Columbia University on June 1, 2002.
Notable labor organizer and women's educator Louise Leonard McLaren received her degree of Master of Arts from Columbia.
Initially, WKCR wasn't a radio station, but an organization concerned with the technology of radio communications.
The band tends to close their Orgo Night performances before Furnald Hall, known among students as the more studious and reportedly "anti-social" residence hall, where the underclassmen in the band serenade the graduating seniors with an entertaining, though vulgar, mock-hymn to Columbia, composed of quips that poke fun at the stereotypes about the Columbia student body.
Notable speakers include Peter Thiel, Jack Dorsey, Alexis Ohanian, Drew Houston, and Mark Cuban.
The InterGreek Council meetings provide opportunity for member organizations to learn from each other, work together and advocate for community needs.
According to Columbia, the first four designated scholars "distinguish themselves for their remarkable academic and personal achievements, dynamism, intellectual curiosity, the originality and independence of their thinking, and the diversity that stems from their different cultures and their varied educational experiences."
The university is affiliated with Teachers College, Barnard College, and Union Theological Seminary, all located nearby in Morningside Heights.
The latter statement drew laughter from the audience.
Solicitor General Donald Verrilli Jr. Dwight D. Eisenhower served as the thirteenth president of Columbia University from 1948 to 1953.
In total, 2,193 out of 36,292 applicants were admitted for an overall acceptance rate of 6.04%, making Columbia the third most selective college in the United States by admission rate behind Stanford and Harvard.
The suspension continued through the military occupation of New York City by British troops until their departure in 1783.
On April 11, 2007, Columbia University announced a $400m to $600m donation from media billionaire alumnus John Kluge to be used exclusively for undergraduate financial aid.
On-campus housing is guaranteed for all four years as an undergraduate.
Columbia is a top supplier of young engineering entrepreneurs for New York City.
In 1857, the college moved from Park Place to a primarily Gothic Revival campus on 49th&nbsp;Street and Madison Avenue, where it remained for the next forty years.
The small hidden owl on the sculpture is also the subject of many Columbia legends, the main legend being that the first student in the freshmen class to find the hidden owl on the statue will be valedictorian, and that any subsequent Columbia male who finds it will marry a Barnard student, given that Barnard is a women's college.
As of 2011, alumni also have received more than 35 National Book Awards and 123 Pulitzer Prizes.
The university is governed by 24 Trustees, customarily including the President, who serves ex officio.
Stretching from 125th Street to 133rd&nbsp;Street, the new campus will house buildings for Columbia's Business School, School of International and Public Affairs, and the Jerome L. Greene Center for Mind, Brain, and Behavior, where research will occur on neurodegenerative diseases such as Parkinson's and Alzheimer's.
A leading First Amendment scholar, he is widely published on freedom of speech and press, and  serves on the faculty of Columbia Law School.
News & World Report''.
The Columbia Queer Alliance is the central Columbia student organization that represents the bisexual, lesbian, gay, transgender, and questioning student population.
At a forum at the university during the 2008 presidential election campaign, both John McCain and Barack Obama said that the university should consider reinstating ROTC on campus.
In 2006, the university established the Office of Environmental Stewardship to initiate, coordinate and implement programs to reduce the university's environmental footprint.
The term refers to the long series of granite steps leading from the lower part of campus (South Field) to its upper terrace.
It has also been ranked among the United States' most beautiful libraries.
The student-run group aims to foster entrepreneurship on campus.
Columbia is also second only to Harvard University in the number of Pulitzer Prize winning alumni and former students, with over 100 recipients as of 2015.
On the northern tip of Manhattan island (in the neighborhood of Inwood), Columbia owns  Baker Field, which includes the Lawrence A. Wien Stadium as well as facilities for field sports, outdoor track, and tennis.
The lab will also create a media research and development database.
A prominent advocate of affirmative action, he played a leading role in the twin Supreme Court cases—Grutter v Bollinger and Gratz v Bollinger—that upheld and clarified the importance of diversity as a compelling justification for affirmative action in higher education.
The university also houses an independent nonprofit organization, Community Impact, which strives to serve disadvantaged people in the Harlem, Washington Heights, and Morningside Heights communities.
Columbia's main campus occupies more than six city blocks, or , in Morningside Heights, New York City, a neighborhood that contains a number of academic institutions.
Arts and literary publications include the ''Columbia Review'', the nation's oldest college literary magazine; ''Columbia'', a nationally regarded literary journal; the ''Columbia Journal of Literary Criticism''; and ''The Mobius Strip'', an online arts and literary magazine.
That was the Lions' first victory at Wien Stadium, which had been opened during the losing streak and was already four years old.
On May 21, 1787, William Samuel Johnson, the son of Dr. Samuel Johnson, was unanimously elected President of Columbia College.
On warm days when the weather is favorable, the Low Steps often become a popular gathering place for students to sunbathe, eat lunch, or play frisbee.
In science and technology, Columbia alumni include: founder of IBM Herman Hollerith; inventor of FM radio Edwin Armstrong; Francis Mechner; integral in development of the nuclear submarine Hyman Rickover; founder of Google China Kai-Fu Lee; scientists Stephen Jay Gould, Robert Millikan, Helium–neon laser inventor Ali Javan and Mihajlo Pupin; chief-engineer of the New York City Subway, William Barclay Parsons; philosophers Irwin Edman and Robert Nozick; economist Milton Friedman; and psychologist Harriet Babcock.
Her right hand holds a scepter composed of four sprays of wheat, terminating with a crown of King's College which refers to Columbia's origin as a Royalist institution in 1754.
The college's library was looted and its sole building requisitioned for use as a military hospital first by American and then British forces.
The incident forced the resignation of Columbia's President, Grayson Kirk and the establishment of the University Senate.
One hundred blocks north of the main campus at Morningside Heights, the Baker Athletics Complex also includes facilities for baseball, softball, soccer, lacrosse, field hockey, tennis, track and rowing, as well as the new Campbell Sports Center opened in January 2013.
Each year, the lab will host a range of roundtable discussions between the private sector and academic institutions.
Notable alumni and former students (counting those from King's College) include five Founding Fathers of the United States; nine Justices of the United States Supreme Court; 20 living billionaires; 29 Academy Award winners; and 29 heads of state, including three United States Presidents.
'''Columbia University''' (officially '''Columbia University in the City of New York''') is a private Ivy League research university in Upper Manhattan, New York City.
In 1746 an act was passed by the general assembly of New York to raise funds for the foundation of a new college.
This is especially challenging for lab and research buildings with their intensive energy use; however, the university also uses lab design guidelines that seek to maximize energy efficiency while protecting the safety of researchers.
Other awards and honors won by faculty include 30 MacArthur Foundation Award winners, 4 National Medal of Science recipients, 43 National Academy of Sciences Award winners, 20 National Academy of Engineering Award winners, 38 Institute of Medicine of the National Academies Award recipients and 143 American Academy of Arts and Sciences Award winners.
Other publications include ''The Columbian'', the undergraduate colleges' annually published yearbook the ''Gadfly'', a biannual journal of popular philosophy produced by undergraduates; and ''Rhapsody in Blue'', an undergraduate urban studies magazine.
Twenty-six percent of students at Columbia have family incomes below $60,000, making it one of the most socioeconomically diverse top-tier colleges.
University alumni have also been very prominent in the film industry, with 28 alumni and former students winning a combined 39 Academy Awards (as of 2011), second in the world only to New York University (NYU).
Many Columbia alumni have gone on to renowned careers in the arts, such as the composers Richard Rodgers, Oscar Hammerstein II, Lorenz Hart, and Art Garfunkel.
It succeeded to the powers of the University Council, which was created in 1890 as a body of faculty, deans, and other administrators to regulate inter-Faculty affairs and consider issues of university-wide concern.
Though several schools within the university had admitted women for years, Columbia College first admitted women in the fall of 1983, after a decade of failed negotiations with Barnard College, the all-female institution affiliated with the university, to merge the two schools.
Other inventions and products related to Columbia include Sequential Lateral Solidification (SLS) technology for making LCDs, System Management Arts (SMARTS), Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) (which is used for audio, video, chat, instant messaging and whiteboarding), pharmacopeia, Macromodel (software for computational chemistry), a new and better recipe for glass concrete, Blue LEDs, and Beamprop (used in photonics).
The Nicholas Murray Butler Library, commonly known simply as Butler Library, is the largest single library in the Columbia University Library System, and is one of the largest buildings on the campus.
In April 2011 the Columbia University Senate voted to welcome the ROTC program back on campus.
Armstrong helped the students in their early efforts, donating a microphone and turntables when they designed their first makeshift studio in a dorm room.
It was established in 1754 as '''King's College''' by royal charter of George II of Great Britain.
CJR.org, its web site, delivers real-time criticism and reporting, giving CJR a presence in the ongoing conversation about the media.
In February 2011 during one of three town-hall meetings on the ROTC ban, former Army staff sergeant Anthony Maschek, a Purple Heart recipient for injuries sustained during his service in Iraq, was booed and hissed at by some students during his speech promoting the idea of allowing the ROTC on campus.
According to ''U.S.
Individual colleges and schools were also nationally ranked by ''U.S.
Salinger, Upton Sinclair, and the journalist Hunter S. Thompson, primarily known for his works in the American magazine Rolling Stone.
File:President Barack Obama.jpg|Barack Obama, President of the United States and Nobel laureate, Class of 1983, Columbia College
The Lab is modeled after similar ones at MIT and Stanford.
The American Revolutionary War broke out in 1776, and was catastrophic for the operation of King's College, which suspended instruction for eight years beginning in 1776 with the arrival of the Continental Army.
The Legislature agreed to assist the college, and on May 1, 1784, it passed "an Act for granting certain privileges to the College heretofore called King's College."
Professor Chris Wiggins of the Fu Foundation School of Engineering and Applied Science is working in conjunction with Professors Evan Korth of New York University and Hilary Mason, chief scientist at bit.ly to facilitate the growth of student tech-startups in an effort to transform a traditionally financially centered New York City into the next Silicon Valley.
Other teaching hospitals affiliated with Columbia through the New York-Presbyterian network include the Payne Whitney Clinic in Manhattan, and the Payne Whitney Westchester, a psychiatric institute located in White Plains, New York.
''Inside New York'' is an annual guidebook to New York City, written, edited, and published by Columbia undergraduates.
As a result of the protests, Bloom stated, "American universities were no longer places of intellectual and academic debate, but rather places of 'political correctness' and liberalism."
Approximately 10–15% of undergraduate students are associated with Greek life.
Along with NYU and the Catholic Church, Columbia University is one of the top 3 largest landowners in New York City.
However, this does not apply to international students, transfer students, visiting students, or students in the School of General Studies.
File:President Theodore Roosevelt, 1904.jpg|Theodore Roosevelt, President of the United States and Nobel laureate, Columbia Law School
The show has one of the largest operating budgets of all university events.
A troop of students dressed as Continental Army soldiers carry the eponymous log from the sun-dial to the lounge of John Jay Hall, where it is lit amid the singing of seasonal carols.
In 1763, Dr. Johnson was succeeded in the presidency by Myles Cooper, a graduate of The Queen's College, Oxford, and an ardent Tory.
In the 2005–06 academic year, the Columbia Military Society, Columbia's student group for ROTC cadets and Marine officer candidates, was renamed the Hamilton Society for "students who aspire to serve their nation through the military in the tradition of Alexander Hamilton".
CI consists of a dedicated corps of about 950 Columbia University student volunteers participating in 25 community service programs, which serve more than 8,000 people each year.
The college was officially founded on October 31, 1754, as King's College by royal charter of King George II, making it the oldest institution of higher learning in the state of New York and the fifth oldest in the United States.
One affiliated institution—Teachers College—is likewise an academic department of the university.
