John McLoughlin, a physician, was appointed Chief Factor of the Columbia District.
From 1944 to 1971, pump systems drew cooling water from the river and, after treating this water for use by the reactors, returned it to the river.
The federally operated system is known as the Federal Columbia River Power System, which includes 31&nbsp;dams on the Columbia and its tributaries.
At the beginning of the 20th&nbsp;century, roughly 75&nbsp;percent of the Columbia's flow occurred in the summer, between April and September.
For its first , the Columbia flows northwest along the trench through Windermere Lake and the town of Invermere, a region known in British Columbia as the Columbia Valley, then northwest to Golden and into Kinbasket Lake.
The Columbia Unglaciated ecoregion makes up the rest of the watershed.
Various studies have placed the date of the Bonneville Slide anywhere between 1060 and 1760 AD; the idea that the landslide debris present today was formed by more than one slide is relatively recent and may explain the large range of estimates.
In the 1840s a mass migration of American settlers undermined British control.
Downriver of Grand Coulee, each dam's reservoir is closely regulated by the Bonneville Power Administration (BPA), the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and various Washington public utility districts to ensure flow, flood control, and power generation objectives are met.
Sediments were also deposited when the floodwaters slowed in the broad flats of the Quincy, Othello, and Pasco Basins.
In October 1792, Vancouver sent Lieutenant William Robert Broughton, his second-in-command, up the river.
The dredging and dam building that followed would permanently alter the river, disrupting its natural flow but also providing electricity, irrigation, navigability and other benefits to the region.
It marks the southern and eastern borders of the Colville Indian Reservation and the western border of the Spokane Indian Reservation.
Broughton got as far as the Sandy River at the western end of the Columbia River Gorge, about  upstream, sighting and naming Mount Hood.
This waste is expected to reach the river in 12 to 50&nbsp;years if cleanup does not proceed on schedule.
The Nelson and Mackenzie watersheds are separated by a divide between streams flowing to the Arctic Ocean and those of the Hudson Bay watershed.
Cascade Locks and Canal were first constructed in 1896 around the Cascades Rapids, enabling boats to travel safely through the Columbia River Gorge.
The Columbia is the twelfth-longest river and has the sixth-largest drainage basin in the United States.
South of the Canada–US&nbsp;border, the Colville, Spokane, Coeur d'Alene, Yakama, Nez Perce, Cayuse, Palus, Umatilla, Cowlitz, and the Confederated Tribes of Warm Springs live along the US stretch.
It flows northwest and then south into the US state of Washington, then turns west to form most of the border between Washington and the state of Oregon before emptying into the Pacific Ocean.
Compared to the Columbia River above the two rivers' confluence, the Pend Oreille-Clark-Flathead is nearly as long (about 86%), its basin about three-fourths as large (76%), and its discharge over a third (37%).
In 1902, the United States Bureau of Reclamation was established to aid in the economic development of arid western states.
The Chief Joseph Dam and several dams on the Columbia's tributaries entirely block migration, and there are no migrating fish on the river above these dams.
Climate varies greatly from place to place within the watershed.
As years progressed, the right of natives to fish along the Columbia became the central issue of contention with the states, commercial fishers, and private property owners.
The Canadian portion of the Columbia Basin outline the Traditional homelands of the Canadian Kootenay- Ktunaxa.
US government intervention, to which the states of Alaska, Idaho, and Oregon objected, included an 11-day closure of an Alaska fishery.
Other Columbia Basin dams that have been removed include Condit Dam on Washington's White Salmon River, and the Milltown Dam on the Clark Fork in Montana.
The river is  long, and its largest tributary is the Snake River.
Several major North American drainage basins and many minor ones share a common border with the Columbia River's drainage basin.
, 1&nbsp;million&nbsp;US&nbsp;gallons (3,785&nbsp;m3) of highly radioactive waste is traveling through groundwater toward the Columbia River.
Each of these four averages more than  and drains an area of more than .
For years the Hudson's Bay Company successfully maintained control of the Columbia River and American attempts to gain a foothold were fended off.
In the late 1920s, political forces in the Northwestern United States generally favored private development of hydroelectric dams along the Columbia.
The Columbia receives more than 60&nbsp;significant tributaries.
This part of the Oregon Trail, from The Dalles to Fort Vancouver, was the trail's most treacherous stretch, which prompted the 1846 construction of the Barlow Road.
The Celilo Canal, bypassing Celilo Falls, opened to river traffic in 1915.
Idaho Power Company's Hells Canyon dams have no fish ladders (and do not pass juvenile salmon downstream), and thus allow no steelhead or salmon to migrate above Hells Canyon.
The river flows past The Gorge Amphitheatre, a prominent concert venue in the Northwest, then through Priest Rapids Dam, and then through the Hanford Nuclear Reservation.
Of the 227&nbsp;major dams in the Columbia River drainage basin, the four Washington dams on the lower Snake River are often identified for removal, for example in an ongoing lawsuit concerning a Bush administration plan for salmon recovery.
To the north, mostly in British Columbia, the Columbia watershed borders the Fraser River watershed.
White sturgeon, which take 15 to 25&nbsp;years to mature, typically migrate between the ocean and the upstream habitat several times during their lives.
Its drainage basin is roughly the size of France and extends into seven US states and a Canadian province.
As river development continued in the 20th&nbsp;century, each of these major fishing sites was flooded by a dam, beginning with Cascades Rapids in 1938.
This region has 14&nbsp;species of fish, many of which are endemic.
For many the final leg of the journey involved travel down the lower Columbia River to Fort Vancouver.
The project has met opposition because of concerns about stirring up toxic sediment on the riverbed.
The legislation was attributed to the efforts of Oregon Senator Charles McNary, Washington Senator Clarence Dill, and Oregon Congressman Charles Martin, among others.
The Sinixt or Lakes people lived on the lower stretch of the Canadian portion, while above that the Shuswap people (Secwepemc in their own language) reckon the whole of the upper Columbia east to the Rockies as part of their territory.
Fish ladders have been installed at some dam sites to help the fish journey to spawning waters.
An extensive system of locks allowed ships and barges to pass easily from one reservoir to the next.
Native American stories about the bridge differ in their details but agree in general that the bridge permitted increased interaction between tribes on the north and south sides of the river.
Vegetation varies widely, ranging from western hemlock and western redcedar in the moist regions to sagebrush in the arid regions.
Atmospheric conditions block the flow of moisture in summer, which is generally dry except for occasional thunderstorms in the interior.
Fourteen farms in the area have gone through the permitting process to build such dams legally.
The watershed provides habitat for 609&nbsp;known fish and wildlife species, including the bull trout, bald eagle, gray wolf, grizzly bear, and Canada lynx.
But the overwhelming victories of gubernatorial candidate George W. Joseph in the 1930 Oregon Republican Party primary, and later his law partner Julius Meier, were understood to demonstrate strong public support for public ownership of dams.
The Mississippi and Nelson watersheds are separated by the Laurentian Divide, which meets the Continental Divide at Triple Divide Peak near the headwaters of the Columbia's Flathead River tributary.
Projections for the coming decades assume growth throughout the watershed, including the interior.
Environmental advocates have called for the removal of certain dams in the Columbia system in the years since.
and ''Nch’i-Wàna'' to the Sahaptin-speaking peoples of its middle course in present-day Washington;  The river is known as ''swah'netk'qhu'' by the Sinixt people, who live in the area of the Arrow Lakes in the river's upper reaches in Canada.
Annual precipitation varies from more than  a year in the Cascades to less than  in the interior.
Between 40 and 20&nbsp;million years ago, in the Eocene and Miocene eras, tremendous volcanic eruptions frequently modified much of the landscape traversed by the Columbia.
Near Longview, Washington and the Cowlitz River confluence, the river turns west again.
The annual catch by natives has been estimated at .
In early 2006, the Corps spilled  of hydraulic oil into the Columbia, drawing further criticism from environmental organizations.
It includes the mainstem Columbia below the Snake River and tributaries such as the Salmon, John Day, Deschutes, and lower Snake Rivers.
The states, Indian tribes, and federal government are all engaged in efforts to restore and improve the water, land, and air quality of the Columbia River drainage basin and have committed to work together to enhance and accomplish critical ecosystem restoration efforts.
Kootenay River (Kootenai)
The 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens caused mudslides in the area, which reduced the Columbia's depth by  for a  stretch, disrupting Portland's economy.
Water depths have been estimated at  at Wallula Gap,  at Bonneville Dam, and  over modern Portland, Oregon.
Production of nuclear power has taken place at two sites along the river.
Plutonium for nuclear weapons was produced for decades at the Hanford Site, which is now the most contaminated nuclear site in the US.
Columbia Lake&nbsp;–  above sea level&nbsp;– and the adjoining Columbia Wetlands form the river's headwaters.
As the plate subducted, it carried along island arcs which were accreted to the North American continent, resulting in the creation of the Pacific Northwest between 150 and 90&nbsp;million years ago.
The highest population densities are found west of the Cascade Mountains along the I-5 corridor, especially in the Portland-Vancouver urban area.
The Hudson's Bay Company tried to maintain dominance by shifting from the fur trade, which was in sharp decline, to exporting other goods such as salmon and lumber.
Canadian explorer Alexander Mackenzie crossed what is now interior British Columbia in 1793.
Roughly  of the river's length and 85&nbsp;percent of its drainage basin are in the US.
Four mainstem dams and four lower Snake River dams contain navigation locks to allow ship and barge passage from the ocean as far as Lewiston, Idaho.
The river system hosts many species of anadromous fish, which migrate between freshwater habitats and the saline waters of the Pacific Ocean.
The affected tribes received a $26.8&nbsp;million settlement for the loss of Celilo and other fishing sites submerged by The Dalles Dam.
Studies have also found significant levels of toxins in fish and the waters they inhabit within the basin.
The US Supreme Court upheld fishing rights in landmark cases in 1905 and 1918, as well as the 1974 case United States v. Washington, commonly called the Boldt Decision.
The river defines that border for the final  of its journey.
Flow rates on the Columbia are affected by many large upstream reservoirs, many diversions for irrigation, and, on the lower stretches, reverse flow from the tides of the Pacific Ocean.
The boats, initially powered by burning wood, carried passengers and freight throughout the region for many years.
''The Columbian'' called for the channel to be deepened to  as early as 1905, but that depth was not attained until 1976.
Today, a dam-impounded reservoir lies along nearly every US mile of the once free-flowing river, and much of the Canadian stretch has been impounded as well.
Much of the landslide's debris remained, forcing the river about  south of its previous channel and forming the Cascade Rapids.
The lowest flow recorded at The Dalles was  on April 16, 1968, and was caused by the initial closure of the John Day Dam,  upstream.
Inexpensive hydropower supported the location of a large aluminum industry in the region, because its reduction from bauxite requires large amounts of electricity.
In April 1994 the Pacific Fisheries Management Council unanimously approved the strictest regulations in 18&nbsp;years, banning all commercial salmon fishing for that year from Cape Falcon north to the Canada–US border.
The most important and productive native fishing site was located at Celilo Falls, which was perhaps the most productive inland fishing site in North America.
The 14 hydroelectric dams on the Columbia's main stem and many more on its tributaries produce more than 44% of total U.S. hydroelectric generation – much more hydroelectric power than those of any other North American river.
In Canada, where the Columbia flows for  and drains , the river ranks 23rd in length, and the Canadian part of its basin ranks 13th in size among Canadian basins.
Following Heceta's reports, British maritime fur trader Captain John Meares searched for the river in 1788 but concluded that it did not exist.
This divide meets the Continental Divide at Snow Dome (also known as Dome), near the northernmost bend of the Columbia River.
A number of cleanup efforts are currently underway, including Superfund projects at Portland Harbor, Hanford, and Lake Roosevelt.
Oral histories describe the formation and destruction of the Bridge of the Gods, a land bridge that connected the Oregon and Washington sides of the river in the Columbia River Gorge.
After the floods, the river found its present course, and the Grand Coulee was left dry.
The gorge is known for its strong and steady winds, scenic beauty, and its role as an important transportation link.
In the 21st&nbsp;century, the Yakama, Nez Perce, Umatilla, and Warm Springs tribes all have treaty fishing rights along the Columbia and its tributaries.
Americans generally settled south of the Columbia, mainly in the Willamette Valley.
The longest, lasting 12&nbsp;years in the mid‑19th century, reduced the river's flow to 20&nbsp;percent below average.
The river and its drainage basin experienced some of the world's greatest known catastrophic floods toward the end of the last ice age.
This prompted agencies to conduct the first formal financial analysis of hydroelectric development; the reports produced by various agencies were presented in House Document&nbsp;308.
In 2007, the destruction of the Marmot Dam on the Sandy River was the first dam removal in the system.
Important crops include orchard fruit, potatoes, alfalfa, mint, beans, beets, and wine grapes.
All these developments have had a tremendous impact on river environments, mainly through industrial pollution and barriers to fish migration.
These include chemical pesticides, bacteria, arsenic, dioxins, and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB).
No other river except for the Klamath completely breaches the Cascades—the other rivers that flow through the range also originate in or very near the mountains.
Within the watershed are diverse landforms including mountains, arid plateaus, river valleys, rolling uplands, and deep gorges.
The development was accompanied by extensive negotiations between natives and US government agencies.
The headwaters and upper course of the Pit River flows through much of the Cascades; in contrast the Columbia cuts through the range nearly a thousand miles from its source in the Rocky Mountains.
This C‑shaped segment of the river is also known as the "Big Bend".
The Snake River and Yakima River join the Columbia in the Tri‑Cities population center.
The site drew traders from as far away as the Great Plains.
Previously active fishing sites, such as Celilo Falls in the eastern Columbia River Gorge, have exhibited a sharp decline in fishing along the Columbia in the last century, and salmon populations have been dramatically reduced.
In 1879 it was reported that 545,450 salmon, with an average weight of  were caught (in a recent season) and mainly canned for export to England.
In 1825 the Hudson's Bay Company (HBC) established Fort Vancouver on the bank of the Columbia, in what is now Vancouver, Washington, as the headquarters of the company's Columbia District, which encompassed everything west of the Rocky Mountains.
Natives drew fish from the Columbia at several major sites, which also served as trading posts.
Hells Canyon, the deepest gorge in North America, and the Columbia Gorge are in the watershed.
Canada agreed to build dams and provide reservoir storage, and the United States agreed to deliver to Canada one-half of the increase in US&nbsp;downstream power benefits as estimated five years in advance.
Over some of the watershed, especially west of the Cascade Mountains, precipitation maximums occur in winter, when Pacific storms come ashore.
Between 17&nbsp;million and 6&nbsp;million years ago, huge outpourings of flood basalt lava covered the Columbia River Plateau and forced the lower Columbia into its present course.
In the Treaty of 1818 the United States and Britain agreed that both nations were to enjoy equal rights in Oregon Country for 10&nbsp;years.
In 1962, archaeologists found evidence of human activity dating back 11,230&nbsp;years at the Marmes Rockshelter, near the confluence of the Palouse and Snake rivers in eastern Washington.
Royal Navy commander George Vancouver sailed past the mouth in April 1792 and observed a change in the water's color, but he accepted Meares' report and continued on his journey northward.
After crossing the Rocky Mountains, Lewis and Clark built dugout canoes and paddled down the Snake River, reaching the Columbia near the present-day Tri-Cities, Washington.
Those reports, and subsequent related reports, are referred to as 308 Reports.
Oregon became a US state in 1859, Washington in 1889.
The construction of the Grand Coulee Dam in the mid-20th&nbsp;century impounded the river, forming Lake Roosevelt, from which water was pumped into the dry coulee, forming the reservoir of Banks Lake.
By volume, the Columbia is the fourth-largest river in the United States; it has the greatest flow of any North American river draining into the Pacific.
In 2000, about six million people lived within the Columbia's drainage basin.
Since 1750, the Columbia has experienced six multi-year droughts.
The project's cost is estimated at $150&nbsp;million.
Along with horses came aspects of the emerging plains culture, such as equestrian and horse training skills, greatly increased mobility, hunting efficiency, trade over long distances, intensified warfare, the linking of wealth and prestige to horses and war, and the rise of large and powerful tribal confederacies.
In addition to concerns about nuclear waste, numerous other pollutants are found in the river.
The commoditization of power in the early 21st century, coupled with drought that reduced the generation capacity of the river, damaged the industry and by 2001, Columbia River aluminum producers had idled 80% of its production capacity, and by 2003, the entire United States produced only 15% of the world's aluminum, with many smelters along the Columbia having gone dormant or out of business.
The Washington Department of Ecology, using new techniques involving aerial photographs, estimated there may be as many as a hundred such dams in the area, most of which are illegal.
From the earliest contact with westerners, the natives of the mid- and lower Columbia were not tribal, but instead congregated in social units no larger than a village, and more often at a family level; these units would shift with the season as people moved about, following the salmon catch up and down the river's tributaries.
Gray's fur trading mission had been financed by Boston merchants, who outfitted him with a private vessel named ''Columbia Rediviva''; he named the river after the ship on May 18.
In the early 1840s Americans began to colonize the Oregon country in large numbers via the Oregon Trail, despite the HBC's efforts to discourage American settlement in the region.
On July 1, 2003, Christopher Swain of Portland, Oregon, became the first person to swim the Columbia River's entire length, in an effort to raise public awareness about the river's environmental health.
Sparked by the 1848 Whitman Massacre, a number of violent battles were fought between American settlers and the region's natives.
In 1933, President Franklin D. Roosevelt signed a bill that enabled the construction of the Bonneville and Grand Coulee dams as public works projects.
There are also high levels of mollusk endemism.
The National Ocean Service issues water level observations for six tide gauges and tide forecasts for twenty-two locations along the river between the entrance at the North Jetty and the base of Bonneville Dam.
Timber industry activity further contaminates river water, for example in the increased sediment runoff that results from clearcuts.
The Yakama were slower to do so, organizing a formal government in 1944.
These dams and reservoirs limit the recovery of upriver salmon runs to Idaho's Salmon and Clearwater rivers.
The Deschutes River joins the Columbia near The Dalles.
While some British interests, especially the Hudson's Bay Company, fought for a boundary along the Columbia River, the Oregon Treaty of 1846 set the boundary at the 49th&nbsp;parallel.
All three terms essentially mean "the big river".
With the onset of World War II, the focus of dam construction shifted to production of hydroelectricity.
Steamships along the river linked communities and facilitated trade; the arrival of railroads in the late 19th century, many running along the river, supplemented these links.
The first documented European discovery of the Columbia River was that of Bruno de Heceta, who in 1775 sighted the river's mouth.
Numerous flat-topped buttes with rich soil stand high above the chaotic scablands.
The Bureau of Reclamation's Columbia Basin Project focused on the generally dry region of central Washington known as the Columbia Basin, which features rich loess soil.
As early as 1881, industrialists proposed altering the natural channel of the Columbia to improve navigation.
Some of the Columbia and Snake River dams employ fish ladders, which are effective to varying degrees at allowing these fish to travel upstream.
Today the main stem of the Columbia River has 14&nbsp;dams, of which three are in Canada and 11 in the US.
Salmon populations declined dramatically after the establishment of canneries in 1867.
Accumulation of toxins in fish threatens the survival of fish species, and human consumption of these fish can lead to health problems.
Before being released back into the river, the used water was held in large tanks known as retention basins for up to six hours.
To the west and southwest the Columbia watershed borders a number of smaller watersheds that drain to the Pacific Ocean, such as the Klamath River in Oregon and California and the Puget Sound Basin in Washington.
In 1811 he traveled down the Columbia to the Pacific Ocean, arriving at the mouth just after John Jacob Astor's Pacific Fur Company had founded Astoria.
In many upstream areas cut off from the ocean by dams, sturgeon simply live upstream of the dam.
Steamboats operated in several distinct stretches of the river: on its lower reaches, from the Pacific Ocean to Cascades Rapids; from the Cascades to Celilo Falls; from Celilo to the confluence with the Snake River; on the Wenatchee Reach of eastern Washington; on British Columbia's Arrow Lakes; and on tributaries like the Willamette, the Snake and Kootenay Lake.
Rounding the northern end of the Selkirk Mountains, the river turns sharply south through a region known as the Big Bend Country, passing through Revelstoke Lake and the Arrow Lakes.
Other peoples acquired horses and aspects of the plains culture unevenly.
In the 18th&nbsp;century, there was strong interest in discovering a Northwest Passage that would permit navigation between the Atlantic (or inland North America) and the Pacific Ocean.
The installation of dams dramatically altered the landscape and ecosystem of the river.
The channel between the ocean and Portland and Vancouver was deepened from  to .
Gray spent nine days trading near the mouth of the Columbia, then left without having gone beyond  upstream.
The river system as a whole has more than 400&nbsp;dams for hydroelectricity and irrigation.
Research in the mid-1980s found that juvenile salmon were suffering substantially from the predatory pikeminnow, and in 1990, in the interest of protecting salmon, a "bounty" program was established to reward anglers for catching pikeminnow.
The Columbia supports several species of anadromous fish that migrate between the Pacific Ocean and fresh water tributaries of the river.
Some groups remained essentially unaffected, such as the Sanpoil and Nespelem people, whose culture remained centered on fishing.
Some historians believe that Japanese or Chinese vessels blown off course reached the Northwest Coast long before Europeans—possibly as early as 219&nbsp;BCE.
The Chinook tribe, which is not federally recognized,  who live near the lower Columbia River, call it ''Wimahl'' in the Chinookan language.
The project's initial purpose was irrigation, but the onset of World War&nbsp;II created a high demand for electricity, mainly for aluminum production and for the development of nuclear weapons at the Hanford Site.
The plans were controversial from the start because of economic and environmental concerns.
Several groups developed competing proposals, and in 1933, President Franklin D. Roosevelt authorized the Columbia Basin Project.
Portland-based Northwest Environmental Advocates brought a lawsuit against the Army Corps of Engineers, but it was rejected by the Ninth U.S.&nbsp;Circuit Court of Appeals in August 2006.
The use of steamboats along the river, beginning with the British ''Beaver'' in 1836 and followed by American vessels in 1850, contributed to the rapid settlement and economic development of the region.
The associated triple divide points are Commissary Ridge North, Wyoming, and Sproats Meadow Northwest, Oregon.
Many different Native Americans and First Nations peoples have a historical and continuing presence on the Columbia.
Much of the watershed gets less than  a year.
European and American vessels explored the coastal area around the mouth of the river in the late 18th&nbsp;century, trading with local natives.
Revelstoke, the Big Bend, and the Columbia Valley combined are referred to in BC parlance as the Columbia Country.
In 1957 Celilo Falls was submerged by the construction of The Dalles Dam, and the native fishing community was displaced.
In the late 18th century, a private American ship became the first non-indigenous vessel to enter the river; it was followed by a British explorer, who navigated past the Oregon Coast Range into the Willamette Valley.
To the northeast, mostly along the southern border between British Columbia and Alberta, the Continental Divide separates the Columbia watershed from the Nelson-Lake Winnipeg-Saskatchewan watershed, which empties into Hudson Bay.
Here the river slows considerably, dropping sediment that might otherwise form a river delta.
River development occurred within the structure of the 1909 International Boundary Waters Treaty between the US and Canada.
In the United States and Canada the term watershed is often used to mean drainage basin.
The trench is a broad, deep, and long glacial valley between the Canadian Rockies and the Columbia Mountains in BC.
Increasingly, hydro-power operations are required to meet standards under the US Endangered Species Act and other agreements to manage operations to minimize impacts on salmon and other fish, and some conservation and fishing groups support removing four dams on the lower Snake River, the largest tributary of the Columbia.
