Except for black, which was the color for war, there was no standard color or pattern for face and body painting: it was a matter of individual preference.
The Comanche were initially hunter-gatherers.
When the Comanche reached the plains, hunting came to predominate.
When he was ready to become a warrior, at about age fifteen or sixteen, a young man first "made his medicine" by going on a vision quest (a rite of passage).
Parker also campaigned for the Comanches' permission to practice the Native American Church religious rites, such as the usage of peyote, which was condemned by European Americans.
The western Comanche lived in the region of the upper Arkansas, Canadian, and Red rivers, and the Llano Estacado.
One of the most famous captives in Texas was a German boy named Herman Lehmann.
By 1777, the Lipan Apache had retreated to the Rio Grande and the Mescalero Apache to Coahuila.
They also drank the milk from the slashed udders of buffalo, deer, and elk .
They separated from the Shoshone after this, as the horses allowed them greater mobility in their search for better hunting grounds.
She was given a little deerskin doll, which she took with her everywhere.
Buffalo meat and other game was prepared and cooked by the women.
After they came into contact with the Spanish, the Comanche traded for copper pots and iron kettles, which made cooking easier.
The Comanche under ''Isa-tai'' (Coyote's Vagina) retaliated by attacking a group of hunters in the Texas Panhandle in the Second Battle of Adobe Walls (1874).
They were the dominant tribe on the Southern Plains and often took captives from weaker tribes during warfare, selling them as slaves to the Spanish and later Mexican settlers.
Men were not allowed inside the tipi during or immediately after the delivery.
This slender braid, called a scalp lock, was decorated with colored scraps of cloth and beads, and a single feather.
The Comanche women were the ones who did the most work with food processing and preparation.
New allotments were made in 1906 to all children born after the agreement, and the remaining land was opened to white settlement.
The Comanche Nation Homecoming Powwow is held annually in Walters, Oklahoma in mid-July.
They did not use pottery that could easily be broken on long journeys.
The children were taught English and discouraged from speaking their native language.
He eventually ranged farther from camp looking for better game to kill.
Some designs had special meaning to the individual, and special colors and designs might have been revealed in a dream.
These included the "peace chief", the members of the council, and the "war chief".
If he had proved himself as a warrior, a Give Away Dance might be held in his honor.
When game was scarce, the men hunted wild mustangs, sometimes eating their own ponies.
One of the holes was for heating water and the other for the afterbirth.
Christian missionaries convinced Comanche people to bury their dead in coffins in graveyards, which is the practice today.
Only after they moved onto a reservation late in the 19th century did Comanche men begin to wear the typical Plains headdress.
Over time, these divisions were altered in various ways.
As drummers faced east, the honored boy and other young men danced.
Removing the lining of the inner stomach, women made the paunch into a water bag.
Often horse herds numbering in the hundreds were stolen by Comanche during raids against other Indian nations, Spanish, Mexicans, and later from the ranches of Texans.
The Comanche emerged as a distinct group shortly before 1700, when they broke off from the Shoshone people living along the upper Platte River in Wyoming.
The thick neck skin of an old bull was ideal for war shields that deflected arrows as well as bullets.
The Comanche language is a Numic language of the Uto-Aztecan family, sometimes classified as a Shoshoni dialect.
Men wore a leather belt with a breechcloth — a long piece of buckskin that was brought up between the legs and looped over and under the belt at the front and back, and loose-fitting deerskin leggings.
The last independent Kiowa and Kiowa Apache had also surrendered.
Only about 1% of Comanches speak their language today.
Appointed paramount chief by the United States government, Chief Quanah Parker campaigned vigorously for better deals for his people, meeting with Washington politicians frequently; and helped manage land for the tribe.
They were fond of painting their bodies and were free to paint themselves however they pleased.
They also relied upon buckskin for bedding, cradles, dolls, bags, pouches, quivers, and gun cases.
Entering the Western economy was a challenge for the Comanche in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
The baby remained in the cradleboard for about ten months; then it was allowed to crawl around.
Because of cultural and linguistic differences from other Comanche bands, they became the “(Yap)Root-Eaters”, in contrast to the ''Kʉhtsʉtʉhka'' (“Buffalo-Eaters”).
Families might paint a flap on the tipi to tell the rest of the tribe that they had been strengthened with another warrior.
Rawhide was also made into rattles and drums.
Bands were part of larger divisions, or tribes.
Comanche clothing was simple and easy to wear.
On May 29, 1908, the United States Congress authorized the United States Secretary of the Interior to allot Lehmann, as an adopted member of the Comanche nation, 160 acres of Oklahoma land, near Grandfield.
Comanche women wore buckskin moccasins with buffalo soles.
By the age of twelve or thirteen, they adopted the clothes of Comanche women.
Traders ate pemmican sliced and dipped in honey, which they called Indian bread.
The Comanche Nation Fair is held every September.
During the public naming ceremony, the medicine man lit his pipe and offered smoke to the heavens, earth, and each of the four directions.
The Comanche Little Ponies host two annual dances—one over New Year's and one in May.
A female relative would pierce the outer edge of the ear with six or eight holes.
The hides were made even more supple by further rinsing and working back and forth over a rawhide thong.
He held the child a little higher each time he said the name.
He then lifted the child to symbolize its growing up and announced the child's name four times.
Later, they acquired horses from other tribes, such as the Pueblo, and from the Spaniards.
As he approached manhood, a boy went on his first buffalo hunt.
Comanche groups did not have a single acknowledged leader.
These streams supported trees that the Comanche used to build shelters.
A typical band might number about one hundred people.
Two wing-shaped flaps at the top of the tipi were turned back to make an opening, which could be adjusted to keep out the moisture and held pockets of insulating air.
With this new arrangement, the era of the Comanche reservation came to an abrupt end.
His parents, along with his other relatives and the people in the band, threw presents at his feet – especially blankets and horses symbolized by sticks.
In the eastern part of the Comancheria, between the Colorado and Red rivers, roamed the ''Nokoni'' (''Nokoni Nʉʉ'' — ‘Movers’, ‘Returners’).
They prepared meals whenever a visitor arrived in camp, which led to outsiders' belief that the Comanches ate at all hours of the day or night.
The women also gathered wild fruits, seeds, nuts, berries, roots, and tubers — including plums, grapes, juniper berries, persimmons, mulberries, acorns, pecans, wild onions, radishes, and the fruit of the prickly pear cactus.
From Natchitoches in  Spanish Louisiana, Athanase de Mézières reported in 1770 that the Comanches were "so skilful in horsemanship that they have no equal, so daring that they never ask for or grant truces, and in possession of such a territory that... they only just fall short of possessing all of the conveniences of the earth, and have no need to covet the trade pursued by the rest of the Indians."
Large-scale groupings became unstable and unclear during the 19th century.
On the plains, Comanche women carried out the demanding tasks of cooking, skinning animals, setting up camp, rearing children, and transporting household goods.
When they lived in the Rocky Mountains, during their migration to the Great Plains, both men and women shared the responsibility of gathering and providing food.
The Comanche maintained an ambiguous relationship with Europeans and later settlers attempting to colonize their territory.
They own ten tribal smoke shops and four casinos.
The Comanche had stolen many of the horses from other tribes and settlers; they earned their reputation as formidable horse thieves, later extending their rustling to cattle.
Most meats were roasted over a fire or boiled.
The Comanches sometimes ate raw meat, especially raw liver flavored with gall.
It features a cast of more than 300 Comanche and Kiowa.
All these division names were spelled in many different ways by Spanish and English writers, and spelling differences continue today.
His grandfather also taught him about his own boyhood and the history and legends of the Comanche.
One of the largest groups, as well as the southernmost, lived on the edge of the Edwards Plateau and east across to the Cross Timbers, and became known as the ''Penateka'', (''Penatʉka Nʉʉ'') ''Southern Comanches''.
Meusebach brokered the treaty in order to settle the lands on the Fisher-Miller Land Grant, from which were formed the ten counties of Concho, Kimble, Llano, Mason, McCulloch, Menard, Schleicher, San Saba, Sutton and Tom Green.
While the band was at war, the war chief was in charge, and all the warriors had to obey him.
Children were rarely punished.
Comanche women wore long deerskin dresses.
To finish the tipi covering, women laid the tanned hides side by side and stitched them together.
The latter was made from rawhide straps, or a leather sheath that laced up the front.
In the winter they, too, wore warm buffalo robes and tall, fur-lined buffalo-hide boots.
Together, the Nokoni, Tenawa and Tanima were called the ''Middle Comanche''.
If the winter was severely cold, they might wear a brimless, woolly buffalo hide hat.
As the boy grew older, he joined the other boys to hunt birds.
Instead, they depended upon the buffalo for most of their tools, household goods, and weapons.
There may have been as many as 45,000 Comanches in the late 18th century.
She learned to make all the clothing for the doll.
Anyone might snatch one of the gifts for themselves, although those with many possessions refrained; they did not want to appear greedy.
Comanche men rarely wore anything on their heads.
Moccasins had soles made from thick, tough buffalo hide with soft deerskin uppers.
The Agreement with the Comanche, Kiowa and Apache signed with the Cherokee Commission October 6–21, 1892, further reduced their reservation to  at a cost of $1.25 per acre ($308.88/km2), with an allotment of  per person per tribe to be held in trust.
After the conflict was over, however, the war chief's authority ended.
This type of woolly, horned buffalo hat was worn only by the Comanche.
Comanche children ate pemmican, but this was primarily a tasty, high-energy food reserved for war parties.
Petri's sketches and watercolors gave witness to the friendly relationships between the Germans and various local Native American tribes.
Young women might wear their hair long and braided, but women parted their hair in the middle and kept it short.
Comanche people took pride in their hair, which was worn long and rarely cut.
Like the men, they painted their scalp along the parting with bright paint.
Horses were used for warfare with the Comanche being considered to be among the finest light cavalry and mounted warriors in history.
Basketry, weaving, wood carving, and metal working were also unknown among the Comanches.
Many Yamparikas moved southeast, joining the eastern Comanche and becoming known as the ''Tenewa''.
The Comanche sheathed their tipis with a covering made of buffalo hides sewn together.
New divisions arose, such as the ''Nokonis'', closely linked with the Tenewa; and the ''Kwahadi'', who emerged as a new faction on the southern ''Llano Estacado''.
The 1890 Census showed 1,598 Comanche at the Fort Sill reservation, which they shared with 1,140 Kiowa and 326 Kiowa Apache.
The council made decisions about where the band should hunt, whether they should war against their enemies, and whether to ally themselves with other bands.
It is closely related to the language of the Shoshone, from which the Comanche diverged around 1700.
The Comanche society was slowly overwhelmed and ultimately subjugated to the United States.
This treaty was named for the nearest military fort, which was Fort Martin Scott.
Strips of rawhide were twisted into sturdy ropes.
Additionally, they operate the Comanche Nation College in Lawton, Oklahoma.
He did this in the hope of his child living a long and productive life.
Warriors cut away most of the hide and flesh from a buffalo head, leaving only a portion of the woolly hair and the horns.
Boys were often named after their grandfather, uncle, or other relative.
A popular pattern among the women was to paint the insides of their ears a bright red and paint great orange and red circles on their cheeks.
By 1875, the Comanches had been relocated to reservations.
To prepare the buffalo hides, women first spread them on the ground, then scraped away the fat and flesh with blades made from bones or antlers, and left them in the sun.
Beads and pieces of metal were attached in geometric patterns.
During the day they ate whenever they were hungry or when it was convenient.
Lehmann became the adoptive son of Quanah Parker.
Horses were prime targets to steal during raids; often raids were conducted specifically to capture horses.
The men also tattooed their face, arms, and chest with geometric designs, and painted their face and body.
They also took thousands of captives from the Spanish, Mexican, and American settlers.
By the time he was four or five, he was expected to be able to skillfully handle a horse.
The horse was of the utmost value to the Comanche.
Later, traders supplied them with vermilion (red pigment) and bright grease paints.
With wood scarce on the plains, women relied on buffalo chips (dried dung) to fuel the fires that cooked meals and warmed the people through long winters.
His efforts were thwarted in 1845 when the Texas legislature refused to create an official boundary between Texas and the ''Comancheria.''
The Comanche men did most of the hunting and all of the fighting in the wars.
Carried in a parfleche pouch, pemmican was eaten only when the men did not have time to hunt.
The Quahada band followed this custom longer than other bands and buried their relatives in the Wichita Mountains.
During the 19th century, the traditional Comanche burial custom was to wrap the deceased's body in a blanket and place it on a horse, behind a rider, who would then ride in search of an appropriate burial place, such as a secure cave.
The northernmost Comanche band was the ''Yamparikas'' (''Yaparʉhka'' or ''Yapai Nʉʉ'' — ‘(Yap)Root-Eaters’).
These groups shared the same language and culture, and rarely fought each other.
They arranged their hair with porcupine quill brushes, greased it and parted it in the center from the forehead to the back of the neck.
With a fire pit in the center of the earthen floor, the tipis stayed warm in the winter.
Even though the western-eastern distinction had changed in the 19th century, these people were classified as ''Western Comanche'' because of their relative isolation on the westernmost edge of the Comancheria.
Membership of the tribe requires a 1/8 blood quantum (equivalent to one great-grandparent).
Post-contact, the Comanches were hunter-gatherers with a horse culture.
Hooves were turned into glue and rattles.
The dresses had a flared skirt and wide, long sleeves, and were trimmed with buckskin fringes along the sleeves and hem.
The Comanche men wore nothing on the upper body except in the winter, when they wore warm, heavy robes made from buffalo hides (or occasionally, bear, wolf, or coyote skins) with knee-length buffalo-hide boots.
The horse was a key element in the emergence of a distinctive Comanche culture.
During that time, their population increased dramatically because of the abundance of buffalo, an influx of Shoshone migrants, and their adoption of significant numbers of women and children taken captive from rival groups.
Cooking was done outside during the hot weather.
Anecdotally, enforcement of speaking English was severe.
The baby was placed in a cradleboard, and the mother went back to work.
They wore their hair in two long braids tied with leather thongs or colored cloth, and sometimes wrapped with beaver fur.
After entombment, the rider covered the body with stones and returned to camp, where the mourners burned all the deceased's possessions.
During World War II, many Comanche left the traditional tribal lands in Oklahoma to seek jobs and more opportunities in the cities of California and the Southwest.
Larger dwellings were made due to the ability to pull and carry more belongings.
Following this quest, his father gave the young man a good horse to ride into battle and another mount for the trail.
The newborn was swaddled and remained with its mother in the tipi for a few days.
Five years later, artist Friedrich Richard Petri and his family moved to the settlement of Pedernales, near Fredericksburg.
This treaty was not affiliated with any level of government.
The treaty was never officially ratified by any level of government and was binding only on the part of the Native Americans.
Women used berries and nuts, as well as honey and tallow, to flavor buffalo meat.
Before calling a public event, the chief took a morsel of food, held it to the sky, and then buried it as a peace offering to the Great Spirit.
Girls learned to gather healthy berries, nuts, and roots.
The second generation then grew up speaking English, because it was believed that it was better for them not to know Comanche.
The Peneteka band agreed to a peace treaty with the German Immigration Company under John O. Meusebach.
Outbreaks of smallpox (1817, 1848) and cholera (1849) took a major toll on the Comanche, whose population dropped from an estimated 20,000 in mid-century to just a few thousand by the 1870s.
They painted the scalp along the parting with yellow, red, or white clay (or other colors).
Many families offered thanks as they sat down to eat their meals in their tipis.
He also had to have the respect of all the other warriors in the band.
Among their delicacies was the curdled milk from the stomachs of suckling buffalo calves.
During World War II, a group of 17 young men, referred to as "The Comanche Code Talkers", were trained and used by the U.S. Army to send messages conveying sensitive information that could not be deciphered by the Germans.
Much of the area inhabited by the Comanches was flat and dry, with the exception of major rivers like the Cimarron River, the Pecos River, the Brazos River, and the Red River.
Unhappy with life on the reservation, 170 warriors and their families, led by Black Horse, left the reservation in late 1876 for the Llano Estacado.
Because of their frequent traveling, Comanche Indians had to make sure that their household goods and other possessions were unbreakable.
In the late 19th century, many Comanche children were placed in boarding schools with children from different tribes.
Children were also told about Big Cannibal Owl (''Pia Mupitsi''), who lived in a cave on the south side of the Wichita Mountains and ate bad children at night.
They were formidable opponents who developed strategies for using traditional weapons for fighting on horseback.
An entire Comanche band could be packed and chasing a buffalo herd within about 20 minutes.
Unlike the boys, young girls did not go without clothes.
The horns were shaped into cups, spoons, and ladles, while the tail made a good whip, a fly-swatter, or a decoration for the tipi.
If the baby was a boy, one of the midwives informed the father or grandfather, "It's your close friend".
In the summer, the bottom edges of the tipis could be rolled up to let cool breezes in.
Often, a boy was taught to ride and shoot by his grandfather, since his father and other warriors were on raids and hunts.
In the early 19th century, the Jupes vanished from history, probably merging into the other divisions.
Sometimes a man named his child, but mostly the father asked a medicine man (or another man of distinction) to do so.
At one point, Sam Houston, president of the newly created Republic of Texas, almost succeeded in reaching a peace treaty with the Comanche in the 1844 Treaty of Tehuacana Creek.
Finally, they were smoked over a fire, which gave the hides a light tan color.
The earliest records of Comanche from 1786 clearly show a dialect of Shoshone, but by the beginning of the 20th century, these sound changes had modified the way Comanche sounded in subtle, but profound, ways.
The last large group was known as ''Kwahadis'' (''Quohada'' or ''Kwaarʉ Nʉʉ/Kwahare'' — ‘Antelope-Eaters’), originally ''Kotsoteka''-residential local groups that moved south out of the Cimarron Valley onto the desert plains of the Llano Estacado.
During cold weather, the baby was wrapped in blankets, and then placed in the cradleboard.
As many as 22 hides could be used, but 14 was the average.
The German Immigration Company was dissolved by Meusebach himself shortly after it had served its purpose.
Both girls and boys were welcomed into the band, but boys were favored.
Just north of the Nokonis in the Red River Valley, between the Red and Canadian rivers, lived the numerous residential local groups of the powerful ''Kotsotekas'' (''Kʉhtsʉtʉʉka'' — ‘Buffalo-Eaters’); they took their name from the large buffalo herds that were always in their territory.
