rainforests or wet sclerophyll forests) but are found in coastal areas, where they nest and roost on cliffs and forage amongst seaweed.
While the consumption of invertebrates is necessary for successful breeding, common starlings are omnivorous and can also eat grains, seeds, fruits, nectar and food waste if the opportunity arises.
Pliny the Elder claimed that these birds could be taught to speak whole sentences in Latin and Greek, and in ''Henry IV'', William Shakespeare had Hotspur declare "The king forbade my tongue to speak of Mortimer.
They can usually be sexed by the colour of the irises, rich brown in males, mouse-brown or grey in females.
There is more genetic variation between common starling populations than between nominate common starling and spotless starling.
Common starling on migration can fly at  and cover up to .
This bird is resident in southern and western Europe and southwestern Asia, while northeastern populations migrate south and west in winter within the breeding range and also further south to Iberia and North Africa.
Since then, despite some initial attempts at eradication, the bird has been expanding its breeding range at an average rate of  per year, keeping within  of the Atlantic coast.
Incubation lasts thirteen days, although the last egg laid may take 24&nbsp;hours longer than the first to hatch.
Each common starling changes its course and speed as a result of the movement of its closest neighbours.
In Britain, the rook and the common starling are the most infested wild birds.
Large numbers of birds from northern Europe, Russia and Ukraine migrate south westwards or south eastwards.
Both parents share the responsibility of brooding the eggs, but the female spends more time incubating them than does the male, and is the only parent to do so at night when the male returns to the communal roost.
Huge urban roosts in cities can create problems due to the noise and mess made and the smell of the droppings.
Several other subspecies have been named, but are generally no longer considered valid.
Among standard measurements, the wing chord is , the tail is , the culmen is  and the tarsus is .
The male is the main songster and engages in bouts of song lasting for a minute or more.
No permit is required to remove nests and eggs or kill juveniles or adults.
It has been suggested that his ''A Musical Joke'' (K. 522) might be written in the comical, inconsequential style of a starling's vocalisation.
In North America, northern populations have developed a migration pattern, vacating much of Canada in winter.
Gloss of head green, of body bronze-purple, of flanks and upper wing-coverts greenish bronze.
Underwing like ''purpurascens''.
Juvenile sooty black with whitish chin and areas on belly; throat spotted black.
The common starling was introduced to Jamaica in 1903, and the Bahamas and Cuba were colonised naturally from the US.
Females appear to prefer mates with more complex songs, perhaps because this indicates greater experience or longevity.
The common starling builds an untidy nest in a natural or artificial cavity in which four or five glossy, pale blue eggs are laid.
Austrian ethologist Konrad Lorenz wrote of them in his book ''King Solomon's Ring'' as "the poor man's dog" and "something to love", because nestlings are easily obtained from the wild and after careful hand rearing they are straightforward to look after.
The early settlers in New Zealand cleared the bush and found their newly planted crops were invaded by hordes of caterpillars and other insects deprived of their previous food sources.
Flocks of anything from five to fifty thousand common starlings form in areas of the UK just before sundown during mid-winter.
He became very attached to the bird and arranged an elaborate funeral for it when it died three years later.
The bill is narrow and conical with a sharp tip; in the winter it is brownish-black but in summer, females have lemon yellow beaks while males have yellow bills with blue-grey bases.
Green gloss on head and back, purple gloss on neck and belly, more bluish on upper wing-coverts.
"Hawking" is the capture of flying insects directly from the air, and "lunging" is the less common technique of striking forward to catch a moving invertebrate on the ground.
Eastern Bashkortostan eastwards through Urals and central Siberia, to Lake Baykal and western Mongolia
The common starling is a noisy bird.
It is about  long and has glossy black plumage with a metallic sheen, which is speckled with white at some times of year.
This bird is fairly common but local in Jamaica, Grand Bahama and Bimini, and is rare in the rest of the Bahamas, eastern Cuba, the Cayman Islands, Puerto Rico and St. Croix.
Prior to that, the fouling would wet both the chicks' plumage and the nest material, thereby reducing their effectiveness as insulation and increasing the risk of chilling the hatchlings.
"Starling" was first recorded in the 11th century, when it referred to the juvenile of the species, but by the 16th century it had already largely supplanted "stare" to refer to birds of all ages.
They chatter while roosting and bathing, making a great deal of noise that can cause irritation to people living nearby.
They acquire their adult plumage the following year.
The typical response of starling groups is to take flight, with a common sight being undulating flocks of starling flying high in quick and agile patterns.
Pairs may be part of a colony, in which case several other nests may occupy the same or nearby trees.
More than twenty species of hawk, owl and falcon are known to occasionally predate feral starlings in North America, though the most regular predators of adults are likely to be urban-living peregrine falcons or merlins (''Falco columbarius'').
Prey are consumed in both adult and larvae stages of development, and common starlings will also feed on earthworms, snails, small amphibians and lizards.
Although common starlings were first sighted in Albany, Western Australia in 1917, they have been largely prevented from spreading to the state.
This species is omnivorous, taking a wide range of invertebrates, as well as seeds and fruit.
This technique involves inserting the bill into the ground and opening it as a way of searching for hidden food items.
Breeding takes place during the spring and summer.
The '''common starling''' (''Sturnus vulgaris''), also known as the '''European starling''', or in the British Isles just the '''starling''', is a medium-sized passerine bird in the starling family, Sturnidae.
It is now common in the southern Cape region, thinning out northwards to the Johannesburg area.
Having a complex song is also useful in defending a territory and deterring less experienced males from encroaching.
Large flocks may engage in a practice known as "roller-feeding", where the birds at the back of the flock continually fly to the front where the feeding opportunities are best.
Common starlings can be prevented from using nest boxes by ensuring that the access holes are smaller than the  diameter they need, and the removal of perches discourages them from visiting bird feeders.
Not in uplands where replaced by ''purpurascens''
The common starling has about a dozen subspecies breeding in open habitats across its native range in temperate Europe and western Asia, and it has been introduced to Australia, New Zealand, Canada, United States, Mexico, Peru, Argentina, the Falkland Islands, Brazil, Chile, Uruguay, South Africa and Fiji.
Mozart had a pet common starling which could sing part of his Piano Concerto in G Major (KV.
Flocks form a tight sphere-like formation in flight, frequently expanding and contracting and changing shape, seemingly without any sort of leader.
v. vulgaris'' expanded its range in the British Isles, spreading into Ireland and areas of Scotland where it had formerly been absent, although ''S.
They develop light fluffy down within seven days of hatching and can see within nine days.
New flocks arriving from the east are routinely shot, while the less cautious juveniles are trapped and netted.
The egg size is  in length and  in maximum diameter.
There are normally four or five eggs that are ovoid in shape and pale blue or occasionally white, and they commonly have a glossy appearance.
The Old English ''staer'', later ''stare'', and the Latin ''sturnus'' are both derived from an unknown Indo-European root dating back to the second millennium BC.
In smaller amounts, the droppings act as a fertiliser, and therefore woodland managers may try to move roosts from one area of a wood to another to benefit from the soil enhancement and avoid large toxic deposits.
In Australia, competitors for nesting sites include the crimson and eastern rosellas.
Their ability to adapt to a large variety of habitats has allowed them to disperse and establish themselves in diverse locations around the world resulting in a habitat range from coastal wetlands to alpine forests, from sea cliffs to mountain ranges  above sea level.
Western Australia banned the import of common starlings in 1895.
The food range includes spiders, crane flies, moths, mayflies, dragonflies, damsel flies, grasshoppers, earwigs, lacewings, caddisflies, flies, beetles, sawflies, bees, wasps and ants.
Afghanistan, SE Turkmenistan and adjacent Uzbekistan to E Iran
Where it is introduced, the common starling is unprotected by legislation, and extensive control plans may be initiated.
The structure and simplicity of the sound mimicked is of greater importance than the frequency with which it occurs.
It may have colonised from New Zealand via Raoul in the Kermadec Islands where it is abundant, that group being roughly equidistant between New Zealand and Fiji.
Following copulation, the female lays eggs on a daily basis over a period of several days.
Although flock size is highly variable, huge, noisy flocks - murmurations - may form near roosts.
Very large roosts, exceptionally up to 1.5&nbsp;million birds, can form in city centres, woodlands or reedbeds, causing problems with their droppings.
The small, pale house-sparrow flea ''C.
Volga Delta through eastern Caucasus and adjacent areas
Slightly larger than nominate, especially bill and feet.
Common starlings are hosts to a wide range of parasites.
Another technique is to analyse the DNA of Australian common starling populations to track where the migration from eastern to western Australia is occurring so that better preventive strategies can be used.
Estimating the contrast between an iris and the central always-dark pupil is 97% accurate in determining sex, rising to 98% if the length of the throat feathers is also considered.
The reproductive success of the bird is poorer in the second nest than it is in the primary nest and is better when the male remains monogamous.
Because of the damage they do, there have been attempts to control the numbers of both native and introduced populations of common starlings.
Fledglings continue to be fed by their parents for another one or two weeks.
As a result, it has also been able to migrate to Thailand, Southeast Asia and New Guinea.
In Argentina, the species makes use of a variety of natural and man-made nesting sites, particularly woodpecker holes.
Unpaired males find a suitable cavity and begin to build nests in order to attract single females, often decorating the nest with ornaments such as flowers and fresh green material, which the female later disassembles upon accepting him as a mate.
At roosting sites this fungus can thrive in accumulated droppings.
It had shown a marked increase in numbers throughout Europe from the 19th century to around the 1950s and 60s.
Non-lethal techniques such as scaring with visual or auditory devices have only a temporary effect in any case.
Common starlings have the physical traits that enable them to use this feeding technique, which has undoubtedly helped the species spread far and wide.
The underparts of adult male common starlings are less spotted than those of adult females at a given time of year.
Native birds were not habituated to living in close proximity to man so the common starling was introduced from Europe to control the pests.
In eastern Australia, weeds like bridal creeper, blackberry and boneseed are thought to have been spread by common starlings.
Since common starlings eat insect pests such as wireworms, they are considered beneficial in northern Eurasia, and this was one of the reasons given for introducing the birds elsewhere.
This species is migratory, so birds involved in control measures may have come from a wide area and breeding populations may not be greatly affected.
The species has declined in numbers in parts of northern and western Europe since the 1980s due to fewer grassland invertebrates being available as food for growing chicks.
The common starling is a highly gregarious species, especially in autumn and winter.
Like nominate, but smaller, especially feet.
Tonga was colonised at about the same date and the birds there have been slowly spreading north through the group.
Nay I'll have a starling shall be taught to speak nothing but Mortimer, and give it to him to keep his anger still in motion."
They gather in March until northern Scandinavian birds leave for their breeding ranges by mid-April.
The reduction in the spotting in the breeding season is achieved through the white feather tips largely wearing off.
Despite this, its huge global population is not thought to be declining significantly, so the common starling is classified as being of least concern by the International Union for Conservation of Nature.
v. zetlandicus'' and the nominate form, and their subspecies placement varies according to the authority.
In flight, its strongly pointed wings and dark colouration are distinctive, while on the ground its strange, somewhat waddling gait is also characteristic.
In the United States, common starlings are exempt from the Migratory Bird Treaty Act, which prohibits the taking or killing of migratory birds.
Small numbers of common starling have sporadically been observed in Japan and Hong Kong but it is unclear from where these birds originated.
The larger the flock, the nearer individuals are to one another while foraging.
Intraspecific brood parasites are common in common starling nests.
There are several methods by which common starlings obtain their food but for the most part, they forage close to the ground, taking insects from the surface or just underneath.
At close range it can be seen that the latter has longer throat feathers, a fact particularly noticeable when it sings.
Nest-boxes for the newly released birds were placed on farms and near crops.
This adaptation is most strongly developed in the common starling (along with the spotless and white-cheeked starlings), where the protractor muscles responsible for opening the jaw are enlarged and the skull is narrow, allowing the eye to be moved forward to peer down the length of the bill.
Their abilities in flight are seldom matched by birds of prey.
The only disadvantages are their messy and indiscriminate defecation habits and the need to take precautions against diseases that may be transmitted to humans.
The chemical that best fitted these criteria was DRC-1339, now marketed as Starlicide.
Common starlings may also be a nuisance through the noise and mess caused by their large urban roosts.
Nests may be in any type of hole, common locations include inside hollowed trees, buildings, tree stumps and man-made nest-boxes.
), and cats may catch the unwary.
Its spread in Fiji has been limited, and there are doubts about the population's viability.
"Probing" involves the bird plunging its beak into the ground randomly and repetitively until an insect has been found, and is often accompanied by bill gaping where the bird opens its beak in the soil to enlarge a hole.
The bout starts with a series of pure-tone whistles and these are followed by the main part of the song, a number of variable sequences that often incorporate snatches of song mimicked from other species of bird and various naturally occurring or man-made noises.
Around 25&nbsp;million nest boxes were erected for this species in the former Soviet Union, and common starlings were found to be effective in controlling the grass grub ''Costelytra zelandica'' in New Zealand.
Birds from Fair Isle, St Kilda and the Outer Hebrides are intermediate between this subspecies and the nominate and placement with ''vulgaris'' or ''zetlandicus'' varies according to authority.
Nearly spotless in breeding plumage.
Like nominate, but gloss on head predominantly purple, on back green, on flanks usually purplish-blue, on upper wing-coverts bluish-green.
The overall decline seems to be due to the low survival rate of young birds, which may be caused by changes in agricultural practices.
There are normally one or two breeding attempts each year.
Each bird has its own repertoire with more proficient birds having a range of up to 35 variable song types and as many as 14 types of clicks.
Several birds may be kept in the same cage, and their inquisitiveness makes them easy to train or study.
As a laboratory bird, the common starling is second in numbers only to the domestic pigeon.
Nests are typically made out of straw, dry grass and twigs with an inner lining made up of feathers, wool and soft leaves.
The dark juveniles typical of these island forms are occasionally found in mainland Scotland and elsewhere, indicating some gene flow from ''faroensis'' or ''zetlandicus'', subspecies formerly considered to be isolated.
The Sturnidae differ from most birds in that they cannot easily metabolise foods containing high levels of sucrose, although they can cope with other fruits such as grapes and cherries.
vulgaris'' that survived in an Iberian refugium during an ice age retreat, and mitochondrial gene studies suggest that it could be considered as a subspecies of the common starling.
The birds soon became established and are now found all over the country including the subtropical Kermadec Islands to the north and the equally distant Macquarie Island far to the south.
Reedbeds are also favoured for roosting and the birds commonly feed in grassy areas such as farmland, grazing pastures, playing fields, golf courses and airfields where short grass makes foraging easy.
It spread slowly and by 1954 had reached Clanwilliam and Port Elizabeth.
Protozoan blood parasites of the genus ''Haemoproteus'' have been found in common starlings, but a better known pest is the brilliant scarlet nematode ''Syngamus trachea''.
The words have no meaning for the starling, so they often mix them up or use them on what to humans are inappropriate occasions in their songs.
The common starling has bred in northern Sweden from 1850 and in Iceland from 1935.
Very similar to ''tauricus'' but smaller and completely allopatric, being separated by ''purpurascens'', ''caucasicus'' and ''nobilior''.
Adult with darker and duller green gloss and far less spotting even in fresh plumage.
They may also eat animal feed and distribute seeds through their droppings.
The common starling has been introduced to and has successfully established itself in New Zealand, Australia, South Africa, North America, Fiji and several Caribbean islands.
The starling family, Sturnidae, is an entirely Old World group apart from introductions elsewhere, with the greatest numbers of species in Southeast Asia and sub-Saharan Africa.
New methods are being developed, such as tagging one bird and tracking it back to establish where other members of the flock roost.
Singing also occurs outside the breeding season, taking place throughout the year apart from the moulting period.
Research was undertaken in 1966 to identify a suitable avicide that would both kill common starlings and would readily be eaten by them.
Captive starlings often accumulate excess iron in the liver, a condition that can be prevented by adding black tea-leaves to the food.
Birds in the east of the country move southwards, and those from further west winter in the southwest of the US.
In the UK, the common starling may be killed at any time of year.
Moulting occurs once a year- in late summer after the breeding season has finished; the fresh feathers are prominently tipped white (breast feathers) or buff (wing and back feathers), which gives the bird a speckled appearance.
Female "floaters" (unpaired females during the breeding season) present in colonies often lay eggs in another pair's nest.
The common starling appears to have arrived in Fiji in 1925 on Ono-i-lau and Vatoa islands.
Common starlings introduced to areas such as Australia or North America, where other members of the genus are absent, may affect native species through competition for nest holes.
It breeds from September to December and outside the breeding season may congregate in large flocks, often roosting in reedbeds.
In the medieval Welsh ''Mabinogion'', Branwen tamed a common starling, "taught it words", and sent it across the Irish Sea with a message to her brothers, Bran and Manawydan, who then sailed from Wales to Ireland to rescue her.
These birds became established but disappeared around 1902.
It takes time for young common starlings to perfect this technique, and because of this the diet of young birds will often contain fewer insects.
The original Australian introduction was facilitated by the provision of nest boxes to help this mainly insectivorous bird to breed successfully, and even in the US, where this is a pest species, the Department of Agriculture acknowledges that vast numbers of insects are consumed by common starlings.
The presence of this control on numbers of the parasitic species may explain why birds are prepared to reuse old nests.
Their flight is quite strong and direct; their triangular-shaped wings beat very rapidly, and periodically the birds glide for a short way without losing much height before resuming powered flight.
The common starling was introduced to Melbourne in 1857 and Sydney two decades later.
A pair can raise up to three broods per year, frequently reusing and relining the same nest, although two broods is typical, or just one north of 48°N.
Other recorded internal parasites include the spiny-headed worm ''Prosthorhynchus transverses''.
Common starlings may contract avian tuberculosis, avian malaria and retrovirus-induced lymphomas.
Juveniles are grey-brown and by their first winter resemble adults though often retaining some brown juvenile feathering, especially on the head.
The breeding range spread through southern France to northeastern Spain, and there were other range expansions particularly in Italy, Austria and Finland.
Like ''faroensis'' but intermediate in size between that and ''vulgaris''.
Introduced populations in particular have been subjected to a range of controls, including culling, but these have had limited success except in preventing the colonisation of Western Australia.
In Europe, the varying legislation and mobile populations mean that control attempts may have limited long-term results.
They occasionally inhabit open forests and woodlands and are sometimes found in shrubby areas such as Australian heathland.
The colouring and build usually distinguish this bird from other starlings, although the closely related spotless starling may be physically distinguished by the lack of iridescent spots in adult breeding plumage.
A majority of starling predators are avian.
There are a number of other infectious diseases that can potentially be transmitted by common starlings to humans, although the potential for the birds to spread infections may have been exaggerated.
Major declines in populations have been observed from 1980 onward in Sweden, Finland, northern Russia (Karelia) and the Baltic States, and smaller declines in much of the rest of northern and central Europe.
Blood-sucking species leave their host when it dies, but other external parasites stay on the corpse.
A bird with a deformed bill was heavily infested with ''Mallophaga'' lice, presumably due to its inability to remove vermin.
The global population of the common starling is estimated to be more than 310&nbsp;million individuals and its numbers are not thought to be declining significantly, so the bird is classified by the International Union for Conservation of Nature as being of least concern.
E Turkey to Tbilisi and Lake Sevan, in uplands on E shore of Black Sea replacing ''tauricus''
The large size of flocks can also cause problems.
Common starlings rarely inhabit dense, wet forests (i.e.
The amount of green material is not important, as long as some is present, but the presence of herbs in the decorative material appears to be significant in attracting a mate.
The low rate of advance, about  per year for both species, is due to the suboptimal mountain and woodland terrain.
Underwing blackish with pale fringes of coverts.
Larvae of the moth ''Hofmannophila pseudospretella'' are nest scavengers, which feed on animal material such as faeces or dead nestlings.
Western Central Asia, grading into ''poltaratskyi'' between Dzungarian Alatau and Altai
Their swarm behaviour creates complex shapes silhouetted against the sky, a phenomenon known locally as ''sort sol'' ("black sun").
When a flock of common starlings is flying together, the synchronised movements of the birds' wings make a distinctive whooshing sound that can be heard hundreds of metres (yards) away.
It is a noisy bird, especially in communal roosts and other gregarious situations, with an unmusical but varied song.
The common starling was first described by Linnaeus in his ''Systema Naturae'' in 1758 under its current binomial name.
It is readily distinguished from other mid-sized passerines, such as thrushes, icterids or small corvids, by its relatively short tail, sharp, blade-like bill, round-bellied shape and strong, sizeable (and rufous-coloured) legs.
Huge flocks of more than a million common starlings may be observed just before sunset in spring in southwestern Jutland, Denmark over the seaward marshlands of Tønder and Esbjerg municipalities between Tønder and Ribe.
The common starling is  long, with a wingspan of  and a weight of .
v. heinrichi'' Stresemann, 1928, an intergrade between ''caucasicus'' and ''nobilior'' in northern Iran.
In about 1830, ''S.
The non-migratory spotless starling may be descended from a population of ancestral ''S.
