Another example still influential today is from G. E. Moore, several of whose essays, such as the 1925 "A Defence of Common Sense", argued that individuals can make many types of statements about what they judge to be true, and that the individual and everyone else knows to be true.
The moral imperative "cannot be based on feeling, not even if one does not mean an individual's feeling but common moral sensibility".
While the term "common sense" had already become less commonly used as a term for the empathetic moral sentiments by the time of Adam Smith, debates continue about methodological individualism as something supposedly justified philosophically for methodological reasons (as argued for example by Milton Friedman and more recently by Gary S. Becker, both members of the so-called Chicago school of economics).
She argued that there was often a banality to evil in the real world, for example in the case of someone like Adolf Eichmann, which consisted in a lack of ''sensus communis'' and thoughtfulness generally.
The most well-known such case is ''De Anima'' Book III, chapter 2, especially at line 425a27.
''Bon sens'' is the equivalent of modern English "common sense" or "good sense".
On the lowest level it means tact.
But he distanced himself from the Aristotelian conception of a common sense faculty, abandoning it entirely by the time of his ''Passions of the Soul'' (1649).
Therefore, a skeptical logical method described by Descartes needs to be followed and common sense should not be overly relied upon.
It was "one of the most successful and resilient of Aristotelian notions."
And so despite the criticism heaped upon Mandeville and Hobbes by Adam Smith, Hutcheson's student and successor in Glasgow university, Smith made self-interest a core assumption within nascent modern economics, specifically as part of the practical justification for allowing free markets.
The imagination or fantasy, which under traditional Aristotelianism was often equated with the ''koinē aisthēsis'', is built up under this training, becoming the "fund" (to use Schaeffer's term) accepting not only memories of things seen by an individual, but also metaphors and images known in the community, including the ones out of which language itself is made.
The ''nous'' identifies the true forms of things, while the common sense identifies shared aspects of things.
This was similar to the approach of Thomas Reid, who for example was a direct influence on Théodore Jouffroy.
Ancient forgotten wisdoms, he claimed, could be re-discovered by analysis of languages and myths formed under the influence of them.
Gadamer notes one less-known exception—the Württemberg pietism, inspired by the 18th century Swabian churchman, M. Friedrich Christoph Oetinger, who appealed to Shaftesbury and other Enlightenment figures in his critique of the Cartesian rationalism of Leibniz and Wolff, who were the most important German philosophers before Kant.
As examples of perceiving by accident Aristotle mentions using the specific sense perception vision on its own to see that something is sweet, or to recognize a friend by their distinctive color.
... Do you come to a philosopher as to a cunning man, to learn something by magic or witchcraft, beyond what can be known by common prudence and discretion?
In medieval terminology these are the ''species sensibilis'' used for perception and imagination in animals, and the ''species intelligibilis'' or apprehendable forms used in the human intellect or ''nous''.
The common sense is where this comparison happens, and this must occur by comparing impressions (or symbols or markers; Greek: ''sēmeion'') of what the specialist senses have perceived.
According to Hobbes ... man is no different from the other animals.
For example, sight can see colour.
Kant saw this concept as answering a particular need in his system: "the question of why aesthetic judgments are valid: since aesthetic judgments are a perfectly normal function of the same faculties of cognition involved in ordinary cognition, they will have the same universal validity as such ordinary acts of cognition".
Thus she created a "Kantian" political philosophy, which, as she said herself, Kant did not write.
In France, the Netherlands, Belgium, Spain and Italy, it was in its initial florescence associated with the administration of Catholic empires of the competing Bourbon, and Habsburg dynasties, both seeking to centralize their power in a modern way, responding to Machiavellianism and Protestantism as part of the so-called counter reformation.Cartesian theory offered a justification for innovative social change achieved through the courts and administration, an ability to adapt the law to changing social conditions by making the basis for legislation "rational" rather than "traditional".
This, according to Gilson, is going beyond the original meaning.
Vico proposed his own anti-Cartesian methodology for a new Baconian science, inspired, he said, by Plato, Tacitus, Francis Bacon and Grotius.
This is comparable to both Montesquieu's ''Spirit of the Laws'', as well as much later Hegelian historicism, both of which apparently developed without any awareness of Vico's work.
But Plato's dialogue presented an argument that recognizing ''koina'' is an active thinking process in the rational part of the human soul, making the senses instruments of the thinking part of man.
This line of thought was taken further, if not by Descartes himself then by those he influenced, until the concept of a faculty or organ of common sense was itself rejected.René Descartes is generally credited with making obsolete the notion that there was an actual faculty within the human brain that functioned as a ''sensus communis''.
Plato, on the other hand was apparently willing to allow that animals could have some level of thought, meaning that he did not have to explain their sometimes complex behavior with a strict division between high-level perception processing and the human-like thinking such as being able to form opinions.
For example, in some passages in his works, Aristotle seems to use the term to refer to the individual sense perceptions simply being common to all people, or common to various types of animals.
The influence has been particularly important concerning the epistemological importance of a ''sensus communis'' for any possibility of rational discussion between people.
Now there are none so far from being ''Partners'' in this ''Sense'', or sharers in this ''common Affection'', as they who scarcely know ''an Equall'', nor consider themselves as subject to any law of ''Fellowship'' or ''Community''.
Arendt and also Jürgen Habermas, who took a similar position concerning Kant's ''sensus communis'', were criticised by Lyotard for their use of Kant's ''sensus communis'' as a standard for real political judgement.
He was also not in agreement with Reid and the Scottish school, who he criticized in his ''Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics'' as using "the magic wand of common sense", and not properly confronting the "metaphysical" problem defined by Hume, which Kant wanted to be solved scientifically - the problem of how to use reason to consider how one ought to act.
Though his own proposed solution was even more controversial, Berkeley famously wrote that enlightenment requires a "revolt from metaphysical notions to the plain dictates of nature and common sense".
On the one hand, the approach of Descartes is and was seen as radically sceptical in some ways.
One aspect of this, later taken up by authors such as Kant, was good taste.
As Gadamer wrote in the "Afterword" of ''Truth and Method'', "I find it frighteningly unreal when people like Habermas ascribe to rhetoric a compulsory quality that one must reject in favor of unconstrained, rational dialogue".
The great anatomist Andreas Vesalius however found no connections between the anterior ventricle and the sensory nerves, leading to speculation about other parts of the brain into the 1600s.
But he felt that Gadamer under-estimated the need for a dialectic that was critical and distanced, and attempting to go behind language.
A recent commentator on Vico, John D. Schaeffer has argued that Gadamer's approach to ''sensus communis'' exposed itself to the criticism of Habermas because it "privatized" it, removing it from a changing and oral community, following the Greek philosophers in rejecting true communal rhetoric, in favour of forcing the concept within a Socratic dialectic aimed at truth.
Jeremy Bentham gives a summary of the plethora of terms used in British philosophy by the nineteenth century to describe common sense in discussions about ethics:Another man comes and alters the phrase: leaving out moral, and putting in ''common'', in the room of it.
He noted that ''sensus'' could be a translation of ''nous'', (for example in the Vulgate Bible), but he only found one clear case of a Latin text showing this apparent meaning, a text by Phaedrus the fable writer.
This however meant basing knowledge upon something uncertain, and irrational.
The passage is about how the animal mind converts raw sense perceptions from the five specialized sense perceptions, into perceptions of real things moving and changing, which can be thought about.
Despite hints by Aristotle himself that they were united, early commentators such as Alexander of Aphrodisias and Al-Farabi felt they were distinct, but later, Avicenna emphasized the link, influencing future authors including Christian philosophers.
They may even be the same.
The Greek for these common sensibles is ''ta koina'', which means shared or common things, and examples include the oneness of each thing, with its specific shape and size and so on, and the change or movement of each thing.
argues, in agreement with Shaftesbury in the 18th century, that the concept developed from the Stoic concept of ethical virtue, influenced by Aristotle, but emphasizing the role of both the individual perception, and shared communal understanding.
... Hobbes' philosophy constituted a more profound rupture with Peripatetic thought.
The sense of the community is in this case one translation of "''communis sensus''" in the Latin of Cicero.
argues that Aristotle used the term "common sense" both to discuss the individual senses when these act as a unity, which Gregorić calls "the perceptual capacity of the soul", or the higher level "sensory capacity of the soul" that represents the senses and the imagination working as a unity.
These especially Roman meanings were apparently influenced by several Stoic Greek terms with the word ''koinē'' (meaning shared or common); not only ''koinē aisthēsis'', but also such terms as ''koinē nous'', ''koinē ennoia'', and ''koinonoēmosunē'', all of which involve ''nous'', something, at least in Aristotle, that would not be present in "lower" animals.
He described this inner faculty when writing in Latin in his ''Meditations on first philosophy''.
Among Catholic theologians, writers such as theologian François Fénelon and philosopher Claude Buffier (1661-1737) gave an anti-Cartesian defense of common sense as a foundation for knowledge.
writes that "Descartes is the source of the most common meaning of ''common sense'' today: practical judgment".
Some philosophers such as Jacques Rancière indeed take the lead from Jean-François Lyotard and refer to the "postmodern" condition as one where there is "''dissensus communis''".
He also agreed with Gadamer that hermeneutics is a "basic kind of knowing on which others rest."
So the normal five individual senses do sense the common perceptibles according to Aristotle (and Plato), but it is not something they necessarily interpret correctly on their own.
In several European languages, a separate term for this type of common sense is used.
Vico's initial use of the term, which was of much inspiration to Gadamer for example, appears in his ''On the Study Methods of our Time'', which was partly a defense of his own profession, given the reformist pressure upon both his University and the legal system in Naples.
Schaeffer claims that Vico's concept provides a third option to those of Habermas and Gadamer and he compares it to the recent philosophers Richard J. Bernstein, Bernard Williams, Richard Rorty, and Alasdair MacIntyre, and the recent theorist of rhetoric, Richard Lanham.
Plato's Socrates says this kind of thinking is not a kind of sense at all.
One ethical concern was the deliberately simplified method that treated human communities as made up of selfish independent individuals (methodological individualism), ignoring the ''sense of community'' that the Romans understood as part of common sense.
The idea that now became influential, developed in both the Latin and French works of Descartes, though coming from different directions, is that common good sense (and indeed sense perception) is not reliable enough for the new Cartesian method of skeptical reasoning.
But even though Cicero did at least once use the term in a manuscript on Plato's ''Timaeus'' (concerning a primordial "sense, one and common for all ... connected with nature"), he and other Roman authors did not normally use it as a technical term limited to discussion about sense perception, as Aristotle apparently had in ''De Anima'', and as the Scholastics later would in the Middle Ages.
This was at least to some extent opposed to the Hobbesian approach, still today normal in economic theory, of trying to understand all human behaviour as fundamentally selfish, and would also be a foil to the new ethics of Kant.
So while agreeing upon the need to help common sense with a methodical approach, he also insisted that starting from common sense, including especially common sense perceptions, was acceptable and correct.
Hence, amongst critics of the methodological argument for assuming self-centeredness in economics are authors such as Deirdre McCloskey, who have taken their bearings from the above-mentioned philosophical debates involving Habermas, Gadamer, the anti-Cartesian Richard Rorty and others, arguing that trying to force economics to follow artificial methodological laws is bad, and it is better to recognize social science as driven by rhetoric.
He influenced Locke and Pierre Bayle, in their critique of metaphysics, and in 1733 Voltaire "introduced him as the "father" of the scientific method" to a French audience, an understanding that was widespread by 1750.
One of the last notable philosophers to accept something like the Aristotelian "common sense" was Descartes in the 17th century, but he also undermined it.
has proposed for example that the Roman republic maintained a very "oral" culture whereas in Aristotle's time rhetoric had come under heavy criticism from philosophers such as Socrates.
The French philosopher did not fully reject the idea of the inner senses, which he appropriated from the Scholastics.
Gilson noted that Descartes actually gave ''bon sens'' two related meanings, first the basic and widely shared ability to judge true and false, which he also calls ''raison'' (reason); and second, wisdom, the perfected version of the first.
Unlike Grotius, Vico went beyond looking for one single set of similarities amongst nations but also established rules about how natural law properly changes as peoples change, and has to be judged relative to this state of development.
According to Gadamer, in contrast to the "wealth of meaning" that Vico and Shaftesbury brought from the Roman tradition into their humanism, Kant "developed his moral philosophy in explicit opposition to the doctrine of "moral feeling" that had been worked out in English philosophy".
During the Enlightenment, Descartes' insistence upon a mathematical-style method of thinking that treated common sense and the sense perceptions sceptically, was accepted in some ways, but also criticized.
Unlike Aristotle, who had placed it in the heart, by the time of Descartes this faculty was thought to be in the brain, and he located it in the pineal gland.
As in the Enlightenment, this debate therefore continues to combine debates about not only what the individual motivations of people are, but also what can be known about scientifically, and what should be usefully assumed for methodological reasons, even if the truth of the assumptions are strongly doubted.
There is also difficulty with trying to determine whether the common sense is truly separable from the individual sense perceptions and from imagination, in anything other than a conceptual way as a capability.
Today, the concept of common sense, and how it should best be used, remains linked to many of the most perennial topics in epistemology and ethics, with special focus often directed at the philosophy of the modern social sciences.
While Descartes had distanced himself from it, John Locke abandoned it more openly, while still maintaining the idea of "common sensibles" that are perceived.
Like Descartes, he rejected appeals to uncertain sense perception and common sense (except in the very specific way he describes concerning aesthetics), or the prejudices of one's "''Weltanschauung''", and tried to give a new way to certainty through methodical logic, and an assumption of a type of ''a priori'' knowledge.
Hutcheson described it as, "a Publick Sense, viz.
Other catholic theologians took up this approach, and attempts were made to combine this with more traditional Thomism, for example Jean-Marie de Lamennais.
"Thomas Aquinas and John of Jandun recognized four internal senses: the common sense, imagination, ''vis cogitativa'', and memory.
Vico united the Roman and Greek meanings of the term ''communis sensus''.
Paul Ricoeur argued that Gadamer and Habermas were both right in part.
Related terms in other languages include Latin '''''''''', Greek  ('''''koinē aísthēsis'''''), and French '''''''''', but these are not straightforward translations in all contexts.
Distinct combinations of these properties are ''common'' to all perceived things.
"Common sense" has at least two specifically philosophical meanings.
Enthymemes are reasonings about uncertain truths and probabilities—as opposed to the Cartesian method, which was skeptical of all that could not be dealt with as syllogisms, including raw perceptions of physical bodies.
In short, there can be no middle ground between Reid and St. Thomas.
Hume was critical of Reid on this point.
The interplay between the meanings has come to be particularly notable in English, as opposed to other western European languages, and the English term has become international.
Gilson pointed out that Liberatore's approach means categorizing such common beliefs as the existence of God or the immortality of the soul, under the same heading as (in Aristotle and Aquinas) such logical beliefs as that it is impossible for something to exist and not exist at the same time.
In the case of Gadamer, this was in specific contrast to the ''sensus communis'' concept in Kant, which he felt (in agreement with Lyotard) could not be relevant to politics if used in its original sense.
And thus Morality and good Government go together.
Bacon is known for his doctrine of the "idols of the mind", presented in his ''Novum Organum'', and in his ''Essays'' described normal human thinking as biased towards believing in lies.
Shaftesbury explained the change of meaning as being due to the specific way that Stoics understood perception and intellect, saying that one should "consider withal how small the distinction was in that Philosophy, between the ὑπόληψις conjecture, and the vulgar αἴσθησις perception; how generally Passion was by those Philosophers brought under the Head of Opinion".
It was contrasted to metaphysics, which was, like Cartesianism, associated with the ''ancien régime''.
A reaction to Shaftesbury in defense of the Hobbesian approach of treating communities as driven by individual self-interest, was not long coming in Bernard Mandeville's controversial works.
In this way his common sense has a similarity to the assertion of ''a priori'' knowledge asserted by rationalists like Descartes and Kant, despite Reid's criticism of Descartes concerning his theory of ideas.
He drew upon authors such as Seneca, Juvenal, Horace and Marcus Aurelius, for whom, he saw, common sense was not just a reference to widely held vulgar opinions, but something cultivated among educated people living in better communities.
The concept of ''sensus communis'' "was emptied and intellectualized by the German enlightenment".
In its mature version, Vico's conception of ''sensus communis'' is defined by him as “judgment without reflection, shared by an entire class, an entire people, and entire nation, or the entire human race”.
Gilson argued that Thomism avoided the problem of having to decide between Cartesian innate certainties and Reid's uncertain common sense, and that "as soon as the problem of the existence of the external world was presented in terms of common sense, Cartesianism was accepted".
Michael Huemer has advocated an epistemic theory he calls ''phenomenal conservatism'', which he claims to accord with common sense by way of internalist intuition.
Another connected epistemological concern was that by considering ''common good sense'' as inherently inferior to Cartesian conclusions developed from simple assumptions, an important type of wisdom was being arrogantly ignored.
This refers to shared notions, or common conceptions, that are either in-born or imprinted by the senses on to the soul.
All these meanings of "common sense", including the everyday one, are inter-connected in a complex history and have evolved during important political and philosophical debates in modern western civilisation, notably concerning science, politics and economics.
Together with this, references to "common sense" became positive and associated with modernity, in contrast to negative references to ''metaphysics'', which was associated with the ''ancien regime''.
Concerning such sceptics, he wrote:But would these prejudiced reasoners reflect a moment, there are many obvious instances and arguments, sufficient to undeceive them, and make them enlarge their maxims and principles.
In the opening line of one of his most famous books, ''Discourse on Method'', Descartes established the most common modern meaning, and its controversies, when he stated that everyone has a similar and sufficient amount of common sense (''bon sens''), but it is rarely used well.
Gadamer argued that being critical requires being critical of prejudices including the prejudice against prejudice.
explains that "when I see Socrates, it is not insofar as he is Socrates that he is visible to my eye, but rather because he is coloured".
So after Descartes, critical attention turned from Aristotle and his theory of perception, and more towards Descartes' own treatment of common good sense, concerning which several 18th-century authors found help in Roman literature.
But he was also the opponent of all metaphysical explanations of nature, or over-reaching speculation generally, and a proponent of science based on small steps of experience,  experimentation and methodical induction.
"''Sensus communis''" is the Latin translation of ''koinē aesthēsis'', which came to be recovered by Medieval scholastics when discussing Aristotelian theories of perception.
The alternative to induction, deductive reasoning, demanded a mathematical approach, starting from simple and certain assumptions.
Aristotle also occasionally called the ''koinē aisthēsis'' (or one version of it), the ''prōton aisthētikon'', the first of the senses.
Therefore, in Aristotle (and the medieval Aristotelians) the universals used to identify and categorize things are divided into two.
In his synthesis, which he saw as the first Baconian analysis of man (something the lesser known Vico had claimed earlier), common sense is entirely built up from shared experience and shared innate emotions, and therefore it is indeed imperfect as a basis for any attempt to know the truth or to make the best decision.
This began with Descartes' criticism of it, and what came to be known as the dispute between "rationalism" and "empiricism".
Furthermore, he insisted that because all understanding comes through language, hermeneutics has a claim to universality.
In order to confer a technical philosophical value upon the common sense of orators and moralists it is necessary either to accept Reid's common sense as a sort of unjustified and unjustifiable instinct, which will destroy Thomism, or to reduce it to the Thomist intellect and reason, which will result in its being suppressed as a specifically distinct faculty of knowledge.
But in any case a complex of ideas attached itself to the term, to be almost forgotten in the Middle Ages, and eventually returning into ethical discussion in 18th-century Europe, after Descartes.
With this in mind, Shaftesbury and, much less known at the time, Giambattista Vico, both presented new arguments for the importance of the Roman understanding of common sense, in what is now often referred to, after Hans-Georg Gadamer, as a humanist interpretation of the term.
The origin of the term is in the works of Aristotle.
Concerning Liberatore he wrote:
In Horace the man who talks to you when you obviously don't want to talk lacks ''communis sensus''.
To get a more distinct understanding of things, it is more important to be methodical and mathematical.
Taste, for Kant, is universal only in that it results from "the free play of all our cognitive powers", and is communal only in that it "abstracts from all subjective, private conditions such as attractiveness and emotion".
Shaftesbury and others felt it represented the Stoic Greek original, which gave the special Roman meaning of ''sensus communis'', especially when used to refer to someone's public spirit.
Compared to Aristotle and his strictest medieval followers, these Roman authors were not so strict about the boundary between animal-like common sense and specially human reasoning.
In the twentieth century, this debate is especially associated with Étienne Gilson and Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange.
As a hermeneutist like Gadamer he agreed with him about the problem of lack of any perspective outside of history, pointing out that Habermas himself argued as someone coming from a particular tradition.
But according to Gadamer, the civic quality implied in discussion of ''sensus communis'' in other European countries did not take root in the German philosophy of the 18th and 19th centuries, despite the fact it consciously imitated much in English and French philosophy.
He made this a basis for a new and better-founded approach to discuss Natural Law, improving upon Grotius, John Selden, and Pufendorf who he felt had failed to convince, because they could claim no authority from nature.
As the Aristotelian meaning of the Latin term began to be forgotten after Descartes, his discussion of ''bon sens'' gave a new way of defining "sensus communis" in various European languages (including Latin, even though Descartes himself did not translate ''bon sens'' as ''sensus communis'', but treated them as two separate things).
This work was written in French, and does not directly discuss the Aristotelian technical theory of perception.
Unfortunately few true Stoic texts survive, and our understanding of their technical terminology is limited.
And this is what did happen after Kant - so much so that today it is extraordinarily difficult to retrieve any idea of taste or aesthetic judgment that is more than the expression of personal preferences.
Indeed, this approach was never fully rejected, at least in economics.
* ''Koinonoēmosunē'' is found only in the work of the emperor Marcus Aurelius (''Meditations'' I.16), also known as a Stoic.
This in turn required Descartes (and later rationalists such as Kant) to assume the existence of innate or "''a priori''" knowledge in the human mind - a controversial proposal.
Economics and social science generally have been criticized as a refuge of Cartesian methodology.
Matteo Liberatore, seeking an approach more consistent with Aristotle and Aquinas, equated this foundational common sense with the ''koinai doxai'' of Aristotle, that correspond to the ''communes conceptiones'' of Aquinas.
Reid was criticised, partly for his critique of Hume, by Kant and J. S. Mill, who were two of the most important influences in nineteenth century philosophy.
Hence common sense is not just a "guiding standard of eloquence" but also "the standard of practical judgment".
Despite the criticism, the influence of the Scottish school was notable for example upon American pragmatism, and modern Thomism.
Reid furthermore emphasized inborn common sense as opposed to only experience and sense perception.
The concept of the inner senses, plural, was further developed in the Middle Ages.
In his ''Rhetoric'' for example Aristotle mentions "''koinōn ... tàs písteis''" or "common beliefs", saying that "our proofs and arguments must rest on generally accepted principles, ... when speaking of converse with the multitude".
of a faculty of judgement, which in its reflection takes account (a priori) of the mode of representation of all other men in thought; in order as it were to compare its judgement with the collective Reason of humanity, and thus to escape the illusion arising from the private conditions that could be so easily taken for objective, which would injuriously affect the judgement.
But Descartes used two different terms in his work, not only the Latin term "''sensus communis''", but also the French term ''bon sens'', with which he opens his ''Discourse on Method''.
Animals with imagination come closest to having something like reasoning and ''nous''.
It can be negatively equated to vulgar prejudice and superstition, or on the contrary it is often positively contrasted to them as a standard for good taste and as the source of the most basic axioms needed for science and logic.
Vico, who taught classical rhetoric in Naples (where Shaftesbury died) under a Cartesian-influenced Spanish government, was not widely read until the 20th century, but his writings on common sense have been an important influence upon Hans-Georg Gadamer, Benedetto Croce and Antonio Gramsci.
He believed that the term common sense as he used it did encompass both the social common sense described by Shaftesbury and Hutcheson, and the perceptive powers described by Aristotelians.
The everyday understanding of common sense derives from philosophical discussion involving several European languages.
As mentioned above, in terms of the more general epistemological implications of common sense, modern philosophy came to use the term common sense like Descartes, abandoning Aristotle's theory.
In this he went further than his predecessors concerning the ancient certainties available within vulgar common sense.
In contrast to Descartes who "found it unacceptable to assume that sensory representations may enter the mental realm from without"...
In this passage, Aristotle explained that concerning these ''koina'' (such as movement) we already have a sense, a "common sense" or sense of the common things (Greek: ''koinē aisthēsis''), which does not work by accident (Greek: ''kata sumbebēkos'').
Aristotle proposes that the reason for having several senses is in fact that it increases the chances that we can distinguish and recognize things correctly, and not just occasionally or by accident.
In the ensuing 18th century Enlightenment, common sense came to be seen more positively as the basis for modern thinking.
One of the names Peirce used for the movement was "Critical Common-Sensism".
* ''Koinos nous'' is a term found in Epictetus (III.vi.8), a Stoic philosopher.
It was promoted further by people such as Hobbes, Spinoza, and others and continues to have important impacts on everyday life.
Descartes was being original.
But he defended the possibility of science without absolute certainty, and consistently described common sense as giving a valid answer to the challenge of extreme skepticism.
Endeavours of this sort always end in defeat.
The common sense is therefore also where a type of consciousness originates, "for it makes us aware of having sensations at all".
This understanding of a moral sense or public spirit remains a subject for discussion, although the term "common sense" is no longer commonly used for the sentiment itself.
He thus developed a detailed view of an evolving wisdom of peoples.
The Cartesian project to replace common good sense with clearly defined mathematical reasoning was aimed at certainty, and not mere probability.
In America, Reid influenced C. S. Peirce, the founder of the philosophical movement now known as Pragmatism, which has become internationally influential.
What is required, according to his new science, is to find the common sense shared by different people and nations.
Gadamer came into direct debate with his contemporary Habermas, the so-called ''Hermeneutikstreit''.
And this second concept survived better.
Aristotle never fully spells out the relationship between the common sense and the imaginative faculty ("''phantasia''"), although the two clearly work together in animals, and not only humans, for example in order to enable a perception of time.
has argued that this may be because Aristotle did not use the term as a standardized technical term at all.
In contrast to the rationalists, the "empiricists", took their orientation from Francis Bacon, whose arguments for methodical science were earlier than those of Descartes, and less directed towards mathematics and certainty.
Under the influence of the great Persian philosophers Al-Farabi and Avicenna, several inner senses came to be listed.
But while such beliefs might be well adapted to primitive conditions, they were not infallible, and could not always be relied upon.
Kant himself did not see himself as a relativist, and was aiming to give knowledge a more solid basis, but as Richard J. Bernstein remarks, reviewing this same critique of Gadamer:Once we begin to question whether there is a common faculty of taste (a ''sensus communis''), we are easily led down the path to relativism.
He accepted mental representations but ... "All sense is fancy", as Hobbes famously put it, with the only exception of extension and motion.
Descartes and the Cartesian "rationalists", rejected reliance upon experience, the senses and inductive reasoning, and seemed to insist that certainty was possible.
David Hume agreed with Berkeley on this, and like Locke and Vico saw himself as following Bacon more than Descartes.
In rhetoric, a prudent speaker must take account of opinions (Greek ''doxai'') that are widely held.
He then tells you, that his common sense teaches him what is right and wrong, as surely as the other’s moral sense did: meaning by common sense, a sense of some kind or other, which he says, is possessed by all mankind: the sense of those, whose sense is not the same as the author’s, being struck out of the account as not worth taking.
In this discussion "common" (''koinos'') is a term opposed to specific or particular (''idia'').
Aristotle, trying to give a more general account of the souls of all animals, not just humans, moved the act of perception out of the rational thinking soul into this ''sensus communis'', which is something like a sense, and something like thinking, but not rational.
But Aristotle was explaining how the animal mind, not just the human mind, links and categorizes different tastes, colours, feelings, smells and sounds in order to perceive real things in terms of the "common sensibles" (or "common perceptibles").
Continuing the tradition of Reid and the enlightenment generally, the common sense of individuals trying to understand reality continues to be a serious subject in philosophy.
Another very important aspect of common sense particularly interesting to later British political philosophers such as Francis Hutcheson was what came to be called ''moral sentiment'', which is different from a tribal or factional sentiment, but a more general fellow feeling that is very important for larger communities:A publick Spirit can come only from a social Feeling or ''Sense of Partnership'' with Human Kind.
Contemporaries such as Gassendi and Hobbes went beyond Descartes in some ways in their rejection of Aristotelianism, rejecting explanations involving anything other than matter and motion, including the distinction between the animal-like judgement of sense perception, a special separate common sense, and the human mind or ''nous'', which Descartes had retained from Aristotelianism.
