Computer graphics is often differentiated from the field of visualization, although the two fields have many similarities.
He created an animation of his hand opening and closing.
TRW, Lockheed-Georgia, General Electric and Sperry Rand are among the many companies that were getting started in computer graphics by the mid-1960s.
Models may be created automatically or manually; the manual modeling process of preparing geometric data for 3D computer graphics is similar to plastic arts such as sculpting.
Software can simulate this through specialized rendering methods.
'''Computer graphics''' are pictures and movies created using computers – usually referring to image data created by a computer specifically with help from specialized graphical hardware and software.
An understanding of the advantages and limitations of each technology and the relationship between them is most likely to result in efficient and effective use of tools.
3D computer graphics are the same as 3D models.
It is a vast and recent area in computer science.
Called the Sword of Damocles because of the hardware required for support, it displayed two separate wireframe images, one for each eye.
For the purpose of performance this is stored in the computer.
Anti-aliasing methods rectify such problems, resulting in imagery more pleasing to the viewer, but can be somewhat computationally expensive.
:Texture mapping is a method for adding detail, surface texture, or colour to a computer-generated graphic or 3D model.
The TX-2 integrated a number of new man-machine interfaces.
1999 saw Nvidia release the seminal GeForce 256, the first home video card billed as a graphics processing unit or GPU, which in its own words contained "integrated transform, lighting, triangle setup/clipping, and rendering engines".
Sinden created a film called  ''Force, Mass and Motion'' illustrating Newton's laws of motion in operation.
It could stretch the body of car without deforming the tires.
Greenberg was the founding director of the NSF Center for Computer Graphics and Scientific Visualization.
In the arcades, advances were made in commercial, real-time 3D graphics.
One can simply specify that they want to draw a box, and then specify the location and size of the box.
The Nvidia GeForce line of graphics cards dominated the market in the early decade with occasional significant competing presence from ATI.
Video games and CGI cinema had spread the reach of computer graphics to the mainstream by the late 1990s, and continued to do so at an accelerated pace in the 2000s.
(Higginbotham's ''Tennis For Two'' had beaten ''Spacewar'' by almost three years;  but it was almost unknown outside of a research or academic setting.)
Rendering is the generation of a 2D image from a 3D model by means of computer programs.
Most are 3D cartoons.
By the end of the decade, the GPU would begin its rise to the prominence it still enjoys today.
By 1973, the first annual SIGGRAPH conference was held, which has become one of the focuses of the organization.
CGI movies proliferated, with traditional animated cartoon films like Ice Age and Madagascar as well as numerous Pixar offerings like Finding Nemo dominating the box office in this field.
The model can also be physically created using 3D Printing devices.
Each pixel is a sample of an original image, where more samples typically provide a more accurate representation of the original.
Using a light pen, Sketchpad allowed one to draw simple shapes on the computer screen, save them and even recall them later.
Originally, sprites were a method of integrating unrelated bitmaps so that they appeared to be part of the normal bitmap on a screen, such as creating an animated character that can be moved on a screen without altering the data defining the overall screen.
In 1988, the first shaders - small programs designed specifically to do shading as a separate algorithm - were developed by Pixar, which had already spun off from Industrial Light & Magic as a separate entity - though the public would not see the results of such technological progress until the next decade.
According to the Information Processing Society of Japan: "The core of 3D image rendering is calculating the luminance of each pixel making up a rendered surface from the given viewpoint, light source, and object position.
The precursor sciences to the development of modern computer graphics were the advances in electrical engineering, electronics, and television that took place during the first half of the twentieth century.
The modern videogame arcade as is known today was birthed in the 1970s, with the first arcade games using real-time 2D sprite graphics.
The sales force picked up on this quickly enough and when installing new units, would run the "world's first video game" for their new customers.
The continued rise and increasing sophistication of the graphics processing unit was crucial to this decade, and 3D rendering capabilities became a standard feature as 3D-graphics GPUs became considered a necessity for desktop computer makers to offer.
Catmull had just come from The Boeing Company and had been working on his degree in physics.
The rendering program is usually built into the computer graphics software, though others are available as plug-ins or entirely separate programs.
David C. Evans was director of engineering at Bendix Corporation's computer division from 1953 to 1962, after which he worked for the next five years as a visiting professor at Berkeley.
The technique is capable of producing a very high degree of photorealism; usually higher than that of typical scanline rendering methods, but at a greater computational cost.
Sometimes the target of the animation is the computer itself, but sometimes the target is another medium, such as film.
The technique has also been used for Bitcoin mining and has applications in computer vision.
Experiments into the processing power required to provide graphics in real time at ultra-high-resolution modes like Ultra HD are beginning, though beyond reach of all but the highest-end hardware.
Typical of the early move to high resolution computer graphics intelligent workstations for the computer-aided engineering market were the Orca 1000, 2000 and 3000 workstations, developed by Orcatech of Ottawa, a spin-off from Bell-Northern Research, and led by David Pearson, an early workstation pioneer.
Computer imagery is found on television, in newspapers, for example in weather reports, or for example in all kinds of medical investigation and surgical procedures.
Also can be used in non-graphical computer simulations and calculations.
Texture mapping has matured into a multistage process with many layers;  generally it is not uncommon to implement texture mapping, bump mapping or isosurfaces, normal mapping, lighting maps including specular highlights and reflection techniques, and shadow volumes into one rendering engine using shaders, which are maturing considerably.
Other methods of animation include procedural and expression-based techniques: the former consolidates related elements of animated entities into sets of attributes, useful for creating particle effects and crowd simulations; the latter allows an evaluated result returned from a user-defined logical expression, coupled with mathematics, to automate animation in a predictable way (convenient for controlling bone behavior beyond what a hierarchy offers in skeletal system set up).
Another example is that Sutherland's software modeled objects - not just a picture of objects.
Home computers became able to take on rendering tasks that previously had been limited to workstations costing thousands of dollars;  as 3D modelers became available for home systems, the popularity of Silicon Graphics workstations declined and powerful Microsoft Windows and Apple Macintosh machines running Autodesk products like 3D Studio or other home rendering software ascended in importance.
(''Fetter has said that the terms were actually given to him by Verne Hudson of the Wichita Division of Boeing''.)
''Speed Race'' in 1974 featured sprites moving along a vertically scrolling road.
Multitexturing is the use of more than one texture at a time on a polygon.
There are instances when working with vector tools and formats is best practice, and instances when working with raster tools and formats is best practice.
Their shader languages HLSL and GLSL are active fields of research and development.
The first cathode ray tube, the Braun tube, was invented in 1897 - it in turn would permit the oscilloscope and the military control panel - the more direct precursors of the field, as they provided the first two-dimensional electronic displays that responded to programmatic or user input.
It was not long before major corporations started taking an interest in computer graphics.
Computer generated imagery can be categorized into several different types: two dimensional (2D), three dimensional (3D), and animated graphics.
'Rendering' is also used to describe the process of calculating effects in a video editing file to produce final video output.
Many of his former students have won Academy Awards for technical achievements and several have won the SIGGRAPH Achievement Award.
In scientific computing, the GPGPU technique to pass large amounts of data bidirectionally between a GPU and CPU was invented;  speeding up analysis on many kinds of bioinformatics and molecular biology experiments.
Virtual entities may contain and be controlled by assorted attributes, such as transform values (location, orientation, and scale) stored in an object's transformation matrix.
Shaders are now very nearly a necessity for advanced work in the field, providing considerable complexity in manipulating pixels, vertices, and textures on a per-element basis, and countless possible effects.
Once that was determined, the computer could then draw a cursor at that location.
After receiving his Ph.D. from MIT, Sutherland became Director of Information Processing at ARPA (Advanced Research Projects Agency), and later became a professor at Harvard.
There are various techniques of shading including cross hatching where perpendicular lines of varying closeness are drawn in a grid pattern to shade an area.
SIGGRAPH has grown in size and importance as the field of computer graphics has expanded over time.
There are times when both formats come together.
Since then, computer graphics have only become more detailed and realistic, due to more powerful graphics hardware and 3D modeling software.
Vector graphics formats are complementary to raster graphics.
Important advances in chroma keying ("bluescreening", etc.)
AMD also became a leading developer of graphics boards in this decade, creating a "duopoly" in the field which exists this day.
This began the decades-long transformation of the southern San Francisco Bay Area into the world's leading computer technology hub - now known as Silicon Valley.
Also in the 1970s, Henri Gouraud, Jim Blinn and Bui Tuong Phong contributed to the foundations of shading in CGI via the development of the Gouraud shading and Blinn-Phong shading models, allowing graphics to move beyond a "flat" look to a look more accurately portraying depth.
Computer graphics is widespread today.
Around the same time, other scientists were creating computer graphics to illustrate their research.
Multiple methods of achieving animation exist; the rudimentary form is based on the creation and editing of keyframes, each storing a value at a given time, per attribute to be animated.
Though the technical details of rendering methods vary, the general challenges to overcome in producing a 2D image from a 3D representation stored in a scene file are outlined as the graphics pipeline along a rendering device, such as a GPU.
Texture mapping as a discipline also encompasses techniques for creating normal maps and bump maps that correspond to a texture to simulate height and specular maps to help simulate shine and light reflections, as well as environment mapping to simulate mirror-like reflectivity, also called gloss.
As technology has improved, 3D computer graphics have become more common, but 2D computer graphics are still widely used.
Early projects like the Whirlwind and SAGE Projects introduced the CRT as a viable display and interaction interface and introduced the light pen as an input device.
Many powerful tools have been developed to visualize data.
Likewise, the farther apart the lines are, the lighter the area appears.
:Ray tracing is a technique for generating an image by tracing the path of light through pixels in an image plane.
The studio to invent the programmable shader would go on to have many animated hits, and its work on prerendered video animation is still considered an industry leader and research trailbreaker.
3D graphics compared to 2D graphics are graphics that use a three-dimensional representation of geometric data.
The intensity of each pixel is variable; in color systems, each pixel has typically three
Graphics are visual presentations on a surface, such as a computer screen.
IBM was quick to respond to this interest by releasing the IBM 2250 graphics terminal, the first commercially available graphics computer.
In 1965, Noll along with Frieder Nake and Georg Nees were the first to publicly exhibit their computer art.
Artists and graphic designers began to see the personal computer, particularly the Commodore Amiga and Macintosh, as a serious design tool, one that could save time and draw more accurately than other methods.
Because of David C. Evans' and Sutherland's presence, UU was gaining quite a reputation as the place to be for computer graphics research so Catmull went there to learn 3D animation.
:Donald P. Greenberg is a leading innovator in computer graphics.
In 1961 another student at MIT, Steve Russell, created the second video game, ''Spacewar''.
The 1990s' overwhelming note was the emergence of 3D modeling on a mass scale, and an impressive rise in the quality of CGI generally.
''Pong'' in 1972 was one of the first hit arcade cabinet games.
3D models may be created using multiple approaches: use of NURBS curves to generate accurate and smooth surface patches, polygonal mesh modeling (manipulation of faceted geometry), or polygonal mesh subdivision (advanced tessellation of polygons, resulting in smooth surfaces similar to NURBS models).
Graphic design may consist of the deliberate selection, creation, or arrangement of typography alone, as in a brochure, flier, poster, web site, or book without any other element.
3D modeling is the process of developing a mathematical, wireframe representation of any three-dimensional object, called a "3D model", via specialized software.
In those applications, the two-dimensional image is not just a representation of a real-world object, but an independent artifact with added semantic value; two-dimensional models are therefore preferred, because they give more direct control of the image than 3D computer graphics, whose approach is more akin to photography than to typography.
Pixels are placed on a regular 2-dimensional grid, and are often represented using dots or squares.
A scene file contains objects in a strictly defined language or data structure; it would contain geometry, viewpoint, texture, lighting, and shading information as a description of the virtual scene.
Jim Clark was also there; he would later found Silicon Graphics.
In 1967 Sutherland was recruited by Evans to join the computer science program at the University of Utah - a development which would turn that department into one of the most important research centers in graphics for nearly a decade thereafter, eventually producing some of the most important pioneers in the field.
The Macintosh remains a highly popular tool for computer graphics among graphic design studios and businesses.
Due to printing, 3D models are not only confined to virtual space.
In 1968, Arthur Appel described the first algorithm for what would eventually become known as ray casting - a basis point for almost all of modern 3D graphics, as well as the later pursuit of photorealism in graphics.
There Sutherland perfected his HMD;  twenty years later, NASA would re-discover his techniques in their virtual reality research.
In 1959, Douglas T. Ross innovated again while working at MIT on transforming mathematic statements into computer generated machine tool vectors, and took the opportunity to create a display scope image of a Disney cartoon character.
Digital images include both vector images and raster images, but raster images are more commonly used.
Ralph Baer, a supervising engineer at Sanders Associates, came up with a home video game in 1966 that was later licensed to Magnavox and called the Odyssey.
Computer graphics is responsible for displaying art and image data effectively and meaningfully to the user, and processing image data received from the physical world.
Sutherland's graphics class would contribute a number of significant pioneers to the field, including a student by the name of Edwin Catmull - a later founder of Pixar.
Demoscenes and shareware games proliferated;  John Carmack, a later 3D innovator, would start out in this period developing sprite-based games.
Its application to 3D graphics was pioneered by Dr Edwin Catmull in 1974.
Also at BTL, Ken Knowlton, Frank Sinden and Michael Noll started working in the computer graphics field.
At Lawrence Radiation Laboratory, Nelson Max created the films ''Flow of a Viscous Fluid'' and ''Propagation of Shock Waves in a Solid Form''.
The 1980s is also called the golden era of videogames;  millions-selling systems from Atari, Nintendo and Sega, among other companies, exposed computer graphics for the first time to a new, young, and impressionable audience - as did MS-DOS-based personal computers, Apple IIs and Macs, and Amigas, which also allowed users to program their own games if skilled enough.
Greenberg has authored hundreds of articles and served as a teacher and mentor to many prominent computer graphic artists, animators, and researchers such as Robert L. Cook, Marc Levoy, Brian A. Barsky, and Wayne Lytle.
Sutherland seemed to find the perfect solution for many of the graphics problems he faced.
:Shading refers to depicting depth in 3D models or illustrations by varying levels of darkness.
Microsoft made a decision to expose DirectX more easily to the independent developer world with the XNA program, but it was not a success.
While very simplistic, and requiring fairly inexpensive electronic parts, it allowed the player to move points of light around on a screen.
Graphics in most old (or relatively limited) computer and video games, graphing calculator games, and many mobile phone games are mostly pixel art.
The 2D/3D graphics software will change with each keyframe, creating an editable curve of a value mapped over time, in which results in animation.
were made for the later films of the original trilogy.
components such as red, green, and blue.
The interaction and understanding of computers and interpretation of data has been made easier because of computer graphics.
In videogames, the Xbox One by Microsoft, Sony Playstation 4, and Nintendo Wii U currently dominate the home space and are all capable of highly advanced 3D graphics;  the Windows PC is still one of the most active gaming platforms as well.
Also in 1966, Ivan Sutherland continued to innovate at MIT when he invented the first computer controlled head-mounted display (HMD).
It is a subfield of computer graphics and animation.
Computer graphics used in films and video games gradually began to be realistic to the point of entering the uncanny valley.
:Noll was one of the first researchers to use a digital computer to create artistic patterns and to formalize the use of random processes in the creation of visual arts.
In 1959, the TX-2 computer was developed at MIT's Lincoln Laboratory.
As most current methods for displaying graphical data are based on planar two dimensional media, the use of this type of projection is widespread, especially in computer graphics, engineering and drafting.
A large form of digital art being pixel art is created through the use of raster graphics software, where images are edited on the pixel level.
He began creating digital computer art in 1962, making him one of the earliest digital computer artists.
The first major advance in 3D computer graphics was created at UU by these early pioneers, the hidden-surface algorithm.
The Sega Model 2 in 1993 and Sega Model 3 in 1996 subsequently pushed the boundaries of commercial, real-time 3D graphics.
:Rendering resolution-independent entities (such as 3D models) for viewing on a raster (pixel-based) device such as a liquid-crystal display or CRT television inevitably causes aliasing artifacts mostly along geometric edges and the boundaries of texture details; these artifacts are informally called "jaggies".
This cell emitted an electronic pulse whenever it was placed in front of a computer screen and the screen's electron gun fired directly at it.
In other words, with a model of a car, one could change the size of the tires without affecting the rest of the car.
It was the first consumer computer graphics product.
The Orca 3000 was based on Motorola 68000 and AMD bit-slice processors and had Unix as its operating system.
The video was presented at the Fujitsu pavilion at the 1985 International Exposition in Tsukuba."
In digital imaging, a pixel (or picture element) is a single point in a raster image.
Computer animation is the art of creating moving images via the use of computers.
Graphics are one of the five key elements of multimedia technology.
Examples would be sprites and character maps in 2d video games, geometric primitives in CAD, or polygons or s in 3d rendering.
Tom Stockham led the image processing group at UU which worked closely with the computer graphics lab.
The  ''Final Fantasy: The Spirits Within'', released in 2001, was the first fully computer-generated feature film to use photorealistic CGI characters and be fully made with motion capture.
In cinema, most animated movies are CGI now; a great many animated CGI films are made per year, but few, if any, attempt photorealism due to continuing fears of the uncanny valley.
The 3D Core Graphics System (or '''Core''') was the first graphical standard to be developed.
Computer graphics has emerged as a sub-field of computer science which studies methods for digitally synthesizing and manipulating visual content.
The term has been recently generalized to mean that shaders are applied.
A GPU is a  device able to assist the CPU in calculations.
This includes images that may be for later display or for real-time viewing.
Written for the DEC PDP-1, Spacewar was an instant success and copies started flowing to other PDP-1 owners and eventually DEC got a copy.
In 1966, the University of Utah recruited Evans to form a computer science program, and computer graphics quickly became his primary interest.
Now Catmull (along with many others) saw computers as the natural progression of animation and they wanted to be part of the revolution.
If one wants to draw a square for example, they do not have to worry about drawing four lines perfectly to form the edges of the box.
By the end of the decade, computers adopted common frameworks for graphics processing such as DirectX and OpenGL.
It became one of his goals to produce a feature-length motion picture using computer graphics.
In the media "such graphs are used to illustrate papers, reports, thesis", and other presentation material.
As the UU computer graphics laboratory was attracting people from all over, John Warnock was one of those early pioneers; he would later found Adobe Systems and create a revolution in the publishing world with his PostScript page description language, and Adobe would go on later to create the industry standard photo editing software in Adobe Photoshop and the movie industry's special effects standard in Adobe After Effects.
There he continued his interest in computers and how they interfaced with people.
New kinds of displays were needed to process the wealth of information resulting from such projects, leading to the development of computer graphics as a discipline.
It is often abbreviated as '''CG''', though sometimes erroneously referred to as CGI.
One of the first interactive video games to feature recognizable, interactive graphics – ''Tennis for Two'' – was created for an oscilloscope by William Higinbotham to entertain visitors in 1958 at Brookhaven National Laboratory and simulated a tennis match.
Procedural textures (created from adjusting parameters of an underlying algorithm that produces an output texture), and bitmap textures (created in an image editing application or imported from a digital camera) are, generally speaking, common methods of implementing texture definition on 3D models in computer graphics software, while intended placement of textures onto a model's surface often requires a technique known as UV mapping (arbitrary, manual layout of texture coordinates) for polygon surfaces, while NURBS surfaces have their own intrinsic parameterization used as texture coordinates.
It was used to create the world's first 3D planetarium-like video of the entire heavens that was made completely with computer graphics.
Other animated films like ''The Polar Express'' drew attention at this time as well.
Examples are photographs, drawing, graphics designs, maps, engineering drawings, or other images.
The rendering equation does not account for all lighting phenomena, but is a general lighting model for computer-generated imagery.
A texture map is applied (mapped) to the surface of a shape, or polygon.
The engineers at DEC used it as a diagnostic program on every new PDP-1 before shipping it.
The first animation that Catmull saw was his own.
These curves would form the foundation for much curve-modeling work in the field, as curves - unlike polygons - are mathematically complex entities to draw and model well.
Graphics often combine text and illustration.
The model is contained within the graphical data file, apart from the rendering.
2D computer graphics are mainly used in applications that were originally developed upon traditional printing and drawing technologies such as typography.
The field of computer graphics developed with the emergence of computer graphics hardware.
Certain late-90's first-generation 3D titles became seen as influential in popularizing 3D graphics among console users,  such as platform games ''Super Mario 64'' and ''The Legend Of Zelda: Ocarina Of Time'', and early 3D fighting games like ''Virtua Fighter'', ''Battle Arena Toshinden'', and ''Tekken''.
OpenGL continued to mature as well, and it and DirectX improved greatly;  the second-generation shader languages HLSL and GLSL began to be popular in this decade.
Various anti-aliasing algorithms (such as supersampling) are able to be employed, then customized for the most efficient rendering performance versus quality of the resultant imagery; a graphics artist should consider this trade-off if anti-aliasing methods are to be used.
In videogames, in 1992, ''Virtua Racing'', running on the Sega Model 1 arcade system board, laid the foundations for fully 3D racing games and popularized real-time 3D polygonal graphics among a wider audience in the video game industry.
This technique is identical to the illusion of movement in television and motion pictures.
A group of 25 experts of the ACM Special Interest Group SIGGRAPH developed this "conceptual framework".
In film, Pixar began its serious commercial rise in this era under Edwin Catmull, with its first major film release, in 1995 - Toy Story - a critical and commercial success of nine-figure magnitude.
Also in the field of realistic rendering, the general rendering equation of David Immel and James Kajiya was developed in 1986 - an important step towards implementing  global illumination, which is necessary to pursue photorealism in computer graphics.
In the field of realistic rendering, Japan's Osaka University developed the LINKS-1 Computer Graphics System, a supercomputer that used up to 257 Zilog Z8001 microprocessors, in 1982, for the purpose of rendering realistic 3D computer graphics.
Physically-based rendering or PBR, which implements even more maps to simulate real optic light flow, is an active research area as well, along with advanced optics areas like subsurface scattering and photon mapping.
''Gun Fight'' in 1975 featured human-looking sprite character graphics, while ''Space Invaders'' in 1978 featured a large number of sprites on screen; both used an Intel 8080 microprocessor and Fujitsu MB14241 video shifter to accelerate the drawing of sprite graphics.
Screens could display art since the Lumiere brothers' use of mattes to create special effects for the earliest films dating from 1895, but such displays were limited and not interactive.
Douglas T. Ross of  the Whirlwind SAGE system performed a personal experiment in 1954 in which a small program he wrote captured the movement of his finger and displayed its vector (his traced name) on a display scope.
In 1988, the first dedicated real-time 3D graphics boards were introduced in arcades, with the Namco System 21 and Taito Air System.
The continuing popularity of Star Wars and other science fiction franchises were relevant in cinematic CGI at this time, as Lucasfilm and Industrial Light & Magic became known as the "go-to" house by many other studios for topnotch computer graphics in film.
The closer the lines are together, the darker the area appears.
