The digital data on a CD begins at the center of the disc and proceeds toward the edge, which allows adaptation to the different size formats available.
The ReWritable Audio CD is typically somewhat more expensive than CD-RW due to (a) lower volume and (b) a 3% AHRA royalty used to compensate the music industry for the making of a copy.
CD data is represented as tiny indentations known as "pits", encoded in a spiral track moulded into the top of the polycarbonate layer.
This is a myth according to Kees Immink, as the code format had not yet been decided in May 1980.
Following litigation, Sony and Philips licensed Russell's patents (then held by a Canadian company, Optical Recording Corp.) in the 1980s.
The die is a negative image of the glass master: typically, several are made, depending on the number of pressing mills that are to make the CD.
This approximates the (overall) resolution of an analog VHS tape, which, although it has double the number of (vertical) scan lines, has a much lower horizontal resolution.
The design life is from 20 to 100 years, depending on the quality of the discs, the quality of the writing drive, and storage conditions.
The CD+G format takes advantage of the channels R through W. These six bits store the graphics information.
(A disc played from beginning to end slows its rotation rate during playback.)
American inventor James T. Russell has been credited with inventing the first system to record digital information on an optical transparent foil that is lit from behind by a high-power halogen lamp.
The CD-i Ready specification was later created to improve compatibility with audio CD players, and the CD-i Bridge specification was added to create CD-i compatible discs that can be accessed by regular CD-ROM drives.
One major drawback to these copy-protected discs is that most will not play on either computer CD-ROM drives or some standalone CD players that use CD-ROM mechanisms.
A small amount of lacquer is applied as a ring around the center of the disc, and rapid spinning spreads it evenly over the surface.
The Recordable Audio CD is typically somewhat more expensive than CD-R due to lower production volume and a 3% AHRA royalty used to compensate the music industry for the making of a copy.
Introduced in 1999, it was developed by Sony and Philips, the same companies that created the ''Red Book''.
These encoding techniques (defined in the ''Red Book'') were originally designed for CD Digital Audio, but they later became a standard for almost all CD formats (such as CD-ROM).
Led by engineers Kees Schouhamer Immink and Toshitada Doi, the research pushed forward laser and optical disc technology.
With a scanning speed of 1.2&nbsp;m/s, the playing time is 74 minutes, or 650&nbsp;MiB of data on a CD-ROM.
This method produces the clear plastic blank part of the disc.
In 2014, revenues from digital music services matched those from physical format sales for the first time.
The inner program area occupies a radius from 25 to 58&nbsp;mm.
The areas between pits are known as "lands".
From its origins as a musical format, CDs have grown to encompass other applications.
The distance between the tracks, the pitch, is 1.6&nbsp;µm.
As of 2012, CDs and DVDs made up only 34 percent of music sales in the United States.
CD-RW is a re-recordable medium that uses a metallic alloy instead of a dye.
* The first ''popular music'' CD produced at the new factory was ''The Visitors'' (1981) by ABBA.
The new audio disc was enthusiastically received, especially in the early-adopting classical music and audiophile communities, and its handling quality received particular praise.
At the time of the technology's introduction in 1982, a CD could store much more data than a personal computer hard drive, which would typically hold 10 MB.
The Compact Disc is an evolution of LaserDisc technology, where a focused laser beam
However, testing has demonstrated such degradation of some discs in as little as 18 months under normal storage conditions.
The unified design of the compact disc allowed consumers to purchase any disc or player from any company, and allowed the CD to dominate the at-home music market unchallenged.
After their commercial release in 1982, compact discs and their players were extremely popular.
This in turn is decoded by reversing the eight-to-fourteen modulation used in mastering the disc, and then reversing the cross-interleaved Reed–Solomon coding, finally revealing the raw data stored on the disc.
Photo CD is a system designed by Kodak for digitizing and storing photos on a CD.
The incremental cost, though, to produce an MP3 is very small.
This swing arm allows the laser to read information from the centre to the edge of a disc, without having to interrupt the spinning of the disc itself.
CD-MIDI is a format used to store music-performance data which upon playback is performed by electronic instruments that synthesize the audio.
Arrau was invited to the Langenhagen plant to press the start button.
The 120&nbsp;mm diameter has been adopted by subsequent formats, including Super Audio CD, DVD, HD DVD, and Blu-ray Disc.
By 2010, hard drives commonly offered as much storage space as a thousand CDs, while their prices had plummeted to commodity level.
One of the first CD markets was devoted to reissuing popular music whose commercial potential was already proven.
It is usually difficult to fit much more than 100 minutes of video onto one SVCD without incurring significant quality loss, and many hardware players are unable to play video with an instantaneous bit rate lower than 300 to 600 kilobits per second.
Currently, with the increasing popularity of portable digital audio players, such as mobile phones, and solid state music storage, CD players are being phased out of automobiles in favor of minijack auxiliary inputs, connections to USB devices and Bluetooth.
Higher speed CD-RW discs, Ultra Speed (16x to 24x write speed) and Ultra Speed+ (32x write speed) are now available.
In 1977, Philips then established a laboratory with the mission of creating a digital audio disc.
The vinyl layer on the disc's label side can hold approximately three minutes of music.
The format is a two-channel 16-bit PCM encoding at a 44.1&nbsp;kHz sampling rate per channel.
Audio CD players have been commercially available since October 1982, when the first commercially available CD player was released in Japan.
CD-RWs follow the ''Orange Book'' standard.
Enhanced Music CD, also known as CD Extra or CD Plus, is a format which combines audio tracks and data tracks on the same disc by putting audio tracks in a first session and data in a second session.
The CD-MIDI format is defined as an extension to the original ''Red Book''.
The Japanese launch was followed in March 1983 by the introduction of CD players and discs to Europe and North America (where CBS Records released sixteen titles).
In 1995, material costs were 30 cents for the jewel case and 10 to 15 cents for the CD.
Sony's AES technical paper was published on 1 March 1979.
Known at least as early as 2001, attempts were made by record companies to market "copy-protected" non-standard compact discs, which cannot be ripped, or copied, to hard drives or easily converted to other formats (like Flac, MP3 or Vorbis).
Despite the rapidly declining sales year-over-year, the pervasiveness of the technology remains: companies are placing CDs in drug stores, supermarkets, and gas station convenience stores targeting to buyers least able to utilize internet-based distribution.
The program area is 86.05&nbsp;cm2, and the length of the recordable spiral is (86.05&nbsp;cm2&nbsp;/&nbsp;1.6&nbsp;µm)&nbsp;=&nbsp;5.38&nbsp;km.
Heitaro Nakajima, who developed an early digital audio recorder within Japan's national public broadcasting organization NHK in 1970, became general manager of Sony's audio department in 1971.
After a metallic reflecting layer (usually aluminium, but sometimes gold or other metal) is applied to the clear blank substrate, the disc goes under a UV light for curing and it is ready to go to press.
This extra data is stored in subcode channels R-W.
Other newer video formats such as DVD and Blu-ray use the same physical geometry as CD, and most DVD and Blu-ray players are backward compatible with audio CD.
High Speed CD-RW drives can typically write to both original ReWritable CDs and High Speed ReWritable CDs.
A photosensitive dye is then applied, after which the discs are metalized and lacquer-coated.
CD-R recordings are designed to be permanent.
The higher capacity is incompatible with some recorders and recording software.
High Speed ReWritable CD has a different design, which permits writing at speeds ranging from 4x to 12x.
* The first 50 titles were ''released'' in Japan on 1 October 1982.
Scratches on the clear side can be repaired by refilling them with similar refractive plastic or by careful polishing.
80x54&nbsp;mm&nbsp;– 80x64&nbsp;mm
The glass master is a positive image of the desired CD surface (with the desired microscopic pits and lands).
The format was originally developed to store and play only sound recordings but was later adapted for storage of data (CD-ROM).
The resulting discs can be read by most CD-ROM drives and played in most audio CD players.
Sony first publicly demonstrated an optical digital audio disc in September 1976.
The first artist to sell a million copies on CD was Dire Straits, with their 1985 album ''Brothers in Arms''.
Numerous copy-protection systems have been countered by readily available, often free, software.
Titles in the SACD format can be issued as hybrid discs; these discs contain the SACD audio stream as well as a standard audio CD layer which is playable in standard CD players, thus making them backward compatible.
Russell's patent application was first filed in 1966, and he was granted a patent in 1970.
Pits are much closer to the label side of a disc, enabling defects and contaminants on the clear side to be out of focus during playback.
'''Compact Disc''' ('''CD''') is a digital optical disc data storage format, co-developed by Philips and Sony.
The ReWritable Audio CD is designed to be used in a consumer audio CD recorder, which will not (without modification) accept standard CD-RW discs.
The first major artist to have his entire catalogue converted to CD was David Bowie, whose 15 studio albums were made available by RCA Records in February 1985, along with four greatest hits albums.
An advantage of the format was the ability to produce and market boxed sets and multi-volume collections.
These consumer audio CD recorders use the Serial Copy Management System (SCMS), an early form of digital rights management (DRM), to conform to the United States' Audio Home Recording Act (AHRA).
Technical details of Sony's digital audio disc were presented during the 62nd AES Convention, held on 13–16 March 1979, in Brussels.
Hence, unlike the original ''Red Book'' CD-DA, these recordings are not digitally sampled audio recordings.
A CD is made from  thick, polycarbonate plastic and weighs 15–20&nbsp;grams.
In 1979, Sony and Philips set up a joint task force of engineers to design a new digital audio disc.
This format is not to be confused with Kodak Picture CD, which is a consumer product in CD-ROM format.
Although originally dismissed by Philips Research management as a trivial pursuit, the CD became the primary focus for Philips as the LaserDisc format struggled.
CDs are susceptible to damage during handling and from environmental exposure.
In 1983, following the CD's introduction, Immink and Braat presented the first experiments with erasable compact discs during the 73rd AES Convention.
The adoption of EFM one month later would have allowed a playing time of 97 minutes for 120&nbsp;mm diameter or 74 minutes for a disc as small as 100&nbsp;mm.
The images can also be printed out on photographic paper with a special Kodak machine.
In 1988, 400 million CDs were manufactured by 50 pressing plants around the world.
A screw forces the liquefied plastic into the mold cavity.
In September 1978, the company demonstrated an optical digital audio disc with a 150-minute playing time, 44,056&nbsp;Hz sampling rate, 16-bit linear resolution, and cross-interleaved error correction code—specifications similar to those later settled upon for the standard Compact Disc format in 1980.
The edges of CDs are sometimes incompletely sealed, allowing gases and liquids to corrode the metal reflective layer and to interfere with the focus of the laser on the pits.
This failure is known as disc rot, for which there are several, mostly environmental, reasons.
The die then goes into a press, and the physical image is transferred to the blank CD, leaving a final positive image on the disc.
The logical format of an audio CD (officially Compact Disc Digital Audio or CD-DA) is described in a document produced in 1980 by the format's joint creators, Sony and Philips.
They are intended to play on CD-i players, Photo CD players and any computer with the suitable software irrespective of the operating system.
Photo CDs are defined in the ''Beige Book'' and conform to the CD-ROM XA and CD-i Bridge specifications as well.
When 8-track tapes, cassette tapes, and CDs were introduced, each was marketed at a higher price than the format they succeeded, even though the cost to produce the media was reduced.
CDs are increasingly being replaced by other forms of digital storage and distribution, with the result that audio CD sales rates in the U.S. have dropped about 50% from their peak; however, they remain one of the primary distribution methods for the music industry.
The Philips ''Green Book'' specifies a standard for interactive multimedia compact discs designed for CD-i players (1993).
Both types of CD-RW discs can be read in most CD drives.
As the price of players gradually came down, and with the introduction of the portable Discman the CD began to gain popularity in the larger popular and rock music markets.
A disc with data packed slightly more densely is tolerated by most players (though some old ones fail).
This format was supposed to be more compatible with older audio CD players.
Once opened, the disc substrate is removed from the mold by a robotic arm, and a 15&nbsp;mm diameter center hole (called a stacking ring) is created.
By 2007, 200 billion CDs had been sold worldwide.
Recordable CDs were a new alternative to tape for recording music and copying music albums without defects introduced in compression used in other digital recording methods.
Standard CDs have a diameter of  and can hold up to about 80 minutes of uncompressed audio or about 700&nbsp;MiB of data.
In 1974, L. Ottens, director of the audio division of Philips, started a small group with the aim to develop an analog optical audio disc with a diameter of 20&nbsp;cm and a sound quality superior to that of the vinyl record.
This capacity was reportedly specified by Sony executive Norio Ohga in May 1980 so as to be able to contain the entirety of Beethoven's Ninth Symphony on one disc.
The ''Red Book'' audio specification, except for a simple "anti-copy" statement in the subcode, does not include any copy protection mechanism.
Four-channel sound was to be an allowable option within the ''Red Book'' format, but has never been implemented.
Edge protection lacquer is applied before the disc is finished.
A CD-RW does not have as great a difference in reflectivity as a pressed CD or a CD-R, and so many earlier CD audio players ''cannot'' read CD-RW discs, although ''most'' later CD audio players and stand-alone DVD players can.
It was developed by Philips and Sony, and it is defined in the ''Blue Book''.
The change in height between pits and lands results in a difference in the way the light is reflected.
Replicated CDs are mass-produced initially using a hydraulic press.
After a year of experimentation and discussion, the ''Red Book'' CD-DA standard was published in 1980.
Standard CDs are available in two sizes.
The CD was planned to be the successor of the gramophone record for playing music, rather than primarily as a data storage medium.
352x288 is similarly one quarter PAL/SECAM resolution.
In 2004, worldwide sales of audio CDs, CD-ROMs and CD-Rs reached about 30 billion discs.
After testing, it is used to make a die by pressing it against a metal disc.
SVCD has two-thirds the resolution of DVD, and over 2.7 times the resolution of VCD.
By far, the most common is  in diameter, with a 74- or 80-minute audio capacity and a 650 or 700&nbsp;MiB (737,280,000-byte) data capacity.
Recordable Compact Discs, CD-Rs, are injection-molded with a "blank" data spiral.
For example, between 2000 - 2008, despite overall growth in music sales and one anomalous year of increase, major-label CD sales declined overall by 20%, although independent and DIY music sales may be tracking better according to figures released 30 March 2009, and CDs still continue to sell greatly.
For the first few years of its existence, the CD was a medium used purely for audio.
The task force consisted of around four to eight persons, though according to Philips, the Compact Disc was "invented collectively by a large group of people working as a team."
On average, the store received 35 percent of the retail price, the record company 27 percent, the artist 16 percent, the manufacturer 13 percent, and the distributor 9 percent.
A thin layer of aluminium or, more rarely, gold is applied to the surface, making it reflective.
Very few, if any, CD+EG discs have been published.
The most expensive part of a CD is the jewel case.
Philips defined a format similar to CD-i called CD-i Ready, which puts CD-i software and data into the pregap of track 1.
Original CD-RW drives can only write to original ReWritable CDs.
Compact Disc + Graphics is a special audio compact disc that contains graphics data in addition to the audio data on the disc.
* The first ''commercial'' compact disc was produced on 17 August 1982.
The ''Compact Disc Story'', told by a former member of the task force, gives background information on the many technical decisions made, including the choice of the sampling frequency, playing time, and disc diameter.
The recordable audio CD is designed to be used in a consumer audio CD recorder.
Like CD+G, CD+EG utilizes basic CD-ROM features to display text and video information in addition to the music being played.
Due to technical limitations, the original ReWritable CD could be written no faster than 4x speed.
352x240 (or SIF) resolution was chosen because it is half the vertical and half the horizontal resolution of NTSC video.
The fungus ''Geotrichum candidum'', found in Belize, has been found to consume the polycarbonate plastic and aluminium found in CDs.
The label is printed on the lacquer layer, usually by screen printing or offset printing.
Philips has stated that such discs are not permitted to bear the trademarked ''Compact Disc Digital Audio'' logo because they violate the ''Red Book'' specifications.
SACD was in a format war with DVD-Audio, but neither has replaced audio CDs.
"Business card" size
His team developed a digital PCM adaptor audio tape recorder using a Betamax video recorder in 1973.
Consequently, CDs are more likely to suffer damage on the label side of the disc.
A motor within the CD player spins the disc to a scanning velocity of 1.2–1.4&nbsp;m/s (constant linear velocity)&nbsp;– equivalent to approximately 500 RPM at the inside of the disc, and approximately 200 RPM at the outside edge.
Launched in 1992, the discs were designed to hold nearly 100 high-quality images, scanned prints and slides using special proprietary encoding.
CD-Text is an extension of the ''Red Book'' specification for audio CD that allows for storage of additional text information (e.g., album name, song name, artist) on a standards-compliant audio CD.
Monaural audio has no existing standard on a ''Red Book'' CD; thus, mono source material is usually presented as two identical channels in a standard ''Red Book'' stereo track (i.e., mirrored mono); an MP3 CD, however, can have audio file formats with mono sound.
However, due to the unsatisfactory performance of the analog format, two Philips research engineers recommended a digital format in March 1974.
One CD-R disc can hold up to 60 minutes of standard quality SVCD-format video.
After a year of experimentation and discussion, the task force produced the ''Red Book'' CD-DA standard.
It was a recording from 1979 of Claudio Arrau performing Chopin waltzes (Philips 400 025-2).
Over time, the dye's physical characteristics may change causing read errors and data loss until the reading device cannot recover with error correction methods.
By the early 2000s, the CD player had largely replaced the audio cassette player as standard equipment in new automobiles, with 2010 being the final model year for any car in the US to have a factory-equipped cassette player.
As a result, in 1979, Sony and Philips set up a joint task force of engineers to design a new digital audio disc.
Wholesale cost of CDs was $0.75 to $1.15, which retailed for $16.98.
The metal is protected by a film of lacquer normally spin coated directly on the reflective layer.
The write laser in this case is used to heat and alter the properties (amorphous vs. crystalline) of the alloy, and hence change its reflectivity.
The Mini CD has various diameters ranging from ; they are sometimes used for CD singles, storing up to 24 minutes of audio, or delivering device drivers.
In order to accommodate the spiral pattern of data, the semiconductor laser is placed on a swing arm within the disc tray of any CD player.
The mold closes with a metal stamper in contact with the disc surface.
Each pit is approximately 100&nbsp;nm deep by 500&nbsp;nm wide, and varies from 850&nbsp;nm to 3.5&nbsp;µm in length.
Vinyl Disc is the hybrid of a standard audio CD and the vinyl record.
The information is stored either in the lead-in area of the CD, where there is roughly five kilobytes of space available, or in the subcode channels R to W on the disc, which can store about 31 megabytes.
, only 24% of music in the United States was purchased on physical media, ⅔ of this consisting of CDs; however, in the same year in Japan, over 80% of music was bought on CDs and other physical formats.
After this, in 1974 the leap to storing digital audio on an optical disc was easily made.
This continued from vinyl to CDs but was broken when Apple marketed MP3s for $0.99, and albums for $9.99.
The plastic is allowed to cool and harden.
Super Audio CD (SACD) is a high-resolution read-only optical audio disc format that was designed to provide higher fidelity digital audio reproduction than the ''Red Book''.
The disc can then be printed and packed.
These consumer audio CD recorders use SCMS (Serial Copy Management System), an early form of digital rights management (DRM), to conform to the AHRA (Audio Home Recording Act).
A week later, on 8 March, Philips publicly demonstrated a prototype of an optical digital audio disc at a press conference called "Philips Introduce Compact Disc" in Eindhoven, Netherlands.
Philips also contributed eight-to-fourteen modulation (EFM), which offers a certain resilience to defects such as scratches and fingerprints, while Sony contributed the error-correction method, CIRC.
is used that enables the high information density required for high-quality digital audio signals.
The SACD standard is referred to the ''Scarlet Book'' standard.
CD-ROM Data Capacity
The write laser of the CD recorder changes the colour of the dye to allow the read laser of a standard CD player to see the data, just as it would with a standard stamped disc.
This event is often seen as the "Big Bang" of the digital audio revolution.
In June 1985, the computer-readable CD-ROM (read-only memory) and, in 1990, CD-Recordable were introduced, also developed by both Sony and Philips.
A CD is read by focusing a 780&nbsp;nm wavelength (near infrared) semiconductor laser housed within the CD player, through the bottom of the polycarbonate layer.
Philips coined the term ''compact disc'' in line with another audio product, the Compact Cassette, and contributed the general manufacturing process, based on video LaserDisc technology.
The disc can be played on a regular audio CD player, but when played on a special CD+G player, it can output a graphics signal (typically, the CD+G player is hooked up to a television set or a computer monitor); these graphics are almost exclusively used to display lyrics on a television set for karaoke performers to sing along with.
CD + Extended Graphics (CD+EG, also known as CD+XG) is an improved variant of the Compact Disc + Graphics (CD+G) format.
Using a linear velocity of 1.2&nbsp;m/s and a narrower track pitch of 1.5&nbsp;µm increases the playing time to 80 minutes, and data capacity to 700&nbsp;MiB.
However, in 1988, the ''Yellow Book'' CD-ROM standard was established by Sony and Philips, which defined a non-volatile optical data computer data storage medium using the same physical format as audio compact discs, readable by a computer with a CD-ROM drive.
First published in 1980, the standard was formally adopted by the IEC as an international standard in 1987, with various amendments becoming part of the standard in 1996.
Meanwhile, with the advent and popularity of Internet-based distribution of files in lossily-compressed audio formats such as MP3, sales of CDs began to decline in the 2000s.
A year later, in September 1977, Sony showed the press a 30&nbsp;cm disc that could play 60 minutes of digital audio (44,100&nbsp;Hz sampling rate and 16-bit resolution) using MFM modulation.
