In IEEE Project 802, this involves a succession of terrestrial wireless LANs.
A '''computer network''' or '''data network''' is a telecommunications network which allows computers to exchange data.
The size of an Ethernet MAC address is six octets.
Synchronous optical networking (SONET) and Synchronous Digital Hierarchy (SDH) are standardized multiplexing protocols that transfer multiple digital bit streams over optical fiber using lasers.
To avoid address conflicts between network devices, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) maintains and administers MAC address uniqueness.
Users can share printers and some servers from a workgroup, which usually means they are in the same geographic location and are on the same LAN, whereas a Network Administrator is responsible to keep that network up and running.
Packets consist of two kinds of data: control information, and user data(payload).
Most routing algorithms use only one network path at a time.
It carries pulses of light that represent data.
Business and employee needs may override any cost considerations.
Even today, each Internet node can communicate with virtually any other through an underlying mesh of sub-networks of wildly different topologies and technologies.
The Internet itself was initially built as an overlay on the telephone network.
Each computer or device on the network is a node.
An intranet is also anything behind the router on a local area network.
Network connection to an extranet is often, but not always, implemented via WAN technology.
*ATM: In an Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) network, performance can be measured by line rate, quality of service (QoS), data throughput, connect time, stability, technology, modulation technique and modem enhancements.
In a protocol stack (also see the OSI model), each protocol leverages the services of the protocol below it.
In Ethernet networks, each network interface controller has a unique Media Access Control (MAC) address—usually stored in the controller's permanent memory.
Unofficially, the Internet is the set of users, enterprises, and content providers that are interconnected by Internet Service Providers (ISP).
;Enterprise private network
Typically, control information is found in packet headers and trailers, with payload data in between.
If an unknown destination is targeted, the switch broadcasts to all ports but the source.
A router is an internetworking device that forwards packets between networks by processing the routing information included in the packet or datagram (Internet protocol information from layer 3).
Address resolution and routing are the means that allow mapping of a fully connected IP overlay network to its underlying network.
There are usually multiple routes that can be taken, and to choose between them, different elements can be considered to decide which routes get installed into the routing table, such as (sorted by priority):
A network bridge connects and filters traffic between two network segments at the data link layer (layer 2) of the OSI model to form a single network.
The control information provides data the network needs to deliver the user data, for example: source and destination network addresses, error detection codes, and sequencing information.
Note that the physical layout of the nodes in a network may not necessarily reflect the network topology.
A SAN typically has its own network of storage devices that are generally not accessible through the local area network by other devices.
The number of rejected calls is a measure of how well the network is performing under heavy traffic loads.
The intranet uses the IP protocol and IP-based tools such as web browsers and file transfer applications.
Modems (MOdulator-DEModulator) are used to connect network nodes via wire not originally designed for digital network traffic, or for wireless.
To do this one or more carrier signals are modulated by the digital signal to produce an analog signal that can be tailored to give the required properties for transmission.
For example, an organization may provide access to some aspects of its intranet to share data with its business partners or customers.
There are many communication protocols, a few of which are described below.
The media and protocol standards that enable communication between networked devices over Ethernet are defined by IEEE 802.3.
Optic fibers can be used for long runs of cable carrying very high data rates, and are used for undersea cables to interconnect continents.
It may or may not be legal and may or may not require authorization from a court or other independent agency.
Structured addresses allow a single routing table entry to represent the route to a group of devices.
#''Prefix-Length'': where longer subnet masks are preferred (independent if it is within a routing protocol or over different routing protocol)
With fiber optics, repeaters can be tens or even hundreds of kilometers apart.
A third method to avoid network congestion is the explicit allocation of network resources to specific flows.
Network resilience is "the ability to provide and maintain an acceptable level of service in the face of faults and challenges to normal operation.”
Another method to avoid the negative effects of network congestion is implementing priority schemes, so that some packets are transmitted with higher priority than others.
In packet networks, the data is formatted into packets that are sent through the network to their destination.
They may be connection-oriented or connectionless, they may use circuit mode or packet switching, and they may use hierarchical addressing or flat addressing.
A WAN often makes use of transmission facilities provided by common carriers, such as telephone companies.
Intermediate nodes are typically network hardware devices such as routers, bridges, gateways, firewalls, or switches.
The signal is retransmitted at a higher power level, or to the other side of an obstruction, so that the signal can cover longer distances without degradation.
Examples of end-to-end encryption include PGP for email, OTR for instant messaging, ZRTP for telephony, and TETRA for radio.
;Local area network
Wired LANs are most likely based on Ethernet technology.
Computer communication links that do not support packets, such as traditional point-to-point telecommunication links, simply transmit data as a bit stream.
*Remote bridges: Can be used to create a wide area network (WAN) link between LANs.
The routing information is often processed in conjunction with the routing table (or forwarding table).
Surveillance is very useful to governments and law enforcement to maintain social control, recognize and monitor threats, and prevent/investigate criminal activity.
In most twisted pair Ethernet configurations, repeaters are required for cable that runs longer than 100 meters.
The term ''switch'' is often used loosely to include devices such as routers and bridges, as well as devices that may distribute traffic based on load or based on application content (e.g., a Web URL identifier).
Some systems that normally offer end-to-end encryption have turned out to contain a back door that subverts negotiation of the encryption key between the communicating parties, for example Skype or Hushmail.
However, due to its protocol neutrality and transport-oriented features, SONET/SDH also was the obvious choice for transporting Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) frames.
It can be thought of as a multi-port bridge.
ATM uses a connection-oriented model in which a virtual circuit must be established between two endpoints before the actual data exchange begins.
Overlay networks have been around since the invention of networking when computer systems were connected over telephone lines using modems, before any data network existed.
An overlay network is a virtual computer network that is built on top of another network.
An example of this is 802.1p.
These systems can only guarantee protection of communications between clients and servers, not between the communicating parties themselves.
Ethernet transmits data over both copper and fiber cables.
The topology of the overlay network may (and often does) differ from that of the underlying one.
Often the route a packet needs to take through a network is not immediately available.
Multipath routing techniques enable the use of multiple alternative paths.
Currently, 400 Gbit/s Ethernet is being developed.
The cables consist of copper or aluminum wire surrounded by an insulating layer (typically a flexible material with a high dielectric constant), which itself is surrounded by a conductive layer.
A destination in a routing table can include a "null" interface, also known as the "black hole" interface because data can go into it, however, no further processing is done for said data, i.e.
These other entities are not necessarily trusted from a security standpoint.
the packets are dropped.
For the Internet RFC 2914 addresses the subject of congestion control in detail.
The network planner uses these diagrams to analyze how the network performs in each state, ensuring that the network is optimally designed.
As a result, many network architectures limit the number of repeaters that can be used in a row, e.g., the Ethernet 5-4-3 rule.
Computer and network surveillance programs are widespread today, and almost all Internet traffic is or could potentially be monitored for clues to illegal activity.
When money or sensitive information is exchanged, the communications are apt to be protected by some form of communications security mechanism.
A virtual private network (VPN) is an overlay network in which some of the links between nodes are carried by open connections or virtual circuits in some larger network (e.g., the Internet) instead of by physical wires.
Multi-layer switches are capable of routing based on layer 3 addressing or additional logical levels.
Networks are typically managed by the organizations that own them.
A LAN can be connected to a WAN using a router.
A personal area network (PAN) is a computer network used for communication among computer and different information technological devices close to one person.
The vital role firewalls play in network security grows in parallel with the constant increase in cyber attacks.
Academic research includes end system multicast, resilient routing and quality of service studies, among others.
It is standarized by IEEE 802.11 and shares many properties with wired Ethernet.
As an example, with FDDI, the network topology is a ring (actually two counter-rotating rings), but the physical topology is often a star, because all neighboring connections can be routed via a central physical location.
An extranet is a network that is also under the administrative control of a single organization, but supports a limited connection to a specific external network.
Another example of an overlay network is a distributed hash table, which maps keys to nodes in the network.
Network protocols that use aggressive retransmissions to compensate for packet loss tend to keep systems in a state of network congestion—even after the initial load is reduced to a level that would not normally induce network congestion.
Repeaters require a small amount of time to regenerate the signal.
One common application is secure communications through the public Internet, but a VPN need not have explicit security features, such as authentication or content encryption.
Users and network administrators typically have different views of their networks.
An important example of a protocol stack is HTTP (the World Wide Web protocol) running over TCP over IP (the Internet protocols) over IEEE 802.11 (the Wi-Fi protocol).
IEEE 802 is a family of IEEE standards dealing with local area networks and metropolitan area networks.
IEEE 802.1Q describes VLANs, and IEEE 802.1X defines a port-based Network Access Control protocol, which forms the basis for the authentication mechanisms used in VLANs (but it is also found in WLANs)&nbsp;– it is what the home user sees when the user has to enter a "wireless access key".
Routing has become the dominant form of addressing on the Internet.
For example, a university campus network is likely to link a variety of campus buildings to connect academic colleges or departments, the library, and student residence halls.
The hacktivist group Anonymous has hacked into government websites in protest of what it considers "draconian surveillance".
Again using TCP/IP architectural terminology, an intranet is a community of interest under private administration usually by an enterprise, and is only accessible by authorized users (e.g.
;Global area network
Secondly, it is common that a protocol implementation at one layer may require data, state or addressing information that is only present at another layer, thus defeating the point of separating the layers in the first place.
*Local bridges: Directly connect LANs
It is a global system of interconnected governmental, academic, corporate, public, and private computer networks.
Typically, the human-readable names of servers are translated to IP addresses, transparently to users, via the directory function of the Domain Name System (DNS).
Network security is used on a variety of computer networks, both public and private, to secure daily transactions and communications among businesses, government agencies and individuals.
They were originally designed to transport circuit mode communications from a variety of different sources, primarily to support real-time, uncompressed, circuit-switched voice encoded in PCM (Pulse-Code Modulation) format.
When designing a network backbone, network performance and network congestion are critical factors to take into account.
Transmission speed ranges from 200 million bits per second to more than 500 million bits per second.
In most cases, application-specific communications protocols are layered (i.e.
Network security is the authorization of access to data in a network, which is controlled by the network administrator.
A network packet is a formatted unit of data (a list of bits or bytes, usually a few tens of bytes to a few kilobytes long) carried by a packet-switched network.
Hubs have been mostly obsoleted by modern switches; but repeaters are used for long distance links, notably undersea cabling.
The complete IEEE 802 protocol suite provides a diverse set of networking capabilities.
SANs are primarily used to make storage devices, such as disk arrays, tape libraries, and optical jukeboxes, accessible to servers so that the devices appear like locally attached devices to the operating system.
A backbone can tie together diverse networks within the same building, across different buildings, or over a wide area.
It offers connection-less as well as connection-oriented services over an inherently unreliable network traversed by data-gram transmission at the Internet protocol (IP) level.
Ordinary telephone wires consist of two insulated copper wires twisted into pairs.
The administrative entity limits use of the intranet to its authorized users.
A router uses its routing table to determine where to forward packets.
Previous proposals such as IntServ, DiffServ, and IP Multicast have not seen wide acceptance largely because they require modification of all routers in the network.
Wireless LAN standards (e.g.
A storage area network (SAN) is a dedicated network that provides access to consolidated, block level data storage.
The key challenge in mobile communications is handing off user communications from one local coverage area to the next.
Intranets and extranets can be securely superimposed onto the Internet, without any access by general Internet users and administrators, using secure Virtual Private Network (VPN) technology.
At its core, the protocol suite defines the addressing, identification, and routing specifications for Internet Protocol Version 4 (IPv4) and for IPv6, the next generation of the protocol with a much enlarged addressing capability.
In this case, the underlying network is an IP network, and the overlay network is a table (actually a map) indexed by keys.
Some examples of devices that are used in a PAN are personal computers, printers, fax machines, telephones, PDAs, scanners, and even video game consoles.
They may also provide network access to the Internet, which has no single owner and permits virtually unlimited global connectivity.
For example, many peer-to-peer networks are overlay networks.
For example, TCP uses the ECN field in the IPv4 header as an indication of congestion; IP is a network layer protocol whereas TCP is a transport layer protocol.
ATM has similarity with both circuit and packet switched networking.
Providing access to information on shared storage devices is an important feature of many networks.
;Storage area network
A large intranet typically has at least one web server to provide users with organizational information.
However, many civil rights and privacy groups—such as Reporters Without Borders, the Electronic Frontier Foundation, and the American Civil Liberties Union—have expressed concern that increasing surveillance of citizens may lead to a mass surveillance society, with limited political and personal freedoms.
A computer network may be used by computer crackers to deploy computer viruses or computer worms on devices connected to the network, or to prevent these devices from accessing the network via a denial of service attack.
A community of interest has less of a connection of being in a local area, and should be thought of as a set of arbitrarily located users who share a set of servers, and possibly also communicate via peer-to-peer technologies.
The protocols have a flat addressing scheme.
Typical effects include queueing delay, packet loss or the blocking of new connections.
*Circuit-switched networks: In circuit switched networks, network performance is synonymous with the grade of service.
Price is a main factor distinguishing wired- and wireless-technology options in a business.
*Wireless bridges: Can be used to join LANs or connect remote devices to LANs.
For example, state transition diagrams are often used to model queuing performance in a circuit-switched network.
The defining characteristics of a LAN, in contrast to a wide area network (WAN), include higher data transfer rates, limited geographic range, and lack of reliance on leased lines to provide connectivity.
When one user is not sending packets, the link can be filled with packets from others users, and so the cost can be shared, with relatively little interference, provided the link isn't overused.
The physical layout of a network is usually less important than the topology that connects network nodes.
In general the more interconnections there are, the more robust the network is; but the more expensive it is to install.
;Virtual private network
A Metropolitan area network (MAN) is a large computer network that usually spans a city or a large campus.
Communication protocols have various characteristics.
Bridging is still widely used within localized environments.
Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) is a switching technique for telecommunication networks.
A repeater is an electronic device that receives a network signal, cleans it of unnecessary noise and regenerates it.
Logical networks, called, in the TCP/IP architecture, subnets, map onto one or more transmission media.
#''Administrative distance'': where a lower distance is preferred (only valid between different routing protocols)
It learns to associate physical ports to MAC addresses by examining the source addresses of received frames.
Routing, in a more narrow sense of the term, is often contrasted with bridging in its assumption that network addresses are structured and that similar addresses imply proximity within the network.
Generally, a VPN has a topology more complex than point-to-point.
The Internet is the largest example of an internetwork.
A widely adopted ''family'' of transmission media used in local area network (LAN) technology is collectively known as Ethernet.
A global area network (GAN) is a network used for supporting mobile across an arbitrary number of wireless LANs, satellite coverage areas, etc.
They are organized as nodes of a virtual system of links that run on top of the Internet.
A consequence of these latter two is that incremental increases in offered load lead either only to small increase in network throughput, or to an actual reduction in network throughput.
The reach of a PAN typically extends to 10 meters.
A network allows sharing of network and computing resources.
Network computer devices that originate, route and terminate the data are called network nodes.
This can cause a propagation delay that affects network performance.
With many technologies, such as bus networks, a single failure can cause the network to fail entirely.
An internetwork is the connection of multiple computer networks via a common routing technology using routers.
The symbols on these diagrams usually denote network links and network nodes.
A network allows sharing of files, data, and other types of information giving authorized users the ability to access information stored on other computers on the network.
From an engineering viewpoint, the Internet is the set of subnets, and aggregates of subnets, which share the registered IP address space and exchange information about the reachability of those IP addresses using the Border Gateway Protocol.
An intranet is a set of networks that are under the control of a single administrative entity.
those defined by IEEE 802.11) use radio waves, or others use infrared signals as a transmission medium.
Apart from any physical transmission medium there may be, networks comprise additional basic system building blocks, such as network interface controller (NICs), repeaters, hubs, bridges, switches, routers, modems, and firewalls.
The transmission speed ranges from 2 million bits per second to 10 billion bits per second.
The three most significant octets are reserved to identify NIC manufacturers.
End-to-end encryption (E2EE) is a digital communications paradigm of uninterrupted protection of data traveling between two communicating parties.
In packet switched networks, routing directs packet forwarding (the transit of logically addressed network packets from their source toward their ultimate destination)  through intermediate nodes.
A PAN may include wired and wireless devices.
There are many ways to measure the performance of a network, as each network is different in nature and design.
Once the packets arrive they are reassembled into their original message.
A campus area network (CAN) is made up of an interconnection of LANs within a limited geographical area.
The end-to-end encryption paradigm does not directly address risks at the communications endpoints themselves, such as the technical exploitation of clients, poor quality random number generators, or key escrow.
Different network topologies can affect throughput, but reliability is often more critical.
Firstly, abstracting the protocol stack in this way may cause a higher layer to duplicate functionality of a lower layer, a prime example being error recovery on both a per-link basis and an end-to-end basis.
Most diagrams that describe a physical network are therefore topological, rather than geographic.
Before making the decision to purchase hard-wired technology products, a review of the restrictions and limitations of the selections is necessary.
The cost and complexity of SANs dropped in the early 2000s to levels allowing wider adoption across both enterprise and small to medium-sized business environments.
*An ''optical fiber'' is a glass fiber.
VPNs, for example, can be used to separate the traffic of different user communities over an underlying network with strong security features.
These include: exponential backoff in protocols such as 802.11's CSMA/CA and the original Ethernet, window reduction in TCP, and fair queueing in devices such as routers.
Remote bridges, where the connecting link is slower than the end networks, largely have been replaced with routers.
Both users and administrators are aware, to varying extents, of the trust and scope characteristics of a network.
are almost entirely owned by the campus tenant / owner (an enterprise, university, government, etc.
Computer network cabling (wired Ethernet as defined by IEEE 802.3) consists of 4 pairs of copper cabling that can be utilized for both voice and data transmission.
One example of this is the use of Contention-Free Transmission Opportunities (CFTXOPs) in the ITU-T G.hn standard, which provides high-speed (up to 1 Gbit/s) Local area networking over existing home wires (power lines, phone lines and coaxial cables).
