Moreover, these operations satisfy a number of laws, for example the law of commutativity of addition and multiplication for any two complex numbers  and :
Some authors write  instead of , particularly when ''b'' is a radical.
The Italian mathematician Gerolamo Cardano is the first known to have introduced complex numbers.
Analytic number theory studies numbers, often integers or rationals, by taking advantage of the fact that they can be regarded as complex numbers, in which analytic methods can be used.
There are no other nontrivial ways of completing '''Q''' than '''R''' and '''Q'''''p'', by Ostrowski's theorem.
At least one of the real part  and the imaginary part  of the denominator must be nonzero for division to be defined.
However, just as applying the construction to reals loses the property of ordering, more properties familiar from real and complex numbers vanish with increasing dimension.
This gives another characterization of '''C''' as a topological field, since '''C''' can be distinguished from '''R''' because the nonzero complex numbers are connected, while the nonzero real numbers are not.
Moreover, the square of the absolute value of a complex number expressed as a matrix is equal to the determinant of that matrix:
The term "imaginary" for these quantities was coined by René Descartes in 1637, although he was at pains to stress their imaginary nature
Unlike real functions, which are commonly represented as two-dimensional graphs, complex functions have four-dimensional graphs and may usefully be illustrated by color-coding a three-dimensional graph to suggest four dimensions, or by animating the complex function's dynamic transformation of the complex plane.
This is the statement of the ''fundamental theorem of algebra''.
Reals, complex numbers, quaternions and octonions are all normed division algebras over '''R'''.
It can increase by any integer multiple of  and still give the same angle.
This formula can be used to compute the multiplicative inverse of a complex number if it is given in rectangular coordinates.
The sum and product of two such matrices is again of this form, and the sum and product of complex numbers corresponds to the sum and product of such matrices.
Some applications of complex numbers are:
Another consequence of this algebraic characterization is that '''C''' contains many proper subfields that are isomorphic to '''C'''.
In the 18th century complex numbers gained wider use, as it was noticed that formal manipulation of complex expressions could be used to simplify calculations involving trigonometric functions.
the Mandelbrot set and Julia sets.
The fields '''R''' and '''Q'''''p'' and their finite field extensions, including '''C''', are local fields.
For example, they do not satisfy
The complex number  can be identified with the point  in the complex plane.
In differential equations, it is common to first find all complex roots  of the characteristic equation of a linear differential equation or equation system and then attempt to solve the system in terms of base functions of the form .
Gauss had earlier published an essentially topological proof of the theorem in 1797 but expressed his doubts at the time about "the true metaphysics of the square root of −1".
This property does not hold for the field of rational numbers '''Q''' (the polynomial  does not have a rational root, since  is not a rational number) nor the real numbers '''R''' (the polynomial  does not have a real root for , since the square of  is positive for any real number ).
In electrical engineering, the imaginary unit is denoted by , to avoid confusion with , which is generally in use to denote electric current, or, more particularly, , which is generally in use to denote instantaneous electric current.
There are various proofs of this theorem, either by analytic methods such as Liouville's theorem, or topological ones such as the winding number, or a proof combining Galois theory and the fact that any real polynomial of ''odd'' degree has at least one real root.
If a linear, time-invariant (LTI) system has poles that are
A further source of confusion was that the equation  seemed to be capriciously inconsistent with the algebraic identity , which is valid for non-negative real numbers  and , and which was also used in complex number calculations with one of ,  positive and the other negative.
This difficulty eventually led to the convention of using the special symbol  in place of  to guard against this mistake.
As with the modulus, the argument can be found from the rectangular form :
has the property that its square is the negative of the identity matrix: .
Complex numbers extend the concept of the one-dimensional number line to the two-dimensional complex plane by using the horizontal axis for the real part and the vertical axis for the imaginary part.
In this notation, the above formulas for addition and multiplication read
In this ring, the equation  has four solutions.
have real part greater than or less than zero.
Using the cis function, this is sometimes abbreviated to
*in the right half plane, it will be unstable,
Likewise, in difference equations, the complex roots  of the characteristic equation of the difference equation system are used, to attempt to solve the system in terms of base functions of the form .
Compared to , the algebraic closure of '''Q''', which also contains all algebraic numbers, '''C''' has the advantage of being easily understandable in geometric terms.
*  is closed under addition, multiplication and taking inverses.
For given real functions representing actual physical quantities, often in terms of sines and cosines, corresponding complex functions are considered of which the real parts are the original quantities.
Second, for any complex number , its additive inverse  is also a complex number; and third, every nonzero complex number has a reciprocal complex number.
Moreover, the above formulas for addition etc.
This means the following: the '''R'''-linear map
This use is also extended into digital signal processing and digital image processing, which utilize digital versions of Fourier analysis (and wavelet analysis) to transmit, compress, restore, and otherwise process digital audio signals, still images, and video signals.
The set '''C''' of complex numbers is a field.
Every triangle has a unique Steiner inellipse—an ellipse inside the triangle and tangent to the midpoints of the three sides of the triangle.
The impetus to study complex numbers proper first arose in the 16th century when algebraic solutions for the roots of cubic and quartic polynomials were discovered by Italian mathematicians (see Niccolò Fontana Tartaglia, Gerolamo Cardano).
In fact, in any ordered field, the square of any element is necessarily positive, so  precludes the existence of an ordering on '''C'''.
In his elementary algebra text book, Elements of Algebra, he introduces these numbers almost at once and then uses them in a natural way throughout.
The foci of a triangle's Steiner inellipse can be found as follows, according to Marden's theorem: Denote the triangle's vertices in the complex plane as , , and .
The real number  is called the ''real part'' of the complex number ; the real number  is called the ''imaginary part'' of .
A field is a set endowed with addition, subtraction, multiplication and division operations that behave as is familiar from, say, rational numbers.
Wessel's memoir appeared in the Proceedings of the Copenhagen Academy but went largely unnoticed.
To obtain the measurable quantity, the real part is taken:
This is done by encoding number-theoretic information in complex-valued functions.
Like in real analysis, this notion of convergence is used to construct a number of elementary functions: the ''exponential function'' , also written , is defined as the infinite series
The roots of such equations are called algebraic numbers &ndash; they are a principal object of study in algebraic number theory.
Viewed in this way the multiplication of a complex number by  corresponds to rotating the position vector counterclockwise by a quarter turn (90°) about the origin:  = 2 = .
Unlike in the situation of real numbers, there is an infinitude of complex solutions  of the equation
The incorrect use of this identity (and the related identity ) in the case when both  and  are negative even bedeviled Euler.
This map is holomorphic if and only if .
He called them "fictitious" during his attempts to find solutions to cubic equations in the 16th century.
If Fourier analysis is employed to write a given real-valued signal as a sum of periodic functions, these periodic functions are often written as complex valued functions of the form
It was not until 1831 that he overcame these doubts and published his treatise on complex numbers as points in the plane, largely establishing modern notation and terminology.
Moreover, '''C''' has a nontrivial involutive automorphism  (namely the complex conjugation), such that  is in  for any nonzero  in '''C'''.
However, specifying an isomorphism requires the axiom of choice.
In the network analysis of electrical circuits, the complex conjugate is used in finding the equivalent impedance when the maximum power transfer theorem is used.
*on the imaginary axis, it will have marginal stability.
(which holds for positive real numbers), do in general not hold for complex numbers.
Above, complex numbers have been defined by introducing , the imaginary unit, as a symbol.
Write the cubic equation , take its derivative, and equate the (quadratic) derivative to zero.
For example: complex analysis, complex matrix, complex polynomial, and complex Lie algebra.
In fluid dynamics, complex functions are used to describe potential flow in two dimensions.
In general, by Pythagoras' theorem,  is the distance of the point ''P'' representing the complex number  to the origin.
by formally manipulating complex power series and observed that this formula could be used to reduce any trigonometric identity to much simpler exponential identities.
Both sides of the equation are multivalued by the definition of complex exponentiation given here, and the values on the left are a subset of those on the right.
Complex analysis shows some features not apparent in real analysis.
The ''argument'' of  (in many applications referred to as the "phase") is the angle of the radius ''OP'' with the positive real axis, and is written as .
For example, any non-empty complex square matrix has at least one (complex) eigenvalue.
*all in the left half plane, it will be stable,
In control theory, systems are often transformed from the time domain to the frequency domain using the Laplace transform.
This expression is sometimes known as the Cartesian form of .
The quotient ring  can be shown to be a field.
Another example, relevant to the two side bands of amplitude modulation of AM radio, is:
Notably, the operations of addition and multiplication take on a very natural geometric character when complex numbers are viewed as position vectors: addition corresponds to vector addition while multiplication corresponds to multiplying their magnitudes and adding their arguments (i.e.
With algebraic methods, more specifically applying the machinery of field theory to the number field containing roots of unity, it can be shown that it is not possible to construct a regular nonagon using only compass and straightedge &ndash; a purely geometric problem.
This characterization relies on the notion of fields and polynomials.
The expression ''direction coefficient'', often used for , is due to Hankel (1867), and ''absolute value,'' for ''modulus,'' is due to Weierstrass.
Here  is called the modulus of , and the square root sign indicates the square root with non-negative real part, called the '''principal square root'''; also , where .
A fortiori, the same is true if the equation has rational coefficients.
Rafael Bombelli was the first to explicitly address these seemingly paradoxical solutions of cubic equations and developed the rules for complex arithmetic trying to resolve these issues.
This is equivalent to the (ε, δ)-definition of limits, where the absolute value of real numbers is replaced by the one of complex numbers.
Argand called  the ''direction factor'', and  the ''modulus''; Cauchy (1828) called  the ''reduced form'' (l'expression réduite) and apparently introduced the term ''argument''; Gauss used  for , introduced the term ''complex number'' for , and called  the ''norm''.
The rules for addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division of complex numbers were developed by the Italian mathematician Rafael Bombelli.
Using Euler's formula this can be written as
Complex numbers provide a solution to this problem.
Moreover, when the imaginary part is negative, it is common to write  with  instead of , for example  instead of .
Hence, the arg function is sometimes considered as multivalued.
The idea is to extend the real numbers with the imaginary unit  where , so that solutions to equations like the preceding one can be found.
With respect to the basis , this matrix is
i.e., the one mentioned in the section on matrix representation of complex numbers above.
''Euler's identity'' states:
Other choices of metrics on '''Q''' lead to the fields '''Q'''''p'' of ''p''-adic numbers (for any prime number ''p''), which are thereby analogous to '''R'''.
For example, the distributive law
The set of all complex numbers is denoted by ,  or .
This is because any square in an ordered field is at least , but .
The field '''R''' is the completion of '''Q''', the field of rational numbers, with respect to the usual absolute value metric.
A purely imaginary number  is a complex number  whose real part is zero.
These two values used to identify a given complex number are therefore called its ''Cartesian'', ''rectangular'', or ''algebraic form''.
As arg is a multivalued function, unique only up to a multiple of 2''π'', log is also multivalued.
A real number  can be regarded as a complex number  whose imaginary part is 0.
where the  are real numbers.
This ring is called polynomial ring.
The conjugate  corresponds to the transpose of the matrix.
While the th root of a positive real number  is chosen to be the ''positive'' real number  satisfying  there is no natural way of distinguishing one particular complex th root of a complex number.
where arg is the argument defined above, and ln the (real) natural logarithm.
The idea of a complex number as a point in the complex plane (above) was first described by Caspar Wessel in 1799, although it had been anticipated as early as 1685 in Wallis's ''De Algebra tractatus''.
The algebraic closures  of '''Q'''''p'' still carry a norm, but (unlike '''C''') are not complete with respect to it.
If a system has zeros in the right half plane, it is a nonminimum phase system.
Together,  and  give another way of representing complex numbers, the ''polar form'', as the combination of modulus and argument fully specify the position of a point on the plane.
Complex numbers have essential concrete applications in a variety of scientific and related areas such as signal processing, control theory, electromagnetism, fluid dynamics, quantum mechanics, cartography, and vibration analysis.
When the underlying field for a mathematical topic or construct is the field of complex numbers, the topic's name is usually modified to reflect that fact.
Another example are Gaussian integers, that is, numbers of the form , where  and  are integers, which can be used to classify sums of squares.
Augustin Louis Cauchy and Bernhard Riemann together brought the fundamental ideas of complex analysis to a high state of completion, commencing around 1825 in Cauchy's case.
The complex number field is intrinsic to the mathematical formulations of quantum mechanics, where complex Hilbert spaces provide the context for one such formulation that is convenient and perhaps most standard.
(This approach is no longer standard in classical relativity, but is used in an essential way in quantum field theory.)
The treatment of resistors, capacitors, and inductors can then be unified by introducing imaginary, frequency-dependent resistances for the latter two and combining all three in a single complex number called the impedance.
The quaternions are only a skew field, i.e.
A complex number can be viewed as a point or position vector in a two-dimensional Cartesian coordinate system called the complex plane or Argand diagram (see  and ), named after Jean-Robert Argand.
for some fixed complex number  can be represented by a  matrix (once a basis has been chosen).
For example, the algebraic closure of '''Q'''''p'' also satisfies these three properties, so these two fields are isomorphic.
is also isomorphic to the field '''C''', and gives an alternative complex structure on '''R'''2.
In this way, algebraic methods can be used to study geometric questions and vice versa.
Complex numbers, unlike real numbers, do not in general satisfy the unmodified power and logarithm identities, particularly when naïvely treated as single-valued functions; see failure of power and logarithm identities.
Hypercomplex numbers also generalize '''R''', '''C''', '''H''', and '''O'''.
The polar angle for the complex number 0 is indeterminate, but arbitrary choice of the angle&nbsp;0 is common.
The geometric description of the multiplication of complex numbers can also be expressed in terms of rotation matrices by using this correspondence between complex numbers and such matrices.
for any integer  satisfying .
As well as their use within mathematics, complex numbers have practical applications in many fields, including physics, chemistry, biology, economics, electrical engineering, and statistics.
The value of  equals the result of atan2: .
For a sine wave of a given frequency, the absolute value  of the corresponding  is the amplitude and the argument  is the phase.
In 1748 Leonhard Euler went further and obtained Euler's formula of complex analysis:
The numbers are conventionally plotted using the real part as the horizontal component, and imaginary part as vertical (see Figure 1).
For example, this notion contains the split-complex numbers, which are elements of the ring  (as opposed to ).
The rearrangement of terms is justified because each series is absolutely convergent.
The real part of a complex number  is denoted by  or ; the imaginary part of a complex number  is denoted by  or .
This is called "rationalization" of the denominator (although the denominator in the final expression might be an irrational real number).
As mentioned above, any nonconstant polynomial equation (in complex coefficients) has a solution in '''C'''.
However, by Hurwitz's theorem they are the only ones.
This is generalized by the notion of a linear complex structure.
The original foundation formulas of quantum mechanics&mdash;the Schrödinger equation and Heisenberg's matrix mechanics&mdash;make use of complex numbers.
* If  and  are distinct elements of , then either  or  is in .
It can be shown that any such solution &mdash;called complex logarithm of &mdash;satisfies
As an example, Tartaglia's formula for a cubic equation of the form  gives the solution to the equation  as
For example, any two holomorphic functions  and  that agree on an arbitrarily small open subset of '''C''' necessarily agree everywhere.
From a more abstract point of view, '''C''', endowed with the metric
The following description of '''C''' as a topological field (that is, a field that is equipped with a topology, which allows the notion of convergence) does take into account the topological properties.
A sequence  of complex numbers is said to converge if and only if its real and imaginary parts do.
In applied fields, complex numbers are often used to compute certain real-valued improper integrals, by means of complex-valued functions.
Second, its transcendence degree over '''Q''', the prime field of '''C''', is the cardinality of the continuum.
Even so, Euler considered it natural to introduce students to complex numbers much earlier than we do today.
There is no linear ordering on the complex numbers that is compatible with addition and multiplication.
The completion  of  turns out to be algebraically closed.
The complex-valued signal  is called the analytic representation of the real-valued, measurable signal .
Unlike the reals, '''C''' is not an ordered field, that is to say, it is not possible to define a relation  that is compatible with the addition and multiplication.
The value of  is expressed in radians in this article.
The principal value of log is often taken by restricting the imaginary part to the interval .
The common terms used in the theory are chiefly due to the founders.
has at least one complex solution ''z'', provided that at least one of the higher coefficients  is nonzero.
It can be shown that any field having these properties is isomorphic (as a field) to '''C'''.
Consequently, they are in general multi-valued.
where sgn is the signum function.
Marden's Theorem says that the solutions of this equation are the complex numbers denoting the locations of the two foci of the Steiner inellipse.
A complex number whose real part is zero is said to be purely imaginary, whereas a complex number whose imaginary part is zero is a real number.
Equivalently, ''X'' is the point such that the triangles with vertices ''O'', ''A'', ''B'', and ''X'', ''B'', ''A'', are congruent.
At first glance this looks like nonsense.
The second summand  is real-differentiable, but does not satisfy the Cauchy–Riemann equations.
Here  is the usual (positive) th root of the positive real number .
More rigorously, the set  of complex numbers can be defined as the set  of ordered pairs  of real numbers.
That is to say, the properties of nearness and continuity, which matter in areas such as analysis and topology, are not dealt with.
Complex exponentiation  is defined as
Because of this fact, theorems that hold ''for any algebraically closed field'', apply to '''C'''.
Hence, in terms of its real and imaginary parts, a complex number  is equal to .
As shown earlier,  is the complex conjugate of the denominator .
Third, it is algebraically closed (see above).
For instance, in 1730 Abraham de Moivre noted that the complicated identities relating trigonometric functions of an integer multiple of an angle to powers of trigonometric functions of that angle could be simply re-expressed by the following well-known formula which bears his name, de Moivre's formula:
Because of this fact, '''C''' is called an algebraically closed field.
Though this low-level construction does accurately describe the structure of the complex numbers, the following equivalent definition reveals the algebraic nature of  more immediately.
The field '''C''' has the following three properties: first, it has characteristic 0.
Using the visualization of complex numbers in the complex plane, the addition has the following geometric interpretation: the sum of two complex numbers ''A'' and ''B'', interpreted as points of the complex plane, is the point ''X'' obtained by building a parallelogram, three of whose vertices are ''O'', ''A'' and ''B''.
where  is the complex conjugate of .
For example, multiplying by  corresponds to a quarter-turn counter-clockwise, which gives back .
Equivalently, elements of the extension field can be written as ordered pairs  of real numbers.
The root locus, Nyquist plot, and Nichols plot techniques all make use of the complex plane.
In this case the solutions are  and , as can be verified using the fact that :
This means that  for any number of summands (all of which equal one).
Complex numbers are used in signal analysis and other fields for a convenient description for periodically varying signals.
