Unreinforced masonry structures constitute one of the largest earthquake risks globally.
Whichever equipment builders use, however, the objective is to produce the desired building material; ingredients must be properly mixed, placed, shaped, and retained within time constraints.
The overall embodied energy of concrete is therefore lower than for most structural materials other than wood.
Concrete production is the process of mixing together the various ingredients—water, aggregate, cement, and any additives—to produce concrete.
It consists of a mixture of calcium silicates (alite, belite), aluminates and ferrites - compounds which combine calcium, silicon, aluminium and iron in forms which will react with water.
Today, large concrete structures (for example, dams and multi-storey car parks) are usually made with reinforced concrete.
The most conspicuous of these are fly ash, a by-product of coal-fired power plants, ground granulated blast furnace slag, a byproduct of steelmaking, and silica fume, a byproduct of industrial electric arc furnaces.
The conversion of calcium hydroxide in the concrete into calcium carbonate from absorption of CO2 over several decades further strengthens the concrete and makes it more resistant to damage.
The ''mix design'' depends on the type of structure being built, how the concrete is mixed and delivered, and how it is placed to form the structure.
Concrete as a fire shield, for example Fondu fyre, can also be used in extreme environments like a missile launch pad.
English masonry worker Joseph Aspdin patented Portland cement in 1824.
Any interruption in pouring the concrete can cause the initially placed material to begin to set before the next batch is added on top.
Crushed recycled concrete can sometimes be used as the dry aggregate for brand new concrete if it is free of contaminants, though the use of recycled concrete limits strength and is not allowed in many jurisdictions.
A range of materials can be used as the cement in concrete.
Addition of short-cut polymer fibers can improve (reduce) shrinkage-induced stresses during curing and increase early and ultimate compression strength.
Slump is normally measured by filling an "Abrams cone" with a sample from a fresh batch of concrete.
Typical polyol retarders are sugar, sucrose, sodium gluconate, glucose, citric acid, and tartaric acid.
Prestressed reinforcement along the bottom of the beam counteracts this.
In addition to being decorative, exposed aggregate may add robustness to a concrete.
In chemical terms, curing allows calcium-silicate hydrate (C-S-H) to form.
The strength of concrete changes (increases) for up to three years.
It is then filled in three layers of equal volume, with each layer being tamped with a steel rod to consolidate the layer.
Nanoconcrete is created by high-energy mixing (HEM) of cement, sand and water.
This intense mixing serves to divide the cement particles into extremely fine nanometer scale sizes, which provides for extremely thorough mixing.
The paste is generally mixed in a ''high-speed'', shear-type mixer at a w/cm (water to cement ratio) of 0.30 to 0.45 by mass.
Air leakage accounts for a large percentage of energy loss from a home.
In the United States alone, concrete production is a $30-billion-per-year industry, considering only the value of the ready-mixed concrete sold each year.
Carbon fiber has many advantages in terms of mechanical and electrical properties (e.g.
A concrete plant consists of large storage hoppers for various reactive ingredients like cement, storage for bulk ingredients like aggregate and water, mechanisms for the addition of various additives and amendments, machinery to accurately weigh, move, and mix some or all of those ingredients, and facilities to dispense the mixed concrete, often to a concrete mixer truck.
However, use of chlorides may cause corrosion in steel reinforcing and is prohibited in some countries, so that nitrates may be favored.
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health in the United States recommends attaching local exhaust ventilation shrouds to electric concrete grinders to control the spread of this dust.
For this reason it is usually reinforced with materials that are strong in tension (often steel).
The hardened concrete contains interconnected air voids totalling approximately 15 to 25 percent.
A relatively dry sample slumps very little, having a slump value of one or two inches (25 or 50&nbsp;mm) out of one foot (305&nbsp;mm).
Higher-strength concrete is often used for larger civil projects.
* Bonding agents are used to create a bond between old and new concrete (typically a type of polymer) with wide temperature tolerance and corrosion resistance.
Concrete is sometimes used as a fire protection for steel frames, for the same effect as above.
The earliest large-scale users of concrete technology were the ancient Romans, and concrete was widely used in the Roman Empire.
Alternatively, concrete can be mixed into dryer, non-fluid forms and used in factory settings to manufacture Precast concrete products.
The Baths of Caracalla in Rome are just one example.
Initially the gel is fluid, which improves workability and aids in placement of the material, but as the concrete sets, the chains of crystals join into a rigid structure, counteracting the fluidity of the gel and fixing the particles of aggregate in place.
Curing allows concrete to achieve optimal strength and hardness.
''Bacillus pasteurii'' and ''B.
The properties of fly ash depend on the type of coal burnt.
There are many different ways in which concrete formwork can be prepared, such as Slip forming and Steel plate construction.
''Separate paste mixing'' has shown that the mixing of cement and water into a paste before combining these materials with aggregates can increase the compressive strength of the resulting concrete.
Large concrete structures such as dams, navigation locks, large mat foundations, and large breakwaters generate excessive heat during cement hydration and associated expansion.
This development is due to cement production being one of the largest producers (at about 5 to 10%) of global greenhouse gas emissions, as well as lowering costs, improving concrete properties, and recycling wastes.
Minimizing stress prior to curing minimizes cracking.
Concrete-like materials were used since 6500 BC by the Nabataea traders or Bedouins who occupied and controlled a series of oases and developed a small empire in the regions of southern Syria and northern Jordan.
concrete is readily commercially available as a more durable, although more expensive, option.
Concrete is strong in compression, as the aggregate efficiently carries the compression load.
In both Roman and Egyptian times, it was re-discovered that adding volcanic ash to the mix allowed it to set underwater.
Concrete buildings are more resistant to fire than those constructed using steel frames, since concrete has lower heat conductivity than steel and can thus last longer under the same fire conditions.
Instead it is placed in thick layers as a semi-dry material and compacted into a dense, strong mass with rolling compactors.
This surpassed the previous record by 50% in total volume and 7.5% in total area.
The placement consisted of 10,251 cubic yards of concrete placed in a 58.5 hour period using two concrete pumps and two dedicated concrete batch plants.
The cone is placed with the wide end down onto a level, non-absorptive surface.
Given the size of the concrete industry, and the fundamental way concrete is used to shape the infrastructure of the modern world, it is difficult to overstate the role this material plays today.
German archaeologist Heinrich Schliemann found concrete floors, which were made of lime and pebbles, in the royal palace of Tiryns, Greece, which dates roughly to 1400-1200 BC.
Bridges may use long beams of high-strength concrete to lower the number of spans required.
Tests can be performed to ensure that the properties of concrete correspond to specifications for the application.
Different strengths of concrete are used for different purposes.
The widespread use of concrete in many Roman structures ensured that many survive to the present day.
The previous record, 13,200 cubic meters poured in 54 hours despite a severe tropical storm requiring the site to be covered with tarpaulins to allow work to continue, was achieved in 1992 by joint Japanese and South Korean consortiums Hazama Corporation and the Samsung C&T Corporation for the construction of the Petronas Towers in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
To ensure the mixing is thorough enough to create nano-concrete, the mixer must apply a total mixing power to the mixture of 30 - 600 watts per kilogram of the mix.
The amount of concrete used in the construction of the dam is estimated at 16 million cubic meters over 17 years.
In general usage, concrete plants come in two main types, ready mix plants and central mix plants.
By storing and releasing the energy needed for heating or cooling, concrete's thermal mass delivers year-round benefits by reducing temperature swings inside and minimizing heating and cooling costs.
Concrete, when ground, can result in the creation of hazardous dust.
Another approach to mass concrete structures that is becoming more widespread is the use of roller-compacted concrete, which uses much lower amounts of cement and water than conventional concrete mixtures and is generally not poured into place.
One of these methods includes placing the cone on the narrow end and observing how the mix flows through the cone while it is gradually lifted.
As discussed above, concrete is very strong in compression, but weak in tension.
* Plasticizers increase the workability of plastic or "fresh" concrete, allowing it be placed more easily, with less consolidating effort.
A central mix plant offers more accurate control of the concrete quality through better measurements of the amount of water added, but must be placed closer to the work site where the concrete will be used, since hydration begins at the plant.
These ingredients may accelerate or slow down the rate at which the concrete hardens, and impart many other useful properties including increased tensile strength, entrainment of air, and/or water resistance.
However this stiffness can work against certain types of concrete structures, particularly where a relatively higher flexing structure is required to resist more extreme forces.
* Fly ash: A by-product of coal-fired electric generating plants, it is used to partially replace Portland cement (by up to 60% by mass).
Silica fume is similar to fly ash, but has a particle size 100 times smaller.
Concrete is also the basis of a large commercial industry.
Excessive water leads to increased bleeding and/or segregation of aggregates (when the cement and aggregates start to separate), with the resulting concrete having reduced quality.
Sand, natural gravel, and crushed stone are used mainly for this purpose.
The world record for largest continuously poured concrete floor was completed 8 November 1997, in Louisville, Kentucky by design-build firm EXXCEL Project Management.
Products which incorporate limestone, fly ash, blast furnace slag, and other useful materials with pozzolanic properties into the mix, are being tested and used.
A self-healing concrete has been developed that can also last longer than conventional concrete.
It is a basic ingredient of concrete, mortar and many plasters.
pasteurii'' increases resistance to acid.
The concrete solidifies and hardens through a chemical process called hydration.
Among the qualities typically desired, are mechanical strength, low moisture permeability, and chemical and volumetric stability.
As of 2006, about 7.5 billion cubic meters of concrete are made each year, more than one cubic meter for every person on Earth.
There is a wide variety of equipment for processing concrete, from hand tools to heavy industrial machinery.
The picture to the right shows one of many ways to achieve this, ponding&nbsp;– submerging setting concrete in water and wrapping in plastic to prevent dehydration.
Laid in the shape of arches, vaults and domes, it quickly hardened into a rigid mass, free from many of the internal thrusts and strains that troubled the builders of similar structures in stone or brick.
Portland cement and similar materials are made by heating limestone (a source of calcium) with clay and/or shale (a source of silicon, aluminium and iron) and grinding this product (called ''clinker'') with a source of sulfate (most commonly gypsum).
school buildings in Istanbul, Turkey).
Many Roman aqueducts and bridges such as the magnificent Pont du Gard have masonry cladding on a concrete core, as does the dome of the Pantheon.
Recycled aggregates (from construction, demolition, and excavation waste) are increasingly used as partial replacements for natural aggregates, while a number of manufactured aggregates, including air-cooled blast furnace slag and bottom ash are also permitted.
The pour (a part of the foundation for the Abu Dhabi's Landmark Tower) was 16,000 cubic meters of concrete poured within a two-day period.
For example, the lower floor columns of high-rise concrete buildings may use concrete of  or more, to keep the size of the columns small.
High-early-strength concrete is designed to hydrate faster, often by increased use of cement that increases shrinkage and cracking.
In modern cement kilns many advanced features are used to lower the fuel consumption per ton of clinker produced.
Many kilns can be fueled with difficult-to-dispose-of wastes, the most common being used tires.
Not all bacteria increase the strength of concrete significantly with their biomass.
Water runs through the voids in the pavement to the soil underneath.
Often, additives (such as pozzolans or superplasticizers) are included in the mixture to improve the physical properties of the wet mix or the finished material.
It provides superior fire resistance compared with wooden construction and gains strength over time.
In modern usage, most concrete production takes place in a large type of industrial facility called a concrete plant, or often a batch plant.
If a structure must be very rigid, concrete of very high strength may be specified, even much stronger than is required to bear the service loads.
The cisterns were kept secret and were one of the reasons the Nabataea were able to thrive in the desert.
Many concrete structures are built with an expected lifetime of approximately 100 years, but researchers have suggested that adding silica fume could extend the useful life of bridges and other concrete uses to as long as 16,000 years.
In normal use, admixture dosages are less than 5% by mass of cement and are added to the concrete at the time of batching/mixing.
Reinforced concrete, prestressed concrete and precast concrete are the most widely used types of concrete functional extensions in modern days.
Too much water is counterproductive, but too little water is deleterious.
(See the section on Concrete Production, below.
Concrete is widely used for making architectural structures, foundations, brick/block walls, pavements, bridges/overpasses, highways, runways, parking structures, dams, pools/reservoirs, pipes, footings for gates, fences and poles and even boats.
Concrete is one of the most frequently used building materials in animal houses and for manure and silage storage structures in agriculture.
Perhaps the earliest known occurrence of cement was twelve million years ago.
During the Roman Empire, Roman concrete (or ''opus caementicium'') was made from quicklime, pozzolana and an aggregate of pumice.
They discovered the advantages of hydraulic lime, with some self-cementing properties, by 700 BC.
Larger earthquakes can generate very large shear loads on structures.
Workability can also be measured by the flow table test.
Its widespread use in many Roman structures, a key event in the history of architecture termed the Roman Architectural Revolution, freed Roman construction from the restrictions of stone and brick material and allowed for revolutionary new designs in terms of both structural complexity and dimension.
The word concrete comes from the Latin word "''concretus''" (meaning compact or condensed), the perfect passive participle of "''concrescere''", from "''con''-" (together) and "''crescere''" (to grow).
Upon curing, this placement allows the  cofferdam to be dewatered approximately  below sea level to allow the construction of the Inner Harbor Navigation Canal Sill & Monolith Project to be completed in the dry.
''Workability'' is the ability of a fresh (plastic) concrete mix to fill the form/mold properly with the desired work (vibration) and without reducing the concrete's quality.
The micro fungi Aspergillus Alternaria and Cladosporium 
Cement kilns are extremely large, complex, and inherently dusty industrial installations, and have emissions which must be controlled.
Mixing the ingredients in a carefully controlled process creates a paste that coats and bonds the aggregate particles.
The water reacts with the cement, which bonds the other components together, creating a robust stone-like material.
Crystallization of strätlingite and the introduction of pyroclastic clays creates further fracture resistance.
* Pigments can be used to change the color of concrete, for aesthetics.
Most concrete is poured with reinforcing materials (such as rebar) embedded to provide tensile strength, yielding reinforced concrete.
To ensure full hydration during curing, concrete slabs are often sprayed with "curing compounds" that create a water-retaining film over the concrete.
Concrete was used for construction in many ancient structures.
Of the various ingredients used to produce a given quantity of concrete, the cement is the most energetically expensive.
The early strength of the concrete can be increased if it is kept damp during the curing process.
For this reason it is usually reinforced with materials that are strong in tension, often steel.
Once the mix is where it should be, the curing process must be controlled to ensure that the concrete attains the desired attributes.
Concrete, as the Romans knew it, was a new and revolutionary material.
''Chemical admixtures'' are materials in the form of powder or fluids that are added to the concrete to give it certain characteristics not obtainable with plain concrete mixes.
Pervious concrete is a mix of specially graded coarse aggregate, cement, water and little-to-no fine aggregates.
Additional common curing methods include wet burlap and/or plastic sheeting covering the fresh concrete.
Epoxy coatings may be applied only to interior surfaces, though, as they would otherwise trap moisture in the concrete.
Portland cement is the most common type of cement in general usage.
Accelerating admixtures are especially useful for modifying the properties of concrete in cold weather.
Options for non-combustible construction include floors, ceilings and roofs made of cast-in-place and hollow-core precast concrete.
For most routine uses,  to  concrete is often used.
In pre-tensioned concrete, the prestressing is achieved by using steel or polymer tendons or bars that are subjected to a tensile force prior to casting, or for post-tensioned concrete, after casting.
Similar systems are still used; depending on volume of the pour, the concrete mix used, and ambient air temperature, the cooling process may last for many months after the concrete is placed.
These risks can be reduced through seismic retrofitting of at-risk buildings, (e.g.
The ''Canal du Midi'' was built using concrete in 1670, and there are concrete structures in Finland that date from the 16th century.
The proper treatment of the surface of concrete, and therefore its characteristics, is an important stage in the construction and renovation of architectural structures.
Inorganic materials that have pozzolanic or latent hydraulic properties, these very fine-grained materials are added to the concrete mix to improve the properties of concrete (mineral admixtures), or as a replacement for Portland cement (blended cements).
Decorative stones such as quartzite, small river stones or crushed glass are sometimes added to the surface of concrete for a decorative "exposed aggregate" finish, popular among landscape designers.
Another major benefit is that pervious concrete can be used, which eliminates the need to place storm drains near the road, and reducing the need for slightly sloped roadway to help rainwater to run off.
After the Roman Empire collapsed, use of concrete became rare until the technology was redeveloped in the mid-18th century.
* High reactivity Metakaolin (HRM): Metakaolin produces concrete with strength and durability similar to concrete made with silica fume.
Occasionally, other structural needs may require high-strength concrete.
Concrete walls leak air far less than those made of wood frames.
In the HEM process, the intense mixing of cement and water with sand provides dissipation of energy and increases shear stresses on the surface of cement particles.
The amount of concrete used worldwide, ton for ton, is twice that of steel, wood, plastics, and aluminum combined.
Modern concrete is usually prepared as a viscous fluid, so that it may be poured into forms, which are containers erected in the field to give the concrete its desired shape.
On a human timescale, small usages of concrete go back for thousands of years.
The aggregate is nearly always stronger than the binder, so its use does not negatively affect the strength of the concrete.
Raising the water content or adding chemical admixtures increases concrete workability.
After the Roman Empire, the use of burned lime and pozzolana was greatly reduced until the technique was all but forgotten between 500 and the 14th century.
* Retarders slow the hydration of concrete and are used in large or difficult pours where partial setting before the pour is complete is undesirable.
The extremely high temperatures and long periods of time at those temperatures allows cement kilns to efficiently and completely burn even difficult-to-use fuels.
These shear loads subject the structure to both tensile and compressional loads.
The elasticity of concrete is relatively constant at low stress levels but starts decreasing at higher stress levels as matrix cracking develops.
Globally, the ready-mix concrete industry, the largest segment of the concrete market, is projected to exceed $100 billion in revenue by 2015.
For higher-strength applications, accelerated curing techniques may be applied to the concrete.
Insulating concrete forms (ICFs) are hollow blocks or panels made of either insulating foam or rastra that are stacked to form the shape of the walls of a building and then filled with reinforced concrete to create the structure.
Redistribution of aggregates after compaction often creates inhomogeneity due to the influence of vibration.
A deposit of cement was formed after an occurrence of oil shale located adjacent to a bed of limestone burned due to natural causes.
The use of recycled materials as concrete ingredients has been gaining popularity because of increasingly stringent environmental legislation, and the discovery that such materials often have complementary and valuable properties.
An early example at Hoover Dam, installed a network of pipes between vertical concrete placements to circulate cooling water during the curing process to avoid damaging overheating.
sphaericuscan'' induce calcium carbonate precipitation in the surface of cracks, adding compression strength.
Once the ingredients are mixed, workers must put the concrete in place before it hardens.
All concrete structures crack to some extent, due to shrinkage and tension.
Modern paving methods and design practices have changed the economics of concrete paving, so that a well designed and placed concrete pavement will be less expensive on initial costs and significantly less expensive over the life cycle.
Concrete roads are more fuel efficient to drive on, more reflective and last significantly longer than other paving surfaces, yet have a much smaller market share than other paving solutions.
The use of these materials in concrete reduces the amount of resources required, as the mineral admixtures act as a partial cement replacement.
To produce concrete from most cements (excluding asphalt), water is mixed with the dry powder and aggregate, which produces a semi-liquid that workers can shape, typically by pouring it into a form.
During concrete preparation, various technical details may affect the quality and nature of the product.
* Pumping aids improve pumpability, thicken the paste and reduce separation and bleeding.
When the cone is carefully lifted off, the enclosed material slumps a certain amount, owing to gravity.
were able to grow on samples of concrete used as a radioactive waste barrier in the Chernobyl reactor; leaching aluminium, iron, calcium and silicon.
Concrete is used more than any other manmade material in the world.
Bacteria such as ''Bacillus pasteurii'', ''Bacillus pseudofirmus'', ''Bacillus cohnii'', ''Sporosarcina pasteuri'', and ''Arthrobacter crystallopoietes'' increase the compression strength of concrete through their biomass.
As a type of mineral, the compounds of which it is composed are extremely stable.
better distributing the stresses in the structure to make optimal use of the reinforcement.
Abnormally fast drying and shrinkage due to factors such as evaporation from wind during placement may lead to increased tensile stresses at a time when it has not yet gained sufficient strength, resulting in greater shrinkage cracking.
However, asphalt concrete which is very frequently used for road surfaces is also a type of concrete, where the cement material is bitumen, and polymer concretes are sometimes used where the cementing material is a polymer.
Aggregate base gravel is laid down as the lowest layer in a road, with fresh concrete or asphalt placed over it.
No longer requiring to discard the rainwater using drains also means that less electricity is needed (more pumping is otherwise needed in the water distribution system), and no rainwater gets polluted as it no longer mixes with polluted water; rather it is immediately absorbed by the ground.
Traditional conditions for curing involve by spraying or ponding the concrete surface with water.
Concrete's use in the modern world is exceeded only by that of naturally occurring water.
HEM Nanoconcrete hardens in low and subzero temperature conditions and possesses an increased volume of gel, which reduces capillarity in solid and porous materials.
During curing, the cement continues to react with the residual water in a process of hydration.
