Since the 1990s there has been steady revitalization of the area.
Construction was held up for another four years as Bullard and Sportsplex fought over the site.
The bus terminal beneath the station serves the  to Prospect Park, the  to the Coney Island/Sea Gate border, the  to Bay Ridge, and the  to Starrett City.
In 2006, David Scharfenberg of ''The New York Times'' said, "Coney Island’s elementary schools are a mixed lot, with only some exceeding citywide averages on the state’s testing regimen."
* ''Thunderbolt''&nbsp;– In March 2014, construction started on the new ''Thunderbolt'' coaster at Coney Island.
The neighborhoods on Coney Island, from west to east, are Sea Gate, Coney Island proper, Brighton Beach, and Manhattan Beach.
Sitt released renderings of a hotel that would take up the entire amusement area from the Aquarium to beyond Keyspan Park and would most likely need to involve the demolition of The Wonder Wheel, Cyclone, and Nathan's original hot dog stand, as well as the new Keyspan Park.
This  hotel, with rooms for up to 5,000 people nightly and meals for up to 20,000 people daily, was close to the then-rundown western Coney Island, so it was mostly the upper middle class that went to this hotel.
Trump invited the press to the funeral where bikini-clad girls first handed out hot dogs, then handed out stones which Fred invited all to cast through the stained-glass windows of the pavilion.
The local amusement community opposed the city.
Thor said it wanted to give the mall a Vegas-style makeover and bring in more name brand retail while maintaining the original vendors occupying the mall.
These three rides are:
Thor admitted that condos would be part of its resort and said that the resort was not economically feasible without the addition of condos.
However, several bureaucrats held up the project for another two years while the NYC Planning Commission compiled an environmental impact report.
A plan was developed by the Astella Development Corporation.
The following month in "an early-morning raid" on the site, Giuliani, who stated that the Thunderbolt was about to collapse, had the coaster demolished; however, full destruction of the supposedly structurally unstable coaster took weeks.
In 1987, state senator Thomas Bartosiewics attempted to block Bullard from building on the Steeplechase site.
In 1868, William A. Engeman built a resort in the area.
There even evolved a Coney Island school of carousel design, distinct from the more staid Philadelphia and County Fair styles.
City Planning certified the rezoning plan in January 2009 to negative responses from all amusement advocates and Coney Island enthusiasts.
The  runs from the Sea Gate border at West 37th Street to Nostrand Avenue at Avenue U in Sheepshead Bay, Brooklyn.
Sea Gate and the Breezy Point Cooperative are the only city neighborhoods cordoned off by a fence and gate houses.
It suffered a series of small fires which made the structure unstable, and was torn down in 1977.
The western and eastern ends of the island are now peninsulas.
In the early 1920s it received a new set of horses that were carved by Charles Carmel, one of Coney Island’s celebrated carousel makers.
* ''Thunderbolt''&nbsp;– this roller coaster across the street from Steeplechase Park was constructed in 1925 and closed in 1983.
After a decade of court battles, Trump exhausted all his legal options and the property was still zoned only for amusements.
When the long-term operator died unexpectedly, the carousel was put up for auction, with fears that it would leave Coney Island or be broken up for sale to collectors.
In 1964, Coney Island's last remaining large theme park, Steeplechase Park, closed.
The Coney Island style was characterized by a flamboyant, aggressive-looking horse&nbsp;— neck straining, nostrils flaring, and tongue lolling.
Luna Park closed in 1946 after a series of fires and the street gang problems of the 1950s spilled into Coney Island.
In 1994, after Rudy Giuliani took office as mayor of New York, he negated the Bullard deal by building a baseball stadium on the site allotted for Steeplechase Park.
* William E. Grady Vocational High School
In 1915, the Sea Beach Line was upgraded to a subway line, followed by the other former excursion roads, and the opening of the New West End Terminal in 1919 ushered in Coney Island's busiest era.
Many amusement owners worried that because one of the report's goals to develop the area as a year-round destination, they could be forced out as their businesses are only seasonal and did not meet the CIDC's year-round goal.
Arcadia plans to demolish the mall and build the tower only with a possible box store on the ground level.
BLP stated that the library was referred to as "the first-ever library built on stilts over the Atlantic Ocean."
In January 2007, Thor released renderings for a new amusement park to be built on the Astroland site called Coney Island Park.
The city was considering demolishing the Cyclone in favor of an extension of the adjacent New York Aquarium.
The beach area is divided into "bays", areas of beach delineated by rock jetties, which moderate erosion and the force of ocean waves.
A number of amusements are directly accessible from the land-side of the boardwalk, as is the aquarium and a variety of food shops and arcades.
Coney Island has been featured in many films, television shows, cartoons, and theatrical plays.
In September 2005, Thor's founder, Joe Sitt, went public with his new plans, which he claimed was going to be a large Bellagio-style hotel resort surrounded by rides and amusements.
In April 2009, Feld Entertainment, parent company to Ringling Bros. and Barnum & Bailey Circus, announced that "The Greatest Show on Earth" would perform on Coney Island for the entire summer of 2009, the first time since July 16, 1956 that Ringling Bros. had performed in this location.
Besides Luna Park, the remaining parks and attractions include Deno's Wonder Wheel Amusement Park, 12th Street Amusements, and Kiddie Park, while the Eldorado Arcade has an indoor bumper car ride.
* ''Tornado''&nbsp;– this roller coaster was constructed in 1926.
Shortly before the CIDC's plans were publicly released, a development company, Thor Equities, purchased all of Bullard's  western property, worth $2.2 million, for $13 million.
These hotels were used by the wealthy upper class, who would not go to Brighton Beach because of its proximity to Coney Island.
The most popular theory is the name came from the old spelling of the Dutch word for rabbit, "conyn", derived from a purported large population of wild rabbits, giving it the name "Conyne Eylandt" ("Rabbits Island"), with the name being anglicized to "Coney Island" after the English took over the colony in 1664, "coney" being the English version of the word rabbit.
“I wouldn’t have chosen to put some of the colors together, but overall it works,” she said.
Coney Island's main subway stop is Coney Island&nbsp;– Stillwell Avenue and is served by the .
Starting in the early 1900s, the City of New York made efforts to condemn all buildings and piers built south of Surf Avenue.
Once home to many Jewish residents, Coney Island's main population groups today are African American, Hispanic, and recent Russian immigrants.
In 2001 Thor purchased the Albee Square Mall for $25 million claiming it wanted to revitalize it.
The Coney Island "Funny Face" logo, which is still extant, dates 100 years to the early days of George C. Tilyou's Steeplechase Park.
'''Coney Island''' is a peninsular residential neighborhood, beach, and leisure/entertainment destination on the Coney Island Channel, which is part of the Lower Bay in the southwestern part of the borough of Brooklyn, New York City.
The majority of Coney Island's population resides in approximately thirty 18- to 24-story towers, mostly various forms of public housing.
By the 1970s, the area was in dispute.
The , double-decker Brighton Beach Pavilion was also built nearby.
The ''Thunderbolt'' will be manufactured by Zamperla at a cost of US$10 million and will have a 90-degree vertical drop, followed by a 100-foot loop and a zero-gravity roll, along with dives, hills and a corkscrew&nbsp;— all within two minutes.
However, the City of New York bought the B&B Carousell a few days before the auction; it has since been dismantled, with plans to operate it again in Coney Island in 2013 in a newly constructed carousel pavilion that will be built in Steeplechase Plaza, a 2.2-acre public plaza that is also scheduled to be open for the 2013 season.
In the late 1970s, the city came up with a plan to revitalize Coney Island by bringing in gambling casinos, as had been done in Atlantic City.
It is owned by the City of New York, and was operated by Astroland, under a franchise agreement.
Nathan's, however, reported that the Nathan's Hot Dog Eating Contest would be held the following summer, as usual.
The J. Pickering Putnam-designed, 150-room Manhattan Beach Hotel, with restaurants, ballrooms, and shops, was open for business by 1877 at a ceremony presided over by Ulysses S. Grant.
The Dutch established the colony of Nieuw Amsterdam in that area in the early 17th century.
With attendance dropping, many amusement owners abandoned their properties.
At the same time, Brooklyn was involved with two other major development projects: the Pacific Park project, which involved eminent domain, and the Brooklyn Bridge Park project, which involved the demolition of a building with landmark status.
After World War II, contraction began seriously from a series of pressures.
Patrons were hoisted  in the air before being allowed to drop using guy-wired parachutes.
Air conditioning in movie theaters and then in homes, along with the advent of automobiles, which provided access to the less crowded and more appealing Long Island state parks, especially Jones Beach, lessened the attractions of Coney's beaches.
Gambling was never legalized for Coney, and the area ended up with vacant lots.
Giuliani stated that he wanted to build Sportsplex, provided that it included a stadium for a minor-league team owned by the Mets; however, when Giuliani ordered the stadium to be built first, Sportsplex accused the city of planning to build a parking lot on the property earmarked for the Sportsplex construction.
City officials questioned Thor's motives for wanting the zoning changes inside the amusement zone and feared that once Thor gets those changes, it will flip the property to the highest bidder who will have no obligation to build any amusements.
Bullard, now no longer rebuilding Steeplechase Park, had wanted to restore the Thunderbolt as part of a scaled-down amusement park.
The Zipper and Spider on 12th Street were closed permanently on September 4, 2007, and dismantling began after its owner lost his lease.
Inventor Samuel Colt built an observation tower on the peninsula in 1845, but he abandoned the project soon after.
There are no zoned high schools, though Abraham Lincoln High School, an academic high school, is in Coney Island.
The property remained vacant for another five years.
Soon after, Thor sold the property to Arcadia Reality Trust for $125 million.
The median household income in 1999 was $21,281.
In June 2006 Ehrenkrantz Eckstut & Kuhn (EEK), an architectural design firm working for Thor, released detailed renderings of Thor's planned resort area showing luxury high rise condo towers in place of the hotel with retail on the ground floor.
Other notable, currently operating attractions include:
"Hotel Brighton" (or Brighton Beach Hotel) was situated on the beach at what is now the foot of Coney Island Avenue, and was accessed by the Brooklyn, Flatbush, and Coney Island Railway (the present-day BMT Brighton Line), which opened on July 2, 1878.
The opening of the ''Thunderbolt'', expected to be by Memorial Day 2014, was pushed back to June 6, 2014, and in early June, it was delayed once again to later in summer 2014.
Coney Island is well known as the site of amusement parks and a seaside resort.
At night, the Wonder Wheel's steel frame is outlined and illuminated by neon tubes.
There is no clear historical consensus on how the island got the name "Coney Island".
Currently, Coney Island has two amusement parks — Luna Park and Deno's Wonder Wheel Amusement Park — as well as several rides that are not incorporated into either theme park.
Coney Island's amusement area is one of a few in the United States that is not mostly owned by any one entity.
When the city lost the bid for the Olympics, revitalization plans were passed on to the Coney Island Development Corporation (CIDC), which came up with a plan to restore the resort.
Most of the vacationers were wealthy and went by carriage.
The original Native American inhabitants of the region were the Lenape, who called the island ''Narrioch''.
Immediately Thor announced plans to build a Nickelodeon-themed hotel on the site.
Another purported origin is that the island is named after Henry Hudson's right-hand-man, John Coleman, supposed to have been slain by Indians.
A tent-top protected the riders from the weather.
The 150-suite Cable Hotel was built nearby in 1875.
The presence of threatening youths did not impact the beachgoing but discouraged visitors to the rides and concessions, staples of the Coney Island economy.
Of those people, 51.2% were White, 29.3% were Black, 18% were Hispanic or Latino, 3.8% were Asian, 0.5% were Native American, 0.1% were Pacific Islander, 7.6% were some other race, and 3.7% described themselves as two or more races.
The carousel consisted of hand-carved horses and animals standing two abreast.
There were plans early in the 20th century to dredge and straighten the creek as a ship canal, but they were abandoned, and the center of the creek was filled in completely to allow construction of the Belt Parkway before World War II, and it was filled in again in 1962 with the construction of the Verrazano–Narrows Bridge.
The carousel is faster than usual, with a traditional roll-operated fairground organ.
A metal ring-arm hung on a pole outside the ride, feeding small, iron rings for eager riders to grab.
In the Woody Allen movie ''Annie Hall'', Allen's character's family lives in the small house-like structure under the rear of the roller coaster track.
It holds 144 riders, stands  tall, and weighs over 200 tons.
that would project images of whales and mermaids.
Eventually a settlement was reached where the beach did not begin until  south of Surf Avenue, the territory marked by a city-owned boardwalk, while the city would demolish any structures that had been built over public streets, to reclaim beach access.
In 2012, Hurricane Sandy caused major damage to the Coney Island amusement parks, the Aquarium, and businesses.
Taconic now had , on which it planned to build 2,000 apartment units.
The tournament, usually held on the west coast of the United States, was televised live on NBC.
* John Dewey High School
It opened in 1911 as an unmanned deposit station.
It was formerly an island that was separated from the main part of Brooklyn by Coney Island Creek, a partial tidal mudflats, but it has since been developed into a peninsula.
Two musicians, a drummer and a flute player, provided the music.
Critics complained that Moses took three times more land than each structure needed, surrounding each with vacant lots that were of no use to the city.
The final part of the restoration was new horsehair tails for the 50 horses, and with that the New York City Economic Development Corp paid $1,700,000 for the restoration.
In their place, Sitt plans to build cheap, one-story retail, and his recently released rendering clearly shows Burger King and Taco Bell-like buildings.
He spent ten years battling in court to get the property rezoned.
In 2001, KeySpan Park opened on the former site of Steeplechase Park to host the Brooklyn Cyclones minor league baseball team.
The Mets decided the minor league team would be called the Brooklyn Cyclones and sold the naming rights to the stadium to Keyspan Energy.
The city agreed, and it and the state legislature approved the project in 1986.
MAS held several public workshops, a call for ideas, and a charrette to garner attention to the issue.
Coney Island is served by the New York City Department of Education.
In 2003, Mayor Michael Bloomberg took an interest in revitalizing Coney Island as a possible site for the New York City bid of the 2012 Summer Olympics.
For the restoration, Theresa Rollison, a painter with Carousels and Carvings, custom-mixed more than 80 colors to replicate the original hues.
Development on Coney Island has always been controversial.
After many public complaints, the Estimate Board reinstated the area between West 22nd Street and The Cyclone as amusement only and threw in  of property north of Surf Av.
''Thunderbolt'' will feature three inversions including a vertical loop, corkscrew, and an Immelmann loop.
On April 20, 2011, the first new roller coasters to be built at Coney Island in eighty years were opened as part of efforts to reverse the decline of the amusement area.
The B&B was built in Coney Island, with a frame dating to 1906, and at some point, it operated in New Jersey, although it is unclear for how long.
Quickly, rumors started that Thor was interested in building a retail mall in the heart of the amusement area.
As soon as the stadium was completed, Giuliani nullified the Sportsplex deal and had the parking lot built, angering many in the community.
It is now located in and operated by Luna Park.
The entire station was rebuilt in 2002–2004.
Coney Island started to become a resort area after the Coney Island Hotel was finished in 1829.
In recent years, the area has seen the opening of MCU Park stadium and has become home to the Brooklyn Cyclones minor league baseball team, as well as the opening of a new amusement park among several adjacent ones.
At one point Trump organized a funeral for amusement parks in Coney Island.
The Shore Parkway bikeway runs east along Jamaica Bay, and west and north along New York Harbor.
It was torn down by the city "to protect public safety" in 2000 during the construction of nearby Keyspan Park.
The resort was given the name "Brighton Beach" in 1878 by Henry C. Murphy and a group of businessmen, who chose to name as an allusion to the English resort city of Brighton.
In less than a year, Thor flipped the property to Taconic Investment Partners for over $90 million.
Giuliani publicly denied this and promised Sportsplex could begin construction the moment the stadium was finished.
The area was also the center of new technological events, with electric lights, roller coasters, and baby incubators among the innovations at Coney Island in the 1900s.
The league built a 4,000-seat stadium and twelve outer courts next to the boardwalk for the event.
Four years later, Moses had the entire peninsula rezoned for residential use only and announced plans to demolish the amusements to make room for public housing.
This name has been attributed the meaning of "''land without shadows''" or "''always in light''" describing how its south facing beaches always remained in sunlight.
* The High School Of Sports Management
The tournament returned to Coney Island in 2007 and 2008.
Street bike lanes are marked in Neptune Avenue and other streets in Coney Island.
Thor Equities said it hoped to complete the project by 2011.
Due to Coney Island's proximity to Manhattan and other boroughs, and its simultaneous relative distance from the city of Brooklyn to provide the illusion of a proper vacation, it began attracting vacationers in the 1830s and 1840s, assisted by carriage roads and steamship service that reduced travel time from a formerly half-day journey to two hours.
They are to be reassembled at an amusement park in Honduras.
Another theory has an Irish captain named Peter O'Connor naming Coney Island in the 18th century, after an island in Sligo Bay known as both ''Coney Island'' and ''Inishmulclohy''.
Critics pointed out that even though Thor claimed its project would expand the amusement area, the company had already evicted several acres of amusements from the property it bought and planned to evict the rest of the amusements on the property after the 2007 season, as well as close Astroland.
It had returned to Brooklyn by 1935.
Many townhouses were built on empty lots, popular franchises opened, and Keyspan Park was built to serve as the home for the Brooklyn Cyclones baseball team.
Since the area has both zoning restrictions only allowing amusements and no buildings taller than .
The nearby "Camera Obscura" similarly used mirrors and lens to provide a panoramic view of the area.
Some of the alternative theories on how the island got its name include the Irish Gaelic name for rabbit which is ''Coinín'', which is also anglicized to Coney.
In 1979, the city purchased Steeplechase Park from Fred Trump and proceeded to evict Norman Kaufman's amusements.
Next to it, on a  piece of land leased by James Voorhies, maitre d' Paul Bauer built the western peninsula's largest hotel, which opened in 1876.
The fare was five cents.
Between about 1880 and World War II, Coney Island was the largest amusement area in the United States, attracting several million visitors per year.
between these streets.
By doing this, Giuliani wanted to improve sports facilities in the area, as well as found a professional baseball team in Brooklyn (which had not hosted such a team since 1957, when the Brooklyn Dodgers—now the Los Angeles Dodgers—moved to Los Angeles).
At a public meeting Thor representatives continued to downplay the condos by claiming that the company only wanted to build hundreds of condo units, not thousands.
Coney Island also has several other visitor attractions and hosts renowned events as well.
In 2010, they returned to the same location with ''The Coney Island Illuscination''.
The  provides express bus service to Manhattan on weekdays.
* ''Steeplechase Park Horse Race''&nbsp;– created by a Coney Island resident George C. Tilyou in 1897, this ride consisted of people riding wooden horses around the park on a steel track.
The Coney Island neighborhood is zoned to PS 90 Edna Cohen School for K-5 education PS 329 (K-5), PS 188 The Michael E. Berdy School (K-5), PS 100 Coney Island School (K-5), Mark Twain (6–8), IS 303 Herbert S. Eisenberg, and PS/IS 288 The Shirley Tanyhill School (Pre-K-8) serve Coney Island.
The Ocean Parkway bicycle path, the oldest designated bicycle path in the United States, terminates in Coney Island.
In the mid-1980s, businessman Horace Bullard approached the city to allow him to rebuild Steeplechase Park.
Former rides include:
The beach is groomed and replenished on a regular basis by the city.
The ride will feature  of track, a height of , and a top speed of .
CIBBOWS hosts several open water swim races each year, such as Grimaldo's Mile and the New York Aquarium 5k, as well as regular weekend training swims.
The residential portion of the peninsula is a community of 60,000 people in its western part, with Sea Gate to its west, Brighton Beach and Manhattan Beach to its east, the Lower Bay to the south, and Gravesend to the north.
* Bumper cars&nbsp;– there are three separate bumper car rides on Coney Island, located on 12th street, Deno's Wonder Wheel Park, and Eldorado's Arcade on Surf Avenue.
He eventually leased the property to Norman Kaufman, who ran a small collection of fairground amusements on a corner of the site, calling his amusement park "Steeplechase Park".
Although the ride has been closed since 1968, it remains a Coney Island landmark and is sometimes referred to as Brooklyn's Eiffel Tower.
All the other carousels on Coney Island are kiddie park-style.
At its height, it contained three competing major amusement parks, Luna Park, Dreamland, and Steeplechase Park, as well as many independent amusements.
The CIDC also suggested that property north of Surf Avenue and west of Abe Stark should be rezoned for other uses including residential to lure developers into the area.
At the 2000 census, there were 51,205 people living in Coney Island.
In the winter of 2007, Thor began to evict businesses from the buildings it owned along the boardwalk.
In 1847, the middle class started going to Coney Island upon the introduction of a ferry line to Norton's Point—named after hotel owner Michael Norton—at the western portion of the peninsula.
Bartosiewics was part of a group called The Brooklyn Sports Foundation which had promised another theme park developer, Sportsplex, the right to build on the site.
Gang activity started as well, with one 1870s writer noting that going to Coney Island could result in losing money and even lives.
In June 2009, the city's planning commission unanimously approved the construction of 4,500 units of housing and 900 affordable units and vowed to "preserve, in perpetuity, the open amusement area rides that everyone knows and loves," while protesters argued that "20 percent affordable-housing component is unreasonably low."
Between 2002 and 2004, it was completely dismantled, cleaned, painted, and restored, but remains inactive.
* The Leon M. Goldstein High School for the Sciences
When the first structures were built around the 1840s, there was an outcry to prevent any development on the island and preserve it as a natural park.
Coney Island is expected to be served by the Citywide Ferry Service at a date not yet determined.
The beach is open to all without restriction, and there is no charge for use.
Corbin, who worked on Wall Street and had many railroad investments, built the New York and Manhattan Beach Railway for his two luxury shoreline hotels.
By the turn of the century, Victorian hotels, private bathhouses, and vaudeville theaters were a common sight on Coney island.
In August 2006, Coney Island hosted a major national volleyball tournament sponsored by the Association of Volleyball Professionals.
However, this idea was scrapped when New York City started conserving electricity in the summer months, and it has not been lit regularly since.
The tents were located between the boardwalk and Surf Avenue, and the show was called ''The Coney Island Boom-A-Ring''.
