She stresses the complementarity and equal importance of the male and female roles according to yin-yang theory, but she clearly accepts the dominance of the yang-male.
By the early 18th century, this initial portrayal was rejected by the Dominicans and Franciscans, creating a dispute among Catholics in East Asia that was known as the "Rites Controversy".
Another meaning of ''rén'' is "not to do to others as you would not wish done to yourself".
To Confucius, the ''junzi'' sustained the functions of government and social stratification through his ethical values.
He praised Confucian ethics and politics, portraying the sociopolitical hierarchy of China as a model for Europe.
While ''Tiān'' has some characteristics that overlap the category of deity, it is primarily an ''impersonal'' absolute principle, like the ''Dào'' (道) or the ''Brahman''.
In the later dynasties, more emphasis was placed on women to uphold the virtue of chastity when they lost their husbands.
In 7.19 he says that he is able to understand the order of Tiān.
While China has always had a diversity of religious beliefs, filial piety has been common to almost all of them; historian Hugh D.R.
Similarly, Mencius also said that "when the prince regards his ministers as his hands and feet, his ministers regard their prince as their belly and heart; when he regards them as his dogs and horses, they regard him as another man; when he regards them as the ground or as grass, they regard him as a robber and an enemy".
'''Confucianism''', also known as '''Ruism''', is described as tradition, a philosophy, a religion, a humanistic or rationalistic religion, a way of governing, or simply a way of life.
In the last decades there have been talks of a "Confucian Revival" in the academic and the scholarly community and there has been a grassroots proliferation of various types of Confucian churches.
*''Yì'' (義/义, righteousness).
Many European and American admirers such as Voltaire and H. G. Creel point to the revolutionary idea of replacing nobility of blood with nobility of virtue.
On spirituality, Confucius said to Chi Lu, one of his students: "You are not yet able to serve men, how can you serve spirits?"
Zǐgòng, a disciple of Confucius, said that Tiān had set the master on the path to become a wise man (''Analects'' 9.6).
These additions more than tripled the number of officially recognized descendants of Confucius.
Chinese folk religion's temples and kinship ancestral shrines on special occasions may choose Confucian liturgy (that is called 儒 ''rú'', or sometimes 正统 ''zhèngtǒng'', meaning "orthoprax" ritual style) led by Confucian priests (礼生 ''lǐshēng'') to worship the gods enshrined, instead of Taoist or popular ritual.
Xunzi cites "songs and laughter, weeping and lamentation... rice and millet, fish and meat... the wearing of ceremonial caps, embroidered robes, and patterned silks, or of fasting clothes and mourning clothes... spacious rooms and secluded halls, soft mats, couches and benches" as vital parts of the fabric of ''li''.
Matthew Sommers has also indicated that during the Qing dynasty, the imperial government began to realize the utopian nature of enforcing the "cult of chastity."
Numerous opinions and interpretations of Confucianism (of which many are actually opposed by Confucianism) were invented.
Especially the works of Liu Zhi such as ''Tiānfāng Diǎnlǐ''（天方典禮）sought to harmonize Islam with not only Confucianism but also with Daoism and is considered to be one of the crowning achievements of the Chinese Islamic culture.
The this-worldly concern of Confucianism rests on the belief that human beings are fundamentally good, and teachable, improvable, and perfectible through personal and communal endeavor especially self-cultivation and self-creation.
The character ''rú'' in ancient China has diverse meanings.
Overall, Confucians believed governments should place more emphasis on ''li'' and rely much less on penal punishment when they govern.
There are still many other elements, such as ''chéng'' (誠/诚, honesty), ''shù'' (恕, kindness and forgiveness), ''lián'' (廉, honesty and cleanness), ''chǐ'' (恥/耻, shame, judge and sense of right and wrong),''yǒng'' (勇, bravery), ''wēn'' (溫/温, kind and gentle), ''liáng'' (良, good, kindhearted), ''gōng'' (恭, respectful, reverent), ''jiǎn'' (儉/俭, frugal), ''ràng'' (讓/让, modestly, self-effacing).
In the late twentieth century Confucian work ethic has been credited with the rise of the East Asian economy.
Individuals can realise their humanity and become one with Heaven through the contemplation of this order.
A virtuous plebeian who cultivates his qualities can be a "gentleman", while a shameless son of the king is only a "small man".
Chaste widows were revered as heroes during the Ming and Qing periods.
Confucianism revolves around the pursuit of the unity of the self and ''Tiān'' (Heaven, or God), and the relationship of humankind to the Heaven.
It is exemplified by a normal adult's protective feelings for children.
In Confucian philosophy, filial piety (, ''xiào'') is a virtue of respect for one's parents and ancestors.
The moral-spiritual ideal of Confucianism conciles both the inner and outer polarities of self-cultivation and world redemption, synthesised in the ideal of "sageliness within and kingliness without".
We should not underestimate the significance of this point, as education was the bottom line qualification for being a junzi or "noble person,"...her example suggests that the Confucian prescription for a meaningful life as a woman was apparently not stifling for all women.
During the Ming-Qing era, prominent Confucians such as Wang Yangming promoted individuality and independent thinking as a counterweight to subservience to authority.
The ''junzi'' disciplines himself.
Yán Huí, Confucius's most outstanding student, once asked his master to describe the rules of ''rén'' and Confucius replied, "one should see nothing improper, hear nothing improper, say nothing improper, do nothing improper".
Over the following centuries the system grew until finally almost anyone who wished to become an official had to prove his worth by passing written government examinations.
This idea is developed further in the Great Learning, and is tightly linked with the Taoist concept of wu wei (): the less the king does, the more gets done.
*''Zhì'' (智, knowledge);
Although this is a relatively rare instance of a female Confucian voice, Ban Zhao almost entirely accepts the prevailing views concerning women's proper roles; they should be silent, hard-working, and compliant.
Another new idea, that of meritocracy, led to the introduction of the imperial examination system in China.
She wrote the ''Nüjie'' ostensibly for her daughters, instructing them on how to live proper Confucian lives as wives and mothers.
In later centuries, Confucianism heavily influenced many educated martial artists of great influence, such as Sun Lutang, especially from the 19th century onwards, when empty-handed martial arts in China became more widespread and had begun to more readily absorb philosophical influences from Confucianism, Buddhism and Daoism.
* "Refined school" ()
Analects 10.11 tells that Confucius always took a small part of his food and placed it on the sacrificial bowls as an offering to his ancestors.
Some South Koreans believe Confucianism has not contributed to the modernization of South Korea.
The Dominicans and Franciscans argued that Chinese ancestral worship was a form of idolatry that was contradictory to the tenets of Christianity.
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;If language be not in accordance with the truth of things, affairs cannot be carried on to success.
The system of "virtue" he proposed was one of respect for others, including for their position in society, focusing on this as a system of principles, not mysticism.
Her only departure from the standard male versions of this orthodoxy is that she insists on the necessity of educating girls and women.
In the 16th and the 17th centuries, the earliest European arrivals in China, the Christian Jesuits, considered Confucianism to be an ethical system, not a religion, and one that was compatible with Christianity.
The superior man Junzi cannot care about the everything, just as he cannot go to check all himself!
There are many characteristics of the ''junzi'': he can live in poverty, he does more and speaks less, he is loyal, obedient and knowledgeable.
Confucianism "largely defined the mainstream discourse on gender in China from the Han dynasty onward."
The term can also be applied to general obedience, and is used in religious titles in Christian Churches, like "filial priest" or "filial vicar" for a cleric whose church is subordinate to a larger parish.
This transformation of the self can be extended to the family and society to create a harmonious fiduciary community.
Some scholars also consider the reconstruction of lineage churches and their ancestral temples, as well as cults and temples of natural and national gods within broader Chinese traditional religion, as part of the revival of Confucianism.
What the superior man requires is just that in his words there may be nothing incorrect."
Fundamentally, then, social disorder can stem from the failure to call things by their proper names, and his solution to this was ''zhèngmíng'' ().
Regarding personal gods (''shén'', energies who emanate from and reproduce the ''Tiān'') enliving nature, in ''Analects'' 6.22 Confucius says that it is appropriate (義/义, ''yì'') for people to worship (敬, ''jìng'') them, though through proper rites (禮/礼, ''lǐ''), implying respect of positions and discretion.
Why must there be such rectification?"
Many of these Confucians suffered and sometimes died because of their conviction and action.
Some Confucians proposed the perfectibility of all human beings with learning ''li'' as an important part of that process.
For example, South Korean writer Kim Kyong-il wrote an essay entitled "Confucius Must Die For the Nation to Live" (공자가 죽어야 나라가 산다, ''gongjaga jug-eoya naraga sanda'').
(''Analects'' XII, 11, trans.
The principle of Heaven (''Tiān lǐ'' 天理 or ''Dào'' 道), is the order of the creation and divine authority, monistic in its structure.
In 2009, for the first time women (and ethnic minorities and people living overseas) were officially recognized as being descendants of Confucius.
Confucian ethics is characterized by the promotion of virtues, encompassed by the Five Constants, or the ''wǔ cháng'' (五常), extrapolated by Confucian scholars during the Han Dynasty.
In original Confucianism the concept of Tiān expresses a form of pantheism.
In more general terms, filial piety means to be good to one's parents; to take care of one's parents; to engage in good conduct not just towards parents but also outside the home so as to bring a good name to one's parents and ancestors; to perform the duties of one's job well so as to obtain the material means to support parents as well as carry out sacrifices to the ancestors; not be rebellious; show love, respect and support; display courtesy; ensure male heirs, uphold fraternity among brothers; wisely advise one's parents, including dissuading them from moral unrighteousness, for blindly following the parents' wishes is not considered to be ''xiao''; display sorrow for their sickness and death; and carry out sacrifices after their death.
Filial piety is considered a key virtue in Chinese culture, and it is the main concern of a large number of stories.
Confucius also said, "''rén'' is not far off; he who seeks it has already found it".
''Rén'' () is the Confucian virtue denoting the good feeling a virtuous human experiences when being altruistic.
This can be true especially in times of social chaos, such as during the period of the Ming-Qing transition.
If the ruler is evil, then the people have the right to overthrow him.
In the ''Dàtóng shū'' (《大同書/大同书》) it is defined as "to form one body with all things" and "when the self and others are not separated ... compassion is aroused".
A good Confucian is also expected to remonstrate with his superiors when necessary.
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;If names be not correct, language is not in accordance with the truth of things.
When actual, the king's personal virtue (''de'') spreads beneficent influence throughout the kingdom.
In this context, it is more readily construed as meaning "school of thought", since it is also used to construct the names of philosophical schools contemporary with Confucianism: for example, the Chinese names for Legalism and Mohism end in ''jiā''.
Even some women of the literate elite, for whom Confucianism was quite explicitly the norm, were able to flourish by living their lives according to that model.
This did not exclude martial arts culture.
Confucianism holds one in contempt, either passively or actively, for failure to uphold the cardinal moral values of ''rén'' and ''yì''.
"Confucian businessmen" (儒商人 ''rúshāngrén'', also "refined businessman") is a recently recovered term that defines people of the entrepreneurial or economic elite that recognise their social responsibility and therefore apply Confucian culture to their business.
* "Kong family's business" ()
The idea of a "Confucian Church" as the state religion of China has roots in the thought of Kang Youwei, an exponent of the early New Confucian search for a regeneration of the social relevance of Confucianism, at a time when it was de-institutionalised with the collapse of the Qing dynasty and the Chinese empire.
Many Confucians also realized that loyalty and filial piety have the potential of coming into conflict with one another.
Later, Zhu Xi defined ''junzi'' as second only to the sage.
In ''Analects'' 9.5 Confucius says that a person can know the movement of the Tiān, and speaks about his own sense of having a special place in the universe.
In late 2015 many Confucian personalities formally established a national Holy Confucian Church (孔聖會/孔圣会 ''Kǒngshènghuì'') in China to unify the many Confucian congregations and civil society organisations.
Some examples include, "weak", "soft", "to tame", "to comfort" and "to educate" or "to refine".
In contemporary China, the Confucian revival has developed into different, yet interwoven, directions: the proliferation of Confucian schools or academies (''shuyuan'' 书院), the resurgence of Confucian rites (''chuántǒng lǐyí'' 传统礼仪), and the birth of new forms of Confucian activity on the popular level, such as the Confucian communities (''shèqū rúxué'' 社区儒学).
In the 20th century Confucianism's influence reduced greatly.
''Rúxué'' contains ''xué'', "study".
Examples of such ''xiaoren'' individuals can range from those who continually indulge in sensual and emotional pleasures all day to the politician who is interested merely in power and fame; neither sincerely aims for the long-term benefit of others.
He reportedly grew up in a time of instability in the region that would someday be known as China, and failed in his ambitions to become a high minister of the national government.
All of these things add to the complexity of the issue of women in Confucian teaching.
Confucianism was usually characterized by Western scholarship, up until the mid-1990s, as a sexist, patriarchal ideology that was responsible for the severe subjugation and oppression of women in pre-modern China.
Confucian thought focuses on the cultivation of virtue and maintenance of ethics.
* "Confucius' teaching" ()
There had been a difference between textual teaching and the actual social practice by the Confucians and society in general throughout all of China's dynasties.
In South Korea, there has long been criticism of Confucianism.
The term, however, is notably used to construct the names of religions in Chinese: the terms for Islam, Judaism, Christianity, and other religions in Chinese all end with ''jiào''.
With the latter definition, Confucianism is religious, even if non-theistic, in the sense that it "performs some of the basic psycho-social functions of full-fledged religions".
The Five Bonds are: ruler to ruled, father to son, husband to wife, elder brother to younger brother, friend to friend.
''Rújiā'' contains the character ''jiā'', which literally means "house" or "family".
As a result, by the late Qing period, Qing officials became more tolerant and allowed practices such as widow remarrying to stand.
The Taiping Rebellion, New Culture Movement and Cultural Revolution are some upsurges of those waves in China.
Confucianism influenced Gottfried Leibniz, who was attracted to the philosophy because of its perceived similarity to his own.
In all other relationships, high reverence is usually held for elders.
The only relationship where respect for elders isn't stressed was the friend to friend relationship, where mutual equal respect is emphasized instead.
As Confucius stated "a prince should employ his minister according to the rules of propriety; ministers should serve their prince with faithfulness (loyalty)".
There is government, when the prince is prince, and the minister is minister; when the father is father, and the son is son.
These names do not use the name "Confucius" at all, but instead center on the figure or ideal of the Confucian scholar; however, the suffixes ''jiā'', ''jiào'' and ''xué'' carry different implications as to the nature of Confucianism itself.
This idea may be traced back to the ancient shamanic beliefs of the king being the axle between the sky, human beings, and the Earth, reflected in the Chinese idea of the Mandate of Heaven.
The Analects that are generally attributed to Confucius actually appear to have been compiled after his death, by followers one or two generations removed, perhaps during the Warring States period (476 BC-221 BC), though no copies exist older than 50 BC, with some scholars saying the document may have been compiled as recently as 140 BC.
Confucius created the model of ''junzi'', gentleman, which can be achieved by any individual.
As he writes, "Neo-Confucian writings do not necessarily reflect either the prevailing social practices or the scholars' own attitudes and practices in regard to actual women."
*''Jié'' (節/节, continency);
He gave an explanation of ''zhengming'' to one of his disciples.
''Rújiào'' and ''Kǒngjiào'' contain the Chinese character ''jiào'', the noun "teaching" or "transmission", used in such terms as "education", or "educator".
In 2009 Zhou Beichen founded another institution that inherits the idea of Kang Youwei's Confucian Church, the Holy Hall of Confucius (孔圣堂 ''Kǒngshèngtáng'') in Shenzhen affiliated with the Federation of Confucian Culture of Qufu City, the first of a nationwide movement of congregations and civil organisations that was unified in 2015 by the Holy Confucian Church (孔圣会 ''Kǒngshènghuì'').
With particular emphasis on the importance of the family and social harmony, rather than on an otherworldly source of spiritual values, the core of Confucianism is humanistic.
Confucius himself was a ritual and sacrificial master.
Although Confucius claimed that he never invented anything but was only transmitting ancient knowledge (''Analects'' 7.1), he did produce a number of new ideas.
The ultimate goal is that the government behaves much like a family, the ''junzi'' being a beacon of filial piety.
Marxists during the Cultural Revolution described Confucius as the general representative of the class of slave owners.
Scholars recognize that classification ultimately depends on how one defines religion.
In ''Analects'' 7.23 Confucius says that he has no doubt left that the Tiān gave him life, and from it he had developed the virtue (Dé, 德).
The Master said, "How uncultivated you are, Yu!
The use of the term Confucianism has been avoided by some modern scholars, who favor ''Ruism'' or ''Ruists'' in lieu of Confucianism.
While juniors are considered in Confucianism to owe their seniors reverence, seniors also have duties of benevolence and concern toward juniors.
It is not until the 12th century AD, though, that it has become such an accepted part of the state that the Analects themselves are integrated into civil service tests.
Since social harmony is of utmost importance, without the proper rectification of names, society would essentially crumble and "undertakings would not be completed."
In ''Analects'' 8.19 he says that the lives of the sages and their communion with Tian are interwoven.
Such duties are also extended to the dead, where the living stand as sons to their deceased family.
Several different terms are used in different situations, several of which are of modern origin:
Finally, some Confucian texts like the ''Chunqiu Fanlu'' 春秋繁露 also has passages which suggest a more equal relationship between a husband and his wife.
Though in his own day, Confucius had rejected the practice of Martial Arts (with the exception of Archery), he did serve under rulers who used military power extensively to achieve their goals.
From the late 17th century onwards a whole body of literature known as the Han Kitab developed amongst the Hui Muslims of China who infused Islamic thought with Confucianism.
Kang modeled his ideal "Confucian Church" after European national Christian churches, as a hierarchical and centralised institution, closely bound to the state, with local church branches, devoted to the worship and the spread of the teachings of Confucius.
Confucianism focuses on the practical order that is given by a this-worldly awareness of the ''Tiān''.
*''Xiào'' (孝, filial piety);
* "Refined doctrine" ()
Moreover, Mencius indicated that if the ruler is incompetent, he should be replaced.
''Yì'' (義/义) is the upholding of righteousness and the moral disposition to do good.
*''Rén'' (仁, benevolence, humaneness);
* "Refined studies" ()
Ruism, as he states, is more faithful to the original Chinese name for the school.
Ever since Europeans first encountered Confucianism, the issue of how Confucianism should be classified has been subject to debate.
Zi-lu said, "The vassal of Wei has been waiting for you, in order with you to administer the government.
Another modern proponent of the institutionalisation of Confucianism in a state church is Jiang Qing.
*''Zhōng'' (忠, loyalty);
Confucianism developed from what was later called the Hundred Schools of Thought from the teachings of the Chinese philosopher Confucius (551–479 BCE), who considered himself a retransmitter of the values of the Zhou dynasty golden age of several centuries before.
Confucius believed that social disorder often stemmed from failure to perceive, understand, and deal with reality.
It is the virtue-form of Heaven.
The ''Tiān'' can also be compared to the ''Brahman'' of Hindu and Vedic traditions.
Traditionally, cultures and countries in the East Asian cultural sphere are strongly influenced by Confucianism, including mainland China, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Macau, Korea, Japan, and Vietnam, as well as various territories settled predominantly by Chinese people, such as Singapore.
In the Chinese language, the character ''rú'' 儒 meaning "scholar" or "learned man" is generally used both in the past and the present to refer to things related to Confucianism.
*''Yì'' (義/义, righteousness or justice);
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;When punishments are not properly awarded, the people do not know how to move hand or foot.
The New Culture intellectuals of the early twentieth century blamed Confucianism for China's weaknesses.
Three of these use ''rú''.
In 2005 the Center for the Study of Confucian Religion was established, and ''guoxue'' education started to be implemented in public schools.
The ''junzi'' enforces his rule over his subjects by acting virtuously himself.
"lord's child"), which originally signified the younger, non-inheriting, offspring of a noble, became, in Confucius' work, an epithet having much the same meaning and evolution as the English "gentleman".
Using stricter definitions of religion, Confucianism has been described as a moral science or philosophy.
"You are wide off the mark!
In ''Analects'' 3.12 he explains that religious rituals produce meaningful experiences.
Like filial piety, loyalty was often subverted by the autocratic regimes in China.
''Li'' embodies the entire web of interaction between humanity, human objects, and nature.
Despite its literal meaning, any righteous man willing to improve himself can become a ''junzi''.
Particular duties arise from one's particular situation in relation to others.
Thought to be a real historic figure, Confucius was born on September 28, 551 BC.
This view was reinforced by Pope Benedict XIV, who ordered a ban on Chinese rituals.
Should the ruler be surrounded by ''xiaoren'' as opposed to ''junzi'', his governance and his people will suffer due to their small-mindness.
(''Analects'' XIII, 3, tr.
Starting from the Han period onward, Confucians in general began to gradually teach that a virtuous woman was supposed to follow the lead of the males in her family, especially the father before her marriage and the husband after she marries.
Some argue therefore that despite Confucius' disdain with martial culture, his teachings became of much relevance to it.
It is considered the essence of the human being, endowed by Heaven, and at the same time the means by which man can act according to the principle of Heaven (天理, ''Tiān lǐ'') and become one with it.
''Rén'' is close to man and never leaves him.
The most enthusiast New Confucians proclaim the uniqueness and superiority of Confucian Chinese culture, and have generated some popular sentiment against Western cultural influences in China.
It is thought that his pure virtue would lead others to follow his example.
Also, the Hong Kong Confucian Academy has expanded its activities to the mainland, with the construction of statues of Confucius, Confucian hospitals, restoration of temples and sponsorship of other activities.
''Tiān'' (天), commonly translated as "Heaven" or "Sky", but philologically meaning the "Great One", "Great Whole", is a key concept in Confucianism.
The individual stands simultaneously in several different relationships with different people: as a junior in relation to parents and elders, and as a senior in relation to younger siblings, students, and others.
*''Lǐ'' (禮/礼, proper rite);
Confucian liturgy (that is called 儒 ''rú'', or sometimes 正統/正统 ''zhèngtǒng'', meaning "orthoprax" ritual style) led by Confucian priests or "sages of rites" (禮生/礼生 ''lǐshēng'') to worship the gods in public and ancestral Chinese temples is preferred in various occasions, by Confucian religious groups and for civil religious rites, over Taoist or popular ritual.
The same is true with the husband and wife relationship where the husband needs to show benevolence towards his wife and the wife needs to respect the husband in return.
This theme of mutuality still exists in East Asian cultures even to this day.
Other philosophical currents, like Mohism, developed a more theistic idea of the Tiān.
Being well received by the population, even Confucian preachers started to appear on television since 2006.
''Rén'' (仁, "benevolence" or "humaneness") is the essence of the human being which manifests as compassion.
Other studies, for example Cristobal Kay's ''Why East Asia Overtook Latin America: Agrarian Reform, Industrialization, and Development'', have attributed the Asian growth to other factors, for example the character of agrarian reforms, "state-craft" (state capacity), and interaction between agriculture and industry.
By being the "calm center" around which the kingdom turns, the king allows everything to function smoothly and avoids having to tamper with the individual parts of the whole.
The Master replied, "What is necessary to rectify names."
Confucian ethics are described as humanistic.
The Jesuits, including Matteo Ricci, saw Chinese rituals as "civil rituals" that could co-exist alongside the spiritual rituals of Catholicism.
