The Portuguese founded a fort at the port city of Colombo in 1517 and gradually extended their control over the coastal areas and inland.
He sought a way to transport the Potosi's silver to Europe.
Mem de Sá was supporting of Jesuit priests, Fathers Manuel da Nóbrega and José de Anchieta, who founded São Vicente in 1532, and São Paulo, in 1554.
Animals were another important factor for Spanish triumph.
In 1534 the explorer French Jacques Cartier describe and map the Gulf of Saint Lawrence and the shores of the Saint Lawrence River.
In 1536, Dominican friar Bartolomé de las Casas went to Oaxaca to participate in a series of discussions and debates among the Bishops of the Dominican and Franciscan orders.
They not only fought in the battlefield but served as interpreters, informants, servants, teachers, physicians, and scribes.
The expedition was ordered by Philip II of Spain, after whom the Philippines had earlier been named by Villalobos.
China gained control of Taiwan in 1683, but the Portuguese and Spanish maintained a hold on trade with Chinese cities; the Portuguese operated from Macau and other cities, the Spanish controlled Manila.
In 1511, the Portuguese were the first Europeans to reach the city of Guangzhou by the sea, and they settled on its port for a commercial monopoly of trade with other nations.
He claimed to have been the first person to plant wheat in Mexico.
In 1630 the West India Company conquered part of Brazil, and the colony of New Holland (capital Mauritsstad, present-day Recife) was founded.
Attracting settlers proved difficult, however, the Jewish settlement was a success and their descendants settled many parts of Brazil.
That same year, the Portuguese, desiring a commercial alliance, sent an ambassador, Duarte Fernandes, to the kingdom of Ayudhya, where he was well received by king Ramathibodi II.
Stories included the half-fabulous Christian Empire of "Prester John", the kingdom of the White Queen on the "Western Nile" (Sénégal River), the Fountain of Youth, cities of Gold in North and South America such as Quivira, Zuni-Cibola Complex, and El Dorado, and wonderful kingdoms of the Ten Lost Tribes and women named Amazons.
The viceroy of New Spain Antonio de Mendoza, for whom is named the Codex Mendoza, commissioned several expeditions to explore and establish settlements in the northern lands of New Spain in 1540–42.
On the one hand, the introduction of the horse and other domesticated pack animals allowed them greater mobility unknown to the Indian cultures.
Allying himself with Ternate's ruler, Serrão constructed a fortress on that tiny island and served as the head of a mercenary band of Portuguese seamen under the service of one of the two local feuding sultans who controlled most of the spice trade.
On land, these wars combined some European methods with techniques from Muslim bandits in Al-Andalus.
Dávila made an agreement with Francisco Pizarro and Diego de Almagro, which brought about the discovery of Peru, but withdrew in 1526 for a small compensation, having lost confidence in the outcome.
Gonzalo Guerrero was a Mayan war leader for Nachan can, Lord of Chactemal.
In 1565, the application of this principle in the Pacific Ocean led the Spanish discovering the Manila Galleon trade route.
It initially became part of the Portuguese province of Arabia and Ethiopia and was administered by a governor general.
In the 1620s and 1630s, the Dutch West India Company established many trade posts or colonies.
Earlier expeditions by Diogo Dias and Afonso de Albuquerque had explored that part of the Indian Ocean, and discovered several islands new to Europeans.
European young men enlisted in the army because it was one way out of poverty.
In the Red Sea, Massawa was the most northerly point frequented by the Portuguese until 1541, when a fleet under Estevão da Gama penetrated as far as Suez.
The rulers of the competing island states of Ternate and Tidore also sought Portuguese assistance and the newcomers were welcomed in the area as buyers of supplies and spices during a lull in the regional trade due to the temporary disruption of Javanese and Malay sailings to the area following the 1511 conflict in Malacca.
Apart from their religious and scientific aspects, these voyages of discovery were highly profitable.
An early motive for exploration was the search for Cipango, the place where gold was born.
They discovered new routes, ocean currents, trade winds, crops, spices and other products.
Fernão Vaz Dourado (Goa ~1520 – ~1580), produced  work of extraordinary quality and beauty, giving him a reputation as one of the best cartographers of the time.
Less known nationals from Spain and Portugal continued to conduct exploration work, support conquest and colonization.
Following Portuguese missionary work, there have been large Christian communities in eastern Indonesia particularly among the Ambonese.
The first epidemic was recorded in 1529 and killed the emperor Huayna Capac, the father of Atahualpa.
Their fellow conquistador Sebastián de Belalcázar, who had gone forth without Pizarro's approval, had already reached Quito.
Pedro de Ursúa was killed by his subordinate Lope de Aguirre who crowned himself king while looking for ''El Dorado''.
Various places in Africa and the Americas have been named after the imagined cities made of gold, rivers of gold and precious stones.
Under John II (1481–1495) the fortress of São Jorge da Mina, the modern Elmina, was founded  for the protection of the Guinea trade.
The Spanish fishery in Terranova declined over conflicts between Spain and other European powers during the late 16th and early 17th centuries.
Afonso I wrote a series of letters to the kings of Portugal Manuel I and João III of Portugal concerning to the behavior of the Portuguese in his country and their role in the developing slave trade, complaining of Portuguese complicity in purchasing illegally enslaved people and the connections between Afonso's men, Portuguese mercenaries in Kongo's service and the capture and sale of slaves by Portuguese.
In the Iberian peninsula, in a situation of constant conflict, warfare and daily life were strongly interlinked.
King's army officers taught military arts.
Further epidemics of smallpox broke out in 1533, 1535, 1558 and 1565, as well as typhus in 1546, influenza in 1558, diphtheria in 1614 and measles in 1618.
When the others were struck ill, Estevanico continued alone, opening up what is now New Mexico and Arizona.
"In other respects, the affairs of the island were managed by the local 'king,' the predecessor of the Mwinyi Mkuu of Dunga."
European power in the region was weak and Ternate became an expanding, fiercely Islamic and anti-European state under the rule of Sultan Baab Ullah (r. 1570 – 1583) and his son Sultan Said.
The Venetian Sebastiano Caboto was Sebastián Caboto, Georg von Speyer hispanized as Jorge de la Espira, Eusebio Francesco Chini Hispanicised as Eusebio Kino, Wenceslaus Linck was Wenceslao Linck, Ferdinand Konščak, was Fernando Consag, Amerigo Vespucci was Américo Vespucio, and the Portuguese Aleixo Garcia was known as Alejo García in the Castilian army.
They spent years enslaved by the Ananarivo of the Louisiana Gulf Islands.
Through these expeditions and the Dutch–Portuguese War, Colonial Brazil expanded from the small limits of the Tordesilhas Line to roughly the same borders as current Brazil.
The Franciscans used a method of mass conversion, sometimes baptizing many thousands of Indians in a day.
Mem de Sá was the third Governor-General of Brazil in 1556, succeeding Duarte da Costa, in Salvador of Bahia when France founded several colonies.
In 1520-1521, João Álvares Fagundes was granted donatary rights to the inner islands of the Gulf of St. Lawrence.
As a result of his expedition, the 1529 Diego Ribeiro world map outlined the East coast of North America almost perfectly.
It was first used by the Portuguese, and later by the Spanish.
Cook and Borah of the University of California at Berkeley believe that the indigenous population in Mexico declined from 25.2 million in 1518 to 700,000 people in 1623, less than 3% of the original population.
The gold brought home from Guinea stimulated the commercial energy of the Portuguese, and its European neighbours, especially Spain.
Epidemic disease is commonly cited as the primary reason for the population collapse.
On the return trip, Francisco Serrão was shipwrecked at Hitu island (northern Ambon) in 1512.
The event closed the Anza Trail, crippling the overland population growth of the colony.
He discovered a great waterfall and the Chaco Plain.
The Spanish silver fleet, which carried silver from Spanish colonies to Spain, were seized by Piet Heyn in 1628.
Later, when Spain established a route to the Indies from the west, Portugal arranged a second treaty, the Treaty of Zaragoza.
Horses and mules carried them, pigs fed them and dogs fought for them.
They established whaling stations at the former, mainly in Red Bay, and probably established some in the latter as well.
Others were born into hidalgo families, and as such they were members of the Spanish nobility with some studies but without economic resources, even some rich nobility families members become soldiers or missionaries but mostly without to be the heir firstborn.
The chroniclers Pedro Cieza de León, Gonzalo Fernández de Oviedo, Diego Durán, Juan de Castellanos and Fray Pedro Simón wrote about the Americas.
Rodeleros (also called espadachines, "swordsmen") were equipped with steel shields or bucklers known as ''rodela'' and swords, usually of the side-sword type.
Wars were mainly between clans, expelling intruders.
These tables revolutionized navigation, enabling  latitude calculations.
Francisco Vázquez de Coronado's 1540–1542 expedition began as a search for the fabled Cities of Gold, but after learning from natives in New Mexico of a large river to the west, he sent García López de Cárdenas to lead a small contingent to find it.
While Spanish soldiers went to the battlefield to kill their enemies, the Aztecs and Mayas captured their enemies for use as sacrificial victims to their gods—a process called "flower war" by Spanish historians.
The first travel around the world.
Mascarenhas served as Captain-Major of the Portuguese colony of Malacca from 1525 to 1526, and as viceroy of Goa, capital of the Portuguese possessions in Asia, from 1554 until his death in 1555.
Many foreigners Hispanicised their names and/or converted to Catholicism to serve the Castilian Crown.
Abu Abdallah's uncle, Abd Al-Malik, had taken it from Abu Abdallah with Ottoman Empire support.
During the 1500s, the Spanish began to travel through and colonize North America.
An expedition commanded by Pizarro and his brothers explored south from what is today Panama, reaching Inca territory by 1526.
However, Cárdenas was reportedly unimpressed with the canyon, assuming the width of the Colorado River at six feet (1.8 m) and estimating -tall rock formations to be the size of a man.
Dávila was a soldier in wars against Moors at Granada in Spain, and in North Africa, under Pedro Navarro intervening in the Conquest of Oran.
By a series of successful expeditions, he gradually extended the Dutch possessions from Sergipe on the south to São Luís de Maranhão in the north.
For decades the Spanish Netherlands ports produced more revenue than the colonies since all goods brought from Spain, Mediterranean possessions, and the colonies were sold directly there to neighbouring European countries: wheat, olive oil, wine, silver, spice, wool and silk were big businesses.
They grew from 200 tons capacity in the 15th century to 500.
The Emperor commissioned bishop Pedro de la Gasca to restore the peace, naming him president of the ''Audiencia'' and providing him with unlimited authority to punish and pardon the rebels.
After being declared innocent of the charges against him he was sent back to reassume his throne, but died en route at Malacca in 1545.
These war dogs were used against barely clothed troops.
In 1536 Francisco de Ulloa, the first documented European to reach the Colorado River, sailed up the Gulf of California and a short distance into the river's delta.
Worried about the foreign incursions and hoping to find mineral riches, the Portuguese crown decided to send large missions to take possession of the land and combat the French.
Buenos Aires was established in 1536, establishing the Governorate of the Río de la Plata.
Some European countries, especially France, were also sending excursions to Brazil to extract brazilwood.
Juan Ponce de León equipped three ships with at least 200 men at his own expense and set out from Puerto Rico on 4 March 1513 to Florida and surrounding coastal area.
The Portuguese following the maritime trade routes of Muslims and Chinese traders, sailed the Indian ocean.
Dávila sent Gil González Dávila to explore northward, and Pedro de Alvarado to explore Guatemala.
The treaty gave to Portugal all lands which might be discovered east of a  meridian drawn from the Arctic Pole to the Antarctic, at a distance of  west of Cape Verde.
They explored a part of the route visited by Coronado in New Mexico and other parts in the southwestern United States between 1540 and 1542.
This typical path of disease transmission moved much faster than the conquistadors so that as they advanced, resistance weakened.
A written report about the results was mandatory.
After the Iberian Union period, the Eastern Strip were settled by Portugal.
In 1544, Lope de Aguirre and Melchor Verdugo (a ''converso'' Jew) were at the side of Peru's first viceroy Blasco Núñez Vela, who had arrived from Spain with orders to implement the New Laws and suppress the Encomiendas.
This has added to the body of epidemiological evidence indicating that cocoliztli epidemics (Nahuatl name for viral haemorrhagic fever) were indigenous fevers transmitted by rodents and aggravated by the drought.
These specially trained dogs were feared because of their strength and ferocity.
It had a high rounded stern with large aftcastle, forecastle and bowsprit at the stem.
The Spanish peninsular Muslims were suspected of connivance with Northern African Muslim pirates.
'Jacome of Majorca' is even sometimes described as the head of Henry's legendary observatory and "school" at Sagres.
Later they were enslaved by the ''Hans'', the ''Capoques'' and others.
The Comoros at the north proved to be a more practical port of call.
In Mombasa, Dom Vasco da Gama resorted to piracy, looting Arab merchant ships, which were generally unarmed trading vessels without heavy cannons.
The origin of many people in mixed expeditions was not always distinguished.
By contrast, Europe had moved to 'sporadic' warfare in the Middle Ages due to the availability of professionally mercenary armies.
The American natives  lacked immunity and resistance to these infections.
However, in the mountains and jungles, the Spaniards were less able to use narrow Amerindian roads and bridges made for pedestrian traffic, which were sometimes no wider than a few feet.
Rodríguez de Fonseca effectively became minister for the Indies and laid the foundations for the creation of a colonial bureaucracy, combining legislative, executive and judicial functions.
In this first group of Jesuit missionaries were included Spaniards Cosme de Torres and Juan Fernandez.
After Mexico fell, Hernán Cortés's enemies, Bishop Fonseca, Diego Velázquez de Cuéllar, Diego Columbus and Francisco Garay were mentioned in the Cortés' fourth letter to the King in which he describes himself as the victim of a conspiracy.
In 1519 Dávila founded Darién, then in 1524 he founded Panama City and moved his capital there laying the basis for the exploration of South America's west coast and the subsequent conquest of Peru.
This was disputed in vain, and in 1777 Spain confirmed Portuguese sovereignty.
Books such as The Travels of Marco Polo fuelled rumours of mythical places.
The army had a royal official, the "veedor".
In the struggle between Holland and Portugal for the possession of Brazil the Dutch were supported by the Jews.
Sir Walter Raleigh and some Italian, Spanish, Dutch, French and Portuguese expeditions were looking for the wonderful Guiana empire that gave its name to the present day countries of the Guianas.
Portuguese explored the Atlantic, Indian and Pacific oceans before the Iberian Union period (1580–1640).
Pizarro was named governor and captain of all conquests in New Castile" The Viceroyalty of Peru was established in 1542, encompassing all Spanish holdings in South America.
Image:Imperio Español Completo.svg|Spanish Empire
They were looking for gold in foreign kingdoms.
Thus, Portugal was allied with Britain and preserved its possessions for a longer time.
As time passed, the Portuguese created the Viceroyalty of Brazil.
Diogo Cão, or Can, discovered the Congo in 1482 and reached Cape Cross in 1486.
Colonization was effectively begun in 1534, when Dom João III divided the territory into twelve hereditary captaincies, a model that had previously been used successfully in the colonization of the Madeira Island, but this arrangement proved problematic and in 1549 the king assigned a Governor-General to administer the entire colony, Tomé de Sousa.
The caravel particularly benefited from a greater capacity to tack.
They had benefited from Guinea's connections with neighbouring Iberians and north African Muslim states.
After several years of open warfare, the Dutch formally withdrew in 1661.
Juan Rodríguez Cabrillo explored the western coastline of Alta California in 1542–43.
The 1492 discovery of the West Indies by Christopher Columbus rendered desirable a delimitation of the Spanish and Portuguese spheres of exploration.
They maintaining trade ports in Congo (M'banza), Angola, Natal (City of Cape Good Hope, in Portuguese "Cidade do Cabo da Boa Esperança"), Mozambique (Sofala), Tanzania (Kilwa Kisiwani), Kenya (Malindi) to Somalia.
Thus dividing the world into one exploration and colonizing areas seemed appropriate.
In 1434 the first consignment of slaves was brought to Lisbon; slave trading was the most profitable branch of Portuguese commerce until India was reached.
By the late 16th century silver imports from America provided one-fifth of Spain's total budget.
Sponsors included governments, the king, viceroys, and local governors backed by rich men.
By 1516 Afonso I sent various of his children and nobles to Europe to study, including his son Henrique Kinu a Mvemba, who was elevated to the status of bishop in 1518.
The tendency to secrecy and falsification of dates casts doubts about the authenticity of many primary sources.
The Spanish presence lasted until 1663, when the settlers and military were moved back to the Philippines.
Diego Velázquez, the governor of Cuba, ordered expeditions, one led by his nephew, Juan de Grijalva to Yucatán and the Hernán Cortés expedition of 1519.
Those routes were dominated first by the republics of Venice and Genoa, and then by the Ottoman Empire after the conquest of Constantinople in 1453.
Many of his charts are large scale.
From 1546 to 1547 Francis Xavier worked in Maluku among the peoples of Ambon Island, Ternate, and Morotai, and laid the foundations for the Christian religion there.
When Italy was ransacked by French and Spanish Armies in the early 1500s, most Italian states were easily defeated by armies practicing sporadic-warfare.
In 1503 or 1504, Zanzibar became part of the Portuguese Empire when Captain Ruy Lourenço Ravasco Marques landed and demanded and received tribute from the sultan in exchange for peace.
Alvarado left South America in exchange for monetary compensation from Pizarro.
Through wars against the French the Portuguese slowly expanded their territory to the southeast, taking Rio de Janeiro in 1567, and to the northwest, taking São Luís in 1615.
In 1680 they reached the far south and founded Sacramento on the bank of the Rio de la Plata, in the Eastern Strip region (present-day Uruguay).
This hands-off approach ended when Portugal established a fort on Pemba around 1635 in response to the Sultan of Mombasa's slaughter of Portuguese residents several years earlier.
In 1535 Sultan Tabariji was deposed and sent to Goa in chains, where he converted to Christianity and changed his name to Dom Manuel.
However, not all conquistadors were Castilian.
Many historians suspect that the real documents would have been placed in the Library of Lisbon.
Following his capture of the city on 24 August 1511, it became a strategic base for Portuguese expansion in the East Indies; consequently the Portuguese were obliged to build a fort they named ''A Famosa'' to defend it.
The strongest big breeds of broad-mouthed dogs were specifically trained for battle.
Emperor Charles V was already using the term "Council of the Indies" in 1519.
Image:The Portuguese Empire.png|Portuguese Empire
Francisco Pizarro had children with more than 40 women.
Image:Philip II's realms in 1598.png|Iberian Union (1581–1640)
Príncipe island was settled in 1500 under a similar arrangement.
In 1624 most of the white inhabitants of the town Pernambuco (Recife), in the future Dutch colony of Brazil were Sephardic Jews who had been banned by the Portuguese Inquisition to this town at the other side of the Atlantic Ocean.
In 1774 Juan Pérez, was exploring  the islands in present-day British Columbia, and Canada.
Later military expedition that crossed the Colorado River at the Yuma Crossing include Juan Bautista de Anza (1774).
Gasca repealed the New Laws, the issue around which the rebellion had been organized.
He also entered into diplomatic relations with Persia.
Africans were also conquistadors in the early Conquest campaigns in the Caribbean and Mexico.
Several historians have hypothesized that John II may have known of the existence of Brazil and North America as early as 1480, thus explaining his wish in 1494 at the signing of the Treaty of Tordesillas, to push the line of influence further west.
Before the Iberian Union period (1580–1640), Spain tried to prevent Portuguese expansion into Brazil with the 1494 Treaty of Tordesillas.
For example, Ioánnis Fokás (known as Juan de Fuca) was a Castilian of Greek origin who discovered the strait that bears his name between Vancouver Island and Washington State in 1592.
Altogether, the Portuguese never had the resources or manpower to control the local trade in spices, and failed in attempts to establish their authority over the crucial Banda Islands, the nearby centre of most nutmeg and mace production.
When traders from Portugal introduced arquebuses and muskets, Iberian warlords were quick to adapt them, giving them a large advantage.
To the Spanish, the sword represented their honour and devotion as a Christian knight.
The state of war continued intermittently for centuries and created a very warlike culture in Iberia.
It is thought that Jehuda Cresques, son of Jewish cartographer Abraham Cresques of Palma in Majorca and Italian-Majorcan Angelino Dulcert were cartographers at the service of Prince Henry.
For example, the Island of California refers to a famous cartographic error propagated on many maps during the 17th and 18th centuries, despite contradictory evidence from various explorers.
Bruno de Heceta first explored the Pacific Northwest.
The high heat and humidity of Central and South America could make heavy iron armour and steel items mostly impractical.The Spanish, from a country with very hot summers, usually had lighter armour.
Another factor was the ability of the conquistadors to manipulate the political situation between indigenous peoples.
From 1502, Ferdinand and later Phillip II forced all Muslims in Castile and Aragon to convert or be expelled.
The results varied throughout the year, which required corrections.
Cardinal Francisco Jiménez de Cisneros was instrumental in a massive campaign to convert Muslims to Christianity.
Conquistadors had overwhelming military advantages over the native peoples.
Garcia looted a booty of silver.
Dutch, French, and English later frequented the port through the Canton System.
When they took control of a territory, the conquistadors usually banned possession of steel swords by their subjects.
They belonged to a more militarily advanced civilization with better techniques, tools, firearms, artillery, iron, steel and domesticated animals.
In their first contacts with native peoples, the firearms, including arquebuses, used by the conquistadors were formidable weapons.
Traveling mostly on foot, they crossed Texas, New Mexico and Arizona, and Mexican states of Tamaulipas, Nuevo León and Coahuila.
The Dutch sacked Bahia in 1604, and temporarily captured the capital Salvador.
In 1540, Hernando de Alarcón and his fleet reached the mouth of the Colorado river, intending to provide additional supplies to Coronado's expedition.
It was particularly valuable to the Portuguese as a recognition of their new-found, particularly when, in 1497–1499, Vasco da Gama completed the voyage to India.
It appears, however, that the Portuguese did not closely administer Zanzibar.
By 1511 there were rumours of undiscovered lands to the northwest of Hispaniola.
After receiving notice from Juan de Grijalva of gold in the area of what is now Tabasco, the governor of Cuba, Diego de Velasquez, sent a larger force than had previously sailed, and appointed Cortes as Captain-General of the Armada.
He fought in the Spanish–American War as a free servant or auxiliary, participating in Spanish expeditions to other parts of Mexico (including Baja California) in the 1520s and 1530s.
Several writers have also suggested the Portuguese were the first Europeans to discover Australia and New Zealand.
Among the famous caravels are ''Berrio'' and ''Caravela Annunciation''.
The Spanish also adopted halberdiers and the ''colunella'', the first of the mixed pike and shot formations.
They were second cousins born in Extremadura, as were many of the Spanish conquerors.
