In the European part of Netherlands, compulsory attendance has been officially suspended since 1 May 1997.
Male Druze and Circassian Israeli citizens are liable, by agreement with their community leaders (Female Druze and Circassian are exempt from service).
In practice only motivated volunteers are selected to join the army in Norway.
Most were subsistence farmers, and it was in everyone's interest to send the men home for harvest-time.
The Court emphasized the principle of the reciprocal rights and duties of citizens:
After some sort of lottery, one can become a conscientious objector.
The first mamluks served the Abbasid caliphs in 9th century Baghdad.
The reasons for refusing to serve are varied.
During the Second World War, both Britain and the Soviet Union conscripted women.
It was renewed (by one vote) in summer 1941.
President Gerald Ford suspended mandatory draft registration in 1975, but President Jimmy Carter reinstated that requirement when the Soviet Union intervened in Afghanistan.
The laws and systems which provide for the conscription of armed forces personnel still remain in place.
This met with considerable outcry among states rights advocates who wrote numerous letters to President Lincoln pleading against the unconstitutionality of such an action.
There was much evasion and overt resistance to the draft, especially in Catholic areas.
Male Ultra-Orthodox Jews may apply for a deferment of draft to study in Yeshiva, and the deferment tends to become an exemption, while female religious Jews can be exempted after presenting "religious declaration" to the IDF authorities, and some (primarily National Religious or Modern Orthodox) choose to volunteer for national service instead.
It enabled the creation of the ''Grande Armée'', what Napoleon Bonaparte called "the nation in arms," which overwhelmed European professional armies that often numbered only into the low tens of thousands.
Since the Cold War was over, so was the direct threat of a war.
Sudanese law allows for conscription of women, but this is not implemented in practice.
These thegns were the land-holding aristocracy of the time and were required to serve with their own armour and weapons for a certain number of days each year.
Even though it is generally thought that conscription has been abolished in the Netherlands, it is compulsory attendance that was abolished, not conscription.
An 1840 proposal for a standing army of 200,000 men included conscription, but it never passed and military service was voluntary before 1862.
The draft failed to bring in high-quality soldiers to the Union armies and instead most draftees were lazy, unmotivated men, men with physical or mental disabilities, and even criminals.
Historically, only men have been subjected to conscription, and only in the late 20th century has this begun to change, though most countries still require only men to serve in the military.
Quotas were assigned in each state, the deficiencies in volunteers to be met by conscription.
In the United States around 1970, for example, the draft resistance movement focused on mandatory draft registration.
Their attacks on ships off the coast of Africa or in the Mediterranean, and subsequent capture of able-bodied men for ransom or sale provided some captives for the Sultan's system.
The modern system of near-universal national conscription for young men dates to the French Revolution in the 1790s, where it became the basis of a very large and powerful military.
As a whole the system began to break down, the loyalty of the Jannissaries became increasingly suspect.
On October 1, 1999 in the Taiwan Area, the Judicial Yuan of the Republic of China in its Interpretation 490 considered that the physical differences between males and females and the derived role differentiation in their respective social functions and lives would not make drafting only males a violation of the Constitution of the Republic of China.
During the Second World War, 1.4 million British men volunteered  for service and 3.2 million were conscripted.
They eventually revolted in Egypt to form the Burgi dynasty.
Expanded-age conscription was common during the Second World War: in Britain, it was commonly known as "call-up" and extended to age 51.
The Moroccan Sultan Moulay Ismail, called  "the Bloodthirsty" (1672–1727), employed a corps of 150,000 black slaves, called his Black Guard.
In the middle of the 14th century, Ottoman Sultan Murad I developed personal troops to be loyal to him, with a slave army called the ''Kapıkulu''.
Every soldier conscripted in the army is taken away from his civilian work, and away from contributing to the economy which funds the military.
Niccolò Machiavelli argued strongly for conscription, seeing the professional armies as the cause of the failure of societal unity in Italy.
Months or years of service amongst the most fit and capable subtracts from the productivity of the economy; add to this the cost of training them, and in some countries paying them.
Not only is the work effort of the conscripts wasted and productivity lost, but professionally skilled conscripts are also difficult to replace in the civilian workforce.
The philosopher Ayn Rand opposed conscription, suggesting that "of all the statist violations of individual rights in a mixed economy, the military draft is the worst.
It can be argued that in a cost-to-benefit ratio, conscription during peace time is not worthwhile.
The U.S. Congress followed on July 17, 1862, with an act authorizing a militia draft within a state when it could not meet its quota with volunteers.
Many states that have abolished conscription therefore still reserve the power to resume it during wartime or times of crisis.
Israel has universal female conscription, although in practice women can avoid service by claiming a religious exemption and over a third of Israeli women do so.
Modern conscription, the massed military enlistment of national citizens, was devised during the French Revolution, to enable the Republic to defend itself from the attacks of European monarchies.
Later records show that Ilkum commitments could become regularly traded.
Scharnhorst advocated adopting the ''levée en masse'', the military conscription used by France.
It is estimated by the British military that in a professional military, a company deployed for active duty in peacekeeping corresponds to three inactive companies at home.
Jean Jacques Rousseau argued vehemently against professional armies, feeling it was the right and privilege of every citizen to participate to the defense of the whole society and a mark of moral decline to leave this business to professionals.
While it was outlawed by the Code of Hammurabi, the hiring of substitutes appears to have been practiced both before and after the creation of the code.
In 1814, President James Madison proposed conscription of 40,000 men for the army, but the War of 1812 ended before Congress took any action.
The captive children were forced to convert to Islam.
In 1940 Congress passed the first peacetime draft legislation, which was led by Grenville Clark.
Later in the war, as the need for manpower grew more and more pressing, many earlier deferment categories became draft eligible.
In 1917, the administration of Woodrow Wilson decided to rely primarily on conscription, rather than voluntary enlistment, to raise military manpower for World War I.
American libertarians oppose conscription and call for the abolition of the Selective Service System, believing that impressment of individuals into the armed forces is "involuntary servitude."
Later on, conscription was used for all men over the age of 18.
Others resisted at the point of induction, when they were ordered to put on a uniform, when they were ordered to carry or use a weapon, or when they were ordered into combat.
The recruits were to be not younger than 17 and not older than 35.
Also, the free Soviet university education system required Department of Chemistry students of both sexes to complete an ROTC course in NBC defense, and such female reservist officers could be conscripted in times of war.
Some people resisted at the point of registration for the draft.
The ''Krümpersystem'' was the beginning of short-term compulsory service in Prussia, as opposed to the long-term conscription previously used.
In all, 8,000,000 men were conscripted in the Second World War, as well as several hundred thousand younger single women.
In 1981 in the United States, several men filed lawsuit in the case ''Rostker v. Goldberg'', alleging that the Selective Service Act of 1948 violates the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment by requiring that only men register with the Selective Service System (SSS).
, Norway currently employs a weak form of mandatory military service for men and women.
While a person could claim to have symptoms (or feign homosexuality) if enough physicians sent letters that a person had a problem, he might well be rejected.
Attempts to effectively deal with the issue were frustrated by conflict between state and local governments on the one hand and the national government of the Confederacy.
Many eligibles pooled their money to cover the cost of anyone drafted.
The decision said the Constitution gave Congress the power to declare war and to raise and support armies.
Most were sent to the factories, but they could volunteer for the Auxiliary Territorial Service (ATS) and other women's services.
He used them to coerce the country into submission.
But men drafted could provide substitutes or, until mid-1864, avoid service by paying commutation money.
According to §81 in the Constitution of Denmark, which was promulgated in 1849: Every male person able to carry arms shall be liable with his person to contribute to the defence of his country under such rules as are laid down by Statute.
In the United States and some other countries, the Vietnam War saw new levels of opposition to conscription and the Selective Service System.
Almost all of the men have been volunteers in recent years.
Over time they became a powerful military caste.
However, this proves extremely problematic in a post-industrial society where educational levels are high and where the workforce is highly sophisticated and a replacement for a conscripted specialist is difficult to find.
As of the early 21st century, many states no longer conscript soldiers, relying instead upon professional militaries with volunteers enlisted to meet the demand for troops.
The Prussians were used to relying on superior organization and tactical factors such as order of battle to focus superior troops against inferior ones.
The Mamluks' excellent fighting abilities, massed Islamic armies, and overwhelming numbers succeeded in overcoming the Christian Crusader fortresses in the Holy Land.
The act established a "liability for military service of all male citizens"; authorized a selective draft of all those between twenty-one and thirty-one years of age (later from eighteen to forty-five); and prohibited all forms of bounties, substitutions, or purchase of exemptions.
There is a right of conscientious objection.
It was possible to arrange a substitute against payment.
The United States was on the verge of drafting women into the Nurse Corps because it anticipated it would need the extra personnel for its planned invasion of Japan.
Members of pacifist religious denominations were exempt.
With the exception of a few exempted classes, this was forbidden by the Code of Hammurabi.
It is only compulsory for men, while women are free to choose to join the Danish army.
A number of distinguished military commanders of the Ottomans, and most of the imperial administrators and upper-level officials of the Empire, such as Pargalı İbrahim Pasha and Sokollu Mehmet Paşa, were recruited in this way.
National service takes 4–12 months.
Others used educational exemptions, became conscientious objectors or pretended to be conscientious objectors, although they might then be drafted for non-combat work, such as serving as a combat medic.
Colonial Pennsylvania (controlled by Quakers) did not have such laws.
In the United States, especially during the Vietnam War, some used political connections to ensure that they were placed well away from any potential harm, serving in what was termed a Champagne unit.
Many people opposed to and facing conscription chose to either apply for classification and assignment to civilian alternative service or noncombatant service within the military as conscientious objectors, or to evade the draft by fleeing to a neutral country.
In the United States, every male resident theoretically must register with the Selective Service System within 30 days following his 18th birthday and is available for a draft.
The Mamluks were usually captive non-Muslim Iranian and Turkish children who had been kidnapped or bought as slaves from the Barbary coasts.
However, due to the large population of China and large pool of candidates available for recruitment, the People's Liberation Army has always had sufficient volunteers, so conscription has not been required in practice at all.
On the western coast of Africa, Berber Muslims captured non-Muslims to put to work as laborers.
It often wasn't worth the Army's time to dispute this claim.
These boards issued draft calls in order of numbers drawn in a national lottery and determined exemptions.
However, this failed to produce adequate enlistees, and with few men still volunteering by late 1862, it became necessary for the first time to impose national conscription.
A conscientious objector is an individual whose personal beliefs are incompatible with military service, or, more often, with any role in the armed forces."
The Confederate Congress on April 16, 1862, passed an act requiring military service for three years from all males aged eighteen to thirty-five not legally exempt, and it later extended the obligation so that all soldiers were required to serve for the duration of the conflict.
, countries that were actively drafting women into military service included
Some conscientious objectors are so for religious reasons — notably, the members of the historic peace churches, pacifist by doctrine; Jehovah's Witnesses, while not strictly pacifists, refuse to participate in the armed forces on the ground that they believe Christians should be neutral in worldly conflicts.
Another option was to sell Ilkum lands and the commitments along with them.
By means of drawing lots it was decided who had to undertake service in the French army.
Some selection systems accommodate these attitudes by providing alternative service outside combat-operations roles or even outside the military, such as Zivildienst (civil service) in Austria and Switzerland.
Medical doctors of both sexes could and would be conscripted (as officers).
When combat troops were needed, some of the militiamen volunteered for short terms of service, for which they were paid.
The cost of conscription can be related to the parable of the broken window.
For the reasons given above, this did not make the system any fairer, and the entire system ended in 1973.
Today, American men aged 18–25 are required to register with the Selective Service, but there has not been a call-up since the Vietnam War and nobody has been prosecuted for violating the draft registration law since 1986.
Many people looked upon draft-dodgers with scorn as being "cowards", but some supported them in their efforts.
In the end, conscription was largely a failure.
(Large numbers of soldiers were not used until the invasion of Europe in summer 1944.)
Most refuse such service, as they feel that such roles are a part of the military complex.
The integration of women into militaries, and especially into combat forces, did not begin on a large scale until late in the 20th century.
The United States came close to drafting women into the Nurse Corps in preparation for a planned invasion of Japan.
The introduction of conscription in May 1939, before the war began, was partly due to pressure from the French, who emphasized the need for a large British army to oppose the Germans.
In contrast, volunteers from a trained reserve are in their civilian jobs when they are not deployed.
Following this system in its essentials, the Continental Congress in 1778 recommended that the states draft men from their militias for one year's service in the Continental army; this first national conscription was irregularly applied and failed to fill the Continental ranks.
'''Conscription''', or '''drafting''', is the compulsory enlistment of people in a national service, most often a military service.
In the decades prior to World War I universal conscription along broadly Prussian lines became the norm for European armies, and those modeled on them.
:"It may not be doubted that the very conception of a just government in its duty to the citizen includes the reciprocal obligation of the citizen to render military service in case of need and the right to compel.
The Mamluks were the most successful defense against the Mongol Ilkhanate of Persia and Iraq from entering Egypt.
In some countries, conscientious objectors have special legal status, which augments their conscription duties.
New military law decreed that all male Russian subjects, when they reached the age of 20, were eligible to serve in the military for six years.
The abolition of conscription in Britain was announced on 4 April 1957, by new prime minister Harold Macmillan, with the last conscripts being recruited three years later.
It negates man's fundamental right—the right to life—and establishes the fundamental principle of statism: that a man's life belongs to the state, and the state may claim it by compelling him to sacrifice it in battle."
Frederick IV of Denmark changed the law in 1710 to every 4th man.
Over ten million men were drafted for combat in World War II, more than twice the amount drafted for World War One, the Korean War, and the Vietnam War combined.
The men were chosen by the landowner and it was seen as a penalty.
The new force was built by taking Christian children from newly conquered lands, especially from the far areas of his empire, in a system known as the ''devşirme'' (translated "gathering" or "converting").
Postponement was possible, due to study, for example.
The draft law as established in 1940 exempted males under 21 from mandatory service due to public opposition against the idea of drafting 18-year-olds.
For various reasons, this forced military service was criticized at the end of the twentieth century.
In the late years of the Vietnam War, objections against it and support for draft-dodgers was much more outspoken, because of the casualties suffered by American troops, and the actual cause and purpose of the war being heavily questioned.
The impact is especially severe in wartime, when civilian professionals are forced to fight as amateur soldiers.
Conscientious objectors could perform an alternative civilian service instead of military service.
In practice recruits are not forced to serve, instead only those who are motivated are selected.
A small proportion, like Muhammad Ali, chose to resist the draft by publicly and politically fighting conscription.
They generally converted the younger people to Islam and many became quite assimilated.
More than 2.6 million men were inducted into the French military in this way between the years 1800 and 1813.
Various forms of avoiding military service are recorded.
Some colonial powers such as France reserved their conscript armies for home service while maintaining professional units for overseas duties.
Blacks and Asians were drafted under the same terms as whites.
Deputy Jean-Baptiste Jourdan gave its name to the 5 September 1798 Act, whose first article stated: "Any Frenchman is a soldier and owes himself to the defense of the nation."
Slaves from the Caucasus served in the army and formed an elite corp of troops.
Members of the exempted groups can still volunteer, including Bedouin males, who serve in relatively large numbers.
There was very little draft resistance.
However, to this day, every male and female citizen aged 17 gets a letter in which he is told that he has been registered but does not have to present himself for service.
By 1609, the Sultan's ''Kapıkulu'' forces increased to about 100,000.
There were instances of mass releases of men to increase production in various industries.
Conscription is known in Denmark since the Viking Age, where one man out of every 10 had to serve the king.
Starting in the 17th century, Christian families living under the Ottoman rule began to submit their sons into the Kapikulu system willingly, as they saw this as a potentially invaluable career opportunity for their children.
In the end however, their complaints were ignored as Congress approved the first national conscription act on March 1, 1863, which made all white males between 20 and 44 liable for military service.
In the Russian Empire, the military service time "owed" by serfs was 25 years at the beginning of the 19th century.
This is not a problem in an agrarian or pre-industrialized state where the level of education is universally low, and where a worker is easily replaced by another.
In 1917, a number of radicals and anarchists, including Emma Goldman, challenged the new draft law in federal court arguing that it was a direct violation of the Thirteenth Amendment's prohibition against slavery and involuntary servitude.
One contentious issue involved the drafting of fathers, which was avoided as much as possible.
The complexity and danger of these missions made the use of conscripts controversial.
In 1917 and 1918 some 24 million men were registered and nearly 3 million inducted into the military services, with little of the resistance that characterized the Civil War.
For example, Sweden used to allow conscientious objectors to choose a service in the "weapons-free" branch, such as an airport fireman, nurse or telecommunications technician.
The system worked through local draft boards comprising community leaders who were given quotas and then decided how to fill them.
Though women are conscripted in Taiwan, transsexual persons are exempt.
It is possible to postpone the duty when one is still in full-time education.
The Supreme Court eventually upheld the Act, stating that "the argument for registering women was based on considerations of equity, but Congress was entitled, in the exercise of its constitutional powers, to focus on the question of military need, rather than 'equity.'"
Selective Service registration is still required of almost all young men, although the draft has not been used since 1973 and there have been no prosecutions for violations of the draft registration law since 1986.
The cost of the work, military service, does not disappear even if no salary is paid.
Every man aged 20 years or older had to enlist.
The Dutch army allowed its male soldiers to have long hair from the early 1970s to the end of conscription in the mid-1990s.
Traditionally conscription has been limited to the male population of a given body.
The suspension means that citizens are no longer forced to serve in the armed forces, as long as it is not required for the safety of the country.
By 1943 women were liable to some form of directed labour up to age 51.
Given approximately equivalent forces, as was generally the case with professional armies, these factors showed considerable importance.
In 1940 to 1943, the Army often transferred soldiers to civilian status in the Enlisted Reserve Corps in order to increase production.
Eventually the Sultan turned to foreign volunteers from the warrior clans of Circassians in southern Russia to fill his Janissary armies.
It was, in fact, quite easy for those with some knowledge of the system to avoid being drafted.
None was assigned to combat roles unless she volunteered.
On more than one occasion, they seized power, for example, ruling Egypt from 1250–1517.
Conscription dates back to antiquity and continues in some countries to the present day under various names.
They frequently met with contempt from the volunteer soldiers and required extra amounts of discipline and surveillance to prevent them from committing desertion and petty crimes.
Since then, the Dutch army is an all-volunteer force.
Men born on lower-numbered dates were called up for review.
The levies raised in this way fought as infantry under local superiors.
Those transferred would return to work in essential industry, although they could be called back to active duty if the Army needed them.
The great draft riot in New York City in July 1863 involved Irish immigrants who had been signed up as citizens to swell the machine vote, not realizing it made them liable for the draft.
By 1975, the draft was no longer mandatory.
The bulk of the Anglo-Saxon English army, called the ''fyrd'', was composed of part-time English soldiers drawn from the landowning minor nobility.
Furthermore, the conscription system was thought to be unfair as only men were drafted.
Although the exact laws varied greatly depending on the country and the period, generally these levies were only obliged to fight for one to three months.
The Egyptians assimilated and trained the boys and young men to become Islamic soldiers who served the Muslim caliphs and the Ayyubid sultans during the Middle Ages.
Farmers demanded and were generally given occupational deferments (many volunteered anyway, and those who stayed at home were not eligible for postwar veteran's benefits).
The problem of Confederate desertion was aggravated by the inequitable inclinations of conscription officers and local judges.
In 1874 Russia introduced universal conscription in the modern pattern, an innovation only made possible by the abolition of serfdom in 1861.
Conscripts comprised 50% of the Royal Air Force, 60% of the Royal Navy and 80% of the British Army.
Colonial militia laws—and after 1776 those of the states—required able-bodied white men to enroll in the militia and to undergo a minimum of military training, all without pay.
Ron Paul, a former presidential nominee of the U.S. Libertarian Party has said that conscription "is wrongly associated with patriotism, when it really represents slavery and involuntary servitude."
Even direr economic consequences result if the professional conscripted as an amateur soldier is killed or maimed for life; his work effort and productivity is irrevocably lost.
In the USSR, there was no systematic conscription of women for the armed forces, but the severe disruption of normal life and the high proportion of civilians affected by World War II after the German invasion attracted many volunteers for what was termed "The Great Patriotic War".
Salaries for each are paid from the military budget.
