They show how our conscious experience can discriminate between a virtually unlimited number of different possible scenes and details (differentiation) because it integrates those details from our sensory systems, while the integrative nature of consciousness in this view easily explains how our experience can seem unified as one whole despite all of these individual parts.
The test examines whether animals are able to differentiate between seeing themselves in a mirror versus seeing other animals.
Philosophers who consider subjective experience the essence of consciousness also generally believe, as a correlate, that the existence and nature of animal consciousness can never rigorously be known.
Phenomenology is a method of inquiry that attempts to examine the structure of consciousness in its own right, putting aside problems regarding the relationship of consciousness to the physical world.
In medicine, consciousness is assessed by observing a patient's arousal and responsiveness, and can be seen as a continuum of states ranging from full alertness and comprehension, through disorientation, delirium, loss of meaningful communication, and finally loss of movement in response to painful stimuli.
Understanding the physical basis of qualities, such as redness or pain, has been particularly challenging.
It poses the problem of other minds in an especially severe form, because non-human animals, lacking the ability to express human language, cannot tell us about their experiences.
The patient has intermittent periods of awareness and wakefulness and displays some meaningful behavior.
'''Consciousness''' is the state or quality of awareness, or, of being aware of an external object or something within oneself.
Thomas Nagel spelled out this point of view in an influential essay titled ''What Is it Like to Be a Bat?''.
Karl Popper develops in the book ''The Self and Its Brain'' a similar evolutionary argument.
(4) It always appears to deal with objects independent of itself.
Nor is it explained what specific causal role conscious integration plays, nor why the same functionality cannot be achieved without consciousness.
Humans (older than 18 months) and other great apes, bottlenose dolphins, killer whales, pigeons, European magpies and elephants have all been observed to pass this test.
(2) Within each personal consciousness thought is always changing.
The scientific literature regarding the neural bases of arousal and purposeful movement is very extensive.
Several brain imaging techniques, such as EEG and fMRI, have been used for physical measures of brain activity in these studies.
There were, however, many occurrences in Latin writings of the phrase ''conscius sibi'', which translates literally as "knowing with oneself", or in other words "sharing knowledge with oneself about something".
In ''Search after Truth'' ('''', Amsterdam 1701) he says "conscience or internal testimony" (''conscientiâ, vel interno testimonio'').
The two main types of dualism are substance dualism (which holds that the mind is formed of a distinct type of substance not governed by the laws of physics) and property dualism (which holds that the laws of physics are universally valid but cannot be used to explain the mind).
The simple procedure begins by asking whether the patient is able to move and react to physical stimuli.
It is not obvious to the society."
David Chalmers has called this the ''hard problem of consciousness''.
For surveys, the most common approach is to follow a historical path by associating stances with the philosophers who are most strongly associated with them, for example Descartes, Locke, Kant, etc.
As a result, an exaptive explanation of consciousness has gained favor with some theorists that posit consciousness did not evolve as an adaptation but was an exaptation arising as a consequence of other developments such as increases in brain size or cortical rearrangement.
One formal definition indicating the range of these cognate meanings is given in ''Webster's Third New International Dictionary'' stating that ''consciousness'' is: "(1) ''a.''
Rodolfo Llinás, for example, proposed that consciousness results from recurrent thalamo-cortical resonance where the specific thalamocortical systems (content) and the non-specific (centromedial thalamus) thalamocortical systems (context) interact in the gamma band frequency via synchronous oscillations.
Philosophers and non-philosophers differ in their intuitions about what consciousness is.
First, it allows sensory information to be evaluated in the context of previous experience.
There are also a variety of circumstances that can change the relationship between the mind and the world in less drastic ways, producing what are known as altered states of consciousness.
Donald Griffin suggests in his book ''Animal Minds'' a gradual evolution of consciousness.
Differential diagnosis of these disorders is an active area of biomedical research.
No one has given a causal explanation, they argue, of why it would not be possible for a functionally equivalent non-conscious organism (i.e., a philosophical zombie) to achieve the very same survival advantages as a conscious organism.
In that theory, specific cortical areas, notably in the superior temporal sulcus and the temporo-parietal junction, are used to build the construct of awareness and attribute it to other people.
Some research with brain waves during meditation has reported differences between those corresponding to ordinary relaxation and those corresponding to meditation.
The Latin phrase ''conscius sibi'', whose meaning was more closely related to the current concept of consciousness, was rendered in English as "conscious to oneself" or "conscious unto oneself".
Experimental research on consciousness presents special difficulties, due to the lack of a universally accepted operational definition.
In its earliest uses in the 1500s, the English word "conscious" retained the meaning of the Latin ''conscius''.
In computational neuroscience, Bayesian approaches to brain function have been used to understand both the evaluation of sensory information in light of previous experience, and the integration of information over time.
The first influential writer to propose such an idea explicitly was Julien Offray de La Mettrie, in his book ''Man a Machine'' (''L'homme machine'').
In his essay Turing discussed a variety of possible objections, and presented a counterargument to each of them.
Descartes, for example, has sometimes been blamed for mistreatment of animals due to the fact that he believed only humans have a non-physical mind.
Many more examples could be given.
In the 2013, the ''perturbational complexity index'' (PCI) was proposed, a measure of the algorithmic complexity of the electrophysiological response of the cortex to transcranial magnetic stimulation.
To this William James objects in his essay ''Are We Automata?''
It has been defined as: sentience, awareness, subjectivity, the ability to experience or to  feel, wakefulness, having a sense of selfhood, and the executive control system of the mind.
This category generally includes minimally conscious state and persistent vegetative state, but sometimes also includes the less severe locked-in syndrome and more severe chronic coma.
Western philosophers, since the time of Descartes and Locke, have struggled to comprehend the nature of consciousness and pin down its essential properties.
Despite the difficulty in definition, many philosophers believe that there is a broadly shared underlying intuition about what consciousness is.
The topic of animal consciousness is beset by a number of difficulties.
It is particularly acute for people who believe in the possibility of philosophical zombies, that is, people who think it is possible in principle to have an entity that is physically indistinguishable from a human being and behaves like a human being in every way but nevertheless lacks consciousness.
Their reliability as indicators of consciousness is disputed, however, due to numerous studies showing that alert human subjects can be induced to behave purposefully in a variety of ways in spite of reporting a complete lack of awareness.
Awareness, in this theory, is a useful, simplified schema that represents attentional states.
Wilber described consciousness as a spectrum with ordinary awareness at one end, and more profound types of awareness at higher levels.
He said that an organism is conscious "if and only if there is something that it is like to be that organism — something it is like ''for'' the organism"; and he argued that no matter how much we know about an animal's brain and behavior, we can never really put ourselves into the mind of the animal and experience its world in the way it does itself.
The more complex procedure is known as a neurological examination, and is usually carried out by a neurologist in a hospital setting.
A great deal is known about low-level signal processing in sensory systems, but the ways by which sensory systems interact with each other, with "executive" systems in the frontal cortex, and with the language system are very incompletely understood.
In the literature concerning artificial intelligence, Searle's essay has been second only to Turing's in the volume of debate it has generated.
that water in the distance may be a mirage) and behave accordingly, and it could also facilitate the manipulation of others by recognizing how things appear to them for both cooperative and devious ends.
Some philosophers have argued that it is intrinsically unsolvable, because qualities (''"qualia"'') are ineffable; that is, they are "raw feels", incapable of being analyzed into component processes.
Husserl's original concept gave rise to two distinct lines of inquiry, in philosophy and psychology.
The hope is to find that activity in a particular part of the brain, or a particular pattern of global brain activity, which will be strongly predictive of conscious awareness.
In the 1970s Gordon Gallup developed an operational test for self-awareness, known as the mirror test.
Since the dawn of Newtonian science with its vision of simple mechanical principles governing the entire universe, some philosophers have been tempted by the idea that consciousness could be explained in purely physical terms.
In 2011, Graziano and Kastner proposed the "attention schema" theory of awareness.
Thus, by speaking of "consciousness" we end up misleading ourselves by thinking that there is any sort of thing as consciousness separated from behavioral and linguistic understandings.
After the conference, they signed in the presence of Stephen Hawking, the 'Cambridge Declaration on Consciousness', which summarizes the most important findings of the survey:
During dream sleep, in contrast, people who are awakened report rich and detailed experiences in which events form a continuous progression, which may however be interrupted by bizarre or fantastic intrusions.
Thus, any examination of the evolution of consciousness is faced with great difficulties.
Another way of putting the argument is to say that computer programs can pass the Turing test for processing the syntax of a language, but that the syntax cannot lead to semantic meaning in the way strong AI advocates hoped.
The classic example involves placing a spot of coloring on the skin or fur near the individual's forehead and seeing if they attempt to remove it or at least touch the spot, thus indicating that they recognize that the individual they are seeing in the mirror is themselves.
Descartes used ''conscientia'' the way modern speakers would use "conscience".
While most people have a strong intuition for the existence of what they refer to as consciousness, skeptics argue that this intuition is false, either because the concept of consciousness is intrinsically incoherent, or because our intuitions about it are based in illusions.
Many other neuroscientists, such as Christof Koch, have explored the neural basis of consciousness without attempting to frame all-encompassing global theories.
For one thing, it seems to violate the principle of parsimony, by postulating an invisible entity that is not necessary to explain what we observe.
The medical approach to consciousness is practically oriented.
Searle would pass the Turing test of answering the questions in both languages, but he is only conscious of what he is doing when he speaks English.
Introspectively, the world of conscious experience seems to have considerable structure.
Issues of interest include phenomena such as subliminal perception, blindsight, denial of impairment, and altered states of consciousness produced by alcohol and other drugs, or spiritual or meditative techniques.
Another issue with verbal report as a criterion is that it restricts the field of study to humans who have language:  this approach cannot be used to study consciousness in other species, pre-linguistic children, or people with types of brain damage that impair language.
The English word "conscious" originally derived from the Latin ''conscius'' (''con-'' "together" and ''scio'' "to know"), but the Latin word did not have the same meaning as our word—it meant "knowing with", in other words "having joint or common knowledge with another".
In the attention schema theory, the value of explaining the feature of awareness and attributing it to a person is to gain a useful predictive model of that person's attentional processing.
The structures assumed to be critical for consciousness in mammalian brains have homologous counterparts in avian brains.
His arguments, however, were very abstract.
In the visual system, for example, sensory signals from the eyes are transmitted to the thalamus and then to the primary visual cortex; inside the cerebral cortex they are sent to areas that extract features such as three-dimensional structure, shape, color, and motion.
This phrase had the figurative meaning of "knowing that one knows", as the modern English word "conscious" does.
In this case, the English speaker is acting as a computer and the rulebook as a program.
This is called the problem of other minds.
Signals arising from sensory organs are transmitted to the brain and then processed in a series of stages, which extract multiple types of information from the raw input.
The first identifies the content of consciousness with the experiences that are reported by human subjects; the second makes use of the concept of consciousness that has been developed by neurologists and other medical professionals who deal with patients whose behavior is impaired.
In medicine, conceptual distinctions are considered useful to the degree that they can help to guide treatments.
To be aware of X is explained by constructing a model of one's attentional focus on X.
A third group of scholars have argued that with technological growth once machines begin to display any substantial signs of human-like behavior then the dichotomy (of human consciousness compared to human-like consciousness) becomes passé and issues of machine autonomy begin to prevail even as observed in its nascent form within contemporary industry and technology.
What homologues can be identified?
Obviously not all kinds of information are capable of being disseminated consciously (e.g., neural activity related to vegetative functions, reflexes, unconscious motor programs, low-level perceptual analyses, etc.)
Attention is a style of information processing in which a brain focuses its resources on a limited set of interrelated signals.
The majority of experimental studies assess consciousness by asking human subjects for a verbal report of their experiences (e.g., "tell me if you notice anything when I do this").
In 2013, an experimental procedure was developed to measure degrees of consciousness, the procedure involving stimulating the brain with a magnetic pulse, measuring resulting waves of electrical activity, and developing a consciousness score based on the complexity of the brain activity.
The word first appears in Latin juridical texts by writers such as Cicero.
In philosophy, phenomenology has largely been devoted to fundamental metaphysical questions, such as the nature of intentionality (''"aboutness"'').
For example, Thomas Hobbes in ''Leviathan'' wrote: "Where two, or more men, know of one and the same fact, they are said to be Conscious of it one to another."
As a third issue, philosophers who dispute the validity of the Turing test may feel that it is possible, at least in principle, for verbal report to be dissociated from consciousness entirely:  a philosophical zombie may give detailed verbal reports of awareness in the absence of any genuine awareness.
In partial epileptic seizures, consciousness is impaired or lost while some aspects of consciousness, often automated behaviors, remain intact.
Other authors date the origins of consciousness to the first animals with nervous systems or early vertebrates in the Cambrian over 500 million years ago.
Broadly viewed, scientific approaches are based on two core concepts.
The patient has awareness, sleep-wake cycles, and meaningful behavior (viz., eye-movement), but is isolated due to quadriplegia and pseudobulbar palsy.
There are also, however, a large number of idiosyncratic theories that cannot cleanly be assigned to any of these schools of thought.
Bernard Baars proposed that once in place, this "recursive" circuitry may have provided a basis for the subsequent development of many of the functions that consciousness facilitates in higher organisms.
In a lively exchange over what has come to be referred to as "the Chinese room argument", John Searle sought to refute the claim of proponents of what he calls "strong artificial intelligence (AI)" that a computer program can be conscious, though he does agree with advocates of "weak AI" that computer programs can be formatted to "simulate" conscious states.
Research in this area has not yet reached firm conclusions, but a recent questionnaire-based study identified eleven significant factors contributing to drug-induced states of consciousness:  experience of unity; spiritual experience; blissful state; insightfulness; disembodiment; impaired control and cognition; anxiety; complex imagery; elementary imagery; audio-visual synesthesia; and changed meaning of percepts.
Another example has been proposed by Gerald Edelman called dynamic core hypothesis which puts emphasis on reentrant connections that reciprocally link areas of the brain in a massively parallel manner.
Some philosophers believe that Block's two types of consciousness are not the end of the story.
Modern medical and psychological investigations into consciousness are based on psychological experiments (including, for example, the investigation of priming effects using subliminal stimuli), and on case studies of alterations in consciousness produced by trauma, illness, or drugs.
Whereas the philosophical approach to consciousness focuses on its fundamental nature and its contents, the medical approach focuses on the ''amount'' of consciousness a person has:  in medicine, consciousness is assessed as a "level" ranging from coma and brain death at the low end, to full alertness and purposeful responsiveness at the high end.
Also, it is difficult to reason objectively about the question, because a denial that an animal is conscious is often taken to imply that it does not feel, its life has no value, and that harming it is not morally wrong.
In the literal sense, "conscientia" means knowledge-with, that is, shared knowledge.
Thought processes during the dream state frequently show a high level of irrationality.
To most philosophers, the word "consciousness" connotes the relationship between the mind and the world.
The general conclusion from the study by Butler, et al., is that some of the major theories for the mammalian brain  also appear to be valid for the avian brain.
There are some brain states in which consciousness seems to be absent, including dreamless sleep, coma, and death.
Several psychologists and ethologists have argued for the existence of animal consciousness by describing a range of behaviors that appear to show animals holding beliefs about things they cannot directly perceive — Donald Griffin's 2001 book ''Animal Minds'' reviews a substantial portion of the evidence.
For example, Archbishop Ussher wrote in 1613 of "being so conscious unto myself of my great weakness".
At the same time, computer scientists working in the field of artificial intelligence have pursued the goal of creating digital computer programs that can simulate or embody consciousness.
He proposed that we speak not of minds, bodies, and the world, but of individuals, or persons, acting in the world.
Bayesian models of the brain are probabilistic inference models, in which the brain takes advantage of prior knowledge to interpret uncertain sensory inputs in order to formulate a conscious percept; Bayesian models have successfully predicted many perceptual phenomena in vision and the nonvisual senses.
The most thorough account of the spiritual approach may be Ken Wilber's book ''The Spectrum of Consciousness'', a comparison of western and eastern ways of thinking about the mind.
Issues of concern in the philosophy of consciousness include whether the concept is fundamentally coherent; whether consciousness can ever be explained mechanistically; whether non-human consciousness exists and if so how can it be recognized; how consciousness relates to language; whether consciousness can be understood in a way that does not require a dualistic distinction between mental and physical states or properties; and whether it may ever be possible for computing machines like computers or robots to be conscious, a topic studied in the field of artificial intelligence.
If so, the patient is asked for name, current location, and current day and time.
The dictionary meaning of the word ''consciousness'' extends through several centuries and associated cognate meanings which have ranged from formal definitions to somewhat more skeptical definitions.
The prefrontal cortex is not the only candidate area, however:  studies by Nikos Logothetis and his colleagues have shown, for example, that visually responsive neurons in parts of the temporal lobe reflect the visual perception in the situation when conflicting visual images are presented to different eyes (i.e., bistable percepts during binocular rivalry).
This method fell into disrepute in the early twentieth century because of grave doubts about its reliability, but has been rehabilitated to some degree, especially when used in combination with techniques for examining brain activity.
The outcome may be summarized using the Glasgow Coma Scale, which yields a number in the range 3—15, with a score of 3 to 8 indicating coma, and 15 indicating full consciousness.
(2): the state or activity that is characterized by sensation, emotion, volition, or thought: mind in the broadest possible sense: something in nature that is distinguished from the physical.
It is not obvious to the rest of the Western world or the Far East.
Turing disavowed any interest in terminology, saying that even "Can machines think?"
Some of these QM theories offer descriptions of phenomenal consciousness, as well as QM interpretations of access consciousness.
It has been disputed, however, whether there is enough evidence to count these as physiologically distinct states of consciousness.
The first influential philosopher to discuss this question specifically was Descartes, and the answer he gave is known as Cartesian dualism.
His essay influenced the 18th-century view of consciousness, and his definition appeared in Samuel Johnson's celebrated ''Dictionary'' (1755).
Starting in the 1980s, an expanding community of neuroscientists and psychologists have associated themselves with a field called ''Consciousness Studies'', giving rise to a stream of experimental work published in books, journals such as ''Consciousness and Cognition'', '' Frontiers in Consciousness Research'', and the ''Journal of Consciousness Studies'', along with regular conferences organized by groups such as the Association for the Scientific Study of Consciousness.
The assumption of an avian consciousness also brings the reptilian brain into focus.
The process is generally thought to involve two primary mechanisms: (1) hierarchical processing of sensory inputs, and (2) memory.
P-consciousness, according to Block, is simply raw experience:  it is moving, colored forms, sounds, sensations, emotions and feelings with our bodies and responses at the center.
But if consciousness is subjective and not visible from the outside, why do the vast majority of people believe that other people are conscious, but rocks and trees are not?
The most commonly given answer is that we attribute consciousness to other people because we see that they resemble us in appearance and behavior; we reason that if they look like us and act like us, they must be like us in other ways, including having experiences of the sort that we do.
Some philosophers, such as Daniel Dennett in an essay titled ''The Unimagined Preposterousness of Zombies'', argue that people who give this explanation do not really understand what they are saying.
Related issues have also been studied extensively by Greg Littmann of the University of Illinois.
A related word was ''conscientia'', which primarily means moral conscience.
René Descartes (1596–1650) is generally taken to be the first philosopher to use ''conscientia'' in a way that does not fit this traditional meaning.
Thus the main portions of the theories of Crick and Koch, Edelman and Tononi, and Cotterill  seem  to be compatible with the assumption that birds are conscious.
Other philosophers, however, have suggested that consciousness would not be necessary for any functional advantage in evolutionary processes.
For example, subjects who stare continuously at a Necker cube usually report that they experience it "flipping" between two 3D configurations, even though the stimulus itself remains the same.
There are two commonly used methods for assessing the level of consciousness of a patient: a simple procedure that requires minimal training, and a more complex procedure that requires substantial expertise.
While other conditions may cause a moderate deterioration (e.g., dementia and delirium) or transient interruption (e.g., grand mal and petit mal seizures) of consciousness, they are not included in this category.
But other thinkers sympathetic to his basic argument have suggested that the necessary (though perhaps still not sufficient) extra conditions may include the ability to pass not just the verbal version of the Turing test, but the robotic version, which requires grounding the robot's words in the robot's sensorimotor capacity to categorize and interact with the things in the world that its words are about, Turing-indistinguishably from a real person.
Although it is widely accepted that Descartes explained the problem cogently, few later philosophers have been happy with his solution, and his ideas about the pineal gland have especially been ridiculed.
It has been argued that consciousness emerged (i) exclusively with the first humans, (ii) exclusively with the first mammals, (iii) independently in mammals and birds, or (iv) with the first reptiles.
At the present time many scientists and philosophers consider the arguments for an important role of quantum phenomena to be unconvincing.
Several scholars including Pinker, Chomsky, Edelman, and Luria have indicated the importance of the emergence of human language as an important regulative mechanism of learning and memory in the context of the development of higher-order consciousness (see ''Neural correlates'' section above).
Notable theories falling into this category include the holonomic brain theory of Karl Pribram and David Bohm, and the Orch-OR theory formulated by Stuart Hameroff and Roger Penrose.
David Chalmers has argued that A-consciousness can in principle be understood in mechanistic terms, but that understanding P-consciousness is much more challenging:  he calls this the ''hard problem of consciousness''.
The patient lacks awareness, sleep-wake cycles, and brain-mediated reflexive behavior.
The last three of these can be used as indicators of consciousness when verbal behavior is absent.
Some altered states occur naturally; others can be produced by drugs or brain damage.
In the majority of experiments that are specifically about consciousness, the subjects are human, and the criterion used is verbal report:  in other words, subjects are asked to describe their experiences, and their descriptions are treated as observations of the contents of consciousness.
However, it remains unspecified which kinds of information are integrated in a conscious manner and which kinds can be integrated without consciousness.
Persistent vegetative state
To make a Turing machine that speaks Chinese, Searle imagines a room with one monolingual English speaker (Searle himself, in fact), a book that designates a combination of Chinese symbols to be output paired with Chinese symbol input, and boxes filled with Chinese symbols.
Assuming that not only humans but even some non-mammalian species are conscious, a number of evolutionary approaches to the problem of neural correlates of consciousness open up.
More broadly, philosophers who do not accept the possibility of zombies generally believe that consciousness is reflected in behavior (including verbal behavior), and that we attribute consciousness on the basis of behavior.
Many philosophers consider experience to be the essence of consciousness, and believe that experience can only fully be known from the inside, subjectively.
Theories proposed by neuroscientists such as Gerald Edelman and Antonio Damasio, and by philosophers such as Daniel Dennett, seek to explain consciousness in terms of neural events occurring within the brain.
For a review of the differences between conscious and unconscious integrations, see the article of E. Morsella.
William Lycan, for example, argued in his book ''Consciousness and Experience'' that at least eight clearly distinct types of consciousness can be identified (organism consciousness; control consciousness; consciousness ''of''; state/event consciousness; reportability; introspective consciousness; subjective consciousness; self-consciousness)—and that even this list omits several more obscure forms.
A variety of psychoactive drugs and alcohol have notable effects on consciousness.
Higher brain areas are seen as more promising, especially the prefrontal cortex, which is involved in a range of higher cognitive functions collectively known as executive functions.
by stating an evolutionary argument for mind-brain interaction implying that if the preservation and development of consciousness in the biological evolution is a result of natural selection, it is plausible that consciousness has not only been influenced by neural processes, but has had a survival value itself; and it could only have had this if it had been efficacious.
Nevertheless, it is clear that the relationship between a physical entity such as light and a perceptual quality such as color is extraordinarily complex and indirect, as demonstrated by a variety of optical illusions such as neon color spreading.
Despite the large amount of information available, many important aspects of perception remain mysterious.
Minimally conscious state
Certain aspects of the three theories, however, seem less easy to apply to the hypothesis of avian consciousness.
The components that Tart identified have not, however, been validated by empirical studies.
A-consciousness, on the other hand, is the phenomenon whereby information in our minds is accessible for verbal report, reasoning, and the control of behavior.
Each of these, in his view, could be altered in multiple ways by drugs or other manipulations.
The most influential modern physical theories of consciousness are based on psychology and neuroscience.
Another approach applies specifically to the study of self-awareness, that is, the ability to distinguish oneself from others.
Buddhist teachings describe that consciousness manifests moment to moment as sense impressions and mental phenomena that are continuously changing.
During ordinary non-dream sleep, people who are awakened report only vague and sketchy thoughts, and their experiences do not cohere into a continuous narrative.
This indicates that, in the primary visual areas, changes in firing rates and synchrony can be considered as neural correlates of qualia—at least for some type of qualia.
This ability would enable a creature to recognize the likelihood that their perceptions are deceiving them (e.g.
At a deeper level, there are still basic conceptual issues that remain unresolved.
Consciousness in this sense has been compared to the blind spot in the retina where it is not an adaption of the retina, but instead just a by-product of the way the retinal axons were wired.
Most people have a strong intuition that some animals, such as cats and dogs, are conscious, while others, such as insects, are not; but the sources of this intuition are not obvious, and are often based on personal interactions with pets and other animals they have observed.
Immanuel Kant asserted that the world as we perceive it is organized according to a set of fundamental "intuitions", which include ''object'' (we perceive the world as a set of distinct things); ''shape''; ''quality'' (color, warmth, etc.
Another idea that has drawn attention for several decades is that consciousness is associated with high-frequency (gamma band) oscillations in brain activity.
Daniel Dennett has argued for an approach he calls heterophenomenology, which means treating verbal reports as stories that may or may not be true, but his ideas about how to do this have not been widely adopted.
However, the possibility of actually constructing a conscious machine was probably first discussed by Ada Lovelace, in a set of notes written in 1842 about the Analytical Engine invented by Charles Babbage, a precursor (never built) to modern electronic computers.
Turing-scale robotics is an empirical branch of research on embodied cognition and situated cognition.
In neuroscience, a great deal of effort has gone into investigating how the perceived world of conscious awareness is constructed inside the brain.
These experiences, considered independently of any impact on behavior, are called ''qualia''.
