After the struggle of pacifist Arndt Pekurinen a law was passed providing for a peacetime-only alternative to military service, or civilian service (Finnish ''siviilipalvelus'').
He only became a conscientious objector to join the army.
On June 5, 1917, Salmon wrote in a letter to President Wilson:
Journalist Perihan Magden was tried by a Turkish court for supporting Tarhan and advocating conscientious objection as a human right; but later, she was acquitted.
Although a few objectors were accepted for non-combatant service in the Royal Army Medical Corps, acting as nursing/paramedic assistants, the majority of non-combatants served in the Non-Combatant Corps on non-lethal stores, road and railway building and general labouring in the UK and France.
The 10,700 Canadian objectors were mostly Mennonites (63%) and Dukhobors (20%).
Bahá'ís are advised to do social service instead of active army service, but when this is not possible because of obligations in certain countries, the Bahá'í law of ''loyalty to one's government'' is preferred and the individual should perform the army service.
'', the Supreme Court reiterated its position that selective conscientious objection was not permitted, adding that conscientious objection could only be recognized in cases of general objection to military service.
The Militia Ballot Act of 1757 allowed Quakers to be excluded from service in the Militia.
Conscientious objection was not permitted in Francoist Spain.
Responses included moving to northern states, hiding in the mountains, joining the army but refusing to use a weapon, or being imprisoned.
In spite of this, a strong movement appeared that refused both services.
They may be called to serve in various duties with the rescue services or other necessary work of a non-military nature.
The ''Earning Service'' involved working in institutions such as hospitals for fairly good wages.
Both Sikhs and Hindus believe war should be a last resort and should be fought to sustain life and morality in society.
In 2005, the Swiss parliament considered whether willingness to serve one and a half times longer than an army recruit was sufficient proof of sincerity, citing that the cost of judging the state of conscience of a few thousand men per year was too great.
Ever since the First World War, however, there have been volunteer members of the armed forces who have developed a conscientious objection to continuing in service; a procedure was devised for them in the Second World War, and, with adaptations, it continues to this day.
Alvin York, the most decorated American soldier during WWI, also applied to be a conscientious objector, but was denied multiple times before finally serving in the Argonne Forest in France.
The 14th Dalai Lama has stated that war "should be relegated to the dustbin of history."
Those who were born in the last months of the year typically used to serve in the Navy, unless judged unable for ship service (in this case they could be sent back to Army or Air Force).
Although conscientious objection was not part of the draft law, individuals could provide a substitute or pay $300 to hire one.
When attempting to establish his status as a non-combatant, Desmond T. Doss was told there was no such thing.
A schism arose during and after World War I between Seventh-day Adventists in Germany who agreed to serve in the military if conscripted and those who rejected all participation in warfare&nbsp;— the latter group eventually forming a separate church (the Seventh Day Adventist Reform Movement).
Since the establishment of the Republic of Korea, thousands of conscientious objectors had no choice but to be imprisoned as criminals.
On 14 November 2011, the Ministry of Justice announced a draft proposal to legalise  conscientious objection in Turkey and that it was to take effect two weeks after approval by the President to the change.
This derives from the Jewish tradition that if a man wants to dedicate his life to religious study, society must allow him to do so.
However, the Ministry of Defense has used its discretion under article 36 of this law to automatically exempt all non-Jewish women and all Arab men, except for the Druze, from military service ever since Israel was established.
During Canada's involvement in World War II, Canadian conscientious objectors were given the options of noncombatant military service, serving in the medical or dental corps under military control or working in parks and on roads under civilian supervision.
The program stipulates three years of civilian service that is not connected with the military in any way.
Nevertheless, and uniquely among the Eastern bloc, objections were accepted and the objectors assigned to construction units.
''Pax Service'' was a nonpaying alternative with assignments overseas.
However, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights left the issue of conscientious objection inexplicit, as we see in this quote from War Resisters International: "Article 18 of the Covenant does put some limits on the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion, stating that its manifestations must not infringe on public safety, order, health or morals.
Alternatives to military or civilian service include serving an imprisonment or other punishment for refusing conscription, falsely claiming unfitness for duty by feigning an allergy or a heart condition, delaying conscription until the maximum drafting age, or seeking refuge in a country which does not extradite those wanted for military conscription.
Some theologians see the Constantinian shift and the loss of  Christian pacifism as a great failing of the Church.
This was re-affirmed in 1998, when resolution 1998/77 recognized that "persons already performing military service may ''develop'' conscientious objections.".
''1-W Mission Supporting Service'' was like the Earning Service but the wages were used for the support of mission, relief or service projects of the draftees choice.
After the communist party lost its power in 1989, alternative civil service was established.
Hindu beliefs do not go against the concept of war, as seen in the Gita.
These are common questions from Swiss hearings.
Objectors could apply for the status of conscience objector.
An early recognition of conscientious objection was granted by William the Silent to the Dutch Mennonites in 1575.
They help to determine if the objector is politically motivated or if he is just too lazy to serve the country; or if he truly has a conflict stemming from his conscience.
For believers in Indian religions, the opposition to warfare may be based on either the general idea of ahimsa, nonviolence, or on an explicit prohibition of violence by their religion, e.g., for a Buddhist, one of the five precepts is "Pānātipātā veramaṇi sikkhāpadam samādiyāmi," or "I undertake the precept to refrain from destroying living creatures," which is in obvious opposition to the practice of warfare.
The government's National Action Plan  (NAP) for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights has not shown a clear stance on the pressing human rights issues such as, among other things, the rights of conscientious objectors to military service.
About 5,500 objectors were imprisoned, most charged with refusal to attend a medical examination as a necessary preliminary to call-up after being refused exemption, and some charged with non-compliance with the terms of conditional exemption.
Their objection is in being part in any military capacity whether noncombatant or regular service.
During the 1980s, hundreds of South African white males dodged the draft, refused the call-up or objected to conscription in the South African Defence Force.
He is now somewhat the patron saint of conscientious objectors.
''Voluntary Service'' was nonpaying work done in similar institutions, mostly within North America.
During World War II, all registrants were sent a questionnaire covering basic facts about their identification, physical condition, history and also provided a checkoff to indicate opposition to military service because of religious training or belief.
Turkey, Armenia and Azerbaijan are the only three countries refusing to recognize conscientious objection and sustain their membership in the Council of Europe.
Fronting the decreasing birth rate and the popular opposition to the army, the Spanish government tried to modernise the model carried from the Franco era, professionalizing it.
A notable example of a conscientious objector was the Austrian devout Roman Catholic Christian Franz Jägerstätter, who was executed on August 9, 1943 for openly refusing to serve in the Nazi Wehrmacht, consciously accepting the penalty of death.
The new program eliminated the base camps of CPS and provided wages for the men.
In fact, significant majority of Korean citizens simply associate conscientious objectors with draft dodging, and are unaware of the fact that conscientious objector draftees in other westernized countries are required to serve in alternative services.
The United Council was forced to cease activity in December 1920, but alternative service was available under the New Economic Policy until it was abolished in 1936.
In addition a number of those in the military decided to refuse further duties.
Between late 1862 and 1864 a payment of $500 into the public treasury exempted conscientious objectors from Confederate military duty.
Other non-combatants worked in the Royal Army Medical Corps.
refrain from subjecting conscientious objectors .
Also, "construction soldiers" were discriminated against in their later professional life.
Conscientious objectors formed only a tiny proportion of Military Service Tribunals' cases over the whole conscription period, estimated at around 2%.
During the Finnish Civil War in 1918, conscription was reintroduced for all able-bodied men.
The records of conscientious objectors to military service are kept by a governmental investigative body as criminal files for five years.
Since conscription was suspended in 1994 and military service is voluntary, the status of conscience objector can not be granted anymore in Belgium.
In addition, some countries, including those with national security concerns have shown that alternative service can be successfully implemented.
Democratic Republic of the Congo), conscientious objection is punished severely.
In September 2007 the government announced a program to give conscientious objectors an opportunity to participate in alternative civilian service.
Conscription in the United Kingdom was retained, with rights of conscientious objection, as National Service until the last call-up in 1960 and the last discharge in 1963.
Religious beliefs were a starting point in many nations for legally granting conscientious objector status.
Conscientious objectors who were deemed not to have made any useful contribution to the state were formally disfranchised (through a clause inserted in the Representation of the People Act 1918 at the insistence of chauvinist back-bench MPs) for the five years 1 September 1921 - 31 August 1926, but as it was an ill-prepared last-minute amendment there was no administrative machinery to enforce such disfranchisement, which was admitted to be a "dead letter".
This is not registered into the person's criminal record.
Some states argue that such limitations on the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion would derivatively permit them to make conscientious objection during time of war a threat to public safety, or mass conscientious objection a disruption to public order,...Some states even argue that it is a 'moral' duty to serve the state in its military."
Israeli Arabs may volunteer to perform military service, but very few do so (except among the Bedouin population of Israel).
The various parts of the British Empire and Commonwealth had their own laws: in general, all the larger countries of the Empire participated, and some were, in proportion to their population, major participants in the First World War.
to repeated punishment for failure to perform military service."
Any male getting drafted, but unwilling to serve, has the ability to avoid military service by instead serving community service for the duration of the conscription.
The ECHR gave the Turkish government a deadline until the end of 2011 to legalize conscientious objection.
A number of people not liable for military service made declarations of self-incrimination, stating that they had encouraged ''insumisión''.
In 1757, when the first attempt was made to establish a British Militia as a professional national military reserve, a clause in the Militia Ballot Act allowed Quakers exemption from military service.
The Spanish parliament established a longer service (''Prestación Social Sustitutoria'') as an alternative to the Army.
It then ceased to be a major issue, since Britain's armed forces were generally all-volunteer.
Other conscientious objectors who have been awarded the Medal of Honor are Thomas W. Bennett and Joseph G. LaPointe, both medics who served during the war in Vietnam.
Where, however, the type of military action, with which an individual does not wish to be associated, is condemned by the international community as contrary to basic rules of human conduct, punishment for desertion or draft-evasion could, in the light of all other requirements of the definition, in itself be regarded as persecution.
As of 2011 the draft has been halted in Germany, primarily for the latter reasons (service justice, and a changed view of its necessity).
The suspension of the procedure (1977), allowing to "object with a post card", was ruled unconstitutional in 1978.
After their service, objectors are not allowed to take jobs that require them to carry weapons, such as police jobs until the age of 42.
On May 25, 2005, journalist Jack Random wrote the following: "The case of Sergeant Kevin Benderman (Iraq War Resister) raises the burning issue of selective conscientious objection: While it is universally accepted that an individual cannot be compelled against conscience to war in general, does the same hold for an individual who objects, in the depths of the soul, to a particular war?"
Opposition to the Angolan War, "South Africa's Vietnam," was rife in English-speaking campuses, and later the war in the townships became the focus of these groupings.
He was the most decorated Other rank of the First World War.
Because of this, the waiting lists for the PSS were long, especially in areas like Navarre, where pacifism, Basque nationalism and a low unemployment rate discouraged young males from the army.
Because of their conscientious objection to participation in military service, whether armed or unarmed, Jehovah's Witnesses have often faced imprisonment or other penalties.
39 (c) and 40 of the Defense Service Law, according to which religious reasons can be grounds for exemption.
Other objections can stem from a deep sense of responsibility toward humanity as a whole, or from simple denial that any government possesses the moral authority to command warlike behavior from its citizens.
The terminology conscientious objector technically has not existed in Korean dictionary until recently.
Details shall be regulated by a federal law."
Conscientious objectors in Confederate States initially had few options.
A 1971 United States Supreme Court decision, ''Gillette v. United States'', broadened U.S. rules beyond religious belief but denied the inclusion of objections to specific wars as grounds for conscientious objection.
However, press gangs were used to beef up army and navy rolls on occasions from the 16th to the early 19th centuries.
Until 1972, objectors were considered as traitors and tried by a military tribunal; after 1972, objectors could choose an alternative civilian service, which was eight months longer than standard military service (fifteen months, then twelve, as for Army and Air Force, 24 months, then eighteen, then twelve as for the Navy).
By the early 1950s a replacement program, 1-W service, was in place for conscientious objectors classified as 1-W by Selective Service.
(Interestingly enough, the necessity of ''Zivildienst'' performers to assist in social services, especially in the health area, came to be generally considered such an "other argument".)
Conscription was mandatory to all able-bodied Belgian males until 1994, when it was suspended.
The law was not applied uniformly and hundreds of objectors were imprisoned and over 200 were executed.
Women can claim exemption from military service on grounds of conscience under arts.
Some Seventh-day Adventists volunteered for the US Army's Operation Whitecoat, participating in research to help others.
All Israeli citizens and permanent residents are liable to military service.
Conservative Mennonites do not object to serving their country in peaceful alternatives (alternative service) such as hospital work, farming, forestry, road construction and similar occupations.
These men were imprisoned in military facilities such as Fort Lewis (Washington), Alcatraz Island (California) and Fort Leavenworth (Kansas).
As of 2006, both the Czech Republic and Slovakia have abolished conscription.
In 1998, the Human Rights Commission reiterated previous statements and added "states should .
But in recent years this exemption practice has become the subject of debate in Israeli society, as the absolute and the relative numbers of the men who received this exemption rose sharply.
In Romania, as of 23 October 2006 conscription was suspended, therefore, the status of conscience objector does not apply.
In certain European countries such as Austria, Germany, Greece and Switzerland, there is the option of performing civilian service, subject to the review of a written application or after a hearing about the state of conscience.
In 2008, the term was further shortened to 12 months to match the duration of the longest military service (that of officer trainees and technical crew).
Some simply deserted, or joined organisations such as the End Conscription Campaign, an anti-war movement banned in 1988, while others fled into exile and joined the Committee on South African War Resistance.
By helping to support and maintain the war, Desmond was the first noncombatant to receive the Medal of Honor.
Its Article 18 begins: "Everyone shall have the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion.
Nevertheless, the social stigma attached to 'conchies' (as they were called) was considerable: regardless of the genuineness of their motives, cowardice was often imputed.
However, many people who support conscription will distinguish between "bona fide" ''conscientious objection'' and ''draft dodging'', which they view as evasion of military service without a valid excuse.
After May 1943, as the labour shortage developed within the nation and another Conscription Crisis burgeoned, men were shifted into agriculture, education and industry.
A further 1,000 were court-martialled by the armed forces and sent to military detention barracks or civil prisons.
In 2006, 2010, and again in 2011 the U.N. Human Rights Committee, after reviewing petitions from South Korean conscientious objectors, declared that the government was violating Article 18 of the ICCPR, the provision that guarantees the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion.
Since 1950, there have been more than 16,000 Jehovah's Witnesses sentenced to a combined total of 31,256 years for refusing to perform military service.
Among the roughly one-hundred countries that have conscription, only thirty countries have some legal provisions, 25 of them in Europe.
Since the American Civil War, Seventh-day Adventists have been known as non-combatants, and have done work in hospitals or to give medical care rather than combat roles, and the church has upheld the non-combative position.
In discussing the status of the armed forces shortly after the founding of the State of Israel, representatives of orthodox religious parties argued that yeshiva students should be exempt from military service.
With pressure of public opinion, the Canadian government barred entry of additional Mennonite and Hutterite immigrants, rescinding the privileges of the Order in Council.
Eventually, because of the shortage of farm labor, the conscientious objectors were granted furloughs either for farm service or relief work in France under the American Friends Service Committee.
By and large, these are asked in many other countries.
Today, the two main criteria for classification as a conscientious objector are that the objector must be opposed to war in any form, and the objection must be sincere.
The issue is highly controversial in Turkey.
Over 2,200 Seventh-day Adventists volunteered in experiments involving various infectious agents during the 1950s through the 1970s in Fort Detrick, MD. "
These specific missions included "civilian population centers" in "the occupied territories."
This decision to legalize by the Turkish government was because of pressure from the European Court of Human Rights.
In 1922, the option of noncombatant military service was introduced, but service in the military remained compulsory on pain of imprisonment.
A commission was founded within the National Assembly of the Republic to write a new constitution in 2012.
In Europe, most countries with conscription more or less fulfill international guidelines on conscientious objection legislation (except for Greece, Cyprus, Turkey, Finland and Russia) today.
Nevertheless, many Irishmen volunteered to fight in both world wars.
On June 4, 1967, John Courtney Murray, an American Jesuit priest and theologian, delivered an address at Western Maryland College concerning a more specific type of conscientious objection: "the issue of selective conscientious objection, conscientious objection to particular wars, or as it is sometimes called, discretionary armed service."
In theory, objectors would be drafted and then court-martialled for desertion.
In 1997, an announcement of Amnesty International's forthcoming campaign and briefing for the UN Commission on Human Rights included this quote: "The right to conscientious objection to military service is not a marginal concern outside the mainstream of international human rights protection and promotion."
In many countries outside Europe, especially in armed conflict areas (e.g.
In Greece, for example, before the introduction of alternative civilian service in 1997, hundreds of Witnesses were imprisoned, some for three years or even more for their refusal.
Doss made clear he was not an Objector because he would willingly serve his country, wear a uniform, salute the flag and help with the war effort.
On May 5, 1945, Desmond Doss received the Medal of Honor from President Harry S. Truman.
Objectors became a minority.
Around 16,000 men were recorded as conscientious objectors, with Quakers, traditionally pacifist, forming a large proportion: 4,500 objectors were exempted on condition of doing civilian 'work of national importance', such as farming, forestry or social service; and 7,000 were conscripted into the specially-created Non-Combatant Corps.
(He later went on to serve as Air Officer Commanding No 3 Group.)
v. Military Advocate General et al.
According to Article 4(3) of the German constitution (Grundgesetz): "No person shall be compelled against his conscience to render military service involving the use of arms.
Of those directed to non-combatant military service almost 7,000 were allocated to the Non-Combatant Corps, re-activated in mid-1940; its companies worked in clothing and food stores, in transport, or any military project not requiring the handling of "material of an aggressive nature".
However, 6,000 were refused any exemption and forced into main army regiments; if they then refused to obey orders, they were court-martialled and sent to prison.
Another 256 people of Kurdish origin also had announced their conscientious objection to military service.
Both laws were passed, and, until the suspension of the draft in 2011, required men to perform such actions.
He was declared Blessed by Pope Benedict XVI in 2007 for dying for his beliefs, and is viewed as a symbol of self-sacrificing resistance.
The government, fearing popular reaction, reduced the length of service and instead of sentencing ''insumisos'' to prison declared them unfit for public service.
Differently from the First World War, most sentences were relatively short, and there was no pattern of continually repeated sentences.
Persons who declare themselves to be conscientious objectors only after a crisis has started must, however, prove their conviction before a special board.
Jehovah's Witnesses and Christadelphians, refuse to participate in the armed services on the grounds that they believe they should be neutral in worldly conflicts and often cite the latter portion of  which states, "...neither shall they learn war anymore."
A more general right to refuse military service was not introduced until the First World War.
On September 15, 1939 August Dickmann, a Jehovah's Witness, the first conscientious objector of the war to be executed, died by a firing squad at the Sachsenhausen concentration camp.
Every year about 500 young men, mostly Jehovah's Witnesses, are arrested for refusing the draft.
Alternatively, they may serve without arms, although this, too, has its problems.
The use of all volunteer soldiers was hoped to remove the need to consider conscientious objectors.
According to Article 12a, a law may be passed that requires every adult male to military service called ''Wehrdienst''; also, a law can require conscientious objections to a service of utterly non-military nature (called ''Zivildienst'') no longer than the Wehrdienst.
Tribunals were notoriously harsh towards conscientious objectors, reflecting widespread public opinion that they were lazy, degenerate, ungrateful 'shirkers' seeking to benefit from the sacrifices of others.
On March 8, 1971, the Supreme Court of the United States ruled in the case of ''Gillette v. United States'' that "the exemption for those who oppose "participation in war in any form" applies to those who oppose participating in all war and not to those who object to participation in a particular war only."
The request of orthodox political parties to 'prevent neglect of studying the Torah' was granted by the authorities.
Unlike the earlier forestry and hospital service, later conscientious objectors were classified "enemies of the people" and their alternate service was performed in remote areas in a gulag-like environment in order to break their resistance and encourage enlistment.
They could refuse military service in exchange for a monetary payment.
The first conscription in the United States came with the Civil War.
In January 2006, the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) found Turkey had violated article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights (prohibition of degrading treatment) in a case dealing with the conscientious objection of Osman Murat Ulke.
In 1987, the duration of the service was shortened to 13 months and the board of inspection was abolished.
Conditions were very hard for conscientious objector prisoners, many of whom were not used to manual work, lack of regular exercise, and the often cold, damp conditions; ten died in prison, and around seventy more died elsewhere as a result of their treatment.
The Church preferred to call them "conscientious participants", because they were willing to risk their lives as test subjects in potentially life-threatening research.
The law was dubbed "Lex Pekurinen" after him.
Formal legislation to exempt objectors from fighting was first granted in mid-18th century Great Britain following problems with attempting to force Quakers into military service.
As of March 2011, there were 125 objectors including 25 female objectors in Turkey.
During the American Revolutionary War, exemptions varied by state.
Alternatives to war bonds and war savings stamps were provided for those who would not fund the war for conscientious reasons.
Of the 61,000 who were registered, 3,000 were given complete exemption; 18,000 applications were initially dismissed, but a number of such applicants succeeded at the Appellate Tribunal, sometimes after a "qualifying" sentence of three-months' imprisonment for an offence deemed to have been committed on grounds of conscience.
After the Russian Revolution of 1917, Leon Trotsky issued a decree allowing alternative service for religious objectors whose sincerity was determined upon examination.
Under the Nazis, conscientious objection was not recognized in the law.
These pilots clarified: "We ... shall continue to serve in the Israel Defense Forces and the Air Force for every mission in defense of the state of Israel."
In Greece, civilian service is twice as long as the corresponding military service; the Swiss Civilian Service is one and one-half times longer.
Members of the Historic Peace Churches such as Quakers, Mennonites, Amish, Old Order Mennonite, Conservative Mennonites and Church of the Brethren object to war from the conviction that Christian life is incompatible with military action, because Jesus enjoins his followers to love their enemies and to refuse violence.
The difference was decreased over time, and equal length was reintroduced in 2004.
In total over 350 volunteered.
The Zivildienst was for times up to one third longer than the Wehrdienst, which seemed to contradict the Constitution at first sight but was jointly justified by the fact that soldiers could later be called to military exercises (''Wehrübungen''), had to work longer, and that with the more lenient acceptation since 1983, the will to endure some additional hardship should serve as a test of conscience (ruled constitutional by the Court of Constitution in 1985).
On January 15, 2009, the Korean Presidential Commission on Suspicious Deaths in the Military released its decision acknowledging that the government was responsible for the deaths of five young men, who were Jehovah's Witnesses and had forcibly been conscripted into the army.
In November 1940 it was decided to allow troops in the NCC to volunteer for work in bomb disposal.
In 1923 he ''selectively'' refused to serve in the RAF Iraq Command.
He has ''only'', and ''convincingly'', to show that his conscience does not allow participation in an organization which is intended to use violence.
South Korea's stance has drawn criticism from The U.N. Human Rights Committee, which argues that South Korea is violating article 18 of the ICCPR, which guarantees freedom of thought and conscience.
It is not enough for a person to be in disagreement with his government regarding the political justification for a particular military action.
In 2012, the Israeli Supreme Court ruled in the case of ''Ressler et al.
Arguments like "The army is senseless," "It is not just to wage wars," or opposition to involvement in a specific war (World War II, the Vietnam War, the Iraq War; a hypothetical war of West Germany against fellow Germans from the GDR during the Cold War) will hardly ever be accepted.
By 1864 the draft act allowed the $300 to be paid for the benefit of sick and wounded soldiers.
Historically, many conscientious objectors have been executed, imprisoned, or otherwise penalized when their beliefs led to actions conflicting with their society's legal system or government.
