Article 79, Section 3 states that these principles cannot be changed, even according to the methods of amendment defined elsewhere in the document, until a new constitution comes into effect.
The process by which a country adopts a constitution is closely tied to the historical and political context driving this fundamental change.
Each constitution must be consistent with, and derive its authority from, the ones before it, as well as from a historical act of society formation or constitutional ratification.
In ethnic nation-states such as Estonia, the mission of the state can be defined as preserving a specific nation, language and culture.
Some constitutions include additional branches, such as an auditory branch.
This deliberate Manifestation can be and has been abused to allow a government to suppress dissent without regard for human rights—see the article on state of emergency.
These continental codes were all composed in Latin, while Anglo-Saxon was used for those of England, beginning with the Code of Æthelberht of Kent (602).
An uncodified constitution is one that is not contained in a single document, consisting of several different sources, which may be written or unwritten; see constitutional convention.
Alternatively, a national referendum may be required.
Around 1240, the Coptic Egyptian Christian writer, 'Abul Fada'il Ibn al-'Assal, wrote the ''Fetha Negest'' in Arabic.
The Romans first codified their constitution in 450 BC as the ''Twelve Tables''.
Another example is the Constitution of Honduras, which has an article stating that the article itself and certain other articles cannot be changed in any circumstances.
1971, 1982) and 1999).
''No free man shall be arrested, or imprisoned, or deprived of his property, or outlawed, or exiled, or in any way destroyed, nor shall we go against him or send against him, unless by legal judgement of his peers, or by the law of the land.''
This article, Article 39, of the ''Magna Carta'' read:
Legal transplants of Roman-Byzantine law became the basis of the Serbian medieval law.
However, the presence of statutes with constitutional significance, namely the Statute of Westminster, as adopted by the Commonwealth in the Statute of Westminster Adoption Act 1942, and the Australia Act 1986 means that Australia's constitution is not contained in a single constitutional document.
'Ibn al-Assal took his laws partly from apostolic writings and Mosaic law, and partly from the former Byzantine codes.
The precise dating of the Constitution of Medina remains debated but generally scholars agree it was written shortly after the Hijra (622).
Historians including Donald Grinde, Bruce Johansen and others believe that the Iroquois constitution provided inspiration for the United States Constitution and in 1988 was recognised by a resolution in Congress.
The ''Leges Statutae Republicae Sancti Marini'' was written in Latin and consists of six books.
Uncodified constitutions are the product of an "evolution" of laws and conventions over centuries.
Sometimes the problem is not that a statute is unconstitutional, but the application of it is, on a particular occasion, and a court may decide that while there are ways it could be applied that are constitutional, that instance was not allowed or legitimate.
Charles had rejected the propositions, but before the start of the Second Civil War, the Grandees of the New Model Army had presented the ''Heads of Proposals'' as their alternative to the more radical Agreement of the People presented by the Agitators and their civilian supporters at the Putney Debates.
For example, the United Kingdom has traditionally operated under the principle of parliamentary sovereignty under which the laws passed by United Kingdom Parliament could not be questioned by the courts.
The Carta was a work of great importance in Sardinian history.
Other examples of European constitutions of this era were the Corsican Constitution of 1755 and the Swedish Constitution of 1772.
This began with revival of the Roman law of nations concept and its application to the relations among nations, and they sought to establish customary "laws of war and peace" to ameliorate wars and make them less likely.
The principle of parliamentary sovereignty holds that no sovereign parliament may be bound by the acts of its predecessors; and there is no higher authority that can create law which binds Parliament.
However, the Supreme Court did not identify specific provisions which are in the category of absolute entrenchment.
Procedures for constitutional amendment vary between states.
A seminal juncture in this line of discourse arose in England from the Civil War, the Cromwellian Protectorate, the writings of Thomas Hobbes, Samuel Rutherford, the Levellers, John Milton, and James Harrington, leading to the debate between Robert Filmer, arguing for the divine right of monarchs, on the one side, and on the other, Henry Neville, James Tyrrell, Algernon Sidney, and John Locke.
In 506, the ''Breviarum'' or ''"Lex Romana"'' of Alaric II, king of the Visigoths, adopted and consolidated the ''Codex Theodosianus'' together with assorted earlier Roman laws.
For example, a students' union may be prohibited as an organization from engaging in activities not concerning students; if the union becomes involved in non-student activities these activities are considered ''ultra vires'' of the union's charter, and nobody would be compelled by the charter to follow them.
No special "constitutional amendment" procedure is required.
All of the British colonies in North America that were to become the 13 original United States, adopted their own constitutions in 1776 and 1777, during the American Revolution (and before the later Articles of Confederation and United States Constitution), with the exceptions of Massachusetts, Connecticut and Rhode Island.
For example, executive branches can be divided into a head of government, government departments/ministries, executive agencies and a civil service/administration.
Entrenchment is an inherent feature in most codified constitutions.
It also required the calling of triennial Parliaments, with each sitting for at least five months.
They operated under a series of laws that were added from time to time, but Roman law was never reorganised into a single code until the ''Codex Theodosianus'' (AD 438); later, in the Eastern Empire the ''Codex repetitæ prælectionis'' (534) was highly influential throughout Europe.
Details are to be found in the articles on the constitutions of the various nations and federal states in the world.
On January 4, 1649 the Rump Parliament declared "that the  people are, under God, the original of all just power; that the Commons of England, being chosen by and representing the people, have the supreme power in this nation".
Within states, a constitution defines the principles upon which the state is based, the procedure in which laws are made and by whom.
It was in force in Sardinia until it was superseded by the code of Charles Felix in April 1827.
The ''Instrument of Government'' was adopted by Parliament on December 15, 1653 and Oliver Cromwell was installed as Lord Protector on the following day.
This unmodifiability article played an important role in the 2009 Honduran constitutional crisis.
A confederal state comprises again several regions, but the central structure has only limited coordinating power, and sovereignty is located in the regions.
It constituted a formal agreement between Muhammad and all of the significant tribes and families of Yathrib (later known as Medina), including Muslims, Jews, and pagans.
Codified constitutions are often the product of some dramatic political change, such as a revolution.
One of the first of these Germanic law codes to be written was the Visigothic ''Code of Euric'' (471).
In 1392 the ''Carta de Logu'' was legal code of the Giudicato of Arborea promulgated by the ''giudicessa'' Eleanor.
Cleisthenes again reformed the Athenian constitution and set it on a democratic footing in 508 BC.
A federal state has a central structure with at most a small amount of territory mainly containing the institutions of the federal government, and several regions (called ''states'', ''provinces'', etc.)
Most commonly, the term ''constitution'' refers to a set of rules and principles that define the nature and extent of government.
In 1222, Hungarian King Andrew II issued the Golden Bull of 1222.
These laws had, as the other modern constitutions, preeminence over other laws, and they could not be contradicted by mere decrees or edicts of the king.
In some states the text of the constitution may be changed; in others the original text is not changed, and amendments are passed which add to and may override the original text and earlier amendments.
This finally met its demise in conjunction with the death of Cromwell and the Restoration of the monarchy.
This provision became the cornerstone of English liberty after that point.
Lack of entrenchment is a characteristic of uncodified constitutions; the constitution is not recognised with any higher legal status than ordinary statutes.
This was followed by the ''Lex Burgundionum'', applying separate codes for Germans and for Romans; the ''Pactus Alamannorum''; and the Salic Law of the Franks, all written soon after 500.
It eased the burden of the workers, and determined that membership of the ruling class was to be based on wealth (plutocracy), rather than by birth (aristocracy).
Several rights that in another state might be guaranteed by constitution have indeed been abolished or modified by the British parliament in the early 21st century, including the unconditional right to trial by jury, the right to silence without prejudicial inference, permissible detention before a charge is made extended from 24 hours to 42 days, and the right not to be tried twice for the same offence.
Between 1220 and 1230, a Saxon administrator, Eike von Repgow, composed the ''Sachsenspiegel'', which became the supreme law used in parts of Germany as late as 1900.
''Ultra vires'' gives a legal justification for the forced cessation of such action, which might be enforced by the people with the support of a decision of the judiciary, in a case of judicial review.
893, Alfred the Great combined this and two other earlier Saxon codes, with various Mosaic and Christian precepts, to produce the ''Doom book'' code of laws for England.
A codified constitution is a written constitution contained in a single document, states that do not have such a document have uncodified constitutions but not entirely unwritten constitutions since much of an uncodified constitution is usually written in laws, such as the Basic Laws of Israel or the Parliament Acts of the United Kingdom.
The Constitution of Canada came into force on July 1, 1867 as the British North America Act, an act of the British Parliament.
Many constitutions allow the declaration under exceptional circumstances of some form of state of emergency during which some rights and guarantees are suspended.
The leader of the national emancipation process was the Portuguese prince Pedro I, elder son of the king of Portugal.
The document was drawn up with the explicit concern of bringing to an end the bitter intertribal fighting between the clans of the Aws (Aus) and Khazraj within Medina.
Italian political theorist Giovanni Sartori noted the existence of national constitutions which are a facade for authoritarian sources of power.
Articles 1 and 20 protect human dignity, human rights, democracy, rule of law, federal and social state principles, and the people's right of resistance as a last resort against an attempt to abolish the constitutional order.
Japan's ''Seventeen-article constitution'' written in 604, reportedly by Prince Shōtoku, is an early example of a constitution in Asian political history.
This idea was extended and refined by the English barony when they forced King John to sign ''Magna Carta'' in 1215.
The second is the ''constitution of society'', an unwritten and commonly understood set of rules for the society formed by a social contract before it establishes a government, by which it establishes the third, a ''constitution of government''.
After tribal people first began to live in cities and establish nations, many of these functioned according to unwritten customs, while some developed autocratic, even tyrannical monarchs, who ruled by decree, or mere personal whim.
These Constitutions were usually made formally as a royal initiative, but required for its approval or repeal the favorable vote of the Catalan Courts, the medieval antecedent of the modern Parliaments.
The term ''constitution'' comes through French from the Latin word ''constitutio'', used for regulations and orders, such as the imperial enactments (''constitutiones principis'': edicta, mandata, decreta, rescripta).
Constitutions vary extensively as to the degree of separation of powers between these branches.
This led to considerations of what authority monarchs or other officials have and don't have, from where that authority derives, and the remedies for the abuse of such authority.
It is notable in that it established a democratic standard for the separation of powers in government between the legislative, executive, and judiciary branches, well before the publication of Montesquieu's ''Spirit of the Laws''.
Some constitutions are largely, but not wholly, codified.
Even so, its first recorded use in the function of a constitution (supreme law of the land) is with Sarsa Dengel beginning in 1563.
Brownson argued that it is not ratification alone that makes a written constitution of government legitimate, but that it must also be competently designed and applied.
The oldest written document still governing a sovereign nation today is that of San Marino.
This was followed in the east by the ''Ecloga'' of Leo III the Isaurian (740) and the ''Basilica'' of Basil I (878).
it is not a power granted to the government by the constitution, that act is ''null and void'', and the nullification is ''ab initio'', that is, from inception, not from the date of the finding.
Beside decrees that organized the life of church, there are various norms regarding civil life, most of them were taken from Prohiron.
, loses a particularly important vote in parliament such as vote on the budget.
The terms ''written constitution'' and ''codified constitution'' are often used interchangeably, as are ''unwritten constitution'' and ''uncodified constitution'', although this usage is technically inaccurate.
The US constitution is an example of an entrenched constitution, and the UK constitution is an example of a constitution that is not entrenched (or codified).
That is, if there is any conflict between a legal statute and the codified constitution, all or part of the statute can be declared ''ultra vires'' by a court, and struck down as unconstitutional.
Some of the better-known ancient law codes include the code of Lipit-Ishtar of Isin, the code of Hammurabi of Babylonia, the Hittite code, the Assyrian code and Mosaic law.
The ''Edicts of Ashoka'' established constitutional principles for the 3rd century BC Maurya king's rule in Ancient India.
The English Protectorate that was set up by Oliver Cromwell after the English Civil War promulgated the first detailed written constitution adopted by a modern state; it was called the Instrument of Government.
Most constitutions seek to regulate the relationship between institutions of the state, in a basic sense the relationship between the executive, legislature and the judiciary, but also the relationship of institutions within those branches.
The ''Fetha Negest'' remained the supreme law in Ethiopia until 1931, when a modern-style Constitution was first granted by Emperor Haile Selassie I.
This formed the basis of government for the short lived republic from 1653 to 1657 by providing a legal rationale for the increasing power of Cromwell, after Parliament consistently failed to govern effectively.
The Constitution of Medina (, Ṣaḥīfat al-Madīna), also known as the Charter of Medina, was drafted by the Islamic prophet Muhammad after his flight (hijra to Yathrib where he became political leader.
According to Brownson there are, in a sense, three "constitutions" involved: The first the ''constitution of nature'' that includes all of what was called "natural law."
Constitutions may also provide that their most basic principles can never be abolished, even by amendment.
Brownson argued that a state is a society with effective dominion over a well-defined territory, that consent to a well-designed constitution of government arises from presence on that territory, and that it is possible for provisions of a written constitution of government to be "unconstitutional" if they are inconsistent with the constitutions of nature or society.
The Petition offered hereditary monarchy to Oliver Cromwell, asserted Parliament's control over issuing new taxation, provided an independent council to advise the king and safeguarded 'Triennial' meetings of Parliament.
Historically, the remedy for such violations have been petitions for common law writs, such as ''quo warranto''.
The presence or lack of entrenchment is a fundamental feature of constitutions.
Influenced by Buddhist teachings, the document focuses more on social morality than institutions of government ''per se'' and remains a notable early attempt at a government constitution.
The Court has identified judicial review, independence of Judiciary, free and fair election, core of Fundamental Rights as a few of the essential features which are unamendable.
Many of the Germanic people that filled the power vacuum left by the Western Roman Empire in the Early Middle Ages codified their laws.
Apart from the ''Constitution Acts, 1867 to 1982'', Canada's constitution also has unwritten elements based in common law and convention.
Over a century later, the BNA Act was patriated to the Canadian Parliament and augmented with the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms.
Confederal constitutions are rare, and there is often dispute to whether so-called "confederal" states are actually federal.
A modified version of the Humble Petition with the clause on kingship removed was ratified on 25 May.
The example demonstrates that the protections and benefits of a constitution are ultimately provided not through its written terms but through deference by government and society to its principles.
St. Sava's Nomocanon was the compilation of Civil law, based on Roman Law and Canon law, based on Ecumenical Councils and its basic purpose was to organize functioning of the young Serbian kingdom and the Serbian church.
''constitute'', what the entity is.
In his works ''Constitution of Athens'', ''Politics'', and ''Nicomachean Ethics'' he explores different constitutions of his day, including those of Athens, Sparta, and Carthage.
Some constitutions (such as the constitution of the United Kingdom) are uncodified, but written in numerous fundamental Acts of a legislature, court cases or treaties.
Anthropologist Dean Snow stated that though Franklin's Albany Plan may have drawn some inspiration from the Iroquois League, there is little evidence that either the Plan or the Constitution drew substantially from this source and argues that "...such claims muddle and denigrate the subtle and remarkable features of Iroquois government.
They were taken from the Byzantine code Basilika (book VII, 1, 16–17).
The Code was based on Roman-Byzantine law.
In the Principality of Catalonia, the Catalan constitutions were promulgated by the Court from 1283 (or even two centuries before, if we consider the Usatges of Barcelona as part of the compilation of Constitutions) until 1716, when Philip V of Spain gave the Nueva Planta decrees, finishing with the historical laws of Catalonia.
While elsewhere, like in the United Kingdom, the concept of declaring an act to be unconstitutional does not exist.
In 621 BC a scribe named Draco codified the cruel oral laws of the city-state of Athens; this code prescribed the death penalty for many offences (nowadays very severe rules are often called "Draconian").
In 506, the ''Breviarum'' or ''"Lex Romana"'' of Alaric II, king of the Visigoths, adopted and consolidated the ''Codex Theodosianus'' together with assorted earlier Roman laws.
The legal transplanting is notable with the articles 171 and 172 of Dušan's Code, which regulated the juridical independence.
certain articles may not be amended under any circumstances.
Codified constitutions normally consist of a ceremonial preamble, which sets forth the goals of the state and the motivation for the constitution, and several articles containing the substantive provisions.
Each built on the ideas of those before concerning what those principles might be.
Sovereignty is divided between the centre and the constituent regions.
Most of the concepts and ideas embedded into modern constitutional theory, especially bicameralism, separation of powers, the written constitution, and judicial review, can be traced back to the experiments of that period.
The thesis is not considered credible by some scholars.
States that have codified constitutions normally give the constitution supremacy over ordinary statute law.
In practice democratic governments do not use the lack of entrenchment of the constitution to impose the will of the government or abolish all civil rights, as they could in theory do, but the distinction between constitutional and other law is still somewhat arbitrary, usually following historical principles embodied in important past legislation.
The Serbian revolution initially led to a proclamation of a proto-constitution in 1811; the full-fledged Constitution of Serbia followed few decades later, in 1835.
An extreme example was the Constitution of the Soviet Union that on paper supported freedom of assembly and freedom of speech; however, citizens who transgressed unwritten limits were summarily imprisoned.
This legal act was well developed.
''Agreements and Constitutions of Laws and Freedoms of the Zaporizian Host'' was written in 1710 by Pylyp Orlyk, ''hetman'' of the Zaporozhian Host.
In some countries, such as Germany, this function is carried out by a dedicated constitutional court which performs this (and only this) function.
The constitution set up a state council consisting of 21 members while executive authority was vested in the office of "Lord Protector of the Commonwealth"; this position was designated as a non-hereditary life appointment.
It was never "law", even though, if it had been a statute or statutory provision, it might have been adopted according to the procedures for adopting legislation.
The standard model, described by the Baron de Montesquieu, involves three branches of government: executive, legislative and judicial.
This view can be seen in Plato, who called for rule by "philosopher-kings."
Some constitutions, especially codified constitutions, also act as limiters of state power, by establishing lines which a state's rulers cannot cross, such as fundamental rights.
These rules served in a very real sense as a constitution for the Ming Dynasty for the next 250 years.
They also classified various historical examples of governmental designs, typically into democracies, aristocracies, or monarchies, and considered how just and effective each tended to be and why, and how the advantages of each might be obtained by combining elements of each into a more complex design that balanced competing tendencies.
These rules together make up, i.e.
Constitutions also establish where sovereignty is located in the state.
Systems that appeared somewhat later include the ''Edictum Rothari'' of the Lombards (643), the ''Lex Visigothorum'' (654), the ''Lex Alamannorum'' (730) and the ''Lex Frisionum'' (''ca'' 785).
The following are features of democratic constitutions that have been identified by political scientists to exist, in one form or another, in virtually all national constitutions.
This Constitution also limited the executive authority of the ''hetman'', and established a democratically elected Cossack parliament called the General Council.
893, Alfred the Great combined this and two other earlier Saxon codes, with various Mosaic and Christian precepts, to produce the ''Doom book'' code of laws for England.
In a nation with a federal system of government the approval of a majority of state or provincial legislatures may be required.
Some unitary states (Spain is an example) devolve more and more power to sub-national governments until the state functions in practice much like a federal state.
However the Norwegians managed to infuse a radically democratic and liberal constitution in 1814, adopting many facets from the American constitution and the revolutionary French ones; but maintaining a hereditary monarch limited by the constitution, like the Spanish one.
The strongest level of entrenchment exists in those constitutions that state that some of their most fundamental principles are absolute, i.e.
A constitution may change from being real to a facade and back again as democratic and autocratic governments succeed each other.
The constitutions of Canada and the United States establish federal states, with power divided between the federal government and the provinces or states.
Ultimately it is always possible for a constitution to be overthrown by internal or external force, for example, a revolution (perhaps claiming to be justified by the right to revolution) or invasion.
The Latin term ''ultra vires'' describes activities of officials within an organization or polity that fall outside the constitutional or statutory authority of those officials.
An amendment of a constitution that is made consistently with that constitution, except that it violates the absolute non-modifiability, can be called an ''unconstitutional constitutional law''.
It was an organic, coherent, and systematic work of legislation encompassing the civil and penal law.
Each of the regions may in turn have its own constitution (of unitary nature).
A fundamental classification is codification or lack of codification.
For constitutional principles almost lost to antiquity, see the code of Manu.
The entrenched clauses of a constitution can create different degrees of entrenchment, ranging from simply excluding constitutional amendment from the normal business of a legislature, to making certain amendments either more difficult than normal modifications, or forbidden under any circumstances.
While such documents may express respect for human rights or establish an independent judiciary, they may be ignored when the government feels threatened, or never put into practice.
He classified both what he regarded as good and what he regarded as bad constitutions, and came to the conclusion that the best constitution was a mixed system, including monarchic, aristocratic, and democratic elements.
The most important single article of the ''Magna Carta'', related to "''habeas corpus''", provided that the king was not permitted to imprison, outlaw, exile or kill anyone at a whim—there must be due process of law first.
Article 374 of the Honduras Constitution asserts this unmodifiability, stating, "It is not possible to reform, in any case, the preceding article, the present article, the constitutional articles referring to the form of government, to the national territory, to the presidential period, the prohibition to serve again as President of the Republic, the citizen who has performed under any title in consequence of which she/he cannot be President of the Republic in the subsequent period."
This was followed by the ''Lex Burgundionum'', applying separate codes for Germans and for Romans; the ''Pactus Alamannorum''; and the Salic Law of the Franks, all written soon after 500.
What arose from the latter was a concept of government being erected on the foundations of first, a state of nature governed by natural laws, then a state of society, established by a social contract or compact, which bring underlying natural or social laws, before governments are formally established on them as foundations.
It led to the system of Constitutional Monarchy, with further reforms shifting the balance of power from the monarchy and nobility to the House of Commons.
The second would include such elements as the making of decisions by public conventions called by public notice and conducted by established rules of procedure.
A critical analysis of the Doctrine of Basic Structure appears in Professor M.K.
In a unitary state, sovereignty resides in the state itself, and the constitution determines this.
Pedro was crowned in 1822 as first emperor of Brazil.
The Nomocanon of Saint Sava () was the first Serbian constitution from 1219.
The Constitution of India is the longest written constitution of any sovereign country in the world, containing 444 articles in 22 parts, 12 schedules and 118 amendments, with 146,385 words in its English-language version, while the Constitution of Monaco is the shortest written constitution, containing 10 chapters with 97 articles, and a total of 3,814 words.
Later, the term was widely used in canon law for an important determination, especially a decree issued by the Pope, now referred to as an ''apostolic constitution''.
In the UK, the constitutional doctrine of Parliamentary sovereignty dictates than sovereignty is ultimately contained at the centre.
There may be a requirement for a special body to be set up, or the proportion of favourable votes of members of existing legislative bodies may be required to be higher to pass a constitutional amendment than for statutes.
The first Swiss Federal Constitution was put in force in September 1848 (with official revisions in 1878, 1891, (1949.
The country was ruled by Constitutional monarchy until 1889, when finally adopted the Republican model.
In such a case, only the application may be ruled unconstitutional.
The territory of the state may be divided into regions, but they are not sovereign and are subordinate to the state.
These continental codes were all composed in Latin, while Anglo-Saxon was used for those of England, beginning with the Code of Æthelberht of Kent (602).
Confidence can be lost if the government loses a vote of no confidence or, depending on the country
In constitutions that are not entrenched, no special procedure is required for modification.
In case a formally valid amendment of a constitution infringes these principles protected against any amendment, it may constitute a so-called ''unconstitutional constitutional law''.
The ''Instrument of Government'' was replaced in May 1657 by England's second, and last, codified constitution, the Humble Petition and Advice, proposed by Sir Christopher Packe.
which compose the territory of the whole state.
It is thus the most basic law of a territory from which all the other laws and rules are hierarchically derived; in some territories it is in fact called "Basic Law".
The social contract in the original case was between the king and the nobility, but was gradually extended to all of the people.
In the Constitution of India, the Supreme Court has created the Doctrine of Basic Structure in Kesavananda Bharti's case (1973) stating that the essential features of the Basic structure cannot be amended by the Parliament.
Canada's constitution consists of almost 30 different statutes.
Some, such as Montesquieu, also examined how the functions of government, such as legislative, executive, and judicial, might appropriately be separated into branches.
The most basic definition he used to describe a constitution in general terms was "the arrangement of the offices in a state".
A violation of rights by an official would be ''ultra vires'' because a (constitutional) right is a restriction on the powers of government, and therefore that official would be exercising powers they do not have.
The remaining books cover criminal and civil law, judicial procedures and remedies.
