International government
Social conservatism, Hindutva and Cultural Nationalism are some major ideologies of BJP.
The majority of the party sided with Derby, whilst about a third split away, eventually merging with the Whigs and the radicals to form the Liberal Party.
After the Second World War, the first Labour government (1945–1951) under Clement Attlee embarked on a program of nationalization of industry and the promotion of social welfare.
The split occurred in 1846 over the issue of free trade, which Peel supported, versus protectionism, supported by Derby.
Critical of state assistance to followers of Haredi Judaism.
As early as 1835, Disraeli attacked the Whigs and utilitarians as slavishly devoted to an industrial oligarchy, while he described his fellow Tories as the only "really democratic party of England" and devoted to the interests of the whole people.
Edmund Burke, an 18th-century politician who opposed the French Revolution but supported the American Revolution, is credited as one of the main theorists of conservatism in Britain in the 1790s.
UMP, DLR and MPF: Social market economy, distributism, nationalisation of major industries, loosely influenced by neoliberalism, moderate welfare system.
Defends secularism.Influenced by Catholic social teaching.
The Conservatives combined pro-market liberalism and Toryism.
Historically, the term often referred to the combination of economic liberalism, which champions laissez-faire markets, with the classical conservatism concern for established tradition, respect for authority and religious values.
In some cases, conservative values are grounded in religious beliefs, and some conservatives seek to increase the role of religion in public life.
In cultural and social affairs Putin has collaborated closely with the Russian Orthodox Church.
Holding a monopoly over administrative and judicial offices, they were called the "Family Compact" in Ontario and the "Chateau Clique" in Quebec.
In Favor of English Votes for English Laws and sympathetic to ideas of English Devolution
A second meaning of the term ''social conservatism'' developed in the Nordic countries and continental Europe.
They believe strongly in traditional values and traditional politics, and often have an urgent sense of nationalism.
Hartz explained conservatism in Quebec and Latin America as a result of their settlement as feudal societies.
In Germany, Chancellor Leo von Caprivi promoted a progressive conservative agenda called the "New Course".
Anchoring the ultra tories, ''Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine''  stood firmly against Catholic emancipation, and favoured slavery, cheap money, mercantilism, the Navigation acts, and the Holy Alliance.
They also found that the correlation between racism and conservatism could be entirely accounted for by their mutual relationship with social dominance orientation.
Originally opposed to but now accepting of Scottish Devolution and Welsh Devolution.
Psychologist Felicia Pratto and her colleagues have found evidence to support the idea that a high social dominance orientation (SDO) is strongly correlated with conservative political views, and opposition to social engineering to promote equality, though Pratto's findings have been highly controversial .
Toryism became marginalized during the long period of Whig ascendancy in the 18th century.
FI, LN: Small decentralised state.
He was president for 16 years, until his assassination on October 26, 1979.
Most conservatives, especially in the United States, believe that government action should focus on moral and social questions and oppose government action to help the poor, to regulate the economy, or to protect the environment.
Though Adolf Hitler succeeded in garnering the support of many German industrialists, prominent traditionalists openly and secretly opposed his policies of euthanasia, genocide, and attacks on organized religion, including Claus von Stauffenberg, Dietrich Bonhoeffer, Henning von Tresckow, Bishop Clemens August Graf von Galen, and the monarchist Carl Friedrich Goerdeler.
More broadly the  ''New York Times'' reports in September 2016 how that Church's policy prescriptions support the Kremlin's appeal to social conservatives:
The party's Roh Tae-woo became the first president who was elected through direct election.
All: Support closer ties with Russia.
Its head, Chun Doo-hwan, also gained power through a coup.
They believe that government programs that seek to provide services and opportunities for the poor actually encourage dependence and reduce self-reliance.
They saw the Anglican Church and the aristocracy as balances against commercial wealth.
Some traditionalists have embraced the labels "reactionary" and "counterrevolutionary", defying the stigma that has attached to these terms since the Enlightenment.
Argentina, Brazil, El Salvador and Peru are examples of nations where this did not occur.
The Founding Declaration of the Independent Greeks strongly emphasises in the preservation of the Greek state and its sovereignty, the Greek people and the Greek Orthodox Church.
The Liberal Party of Australia adheres to the principles of social conservatism and liberal conservatism.
Shortly after Burke's death in 1797, conservatism revived as a mainstream political force as the Whigs suffered a series of internal divisions.
In 1952, Marshal Alexandros Papagos created the Greek Rally as an umbrella for the right-wing forces.
Electorally, it was considered a key force in Republicans reclaiming control of the U.S. House of Representatives in 2010.
During Kåre Willoch's premiership in the 1980s, much emphasis was laid on liberalizing the credit- and housing market and abolishing the NRK TV and radio monopoly, while supporting law and order in criminal justice and traditional norms in education
Allegations of statism and authoritarianism.
However, the Glorious Revolution of 1688 destroyed this principle to some degree by establishing a constitutional government in England, leading to the hegemony of the Tory-opposed Whig ideology.
Although conservatives opposed attempts to allow greater representation of the middle class in parliament, in 1834 they conceded that electoral reform could not be reversed and promised to support further reforms so long as they did not erode the institutions of church and state.
Mark Woods provides specific examples of how the Church under Patriarch Kirill of Moscow has backed the expansion of Russian power into Crimea and eastern Ukraine.
Other modern conservative positions include opposition to world government and opposition to environmentalism.
The Council of Europe has called the SVP "extreme right", although some scholars dispute this classification.
National conservatism is also related to traditionalist conservatism.
It stresses the importance of a social safety net to deal with poverty, support of limited redistribution of wealth along with government regulation to regulate markets in the interests of both consumers and producers.
He favored an established church, but allowed for a degree of religious toleration.
Opposed to nuclear disarmament.
Opposed to nuclear disarmament.
Defence of catholic society, public morality and traditional family, opposes abortion, euthanasia, in-vitro, civil unions, same-sex marriage.
Radicalism often generates youth movements, while conservatism is a condition found among the mature, who have discovered what it is in life they most value."
In the Netherlands, conservatives merged into a new Christian democratic party in 1980.
LN and FdI: Sceptical about the EU and NATO.
Critics of the Italian constitution and the Italian judiciary
This new generation of conservatives derived their politics not from Burke but from his predecessor, the Viscount Bolingbroke (1678–1751), who was a Jacobite and traditional Tory, lacking Burke's sympathies for Whiggish policies such as Catholic Emancipation and American independence (famously attacked by Samuel Johnson in "Taxation No Tyranny").
Although both ideologies shared core values such as nationalism and had common enemies such as communism and materialism, there was nonetheless a contrast between the traditionalist nature of authoritarian conservatism and the revolutionary, palingenetic, and populist nature of fascism; thus, it was common for authoritarian conservative regimes to suppress rising fascist and National Socialist movements.
Burke was a leading theorist in his day, finding extreme idealism (either Tory or Whig) an endangerment to broader liberties, and (like Hume) rejecting abstract reason as an unsound guide for political theory.
Critics of Polish constitution and judiciary.
However, in some nations where the elites were able to mobilize popular support for conservative parties, longer periods of political stability were achieved.
The Conservative Party of Venezuela disappeared following the Federal Wars of 1858-1863.
Putin has promoted new think tanks that bring together like-minded intellectuals and writers.
UMP: Interventionist, favor closer ties with the United States.
Conservatism in France focused on The rejection of the French Revolution, support for the Catholic Church, and the restoration of the monarchy.
There have been a variety of progressive conservative governments.
Its policies include the legal equality of all men, the citizen's right to own property and opposition to dictatorship.
Canada, Ireland, and Portugal had right-wing political parties that defied categorization: the Progressive Conservative Party of Canada; Fianna Fáil, Fine Gael, and Progressive Democrats in Ireland; and the Social Democratic Party of Portugal.
Mixture of state regulation and market freedoms, nationalisation only of strategic industries, moderate re-distribution of wealth, rejection of communism.
They developed in the socio-economic and political cleavages that existed during the first three decades of the 19th century, and had the support of the business, professional and established Church (Anglican) elites in Ontario and to a lesser extent in Quebec.
Faced with defeat, the Tories reformed their movement, now holding that sovereignty was vested in the three estates of Crown, Lords, and Commons rather than solely in the Crown.
Sceptical about the European Union.
The Swiss People's Party (SVP or UDC) was formed from the 1971 merger of the Party of Farmers, Traders, and Citizens, formed in 1917 and the smaller Swiss Democratic Party, formed in 1942.
Social conservatives (in the first meaning of the word) in many countries generally favour the pro-life position in the abortion controversy and oppose human embryonic stem cell research (particularly if publicly funded); oppose both eugenics and human enhancement (transhumanism) while supporting bioconservatism; support a traditional definition of marriage as being one man and one woman; view the nuclear family model as society's foundational unit; oppose expansion of civil marriage and child adoption rights to couples in same-sex relationships; promote public morality and traditional family values; oppose atheism, especially militant atheism, secularism and the separation of church and state; support the prohibition of drugs, prostitution, and euthanasia; and support the censorship of pornography and what they consider to be obscenity or indecency.
While mostly in opposition during the 1930s, they embraced economic liberalism, but accepted the welfare state after the war and participated in governments supportive of state intervention and protectionism.
Support strong relations with India, Syria, Iran and China.
Robert Filmer's ''Patriarcha: or the Natural Power of Kings'', published posthumously in 1680 but written before the English Civil War of 1642–1651, became accepted as the statement of their doctrine.
Events after World War I brought the more radical version of classical liberalism to a more conservative (i.e.
The new party had four objectives: to confront Turkish expansionism in Cyprus, to reestablish and solidify democratic rule, to give the country a strong government, and to make a powerful moderate party a force in Greek politics.
Opposed to federalism.
Nevertheless, inside the party there was attention between the growing numbers of wealthy businessmen on the one side, and the aristocracy and rural gentry on the other.
Many Continental or Traditionalist conservatives do not support separation of Church and state, with most supporting state recognition of and cooperation with the Catholic Church, such as had existed in France before the Revolution.
The research also suggested that while most people are resistant to change, liberals are more tolerant of it.
The PP was able to re-group after the Second World War as part of a ''United Nationalist Front'' which achieved power campaigning on a simple anticommunist, ultranationalist platform during the Greek Civil War (1946–49).
Conservatives, UUP and DUP: Interventionist, favor closer ties with Saudi Arabia and Ukraine.
'''Conservatism''' as a political and social philosophy promotes retaining traditional social institutions in the context of culture and civilization.
Cultural conservatives support the preservation of the heritage of one nation, or of a shared culture that is not defined by national boundaries.
The Anti-Defamation League, a non-Swiss lobby group based in the USA has accused them of manipulating issues such as immigration, Swiss neutrality and welfare benefits, awakening anti-Semitism and racism.
The claim of the citizen is prior in time, paramount in title, superior in equity.
The number of Conservative groups, their lack of stability, and their tendency to be identified with local issues defy simple categorization.
This is also the case in countries where liberal economic ideas have been the tradition, such as the United States, and are thus considered conservative.
In the 2005 election it won 18 out of 179 seats in the ''Folketing'' and became a junior partner in coalition with the Liberals.
The Democratic Justice Party changed its form and acted to suppress the opposition party and to follow the people's demand for direct elections.
Typically the church was exempt from taxes and its employees immune from civil prosecution.
Factions are variously interventionist or non-interventionist.
This finding was echoed by Theodor Adorno.
Small conservative political parties, such as the United Kingdom Independence Party (founded in 1993) and the Democratic Unionist Party (founded in 1971), began to appear, although they have yet to make any significant impact at Westminster ( the DUP comprises the largest political party in the ruling coalition in the Northern Ireland Assembly).
Strong scepticism in relations with Iran.
This marked the beginning of the transformation of British conservatism from High Tory reactionism towards a more modern form based on "conservation".
Australia undertook significant economic reform under the Australian Labor Party in the mid-1980s.
The Independent Greeks, a newly formed political party in Greece has also supported conservatism, particularly national and religious conservatism.
Modern American social liberals in the New Deal do not disagree with that consensus view, but conservatives spend much more emphasis on the Revolutionary origins, with the Tea Party advocates using an episode from the 1770s for their name and some even dress in costumes from that era at their rallies.
Burke justified the social order on the basis of tradition: tradition represented the wisdom of the species and he valued community and social harmony over social reforms.
Liberal conservatism is a variant of conservatism that combines conservative values and policies with classical liberal stances.
This stance has allowed it to expand into German-speaking Catholic mountainous areas.
Historian Gregory Schneider identifies several constants in American conservatism: respect for tradition, support of republicanism, "the rule of law and the Christian religion," and a defense of "Western civilization from the challenges of modernist culture and totalitarian governments."
There it refers to liberal conservatives supporting modern European welfare states.
Influenced by secularism and Modern Orthodox Judaism.
In most modern democracies, political conservatism seeks to uphold traditional family structures and social values.
Canada's ''Conservatives'' had their roots in the Loyalists – Tories – who left America after the American Revolution.
Kenneth Minogue criticized Pratto's work, saying "It is characteristic of the conservative temperament to value established identities, to praise habit and to respect prejudice, not because it is irrational, but because such things anchor the darting impulses of human beings in solidities of custom which we do not often begin to value until we are already losing them.
However, since Burke there has always been tension between traditional aristocratic conservatism and the wealthy business class.
South Korea's major conservative party, the Saenuri Party or 새누리당, changed its form throughout its history.
Despite their influence on future conservative thought, none of these early contributors were explicitly involved in Tory politics.
Again, through election, its second leader, Kim Young-sam, became the fourteenth president of Korea.
Small centralised state.
Ware said that Australia, Germany, Israel, Italy, Japan, Malta, New Zealand, Spain and the US had no conservative parties, although they had either Christian Democrats or liberals as major right-wing parties.
Authoritarian conservatism refers to autocratic regimes that center their ideology around conservative nationalism rather than ethnic nationalism, though certain racial components such as antisemitism may exist.
He insisted on standards of honor derived from the medieval aristocratic tradition, and saw the aristocracy as the nation's natural leaders.
A meta-analysis of research literature by Jost, Glaser, Kruglanski, and Sulloway in 2003 found that many factors, such as intolerance of ambiguity and need for cognitive closure, contribute to the degree of one's political conservatism.
Mostly interventionist, strong scepticism in relations with Russia and Germany, majority support strong relations with the United States.
Currently the N-VA (nieuw-vlaamse alliantie / new-Flemish alliance) is the largest party in Belgium.
National conservatism is heavily oriented towards the traditional family and social stability as well as in favour of limiting immigration.
In the 1980s the Conservative government of Margaret Thatcher, guided by neoliberal economics, reversed many of Labour's programmes.
Since the late Kim Dae-jung assumed the presidency in 1998, GNP had not been the ruling party until Lee Myung-bak won the presidential election of 2007.
The Greek Rally came to power in 1952 and remained the leading party in Greece until 1963—after Papagos' death in 1955 reformed as the National Radical Union under Konstantinos Karamanlis.
Most recently, the Tea Party movement, founded in 2009, has proven a large outlet for populist American conservative ideas.
UKIP: Non-interventionist, favor closer ties with Russia.
Freedom, liberty, individualism,  traditionalism, law and order, gun ownership, defence of traditional family, against euthanasia, abortion, and same-sex marriage.Strong supporters of the American Constitution and the separation of powers.
They generally differ from paleoconservatives, in that they are in favor of more personal and economic freedom.
Hans-Georg Betz for example describes it as "populist radical right".
Strong, centralised state.
Its four main branches are Constitutionalism, paleolibertarianism, small government conservatism and Christian libertarianism.
Supportive of the European Union.
In Great Britain, conservative ideas (though not yet called that) emerged in the Tory movement during the Restoration period (1660–1688).
Where national conservative parties were weak or non-existent, conservatives were more likely to rely on military dictatorship as a preferred form of government.
In the second half of the 19th century the Liberal Party faced political schisms, especially over Irish Home Rule.
Conservative thought developed alongside nationalism in Germany, culminating in Germany's victory over France in the Franco-Prussian War, the creation of the unified German Empire in 1871, and the simultaneous rise of Otto von Bismarck on the European political stage.
Having a hierarchical view of society, many traditionalist conservatives, including a few Americans, defend the monarchical political structure as the most natural and beneficial social arrangement.
In 1940, all Japanese parties were merged into a single fascist party.
Defends monarchism and unionism.Rejects republicanism.Supports unelected House of Lords chamber.Defends first-past-the-post voting system.
Sack finds that the ''Quarterly Review'' promoted a balanced Canningite toryism; was neutral on Catholic emancipation and only mildly critical of Nonconformist Dissent; it opposed slavery and supported the current poor laws.
Gaullists held divergent views on social issues.
After a period of Liberal dominance before the First World War, the Conservatives gradually became more influential in government, regaining full control of the cabinet in 1922.
Unlike other Scandanivian conservative (and liberal) parties, it has always had a large working-class following.
Paleoconservatives, in opposition to multiculturalism, press for restrictions on immigration.
Mostly supportive of NATO, various factions are soft- and strong-eurosceptic.
They combined liberalism and conservatism, supported nationalization of infrastructure and opposed class conflict.
Today, German conservatism is often associated with Chancellor Angela Merkel, whose tenure has been marked by attempts to save the common European currency (euro) from demise.
Law and order, traditionalism, nationalism, individualism, defenders of the nature of the Jewish state, opposition to non-Jewish immigration, supporters of West Bank settlements.
Hooker lived in the 16th century, long before the advent of toryism, whilst Hume was an apolitical philosopher and Halifax similarly politically independent.
The party became known as the Conservative Party as a result, a name it has retained to this day.
International affairs
It has usually been Colombia's second largest party, with the Colombian Liberal Party being the largest.
During the Reagan administration, conservatives also supported the so-called "Reagan Doctrine" under which the U.S., as part of a Cold War strategy, provided military and other support to guerrilla insurgencies that were fighting governments identified as socialist or communist.
It has elements both of paternalism, stressing the responsibilities of the state, and of economic liberalism.
Burke was seldom mentioned but William Pitt the Younger (1759–1806) became a conspicuous hero.
In other countries where liberal conservative movements have entered the political mainstream, such as Italy and Spain, the terms ''liberal'' and ''conservative'' may be synonymous.
While the party advocates economic liberalism, it is committed to the social market economy.
A study done on Israeli and Palestinian students in Israel found that RWA scores of right-wing party supporters were significantly higher than those of left-wing party supporters.
Some commentators have identified a growing gap between national and economic conservatism: "most parties of the Right today are run by economic conservatives who, in varying degrees, have marginalized social, cultural, and national conservatives."
In the United States, conservatism is rooted in the American Revolution and its commitment to republicanism, sovereignty of the people, and the rights and liberties of Englishmen while expelling the king and his supporters.
Vladislav Surkov, a senior government official has been one of the key ideologists during Putin's presidency.
These new principles were presented in the Tamworth Manifesto of 1834, which historians regard as the basic statement of the beliefs of the new Conservative Party.
Burke described himself as a Whig.
Economic conservatives and libertarians favor small government, low taxes, limited regulation, and free enterprise.
While conservatism has been seen as an appeal to traditional, hierarchical society, some writers, such as Samuel P. Huntington, see it as situational.
FI, NCR and CR: Supportive of NATO, various factions are moderately supportive or sceptical about the EU.
The early studies focused on conservatives, beginning with Theodor W. Adorno's ''The Authoritarian Personality'' (1950) based on the F-scale personality test.
Following the war, Japanese conservatives briefly returned to politics but were largely purged from public office.
Sceptical about the United Nations and the European Union and critical of NATO.
This has developed as an opposition to the more collectivist views of socialism.
Despite the split, the mainstream Conservative Party accepted the doctrine of free trade in 1852.
Authoritarian conservative movements were prominent in the same era as fascism, with which it sometimes clashed.
They oppose affirmative action.
They worked toward legislation for improved working conditions and urban housing.
Favors closer ties with the United States, India and Russia.
Founded in 1924 as the Conservative Party, Iceland's Independence Party adopted its current name in 1929 after the merger with the Liberal Party.
The shared culture may be as divergent as Western culture or Chinese culture.
The Liberal Unionist influence dragged the Conservative Party towards the left; Conservative governments passing a number of progressive reforms at the turn of the 20th century.
It renamed to Saenoori Party (새누리당) in 2011.
In 1973, British psychologist Glenn Wilson published an influential book providing evidence that a general factor underlying conservative beliefs is "fear of uncertainty".
The meaning of "conservatism" in the United States has little in common with the way the word is used elsewhere.
The term, historically associated with right-wing politics, has since been used to describe a wide range of views.
A 2008 research report found that conservatives are happier than liberals, and that as income inequality increases, this difference in relative happiness increases, because conservatives (more than liberals) possess an ideological buffer against the negative hedonic effects of economic inequality.
Peel, however, would also be the root of a split in the party between the traditional Tories (led by the Earl of Derby and Benjamin Disraeli) and the 'Peelites' (led first by Peel himself, then by the Earl of Aberdeen).
Some conservatives lamented the passing of a pastoral world where the ethos of ''noblesse oblige'' had promoted respect from the lower classes.
Conservatives typically see Richard Hooker (1554–1600) as the founding father of conservatism, along with the Marquess of Halifax (1633–1695), David Hume (1711–1776) and Edmund Burke (1729–1797).
This viewpoint would later be called Tory Democracy.
Halifax promoted pragmatism in government, whilst Hume argued against political rationalism and utopianism.
The main interwar conservative party was called the People's Party (PP), which supported constitutional monarchy and opposed the republican Liberal Party.
It changed again one year later since the President Kim Young-sam was blamed by the citizen for the IMF.
Chile's conservative party, the National Party disbanded in 1973 following a military coup and did not re-emerge as a political force following the subsequent return to democracy.
Social conservatives may believe that the government has a role in encouraging or enforcing traditional values or behaviours.
First it was the Democratic-Republican Party(1963~1980); its head was Park Chung-hee who seized power in a 1961 military coup d'état and ruled as an unelected military strongman until his formal election as president in 1963.
Following the Second World War, psychologists conducted research into the different motives and tendencies that account for ideological differences between left and right.
Strong adherents to the Russian Orthodox Church.
