(State v. Luster, 1935), "Our Supreme Court has stated that constables perform all the duties of law enforcement officers and in particular 'a constable stands on the same footing as a sheriff.'"
Constables are peace officers with full police powers.
Upon completion of Act 44 certification and training, they may also serve as the law-enforcement arm of the court.
They can be assigned to work with agencies (e.g.
Also in this set of changes, coroners who were elected judicial death investigators were generally replaced by medical examiners who were required to be a medical doctor, osteopath, dentist, lawyer or veterinarian in the new system, though coroner still exists on the books in many NC counties.
In Nevada the office of Constable is the only partisan elected office below the county level.
while not working with an agency) specify they may take law enforcement actions if encountering imminent and urgent circumstances when it is necessary to preserve life or protect public safety and they are required to notify the appropriate local law enforcement agency by the fastest means available as specified in the SLED policies and procedures.
They were not ultimately needed for that mission and were never deployed.
The term was also used at the local level within the feudal system however, describing an officer appointed to keep order.
As of 2015 constables for the townships of Incline Village, East Fork, Humboldt, North Las Vegas, Las Vegas and Henderson are on fixed salaries.
The duty of the constable is to uphold the law fairly and firmly; to pursue and bring to justice those who break the law; to keep the peace; to protect, help, and reassure the community; and to be seen to do all this with integrity, common sense, and sound judgment.
This established a three-way balance of power between the Authority's Chairman, the Chief Constable and the Home Secretary.
Courses are presented by the South Carolina Criminal Justice Academy instructors and Certified Law Enforcement Instructors.
Constables were elected to four-year terms alongside that of the JP of their precinct and while they had full peace officer powers, their daily duties focused on serving orders of the JP and providing bailiff service to the JP court.
Constables are also charged with maintaining order at the election polls and ensuring that no qualified elector is obstructed from voting, Constables are the only Law Enforcement Officials permitted at the polls on election day.
While Constables primarily serve the Courts, they belong to the executive branch of government.
Within Victoria Police, a senior constable is the rank above a constable while above a senior constable is a leading senior constable.
Special Constables are appointed by Towns.
The Board of Examiners shall appoint and commission such numbers of constables as it deems necessary to preserve the peace and good order of the State.
In those counties, candidates may run as independents,  however in some counties such as Greene, it is a partisan election.
Group III State Constables are evaluated by the South Carolina State Law Enforcement Division for meeting required qualifications.
With the Roads Inspectors, Roads Committee and other officers, the constable of each parish also carries out the ''visites du branchage'' twice a year.
He has record as to matters of fact, not matters of judgment and law.
Historically, Constables had been the key office for providing law enforcement in rural Connecticut.
The police forces of England and Wales have their origins in constabularies (bodies of constables).
Often the enacting legislation of the state conferred a police officer with the powers of a constable, the most important of these powers being the common law power of arrest.
Basic Constable and Advanced Constable Certification testing are administered at the South Carolina Criminal Justice Academy.
The role of the constable in Bracton's description was as the "eyes and ears" of the court, finding evidence and recording facts on which judges could make a ruling.
This differed from the UK in that the old system was not uniformly abolished in every state.
Like sheriffs they may appoint deputies.
In whatever way they come and on whatever day, it is the duty of the constable to enroll everything in order, for he has record as to the things he sees; but he cannot judge, because there is no judgment at the Tower, since there the third element of a judicial proceeding is lacking, namely a judge and jurisdiction.
Of this number, 35% were primarily assigned to patrol, 33% to serving process, 12% to court security, and 7% to criminal investigations.
The position of hereditary constable persists in some current or former monarchies of Europe.
This includes the service in minor civil cases in the Justice Courts of subpoenas, evictions, summons, vehicle and property liens, business seizures, and wage garnishments, and also enforcing vehicle registration laws and towing abandoned vehicles on public property.
In this revamping of the NC legal system, district court judges were required to be licensed attorneys at the same time that the office of constable, along with JP, mayor's court and city jail systems were phased out with the new NC court system changes of the mid-1960s.
A constable may be assisted by deputy constables as sworn officers or constable's officers as civil staff, usually as process servers.
One of the most common types is 'Constable' and multiple references in South Carolina State Law describe various law enforcement officers having powers of constable with this authority originating from Common Law.
The lowest rank of the police forces and constabularies is "constable", and most outside London are headed by a chief constable.
#National Crime Agency (formerly SOCA) can also designate their officers with the power of a constable (as well as the specific powers of an Immigration Officer or Customs.
In Tennessee, Constable is an elected position with full power of arrest and is a state peace officer.
Group II State Constables are retired police officers in good standing that can receive a State Constable Commission to continue to have authority and carry a weapon as set forth by SLED for Group III State Constables.
In Kentucky, constables are elected from each magistrate district in the state.
Sheriffs, Coroners, and Jailers are also exempted law enforcement officers.
As of 2007, POST requirements of 680 hours of training provided on a full-time basis for new officers, followed by 400 hours of training provided by a certified Field Training Officer make completing the requirements to be a law enforcement officer impractical for elected Constables.
Each constable may, with approval of the President Judge in the county the constable is elected in, appoint deputies to work under his authority.
for routine patrol, special events (e.g.
And ever since, SLED has continued updating the standards of the State Constable Program with care to regulate these personnel as they serve the public by helping maintain peace as they have for hundreds of years, but with qualifications, training and standards that meet the current requirements of a law enforcement officer.
(1) Justice of the Peace court constables are appointed by the Chief Magistrate.
Under the Duke of York's government the constable was elected from one of four overseers of the town or parish.
The rank of Special Constable exists, but is centralised under the Special Volunteer Constabulary in Singapore.
And by the end of the 1970s their election was no longer statutorily mandated.
The office of constable can vary significantly in different jurisdictions.
Upon being sworn in, each officer starts at the rank of constable and is required to undergo a two-year probationary period.
Promotion to Senior Constable can occur after a miniumum of 5 years service, one year as a Probationary Constable in addition to 4 years as Constable and then upon passing probity checks and an exam.
Constables are variously paid only token salaries and earn most of their compensation through fees or are paid a higher fixed salary but earn no fees.
In Alaska, a constable is an appointed official with limited police powers.
In Jersey, each parish elects a constable for a three-year mandate to run the parish and also represent the parish in the legislature, the States of Jersey.
However, they were often paid a fee by the courts for each writ served and warrant executed.
The next highest rank (equivalent to a Police Sergeant in the English-speaking world) is ''ylikonstaapeli'' (''yli-'' "leading"), literally "Over-Constable".
The jurisdiction of Constables in Massachusetts is in most cases limited to the cities and towns in which they are appointed or elected, with limited exceptions.
In 2000, there were 2,630 full-time deputies and 418 reserve deputies working for the 760 constables' offices in Texas.
The general form of address for both senior constable and leading senior constable is "senior" and this is acceptable even in courts.
On the other hand, they can be fully empowered law enforcement officers.
After 1832 the Levy Court of each county appointed the constables, although the Governor could also fill appointments if Levy Court was in recess.
Michigan Commission on Law Enforcement Standards (MCOLES) certification became required if they were to perform general peace officer duties.
Constables within the Metropolitan Police Service are paid an additional London weighting allowance which is currently set at £2,277.
Such constables are the only people who while carrying out enforcement work may dress in a uniform resembling a police uniform although they are not members of a police force.
General law and order being a state subject in India, each state government recruits police constables.
However, since these have been eliminated by judicial reform, the office of constable now has few real functions.
Special constables generally had powers within a designated area.
Allor v. Wayne County Auditor.
This detailed and restricted function identifies one of the most significant purposes of a State Constable in their service as intended.
Their jurisdiction can vary from statewide to county/parish and local township boundaries based on the state's laws.
In such states the office is relatively obscure to its citizens.
Group II and Group III (uncompensated) State Constables are required by law to submit quarterly reports with the Governor (SC ST SEC 23-1-80) via SLED Regulatory of all work assignments, training and actions taken as a law enforcement officer.
However their role was vastly altered upon adoption of the Constitution of 1963 when their office was deleted as was the office of justice of the peace.
The New South Wales Police Force has three grades of Senior Constable, namely senior constable (two chevrons), incremental senior constable (two chevrons and a horizontal bar) and leading senior constable (two chevrons and two horizontal bars).
A distribution of qualified personnel is provided to the public by State Constables and agencies that utilize them throughout South Carolina and they serve an important function within the overall scope of public safety as intended.
He executed all orders, warrants, and other process directed by any court, judge, or justice of the peace; ensured that the peace of the State be kept; arrested all persons committing riot, murder, theft, or breach of the peace, and carried them before a justice of the peace; attended elections to ensure that the peace be kept; and enforced the laws of the State.
This is due to the scarce availability of law enforcement personnel in remote areas of the vast state.
Constables usually serve civil process, they may however, serve both civil and criminal process and also enforce capias arrest warrants.
Constables who are elected officials are generally limited to serving civil process within the town they are elected by.
All senior officers are Indian Police Service officers appointed through Civil Services Exam.
Unlike many so-called militias, many of which are voluntary and non-state affiliated, even to the point of being derided by many military and law enforcement officials, the Alaska State Defense Force is state-recognized under the state's authority to have a state-exclusive militia or guard, in addition to the National Guard of the Army and Air Force.
An equivalent position is that of Marshal, which derives from Old High German ''marah'' "horse" and ''schalh'' "servant", and originally meant "stable keeper", which has a similar etymology.
They are generally responsible for serving warrants and acting as process servers, as well as patrolling the streets and providing security for civic events.
They are not funded from general tax revenues; instead, constables' fees are paid by the criminals they arrest.
The position of Lord High Constable of Scotland is hereditary in the family of the Earl of Erroll.
Further legislation was introduced for the British Transport Police and the Civil Nuclear Constabulary that was similar in defining their organisational form and embedding governance arrangements.
Constables may exercise their functions and perform their duties anywhere in the county wherein the appointing municipality is located.
An administrative regulation governing peace officer certification set the minimum age requirement at twenty-one on peace officers.
This also includes Firearms Training and Firearms Qualification Testing administered by a Certified Law Enforcement Firearms Training Instructor.
Each deputy is given the same authority as the constable himself, but serves at the pleasure of the elected constable.
They are Peace Officers by virtue of the office they hold.
43 Mich. 76 (1880).
Constables are elected to four-year terms in August, many of which are the years coincident with presidential elections, but not all.
Late Roman administrative titles were used by Charlemagne in developing his empire; the position of Constable, along with the similar office of Marshal, spread throughout the emerging states of Western Europe during this period.
Modern-day New Jersey police officers inherit their authority from the constable.
Leading senior constables were appointed specifically to assist in the training and mentoring of more junior members.
Constableship in South Carolina consists of a wide range of laws and regulations with the intent to help provide an effective and efficient resource of law enforcement personnel for the citizens and agencies of South Carolina.
A '''constable''' is a person holding a particular office, most commonly in criminal law enforcement.
Alaska also has a naval militia composed of reserve US Marine Corps and Navy personnel, who serve as needed, but not in conflict with their federal military reserve duties.
A Constable is also an officer empowered to carry out the business of the statewide district court system, by serving warrants of arrest, mental health warrants, transporting prisoners, service of summons, complaints and subpoenas, and enforcing protection from abuse orders as well as orders of eviction and judgement levies.
Advanced Constable training requires an additional 272 pages of law enforcement training material covering additional topics in approximately 60 hours of classroom and physical training including practical examinations.
Unexpired terms may be filled by special election, but such special election must be held coincidentally with another scheduled election.
Elections are held every two years, except communities which by local ordinance or charter have set the term of office at four years.
In addition to serving the justice courts of their county, "constables have always been peace officers ... in the territory of their constituents," and, being constitutional officers, the legislature was without authority to limit the constables powers as they existed at common law.
Constables are elected at the municipal level, however State law governs Constables and they have statewide authority, thus the title became "State Constable".
Case Law Pursuant to new legislation in 2015, most of the case is now moot.
The primary duties of constables are to act as a civil enforcement agency.
The South Carolina Attorney General has supported this recognition whereby auxiliary police officers are considered "law enforcement officers" and they comply with the laws related to possession of weapons (i.e.
Furthermore, the Nevada Supreme Court ruled that absent a statutory revision by the legislature, elected constables (but not their deputies) were exempt from the provisions of NRS 289.550, the primary statute establishing peace officer standards.
Utah Constables are appointed by municipalities whose courts they serve or elected to a precinct to serve the justice of the peace (JP) court.
However, the Royal Parks Constabulary was disbanded in 2001.
The fire brigades (all municipal) still use "konstabel" as in "brannkonstabel" (fire-constable).
A "special constable" may also be appointed by a municipal court judge for a renewable one-year term upon application by any three "freeholders" (landowners) of the county, who are then responsible for paying the special constable.
The Texas Constitution of 1876 (Article 5, Section 18) provides for the election of a constable in each precinct of a county, and counties may have between four and eight precincts each depending on their population.
With completion of each block came expansion of the types of law enforcement the officer could perform.
The payment has become a point of controversy, since constables in Kentucky have few actual duties.
In Vermont, constables are generally elected by the town.
In some rural Nevada constabularies, constables maintain POST status and others do not.
Class 1) is current and accepted by SLED Regulatory.
One is appointed the rank of Leading Senior Constable on a qualification basis but must have a minimum of 7 years service amongst other criteria in order to be eligible.
From colonial times through the 1940s, Town Constables would work with two other Town officials—the Investigating Grand Juror and Prosecuting Grand Juror—in the initial handling of criminal investigations, arrests, and the "binding over" of serious crimes from the Town's Justice Court to a higher court.
They act in an official police capacity only when called into service by the State of Alaska, which has a broad statute governing citizen's arrests, which is why Alaska has unarmed Village Public Safety Officers (VPSO's) all of whom are fully academy-trained, employed by local tribal non-profit corporations and are deputized by the Commissioner of Public Safety to make misdemeanor non-traffic arrests and charge for violations.
If a constable is not appointed as a constable with peace officer powers, they can only serve civil processes.
Agencies that have a law enforcement division or services (e.g.
For example, local authorities can appoint constables to enforce parks by-laws and such officers are employed by the local authority.
State Constables are required to comply with the Federal and State Laws and Regulations governing actions of law enforcement officers.
Constable is the first rank, one rank below a Sergeant and five ranks below Chief Superintendent in all police forces in the United Kingdom.
In ''Hansen'' the 8th District ordered a candidate's name to be removed from the ballot in the election for Constable of the Township of Henderson because the candidate would not be twenty-one years old before taking office.
Constables serve as police officers of some small towns and townships, or as officers of some minor courts.
They answer to the city council or police chief via monthly activity reports.
Some official missions the constables have officially performed include port security after 9-11, disaster relief, and Alaska Pipeline patrols.
The East Fork Township Constable's Office provides certain court security services, under an agreement with the Douglas County Sheriff's Office.
Group II and III State Constables serve the public and assist law enforcement agencies as a State reserve police force to help maintain public safety and officer safety for routine activities, special events, emergencies and fulfill needs for additional law enforcement personnel that arise during various circumstances.
In Alabama, a constable is traditionally elected in each precinct, a subdivision of the state.
However, when vacancies arise, the commissioners coempowered police officers with county-wide jurisdiction and thus, may legally exercise their authority in any precinct within their county and adjacent counties;  however, some constables' offices limit themselves to providing law enforcement services only to their respective precinct, except in the case of serving civil and criminal process.
The appointment of constables is authorized by the Ohio Revised Code, which defines several roles for them.
(State v. Franklin, 1908).
In 1831 this evolved to a permanent volunteer police force.
Some constables were prominent military commanders in the medieval period, such as Bertrand du Guesclin who served from 1370 to 1380.
As of 2007 there were very few elected city constables and less than 10% of Michigan's 1242 townships continue to elect constables.
Some cities continue to maintain temporary lockups, but city jails were abolished as a rule.
However, constables are considered law enforcement officers under New York State law.
Not all townships have constables and the office is in abatement in most counties.
Incremental Senior Constable is attained after 10 years of service automatically.
c. 41 s. 98 provides the chief and other police officers of all cities and towns shall have all the powers and duties of constables except serving and executing civil process, allowing them to exercise common law arrest powers, state police are given the same powers throughout the commonwealth under M.G.L.
The Police Act 1964 was superseded by the Police Act 1996, which contained similar provisions.
In the Norwegian Police Service the rank "konstabel" was until 2003 the lowest rank in the police, the next ranks being "overkonstabel", "betjent", "førstebetjent" and "overbetjent", all with the unhyphenated prefix "politi-".
Legislation relating to constables does not appear in the Delaware Laws until 1770.
In this regard courts prefer constable to handle these matters rather than police officers as they can execute both civil and criminal process.
The Kentucky Constables Association is affiliated with the National Constables Association.
While a small number of towns will also allow the constables to perform road traffic control and event security functions, most strictly prohibit their constables from acting in any official capacity on behalf of the Town.
However, legislation changed to give them identical powers as constables that are no longer regional but are enforceable across England and Wales.
They are charged with service of process; the destruction of unlicensed or dangerous dogs or wolf-hybrids, and of injured deer; removal of disorderly people from town meetings; collection of taxes, when no tax collector is elected; and other duties.
Records of their narrower area successors, parish constables, appear in the early 17th century in the records of Buckinghamshire; traditionally they were elected by the parishioners, but from 1617 onwards were typically appointed by justices of the peace (magistrates) in each county.
The State Constable Training Program is regulated by SLED and established by the SC Law Enforcement Training Council.
Although the service of civil process makes up a major portion of their duties Massachusetts Constables have broad law enforcement authority.
The Norwegian Police Service has an integrated prosecution service in which the Police lawyers ranks require the law degree "juris candidatus" or "master i rettsvitenskap".
Perhaps because of this, the title "constable" is not used for police of any rank.
Constables serve at the pleasure of the local towns and villages, usually in a civil aspect for the courts.
In Bracton's time, anyone seeing a "misdeed" was empowered to make an arrest.
There is also a hereditary constable of Navarre in Spain; this position is presently held by the Duchess of Alba.
A constable is, however, a public peace officer and requires a bond as condition for faithful performance of their duties, and M.G.L.
In some states, a constable may be appointed by the governor or a judge or magistrate of the court which he or she serves; in others the constable is an elected or appointed position at the state or local level of local government.
The Police Act 1964 gave direction on the organisational form of police forces, the appointment of officers and disciplinary matters; in the broadest sense it provided a statutory governance framework.
In Louisiana, constables are traditionally elected in each voting ward, which is a subdivision of a parish.
In 1984 these requirements were for 480 hours of training, which could be completed in 120-hour-long "blocks" which were offered as part-time evening classes.
Constables must be  Nevada POST certified category 1 or category 2 within 1 year of being sworn in, in order to keep their peace officer status and remain in office if they are urban constables, defined as those constables elected from townships with a population of more 100,000 in an urban county, or more than 250,000 in a rural county.
One of the first descriptions of one of the legal duties of a constable, that of the collation of evidence, comes from Bracton, a jurist writing between 1220 and 1250:
The Commissioning of State Constables to enforce the Laws of the State with Regulation by SLED establishes compliance with Federal and State laws and regulations for them to serve as law enforcement officers.
State Constables are employees of the State, including uncompensated/volunteer State Constables, as stated in SC ST 42-1-130.
The constable presides over the Roads Committee, the Conseil Paroissial (Parish Council, the only exception being St. Helier) and Parish Assemblies.
Specific legislation for the Royal Parks of London continued the unique office of 'Parks Constable'.
They were peace officers who served under the justice of the peace (JP) of each voting precinct.
SC ST 23-23-40 states, "No law enforcement officer employed or appointed on or after July 1, 1989 by any public law enforcement agency in this State is authorized to enforce the laws...unless he has been qualified as certified..." In 1989 all State Constables were required to be certified if they were to maintain a Commission since they serve as law enforcement officers and have authority to enforce the laws.
Some constable elections, as in Greene County are held during the presidential mid-terms.
The constables duties include execution of court orders, writs and warrants, serving summonses and subpoenas, collecting debts and fines, and providing courtroom security.
(2) Any non-profit corporation, civic association, or governmental entity which has buildings and grounds open to the public may request for the appointment of constables to serve as law enforcement officers in order to protect life and property.
Many types of law enforcement officers have been created with titles throughout history.
Constables primarily serve the District Courts but may also assist in serving the Common Pleas Court, when requested by the sheriff.
They were not named as officers of the new District Court.
They are paid a small monthly salary for their service.
Police Constable (abbreviated PC) is the lowest police rank in India followed by Head Constable.
This act required constables at the end of their terms to return the names of three freeholders to the Court of General Sessions, who then appointed one to serve the next year.
The office of Constable was abolished in West Virginia in 1976.
Sheriff's Departments, Police Departments, University Police Departments, State agencies, Airport Police, etc.)
In Australia, as in the United Kingdom, constable is the lowest rank in most police services.
Some of the confusion resulted from a 2002 elections case before the Nevada 8th Judicial District in Clark County, ''Hansen v Bell et al.''.
Both manuals are generated by the SC Criminal Justice Academy and are approved by SLED.
With the change in law in 2015, in those townships with constables, most of those constables are also conducting certain civil enforcment for the District Courts as well as, in some cases, the enforcement of civil bench warrants.
The last round of wage negotiations however saw leading senior constable become a rank in its own right, one that a lot of members will pass on their way from constable to sergeant though it's not strictly necessary and is permissible to be promoted to sergeant direct from senior constable.
Constables still have the power of arrest and to execute warrants, subpoenas, summonses and other court documents, and are required to execute any court process given to them.
They may also serve under other conditions as approved by the Chief of SLED.
They are fully empowered peace officers but are not tasked with "General Law Enforcement Duties."
One can obtain the official application at the Rhode Island Judiciary - Homepage.
Persons elected generally serve a year as junior and then senior constable.
Special Constables normally work under the supervision of a Resident State Trooper contracted by the town (a requirement of the Connecticut State Police if the town wishes their constables to be dispatched by the State Police or have access to the radio and computer system of the State Police).
As defined by SC ST 16-9-310 "Law enforcement officer" shall mean any duly appointed or commissioned law enforcement officer of the State, a county or municipality.
