Attempts at overarching understandings of the purpose and nature of contract as a phenomenon have been made, notably relational contract theory originally developed by U.S. contracts scholars Ian Roderick Macneil and Stewart Macaulay, building at least in part on the contract theory work of U.S. scholar Lon L. Fuller, while U.S. scholars have been at the forefront of developing economic theories of contract focussing on questions of transaction cost and so-called 'efficient breach' theory.
The preexisting duty rule also extends to general legal duties; for example, a promise to refrain from committing a tort or crime is not sufficient.
Each contractual party must be a "competent person" having legal capacity.
The High Court of Australia stated that the term unilateral contract is "unscientific and misleading".
A choice of law-clause is recognised in the U.S. (but generally only regarding state law, and not internationally) and through the Rome I Regulation in the European Union (also when the law of a non EU country is chosen).
These common contracts take place in the daily flow of commerce transactions, and in cases with sophisticated or expensive promises may involve extensive negotiation and various condition precedent requirements, which are requirements that must be met for the contract to be fulfilled.
If it did not work, buyers would receive £100 and the company said that they had deposited £1,000 in the bank to show their good faith.
The relative knowledge of the parties may also be a factor, as in English case of ''Bissett v. Wilkinson'' where the court did not find misrepresentation when a seller said that farmland being sold would carry 2000 sheep if worked by one team; the buyer was considered sufficiently knowledgeable to accept or reject the seller's opinion.
Typically, non-severable contracts only require the substantial performance of a promise rather than the whole or complete performance of a promise to warrant payment.
There can also be duress to goods and sometimes, 'economic duress'.
Contractual liability, reflecting the constitutive function of contract, is generally for failing to make things better (by not rendering the expected performance), liability in tort is generally for action (as opposed to omission) making things worse, and liability in restitution is for unjustly taking or retaining the benefit of the plaintiff's money or work.
In addition, Australia, Israel and India imply a similar good faith term through laws.
For example, under certain circumstances, false statements or promises made by a seller of goods regarding the quality or nature of the product that the seller has may constitute misrepresentation.
Thus, consideration is a promise of something of value given by a promissor in exchange for something of value given by a promisee; and typically the thing of value is goods, money, or an act.
If the party did not know that they were entering into a contract, there is no meeting of the minds, and the contract is void.
Statutes or judicial rulings may create implied contractual terms, particularly in standardized relationships such as employment or shipping contracts.
1975  established how third parties could gain the protection of limitation clauses within a bill of lading.
Courts may also look to external standards, which are either mentioned explicitly in the contract or implied by common practice in a certain field.
The U.S. Constitution contains a Contract Clause, but this has been interpreted as only restricting the retroactive impairment of contracts.
When this occurs, the magazine cannot claim copyright for the "killed" assignment.
Most countries have statutes which deal directly with sale of goods, lease transactions, and trade practices.
If based on an illegal purpose or contrary to public policy, a contract is ''void''.
Kill fees are paid by magazine publishers to authors when their articles are submitted on time but are subsequently not used for publication.
''Carbolic'', a medical firm, advertised a smoke ball marketed as a wonder drug that would, according to the instructions, protect users from catching the flu.
Reliance losses cover expense suffered in reliance to the promise.
Although the European Union is fundamentally an economic community with a range of trade rules, there is no overarching "EU Law of Contract".
Representations are traditionally precontractual statements which allow for a tort-based action (such as the tort of deceit) if the misrepresentation is negligent or fraudulent; historically a tort was the only action available, but by 1778, breach of warranty became a separate legal contractual action.
For instance, agreeing to sell a car for a penny may constitute a binding contract (although if the transaction is an attempt to avoid tax, it will be treated by the tax authority as though a market price had been paid).
Another example might be people who are mentally incapacitated, either by disability or drunkenness.
This is in contrast to the civil law, which typically applies certain overarching principles to disputes arising out of contract, as in the French Civil Code.
Other approaches to contract theory are found in the writings of legal realists and critical legal studies theorists.
In specific circumstances these terms are used differently.
For instance, where an offer is made in response to an invitation to treat, the offer may incorporate the terms of the invitation to treat (unless the offer expressly incorporates different terms).
The equitable remedy of specific performance, enforceable through an injunction, may be available if damages are insufficient.
However, Professor Michael Furmston  has argued that "it is wrong to express (the mitigation) rule by stating that the plaintiff is under a duty to mitigate his loss", citing ''Sotiros Shipping Inc v. Sameiet, The Solholt''.
On the facts of this case, where a miller lost production because a carrier delayed taking broken mill parts for repair, the court held that no damages were payable since the loss was foreseeable neither by the "reasonable man" nor by the carrier, both of whom would have expected the miller to have a spare part in store.
More generally, writers have propounded Marxist and feminist interpretations of contract.
In a less technical sense, however, a condition is a generic term and a warranty is a promise.
If, as in the ''Boots  case'', the offer is made by an action without any negotiations (such as presenting goods to a cashier), the offer will be presumed to be on the terms of the invitation to treat.
In some circumstances a court will order a party to perform his or her promise (an order of "specific performance") or issue an order, known as an "injunction", that a party refrain from doing something that would breach the contract.
An exception to the rule of adequacy is money, whereby a debt must always be paid in full  for "accord and satisfaction".
Each party to a contract must have capacity to enter the agreement.
S.1 Crown Proceedings Act 1947 opened the Crown to ordinary contractual claims through the courts as for any other person.
In the U.S., virtually all states (but notably not New York) have adopted the Uniform Arbitration Act to facilitate the enforcement of arbitrated judgments.
In most jurisdictions, the sale of real property is enforceable by specific performance.
But the court of appeal held that it would appear to a reasonable man that Carbolic had made a serious offer, and determined that the reward was a contractual promise.
Whether the "chosen court" will exercise jurisdiction, and whether courts not chosen will decline jurisdiction depends on the legislation of the state concerned, on whether the clause is in conformity with formal requirements (in many U.S. states a Choice of Court Agreement clause is only exclusive, when the word "exclusive" is explicitly mentioned) and the type of action.
The classic tests have been the "business efficacy test" and the "officious bystander test".
A bilateral contract is an agreement in which each of the parties to the contract makes a promise  or set of promises to each other.
An express term is stated by the parties during negotiation or written in a contractual document.
However, in both the European union and the United States, the need to prevent discrimination has eroded the full extent of freedom of contract.
For example, in the early English case of ''Eastwood v. Kenyon'' 1840, the guardian  of a young girl took out a loan to educate her.
In these cases, those accepting the offer are not required to communicate their acceptance to the offeror.
Voidness implies that a contract never came into existence.
In particular, the growing strength of the British economy and the adaptability and flexibility of the English common law led to a swift development of English contract law, while the more rigid civil law in Europe lagged behind.
Likewise, in the United States, an aggrieved party may apply for injunctive relief to prevent a threatened breach of contract, where such breach would result in irreparable harm that could not be adequately remedied by money damages.
English courts may weigh the emphasis or relative knowledge in determining whether a statement is enforceable as part of the contract.
Neither is available as of right and in most jurisdictions and most circumstances a court will not normally order specific performance.
Reliance damages are usually awarded where no reasonably reliable estimate of expectation loss can be arrived at or at the option of the plaintiff.
Action for injunction would prohibit the person from performing the act specified in the contract.
In certain circumstances, an implied contract may be created.
The law that is applicable to a contract is dependent on the conflict of laws legislation of the court where an action in relation to a contract is brought.
This is known as the ''peppercorn rule'', but in some jurisdictions, the penny may constitute legally insufficient ''nominal consideration''.
Another dimension of the theoretical debate in contract is its place within, and relationship to a wider law of obligations.
The Uniform Commercial Code disposes of the mirror image rule in §2-207, although the UCC only governs transactions in goods in the USA.
In the Australian case of ''BP Refinery Westernport v. Shire of Hastings'' the UK Privy Council proposed a five-stage test to determine situations where the facts of a case may imply terms.
The common law describes the circumstances under which the law will recognise the existence of rights, privilege or power arising out of a promise.
* Previous Dealings, as in Spurling v Bradshaw.
Customer claims against securities brokers and dealers are almost always resolved by arbitration, in the United States because securities dealers are required, under the terms of their membership in self-regulatory organizations such as the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (formerly the NASD) or NYSE to arbitrate disputes with their customers.
Not all language in the contract is determined to be a contractual term.
The parties must have an intention to be legally bound; and to be valid, the agreement must have both proper "form" and a lawful object.
However, the agreement was unenforceable as it was intended to "stifle a criminal prosecution", and the bank was forced to return the payments made by the husband.
In maritime law, the cases of ''Scruttons v Midland Silicones'' 1962  and ''N.Z.
Each term gives rise to a contractual obligation, breach of which can give rise to litigation.
Some types of contracts may require formalities, such as a memorialization in writing.
A contract is implied in fact if the circumstances imply that parties have reached an agreement even though they have not done so expressly.
An agreement to agree does not constitute a contract, and an inability to agree on key issues, which may include such things as price or safety, may cause the entire contract to fail.
The payment could be additionally conditioned on the dog being returned alive.
Multilateral instruments requiring non-chosen courts dismiss cases, and require recognition of judgements made by courts having jurisdiction based on a choice of court clause are the Brussels regime instruments (31 European states) and the Hague Choice of Court Agreements Convention (European Union and Mexico), as well as several instruments related to a specific area of law.
Other legal systems such as Islamic law, socialist legal systems, and customary law have their own variations.
The leading case of ''Tweddle v Atkinson'' 1861  immediately showed that the doctrine had the effect of defying the intent of the parties.
The court may make an order of what is called "specific performance", requiring that the contract be performed.
(b) the contract purports to confer a benefit on him.
Fraud in the factum focuses on whether the party alleging misrepresentation knew they were creating a contract.
Formation of a contract generally requires an offer, acceptance, consideration, and a mutual intent to be bound.
Not all terms are stated expressly and some terms carry less legal weight as they are peripheral to the objectives of the contract.
Terms establish conditions precedent.
In a reward contract, for example, a person who has lost a dog could promise a reward if the dog is found, through publication or orally.
In modern English law, sellers often avoid using the term 'represents' in order to avoid claims under the Misrepresentation Act 1967, while in America 'warrants and represents' is relatively common.
Duress has been defined as a "threat of harm made to compel a person to do something against his or her will or judgment; esp., a wrongful threat made by one person to compel a manifestation of seeming assent by another person to a transaction without real volition."
A contract may be deemed 'void', 'voidable', 'unenforceable' or 'ineffective'.
When sued, Carbolic argued the advert was not to be taken as a serious, legally binding offer; instead it was "a mere puff", or  gimmick.
A person who is not a party to a contract  (a “third party”) may in his own right enforce a contract if:
A test for determining which category a clause falls into was established by the English House of Lords in ''Dunlop Pneumatic Tyre Co. Ltd v. New Garage & Motor Co. Ltd''
Generally, statements of opinion or intention are not statements of fact in the context of misrepresentation.
Terms may be implied due to the factual circumstances or conduct of the parties.
Representations, which are often precontractual, are typically less strictly enforced than terms, and material misrepresentations historically was a cause of action for the tort of deceit.
Liquidated damages clauses may be called "penalty clauses" in ordinary language, but the law distinguishes between liquidated damages (legitimate) and penalties (invalid).
The case of ''Currie v Misa'' declared consideration to be a “Right,  Interest,  Profit,  Benefit, or Forbearance,  Detriment,  Loss,  Responsibility”.
A number of common law exceptions allowed some circumvention, but the unpopular doctrine remained intact until it was amended by the Contracts (Rights of Third Parties) Act 1999 which provides:
Both an order for specific performance and an injunction are discretionary remedies, originating for the most part in equity.
In 1993, Harvey McGregor, under the auspices of the English and Scottish  Law Commissions, produced his "Contract Code", a proposal to both unify and codify the contract laws of England and Scotland.
This theory is developed in Fried's book, ''Contract as Promise.''
This is because the very secrecy of the contract is a condition of the contract (in order to maintain plausible deniability).
See ''Odorizzi v. Bloomfield School District''.
Statements in a contract may not be upheld if the court finds that the statements are subjective or promotional puffery.
Civil law countries (especially Germany) later developed their own brand of contract law.
It is thus unenforceable on that ground, as well as the public policy of maintaining national security (since a disgruntled agent might try to reveal ''all'' the government's secrets during his/her lawsuit).
Exemplary damages are not recognised nor permitted in some jurisdictions.
* Custom, as in Hutton v Warren.
English (but not necessarily non-English) common law distinguishes between important ''conditions'' and warranties, with a breach of a condition by one party allowing the other to repudiate and be discharged while a warranty allows for remedies and damages but not complete discharge.
Contract law falls within the general law of obligations, along with tort, unjust enrichment, and restitution.
In England, some contracts (insurance and partnerships) require utmost good faith, while others may require good faith (employment contracts and agency).
The parties may be natural persons  ("individuals") or juristic persons ("corporations").
Not all agreements are necessarily contractual, as the parties generally must be deemed to have an intention to be legally bound.
Jurisdictions vary in their principles of freedom of contract.
Another approach, associated with Charles Fried, maintains that the purpose of contract law is to enforce promises.
Whether or not a term is a ''condition'' is determined in part by the parties' intent.
Some states will not accept action that have no connection to the court that was chosen, and others will not recognise a choice of court clause when they consider them themselves a more convenient forum.
In ''Anglia Television Ltd v. Reed'' the English Court of Appeal awarded the plaintiff expenditures incurred prior to the contract in preparation of performance.
For example, the Civil Rights Act of 1964 restricted private racial discrimination against African-Americans.
Further, reasonable notice of a contract's terms must be given to the other party prior to their entry into the contract.
Shipping v Satterthwaite''
In the United States by way of the 13th Amendment to the United States Constitution, specific performance in personal service contracts is only legal "''as punishment for a crime whereof the criminal shall be dully convicted''."
For instance, very small children may not be held to bargains they have made, on the assumption that they lack the maturity to understand what they are doing; errant employees or directors may be prevented from contracting for their company, because they have acted ''ultra vires'' (beyond their power).
This document was offered as a possible "Contract Code for Europe", but tensions between English and German jurists meant that this proposal has so far come to naught.
Misrepresentation of a material fact (if the party knew the truth, that party would not have entered into the contract) makes a contract voidable.
A contract which is implied in law is also called a quasi-contract, because it is not in fact a contract; rather, it is a means for the courts to remedy situations in which one party would be unjustly enriched were he or she not required to compensate the other.
A term may either be express or implied.
While a contract is being performed, it is called an executory contract, and when it is completed it is an executed contract.
In the similar case of advertisements of deals or bargains, a general rule is that these are not contractual offers but merely an "invitation to treat" (or bargain), but the applicability of this rule is disputed and contains various exceptions.
Compensatory damages compensate the plaintiff for actual losses suffered as accurately as possible.
Restrictive provisions in contracts where the consumer has little negotiating power ("contracts of adhesion") attract consumer protection scrutiny.
To rescind is to set aside or unmake a contract.
Fraud in inducement focuses on misrepresentation attempting to get the party to enter into the contract.
Consequential damages are those damages which, although not naturally flowing from a breach, are naturally supposed by both parties at the time of contract formation.
If the contract contains a valid arbitration clause, the aggrieved party must submit an arbitration claim in accordance with the procedures set forth in the clause.
One prominent answer to this question focuses on the economic benefits of enforcing bargains.
There are two types of misrepresentation: fraud in the factum and fraud in inducement.
Although an invitation to treat cannot be accepted, it should not be ignored, for it may nevertheless affect the offer.
Most English contracts do '''not''' need any good faith, provided that the law is met.
The Uniform Commercial Code of the United States also imposes an implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing in performance and enforcement of contracts covered by the Code.
Those who learn of the reward are not required to search for the dog, but if someone finds the dog and delivers it, the promisor is required to pay.
Secondly, the claimant must show that the defendant took advantage of this special disability.
Undue influence is an equitable doctrine that involves one person taking advantage of a position of power over another person through a special relationship such as between parent and child or solicitor and client.
In order for a contract to be formed, the parties must reach mutual assent (also called a meeting of the minds).
The insufficiency of past consideration is related to the ''preexisting duty rule.''
In the English case of ''Bannerman v. White'' the court upheld a rejection by a buyer of hops which had been treated with sulphur since the buyer explicitly expressed the importance of this requirement.
The United Kingdom has since replaced the original Statute of Frauds, but written contracts are still required for various circumstances such as land (through the Law of Property Act 1925).
Firstly, the claimant must show that they were under a special disability, the test for this being that they were unable to act in their best interest.
For example, a patient may implicitly enter a contract by visiting a doctor and being examined; if the patient refuses to pay after being examined, the patient has breached a contract implied in fact.
In general, the Uniform Commercial Code as adopted in the United States requires a written contract for tangible product sales in excess of $500, and real estate contracts are required to be written.
In addition, the court may also imply a term; if price is excluded, the court may imply a reasonable price, with the exception of land, and second-hand goods, which are unique.
Colonies within the British empire (including the USA and the Dominions) would adopt the law of the mother country.
Voidability implies that one or both parties may declare a contract ineffective at their wish.
Lord Justice Denning famously stated that "The doctrine of consideration is too firmly fixed to be overthrown by a side-wind."
Minors, intoxicated persons, and those under a mental affliction may have insufficient capacity to enter a contract.
In U.S. law, the distinction between the two is somewhat unclear; warranties are viewed as primarily contract-based legal action while negligent or fraudulent misrepresentations are tort-based, but there is a confusing mix of case law in the United States.
Forbearance to act, such as an adult promising to refrain from smoking, is enforceable '''only''' if one is thereby surrendering a legal right.
In England and Wales, a contract may be enforced by use of a claim, or in urgent cases by applying for an interim injunction to prevent a breach.
Whilst early rules of trade and barter have existed since ancient times, modern laws of contract in the West are traceable from the industrial revolution (1750 onwards), when increasing numbers worked in factories for a cash wage.
Legislation governing equality, equal pay, racial discrimination, disability discrimination and so on, has imposed limits of the full freedom of contract.
Although vitiating factors (such as misrepresentation, mistake, undue influence and duress) relate to contracts, they are not contractual actions, and so, in a roundabout way, a claimant in contract may be able to get exemplary damages.
E-signature laws have made the electronic contract and signature as legally valid as a paper contract.
The common law of contract originated with the now-defuct writ of assumpsit, which was originally a tort action based on reliance.
An oral contract may also be called a parol contract or a verbal contract, with "verbal" meaning "spoken" rather than "in words", an established usage in British English with regards to contracts and agreements, and common although somewhat deprecated as "loose" in American English.
A specific performance is obtainable for the breach of a contract to sell land or real estate on such grounds that the property has a unique value.
Damages may be general or consequential.
When no special relationship exists, the question is whether there was a relationship of such trust and confidence that it should give rise to such a presumption.
In other words, is it foreseeable to the objective bystander, and/or to the contracting parties, who may have special knowledge?
In the absence of a choice of law clause, the law of the forum or the law with which the conflict has the strongest link is generally determined as the applicable law.
There is, however, an overarching concept of "legitimate expectation".
Many contracts provide that all disputes arising thereunder will be resolved by arbitration, rather than litigated in courts, partly because arbitration awards are recognized and enforceable internationally under the New York Convention, which has 156 parties.
Expectation damages are awarded to put the party in as good of a position as the party would have been in had the contract been performed as promised.
Failure to mitigate means that damages may be reduced or even denied altogether.
In India, E-contracts are governed by the Indian Contract Act (1872), according to which certain conditions need to be fulfilled while formulating a valid contact.
In colonial times, the concept of consideration was exported to many common law countries, but it is unknown in Scotland and in civil law jurisdictions.
In New South Wales, even if there is uncertainty or incompleteness in a contract, the contract may still be binding on the parties if there is a sufficiently certain and complete clause requiring the parties to undergo arbitration, negotiation or mediation.
However, it was appreciated that contractors might be reluctant to deal on such a basis and claims were entertained under a petition of right that needed to be endorsed by the Home Secretary and Attorney-General.
A contract is often evidenced in writing or by deed, but a valid contract may (with some exceptions) be made orally or even by conduct.
Some modern commentators suggest avoiding the words and substituting 'state' or 'agree', and some model forms do not use the words; however, others disagree.
The minor can enforce breaches of contract by an adult while the adult's enforcement may be more limited under the bargain principle.
Remedies for breach of contract  include "damages" (monetary compensation for loss) and, for serious breaches only, "repudiation" (i.e.
A gentlemen's agreement is one which is not intended to be legally enforceable, and which is "binding in honour only".
An unwritten, unspoken contract, also known as "a contract implied by the acts of the parties", which can be either an implied-in-fact contract or implied-in-law contract, may also be legally binding.
According to ''Gordon v Selico'' 1986 it is possible to misrepresent either by words or conduct.
However, express clauses may be included in a non-severable contract to explicitly require the full performance of an obligation.
Typically, contracts are oral or written, but written contracts have typically been preferred in common law legal systems;  in 1677 England passed the Statute of Frauds which influenced similar statute of frauds laws in the United States and other countries such as Australia.
Sometimes the capacity of either natural or artificial persons to either enforce contracts, or have contracts enforced against them is restricted.
Under the "business efficacy test" first proposed in ''The Moorcock'' 1889, the minimum terms necessary to give business efficacy to the contract will be implied.
However, the term may also narrowly refer to conditions at the end of the contract which specify the governing law provision, venue, assignment and delegation, waiver of jury trial, notice, and force majeure.
The fact that the car was not there does not give the party a right to not attempt to rent another car.
In the United States, the emphasis has shifted to the process of bargaining as exemplified by ''Hamer v. Sidway'' (1891).
Void contracts cannot be ratified by either party.
It was not possible to sue the Crown in the UK for breach of contract before 1948.
The test of whether a clause is severable is an objective test—whether a reasonable person would see the contract standing even without the clauses.
If a contract is in a written form, and somebody signs it, then the signer is typically bound by its terms regardless of whether they have actually read it  provided the document is contractual in nature.
Consequential damages would be the lost business if that person was unable to get to the meeting, if both parties knew the reason the party was renting the car.
After she was married, her husband promised to pay the debt but the loan was determined to be past consideration.
Quantum meruit claims are an example.
