Preemptive bids serve a double purpose&nbsp;– they allow players to indicate they are bidding on the basis of a long suit in an otherwise weak hand, which is important information to share, and they also consume substantial bidding room before a possibly strong opposing pair can identify whether they have a good possibility to play the hand, or in what suit or at what level they should do so.
Opening bids at the one level are made with hands containing 12–13 points or more and which are not suitable for one of the preceding bids.
Bidding systems depart from these basic ideas in varying degrees.
* Point count required for 1 NT opening bid ('mini' 10-12, 'weak' 12-14, 'strong' 15-17 or 16-18)
* Flexibility when to play (24/7), and choice of opponent skill level.
West turns the lead card face up, and the declarer studies the two hands to make a plan for the play.
Overall, the program Jack lost, but by a small margin (359 versus 385 imps).
The cards may be freshly dealt or, in duplicate bridge where partnerships compete with each other, dealt beforehand.
East plays ''low'' (small card) and South takes the A, gaining the ''lead''.
* Bridge Base Online (BBO) is the most active online bridge club in the world, with more than 100 000 daily connections and 500 000 hands played each day.
The player from the declaring side who first bid the denomination named in the final contract becomes declarer.
rebidding the opponents' suit)'' the partnership will play, if any.
This can help the other defender count out the entire original distribution of the cards in that suit.
The game had many significant bridge-like developments: dealer chose the trump suit, or nominated his partner to do so; there was a call of notrumps (''biritch''); dealer's partner's hand became dummy; points were scored above and below the line; game was 3NT, 4H and 5D (although 8 club odd tricks and 15 spade odd tricks were needed); the score could be doubled and redoubled; and there were slam bonuses.
(Some partnerships use "reverse" signals, meaning that a noticeably high card ''discourages'' that suit and a noticeably low card ''encourages'' that suit, thus not "wasting" a potentially useful intermediate card in the suit of interest.)
West chooses the spade king because spades is the suit the partnership has shown strength in, and because they have agreed that when they hold two ''touching honors'' (or ''adjacent honors'') they will play the higher one first.
Bidding systems can be divided into mainly natural systems such as Acol and Standard American, and mainly artificial systems such as the Precision Club and Strong Diamond (see  Strong Diamond).
The dominant variations of the game are rubber bridge, more common in social play and duplicate bridge, which enables comparative scoring for tournament play.
Eventually, the player who bid the highest contract&mdash;which is determined by the contract's level as well as the suggested trump suit or no trump&mdash;wins the contract for their partnership.
* Whether doubling or overcalling over opponents' 1NT is natural or conventional.
'''Contract bridge''', or simply '''bridge''', is a trick-taking game using a standard 52-card deck.
The object became to make at least as many tricks as were contracted for and penalties were introduced for failing to do so.
In addition, the ''distribution'' of the cards in a hand into suits may also contribute to the strength of a hand and be counted as distribution points.
The dealer opens the auction and can make the first call, and the auction proceeds clockwise.
In a game where the auction has determined that there is no trump suit, all suits are of equal strength.
Then, the play in the first declarer played suit is a count signal regarding the critical suit and not the trump suit itself.
(The trick-by-trick notation used above can be also expressed in tabular form, but a textual explanation is usually preferred in practice, for reader's convenience.
Games have several online rubber bridge rooms.
Duplicate bridge is a mind sport, and its popularity gradually became comparable to that of chess, with which it is often compared for its complexity and the mental skills required for high-level competition.
The various scores were adjusted to produce a more balanced and interesting game.
South inserts a ''game try'' of 3, ''inviting'' the partner to bid the ''game'' of 4 with good club support and overall values.
South proceeds by ''drawing trump'', leading the K. West decides there is no benefit to holding back, and so wins the trick with the ace, and then cashes the Q.
For example, a bid of 2NT immediately after partner's 1NT not only shows a balanced hand of a certain point range, but also would almost always deny possession of a five-card major suit (otherwise the player would have bid it) or even a four card major suit (in that case, the player would probably have used the Stayman convention).
* You will meet bridge players from every country and time zone.
Unusually strong bids communicate an especially high number of points (normally 20 or more) or a high trick-taking potential (normally 8 or more).
Bridge departed from whist with the creation of Biritch (or "Russian Whist") in the 19th century, and evolved through the late 19th and early 20th centuries to form the present game.
A bid is higher than another bid if either the level is greater (e.g., 2 over 1NT) or the denomination is higher, with the order being in ascending order: , , , , and NT (no trump).
* Whether opening bids at the two level are 'strong' (20+ points) or 'weak' (i.e., pre-emptive with a 6 card suit).
* Whether the partnership will play ''Jacoby transfers'' (bids of 2 and 2 over 1NT or 3 and 3 over 2NT respectively require the 1NT or 2NT bidder to rebid 2 and 2 or 3 and 3), ''minor suit transfers'' (bids of 2 and either 2NT or 3 over 1NT respectively require the 1NT bidder to bid 3 and 3) and ''Texas transfers'' (bids of 4 and 4 respectively require the 1NT, or 2NT bidder to rebid 4 and 4)
East ''covers'' the queen with the king, and South takes the trick with the ace, and proceeds by ''cashing'' the remaining ''master'' J.
In 2001, the World Bridge Federation promulgated a set of Laws for online play.
Declarer plays low from the table, and East scores the Q.
The player left to the declarer leads the first trick.
Overtricks score the same number of points per odd trick, although their doubled and redoubled values differ.
Duplicate bridge is scored comparatively, meaning that a partnership's round score is compared to other partnerships playing the same hands and scored according to their standing, with common systems of duplicate scoring including matchpoint scoring, where players receive a constant number of matchpoints for receiving more points than another partnership, and IMP (international matchpoint) scoring, where players receive IMPs based on the point difference between partnerships.
Strong bridge playing programs such as Jack (World Champion in 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2006 and 2009), Wbridge5 (World Champion in 2005, 2007 and 2008), RoboBridge and many-time finalist Bridge Baron, would probably rank among the top few thousand human pairs worldwide.
Nearly all trick-taking techniques in bridge can be reduced to one of these four methods.
These cards are stored on a device called a "board" with a slot for each cardinal direction.
East supports spades with 2.
It is sometimes critical to know this when defending.
Similarly, there is a minuscule chance that the K is in the west hand, but the west hand has no other clubs.
In 1935, the first officially recognized world championship was held.
This means that an opening bid of 1 or 1 will sometimes be made with only 3 cards in that suit.
By contrast, a conventional (artificial) call offers and/or asks for information by means of pre-agreed coded interpretations, in which some calls convey very specific information or requests that are not part of the natural meaning of the call.
The leader to the first trick is determined by the auction; the leader to any subsequent trick is the player who won the preceding trick.
The deal is scored based on the number of tricks taken, the contract, and various other factors based on the variation played.
Most common artificial agreement is Cappelletti, where 2 is a transfer to be passed or corrected to a major, 2 means both majors and a major shows that suit plus a minor.
It is during the auction where partners communicate information about their hand, including its overall strength and the length of its suits, although similar conventions for use during play exist.
For a contract in no trump, the declaring side is awarded 40 points for the first odd trick and 30 points for the remaining odd tricks.
The rules of the game are referred to as the ''laws'' as promulgated by various bridge organizations.
West ''overcalls'' with 1, since he has a long spade suit of reasonable quality and 10 high card points (an overcall can be made on a hand that is not quite strong enough for an opening bid).
The term ''preempt'' refers to a high level tactical bid by a weak hand, relying upon a long suit rather than high-value cards for tricks.
Cardinal directions are given to the seats of a bridge table, such that one partnership sits in North and South, while the other sits in West and East.
Thus an astute partner can read much more than the surface meaning into the bidding.
The declarer has control of the dummy's cards and plays them when it is their turn, although the declarer may request the dummy to play a card on behalf.
A common length is 12 boards(deals).
Contract points are doubled or quadrupled if the contract is respectively doubled or redoubled.
wins a trick in the dummy's hand) by leading a low diamond, using dummy's A to win the trick, and leads the Q from dummy to the next trick.
In rubber bridge, each player draws a card at the start of the game: the two players who drew the highest cards are partners with the remaining being another partnership.
Afterwards, the dummy lays their cards face up on the table.
The trumps now accounted for, South can now execute the finesse, perhaps trapping the king as planned.
* Player rating systems may attempt to measure ability without regard to the number of games played or the number of years spent accumulating masterpoints.
However some experts think that the Russian origin of the game is a fallacy.
After that, North's cards are laid on the table and North becomes ''dummy'', as both the North and South hands will be controlled by the declarer.
South, next in turn, opens with the bid of 1, which denotes a reasonable heart suit (at least 4 or 5 cards long, depending on the bidding system) and at least 12 high card points.
* Players may leave before a hand finishes, or in the middle of a planned session, either intentionally or because of connection difficulties.
A number of basic rules of thumb in bridge bidding and play are summarized as bridge maxims.
As well as written commentaries from top level players, voice commentaries have been incorporated since mid-2011.
(If East doesn't play the king, then South will play a low club from South's hand and the queen will win anyway, this being the essence of the finesse).
In 1996, the American Contract Bridge League (ACBL) initiated official World Championships Computer Bridge, to be held annually along with a major bridge event.
Conventions are valuable in bridge because of the need to pass information beyond a simple like or dislike of a particular suit, and because the limited bidding space can be used more efficiently by taking situations in which a given call will have less utility, because the information it would convey is not valuable or because the desire to convey that information would arise only rarely, and giving that call an artificial meaning that conveys more useful (or more frequently useful) information.
Doubles are sometimes given conventional meanings in otherwise mostly natural systems.
Openings at the 2 level are either unusually strong (2NT, natural, and 2, artificial) or preemptive, depending on the system.
Common conventions and variations within natural systems include:
South is the ''declarer'', having been first to bid hearts, and the player to South's left, West, has to choose the first card in the play, known as the ''opening lead''.
There are a very large number of conventions from which players can choose; many books have been written detailing bidding conventions.
The game is now safe: South ''ruffs'' a small club with a dummy's trump, then ruffs a diamond in hand for an ''entry'' back, and ruffs the last club in dummy (sometimes described as a ''crossruff'').
The director of a duplicate bridge game or their assistants may shuffle the decks immediately before play starts, or in advance.
The player who won the previous trick leads the next trick.
The deck is shuffled and cut, usually by the player left to the dealer, before dealing.
Partnerships who agree to play 5-card majors open a minor suit with 4-card majors and then bid their major suit at the next opportunity.
Otherwise, if the declaring side fails to make their contract, the defenders receives points depending on the declaring side's undertricks, or the number of tricks short of the contract, and whether the contract was doubled by the defenders.
In both rubber and duplicate bridge, the declaring side is awarded 20 points per odd trick for a contract in clubs or diamonds, and 30 points per odd trick per for a contract in hearts or spades.
All bids promise to take a number of tricks in excess of six, so a bid must be between one (seven tricks) and seven (thirteen tricks).
This is achievable when there are eight or more players, sitting at two or more tables, and the deals from each table are preserved and passed to the next table, thereby ''duplicating'' them for the next table of participants to play.
In rubber games, play continues with the claiming player's cards face up.
The basic premise of duplicate bridge had previously been used for whist matches as early as 1857.
A large bonus is awarded if the declaring side makes a small slam or grand slam, a contract of twelve tricks and thirteen tricks respectively.
* Inability to decide on bidding convention ahead of time when partners are strangers.
Not having anything better to do, East returns the remaining trump, taken in South's hand.
* A reduced social element.
Initially, bridge was not thought to be suitable for duplicate competition; it wasn't until the 1920s that (auction) bridge tournaments became popular.
A total of 196 boards were played.
The cards are dealt to the players, and then the players auction or ''bid'' to take the  specifying how many tricks their partnership receiving the contract needs to take to receive points for the deal.
* Faster play - no shifting chairs or waiting for shuffles.
In the UK, rubber bridge is still popular in both homes and clubs, as is duplicate bridge.
The majority of rules mirror those of duplicate bridge in the bidding and play and differ primarily in procedures for dealing and scoring.
This form of the game is referred to as ''duplicate bridge'' and is played in clubs and tournaments, which can gather as many as several hundred players.
The opponents can either accept the claim and the round is scored accordingly, or dispute the claim.
In that case, declarer can succeed by simply cashing the A, felling the K and setting up the Q as a winner.
In 1925 when contract bridge first evolved, bridge tournaments were becoming popular, but the rules were somewhat in flux, and several different organizing bodies were involved in tournament sponsorship: the American Bridge League (formerly the American Auction Bridge League, which changed its name in 1929), the American Whist League, and the United States Bridge Association.
In duplicate bridge, the cards are pre-dealt per table in order to allow for competitive scoring.
(South may also elect to ''duck'', but for the purpose of this example, let us assume South wins the A at trick 1).
A partnership's bidding system is usually made up of a core system, modified and complemented by specific conventions (optional customizations incorporated into the main system for handling specific bidding situations) which are pre-chosen between the partners prior to play.
In natural systems, a 1NT opening bid usually reflects a hand that has a relatively balanced shape (usually between two and four (or less often five) cards in each suit) and a sharply limited number of high card points, usually somewhere between 12 and 18&nbsp;– the most common ranges use a span of exactly three points, (e.g., 12-14, 15-17 or 16-18), but some systems use a four-point range, usually 15-18.
In fact, any signal made about a suit in another suit might be called as such.
The situations detailed here are extremely simple examples; many instances of advanced bidding involve specific agreements related to very specific situations and subtle inferences regarding entire sequences of calls.
Finally, South ''claims'' the remaining tricks by showing his or her hand, as it now contains only high trumps and there's no need to play the hand out to prove they are all winners.
The World Bridge Federation is the governing body for international competitive bridge, with numerous other bodies governing bridge at the regional level.
For example, a hand of  would be a candidate for an opening bid of 3, designed to make it difficult for the opposing team to bid and find their optimum contract even if they have the bulk of the points, as it is nearly valueless unless spades are trumps, it contains good enough spades that the penalty for being set should not be higher than the value of an opponent game, and the high card weakness makes it more likely that the opponents have enough strength to make game themselves.
Bridge is a four-player partnership trick-taking game involving thirteen tricks per round.
However very often even the most skillful play will only succeed some of the time, and the skilled player may be unlucky because an alternative, less expert play achieves a better result.
A ''bidding system'' is a set of partnership agreements on the meanings of bids.
The dummy sets its cards face up after the first card is played, with the declarer (the non-dummy player) controlling the dummy's cards as well as their own.
North ''supports'' partner's suit with 2, showing heart support and about  points.
Tournaments are usually shorter online.
Then the 4 contract would fail by one trick (unless West had led a club early in the play).
North asks East to check the score entered on the traveller.
* How the partnership's bidding practices will be varied if their opponents intervene or compete.
The auction ends when, after a player bids, doubles, or redoubles, every other player has passed, in which case the action proceeds to the play; or every player has passed and no bid has been made, in which case, the round is considered to be "passed out" and not played.
In such circumstances the thrown-away card can be used to indicate some aspect of the hand, or a desire for a specific suit to be played.
In rubber bridge, if a side has won 100 contract points, they have won a  and are vulnerable for the remaining rounds, but in duplicate bridge, vulnerability is predetermined based on the number of each board.
Each player is dealt thirteen cards from a standard 52-card deck.
When you finish one tournament, another will start soon.
* Choice of individual, pairs, or team competitions.
The dealer deals the card clockwise one card at a time.
* Count signals cover the situation when a defender is following suit (usually to a suit that the declarer has led).
In duplicate games, play ceases and the director of the game is called to adjudicate the round.
West plays the card face down, to give their partner and the declarer (but not dummy) a chance to ask any last questions about the bidding or to object if they believe West is not the correct hand to lead.
The word ''biritch'' itself is a spelling of the Russian word Бирюч (бирчий, бирич), an occupation of a diplomatic clerk or an announcer.
These and other sites offer various features, such as opportunities to earn ACBL masterpoints, to play in online tournaments, to compile lists of friends, and to earn money playing Bridge.
The zonal organisations of the WBF also publish editions of the Laws.
Bridge Base Online also has a Vugraph feature showing tournaments from around the world for anyone interested to watch live.
By 1937, however, the American Contract Bridge League had come to power (a union of the ABL and the USBA), and it remains the principal organizing body for bridge tournaments in North America.
The line between a well-known convention and a part of a system is not always clear-cut: some bidding systems include specified conventions by default.
However the failure of the contract would not mean that 4 is a bad contract on this hand.
The most basic is the Milton Work point count, (the 4-3-2-1 system detailed above) but this is sometimes modified in various ways, or either augmented or replaced by other approaches such as losing trick count, honor point count, law of total tricks, or Zar Points.
Well-known conventions include Stayman (to ask for the showing of any 4 card major suit in a 1NT opener's hand), Jacoby transfers (a request by the weak hand for the stronger partner to bid a particular suit first, and therefore to become the declarer), and the Blackwood convention (to ask for information on the number of aces and kings held, used in slam bidding situations).
* Unauthorised information cannot be passed by tone of voice or body language (but can much more easily be passed by external communication).
Alternatively, many partnerships play this same bidding sequence as "Crawling Stayman" by which the responder shows a weak hand (less than eight high card points) with shortness in diamonds but at least four hearts and four spades; the opening bidder may correct to spades if that appears to be the better contract.
The most significant change was that only the tricks contracted for were scored below the line toward game or a slam bonus, a change that resulted in bidding becoming much more challenging and interesting.
* The software prevents improper plays and calls, such as insufficient bids, revokes (failure to follow suit when able), and actions out of turn.
(Note: an opening bid of 2 is usually played in otherwise natural systems as conventional, signifying any exceptionally strong hand)
The oldest known Biritch rule book dated 1886 is ''Biritch, or Russian Whist'' by John Collinson.
* Whether an opening bid of 1 and 1 requires a minimum of 4 or 5 cards in the suit (''4 or 5 card majors'')
Bridge and chess are the only "mind sports" recognized by the International Olympic Committee, although they were not found eligible for the main Olympic program.
The contract depends on the club finesse working, or a mis-defense.
If the declaring side is vulnerable, a small slam awards 750 points, and a grand slam awards 1500 points.
North-South score the required 10 tricks, and their opponents take the remaining three.
* Fewer restrictions on the conventions that are permitted compared to club tourneys.
* Surrogate signals cover the situation when it is critical to show length in a side suit and it will be too late if defenders wait till that suit is played.
The name ''bridge'' has its origins in the name of an earlier game.
Software and hardware has been tested in 2011 in order to have digital cameras recognize the cards being played, which will avoid human error or delay.
On the prior hand, it is quite possible that the K is held by West.
* Signals indicate how cards played within a suit are chosen&nbsp;– for example, playing a noticeably high card when this would not be expected can signal encouragement to continue playing the suit, and a low card can signal discouragement and a desire for partner to choose some other suit.
Likewise, in some partnerships the bid of 2 in the sequence 1NT - 2 - 2 - 2 between partners (opponents passing throughout) explicitly shows five hearts but also confirms four cards in spades: the bidder must hold at least five hearts to make it worth looking for a heart fit after 2 denied a four card major, and with at least five hearts, a Stayman bid must have been justified by having exactly four spades, the other major (since Stayman (as used by this partnership) is not useful with anything except a four card major suit).
The position to deal is passed clockwise, with the player left of the dealer dealing for the next round.
At any time, a player may , stating that their side will either win a specific number of the remaining tricks.
For example, if the trump suit is spades and if a player is void and plays a spade card, he wins the trick if no other player plays a higher spade card.
* No need to assemble 4 people in one place.
Some national contract bridge organizations now offer online bridge play to their members, including the English Bridge Union, the Dutch Bridge Federation and the Australian Bridge Federation.
Bridge extends the concept of bidding into an , where partnerships compete to take a  specifying how many tricks they need to take in order to receive points for that round, and the trump suit or no trump, meaning that there will be no trump for the round.
However the chance of this is far lower than the simple chance of approximately 50% that East started with the K. Therefore, the superior ''percentage'' play is to take the club finesse, as described above.
A natural call carries a meaning that reflects the call; a natural bid intuitively showing hand or suit strength based on the level or suit of the bid, and a natural double expressing that the player believes that the opposing partnership will not make their bid.
This measures skill because each player is being judged only on the ability to bid with, and play, the same cards as other players.
A  starts when a player leads, or makes the first play of a card.
A better than average hand, containing 12 or 13 points, is usually considered sufficient to ''open'' the bidding, i.e., to make the first bid in the auction.
If he plays a high card he is showing an entry in the higher side suit and vice versa.
Within a suit, the ace is ranked highest followed by the king, queen and jack and then the ten through to the two.
The four players sit in two partnerships such that each partner sits opposite to each other.
If one or more players plays a trump to a trick when void in the suit led, the highest trump wins.
Millions of people play bridge worldwide in clubs, tournaments, online and with friends at home, making it one of the world's most popular card games, particularly among seniors.
The player who played the highest-ranked card wins the trick.
It confirms or passes some information to a partner, and also denies by implication any other kind of hand which would have tended to support an alternative call.
in part because it is free to play regular games and volunteer-run tournaments.
For fear of conceding a ''ruff and discard'', West plays the 2 instead of another spade.
Undertricks are scored in both variations as follows:
4 is the final contract, 10 tricks being required for N-S to make with hearts as trump.
However, in a game where there is a trump suit, cards of that suit are superior in rank to any of the cards of any other suit.
A combination of two such hands (i.e., 25 or 26 points shared between partners) is often sufficient for a partnership to bid, and generally to make, game in a major suit or notrump (more are usually needed for a minor suit game, as the level is higher).
After the contract is set, one player from that partnership taking the bid (the ) becomes the  and the other becoming the .
In the auction, North-South are trying to investigate whether their cards are sufficient to make a '''game''' (nine tricks at notrump, ten tricks in hearts or spades, 11 tricks in clubs or diamonds), which yields bonus points if bid and made.
* Whether doubling a contract at the 1, 2 and sometimes higher levels signifies a belief that the opponents' contract will fail and a desire to raise the stakes (a ''penalty double''), or an indication of strength but no biddable suit coupled with a request that partner bid something (a ''takeout double'').
In tournaments, "bidding boxes" are frequently used, as noted above.
On this hand, South has 14 high card points.
Calls may be made orally, via a bidding box, or digitally for online bridge.
In the UK, Acol is the most common system; its main features are a weak one notrump opening with 12-14 high card points and several variations for 2-level openings.
At the end of the round, points are awarded to the declaring side if they make the contract or the defenders otherwise.
* Conventions for the opening lead govern how the first card to be played will be chosen and what it will mean,
* Discards cover the situation when a defender cannot follow suit and therefore has free choice what card to play or throw away.
