Copenhagen has several handball teams—a sport which is particularly popular in Denmark.
Several financial institutions and banks have headquarters in Copenhagen, including Alm.
To foster international trade, the East India Company was founded in 1616.
It serves as a sculpture garden with both a permanent display and temporary exhibits during the summer months.
Rugby League is now played in Copenhagen, with the national team playing out of Gentofte Stadion.
With its 42 judges, it has a Probate Division, an Enforcement Division and a Registration and Notorial Acts Division while bankruptcy is handled by the Maritime and Commercial Court of Copenhagen.
The Technical University of Denmark is located in Lyngby in the northern outskirts of Copenhagen.
Municipal administration is also conducted by a mayor, a council, and an executive.
Copenhagen has a significant jazz scene that has existed for many years.
With the expansion of the welfare state and women entering the work force, schools, nurseries, sports facilities and hospitals were established across the city.
Its figures illustrate a Nordic legend.
Copenhagen Airport, opened in 1925, is Scandinavia's largest airport, located in Kastrup on the island of Amager.
Despite a top score for quality of living, its scores were low for employer activity and affordability.
Sometimes referred to as "the City of Spires", Copenhagen is known for its horizontal skyline, broken only by the spires and towers of its churches and castles.
City authorities have encouraged the development of business clusters in several innovative sectors, which include information technology, biotechnology, pharmaceuticals, clean technology and smart city solutions.
Although it is one of the world's most expensive cities, it is also one of the most liveable with its public transport, facilities for cyclists and its environmental policies.
Then come the late 19th and early 20th century residential neighbourhoods of Østerbro, Nørrebro, Vesterbro and Amagerbro.
or ''Kbhvn'' are often used in Danish for ''København'', and ''kbh.''
The Copenhagen metropolitan area has just over 2 million inhabitants.
The CPH:PIX festival takes place in mid-April.
It was during this battle that Lord Nelson was said to have "put the telescope to the blind eye" in order not to see Admiral Parker's signal to cease fire.
It was Christian IV who first developed its landscaping in 1606.
They include Statens Museum for Kunst, i.e.
In Danish, Dyrehavsbakken is often abbreviated as ''Bakken''.
Other important media corporations include Aller Media which is the largest publisher of weekly and monthly magazines in Scandinavia, the Egmont media group and Gyldendal, the largest Danish publisher of books.
Halmtorvet, the old haymarket behind the Central Station, is an increasingly popular area with its cafés and restaurants.
A substantial amount of rebuilding followed.
The first habitations were probably centred on Gammel Strand (literally "old shore") in the 11th century or even earlier.
Years of substantial investment in sewage treatment have improved water quality in the harbour to an extent that the inner harbour can be used for swimming with facilities at a number of locations.
Møller foundation, was completed in 2004.
During the reign of Christian IV between 1588 and 1648, Copenhagen had dramatic growth as a city.
The defences were further enhanced with the completion of the Citadel in 1664 and the extension of Christianshavns Vold with its bastions in 1692, leading to the creation of a new base for the fleet at Nyholm.
Since the completion of the Øresund Bridge, Copenhagen has become increasingly integrated with the Swedish province of Scania and its largest city, Malmö, forming the Øresund Region.
Tourism is a major contributor to Copenhagen's economy, attracting visitors due to the city's harbour, cultural attractions and award-winning restaurants.
The largest church, ''Vor frue kirke'', was destroyed by the sea artillery.
The northern part of Amager and Valby were also incorporated into the City of Copenhagen in 1901–02.
Michael Frayn's 1998 play ''Copenhagen'' about the meeting between the physicists Niels Bohr and Werner Heisenberg in 1941 is also set in the city.
Other distinctive features of Copenhagen include the abundance of water, its many parks, and the bicycle paths that line most streets.
The Netherlands had also become primarily Protestant, as were northern German states.
There was a demographic boom in the 1990s and first decade of the 21st century, largely due to immigration to Denmark.
In the second half of the 18th century, Copenhagen benefitted from Denmark's neutrality during the wars between Europe's main powers, allowing it to play an important role in trade between the states around the Baltic Sea.
Exceptional weather conditions can bring as much as 50&nbsp;cm of snow to Copenhagen in a 24-hour period during the winter months while summer temperatures have been known to rise to heights of .
Den Frie Udstilling near the Østerport Station exhibits paintings created and selected by contemporary artists themselves rather than by the official authorities.
On the winter solstice, it rises at 08:37 and sets at 15:39 with 7 hours and 1 minute of daylight.
The area of Metropolitan Copenhagen is defined by the Finger Plan.
The two national daily newspapers ''Politiken'' and ''Berlingske Tidende'' and the two tabloids ''Ekstra Bladet'' and ''B.T.''
Also ''Kristeligt Dagblad'' is based in Copenhagen and is published six days a week.
Attacks by the Germans continued, and after the original fortress was eventually destroyed by the marauders, islanders replaced it with Copenhagen Castle.
The Tivoli Gardens is an amusement park and pleasure garden located in central Copenhagen between the City Hall Square and the Central Station.
The city's appearance today is shaped by the key role it has played as a regional centre for centuries.
Dyrehavsbakken, a fair-ground and pleasure-park established in 1583, is located in Klampenborg just north of Copenhagen in a forested area known as Dyrehaven.
It houses the Danish crown jewels and crown regalia, the coronation throne and tapestries illustrating Christian V's victories in the Scanian War.
Another important Copenhagen art museum is the Ny Carlsberg Glyptotek founded by second generation Carlsberg philanthropist Carl Jacobsen and built around his personal collections.
Copenhagen has a wide selection of art museums and galleries displaying both historic works and more modern contributions.
This dramatic increase of space was long overdue, as not only were the old ramparts out of date as a defence system but bad sanitation in the old city had to be overcome.
They were built outside the old ramparts when the city was finally allowed to expand beyond its fortifications.
By contrast, the average hours of sunshine are less than two per day in November and only one and a half per day from December to February.
Traditionally, Copenhagen's founding has been dated to Bishop Absalon's construction of a modest fortress on the little island of Slotsholmen in 1167 where Christiansborg Palace stands today.
Today it still maintains a measure of autonomy.
With a number of bridges connecting the various districts, the cityscape is characterized by parks, promenades and waterfronts.
This community developed around the underground scene venue Ungdomshuset in the late 90's punk scene, with punk- and hardcore acts such as Snipers, Amdi Petersens Armé, Gorilla Angreb, Young Wasteners, and No Hope For The Kids emerging as significant bands.
In 2012 some 36% of all working or studying city-dwellers cycled to work, school, or university.
Copenhagen is rich in companies and institutions with a focus on research and development within the field of biotechnology, and the Medicon Valley initiative aims to strengthen this position and to promote cooperation between companies and academia.
The Copenhagen Fire Department forms the largest municipal fire brigade in Denmark with some 500 fire and ambulance personnel, 150 administration and service workers, and 35 workers in prevention.
Copenhagen Ice Skating Club founded in 1869 is the oldest ice hockey team in Denmark but is no longer in the top league.
Copenhagen has an extensive road network including motorways connecting the city to other parts of Denmark and to Sweden over the Øresund Bridge.
Few houses with straw roofs remained after the bombardment.
The brigade began as the Copenhagen Royal Fire Brigade on 9 July 1687 under King Christian V. After the passing of the Copenhagen Fire Act on 18 May 1868, on 1 August 1870 the Copenhagen Fire Brigade became a municipal institution in its own right.
To the south of Frederiksstaden, the Nyhavn canal is lined with colourful houses from the 17th and 18th centuries, many now with lively restaurants and bars.
As a result, Copenhagen has become the centre of a larger metropolitan area spanning both nations.
Jørgens Sø, one of the Copenhagen lakes.
Because of Copenhagen's northern latitude, the number of daylight hours varies considerably between summer and winter.
The København Håndbold women's club has recently been established.
In 2013, it was ranked as one of the leading technical universities in Northern Europe.
During World War II in Denmark, Copenhagen was occupied by German troops along with the rest of the country from 9 April 1940 until 4 May 1945.
Brand, Danske Bank, Nykredit and Nordea Bank Danmark.
Municipalities are responsible for a wide variety of public services, which include land-use planning, environmental planning, public housing, management and maintenance of local roads, and social security.
It was chosen as "best concert venue in Europe" by international music magazine ''Live''.
It is however also among the most expensive cities in Europe.
By 1661, Copenhagen had asserted its position as capital of Denmark and Norway.
Around the historical city centre lies a band of congenial residential boroughs (Vesterbro, Inner Nørrebro, Inner Østerbro) dating mainly from late 19th century.
There are no official statistics on ethnic groups.
The total number of bed nights in the Capital Region surpassed 9 million in 2013, while international bed nights reached 5 million.
Use of these rooms does not lead to prosecution; the city treats drug use as a public health issue, not a criminal one.
Many major Danish companies like Novo Nordisk and Lundbeck, both of which are among the 50 largest pharmaceutical and biotech companies in the world, are located in this business cluster.
The venue has three concert halls: the great hall, Store Vega, accommodates audiences of 1,550, the middle hall, Lille Vega, has space for 500 and Ideal Bar Live has a capacity of 250.
Since 2010, the old B&W Shipyard at Refshaleøen in the harbour has been the location for Copenhell, a heavy metal rock music festival.
Beginning in the 17th century it consolidated its position as a regional centre of power with its institutions, defences and armed forces.
Close to the centre are the Copenhagen lakes of Sortedams Sø, Peblinge Sø and Sankt Jørgens Sø.
Priorities include sustainable drainage systems, recycling rainwater, green roofs and efficient waste management solutions.
Around 1200, the Church of Our Lady was constructed on higher ground to the northeast of the town, which began to develop around it.
Copenhagen also has a sizable film and television industry.
On 15–18 August 1973, an oral literature conference took place in Copenhagen as part of the 9th International Congress of Anthropological and Ethnological Sciences.
The festival temporarily moved to Freetown Christiania after Ungdomshuset was evicted from its original location until a new Ungdomshuset location was opened on Dortheavej 61.
Other landmarks in Indre By include the parliament building of Christiansborg, the City Hall and Rundetårn, originally an observatory.
The public sector workforce is around 110,000, including education and healthcare.
Copenhagen has some of the highest gross wages in the world.
No less than 47% of the medieval section of the city was completely lost.
There are also branches of both University College Capital and Metropolitan University College inside and outside Copenhagen.
It is also home to the Royal Danish Ballet.
Some greensand from the Selandian is also present.
680,000 cruise passengers visited the port in 2015.
Most characteristic of all is the Baroque spire of the Church of Our Saviour with its narrowing external spiral stairway that visitors can climb to the top.
With its new city hall and railway station, its centre was drawn towards the west.
Closed to traffic since 1964, Strøget, the world's oldest and longest pedestrian street, runs the  from Rådhuspladsen to Kongens Nytorv.
However, 18 of the 26 political prisoners in the Shell Building managed to escape while the Gestapo archives were completely destroyed.
By the beginning of the 20th century, Copenhagen had become a thriving industrial and administrative city.
The city is situated on the eastern coast of the island of Zealand; another small portion of the city is located on Amager, and is separated from Malmö, Sweden, by the strait of Øresund.
Particularly notable was the use of incendiary Congreve rockets (containing phosphorus, which cannot be extinguished with water) that randomly hit the city.
The Danish Academy of Fine Arts has provided education in the arts for more than 250 years.
Commercial and residential buildings are to reduce electricity consumption by 20 percent and 10 percent respectively, and total heat consumption is to fall by 20 percent by 2025.
It has a municipal population of 591,481 and a larger urban population of 1,280,371 ().
Founded in 1748 along with the theatre, it is one of the oldest ballet troupes in Europe noted for its Bournonville style of ballet.
In 2009 the event included a  FINA World Cup competition in the morning.
Electricity came in 1892 with electric trams in 1897.
In 2010, the wider Capital Region of Denmark had a gross domestic product (GDP) of €88,366 million, and the 15th largest GDP per capita of regions in the European Union.
Recent years have seen a boom in modern architecture in Copenhagen both for Danish architecture and for works by international architects.
It produces about 4% of the city's energy.
The city's architectural planning authorities continue to take full account of these priorities.
From the 1960s, on the initiative of the young architect Jan Gehl, pedestrian streets and cycle tracks were created in the city centre.
It began on the evening of 20 October, and continued to burn until the morning of 23 October, destroying approximately 28% of the city, leaving some 20% of the population homeless.
High taxes mean that wages are reduced after mandatory deduction.
The area was developed by Christian IV in the early 17th century.
Established in 1862, the Maritime and Commercial Court (''Sø- og Handelsretten'') also hears commercial cases including those relating to trade marks, marketing practices and competition for the whole of Denmark.
The lesser known Vestre Kirkegaard is the largest cemetery in Denmark () and offers a maze of dense groves, open lawns, winding paths, hedges, overgrown tombs, monuments, tree-lined avenues, lakes and other garden features.
Created as an amusement park complete with rides, games and restaurants by Christian IV, it is the oldest surviving amusement park in the world.
Designed by Jean Nouvel, it has four halls with the main auditorium seating 1,800 people.
Christian IV also sponsored an array of ambitious building projects including Rosenborg Slot and the Rundetårn.
In city planning, streets and squares are to be designed to encourage cycling and walking rather than driving.
The national library's Black Diamond building on the waterfront was completed in 1999.
While there are no official statistics, a significant portion of the estimated 175,000–200,000 Muslims in the country live in the Copenhagen urban area, with the highest concentration in Nørrebro and the Vestegnen.
CPH:PIX is Copenhagen's international feature film festival, established in 2009 as a fusion of the 20-year-old Natfilm festival and the four-year-old CIFF.
However, it was not until the 1930s that substantial housing developments ensued, with the demolishment of one side of Christianhavn's Torvegade in order to build five large blocks of flats.
It is official municipal policy in Copenhagen that by 2015 all citizens must be able to reach a park or beach on foot in less than 15 minutes.
According to Statistics Denmark, Copenhagen's urban area has a larger population of 1,280,371 ().
Another popular park is the Frederiksberg Gardens, a 32-hectare romantic landscape park.
During the last ice age, glaciers eroded the surface leaving a layer of moraines up to  thick.
Later, following the Second World War, the Finger Plan fostered the development of housing and businesses along the five urban railway routes stretching out from the city centre.
Copenhagen aims to be carbon-neutral by 2025.
CMP annually receives about 8,000 ships and handled some 148,000 TEU in 2012.
Eckersberg and his students while C.F.
The historic centre of the city, Indre By or the Inner City, features many of Copenhagen's most popular monuments and attractions.
Besides its sculpture collections, the museum also holds a comprehensive collection of paintings of Impressionist and Post-Impressionist painters such as Monet, Renoir, Cézanne, van Gogh and Toulouse-Lautrec as well as works by the Danish Golden Age painters.
Copenhagen has several recurring community festivals, mainly in the summer.
British design magazine ''Monocle'' named Copenhagen the ''World's best design city 2008''.
It is among the most modern opera houses in the world.
Copenhagen is believed to have invented the photomarathon photography competition, which has been held in the City each year since 1989.
The Danish Australian Football League, based in Copenhagen is the largest Australian rules football competition outside of the English speaking world.
Rugby union is also played in the Danish capital with teams such as CSR-Nanok, Copenhagen Business School Sport Rugby, Frederiksberg RK and Rugbyklubben Speed.
Substantial discoveries of flint tools in the area provide evidence of human settlements dating to the Stone Age.
The table to the right shows the most common countries of birth of Copenhagen residents.
Copenhagen is recognized as one of the most environmentally friendly cities in the world.
There are also some 7,000 Jews in Denmark, most of them in the Copenhagen area where there are several synagogues.
Copenhagen Fashion Week, the largest fashion event in Northern Europe, takes place every year in February and August.
There is also a windmill in the area.
According to figures from the first quarter of 2016, approximately 76% of the municipality's population was of Danish descent, defined as having at least one parent who was born in Denmark and has Danish citizenship.
In Dansk Industri's 2013 survey of employment factors in the ninety-six municipalities of Denmark, Copenhagen came in first place for educational qualifications and for the development of private companies in recent years, but fell to 86th place in local companies' assessment of the employment climate.
Since 2009, Copenhagen has been one of the fastest growing metropolitan destinations in Europe.
The nightclubs and bars stay open until 5 or 6 in the morning, some even longer.
June is the sunniest month of the year with an average of about eight hours of sunshine a day.
Many of the most important contributors to Danish literature such as Hans Christian Andersen (1805–1875) with his fairy tales, the philosopher Søren Kierkegaard (1813–1855) and playwright Ludvig Holberg (1684–1754) spent much of their lives in Copenhagen.
Copenhagen Municipality is divided into ten districts (''bydele''): Indre By, Østerbro, Nørrebro, Vesterbro/Kongens Enghave, Valby, Vanløse, Brønshøj-Husum, Bispebjerg, Amager Øst, and Amager Vest.
The Second Battle of Copenhagen (or the Bombardment of Copenhagen) (16 August – 5 September 1807) was from a British point of view a preemptive attack on Copenhagen, targeting the civilian population in order to seize the Dano-Norwegian fleet.
Its weather is subject to low-pressure systems from the Atlantic which result in unstable conditions throughout the year.
Following decades of stagnation, it has experienced a resurgence since 1990 following a merger with Malmö harbour.
Copenhagen Municipality is by far the largest municipality, with the historic city at its core.
Copenhagen Marathon, Copenhagen's annual marathon event, was established in 1980.
While a number of the earlier theatres are now closed, the Betty Nansen Theatre and Aveny-T are still active.
It opened in 1843, making it the second oldest amusement park in the world.
Located near Copenhagen Airport, it currently boasts one of the largest malls in Scandinavia and a variety of office and residential buildings as well as the IT University and a high school.
This festival focuses on indie counterculture, experimental pop music and left field music combined with visual arts exhibitions.
The Pride has a series of different activities all over Copenhagen, but it is at the City Hall Square that most of the celebration takes place.
Copenhagen Central Station is the hub of the DSB railway network serving Denmark and international destinations.
The bacterium ''Hafnia'' is also named after Copenhagen: Vagn Møller of the State Serum Institute in Copenhagen named it in 1954.
The seat of Copenhagen's municipal council is the Copenhagen City Hall (''''), which is situated on City Hall Square.
The Royal Library, belonging to the University of Copenhagen, is the largest library in the Nordic countries with an almost complete collection of all printed Danish books since 1482.
Every year in early July, Copenhagen's streets, squares, parks as well as cafés and concert halls fill up with big and small jazz concerts during the Copenhagen Jazz Festival.
After Christiansborg was destroyed by fire in 1794 and another fire caused serious damage to the city in 1795, work began on the classical Copenhagen landmark of Højbro Plads while Nytorv and Gammel Torv were converged.
A ''beneficial researcher scheme'' with low taxation of foreign specialists has made Denmark an attractive location for foreign labour.
On 2 April 1801, a British fleet under the command of Admiral Sir Hyde Parker defeated a Danish-Norwegian fleet anchored near Copenhagen.
Defensive ramparts and moats were completed and by 1177 St. Clemens Church had been built.
The IT University is Denmark's youngest university, a mono-faculty institution focusing on technical, societal and business aspects of information technology.
Copenhagen is a green city with many parks, both large and small.
The slopes of Valby and Brønshøj reach heights of over , divided by valleys running from the northeast to the southwest.
The canals themselves, branching off the central Christianshavn Canal and lined with house boats and pleasure craft are one of the area's attractions.
However, the city's most distinctive district is Frederiksstaden, developed during the reign of Frederick V. It has the Amalienborg Palace at its centre and is dominated by the dome of Frederik's Church (or the Marble Church) and several elegant 18th-century Rococo mansions.
Denmark's Flexicurity model features some of the most flexible hiring and firing legislation in Europe, providing attractive conditions for foreign investment and international companies looking to locate in Copenhagen.
The Danish National Police and Copenhagen Police headquarters is situated in the Neoclassical-inspired Politigården building built in 1918–24 under architects Hack Kampmann and Holger Alfred Jacobsen.
New buildings must now be constructed according to Low Energy Class ratings and in 2020 near net-zero energy buildings.
As the town became more prominent, it was repeatedly attacked by the Hanseatic League.
In line with this policy, several new parks, including the innovative Superkilen in the Nørrebro district, have been completed or are under development in areas lacking green spaces.
Another interesting feature is Freetown Christiania, a fairly large area which was initially occupied by squatters during student unrest in 1971.
The Copenhagen Stock Exchange (CSE) was founded in 1620 and is now owned by OMX.
It is possible to find modest eateries serving open sandwiches, known as smørrebrød – a traditional, Danish lunch dish; however, most restaurants serve international dishes.
A historical green space in the northeastern part of the city is Kastellet, a well-preserved Renaissance citadel that now serves mainly as a park.
Now known as the City Court of Copenhagen (''Kobenhavns Byret''), it is the largest of the 24 city courts in Denmark with jurisdiction over the municipalities of Copenhagen, Dragør and Tårnby.
It is located on the eastern shore of the island of Zealand, partly on the island of Amager and on a number of natural and artificial islets between the two.
Completed in 1908, Det Ny Teater (the New Theatre) located in a passage between Vesterbrogade and Gammel Kongevej has become a popular venue for musicals since its reopening in 1994, attracting the largest audiences in the country.
The University of Copenhagen is Denmark's oldest university founded in 1479.
for ''københavnsk'' (of Copenhagen).
