The other isotopes are radioactive, with the most stable being 67Cu with a half-life of 61.83&nbsp;hours.
Because compression clothing is a valid treatment for some ailments, the clothing may appear to work, but the added copper may have no benefit beyond a placebo effect.
Yttrium barium copper oxide (YBa2Cu3O7) consists of both Cu(II) and Cu(III) centres.
Isotopes with a mass number above 64 decay by β−, whereas those with a mass number below 64 decay by β+.
A small part of the copper supply is used for nutritional supplements and fungicides in agriculture.
Upon adding excess ammonia, the precipitate dissolves, forming tetraamminecopper(II):
The cultural role of copper has been important, particularly in currency.
They are synthesized by treating copper(I) compounds with Grignard reagents, terminal alkynes or organolithium reagents; in particular, the last reaction described produces a Gilman reagent.
Specifically, using Benedict's reagent and Fehling's solution the presence of the sugar is signaled by a color change from blue Cu(II) to reddish copper(I) oxide.
In Roman times, it was known as ''aes Cyprium'', ''aes'' being the generic Latin term for copper alloys and ''Cyprium'' from Cyprus, where much copper was mined.
The protein hemocyanin is the oxygen carrier in most mollusks and some arthropods such as the horseshoe crab (''Limulus polyphemus'').
For this reason it has long been used to line parts of ships to protect against barnacles and mussels.
Copper's architectural use has been expanded in modern times to include interior and exterior wall cladding, building expansion joints, radio frequency shielding, and antimicrobial and decorative indoor products such as attractive handrails, bathroom fixtures, and counter tops.
63Cu and 65Cu are stable, with 63Cu comprising approximately 69% of naturally occurring copper; both have a spin of .
As for safety, the Food and Nutrition Board also sets Tolerable Upper Intake Levels (known as ULs) for vitamins and minerals when evidence is sufficient.
The seven heavenly bodies known to the ancients were associated with the seven metals known in antiquity, and Venus was assigned to copper.
Many wet-chemical tests for copper ions exist, one involving potassium ferrocyanide, which gives a brown precipitate with copper(II) salts.
As with other metals, if copper is put in contact with another metal, galvanic corrosion will occur.
The metal's distinctive natural green patina has long been coveted by architects and designers.
The current EAR for copper for people ages 14 and up is 0.7&nbsp;mg/day.
Bronze usually refers to copper-tin alloys, but can refer to any alloy of copper such as aluminium bronze.
Similar results were obtained for stiffness (WOMAC B), physical function (WOMAC C), and medication use.
Copper is found as a pure metal in nature, and this was the first source of the metal to be used by humans, c. 8000 BC.
For example, copper salts are used to test for reducing sugars.
The RDA is 0.9&nbsp;mg/day.
This is important because motors and motor-driven systems account for 43%–46% of all global electricity consumption and 69% of all electricity used by industry.
Roughly half of all copper mined is used for electrical wire and cable conductors.
Copper(III) is most often found in oxides.
According to the International Resource Panel's Metal Stocks in Society report, the global per capita stock of copper in use in society is 35–55&nbsp;kg.
This step exploits the relatively easy reduction of copper oxides to copper metal.
The gates of the Temple of Jerusalem used Corinthian bronze treated with depletion gilding.
coli'' O157:H7, methicillin-resistant ''Staphylococcus aureus'' (MRSA), ''Staphylococcus'', ''Clostridium difficile'', influenza A virus, adenovirus, and fungi).
Many electrical devices rely on copper wiring because of its multitude of inherent beneficial properties, such as its high electrical conductivity, tensile strength, ductility, creep (deformation) resistance, corrosion resistance, low thermal expansion, high thermal conductivity, ease of soldering, malleability, and ease of installation.
After processing in the liver, copper is distributed to other tissues in a second phase, which involves the protein ceruloplasmin, carrying the majority of copper in blood.
It dropped to US$2.40/lb (US$5.29/kg) in February 2007, then rebounded to US$3.50/lb (US$7.71/kg) in April 2007.
Copper is one of the most important constituents of silver and carat gold and carat solders used in the jewelry industry, modifying the color, hardness and melting point of the resulting alloys.
However, this small amount is essential to the overall human well-being.
The maximum permissible current density of copper in open air is approximately 3.1×106&nbsp;A/m2 of cross-sectional area, above which it begins to heat excessively.
Alloying copper with tin to make bronze was first practiced about 4000 years after the discovery of copper smelting, and about 2000 years after "natural bronze" had come into general use.
62Cu and 64Cu have significant applications.
Copper is one of three metals, along with lead and silver, used in the museum materials testing procedure called the Oddy test to detect chlorides, oxides, and sulfur compounds.
These minerals are concentrated from crushed ores to the level of 10–15% copper by froth flotation or bioleaching.
The amount of copper in use is increasing and the quantity available is barely sufficient to allow all countries to reach developed world levels of usage.
:2 Cu2+ + 4 I− → 2 CuI + I2
This includes structural power wiring, power distribution cable, appliance wire, communications cable, automotive wire and cable, and magnet wire.
Architectural structures built with copper (usually roofing elements) corrode to give green verdigris (or patina).
Increasing the mass and cross section of copper in a coil increases the efficiency of the motor.
Integrated circuits and printed circuit boards increasingly feature copper in place of aluminium because of its superior electrical conductivity ''(see Copper interconnect for main article)''; heat sinks and heat exchangers use copper because of its superior heat dissipation properties.
Copper forms a rich variety of compounds, usually with oxidation states +1 and +2, which are often called ''cuprous'' and ''cupric'', respectively.
The ectomycorrhizal fungus ''Suillus luteus'' protects young pine trees from copper toxicity.
Copper wire is used in power generation, power transmission, power distribution, telecommunications, electronics circuitry, and countless types of electrical equipment.
The concentration of copper in ores averages only 0.6%, and most commercial ores are sulfides, especially chalcopyrite (CuFeS2) and to a lesser extent chalcocite (Cu2S).
Copper is also found in many superoxide dismutases, proteins that catalyze the decomposition of superoxides by converting it (by disproportionation) to oxygen and hydrogen peroxide:
Seven metastable isotopes have been characterized; 68mCu is the longest-lived with a half-life of 3.8 minutes.
Cytochrome c oxidase is the protein that binds the O2 between a copper and an iron; the protein transfers 8 electrons to the O2 molecule to reduce it to two molecules of water.
It can be a mixture of carbonate and sulfate compounds in various amounts, depending upon environmental conditions such as sulfur-containing acid rain.
It's malleability makes it easy to bend into the various shapes required and allows considerable flexibility in the shaping of the still and associated pipework; the metal also reacts with undesirable sulfur-containing components in the vapor and distillate making for a cleaner product.
:2 Cu2S + 3 O2  → 2 Cu2O + 2 SO2
Sites include Chuquicamata in Chile, Bingham Canyon Mine in Utah, United States and El Chino Mine in New Mexico, United States.
Copper is commonly used as a base on which other metals such as nickel are electroplated.
It occurs as native copper, in the copper sulfides chalcopyrite and chalcocite, in the copper carbonates azurite and malachite, and in the copper(I) oxide mineral cuprite.
The German scientist Gottfried Osann invented powder metallurgy in 1830 while determining the metal's atomic mass; around then it was discovered that the amount and type of alloying element (e.g., tin) to copper would affect bell tones.
At first, the copper itself was valued, but gradually the shape and look of the copper became more important.
A unique tetranuclear copper center has been found in nitrous-oxide reductase.
Copper has been used since ancient times as a durable, corrosion resistant, and weatherproof architectural material.
The history of copper use is at least 11,000 years old, estimated to have begun in 9000 BC in the Middle East; a copper pendant was found in northern Iraq that dates to 8700 BC.
Alloys of copper with aluminium (about 7%) have a pleasant golden color and are used in decorations.
Among the numerous copper sulfides, important examples include copper(I) sulfide and copper(II) sulfide.
Aphrodite (Venus in Rome) represented copper in mythology and alchemy because of its lustrous beauty and its ancient use in producing mirrors; Cyprus was sacred to the goddess.
The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has approved the registrations of these copper alloys as "antimicrobial materials with public health benefits"; that approval allows manufacturers to make legal claims to the public health benefits of products made of registered alloys.
Native copper is known to have been extracted from sites on Isle Royale with primitive stone tools between 800 and 1600.
Compounds that contain a carbon-copper bond are known as organocopper compounds.
The Great Copper Mountain was a mine in Falun, Sweden, that operated from the 10th century to 1992.
In aqueous solution, copper(II) exists as Cu(H2O)62+.
The process was most prevalent in Alexandria, where alchemy is thought to have begun.
Copper(I) acetylide is highly shock-sensitive but is an intermediate in reactions such as the Cadiot-Chodkiewicz coupling and the Sonogashira coupling.
The filled d-shells in these elements contribute little to interatomic interactions, which are dominated by the s-electrons through metallic bonds.
Copper motor rotors, a new technology designed for motor applications where energy savings are prime design objectives, are enabling general-purpose induction motors to meet and exceed National Electrical Manufacturers Association (NEMA) premium efficiency standards.
Copper is an essential trace element in plants and animals, but not all microorganisms.
Schweizer's reagent and related complexes with ethylenediamine and other amines dissolve cellulose.
The alloy of 90% copper and 10% nickel, remarkable for its resistance to corrosion, is used for various objects exposed to seawater, though it is vulnerable to the sulfides sometimes found in polluted harbors and estuaries.
The characteristic color of copper results from the electronic transitions between the filled 3d and half-empty 4s atomic shells – the energy difference between these shells corresponds to orange light.
Roofs, flashings, rain gutters, downspouts, domes, spires, vaults, and doors have been made from copper for hundreds or thousands of years.
In molluscs and crustaceans copper is a constituent of the blood pigment hemocyanin, replaced by the iron-complexed hemoglobin in fish and other vertebrates.
Ceruloplasmin also carries the copper that is excreted in milk, and is particularly well-absorbed as a copper source.
Copper has excellent brazing and soldering properties and can be welded; the best results are obtained with gas metal arc welding.
These proteins relay electrons by the process called electron transfer.
Several sites in the state of Arizona are considered prime candidates for this method.
:2 HO2  →  H2O2  +  O2
The Sudbury matte process converted only half the sulfide to oxide and then used this oxide to remove the rest of the sulfur as oxide.
Both cuprous and cupric oxides are known.
Bronze artifacts from the Vinča culture date to 4500 BC.
Copper, silver and gold are in group 11 of the periodic table, and they share certain attributes: they have one s-orbital electron on top of a filled d-electron shell and are characterized by high ductility and electrical and thermal conductivity.
Some 355 copper alloys were proven to kill more than 99.9% of disease-causing bacteria within just two hours when cleaned regularly.
They are very reactive towards oxygen to form copper(I) oxide and have many uses in chemistry.
Further analyses of the PRI subscales revealed a statistically significant difference between devices (P=0.025), which favoured the experimental device.
:Cu2+ + 2 OH− → Cu(OH)2
The transition between the Neolithic period and the Bronze Age was formerly termed the Chalcolithic period (copper-stone), when copper tools were used with stone tools.
Tommie CopperSo it seems possible that copper-infused compression clothing could help you recover from a tough workout, and it's also possible it could have some anti-bacterial properties in clothes.
In the case of copper the UL is set at 10&nbsp;mg/day.
This observation explains the low hardness and high ductility of single crystals of copper.
Copper is essential in the aerobic respiration of all eukaryotes.
Copper compounds are also used as bacteriostatic agents, fungicides, and wood preservatives.
It was referred to as the nation's treasury; Sweden had a copper backed currency.
:Cu(H2O)4(OH)2 + 4 NH3 → Cu(H2O)2(NH3)42+ + 2 H2O + 2 OH−
Sumerian and Egyptian artifacts of copper and bronze alloys date to 3000 BC.
If it were, it might lead to copper poisoning.
Copper has been in use at least 10,000 years, but more than 95% of all copper ever mined and smelted has been extracted since 1900, and more than half was extracted the last 24 years.
In volume, copper is the third most recycled metal after iron and aluminium.
Participants reported lower sensory pain after wearing the standard magnetic wrist strap, than when wearing control devices.
No evidence shows that copper can be absorbed through the skin.
Copper(I) forms a variety of weak complexes with alkenes and carbon monoxide, especially in the presence of amine ligands.
For infants up to 12 months the AI is 0.22&nbsp;mg/day and for children ages 1–13 years the RDA increases with age from 0.34 to 0.7&nbsp;mg/day.
It is a soft, malleable and ductile metal with very high thermal and electrical conductivity.
The Food and Nutrition Board of the U.S. Institute of Medicine updated Estimated Average Requirements (EARs) and Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs) for copper in 2001.
Shakudō is a Japanese decorative alloy of copper containing a low percentage of gold, typically 4–10%, that can be patinated to a dark blue or black colour.
Some lead-free solders consist of tin alloyed with a small proportion of copper and other metals.
Architectural copper and its alloys can also be 'finished' to embark a particular look, feel, and/or color.
With an estimated annual output of around 15,000 t, Roman copper mining and smelting activities reached a scale unsurpassed until the time of the Industrial Revolution; the provinces most intensely mined were those of Hispania, Cyprus and in Central Europe.
Copper is produced in massive stars and is present in the Earth's crust in a proportion of about 50 parts per million (ppm).
With tetrapeptides, purple-colored copper(III) complexes are stabilized by the deprotonated amide ligands.
The US 5-cent coin (currently called a ''nickel'') consists of 75% copper and 25% nickel in homogeneous composition.
The process exploits the greater ease of converting iron sulfides into oxides, which in turn react with the silica to form the silicate slag that floats on top of the heated mass.
Conjugate addition to enones and carbocupration of alkynes can also be achieved with organocopper compounds.
In mitochondria it is found in cytochrome c oxidase, which is the last protein in oxidative phosphorylation.
''Chromobacterium violaceum'' and ''Pseudomonas fluorescens'' can both mobilize solid copper as a cyanide compound.
Heating this material with silica in flash smelting removes much of the iron as slag.
In ancient India, copper was used in the holistic medical science Ayurveda for surgical instruments and other medical equipment.
Some copper proteins form oxo complexes, which also feature copper(III).
Ancient Egyptians (~2400 BC) used copper for sterilizing wounds and drinking water, and later to treat headaches, burns, and itching.
Just as agriculture was independently invented in several parts of the world, copper smelting was independently invented in different places.
Copper was used in roofing, currency, Renaissance sculpture, photographic technology known as the daguerreotype, the Statue of Liberty, and other structures.
Natural bronze, a type of copper made from ores rich in silicon, arsenic, and (rarely) tin, came into general use in the Balkans around 5500 BC.
The commonly encountered compounds are copper(II) salts, which often impart blue or green colors to such minerals as azurite, malachite, and turquoise, and have been used widely and historically as pigments.
Natural gas is blown across the blister to remove most of the remaining oxygen and electrorefining is performed on the resulting material to produce pure copper:
Textile fibers are blended with copper to create antimicrobial protective fabrics.
The Norddeutsche Affinerie in Hamburg was the first modern electroplating plant starting its production in 1876.
It was probably discovered in China before 2800 BC, in Central America perhaps around 600 AD, and in West Africa about the 9th or 10th century AD.
The history of copper metallurgy is thought to follow this sequence: 1) cold working of native copper, 2) annealing, 3) smelting, and 4) the lost wax casting.
At the macroscopic scale, introduction of extended defects to the crystal lattice, such as grain boundaries, hinders flow of the material under applied stress, thereby increasing its hardness.
Several copper proteins, such as the "blue copper proteins", do not interact directly with substrates, hence they are not enzymes.
The process of recycling copper is roughly the same as is used to extract copper but requires fewer steps.
As with other elements, the simplest compounds of copper are binary compounds, i.e.
RDA for pregnancy equals 1.0&nbsp;mg/day.
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) has set a Recommended exposure limit (REL) of 1&nbsp;mg/m3, time-weighted average.
Copper(II) sulfate forms a blue crystalline pentahydrate, the most familiar copper compound in the laboratory.
This complex exhibits the fastest water exchange rate (speed of water ligands attaching and detaching) for any transition metal aquo complex.
A green layer of verdigris (copper carbonate) can often be seen on old copper structures, such as the roofing of many older buildings and the Statue of Liberty.
Copper tarnishes when exposed to some sulfur compounds, with which it reacts to form various copper sulfides.
The price of copper has historically been unstable, and it sextupled from the 60-year low of US$0.60/lb (US$1.32/kg) in June 1999 to US$3.75 per pound (US$8.27/kg) in May 2006.
Most copper is mined or extracted as copper sulfides from large open pit mines in porphyry copper deposits that contain 0.4 to 1.0% copper.
Copper is essential to all living organisms as a trace dietary mineral because it is a key constituent of the respiratory enzyme complex cytochrome c oxidase.
The ericoid mycorrhizal fungi associated with ''Calluna'', ''Erica'' and ''Vaccinium'' can grow in metalliferous soils containing copper.
Copper is a component of some of the normal cellular enzymes in most mineral rich foods, such as vegetables, potatoes, legumes (beans and peas), nuts (peanuts and pecans), grains (wheat and rye) and fruits.
Copper forms coordination complexes with ligands.
It was the first metal to be smelted from its ore, c. 5000 BC, the first metal to be cast into a shape in a mold, c. 4000 BC and the first metal to be purposefully alloyed with another metal, tin, to create bronze, c. 3,500 BC.
The largest mass of elemental copper discovered weighed 420 tonnes and was found in 1857 on the Keweenaw Peninsula in Michigan, US.
The human body contains copper at a level of about 1.4 to 2.1&nbsp;mg per kg of body mass.
There are 29 isotopes of copper.
It is used as a conductor of heat and electricity, as a building material and as a constituent of various metal alloys, such as sterling silver used in jewelry, cupronickel used to make marine hardware and coins and constantan used in strain gauges and thermocouples for temperature measurement.
Copper is commonly used in jewelry, and according to some folklore, copper bracelets relieve arthritis symptoms.
It ended with the beginning of the Iron Age, 2000–1000 BC in the Near East, and 600 BC in Northern Europe.
Copper burial ornamentals from the 15th century have been uncovered, but the metal's commercial production did not start until the early 20th century.
The alloy of copper and nickel, called cupronickel, is used in low-denomination coins, often for the outer cladding.
Flash smelting was developed by Outokumpu in Finland and first applied at Harjavalta in 1949; the energy-efficient process accounts for 50% of the world's primary copper production.
Collectively the EARs, RDAs, AIs and ULs are referred to as Dietary Reference Intakes.
A simple example is potassium cuprate, KCuO2, a blue-black solid.
The Intergovernmental Council of Copper Exporting Countries, formed in 1967 by Chile, Peru, Zaire and Zambia, operated in the copper market as OPEC does in oil, though it never achieved the same influence, particularly because the second-largest producer, the United States, was never a member; it was dissolved in 1988.
Hence a healthy human weighing 60 kilogram contains approximately 0.1&nbsp;g of copper.
Copper oxide and carbonate are used add color in stain glass works, in glassmaking, and in ceramic glazes to impart turquoise blue, green, and brown colors.
Pure copper is orange-red and acquires a reddish tarnish when exposed to air.
Despite competition from other materials, copper remains the preferred electrical conductor in nearly all categories of electrical wiring except overhead electric power transmission where aluminium is often preferred.
Adding aqueous sodium hydroxide causes the precipitation of light blue solid copper(II) hydroxide.
In southeastern Anatolia, all four of these techniques appear more or less simultaneously at the beginning of the Neolithic c. 7500 BC.
The final patina is a particularly durable layer that is highly resistant to atmospheric corrosion, thereby protecting the underlying metal against further weathering.
Finishes include mechanical surface treatments, chemical coloring, and coatings.
In the Roman era, copper was principally mined on Cyprus, the origin of the name of the metal, from ''aes сyprium'' (metal of Cyprus), later corrupted to ''сuprum'', from which the words ''copper'' (English), ''cuivre'' (French), ''Koper'' (Dutch) and ''Kupfer'' (German) are all derived.
Copper is biostatic, meaning bacteria and many other forms of life will not grow on it.
But as for the claims in the infomercial about relieving joint pain and helping with everyday aches — any relief from copper-compression seems more likely to be a placebo effect than anything else.
In various studies, though, no difference is found between arthritis treated with a copper bracelet, magnetic bracelet, or placebo bracelet.http://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article-1221015/Copper-bracelet-arthritis-cure-myth-say-scientists-casting-doubt-multi-million-pound-alternative-healthcare-industry.html Copper bracelet arthritis cure is a myth, say scientistsNo difference was observed between devices in terms of their effects on pain as measured by the primary outcome measure (WOMAC A), the PRI and the VAS.
Some of copper's other important benefits as an architectural material include low thermal movement, light weight, lightning protection, and recyclability.
Like oxide, fluoride is a highly basic anion and is known to stabilize metal ions in high oxidation states.
The IDLH (immediately dangerous to life and health) value is 100&nbsp;mg/m3.
The European Food Safety Authority reviewed the same safety question and set its UL at 5&nbsp;mg/day.
In the United States, copper deficiency is not common.
Copper is one of four metallic elements with a natural color other than gray or silver, the others being caesium (yellow), gold (yellow), and osmium (bluish).
Similarly, as discussed in copper alloys in aquaculture, copper alloys have become important netting materials in the aquaculture industry because they are antimicrobial and prevent biofouling, even in extreme conditions and have strong structural and corrosion-resistant properties in marine environments.
The Bronze Age began in Southeastern Europe around 3700–3300 BC, in Northwestern Europe about 2500 BC.
Decorative art prominently features copper, both in the elemental metal and in compounds as pigments.
RDAs are higher than EARs so as to identify amounts that will cover people with higher than average requirements.
Copper-alloy touch surfaces have natural properties that destroy a wide range of microorganisms (e.g., ''E.
Copper is used as the printing plate in etching, engraving and other forms of intaglio printmaking.
Together with zinc, copper wires may be installed over non-conductive roofing materials to discourage the growth of moss.
For women, 10% consumed less than the EAR, for men 3.
In North America, copper mining began with marginal workings by Native Americans.
Copper's superior conductivity enhances the efficiency of electrical motors.
Copper plating and copper sheathing was widely used to protect the under-water hulls of ships, a technique pioneered by the British Admiralty in the 18th century.
Copper is absorbed in the gut, then transported to the liver bound to albumin.
The cuprous oxide is converted to ''blister'' copper upon heating:
Recently, some compression clothing with inter-woven copper has been marketed with the same folk medicine claims.
