File:Fluorescent coral - MBA - DSC07089.JPG|Fluorescent coral
The result is both the biomass and individual fish sizes are significantly larger than in places where fishing is unrestricted.
One reason for the unusual clarity of tropical waters is they are deficient in nutrients and drifting plankton.
A 2014 study lists factors such as population explosion along the coast lines, overfishing, the pollution of coastal areas, global warming and invasive species among the main reasons that have put reefs in danger of extinction.
If the land subsides slowly, the fringing reefs keep pace by growing upwards on a base of older, dead coral, forming a barrier reef enclosing a lagoon between the reef and the land.
Coral aquaculture, also known as coral farming or coral gardening, is showing promise as a potentially effective tool for restoring coral reefs, which have been declining around the world.
The few exceptions have tectonic origins where plate movements have lifted the deep ocean floor on the surface.
Sponges are another key: they live in crevices in the coral reefs.
These shapes can depend on the life history of the coral, like light exposure and wave action, and events such as breakages.
Nudibranchia and sea anemones eat sponges.
Conflicts surrounding MPAs involve lack of participation, clashing views of the government and fisheries, effectiveness of the area, and funding.
The reefs surrounding islands form when islands subside into the ocean, and atolls form when an island subsides below the surface of the sea.
This technique is often used by climate scientists to infer the paleoclimate of a region.
Sea urchins, Dotidae and sea slugs eat seaweed.
When waves pass over shallow areas, they shoal, as shown in the diagram at the right.
File:Brain coral.jpg|Brain coral
Wolanski and Hamner  noted aggregations of eggs, larval organisms and plankton on reefs in response to deep water intrusions.
come from colored proteins made by the coral animals.
This vertical break up of internal waves causes significant diapycnal mixing and turbulence.
File:Prionurus laticlavius.jpg| Schooling reef fish
Current research is showing that ecotourism in the Great Barrier Reef is contributing to coral disease, and that chemicals in sunscreens may contribute to the impact of viruses on zooxanthellae.
Most reefs grow best in warm, shallow, clear, sunny and agitated waters.
Coral and calcareous algae growths provide complex habitats and areas which offer protection, such as cracks and crevices.
Without the nutritional gains brought by rough coral surfaces, even the most effective recycling would leave corals wanting in nutrients.
The Belize study estimated the value of reef and mangrove services at $395–559 million annually.
The less water movement, the better the chance for fertilization.
A few species change sex as they grow.
The corals could then overgrow the hills, forming the present cays and reefs.
In El Niño-year 2010, preliminary reports show global coral bleaching reached its worst level since another El Niño year, 1998, when 16% of the world's reefs died as a result of increased water temperature.
Like sea level rise, a rapidly subsiding bottom can overwhelm coral growth, killing the coral polyps and the reef, due to what is called ''coral drowning''.
This diversity results in complex food webs, with large predator fish eating smaller forage fish that eat yet smaller zooplankton and so on.
However, the "topography of coral reefs is constantly changing.
Such mixtures are visible in structures such as Eniwetok Atoll.
On a larger scale, tropical storms may knock out large sections of reef and cause boulders on sandy areas to move."
* The Red Sea—includes 6000-year-old fringing reefs located around a  coastline
Waves, grazing fish (such as parrotfish), sea urchins, sponges, and other forces and organisms act as bioeroders, breaking down coral skeletons into fragments that settle into spaces in the reef structure or form sandy bottoms in associated reef lagoons.
Where the level of the underlying earth allows, the corals grow around the coast to form what he called fringing reefs, and can eventually grow out from the shore to become a barrier reef.
This keeps the warm surface waters floating above the cooler deeper waters.
Alive corals are colonies of small animals embedded in calcium carbonate shells.
Polyps are usually tiny, but they can range in size from a pinhead to  across.
The short-tailed albatross is the rarest, with fewer than 2,200 surviving after excessive feather hunting in the late 19th century.
MPAs promote responsible fishery management and habitat protection.
The process bypasses the early growth stages of corals when they are most at risk of dying.
They observed very little, if any, damage occurred to any of the colonies while they were being transported, and no mortality of coral reefs has been observed on the new transplant site, but they will be continuing to monitor the new transplant site to see how potential environmental impacts (i.e.
The approximately 20,000-year-old Great Barrier Reef offers an example of how coral reefs formed on continental shelves.
Polyps release eggs and sperm into the water en masse, simultaneously.
To improve the management of coastal coral reefs, another environmental group, the World Resources Institute (WRI) developed and published tools for calculating the value of coral reef-related tourism, shoreline protection and fisheries, partnering with five Caribbean countries.
Healthy reefs can produce up to 35 tons of fish per square kilometer each year, but damaged reefs produce much less.
Through infecting coral with genetically modified bacteria, it may be possible to grow corals that are more resistant to climate change and other threats.
General estimates show approximately 10% of the world's coral reefs are dead.
Coral reef systems provide important habitats for seabird species, some endangered.
However, reefs in the Persian Gulf have adapted to temperatures of  in winter and  in summer.
The optimum temperature for most coral reefs is , and few reefs exist in waters below .
Development stopped at the barrier reef stage, since Australia is not about to submerge.
By 13,000 years ago, sea level had risen to   lower than at present, and many hills of the coastal plains had become continental islands.
There are eight clades of Symbiodinium phylotypes.
Arrival of cool, nutrient-rich water from depths due to internal waves and tidal bores has been linked to growth rates of suspension feeders and benthic algae  as well as plankton and larval organisms.
With elevated absorption rates at UV wavelengths, the deeper occurring phylotypes are more prone to coral bleaching versus the more shallow clades.
Sea level on the Great Barrier Reef has not changed significantly in the last 6,000 years, and the age of the modern living reef structure is estimated to be between 6,000 and 8,000 years.
These nutrients are necessary for plant growth, but in the tropics, they do not directly return to the surface.
Where the bottom is rising, fringing reefs can grow around the coast, but coral raised above sea level dies and becomes white limestone.
This means the water is often agitated.
Typical shapes for coral species are wrinkled brains, cabbages, table tops, antlers, wire strands and pillars.
File:Muchroom coral.JPG|Mushroom coral
It is subject to the surge and the rise and fall of tides.
The timing of spawning depends on time of year, water temperature, and tidal and lunar cycles.
State and federal governments also control coastal erosion, which releases stored carbon in the soil into the ocean, increasing ocean acidification.
Other pigments such as reds, blues, greens, etc.
Reefs are home to a large variety of animals, including fish, seabirds, sponges, cnidarians (which includes some types of corals and jellyfish), worms, crustaceans (including shrimp, cleaner shrimp, spiny lobsters and crabs), mollusks (including cephalopods), echinoderms (including starfish, sea urchins and sea cucumbers), sea squirts, sea turtles and sea snakes.
About 60% of the world's reefs are at risk due to destructive, human-related activities.
Reef-building or hermatypic corals live only in the photic zone (above 50&nbsp;m), the depth to which sufficient sunlight penetrates the water, allowing photosynthesis to occur.
Usually sandy, the floor often supports seagrass meadows which are important foraging areas for reef fish.
The Clean Water Act is funded by the federal government, and is monitored by various watershed groups.
Coral reefs support many symbiotic relationships.
This zone is often the most diverse area of the reef.
Most research has been completed on the Symbiodinium clades A–D.
While internal waves generally have a lower frequency than surface waves, they often form as a single wave that breaks into multiple waves as it hits a slope and moves upward.
'''The reef face''' is the zone above the reef floor or the reef drop-off.
Coral which loses a large fraction of its zooxanthellae becomes white (or sometimes pastel shades in corals that are richly pigmented with their own colorful proteins) and is said to be bleached, a condition which, unless corrected, can kill the coral.
As the subsidence continues, the fringing reef becomes a barrier reef, and ultimately an atoll reef.
File:Laticauda colubrina (Wakatobi).jpg| Banded sea krait
However, other organisms must be able to withstand the robust conditions to flourish in this zone.
Sea snakes feed exclusively on fish and their eggs.
Dredging covers the existing corals with sand, and their larvae cannot build and thrive on sand; they can only build on to existing reefs.
Reefs, in turn, protect mangroves and seagrass from waves and produce sediment in which the mangroves and seagrass can root.
As the sea level rise continued, water topped most of the continental islands.
This water movement disrupts the relatively stable thermocline that usually exists between warm shallow water to deeper colder water.
File:Atoll forming-Atoll.png|Ultimately, the island sinks below the sea, and the barrier reef becomes an atoll enclosing an open lagoon.
Each one of the eight contributes their own benefits as well as less compatible attributes to the survival of their coral hosts.
Zooxanthellae can provide up to 90% of a coral’s energy requirements.
When a water parcel encounters a different density it will oscillate and create internal waves.
Coral reefs also often depend on surrounding habitats, such as seagrass meadows and mangrove forests, for nutrients.
Waves breaking on the extremely rough edges of corals disrupt the boundary layer, allowing the corals access to passing nutrients.
The global economic value of coral reefs has been estimated to be between US $29.8 billion and $375 billion per year.
* Pulley Ridge—deepest photosynthetic coral reef, Florida
Efforts to expand the size and number of coral reefs generally involve supplying substrate to allow more corals to find a home.
Coral seeds are grown in nurseries, then replanted on the reef.
In 2011, researchers suggested that "extant marine invertebrates face the same synergistic effects of multiple stressors" that occurred during the end-Permian extinction, and that genera "with poorly buffered respiratory physiology and calcareous shells", such as corals, were particularly vulnerable.
Movement is generally created by tides and wind.
The irregular structure characteristic of coral reef bathymetry may enhance mixing and produce pockets of cooler water and variable nutrient content.
Zooplankton provide the polyp with nitrogen, and the polyp shares some of the nitrogen with the zooxanthellae, which also require this element.
Reefs are threatened well beyond coastal areas.
Coral reefs cover less than 0.1% of the surface of the world’s ocean, about half the land area of France, yet they support over one-quarter of all marine species.
The report shows that healthier reef in the Caribbean are those with large population of parrotfish in countries which protect these key fishes and sea urchins, banning fish trap and Spearfishing creating "resilient reefs".
'''The reef lagoon''' is an entirely enclosed region, which creates an area less affected by wave action that often contains small reef patches.
Much like national parks and wildlife refuges, and to varying degrees, MPAs restrict potentially damaging activities.
Scientists do not yet understand the long-term impacts of coral bleaching, but they do know that bleaching leaves corals vulnerable to disease, stunts their growth, and affects their reproduction, while severe bleaching kills them.
File:PillarCoral.jpg|Pillar coral
Research in Indonesia, Philippines and Papua New Guinea shows that there is no significant difference between an MPA site and an unprotected site.
As a result of this coral restoration project, no environmental effects were seen from the transplantation process, no recreational activities were decreased, and no scenic areas were affected by the project.
Reef biomass is positively related to species diversity.
Corals also absorb nutrients, including inorganic nitrogen and phosphorus, directly from water.
A study released in April 2013 has shown that air pollution can also stunt the growth of coral reefs; researchers from Australia, Panama and the UK used coral records (between 1880 and 2000) from the western Caribbean to show the threat of factors such as coal-burning coal and volcanic eruptions.
The algal population consists of turf algae, coralline algae, and macro algae.
proposed that Codium isthmocladum react to deep water nutrient sources due to their tissues having different concentrations of nutrients dependent upon depth.
In 1842 in his first monograph, ''The Structure and Distribution of Coral Reefs'', Charles Darwin set out his theory of the formation of atoll reefs, an idea he conceived during the voyage of the ''Beagle''.
However, all food webs eventually depend on plants, which are the primary producers.
Decreased oxygen levels can slow down coral's calcification rates weakening the coral and leaving it more susceptible to disease and degradation.
It formed the world's largest barrier reef,  from shore, stretching for .
Similarly, as internal waves and bores move vertically, surface-dwelling larval organisms are carried toward the shore.
The period from release to settlement lasts only a few days, but some planulae can survive afloat for several weeks.
High-end satellite technology is increasingly being employed to monitor coral reef conditions.
One case study with coral reef restoration was conducted on the island of Oahu in Hawaii.
They are efficient filter feeders, and in the Red Sea they consume about 60% of the phytoplankton that drifts by.
Recycling ensures fewer nutrients are needed overall to support the community.
Those animals boring into the rock include sponges, bivalve mollusks, and sipunculans.
Many corals extend their tentacles at night to catch zooplankton that brush them when the water is agitated.
In Australia, the Great Barrier Reef is protected by the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority, and is the subject of much legislation, including a biodiversity action plan.
It is able to produce mycosporine-like amino acids that are UV resistant, using a derivative of glycerin to absorb the UV radiation and allowing them to become more receptive to warmer water temperatures.
However, there are very few MPAs that have actually made a substantial difference.
'''Coral reefs''' are diverse underwater ecosystems held together by calcium carbonate structures secreted by corals.
File:Caribbean reef squid.jpg| Caribbean reef squid
In surveys done around largely uninhabited US Pacific islands, algae inhabit a large percentage of surveyed coral locations.
The lucky few planulae which successfully attach to substrate next confront competition for food and space.
About six million tons of fish are taken each year from coral reefs.
The annual global economic value of coral reefs is estimated between US$29.8-375 billion.
Stormwater surge preventions are also in place, as well as coastal buffers between agricultural land and the coastline.
The warmer water is separated from deeper, cooler water by a stable thermocline, where the temperature makes a rapid change.
File:Atoll forming-volcano.png|Darwin’s theory starts with a volcanic island which becomes extinct
MPAs encompass both social and biological objectives, including reef restoration, aesthetics, biodiversity, and economic benefits.
As the name implies, the bulk of coral reefs is made up of coral skeletons from mostly intact coral colonies.
Some inhabit tropical continental shelves where cool, nutrient rich upwelling does not occur, such as Great Barrier Reef.
During accretion, the settled corals display an increased growth rate, size and density, but after the process is complete, growth rate and density return to levels comparable to natural growth, and are about the same size or slightly smaller.
File:Red sea-reef 3627.jpg| Giant clam
Terrestrial plants that receive less sunlight because they are found in the undergrowth can be analogized to clades B, C, and D. Since clades B through D are found at deeper depths, they require an elevated light absorption rate to be able to synthesize as much energy.
Coral is farmed by coral farmers who live locally to the reefs and farm for reef conservation or for income.
Bermuda has a fairly consistent diversity of coral species, representing a subset of those found in the greater Caribbean.
Biosphere reserve, marine park, national monument and world heritage status can protect reefs.
The WRI was also "making sure that the study results support improved coastal policies and management planning".
Corals reproduce sexually by either internal or external fertilization.
* The world's northernmost individual coral reef so far discovered is located within a bay of Japan's Tsushima Island in the Korea Strait.
Their cultural traditions allow line fishing, but no net or spear fishing.
Because of this, the University of Hawaii decided to relocate some of the coral reef to a different transplant site.
Plants form the base of the food chain, and need sunlight and nutrients to grow.
* The Andros, Bahamas Barrier Reef—third largest, following the east coast of Andros Island, Bahamas, between Andros and Nassau
Alternatively, Moyle and Cech distinguish six zones, though most reefs possess only some of the zones.
Some mature adult corals are hermaphroditic; others are exclusively male or female.
Tropical corals do not grow at depths of over .
ocean acidification) will harm the overall reef mortality rate.
Shallowness means there is plenty of light for photosynthesis by the symbiotic zooxanthellae, and agitated water promotes the ability of coral to feed on plankton.
Deep-water coral can exist at greater depths and colder temperatures at much higher latitudes, as far north as Norway.
Measurements of the oxygen isotopic composition of the aragonitic skeleton of coral reefs, such as Porites, can indicate changes in the sea surface temperature and sea surface salinity conditions of the ocean during the growth of the coral.
The vast majority of these islands are volcanic in origin.
Also, many areas of coral reef patches in the channel had been damaged from past dredging in the channel.
A few of these varied species feed directly on corals, while others graze on algae on the reef.
File:Atoll forming-Fringing reef.png|As the island and ocean floor subside, coral growth builds a fringing reef, often including a shallow lagoon between the land and the main reef.
By the 2030s, 90% of reefs are expected to be at risk from both human activities and climate change; by 2050, all coral reefs will be in danger.
Ideal timing occurs in the spring.
Deforestation causes erosion, which releases a large amount of carbon stored in the soil, which then flows into the ocean, contributing to ocean acidification.
Clade D has been observed to be high temperature-tolerant, and as a result it has a higher rate of survival than clades B and C.
The vicinity of the anode and cathode provides a high-pH environment which inhibits the growth of competitive filamentous and fleshy algae.
This detailed action plan consists of numerous adaptive management strategies, including reducing our carbon footprint, which would ultimately reduce the amount of ocean acidification in the oceans surrounding the Great Barrier Reef.
It is a mistake to think of coral as plants or rocks.
Each reef is made up of irregular patches of algae, sessile invertebrates, and bare rock and sand.
The size, shape and relative abundance of these patches changes from year to year in response to the various factors that favor one type of patch over another.
Coral polyps do not photosynthesize, but have a symbiotic relationship with microscopic algae of the genus ''Symbiodinium'', commonly referred to as zooxanthellae.
Marine protected areas (MPAs) have become increasingly prominent for reef management.
Many other organisms living in the reef community contribute skeletal calcium carbonate in the same manner.
File:Black coral.jpg|Black coral
But they also need nutrients.
Clades B and C are found more frequently in the deeper water regions, which may explain the higher susceptibility to increased temperatures.
The roughness of coral surfaces is the key to coral survival in agitated waters.
The list includes the ocean's role as a carbon dioxide sink, atmospheric changes, ultraviolet light, ocean acidification, viruses, impacts of dust storms carrying agents to far-flung reefs, pollutants, algal blooms and others.
Corals get up to 90% of their nutrients from their symbionts.
Coral reefs are dying around the world.
He theorized uplift and subsidence of the Earth's crust under the oceans formed the atolls.
Nighttime predators such as cardinalfish and squirrelfish hide during the day, while damselfish, surgeonfish, triggerfish, wrasses and parrotfish hide from eels and sharks.
In the ocean, these plants are mainly microscopic phytoplankton which drift in the water column.
For example, Belize's barrier reef, Chagos archipelago, Sian Ka'an, the Galapagos islands, Great Barrier Reef, Henderson Island, Palau and Papahānaumokuākea Marine National Monument are world heritage sites.
Reefs are chronically at risk of algal encroachment.
According to the '' Caribbean Coral Reefs - Status Report 1970-2012'' made by the IUCN.
In some situations, as in the Phoenix Islands Protected Area, MPAs can also provide revenue, potentially equal to the income they would have generated without controls, as Kiribati did for its Phoenix Islands.
It has been generally observed that only the algae growing on dead corals is eaten and the live ones are not.
Substrate materials include discarded vehicle tires, scuttled ships, subway cars, and formed concrete, such as reef balls.
This leads to the idea that, evolutionarily, clade A is more UV resistant and thermally resistant than the other clades.
Runoff can carry nitrogen and phosphorus which promote excess algae growth.
Others are found in the deep ocean surrounding islands or as atolls, such as in the Maldives.
Turbulent water thereby promotes reef growth and branching.
Internal waves can act as nutrient pumps, bringing plankton and cool nutrient-rich water up to the surface.
File:Green turtle John Pennekamp.jpg| Green turtle
