The largest known tree with a single trunk is growing at Pakawau, Golden Bay.
Each branch may fork after producing a flowering stem.
Although adult trees can store water and are drought resistant, seedlings need a good supply of water to survive.
The same oils may also slow down the decay of fallen leaves, so that they build up a dense mat that prevents the seeds of other plants from germinating.
Populations of ''C.&nbsp;australis'' were decimated in some parts of New Zealand because of Sudden Decline.
''Cordyline australis'' grows up to  tall with a stout trunk  in diameter.
Before it flowers, it has a slender unbranched stem.
This variation can alter the overall appearance of the tree, canopy shape and branch size, the relative shape and size of the leaves, and their colour and stiffness.
The fine nerves are more or less equal and parallel.
They can infest young trees but seldom damage older trees, which lack the skirt of dead leaves where the parent moths like to hide.
It is also grown as an ornamental tree in Northern Hemisphere countries with mild maritime climates, including parts of the upper West Coast of the United States and the warmer parts of the British Isles, where its common names include '''Torbay palm''' and '''Torquay palm'''.
The pale to dark grey bark is corky, persistent and fissured, and feels spongy to the touch.
Juice from the leaves was used for cuts, cracks and sores.
The ﬁbre made from cabbage tree leaves is stronger than that made from New Zealand ﬂax.
These ''obtecta''-like characteristics appear in populations of ''C.&nbsp;australis'' along parts of the eastern coastline from the Karikari Peninsula to the Coromandel Peninsula.
The leaves and the rough bark provide excellent homes for insects such as caterpillars and moths, small beetles, ﬂy larvae, weta, snails and slugs.
Rather they are vigorous trees with broad, green leaves and broad canopies.
Because it has evolved in response to the local climate, geology and other factors, ''C.&nbsp;australis'' varies in appearance from place to place.
In the early 1840s, Edward Shortland said Māori preferred rhizomes from trees growing in deep rich soil.
It was saved from extinction because its dwarf form found favour with gardeners and it came to be known as Cordyline 'Kirkii' recording the interest Thomas Kirk had in the plant.
In Hawke's Bay, some trees have greener, broader leaves, and this may be because of wharanui characteristics brought in across the main divide through the Manawatu Gorge.
Few examples of this former abundance survive today—such areas were the first to be cleared by farmers looking for flat land and fertile soil.
A study of seedlings grown from seed collected in 28 areas showed a north-south change in leaf shape and dimensions.
Other names refer to its uses—whether its fruit attracted birds (tī manu), or the leaves were particularly suitable for making ropes (tī whanake) and nets (tī kupenga).
The trees near East Cape, by contrast, have leaves that hang laxly on the tree.
The typical form grows, with little variation, from Cape Campbell to the northern Catlins, and from the eastern coast to the foothills of the Southern Alps.
A dwarf non-flowering selection of ''C.&nbsp;australis'', it has a rubbery, pulpy stem, and thick green leaves.
Cases of sick and dying trees of ''C.&nbsp;australis'' were first reported in the northern part of the North Island in 1987.
Early European explorers of New Zealand described "jungles of cabbage trees" along the banks of streams and rivers, in huge swamps and lowland valleys.
Another hypothesis was that a genetic problem may have been induced in Northland and Auckland by the thousands of cabbage trees brought into the area from elsewhere and planted in gardens and parks.
There are nine species of insect only found on ''C.&nbsp;australis'', of which the best known is ''Epiphryne verriculata'', the cabbage tree moth, which is perfectly adapted to hide on a dead leaf.
They serve to anchor the plant and to store fructose in the form of fructan.
If the leaves are left to decay, the soil underneath cabbage trees becomes a black humus that supports a rich array of amphipods, earthworms and millipedes.
Recent and unpublished DNA work suggests it derives from ''C.&nbsp;australis'' of the central North Island.
It is common over a wide latitudinal range from the far north of the North Island at 34° 25'S to the south of the South Island at 46° 30'S.
In Northland, ''C.&nbsp;australis'' shows a great deal of genetic diversity—suggesting it is where old genetic lines have endured.
''Dracaena indivisa'').
It is absent from much of Fiordland, probably because there is no suitable habitat, and is unknown on the subantarctic islands to the south of New Zealand, probably because it is too cold.
Good flowering seasons occur every few years only.
It grows up to  tall with a stout trunk and sword-like leaves, which are clustered at the tips of the branches and can be up to  long.
The most widely used name, tī kōuka, refers to the use of the leaf hearts as food.
Wharanui grow to the west of the North Island's main divide.
There may also be invisible adaptations for resistance to disease or insect attack.
This gives the tree an advantage because it can regenerate itself quickly and the fire has eliminated competing plants.
In the North Island, Māori cultivated selected forms of ''C.&nbsp;australis'' for food.
Cabbage tree seed also has a store of oil, which means it remains viable for several years.
Cows, sheep, goats, and deer eat the nutritious tissue under the bark of cabbage trees.
Red-crowned parakeets are often seen foraging in cabbage trees.
Other early cultivars included 'Veitchii' (1871) with crimson midribs, 'Atrosanguinea' (1882) with bronze leaves infused with red, 'Atropurpurea' (1886) and 'Purpurea' (1890) with purple leaves, and a range of variegated forms: 'Doucetiana' (1878), 'Argento-striata' (1888) and 'Dalleriana' (1890).
They reappear on the south coast at Waikawa, Southland, but they are not the wharanui type.
The name 'Tawhiti' is equivalent to 'Hawaiki' and indicates the traditional belief that the plant was introduced to Aotearoa by the ancestral canoes of Maori.
In Taranaki, cabbage trees generally have a compact canopy with broad straight leaves.
When growing in the open, tītī can become massive trees with numerous, long thin branches and relatively short, broad leaves.
Like other ''Cordyline'' species, ''C.&nbsp;australis'' can produce sports which have very attractive colouration, including pink stripes and leaves in various shades of green, yellow or red.
The genus name ''Cordyline'' derives from an Ancient Greek word for a club (''kordyle''), a reference to the enlarged underground stems or rhizomes, while the species name ''australis'' is Latin for "southern".
It does well in pots and tubs.
Many plants and animals are associated with ''C.&nbsp;australis'' in healthy ecosystems.
The ropes had to be strong, so they were often made from the leaves or fibre of ''C.&nbsp;australis'', which were much tougher than the fibres of New Zealand flax.
Flowering takes place over a period of four to six weeks, giving maximum exposure to pollinating insects.
At a certain season, the pigeons came in vast flocks to feed on the white berries of the Ti tree (bracœna) sic and got so heavy with fat that they could hardly fly from one tree to another.
At the same time, the bark on the trunk becomes loose and detaches easily.
Cabbage tree leaves contain oils which make them burn readily.
Kāuru could be stored dry until the time came to add it to fern root and other foods to improve their palatability.
The rough bark also provides opportunities for epiphytes to cling and grow, and lizards hide amongst the dead leaves, coming out to drink the nectar and to eat the insects.
In many Northland parks, cabbage trees from the central North Island were growing and flowering within metres of natural forms.
Each tribe had names for the tree depending on its local uses and characteristics.
On the river flats, the trees are tall with narrow, lax, dark green leaves, and an uneven canopy.
Animals and birds associated with ''C.&nbsp;australis'' include lizards which forage among the flowers, including the gold-striped gecko which is well camouflaged for life among the leaves of the tree.
australis'' and its cultivars 'Sundance', 'Torbay Dazzler', and 'Torbay Red' have all gained the Royal Horticultural Society's Award of Garden Merit.
November was the favourite month for preparing kāuru in the South Island.
It can renew its trunk from buds on the protected rhizomes under the ground.
The Māori used various parts of ''Cordyline australis'' to treat injuries and illnesses, either boiled up into a drink or pounded into a paste.
The seeds of ''Cordyline australis'' are high in linoleic acid, one of the essential fatty acids.
The last name is due to its extensive use in Torbay, it being the official symbol of that area, used in tourist posters promoting South Devon as the English Riviera.
The upper and lower leaf surfaces are similar.
Such regeneration can lead to trees of great age with multiple trunks.
Kōuka is delicious as a relish with fatty foods like eel, muttonbirds, or pigeons, or in modern times, pork, mutton and beef.
When a cabbage tree is the only shade in a field, stock will shelter underneath it, damaging the bark by rubbing against it, and compacting the soil around the tree.
The stems and fleshy rhizomes of ''C.&nbsp;australis'' are high in natural sugars and were steam-cooked in earth ovens (umu tī, a large type of hāngi) to produce kāuru, a carbohydrate-rich food used to sweeten other foods.
The leaves can be removed, and what remains is like a small artichoke heart that can be steamed, roasted or boiled to make kōuka, a bitter vegetable available at any time of the year.
''Cordyline australis'' is one of the few New Zealand forest trees that can recover from fire.
Known to Māori as '''tī kōuka''', the tree was used as a source of food, particularly in the South Island, where it was cultivated in areas where other crops would not grow.
They have long, broad flaccid leaves, which may be an adaptation to persistent westerly winds.
The syndrome, eventually called Sudden Decline, soon reached epidemic proportions in Northland and Auckland.
Very vigorous when they are young, these trees seem well adapted to the very cold winters of the south.
used for making anchor ropes and ﬁshing lines, cooking mats, baskets, sandals and leggings for protection when travelling in the South Island high country, home of the prickly speargrasses (''Aciphylla'') and tūmatakuru or matagouri (''Discaria toumatou'').
The leaves were also used for rain capes, although the mountain cabbage tree ''C.&nbsp;indivisa'', was preferred.
One of these, called tī para or tī tāwhiti, was grown because it suckers readily and forms multiple ﬂeshy rhizomes.
The common name ''cabbage tree'' is attributed by some sources to early settlers having used the young leaves as a substitute for cabbage.
The generic Māori language term for plants in the ''Cordyline'' genus is tī, and names recorded as specific to ''C.&nbsp;australis'' include tī kōuka, tī kāuka, tī rākau, tī awe, tī pua, and tī whanake.
The latter two forms extend down the West Coast, with the lax-leaved forms growing in moist, fertile, sheltered river valleys while the bluish-leaved forms prefer rocky slopes exposed to the full force of the salt-laden coastal winds.
Because it takes about two years for a particular stem to produce an inflorescence, cabbage trees tend to flower heavily in alternative years, with a bumper flowering every three to five years.
The long narrow leaves are sword-shaped, erect, dark to light green,  long and  wide at the base, with numerous parallel veins.
They dug them in spring or early summer just before the flowering of the plant, when they were at their sweetest.
They extend along the coast towards Fiordland, and inland to the margins of some of the glacier-fed lakes.
In Otago, cabbage trees gradually become less common towards the south until they come to an end in the northern Catlins.
Kāuru could also be dipped in water and chewed, and was said to smell and taste like molasses.
They resemble the cabbage trees of the North Island's East Cape.
The berries of ''C.&nbsp;australis'' are enjoyed by bellbirds, tūī and pigeons.
Some of these regional provenances are different enough to have been named by North Island Māori: Tītī in the north, tī manu in the central uplands, tarariki in the east and wharanui in the west.
Its caterpillars eat large holes and wedges in the leaves.
It occurs on some offshore islands—Poor Knights, Stewart and the Chathams—but was probably introduced by Māori.
Although Sudden Decline often affects cabbage trees in farmland and open areas, trees in natural forest patches continue to do well.
Simpson reports that the names highlight the characteristics of the tree that were important to Māori.
When the leaves do break down, they form a fertile soil around the tree.
Most of these trees will slowly die out because livestock eat the seedlings and damage the trunks and roots of adult trees.
Growth of leaves ceases, and eventually all the leaves fall, leaving dead branches, often with the dried-out flowering panicles still attached.
After drying, the harvested stems or rhizomes were steamed for 24 hours or more in the umu tī pit.
This stops the species from growing in sand dunes unless there are wet depressions present, and from hillsides unless there is a seepage area.
The nectar produced by the flowers contains aromatic compounds, mainly esters and terpenes, which are particularly attractive to moths.
If the spike of unopened leaves and a few outer leaves is gripped firmly at the base and bent, it will snap off.
Evidence of large cooking pits (umu tī) can still be found in the hills of South Canterbury and North Otago, where large groves of cabbage trees still stand.
With its tall, straight trunk and dense, rounded heads, ''C.&nbsp;australis'' is a characteristic feature of the New Zealand landscape.
In traditional times, Māori had a rich knowledge of the cabbage tree, including spiritual, ecological and many practical aspects of its use.
Often the growth layer dies and the injuries may lead to bacterial or fungal infections that spread into the branches until the canopy too begins to die.
The right conditions can reduce the first flowering age to 3 years (Havelock North, 2015 mast year).
For some years, the cause of the disease was unknown, and hypotheses included tree ageing, fungi, viruses, and environmental factors such as an increase in ultra-violet light.
As the native birds have vanished from much of New Zealand with the clearing of forests, it is now flocks of starlings which descend upon the fruit.
However, it is more probable that the name arose from it being moved around its native land as a domesticated plant."
In New Zealand and overseas, hybrids with other ''Cordyline'' species feature prominently in the range of cultivars available.
''Cordyline australis'' is the tallest of New Zealand's five native ''Cordyline'' species.
In the South Island, wharanui is the most common form, but it is variable.
When a bushfire has cleared the land of vegetation, cabbage tree seeds germinate in great numbers to make the most of the light and space opened up by the flames.
Young trees are killed by frost, and even old trees can be cut back.
The moth lays its eggs at the base of the central spike of unopened leaves.
Its origin as a Maori selection was forgotten until rediscovered in 1991.
Often farmers would leave a solitary cabbage tree—or even groves of trees—standing after the swamps were drained.
Natural and planted groves of the cabbage tree were harvested.
Some of the growing tips have changed from making leaves to producing inflorescences for the coming spring, and around these, two or three buds begin to produce leaves.
The leaves grow in crowded clusters at the ends of the branches, and may droop slightly at the tips and bend down from the bases when old.
Numerous cultivars of ''C.&nbsp;australis'' are sold within New Zealand and around the world.
Different trees were selected for their degree of bitterness, which should be strong for medicinal use, but less so when used as a vegetable.
Generally a lowland species, it grows from sea level to about , reaching its upper limits on the volcanoes of the central North Island, where eruptions have created open spaces for it to exploit, and in the foothills of the Southern Alps in the South Island, where deforestation may have played a part in giving it room to grow.
While it is said that they foretell dry summers, it has been observed that they tend to follow dry seasons.
Māori sometimes planted groves of cabbage trees (pā tī) to attract pigeons which could be snared when they came to eat the berries.
Other mammals can be destructive.
Once the trunk has been damaged by animals, it seldom heals and the wounds get bigger over time.
Seedlings often have leaves with red-brown pigmentation which disappears in older plants, and this coloration becomes increasingly common towards the south.
The Maoris, with a long slender rod and a slip noose at the end, squatted under the leaves and noiselessly slipped the noose over the necks of the stupid pigeons as they were feeding."
The sugar in the stems or rhizomes would be partially crystallised, and could be found mixed in a sugary pulp with other matter between the fibres of the root, which were easily separated by tearing them apart.
New Plymouth plant breeders Duncan and Davies included hybrids of ''C.&nbsp;australis'' and ''C.&nbsp;banksii'' in their 1925 catalogue, and have produced many new cultivars since.
''Cordyline australis'' is a light-demanding pioneer species, and seedlings die when overtopped by other trees.
Large, peg-like rhizomes, covered with soft, purplish bark, up to  long in old plants, grow vertically down beneath the ground.
Hardy and fast growing, ''C.&nbsp;australis'' is widely planted in New Zealand gardens, parks and streets, and numerous cultivars are available.
Although it was recorded by the early naturalists, botanists only rediscovered it in the 1990s, being grown by gardeners as the cultivar ''Cordyline'' 'Thomas Kirk'.
''C.&nbsp;australis'' in the central North Island has evolved a much sturdier form called tī manu "with branches bearing broad, straight upright leaves."
It is estimated to be 400 or 500 years old, and stands  tall with a circumference of  at the base.
It grows well as far north as western coast of Scotland, including the village of Plockton.
Other factors thought to contribute to Rural Decline include wood-rotting fungi like ''Phanerochaete cordylines'', micro-organisms which cause saprobic decay and leaf-feeding caterpillars.
In spring and early summer, sweetly perfumed flowers are produced in large, dense panicles (flower spikes)  long, bearing well-spaced to somewhat crowded, almost sessile to sessile flowers and axes.
Each inflorescence bears 5,000 to 10,000 flowers, so a large inflorescence may carry about 40,000 seeds, or one million seeds for the whole tree in a good flowering year—hundreds of millions for a healthy grove of trees.
Trees growing on limestone bluffs have stiff, blue-green leaves.
The strong framework of the inflorescence can easily bear the weight of heavy birds like the New Zealand pigeon, which was formerly the major disperser of the seeds.
The stamens are about the same length as the tepals.
Another requirement is water during the seedling stage.
''C.&nbsp;australis'' is rather variable, and forms from the northern offshore islands may be hybrids with ''C.&nbsp;obtecta''.
The tree can also be found in large numbers in island restoration projects such as Tiritiri Matangi Island, where it was among the first seedling trees to be planted.
This form resembles that found in the far south of the South Island, suggesting that they are both adapted to cold conditions.
In cultivation in the United Kingdom, ''C.
The first flowers typically appear at 6 to 10 years old, in spring.
''Cordyline'' 'Ti Tawhiti' was "the subject of an intense discussion amongst the leading botanists of New Zealand at a meeting of the Royal Society ... in Wellington 100 years ago.
The nectar attracts great numbers of insects to the flowers.
Of these, the commonest are ''C.&nbsp;banksii'', which has a slender, sweeping trunk, and ''C.&nbsp;indivisa'', a handsome plant with a trunk up to  tall bearing a massive head of broad leaves up to  long.
The latter may serve to protect the seeds from the digestive process in the gut of a bird.
Tarariki's strong leaf fibres may be an adaptation to the region's hot, dry summers.
They grow from a layer called the secondary thickening meristem.
In modern New Zealand, cabbage trees usually grow as isolated individuals rather than as parts of a healthy ecosystem.
The flowers produce a sweet perfume which attracts large numbers of insects.
The seeds are also rich in linoleic acid as a food source for the developing embryo plant, a compound which is also important in the egg-laying cycle of birds.
The growing tips or leaf hearts were stripped of leaves and eaten raw or cooked as a vegetable, when they were called kōuka—the origin of the Māori name of the tree.
An infusion of the leaves was taken internally for diarrhoea and used externally for bathing cuts.
The cooked stems or rhizomes were then ﬂattened by beating and carried back to villages for storage.
Each fruit contains three to six shiny, black seeds which are coated in a charcoal-like substance called phytomelan.
The tree was well known to Māori before its scientific discovery.
Reminiscing in 1903 about life in New Zealand sixty or more years earlier, George Clarke describes how such a tapu grove of cabbage trees would attract huge numbers of pigeons: "About four miles from our house, there was a great preserve of wood pigeons, that was made as tapu as the native chiefs could devise.
When young, the rhizomes are mostly fleshy and are made up of thin-walled storage cells.
In eastern Northland, ''C.&nbsp;australis'' generally has narrow, straight dark green leaves, but some trees have much broader leaves than normal and may have hybridised with the Three Kings cabbage tree, ''C.&nbsp;obtecta'', which grows at North Cape and on nearby islands.
Affected trees usually suffer total defoliation within 2 to 12 months.
In South Canterbury, long-tailed bats shelter during the day in the hollow branches, which would once have provided nesting holes for many birds.
It does not do well in hot tropical climates like Queensland, Southeast Asia and Florida.
To grow well, young plants require open space so they are not shaded out by other vegetation.
The caterpillars eat holes in the surface of the leaves and leave characteristic notches in the leaf margins.
The kōata, the growing tip of the plant, was eaten raw as medicine.
Some feed or hide camouflaged in the skirt of dead leaves, a favourite dry place for weta to hide in winter.
The trunk becomes misshapen or completely ring-barked for a metre above the ground.
The fruit is a white berry  in diameter which is greedily eaten by birds.
Large parties trimmed the cut stems, and left them to dry for days or weeks.
In south Canterbury and North Otago the bracts are green.
It is more common in Southern England and in Ireland where it is grown all over the island.
The southern limit of kūmara (sweet potato) cultivation was at Banks Peninsula at 43°S, and south of there a culture developed around ''C.&nbsp;australis''.
Months later in spring or early summer, it bears its flowers on the outside of the tree, exposed to insects and birds.
To add to the confusion, these may be misidentified as ''Cordyline indivisa'' (syn.
Even though the natural distribution of ''C.&nbsp;australis'' ranges from 34° S to 46°S, and despite its ultimately tropical origins, it also grows at about five degrees from the Arctic Circle in Masfjorden, Norway, latitude 61ºN, in a microclimate protected from arctic winds and moderated by the Gulf Stream.
Hybrids with ''C.&nbsp;pumilio'' and ''C.&nbsp;banksii'' also occur often where the plants are in close vicinity, because they flower at about the same time and share the chromosome number 2n=38, with ''C.&nbsp;australis''.
Bees use the nectar to produce a light honey to feed their young and increase the size of the hive in the early summer.
Europeans used the plant to make alcohol, and the often fearsome brews were relished by whalers and sealers.
Horses can also fell a tree by eating through the trunk.
Insects, including beetles, moths, wasps and flies, use the bark, leaves and flowers of the tree in various ways.
Many of the insect companions of ''C.&nbsp;australis'' have followed it into the domesticated surroundings of parks and home gardens.
Seedling leaves get longer and narrower southwards.
