This undergraduate program opened in September 2002 and was the first coeducational institute of higher education in Qatar.
In 2010, 1,647 of the 3,181 full-time freshmen enrolled were found to have financial need (40%).
The assemblies also finance other student life programs including a concert commission and an on-campus theater.
Two gorges, Fall Creek Gorge and Cascadilla Gorge, bound Central Campus and are used as popular swimming holes during the warmer months (although the university and city code discourage their use).
Legacy applicants receive a slight advantage in the admission process.
Therefore, the SEAP is nationally prominent in promoting advanced foreign language training, area and international knowledge in the liberal arts and applied discipline focused on Southeast Asia.
Cornell counts numerous notable individuals who have either come to the university as faculty to teach and to conduct research, or as students who have gone on to do noteworthy things.
Cornellians are represented over the radio waves on WVBR, an independent commercial FM radio station owned and operated by Cornell students.
The only options for living on North Campus for upperclassmen are the program houses and co-op houses: Risley Residential College, Just About Music, the Ecology House, Holland International Living Center, the Multicultural Living Learning Unit, the Latino Living Center, Akwe:kon, and Ujamaa, as well as the co-op houses Wait Terrace, Wait Ave, Whitby, Triphammer, and others.
A Cornell student organization,  The Cornell Astronomical Society, runs public observing nights every Friday evening at the Fuertes Observatory.
Cornell's academic units and student groups also publish a number of scholarly journals.
Founded in 1865 by Ezra Cornell and Andrew Dickson White, the university was intended to teach and make contributions in all fields of knowledge—from the classics to the sciences, and from the theoretical to the applied.
The student population doubled from 7,000 in 1950 to 15,000 by 1970, at a time when architectural styles favored modernism.
Graduates of the program earn both a Cornell MBA and a Queen's MBA.
''The Cornellian'' is an independent student organization that organizes, arranges, produces, edits, and publishes the yearbook of the same name; it is composed of artistic photos of the campus, student life, and athletics, as well as the standard senior portraits.
Cornell is seeking $125&nbsp;million in gifts to support the financial aid initiative.
Cornell University's football team had at least a share of the national championship four times before 1940 and has won the Ivy League championship three times, last in 1990.
Today, the center is a partner on the National Science Foundation XSEDE supercomputing program, providing coordination for XSEDE architecture and design, systems reliability testing, and online training using the Cornell Virtual Workshop learning platform.
From 1942 to 1979, the campus also housed a Cornell school of nursing.
The dragon is built secretly by the architecture students, and taunting messages are left for the engineering students for the week before Dragon Day.
In 1984, the National Science Foundation began work on establishing five new supercomputer centers, including the Cornell Center for Advanced Computing, to provide high-speed computing resources for research within the United States.
M. H. Abrams is a professor emeritus of English and was the founding editor of ''The Norton Anthology of English Literature''.
In 2004, the Qatar Foundation announced the construction of a 350-bed Specialty Teaching Hospital near the medical college in Education City.
The Board of Trustees hold four regular meetings each year, and portions of those meetings are subject to the New York State Open Meetings Law.
For most of its history, Cornell provided residential medical care for sick students, including at the historic Sage Infirmary.
James L. Hoard, a scientist who worked on the Manhattan Project
The clock tower also plays music.
Cornell University runs one of the largest collegiate outdoor education programs in the country, serving over 20,000 people every year.
Weill Cornell Medical College is also affiliated with the neighboring Memorial Sloan–Kettering Cancer Center, Rockefeller University, and the Hospital for Special Surgery.
arXiv, an e-print archive created at Los Alamos National Laboratory by Paul Ginsparg, is operated and primarily funded by Cornell as part of the library's services.
Cornell has 36 varsity intercollegiate teams that have the nickname of the Big Red.
The School of Continuing Education and Summer Sessions offers programs for college and high school students, professionals, and other adults.
The university ranked 10th in the 2013 ''Business Insider'' Best Colleges in America ranking, 15th in the 2016 ''U.S.
The university received worldwide attention for a series of six student suicides by jumping into a gorge that occurred during the 2009–10 school year, and they have since added temporary fences to the bridges which span its gorges while more permanent measures are in process.
This organization led a movement of fraternities that catered to international Latin American students that was active from 1890 to 1975.
Cornell University Police protect the campus and are classified as peace officers and have the same authority as the Ithaca city police.
It is home to two Cornell divisions, Weill Cornell Medical College and Weill Cornell Graduate School of Medical Sciences, and has been affiliated with the NewYork–Presbyterian Hospital since 1927.
The university demolished them in the 1980s to make way for other development.
The hospital was to be completed in a few years.
In 2011 and 2012, Design Intelligence ranked Cornell's Master of Landscape Architecture program 4th in the nation with the undergraduate program placing 8th for the same two years.
The Automotive Crash Injury Research Project was begun in 1952.
Additionally, alumnus Matt Urban ('41) holds the distinction as the most decorated serviceman in United States history.
Cornell's connection to national Greek life is strong and longstanding.
In the 1950s, Cornell physicists became the first to study synchrotron radiation.
The initiative costs an additional $14&nbsp;million per year to fully implement.
Media personalities who have graduated from Cornell include conservative Ann Coulter ('84) and liberals Bill Maher ('78) and Keith Olbermann ('79).
Several other universities have used Cornell as their model, including Stanford University, the University of Sydney in Australia, and the University of Birmingham in the United Kingdom; the latter on the recommendation of one of its financiers, Andrew Carnegie, who was a Cornell Trustee.
The more ornate buildings generally predate World War II.
Since its founding, Cornell has been a co-educational, non-sectarian institution where admission has not been restricted by religion or race.
Located among the rolling valleys of the Finger Lakes region, the campus on a hill provides views of the surrounding area, including 38&nbsp;miles (61.4&nbsp;km) long Lake Cayuga.
For families above $120,000, need-based loans were capped at $7,500 per year.
On March&nbsp;9, 2004, Cornell and Stanford University laid the cornerstone for a new 'Bridging the Rift Center' to be built and jointly operated for education on the Israel–Jordan border.
The university has a lake source cooling project that uses Lake Cayuga to air condition campus buildings, with an 80% energy saving over conventional systems.
The Cornell International Affairs Society sends over 100 Cornellians to collegiate Model United Nations conferences across North America and hosts the Cornell Model United Nations Conference each spring for over 500 high school students.
The International Linear Collider, to be completed in the late 2010s, will complement the Large Hadron Collider and shed light on questions such as the identity of dark matter and the existence of extra dimensions.
On Dragon Day, the dragon is paraded across the Arts Quad and then set afire.
Weill Cornell, Rockefeller, and Memorial Sloan–Kettering offer the Tri-Institutional MD–PhD Program to selected entering Cornell medical students.
Cornell's Greek system has 67 chapters and over 54 Greek residences that house approximately 1,500 students.
Philanthropy opportunities are used to encourage community relations, for example, during the 2004–05 academic year, the Greek system contributed 21,668 community service and advocacy hours and raised $176,547 in charitable contributions from its philanthropic efforts.
Cornell was ranked 27th nationally in ''The Washington Monthly'''s 2016 ranking of universities' contributions to research, community service, and social mobility.
The university also administers two satellite medical campuses, one in New York City and one in Education City, Qatar.
Cornellian traditions include Slope Day, a celebration held on the last day of classes of the spring semester, and Dragon Day, which includes the burning of a dragon built by architecture students.
The College of Engineering's Operations Research Manhattan, in the city's financial district, brings together business optimization research and decision support services addressed to both financial applications and public health logistics planning.
Of these, Cornell could meet the full financial aid needs of all 1,647 freshmen.
The university also operates eCornell, which offers both certificate programs and professional development courses online.
Student-led scholarly publications include the ''Law Review'', the Cornell Institute for Public Affairs' ''Cornell Policy Review'', the ''International Law Journal'', the ''Journal of Law and Public Policy'', the ''International Affairs Review'', and the ''HR Review''.
Cornell offers a variety of professional and peer counseling services to students.
Frances Perkins joined the Cornell faculty in 1952 after serving as the first female member of the United States Cabinet and served until her death in 1965.
COE also runs one of the largest pre-freshman summer programs known as Outdoor Odyssey.
The program runs over 130 different courses including but not limited to: Backpacking and Camping, Mountain Biking, Bike Touring, Caving, Hiking, Rock and Ice Climbing, Wilderness First Aid, and tree climbing.
These teaching hospitals include the Payne Whitney Clinic in Manhattan and the Westchester Division in White Plains, New York.
In 2015, Cornell ranked fifth among universities in the U.S. in fund-raising, collecting $591&nbsp;million in private support.
Weill Cornell Medical College in Qatar is in Education City, near Doha.
The university has 30 on-campus dining locations, and a program called the Cross Country Gourmet Guest Restaurant Series periodically brings chefs, menus, and atmosphere from restaurants to Cornell's ten cafeterias.
In 2013, the Samuel Curtis Johnson Graduate School of Management accepted 21% of its applicants for its two-year MBA program.
The university has been accredited by the Middle States Commission on Higher Education since 1921.
The board elects a President to serve as the chief executive and educational officer.
Cornell enrolls students from all 50 U.S. states and more than 120 countries.
Cornell's accelerator and high-energy physics groups are involved in the design of the proposed International Linear Collider and plan to participate in its construction and operation.
The middle 50% range of the ACT Composite score was 30-34.
Cornell was on the top-ten list of U.S. universities receiving the most patents in 2003, and was one of the nation's top five institutions in forming start-up companies.
Cornell is decentralized, with its colleges and schools exercising wide autonomy.
Many chapters are among the oldest of their respective national organizations, as evidenced by the proliferation of ''Alpha-series'' chapters.
The Animal Science Teaching and Research Center in Harford, New York, and the Duck Research Laboratory in Eastport, New York, are resources for information on animal disease control and husbandry.
Alpha Phi Alpha, the first intercollegiate Greek-letter organization established for African Americans, was founded at Cornell in 1906.
Several of the university buildings are listed on the National Register of Historic Places, including the Andrew Dickson White House, Bailey Hall, Caldwell Hall, Comstock Hall, Morrill Hall (Cornell University), and Deke House.
In 2015, Cornell ranked 8th domestically and 10th internationally in the CWUR rankings.
Since 1894, Cornell has included colleges that are state funded and fulfill statutory requirements; it has also administered research and extension activities that have been jointly funded by state and federal matching programs.
In the 2011 survey, the program ranked first and the Master of Architecture program ranked sixth.
For example, in 1883 it was one of the first university campuses to use electricity from a water-powered dynamo to light the grounds.
Since the university was founded, it has expanded to about 2300&nbsp;acres (9.3&nbsp;km2), encompassing both the hill and much of the surrounding areas.
The Cornell University Ithaca Campus comprises 745 acres, but is much larger when the Cornell Plantations (more than 4,300 acres) are considered, as well as the numerous university-owned lands in New York City.
Cornell offers specialized reproductive health and family planning services.
Generally, discipline is managed internally by the inter-Greek governing boards.
Instruction began in the fall of 2012 in a temporary location in Manhattan (111 Eighth Avenue in space donated by Google).
6 ranking by the ''The Princeton Review'''s "Top 50 Green Colleges".
The university is broadly organized into seven undergraduate colleges and seven graduate divisions at its main Ithaca campus, with each college and division defining its own admission standards and academic programs in near autonomy.
There is also another myth that if a couple crosses the suspension bridge on North Campus, and the young woman does not accept a kiss from her partner, the bridge will fall.
Kurt Lewin taught at Cornell from 1933 to 1935 and is considered the "father of social psychology".
Cornell also operates New York's Animal Health Diagnostic Center.
Fellow senator and experienced educator Andrew Dickson White agreed to be the first president.
The Asian Studies major, South Asia Program, South East Asia Program and China and Asia-Pacific Studies (CAPS) major provide opportunities for students and researchers in Asia.
The following year, 2009–10, the program improved by replacing loan with scholarships for students from families with incomes up to $75,000, and capped annual loans at $3,000 for students from families with income between $75,000 and $120,000.
Carl Sagan was a professor at the university from 1968 to 1996.
Cornell University is member of the United Nations Academic Impact aligning institutions of higher education to the United Nations and promoting international cooperation.
Cornell is one of three private land grant universities in the nation and the only one in New York.
Cornell is a large, primarily residential research university with a majority of enrollments in undergraduate programs.
and other musical groups that play everything from classical, jazz, to ethnic styles in addition to the Big Red Marching Band, which performs regularly at football games and other campus events.
The chapter house of Alpha Delta Phi constructed in 1877 is believed to be the first house built in America solely for fraternity use.
There were cases of gorge-jumping in the 1970s and 1990s.
The Department of Horticulture operates the Freeville Organic Research Farm and Homer C. Thompson Vegetable Research Farm in Freeville, New York.
Many alumni maintain university ties through Homecoming's reunion weekend, through ''Cornell Magazine'', and through the Cornell Club of New York.
The Weill Cornell Medical College in Qatar trains new doctors to improve health services in the region.
The medical center is housed in a large two-story structure designed by Arata Isozaki, an internationally known Japanese architect.
Although their faculty and academic divisions are separate, the Medical Center shares its administrative and teaching hospital functions with the Columbia University Medical Center.
As of Fall 2014, 25.7% of undergraduate students identified themselves as members of ethnic minority groups.
Cornell developed as a technologically innovative institution, applying its research to its own campus as well as to outreach efforts.
A handful of inter-school academic departments offer courses in more than one college.
Cornell operates on a 4–1–4 academic calendar with the fall term beginning in late August and ending in early December, a three-week winter session in January, and the spring term beginning in late January and ending in early May.
Of its seven undergraduate colleges, three are state-supported statutory or contract colleges through the State University of New York (SUNY) system, including its agricultural and human ecology colleges.
Several Cornellians have also achieved critical acclaim in entertainment.
In addition to the tech campus and medical center, Cornell maintains local offices in New York City for some of its service programs.
The Cornell University Library is the 11th largest academic library in the United States, ranked by number of volumes held.
Cornell and Oregon State University are the only two institutions which are members of the Land Grant, Sea Grant, Space Grant, and Sun Grant programs.
As an NSF center, Cornell deployed the first IBM Scalable Parallel supercomputer.
Cornellians in business include: Citigroup CEO Sanford Weill ('55), Goldman Sachs Group Chairman Stephen Friedman ('59), Kraft Foods CEO Irene Rosenfeld ('75, '77, '80), Autodesk CEO Carl Bass ('83), Aetna CEO Mark Bertolini ('84), S.C. Johnson & Son CEO Fisk Johnson ('79, '80, '82, '84, '86), Cargill Chairman Warren Staley ('67), Chevron Chairman Kenneth T. Derr ('59), Sprint Nextel CEO Dan Hesse ('77), Verizon CEO Lowell McAdam ('76), Mastercard CEO Robert Selander ('72), Coors Brewing Company CEO Adolph Coors ('37), Loews Corporation Chairman Andrew Tisch ('71), Burger King founder James McLamore ('47), Hotels.com founder David Litman ('79), PeopleSoft founder David Duffield ('62), Priceline.com founder Jay Walker ('77), Staples founder Myra Hart ('62), Qualcomm founder Irwin M. Jacobs ('56), Tata Group CEO Ratan Tata ('62), and Johnson & Johnson worldwide chairman Sandi Peterson.
Of the 13,515 undergraduate students, 4,251 (31.5%) are affiliated with the largest college by enrollment, Arts and Sciences, followed by 3,153 (23.3%) in Agriculture and Life Sciences and 2,680 (19.8%) in Engineering.
Most classes are often entirely taught by paid student instructors and courses count toward Cornell's physical education graduation requirement.
Starting in the 1950s Cornell coordinated with other Ivy League schools to provide a consistent set of financial aid.
The university was inaugurated on October 7, 1868, and 412 men were enrolled the next day.
The NYS College of Human Ecology and the NYS College of Agriculture and Life Sciences enable students to reach out to local communities by gardening and building with the Cornell Cooperative Extension.
Charles Evans Hughes taught in the law school from 1893 to 1895 before becoming Governor of New York, United States Secretary of State, and Chief Justice of the United States.
Cornell's Steve Squyres, Principal Investigator for the Athena Science Payload, led the selection of the landing zones and requested data collection features for the Spirit and Opportunity rovers.
In an attempt to create a sense of community and an atmosphere of education outside the classroom and continue Andrew Dickson White's vision, a $250&nbsp;million reconstruction of West Campus created residential colleges there for undergraduates.
However, in 1989, a consent decree to end a Justice Department antitrust investigation ended such coordination.
Cornell's varsity athletic teams consistently challenge for NCAA Division I titles in a number of sports, including men's wrestling, men's lacrosse, men's ice hockey, and rowing (the women's crew program is subject to the NCAA, while the men's rowing program is governed by its own administrative body, the Intercollegiate Rowing Association).
It carries the Silver Crown Award for Journalism as well as a Benjamin Franklin Award for Print Design – the only Ivy League Yearbook with such a distinction.
In September 2011, ''Travel+Leisure'' listed the Ithaca Campus as among the most beautiful in the United States.
The house was built by Robert Henry Treman, the son of an enterprising local family and the first member of that family to attend Cornell University and be elected to its board of trustees.
For the 2004–05 fiscal year, the university spent $561.3&nbsp;million on research.
The colors of the lights on McGraw tower change to orange for Halloween and green for St. Patrick's Day.
Cornell counted 245,027 living alumni as of August 2008.
Buckminster Fuller was a visiting professor at Cornell for one year (1952), and Henry Louis Gates, African American Studies scholar and subject of an arrest controversy and White House "Beer Summit", taught at Cornell from 1985 to 1989.
Dan Duryea ('28) became a well-known Hollywood Actor in the 1940s-1960s, Christopher Reeve ('74) played ''Superman'', Frank Morgan was The Wizard of Oz, Jimmy Smits ('82) was in ''Star Wars: Attack of the Clones'', and Ronald D. Moore created the 2004 remake of ''Battlestar Galactica''.
It was one of the first universities to include alumni-elected representatives on its Board of Trustees.
These statutory colleges received $131.9&nbsp;million in SUNY appropriations in 2010-2011 to support their teaching, research, and service missions, which makes them accountable to SUNY trustees and other state agencies.
The primary recipients of this funding were the colleges of Medicine ($164.2&nbsp;million), Agriculture and Life Sciences ($114.5&nbsp;million), Arts and Sciences ($80.3&nbsp;million), and Engineering ($64.8&nbsp;million).
Cornell is a non-profit organization governed by a 64-member board of trustees consisting of both privately and publicly appointed trustees.
Cornell scientists have researched the fundamental particles of nature for more than 70 years.
Of Cornell's graduate schools, only the veterinary college is state-supported.
In the 21st century, Cornell had a hand in the Mars Exploration Rover Mission.
Organized into 20 divisions, in 2005 it held 7.5&nbsp;million printed volumes in open stacks, 8.2&nbsp;million microfilms and microfiches, and a total of 440,000 maps, motion pictures, DVDs, sound recordings, and computer files in its collections, in addition to extensive digital resources and the University Archives.
Under the Ivy League athletic agreement, the university does not offer athletic scholarships for athletic recruiting.
While some buildings are neatly arranged into quadrangles, others are packed densely and haphazardly.
In 2009, a new gas-fired combined heat and power facility replaced a coal-fired steam plant, resulting in a reduction in carbon emissions to 7% below 1990 levels, and projected to reduce carbon dioxide emissions by 75,000 tons per year.
The library plays an active role in furthering online archiving of scientific and historical documents.
It produces approximately 150 nonfiction titles each year in various disciplines including anthropology, Asian studies, biological sciences, classics, history, industrial relations, literary criticism and theory, natural history, philosophy, politics and international relations, veterinary science, and women's studies.
In 2015, Cornell ranked #5 nationwide for gifts and bequests from alumni.
Similarly, the College of Engineering has an agreement to exchange faculty and graduate students with Tsinghua University in Beijing, and the School of Hotel Administration has a joint master's program with Nanyang Technological University in Singapore.
Since 2000, Cornell has been expanding its international programs.
The money comes largely from federal sources, with federal investment of $381.0&nbsp;million.
People associated with the university are called "Cornellians".
Eight Cornellians have served as NASA astronauts, Steve Squyres ('81) is the principal investigator on the Mars Exploration Rover Mission.
Each defines its own academic programs, operates its own admissions and advising programs, and confers its own degrees.
Cornell University owns and/or operates other facilities.
''Physical Review'', recognized internationally as among the best and well known journals of physics, was founded at Cornell in 1893 before being later managed by the American Physical Society.
The university is also host to various student pranks.
Its alumni constitute 31&nbsp;Marshall Scholars and 28&nbsp; Rhodes Scholars, and Cornell is the only university with three female winners (Pearl S. Buck, Barbara McClintock, and Toni Morrison) of unshared Nobel Prizes among its graduates.
The Cornell Biological Field Station in Bridgeport, New York, conducts long-term ecological research and supports the university's educational programs, with special emphasis on freshwater lake systems.
Bill Nye ('77) is well known as "The Science Guy".
The idea of building a house system can be attributed in part to the success of Risley Residential College, the oldest continually operating residential college at Cornell.
Norman Borlaug taught at the university from 1982 to 1988 and is considered the "father of the Green Revolution", being awarded the Nobel Peace Prize, the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the Congressional Gold Medal, and 49 honorary doctorates.
Senator Ezra Cornell offered his farm in Ithaca, New York as a site and $500,000 of his personal fortune as an initial endowment.
Along with its full four-year MD program, which mirrors the curriculum taught at Weill Medical College in New York City, the college offers a two-year undergraduate pre-medical program with a separate admissions process.
The archive has changed the way many physicists and mathematicians communicate, making the e-print a viable and popular means of announcing new research.
Of these, Schuyler House (which was formerly a part of Sage Infirmary) has a dorm layout, while Maplewood Apartments, Hasbrouck Apartments, and Thurston Court Apartments are apartment-style, some even allowing for family living.
In aerospace, also, Otto Glasser ('40) directed the USAF program that developed the SM-65 Atlas, the World's first operational Intercontinental ballistic missile.
In addition to being New York's land-grant college, Cornell is also a partner in New York's sea-grant program, is the hub of the Northeast's sun-grant program, and is a part of New York's space-grant consortium.
Nine percent of undergraduate students reside in fraternity and sorority houses, although first semester freshmen are not permitted to join them.
Cornell in Rome, operated by the College of Architecture, Art, and Planning, allows students to use the city as a resource for learning architecture, urban studies, and art.
In 2004–05, Cornell received 200 invention disclosures, filed 203 U.S. patent applications, completed 77 commercial license agreements, and distributed royalties of more than $4.1&nbsp;million to Cornell units and inventors.
Today the university has more than 4,000&nbsp;courses.
The university operates biodiversity laboratories in Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, and one in the Peruvian Amazon Rainforest (Cornell University Esbaran Amazon Field Laboratory).
Thomas Midgley, Jr. ('11) invented Freon, Jon Rubinstein ('78) is credited with the development of the iPod, and Robert Tappan Morris developed the first computer worm on the Internet.
In literature, Toni Morrison ('50; Nobel laureate) is well known for her novel ''Beloved'', Pearl S. Buck ('25; Nobel laureate) authored ''The Good Earth'', Thomas Pynchon ('59) penned such canonical works of postwar American fiction as ''Gravity's Rainbow'' and ''The Crying of Lot 49'', and E. B.
About 42% of Greek members live in their houses.
These ideals, unconventional for the time, are captured in Cornell's motto, a popular 1865 Ezra Cornell quotation: "I would found an institution where any person can find instruction in any study."
(ECAC Hockey is no longer affiliated with the ECAC.)
Over the past year, COE has been extensively fundraising to fully upgrade and modernize the wall.
The university arranges study abroad and scholarship programs.
Cornell has facilities devoted to conservation and ecology.
In the 1930s, Cornell built the second cyclotron in the United States.
For Fall 2016, Cornell received 44,966 freshmen applications; 6277 were admitted (13.96% acceptance rate).
Dragon Day is one of the school's oldest traditions and has been celebrated annually since 1901, typically on or near St. Patrick's Day.
Three trustees are appointed by the Governor of New York; one seat is reserved for the eldest lineal descendant of Ezra Cornell; two members from each of the fields of agriculture, business and labor in New York state; eight trustees to be elected from among and by the alumni of the university; two trustees to be elected from among and by the faculty of the university at Ithaca and Geneva; two trustees to be elected from among and by the membership of the university's student body at Ithaca (one undergraduate and one graduate student); and one trustee to be elected from among and by the nonacademic staff and employees of the university at Ithaca and Geneva, 37&nbsp;trustees at large and finally, the Governor, Temporary President of the Senate, Speaker of the Assembly, and president of the university serve in an ''ex officio'' voting capacity.
These eccentricities arose from the university's numerous, ever-changing master plans for the campus.
Robert C. Baker ('43), widely credited for inventing the chicken nugget, taught at Cornell from 1957 to 1989.
The competition was established by New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg in order to increase entrepreneurship and job growth in the city's technology sector.
In December 2010, Cornell announced a policy of matching any grant component of financial aid offers from other Ivy League schools, MIT, Duke University or Stanford, if an accepted applicant is trying to decide between Cornell and those other schools.
In total, 41 Nobel laureates were either faculty or students at Cornell.
