This ultramafic rock also forms a very infertile soil which covers the flat and marshy heaths of the interior of the peninsula.
Cornwall is perhaps best known though for its pasties, a savoury dish made with pastry.
Cornwall has a border with only one other county, Devon, which is formed almost entirely by the River Tamar and (to the north) by the Marsland Valley.
Daphne du Maurier lived at Menabilly near Fowey and many of her novels had Cornish settings, including ''Rebecca'', ''Jamaica Inn'', ''Frenchman's Creek'', ''My Cousin Rachel'', and ''The House on the Strand''.
English is the main language used in Cornwall, although the revived Cornish language may be seen on road signs and is spoken fluently by a small minority of people.
Winston Graham's series ''Poldark'', Kate Tremayne's Adam Loveday series, Susan Cooper's novels ''Over Sea, Under Stone'' and ''Greenwitch'', and Mary Wesley's ''The Camomile Lawn'' are all set in Cornwall.
From the mid-19th century the church reestablished episcopal sees in England, one of these being at Plymouth.
In pre-Roman times, Cornwall was part of the kingdom of Dumnonia, and was later known to the Anglo-Saxons as "''West'' Wales", to distinguish it from "North Wales" (modern-day Wales).
Cornwall was the home of a division of the Dumnonii tribe – whose tribal centre was in the modern county of Devon – known as the Cornovii, separated from the Brythons of Wales after the Battle of Deorham, often coming into conflict with the expanding kingdom of Wessex before King Athelstan in AD 936 set the boundary between English and Cornish at the high water mark of the eastern bank of the River Tamar.
Before the creation of the unitary council, the former county council had 82 seats, the majority of which were held by the Liberal Democrats, elected at the 2005 county council elections.
The Crown Court is based at the Courts of Justice in Truro.
Nevertheless, the language is taught in about twelve primary schools, and occasionally used in religious and civic ceremonies.
Thomas Hardy's drama ''The Queen of Cornwall'' (1923) is a version of the Tristan story; the second act of Richard Wagner's opera ''Tristan und Isolde'' takes place in Cornwall, as do Gilbert and Sullivan's operettas ''The Pirates of Penzance'' and ''Ruddigore''.
Much of this modernist work can be seen in Tate St Ives.
The ''Corn-'' part comes from the hypothesised original tribal name of the Celtic people who had lived here since the Iron Age, the ''Cornovii''.
The prosaically named ''High Cliff'', between Boscastle and St Gennys, is the highest sheer-drop cliff in Cornwall at .
Cornwall provided the inspiration for ''The Birds'', one of her terrifying series of short stories, made famous as a film by Alfred Hitchcock.
The official measures of deprivation and poverty at district and 'sub-ward' level show that there is great variation in poverty and prosperity in Cornwall with some areas among the poorest in England and others among the top half in prosperity.
The Cornish flag is an exact reverse of the former Breton national flag (black cross) and is known by the same name "Kroaz Du".
The council has 123 seats; the largest party (in 2015) is the Liberal Democrats with 37 seats (37), followed by the Independents, 36 seats (23), Conservative Party with 31 seats (46) Labour Party 8 seats (1), UKIP 6 seats (0), Mebyon Kernow with 4 seats (6), Greens 1 seat, (0).
and since the 20th century, rugby union in Cornwall has emerged as one of the most popular spectator and team sports in Cornwall (perhaps the most popular), with professional Cornish rugby footballers being described as a "formidable force", "naturally independent, both in thought and deed, yet paradoxically staunch English patriots whose top players have represented England with pride and passion".
The resulting petition was presented to the Prime Minister, Tony Blair.
They, among other things, objected to the English language Book of Common Prayer, protesting that the English language was still unknown to many at the time.
The question and content recommendations for the 2011 Census provided an explanation of the process of selecting an ethnic identity which is relevant to the understanding of the often quoted figure of 37,000 who claim Cornish identity.
The average annual temperature in Cornwall ranges from  on the Isles of Scilly to  in the central uplands.
Artistic activity within Cornwall was initially centred on the art-colony of Newlyn, most active at the turn of the 20th century.
"Turnip, potatoes and meat", turnip being the Cornish and Scottish term for swede, itself an abbreviation of 'Swedish Turnip', the British term for rutabaga) describes a filling once very common.
Since the 19th century, Cornwall, with its unspoilt maritime scenery and strong light, has sustained a vibrant visual art scene of international renown.
It seems likely that the enemy the Cornish fought was a West Saxon force, as evidenced by the naming of King Ine of Wessex and his kinsman Nonna in reference to an earlier Battle of Lining in 710.
The pie is cooked as part of traditional celebrations for Tom Bawcock's Eve, but is not generally eaten at any other time.
They are grouped with Cornwall for other administrative purposes, such as the National Health Service and Devon and Cornwall Police.
Extensive stretches of Cornwall's coastline, and Bodmin Moor, are protected as an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty.
The plaque bears the inscription "FOR THE FALLEN / Composed on these cliffs, 1914".
From the early 19th to the mid-20th century Methodism was the leading form of Christianity in Cornwall but it is now in decline.
Cornish Wrestling is Cornwall's oldest sport and as Cornwall's native tradition it has travelled the world to places like Victoria, Australia and Grass Valley, California following the miners and gold rushes.
On a more modern note, contemporary musician Richard D. James (also known as Aphex Twin) grew up in Cornwall, as did Luke Vibert and Alex Parks, winner of Fame Academy 2003.
Conan Doyle's ''The Adventure of the Devil's Foot'' featuring Sherlock Holmes is set in Cornwall.
The writer D. M. Thomas was born in Redruth but lived and worked in Australia and the United States before returning to his native Cornwall.
Sir Arthur Quiller-Couch, author of many novels and works of literary criticism, lived in Fowey: his novels are mainly set in Cornwall.
However, it is uncertain how many of the people living in Cornwall consider themselves to be Cornish; results from different surveys (including the national census) have varied.
However, it is unclear whether he was the sole Bishop for Cornwall or the leading Bishop in the area.
:''Age shall not weary them, nor the years condemn''
Cornwall has a tourism-based seasonal economy.
D. H. Lawrence spent a short time living in Cornwall.
Some of these saints are not included in the early lists of saints.
Pasties are often locally referred to as ''oggies''.
Cornwall's only city, and the home of the council headquarters, is Truro.
The Common Brittonic spoken at the time eventually developed into several distinct tongues, including Cornish.
In 1985, sports journalist Alan Gibson made a direct connection between love of rugby in Cornwall and the ancient parish games of hurling and wrestling that existed for centuries before rugby officially began.
Cornish nationalists have organised into two political parties: Mebyon Kernow, formed in 1951, and the Cornish Nationalist Party.
Historically tin mining was important in the Cornish economy, becoming increasingly significant during the High Middle Ages and expanding greatly during the 19th century when rich copper mines were also in production.
Cornish, however, had no legal status in the UK until 2002.
Around the 880s, Anglo-Saxons from Wessex had established modest land holdings in the eastern part of Cornwall; notably Alfred the Great who had acquired a few estates.
The Scottish poet W. S. Graham lived in West Cornwall from 1944 until his death in 1986.
At the 2010 general election Liberal Democrat candidates won three constituencies and Conservative candidates won three constituencies (''see also 2010 United Kingdom general election result in Cornwall'').
Wesleyan Methodist missions began during John Wesley's lifetime and had great success over a long period during which Methodism itself divided into a number of sects and established a definite separation from the Church of England.
Also on the south coast, the picturesque fishing village of Polperro, at the mouth of the Pol River, and the fishing port of Looe on the River Looe are both popular with tourists.
:''We will remember them''
It was granted Objective 1 status by the European Commission for 2000 to 2006, followed by further rounds of funding known as 'Convergence Funding' from 2007 to 2013 and 'Growth Programme' for 2014 to 2020.
The uplands are surrounded by more fertile, mainly pastoral farmland.
See also Cornish literature
The whole of Cornwall was in this period in the Archdeaconry of Cornwall within the Diocese of Exeter.
Various kinds of religious houses existed in mediaeval Cornwall though none of them were nunneries; the benefices of the parishes were in many cases appropriated to religious houses within Cornwall or elsewhere in England or France.
There is some small scale production of wine, mead and cider.
The Liberal Democrats recognise Cornwall's claims for greater autonomy, as do the Liberal Party.
Many place names in Cornwall are associated with Christian missionaries described as coming from Ireland and Wales in the 5th century AD and usually called saints (''See'' List of Cornish saints).
However, there are also many extensive stretches of fine golden sand which form the beaches that are so important to the tourist industry, such as those at Bude, Polzeath, Watergate Bay, Perranporth, Porthtowan, Fistral Beach, Newquay, St Agnes, St Ives, and on the south coast Gyllyngvase beach in Falmouth and the large beach at Praa Sands further to the south west.
'King' Mark of Cornwall is a semi-historical figure known from Welsh literature, the Matter of Britain, and in particular, the later Norman-Breton medieval romance of Tristan and Yseult where he is regarded as a close kinsman of King Arthur; himself usually considered to be born of the Cornish people in folklore traditions derived from Geoffrey of Monmouth's ''Historia Regum Britanniae''.
Due to its long coastline, various maritime sports are popular in Cornwall, notably sailing and surfing.
Railways led to a growth of tourism in the 20th century; however, Cornwall's economy struggled after the decline of the mining and fishing industries.
Cornwall and Devon west of Dartmoor showed a very different type of settlement pattern from that of Saxon Wessex and places continued, even after 1066, to be named in the Celtic Cornish tradition with Saxon architecture being uncommon.
In 2011 Tourism brought £1.85 billion into the Cornish economy.
It continued to be occupied by Neolithic and then Bronze Age peoples, and later (in the Iron Age) by Brythons with distinctive cultural relations to neighbouring Wales and Brittany.
Cornwall is recognised by several organisations, including the Cornish nationalist party Mebyon Kernow, the Celtic League and the International Celtic Congress, as one of the six Celtic nations, alongside Brittany, Ireland, the Isle of Man, Scotland and Wales.
However, if this was so the status of keverangow before the time of King Athelstan is not recorded.
Today's pasties usually contain a filling of beef steak, onion, potato and swede with salt and white pepper, but historically pasties had a variety of different fillings.
St Piran's Day (5 March) is celebrated by the Cornish diaspora around the world.
Nearby Falmouth is notable as a port.
Winters are amongst the warmest in the country due to the southerly latitude and moderating effects of the warm ocean currents, and frost and snow are very rare at the coast and are also rare in the central upland areas.
Cornwall has a comprehensive education system, with 31 state and eight independent secondary schools.
Pilot gig rowing has been popular for many years and the World championships takes place annually on the Isles of Scilly.
This Newlyn School is associated with the names of Stanhope Forbes, Elizabeth Forbes, Norman Garstin and Lamorna Birch.
However, in early Norman times it is likely that Saint Michael the Archangel was recognised as the patron saint and is still recognised by the Anglican Church as the ''Protector of Cornwall''.
The tin trade revived in the Middle Ages and its importance to the Kings of England resulted in certain privileges being granted to the tinners; the Cornish Rebellion of 1497 is attributed to grievances of the tin miners.
On 24 April 2014 it was announced that Cornish people would be granted minority status under the European Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities.
Saint Piran is supposed to have adopted these two colours from seeing the white tin in the black coals and ashes during his supposed discovery of tin.
Cornish piracy was active during the Elizabethan era on the west coast of Britain.
Roger Taylor, the drummer from the band Queen was also raised in the county, and currently lives not far from Falmouth.
In 2002 Cornish was officially recognised as a UK minority language and in 2005 it received limited Government funding.
Extreme temperatures in Cornwall are particularly rare; however, extreme weather in the form of storms and floods is common.
One famous local fish dish is Stargazy pie, a fish-based pie in which the heads of the fish stick through the piecrust, as though "star-gazing".
The Cornish language continued to be spoken and it acquired a number of characteristics establishing its identity as a separate language from Breton.
The administrative centre, and only city in Cornwall, is Truro, although the town of Falmouth has the largest population for a civil parish and the conurbation of Camborne, Pool and Redruth has the highest total population.
R. S. Hawker of Morwenstow wrote some poetry which was very popular in the Victorian period.
Nobel Prize-winning novelist William Golding was born in St Columb Minor in 1911, and returned to live near Truro from 1985 until his death in 1993.
The ''Annales Cambriae'' report that in 722 AD the Britons of Cornwall won a battle at "Hehil".
A study in 2000 suggested that there were around 300 people who spoke Cornish fluently.
– The Liberal Democrat Manifesto for 2009
However, the Camborne School of Mines, which was relocated to Penryn in 2004, is still a world centre of excellence in the field of mining and applied geology and the grant of World Heritage status has attracted funding for conservation and heritage tourism.
A rail bridge, the Royal Albert Bridge, built by Isambard Kingdom Brunel (1859) provides the only other major transport link.
In places these have been subjected to severe folding, as can be seen on the north coast near Crackington Haven and in several other locations.
However, it can be inferred from the districts included at this period that the minimum number would be three: Triggshire; Wivelshire; and the remaining area.
In 875, the last recorded king of Cornwall, Dumgarth, is said to have drowned.
Botanists divide Cornwall and Scilly into two vice-counties: West (1) and East (2).
This may be due to a combination of Cornwall's rural and coastal geography increasing its popularity as a retirement location, and outward migration of younger residents to more economically diverse areas.
Cornwall forms the westernmost part of the south-west peninsula of the island of Great Britain, and a large part of the Cornubian batholith is within Cornwall.
David Cornwell, who writes espionage novels under the name John le Carré, lives and writes in Cornwall.
He has written novels, poetry, and other works, including translations from Russian.
These included Peter Lanyon, Terry Frost, Patrick Heron, Bryan Wynter and Roger Hilton.
Finally, the Cornish language form of the name, ''Kernow'', which first appears around 1400, derives directly from the original ''Cornowii''.
Higher education is provided by Falmouth University, the University of Exeter (including Camborne School of Mines), the Combined Universities in Cornwall, and by Truro College, Penwith College (which combined in 2008 to make Truro and Penwith College) and Cornwall College.
Major road links between Cornwall and the rest of Great Britain are the A38 which crosses the Tamar at Plymouth via the Tamar Bridge and the town of Saltash, the A39 road (Atlantic Highway) from Barnstaple, passing through North Cornwall to end in Falmouth, and the A30 which crosses the border south of Launceston crosses Bodmin Moor and connects Bodmin and Truro.
The area is noted for its wild moorland landscapes, its long and varied coastline, its attractive villages, its many place-names derived from the Cornish language, and its very mild climate.
Local cakes and desserts include Saffron cake, Cornish heavy (''hevva'') cake, Cornish fairings biscuits, figgy 'obbin, Cream tea and whortleberry pie.
On 24 April 2014 it was announced that Cornish people will be granted minority status under the European Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities.
This forms the basis for many local specialities including Cornish fudge and Cornish ice cream.
In the 2001 census, 7 percent of people in Cornwall identified themselves as Cornish, rather than British or English.
Policy grants from the European Union.
The historicity of some of these missionaries is problematic.
During the British Iron Age Cornwall, like all of Britain south of the Firth of Forth, was inhabited by a Celtic people known as the Britons with distinctive cultural relations to neighbouring Wales and Brittany.
Since then immigration to Cornwall has brought more Roman Catholics into the population.
and thenceforth apparently held it as a ducatus or dukedom annexed to his regnum or kingdom of Wessex, but not wholly incorporated with it.
In 2011, the latest available figures, Cornwall's (including the Isles of Scilly) measure of wealth was 64% of the European average per capita.
There is little evidence that Roman rule was effective west of Exeter and few Roman remains have been found.
A Standard Written Form was agreed in 2008.
It continued to be occupied by Neolithic and then Bronze Age peoples.
Their duties were to visit and inspect each parish annually and to execute the bishop's orders.
In the mid-19th century, however, the tin and copper mines entered a period of decline.
In the same year Ecgbert, as a later document expresses it, "disposed of their territory as it seemed fit to him, giving a tenth part of it to God."
For example, the ranking of 32,482 sub-wards in England in the index of multiple deprivation (2006) ranged from 819th (part of Penzance East) to 30,899th (part of Saltash Burraton in Caradon), where the lower number represents the greater deprivation.
The Newlyn Society and Penwith Society of Arts continue to be active, and contemporary visual art is documented in a dedicated online journal.
Surrounded on three sides by the English Channel and Celtic Sea, Cornwall has many miles of beaches and cliffs; the South West Coast Path follows a complete circuit of both coasts.
In 2014, half of the men's GB team fenced for Truro Fencing Club, and 3 Truro fencers appeared at the 2012 Olympics.
The poet Laurence Binyon wrote "For the Fallen" (first published in 1914) while sitting on the cliffs between Pentire Point and The Rumps and a stone plaque was erected in 2001 to commemorate the fact.
These intrusions are the central part of the granite outcrops that form the exposed parts of the Cornubian batholith of south-west Britain, which also includes Dartmoor to the east in Devon and the Isles of Scilly to the west, the latter now being partially submerged.
Prolific writer Colin Wilson, best known for his debut work ''The Outsider'' (1956) and for ''The Mind Parasites'' (1967), lived in Gorran Haven, a small village on the southern Cornish coast.
Cornwall's population was 95.7% White British and has a relatively high level of population growth.
In the Domesday Book it was referred to as ''Cornualia'' and in c. 1198 as ''Cornwal''.
The six former districts had a total of 249 council seats, and the groups with greatest numbers of councillors were Liberal Democrats, Conservatives, and Independents.
Truro, all of the towns and some villages have football clubs belonging to the Cornwall County Football Association, and the Cornwall County Cricket Club plays as one of the minor counties of English cricket.
From that time Christianity in Cornwall was in the main within the Church of England and subject to the national events which affected it in the next century and a half.
According to the 1991 census, the population was 469,800.
This area was first inhabited in the Palaeolithic and Mesolithic periods.
:"The new single council is also the opportunity to gain more control over local issues from regional and national Government bureaucrats – the first step on our way to a Cornish Assembly."
Since 1890 they have been administered by their own unitary authority, the Council of the Isles of Scilly.
The interior of the county consists of a roughly east-west spine of infertile and exposed upland, with a series of granite intrusions, such as Bodmin Moor, which contains the highest land within Cornwall.
China clay extraction has also been an important industry in the St Austell area, but this sector has been in decline, and this, coupled with increased mechanisation, has led to a decrease in employment in this sector, although the industry still employs around 2,133 people in Cornwall, and generates over £80 Million to the local economy
There are two river estuaries on the north coast: Hayle Estuary and the estuary of the River Camel, which provides Padstow and Rock with a safe harbour.
In the 16th century there was some violent resistance to the replacement of Catholicism with Protestantism in the Prayer Book Rebellion.
This is considered to be a corruption of ''Durocornovium'', 'a fort or walled settlement of the Cornovii'.
There are also many types of beers brewed in Cornwall&nbsp;– those produced by Sharp's Brewery, Skinner's Brewery and St Austell Brewery are the best-known – including stouts, ales and other beer types.
From 1267 the archdeacons had a house at Glasney near Penryn.
Between 5 March 2000 and December 2001, the campaign collected the signatures of 41,650 Cornish residents endorsing the call for a devolved assembly, along with 8,896 signatories from outside Cornwall.
A latinisation of the name as ''Cornubia'' first appears in a mid-9th-century deed purporting to be a copy of one dating from c. 705.
From east to west, and with approximately descending altitude, these are Bodmin Moor, Hensbarrow north of St Austell, Carnmenellis to the south of Camborne, and the Penwith or Land's End peninsula.
Another variation, with ''Wales'' reinterpreted as ''Gallia'', thus: ''Cornugallia'', is first attested in 1086.
:''At the going down of the sun and in the morning''
With its comparatively small, and largely rural population, major contribution by the Cornish to national sport in the United Kingdom has been limited, with the county's greatest successes coming in fencing.
Penwith, Kerrier, Pydar and Powder meet at a central point (Scorrier) which some have believed indicates a fourfold division imposed by Athelstan on a sub-kingdom.
Naming evidence cited by medievalist Edith Ditmas suggests that many post-Conquest landowners in Cornwall were Breton allies of the Normans and further proposed this period for the early composition of the Tristan and Iseult cycle by poets such as Beroul from a pre-existing shared Brittonic oral tradition.
Cornwall forms the tip of the south-west peninsula of the island of Great Britain, and is therefore exposed to the full force of the prevailing winds that blow in from the Atlantic Ocean.
The Isles of Scilly form part of the ceremonial county of Cornwall and have, at times, been served by the same county administration.
Cornwall is one of two UK areas designated as 'less developed regions' which qualify for Cohesion
The situation in Cornwall may have been somewhat similar to Wales where each major religious house corresponded to a cantref (this has the same meaning as Cornish keverang) both being under the supervision of a Bishop.
"Turmut, 'tates and mate" (i.e.
There is little evidence that Roman rule was effective west of Exeter in Devon and few Roman remains have been found.
This is home to rare plants, such as the Cornish Heath, which has been adopted as the county flower.
Several Cornish mining words are used in English language mining terminology, such as costean, gunnies, vug, kibbal, gossan and kieve.
Near the south coast, deep wooded valleys provide sheltered conditions for flora that like shade and a moist, mild climate.
With the exception of the Isles of Scilly, Cornwall is governed by a unitary authority, Cornwall Council, based in Truro.
Davey was assisted by A. O. Hume and he thanks Hume, his companion on excursions in Cornwall and Devon, and for help in the compilation of that Flora, publication of which was financed by him.
The first elections for the unitary authority were held on 4 June 2009.
The plaque also bears below this the fourth stanza (sometimes referred to as "The Ode") of the poem:
Cornwall's population was 537,400 at the last census, with a population density of 144 people per square kilometre, ranking it 40th and 41st respectively among the 47 counties of England.
The American singer/songwriter Tori Amos now resides predominantly in North Cornwall not far from Bude with her family.
The major city of Plymouth, a large urban centre closest to east Cornwall is an important location for services such as hospitals, department stores, road and rail transport, and cultural venues.
In other words, he incorporated Cornwall ecclesiastically with the West Saxon diocese of Sherborne, and endowed Eahlstan, his fighting bishop, who took part in the campaign, with an extensive Cornish estate consisting of Callington and Lawhitton, both in the Tamar valley, and Pawton near Padstow.
The Church of England was in the majority from the reign of Queen Elizabeth until the Methodist revival of the 19th century: before the Wesleyan missions dissenters were very few in Cornwall.
The Isles of Scilly are served by ferry (from Penzance) and by aeroplane, having its own airport — St Mary's Airport.
For instance, the licky pasty contained mostly leeks, and the herb pasty contained watercress, parsley, and shallots.
There are three further education colleges: Truro and Penwith College, Cornwall College and Callywith College which is due to open in September 2017.
The name first appears in the ''Anglo-Saxon Chronicle'' in 891 as ''On Corn walum''.
There are also claims that the patron saint of Cornwall is Saint Michael or Saint Petroc, but Saint Piran is by far the most popular of the three and his emblem is internationally recognised as the flag of Cornwall.
The GDP per head for Cornwall and the Isles of Scilly was 79.2% of the EU-27 average for 2004, the UK per head average was 123.0%.
Jack Clemo and the scholar A. L. Rowse were also notable Cornishmen known for their poetry; The Rev.
Before the 2010 boundary changes Cornwall had five constituencies all of which were won by Liberal Democrats in the 2005 general election.
Alteration of the granite also gave rise to extensive deposits of China Clay, especially in the area to the north of St Austell, and the extraction of this remains an important industry.
The title has also been claimed for Saint Petroc who was patron of the Cornish diocese prior to the Normans.
The name ''Cornwall'' derives from the combination of two separate terms from different languages.
Subsequently, however, Norman absentee landlords became replaced by a new Cornu-Norman elite including scholars such as Richard Rufus of Cornwall.
Subsequently china clay extraction became more important and metal mining had virtually ended by the 1990s.
St Ives and Padstow are today small vessel ports with a major tourism and leisure sector in their economies.
The north east of Cornwall lies on Carboniferous rocks known as the Culm Measures.
The Superfast Cornwall project completed in 2015, and saw 95% of Cornish houses and businesses connected to a fibre-based broadband network, with over 90% of properties able to connect with speeds above 24Mbit/s.
These families eventually became the new ruling class of Cornwall (typically speaking Norman French, Cornish, Latin and eventually English), many becoming involved in the operation of the Stannary Parliament system, Earldom and eventually the Duchy.
The coastline is composed mainly of resistant rocks that give rise in many places to impressive cliffs.
Subsequent surveys have suggested that as many as 44 percent identify as Cornish.
Roman Catholicism was virtually extinct in Cornwall after the 17th century except for a few families such as the Arundells of Lanherne.
Rosamunde Pilcher grew up in Cornwall, and several of her books take place there.
According to John T. Koch and others, Cornwall in the Late Bronze Age was part of a maritime trading-networked culture called the Atlantic Bronze Age, in modern-day Ireland, England, France, Spain and Portugal.
