The Cossacks tended to act independently of the central government, increasing friction between the two.
It was a suzerainty under protection of the Russian Tsar from 1667 but ruled by the local Hetmans for a century.
Both Azov and Black Sea Cossacks were resettled to colonise the Kuban steppe which was a crucial foothold for Russian expansion in the Caucasus.
The changing government burdened the Cossacks as well, extending its reach to reform the Cossack traditions.
Mikhail Lomonosov was the first to identify Roxolans as Russians similar to Gotho-Alan identification as Goths.
While less than three thousand Cossack reservists and new recruits from the poorer regions of the Don and Kuban regions were involved, their inaction (and that of the primarily ceremonial ''Konvoi'') came as a psychological blow to the Tsarist authorities in the city and encouraged defections from other units.
On April 14, ataman Yakovlev led elders to destroy the rebel camp and captured Razin, taking him soon afterward to Moscow to be executed.
The government's efforts to alter the traditional nomadic lifestyle of the Cossacks caused the Cossacks to be involved in nearly all the major disturbances in Russia over a 200-year period, including the rebellions led by Stepan Razin and Emilian Pugachev.
Following the defeat of the White Army, the new Communist regime instituted a policy of harsh repressions, the so-called Decossackization, which took place on the surviving Cossacks and their homelands.
For the Cossack elite, a noble status within the empire came at the price of their old liberties in the 18th century.
These subsidies fluctuated often and provided a source of conflict between the Cossacks and the government.
The influx of these refugees troubled the Cossacks not only because of the increased demand for food but also because the large number of these fugitives meant the Cossacks could not absorb them into their culture through the traditional apprenticeship way.
A Cossack detachment of the 4th Guards Corps marched in Red Square during the Moscow Victory Parade of 1945.
The elite did not see much threat from Razin and his followers either, although they realized he could cause them problems with the Muscovite system if his following developed into a rebellion against the central government.
By the 16th century these Cossack societies merged into two independent territorial organisations as well as other smaller, still detached groups:
The dress uniform had blue or green breeches with broad coloured stripes in the Host colour and these were often worn with the service jacket.
They were also called on to physically defend their villages and towns from enemy attacks.
The majority of Danubian Sich Cossacks had moved first to the Azov region in 1828, and later joined other former Zaporozhian Cossacks in the Kuban region.
Ethnic or "born" (''prirodnye'') Cossacks are those who can trace, or claim to trace, their ancestry to people and families identified as Cossacks in the Tsarist era.
When Malorossian Cossack regiments had been disbanded, those Cossacks who were not promoted to nobility or did not join other estates were united into a civil Cossack estate, like Korolev's mother's family.
Many Polish and Polish Jewish children were adopted into Cossack families.
In modern view, Don Cossacks are descendants of both Slavic people and Khazars, which assimilated Slavs, Goths, Alans, and possibly of Rugii, Roxolans, Alans and even Goths-Alans of the Black Sea Rus See the works of Evgueni Goloubinski and Vasily Vasilievsky about Relations of Gothoalans (Goths-Tetraxits) and Russian colonists in region of North-East part of Black Sea and Sea of Azov as well.
Cossacks interacted with nearby peoples, and exchanged cultural influences (for example, the Terek Cossacks were heavily influenced by the culture of North Caucasian tribes).
In the midst of the growing Moscow and Lithuanian powers, new political entities had appeared in the region such as Moldavia and the Crimean Khanate.
The Cossacks' strong historic allegiance to the Eastern Orthodox Church also put them at odds with officials of the Roman Catholic-dominated Commonwealth.
Native Cossacks usually served as officers.
However some Turkologists argue that Cossacks are descendants of native Cumans of Ukraine, who lived there long ago before the Mongol invasion.
The Guard Cossacks of His Majesty and the Ataman's Guard Cossacks, both drawn from the Don Host, wore red and light blue coats respectively.
The '''Ural Cossack Host''' was formed from the '''Ural Cossacks''', who had settled along the Ural River.
Legislative power was given to the Band Assembly (''Rada'').
Their actions increased tension along the southern border of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth.
green with crimson stripes
The Germans used Cossacks for anti-partisan activity in the rear of the German army.
General Bogaevsky, a commander in the Russian Volunteer Army, mentions in his 1918 memoir that one of his Cossacks, Sotnik Khoperski, was a native Chinese who had been brought back as a child from Manchuria during the Russian-Japanese War 1904–1905; a Cossack family adopted and raised him.
The increased taxes fell mainly on the peasants as a burden and continued to widen the gap between the wealthy and the poor.
* The Cossacks of Zaporizhia, centered on the lower bends of Dnieper, inside the territory of modern Ukraine, with the fortified capital of Zaporozhian Sich.
In Russia's 2010 Population Census, Cossacks have been recognized as an ethnicity.
She reportedly made jokes that men could be real Cossack family leaders in outer space only.
Attempts by the szlachta to turn the Zaporozhian Cossacks into peasants eroded the Cossacks' formerly strong loyalty towards the Commonwealth.
The Imperial Guard regiments wore tailored government-issue uniforms, which were colourful and elaborate.
Treated as a separate and elite community by the Tsar, the Cossacks rewarded his government with strong loyalty.
Stendhal had, that "Cossacks were pure as children and great as Gods".
As part of Operation Keelhaul, the British returned Cossack prisoners of war to Russia.
For most hosts, the basic uniform consisted of the standard loose-fitting tunics and wide trousers typical of Russian regular troops during the period 1881–1908.
In many of the stories by adventure writer Harold Lamb, the main character is a Cossack.
The government's power began to grow in 1613 with Mikhail Romanov's ascension to the throne after the Time of Troubles, when dynastic conflicts constantly presented themselves and inconsistency reigned with the lack of a single, competent ruler.
Russian Cossacks founded numerous settlements (called ''stanitsas'') and fortresses along troublesome borders.
They were on active duty for five years, but could fulfill their remaining obligation with the reserves.
Twenty years after Moscow had conquered the Volga from Kazan to Astrakhan, in 1577, the government sent troops to disperse pirates and raiders along the Volga (one of their number was Ermak).
Some historians suggest that the Cossack people were of mixed ethnic origins, descending from Russians, Ukrainians, Moldavians, Poles, Turks, Tatars,  and others who settled or passed through the vast Steppe.
Large hosts are divided into divisions and consequently the Russian Army sub-ranks ''general-mayor'', ''general-leitenatant'' and ''general-polkovnik'' are used to distinguish the ''atamans'' hierarchy of command, with the supreme ''ataman'' having the highest rank available.
The exact origins of Don Cossacks are unknown.
Cossacks such as Stenka Razin, Kondraty Bulavin, Ivan Mazepa, and Yemelyan Pugachev, led major anti-imperial wars and revolutions in the Empire in order to abolish slavery and odious bureaucracy and to maintain independence.
In addition, Catherine did not spread one of Peter III's acts, relevant to economy peasants, or the former church serfs living on the former church lands, freeing from their obligations and payments to church authorities, to other peasants freeing them from serfdom thus.
In 1860, all of them were resettled to the North Caucasus and merged into the Kuban Cossack Host.
Also included in the transfer were civilian members of the Kazachi Stan, consisting of old folk, women, and children, as well as about 850 German officers and non-commissioned officers of the Corps.
Cossacks served as border guards and protectors of towns, forts, settlements and trading posts, performed policing functions on the frontiers and also came to represent an integral part of the Russian army.
There, Cossacks may have served as self-defense formations, organized to defend against raids conducted by neighbors.
Afterwards, the Treaty of Pereyaslav (1654) brought most of the Ukrainian Cossack state under Russian rule.
After this, Ruthenian schlahta refrained from its plans to have a Moscow tsar the king of the Commonwealth, its own Michał Korybut Wiśniowiecki became the king later.
Don Cossacks had a rich military tradition, playing an important part in the historical development of the Russian Empire and successfully participating in all of its major wars.
In some cases, they raided and disarmed neighbouring villages composed of other ethnic groups.
Traditional Russian values, culture and Orthodox Christianity form the bedrock of their beliefs.
The ordinary Cossacks had to follow and give up their traditions and liberties.
But the majority of Zaporozhian Cossacks, especially Ukrainian-speaking Eastern Orthodox, remained loyal to Russia in spite of the Sich destruction and became known as the Black Sea Cossacks.
Cossacks also served as guides to most Russian expeditions formed by civil and military geographers and surveyors, traders and explorers.
The government provided only firearms and supplies for them.
green with light blue stripes
Four regiments of Cossacks formed part of the Imperial Guard, as well as the ''Konvoi''—the tsar's mounted escort.
Cossacks have taken an active part in many of the conflicts that have taken place since the disintegration of the Soviet Union: the War of Transnistria, the Georgian–Abkhazian conflict, the Georgian–Ossetian conflict, the First Chechen War and the Second Chechen War, as well as the 2014 pro-Russian unrest in Ukraine and subsequent War in Donbass.
The two Caucasian Hosts wore high fleece caps on most occasions, together with black felt cloaks (''burke'') in bad weather.
If I had them in my army, I would go through all the world with them."
By 1615 and 1625, Cossacks had razed suburbs of Constantinople, forcing the Ottoman Sultan to flee his palace.
These ventures went on short-term expeditions to acquire the region's natural wealth and this mode of existing—farming, hunting, then returning home in the winter or perhaps remaining permanently—came to be known as the Cossack way of life.
When Alans had moved to Europe, these Goths occupied the part of the former Alania in Crimea and were called Gothoalans, Russian occupying another part were called Roxolans.
The old Cossacks started giving up their traditions and liberties that had been worth dying for to obtain the pleasures of an elite life.
The majority of Don Cossacks are either Eastern Orthodox or Christian Old Believers (старообрядцы); and prior to the Civil War in Russia, there were numerous religious minorities, including Muslims, Subbotniks, Jews and others.
With the destruction of the Zaporozhian Sich, many Zaporozhian Cossacks, especially the vast majority of Old Believers and other people from the Greater Russia, defected to Turkey and settled in the area of the Danube river, founding a new Sich there.
Pugachev's claim to be Peter III stemmed from the expectations the Cossacks held for the late ruler, believing that Peter III would have been an effective ruler after freeing not only church serfs, but the serfs of landlords as well had he not been assassinated by a plot of his wife Catherine II.
However, after the Russo-Turkish war of 1787–1792, most of them were incorporated into the Black Sea Cossack Host together with Loyal Zaporozhians.
After the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the Cossacks made a systematic return to Russia.
green with yellow stripes
The traditional Cossack ''bulawa'' serves as a symbol of the Ukrainian presidency, and the island of the Khortytsia, the origin and center of the Zaporozhian Sich, has been restored.
In August 1671, Muscovite envoys administered the oath of allegiance and the Cossacks swore loyalty to the tsar.
blue with red stripes
Over the next fifty years, the central government responded to Cossack grievances with arrests, floggings, and exiles.
As a result, Cossack units were frequently broken up into small detachments for use as scouts, messengers or picturesque escorts.
Senior Warrant Officer
An unknown number were subsequently executed or imprisoned.
After the split of Ukraine along the Dnieper River by the Polish-Russian Treaty of Andrusovo in 1667, Ukrainian Cossacks were known as Left-bank and Right-bank Cossacks.
Napoleon himself stated "Cossacks are the best light troops among all that exist.
Tensions increased when Commonwealth policies turned from relative tolerance to suppression of the Eastern Orthodox church after the Union of Brest.
Their tactics in open battles were generally inferior to those of regular soldiers such as the Dragoons.
Rural Cossacks often have traditional kinship systems; they live in large clans of extended family.
The starshyna were, however, divided on the issue and the treaty had even less support among rank-and-file Cossacks; thus it failed.
However the ataman, being Razin's godfather and swayed by Razin's promise of a share of the wealth from Razin's expeditions, replied that the elite Cossacks were powerless against the band of rebels.
Cossacks were considered excellent for scouting and reconnaissance duties, as well as undertaking ambushes.
One of Leo Tolstoy's first novellas, ''The Cossacks'', depicts their autonomy and estrangement from Moscow and from centralized rule.
The Terek Cossack Host was a Cossack host created in 1577 from free Cossacks who resettled from the Volga to the Terek River.
In 1840 the hosts included the Don, Black Sea, Astrakhan, Little Russia, Azov, Danube, Ural, Stavropol, Mesherya, Orenburg, Siberia, Tobolsk, Tomsk, Yeniseisk, Irkutsk, Sabaikal, Yakutsk and Tartar voiskos.
The last, ultimately unsuccessful, attempt to rebuild the Polish-Cossack alliance and create a Polish-Lithuanian-Ruthenian Commonwealth was the 1658 Treaty of Hadiach, which was approved by the Polish King and Sejm as well as by some of the Cossack starshyna, including Hetman Ivan Vyhovsky.
All details are based on the 1909–14 dress uniforms as portrayed in "Tablitsi Form' Obmundirovaniya Russkoi Armi", Colonel V.K.
The waning loyalty of the Cossacks and the szlachta's arrogance towards them resulted in several Cossack uprisings against the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth in the early 17th century.
Each Cossack settlement, alone or in conjunction with neighbouring settlements, formed military units and regiments of light cavalry (or mounted infantry in the case of Siberian Cossacks).
However, Slavic settlements in Southern Ukraine started to appear relatively early during the Cuman rule, with the earliest ones, like Oleshky, dating back to the 11th century.
While most Cossacks served as cavalry, several of the larger hosts had infantry and artillery units.
During the Second World War, ethnic Cossacks fought on both sides of the conflict.
This is because the Don Cossack Supreme Ataman is recognized as the official head of all Cossack armies (including those outside the present Russian borders).
Razin's rebellion marked the beginning of the end to traditional Cossack practices.
The ataman of the largest, the All-Mighty Don Host, was granted Marshal rank and the right to form a new host.
In 1648 the Russian Cossack Semyon Dezhnyov discovered a passage between North America and Asia.
In 1570 an anti-Turkish coalition was established in Europe between the Papal States, the Habsburg Empire, and the Polish kings.
Their alternative name, '''Yaik Cossacks''', comes from the former name of the river, which was changed by the government after the Pugachev's rebellion.
Aboriginal Terek Cossacks joined this host later.
The Cossacks experienced difficulties under Tsar Alexis as the influx of refugees grew daily.
grey-brown cherkesska
The Cossacks' opposition to centralization of political authority led them to participate in Pugachev's Rebellion.
Oka Gorodovikov formed 49 Cossack cavalry divisions during the war.
These have come to epitomize the popular image of the Cossacks.
Razin and his followers began to capture cities at the start of the rebellion in 1669.
While these were sometimes manufactured in bulk by factories owned by the individual host, families often handed down garments or made them within the household.
War brides brought from distant lands were also common in Cossack families.
The most popular weapons used by Cossack cavalrymen were usually sabres, or ''shashka'', and long spears.
These divisions between the elite and lawless would lead to the formation of a Cossack army beginning in 1667 under Stenka Razin as well as to the ultimate failure of that rebellion.
Many Cumans, who had assimilated Khazars, retreated to the Ryazan Grand principality (Grand Duchy) after the Mongol invasion.
Some escaped to flee southeast to the Ural River, where they joined Yaik Cossacks.
By 1591 they were fighting on behalf of the government in Moscow.
The Zaporozhian Host adopted a lifestyle that combined the ancient Cossack order and habits with that of the Knights Hospitaller.
A unit of a Cossack troop could be called a ''kuren''.
Russian Cossacks played a key role in the expansion of the Russian Empire into Siberia (particularly by Yermak Timofeyevich), the Caucasus and Central Asia in the period from the 16th to 19th centuries.
With the victory of the Red Army, the Cossack lands were subjected to Decossackization.
A group of Albazin Cossacks settled in China as early as 1685.
However, Pugachev's Rebellion soon came to be seen as an inevitable failure.
Following the 1988 law, which allowed the hosts to reform and the 2005 one that legally recognised the hosts as a combat service, the ranks and insignia were kept, but on all military tickets that are standard for the Russian Army they are given below.
The elite-supporting Cossacks constituted the majority of the first prisoners taken by the rebels.
By the 18th century, Cossack hosts in the Russian Empire occupied effective buffer zones on its borders.
In Ukraine, where Cossackdom represents historical and cultural heritage, some people have started attempting to recreate the images of Ukrainian Cossacks.
During Decossackization, the new regime also divided traditional lands of Cossack Hosts among new Soviet republics and various autonomous republics of non-Cossack peoples.
These attacks, carried out by Cossacks along with Russian light cavalry and other units, were one of the first developments of guerrilla warfare tactics and, to some extent, special operations as we know them today.
They eventually moved to the Kuban region, due to the distribution of Zaporozhian Sich lands among landlords, and the resulting scarcity of land.
There are Cossack organizations in Russia, Kazakhstan, Ukraine, Poland, and the United States.
The Cossacks were Razin's main supporters and followed him during his first Persian campaign in 1667, plundering and pillaging Persian cities on the Caspian Sea.
The major powers tried to exploit Cossack warmongering for their own purposes.
While they still had internal autonomy, the Cossacks became Muscovite subjects, a transition that would prove to be a dividing point yet again in Pugachev's Rebellion.
Western Europeans had a lot of contacts with Cossacks during the Seven Years' War and had seen Cossack patrols in Berlin.
Their distinction in battle eventually led all to be merited as Guards.
Ukrainian folklore remembers the Danubian Sich, while new siches of Loyal Zaporozhians on Bug and Dniester are not famous ones.
By 1492, the Crimean Khan complained that Kanev and Cherkasy Cossacks attacked his ship near Tighina (Bender), and the Grand Duke of Lithuania Alexander I promised to find the guilty among the Cossacks.
At the end of the war, the British repatriated between 40 and 50 thousand Cossacks, including families of military, to the Soviet Union.
The Don Cossack Host, which had been established by the 16th century, allied with the Tsardom of Russia.
By the 1890s the Ussuri, Semirechensk and Amur Cossacks were added; the last had a regiment of elite mounted rifles.
Among the ordinary Cossacks, hatred of the elite and central government boiled and by 1772, an open state of rebellion ensued for six months between the Iaik Cossacks and the central government.
He says this "was one of the main factors which led to the disappearance of the Cossacks as a nation."
Yet the conflict inside the new host of the new loyalty, and the political manoeuvres used by the Russian Empire, led to splits in the Cossacks.
The vast majority of the ethnic Cossacks fought against the Nazis in the ranks of the Red Army and of the Red Navy on all war theatres.
Early "Proto-Cossack" groups are generally reported to have come into existence within the present-day Ukraine in the mid-13th century as the influence of Cumans grew weak though some have ascribed their origins to as early as the tenth century.
By 1916 their wartime strength had expanded to 160 regiments plus 176 independent sotnias (squadrons), the latter employed as detached units.
On par with that, the Cossacks also play a large cultural role in the South of Russia.
The Polish government could not control the Cossacks, but was held responsible as the men were nominally their subjects.
When the Iaik Cossacks sent a delegation to Peter to explain their grievances, Peter stripped the Cossacks of their autonomous status and subordinated them to the War College rather than the College of Foreign Affairs, solidifying the change in the Cossacks from border patrol to military servicemen.
All Poles captured with arms by Russian forces in the 1812–1814 campaign were enlisted in Cossack Hosts for 25 years, though without the obligation to convert to Eastern Orthodoxy.
In 1580 they captured Saraichik.
New Slavic people have come from Dnepr and Taman, and from Novgorod Republic and Principality of Ryazan, both before and after their violent occupation and subjugation by the Muscovite Tsardom.
They were formally recognised as an independent state, the Zaporozhian Host, by a treaty with Poland in 1649.
He also has the authority to recognize and dissolve new hosts.
Not everyone agrees that such initiates should be considered Cossack.
The same can be said about the colonel ranks as they are given to atamans of regional and district status.
In the year of 948 Byzantine Emperor Constantine mentioned of trade of goods, between the Don Cossacks in their home capital.
Cossacks were expected to provide their own uniforms.
This group includes the ''edinovertsy'', who identify as Slavic.
The ataman had executive powers, and at time of war, he was the supreme commander in the field.
The Code of 1649 increased tax revenue for the central government and stopped wandering to stabilize the social order by fixing people in the same land with the same occupation of their families.
green with yellow stripes
The first recorded Zaporizhian Host prototype was formed when the cousin of Ivan the Terrible, Dmytro Vyshnevetsky built a fortress on the island of Little Khortytsia on the banks of the Lower Dnieper in 1552.
Instead of taking these steps of proper assimilation into Cossack society, the runaway peasants spontaneously declared themselves Cossacks and lived beside true Cossacks, laboring or working as barge-haulers to earn food.
The Russian Empire organised its Cossacks into several ''voiskos'' (hosts), which lived along the Russian border, or internal borders between Russian and non-Russian peoples.
Ukraine, lower Volga, Don, Kuban, and Terek territories (the Northern Caucasus) had high fatalities from starvation.
To prevent further defection of Cossacks, the Russian government restored the special Cossack status of the majority of Zaporozhian Cossacks.
Peasants fled once again to the land of the Cossacks; in particular, the fugitive peasants set their destination for the Iaik Host, whose people were committed to the old Cossack traditions.
Older Cossacks began to settle and become prosperous, enjoying the privileges they earned through obeying and assisting the Muscovite system.
Bistrots appeared after the Cossack occupation of Paris.
Some Cossacks, including Polish schlahta, converted to Eastern Orthodox, divided the lands of Ruthenian szlachta in Ukraine, and became the Cossack szlachta.
This episode is widely known as the Betrayal of the Cossacks.
green with yellow stripes
By 1918, Cossacks declared the complete independence of their nations and formed the independent states, the Ukrainian State, the Don Republic, and the Kuban People's Republic.
While, in recent times, the Ukrainian linguistic and cultural impact has been attributed to Ukrainophile interests, the predominant view of ethnologists and historians is considered to be found in the common culture dating back to the Black Sea Cossacks.
The rebels' advancement began to be seen as a problem to the elder Cossacks, who, in 1671, decided to comply with the government in order to receive more subsidies.
In 1767, the empress refused to accept grievances directly from the peasantry.
Though some Cossacks joined German armed forces, they did so usually to defect either to the western allies or to the Resistance, to liberate their co-patriots and family members from Nazi work and Nazi concentration camps.
Finally, the King's adamant refusal to cede to the Cossacks' demand to expand the Cossack Registry was the last straw that prompted the largest and most successful of these: the Khmelnytsky uprising that started in 1648.
The government constantly rebuffed Cossack ambitions for recognition as equal to the szlachta, and plans for transforming the Polish-Lithuanian two-nation Commonwealth into a Polish-Lithuanian-Rus' Commonwealth made little progress due to the idea's unpopularity among the Rus' szlahta of the Rus' Cossacks being equal to Rus' szlachta.
During the initial stages of the February Revolution of 1917, the three Cossack regiments stationed in Saint Petersburg proved in the words of a senior officer to be "extremely slack and indecisive" when deployed in support of the overstretched police.
The Goths-Alans came from the Western part of North Caucasus and from Northern Europe, Goths intermixed with Slavs during their trip from Northern Europe.
In 1936, under pressure and appeals from Cossack communities, the Soviet government lifted the ban on Cossacks serving in the Red Army.
Some Cossacks moved to the Danube delta region, where they formed the Danubian Sich under Ottoman rule.
It is believed that Crimean Greeks have the Gotho-Alan ancestry, among others.
Later these corps units were increased in size and reduced to eight.
As conditions worsened and Mikhail's son Alexis took the throne, divisions among the Cossacks began to emerge.
'''Equivalent modern Russian Army'''
As early as the 15th century a few individuals ventured into the proverbial "Wild Fields," the southern frontier regions of Ukraine separating Poland-Lithuania from the Crimean Khanate, which was a naturally rich and fertile region teeming with cattle, wild animals, and fish.
