With more than 2,000 dead, the resulting 44-day Costa Rican Civil War was the bloodiest event in Costa Rica during the 20th century.
The University of Costa Rica has been awarded the title "Meritorious Institution of Costa Rican Education and Culture".
And later in the 19th century, the African flavor lent its presence with influence from other Caribbean mixed flavors.
Costa Rica was sparsely inhabited by indigenous people before coming under Spanish rule in the 16th century.
In 2005, tourism contributed 8.1% of the country's GNP, and represented 13.3% of direct and indirect employment.
Most of the native population was absorbed into the Spanish-speaking colonial society through inter-marriage, except for some small remnants, the most significant of which are the Bribri and Boruca tribes who still inhabit the mountains of the Cordillera de Talamanca, in the southern part of Costa Rica, near the frontier with Panama.
Another important factor behind Costa Rica's poverty was the lack of a significant indigenous population available for encomienda (forced labor), which meant most of the Costa Rican settlers had to work on their own land, preventing the establishment of large ''haciendas'' (plantations).
While the country has only about 0.1% of the world's landmass, it contains 5% of the world's biodiversity.
About 7% of GDP is allocated to the health sector, and over 70% is government funded.
Mayors are chosen democratically every four years by each canton.
According to the World Bank, in 2010 about 489,200 immigrants lived in the country, mainly from Nicaragua, Panama, El Salvador, Honduras, Guatemala, and Belize, while 125,306 Costa Ricans live abroad in the United States, Panama, Nicaragua, Spain, Mexico, Canada, Germany, Venezuela, Dominican Republic, and Ecuador.
In response, the PRC built a new, $100 million, state-of-the-art football stadium in Parque la Sabana, in the province of San José.
Coffee was first planted in Costa Rica in the early 19th century, and was first shipped to Europe in 1843, soon becoming Costa Rica's first major export.
Over 840 species of birds have been identified in Costa Rica.
The circumstances during this period are believed to have led to many of the idiosyncrasies for which Costa Rica has become known, while concomitantly setting the stage for Costa Rica's development as a more egalitarian society than the rest of its neighbors.
According to the UNDP, in 2010 the life expectancy at birth for Costa Ricans was 79.3 years.
Upon independence, Costa Rican authorities faced the issue of officially deciding the future of the country.
It can be phrased as a question or as an acknowledgement of one's presence.
On September 10, 1961, some months after Fidel Castro declared Cuba a socialist state, Costa Rican President Mario Echandi ended diplomatic relations with Cuba through ''Executive Decree Number 2''.
In exchange for completing the railroad, the Costa Rican government granted Keith large tracts of land and a lease on the train route, which he used to produce bananas and export them to the United States.
Costa Rica is composed of seven provinces, which in turn are divided into 81 cantons (, plural ), each of which is directed by a mayor.
The park is recognized for the annual nesting of the endangered green turtle, and is the most important nesting site for the species.
Costa Rica has a long-term disagreement with Nicaragua over the San Juan River, which defines the border between the two countries, and Costa Rica's rights of navigation on the river.
Costa Rica took in many refugees from a range of other Latin American countries fleeing civil wars and dictatorships during the 1970s and 1980s, notably from Chile and Argentina, as well as people from El Salvador who fled from guerrillas and government death squads.
Coffee production has played a key role in Costa Rica's history and economy, and by 2006, was the third cash crop export.
As of April 2014, it trades around 550 to the US$, and about 760 colones to the euro.
The location receiving the most rain is the Caribbean slopes of the Central Cordillera mountains, with an annual rainfall of over .
Tourism now earns more foreign exchange than bananas and coffee combined.
Costa Rica is home to a rich variety of plants and animals.
All of them have been widely regarded by the international community as peaceful and transparent.
High levels of education among its residents make the country an attractive investing location.
Most Buddhists are members of the Han Chinese community of about 40,000 with some new local converts.
International tourist receipts rose to  billion in 2012, and the lead country of origin was the United States with 864,340 tourists, followed by Nicaragua with 474,011 visitors, and Canada with 136,261.
Around 25% of the country's land area is in protected national parks and protected areas, the largest percentage of protected areas in the world (developing world average 13%, developed world average 8%).
In the "natural resources" subindex, Costa Rica ranks sixth worldwide in the natural resources pillar, but 104th in terms of cultural resources.
Prior to 1940, government hospitals and charities provided most health care.
Costa Rica is located on the Central American isthmus, lying between latitudes 8° and 12°N, and longitudes 82° and 86°W.
Costa Rica's seasons are defined by how much rain falls during a particular period.
In 2012, it became the first country in the Americas to ban recreational hunting.
With uninterrupted democracy dating back to at least 1948, the country is the region's most stable.
Costa Rica's location provides access to American markets as it has the same time zone as the central part of the United States and direct ocean access to Europe and Asia.
Dishes such as the very traditional tamale and many others made of corn are the most representative of its indigenous inhabitants, and similar to other neighboring Mesoamerican countries.
In 2008, there were five specialty national hospitals, three general national hospitals, seven regional hospitals, 13 peripheral hospitals, and 10 major clinics serving as referral centers for primary care clinics, which also deliver biopsychosocial services, family and community medical services and promotion and prevention programs.
In 2014, Intel announced it would end manufacturing in Costa Rica and lay off 1,500 staff.
Permanent programs, such as the National Symphony Orchestra of Costa Rica and the Youth Symphony Orchestra, are conjunctions of two areas of work: Culture and Youth.
Its term expired on December 31, 2009; this was Costa Rica's third time on the Security Council.
Costa Rica also borders Nicaragua to the north ( of border) and Panama to the south-southeast ( of border).
The central government offers tax exemptions for those willing to invest in the country.
The New Economics Foundation (NEF) ranked Costa Rica first in its 2009 Happy Planet Index, and once again in 2012.
This is how Costa Rican cuisine today is very varied, with every new ethnic group who had recently become part of the country's population influencing the country's cuisine.
The perinatal mortality rate dropped from 12.0 per 1000 in 1972 to 5.4 per 1000 in 2001.
Since 1999, tourism earns more foreign exchange than the combined exports of the country's three main cash crops: bananas, pineapples and coffee.
Corcovado is the one park in Costa Rica where all four Costa Rican monkey species can be found.
In 1948, José Figueres Ferrer led an armed uprising in the wake of a disputed presidential election between the previous president Rafael Ángel Calderón Guardia (he served as president between 1940 and 1944) and Otilio Ulate Blanco.
Over 400 types of birds and more than 100 species of mammals can be found there.
Primary health care facilities in Costa Rica include health clinics, with a general practitioner, nurse, clerk, pharmacist and a primary health technician.
Costa Rica hosts many refugees, mainly from Colombia and Nicaragua.
Like the rest of Central America, Costa Rica never fought for independence from Spain.
Costa Rica became a "rural democracy" with no oppressed mestizo or indigenous class.
The Sinagoga Shaarei Zion synagogue is near La Sabana Metropolitan Park in San José.
Costa Rica is an observer of the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie.
Costa Rica is a member of the International Criminal Court, without a Bilateral Immunity Agreement of protection for the United States military (as covered under Article 98).
A Creole-English language, Jamaican ''patois'' (also known as Mekatelyu), is spoken along the Caribbean coast.
Similarly, Costa Rica has a tax on water pollution to penalize businesses and homeowners that dump sewage, agricultural chemicals, and other pollutants into waterways.
In 2006, Intel's microprocessor facility alone was responsible for 20% of Costa Rican exports and 4.9% of its GDP.
The Atlantic coast, meanwhile, was populated with African workers during the 17th and 18th centuries.
The victorious rebels formed a government junta that abolished the military altogether, and oversaw the drafting of a new constitution by a democratically elected assembly.
Costa Rica has a very low malaria incidence of 48 per 100,000 in 2000 and no reported cases of measles in 2002.
About 10.7% of Costa Rica's adult population (18 or older) also speaks English, 0.7% French, and 0.3% speaks Portuguese or German as a second language.
The "summer" or dry season goes from December to April, and "winter" or rainy season goes from May to November, which almost coincides with the Atlantic hurricane season, and during this time, it rains constantly in some regions.
Exceptions are Guanacaste, where almost half the population is visibly mestizo, a legacy of the more pervasive unions between Spanish colonists and Chorotega Amerindians through several generations, and Limón, where the vast majority of the Afro-Costa Rican community lives.
Due to small, but continuous, immigration from Asia and the Middle East, other religions have grown, the most popular being Buddhism, with about 100,000 practitioners (over 2% of the population).
Patients can choose private health care to avoid waiting lists.
Costa Rica was described as "the poorest and most miserable Spanish colony in all America" by a Spanish governor in 1719.
Costa Rica has also developed a system of payments for environmental services.
In the sustainable tourism category, Costa Rica is ranked first.
This freeze lasted 47 years until President Óscar Arias Sánchez re-established normal relations on 18 March 2009, saying, "If we have been able to turn the page with regimes as profoundly different to our reality as occurred with the USSR or, more recently, with the Republic of China, how would we not do it with a country that is geographically and culturally much nearer to Costa Rica?"
Since the late 19th century, however, Costa Rica has experienced two significant periods of violence.
The largest coffee growing areas are in the provinces of San José, Alajuela, Heredia, Puntarenas, and Cartago.
One national park, the Corcovado National Park, is internationally renowned among ecologists for its biodiversity (including big cats and tapirs) and is where visitors can expect to see an abundance of wildlife.
Several global high-tech corporations have already started developing in the area and are exporting goods, including Intel, GlaxoSmithKline, and Procter & Gamble.
Shards of pots, cylindrical vases, platters, gourds and other forms of vases decorated with grooves, prints, and some modelled after animals have been found.
Humidity is also higher on the Caribbean side than on the Pacific side.
Dance-oriented genres, such as ''soca'', ''salsa'', ''bachata'', ''merengue'', ''cumbia'' and Costa Rican swing are enjoyed increasingly by older rather than younger people.
On June 1, 2007, Costa Rica broke diplomatic ties with Taiwan, switching recognition to the People's Republic of China.
Costa Rica is an observing member of the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie (OIF).
Arias announced that both countries would exchange ambassadors.
There are only a few schools in Costa Rica that go beyond the 12th grade.
It was ranked 42nd in the world, and third in the Americas, in the 2016 Environmental Performance Index, was twice ranked the best performing country in the New Economics Foundation's (NEF) Happy Planet Index, which measures environmental sustainability, and was identified by the NEF as the greenest country in the world in 2009.
President Óscar Arias Sánchez admitted the action was a response to economic exigency.
The country's abundant fruit trees, many of which bear fruit year round, are hugely important to the birds, some of whom survive on diets that consist only of one or two types of fruit.
But since the 1941 creation of the Social Insurance Administration (''Caja Costarricense de Seguro Social'' – CCSS), Costa Rica has provided universal health care to its wage-earning residents, with coverage extended to dependants over time.
Nicaragua may require Costa Rican boats to display the flag of Nicaragua, but may not charge them for departure clearance from its ports.
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints claims more than 35,000 members, and has a temple in San José that served as a regional worship center for Costa Rica.
The national team has played in four FIFA World Cup tournaments and reached the quarter-finals for the first time in 2014.
The Instituto Nacional de Biodiversidad is allowed to collect royalties on any biological discoveries of medical importance.
Since then, Costa Rica has held 14 presidential elections, the latest in 2014.
Costa Rica's distance from the capital in Guatemala, its legal prohibition under Spanish law to trade with its southern neighbors in Panama, then part of the Viceroyalty of New Granada (i.e.
In 1838, long after the Federal Republic of Central America ceased to function in practice, Costa Rica formally withdrew and proclaimed itself sovereign.
According to the World Bank, Costa Rica's GDP per capita is US$12,874 PPP (); however, this developing country still faces lack of maintenance and new investment in infrastructure, a poverty rate estimated to be 23%, a 7.8% unemployment rate (2012 est.
Historically, Costa Rica has generally enjoyed greater peace and more consistent political stability compared with many of its fellow Latin American nations.
Since the main market for the coffee was in Europe, it soon became a high priority to develop a transportation route from the Central Plateau to the Atlantic Ocean.
The facility now continues as a test and design facility with approximately 1,600 remaining staff.
Because of the lack of agreement on these two possible outcomes, the first civil war of Costa Rica occurred.
These were all specific items of contention brought to the court in the 2005 filing.
The Inter-American Court of Human Rights and the United Nations University of Peace are based in Costa Rica.
Costa Rica officially plans to become a carbon-neutral country by 2021.
That date is still celebrated as Independence Day in Costa Rica even though, technically, under the Spanish Constitution of 1812 that had been readopted in 1820, Nicaragua and Costa Rica had become an autonomous province with its capital in León.
Most Afro-Costa Ricans, who constitute about 3% of the country's population, descend from Jamaican immigrants who worked in the construction of that railway.
The northwest of the country, the Nicoya peninsula, was the southernmost point of Nahuatl cultural influence when the Spanish conquerors (conquistadores) came in the 16th century.
Most of the coffee exported was grown around the main centers of population in the Central Plateau and then transported by oxcart to the Pacific port of Puntarenas.
would be "''Pura Vida''".
These were small and scattered, although the transition from hunting and gathering to agriculture as the main livelihood in the territory is still unknown.
Costa Rica has been cited in various journals as Central America's great health success story.
Following a brief but bloody civil war, it permanently abolished its army in 1949, becoming one of only a few sovereign nations without a standing army.
Despite enormous difficulties with construction, disease, and financing, the railroad was completed in 1890.
The highest volcano in the country is the Irazú Volcano () and the largest lake is Lake Arenal.
In the 2011 Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Index, Costa Rica ranked 44th in the world and second among Latin American countries after Mexico.
Giant leatherback, hawksbill, and loggerhead turtles also nest there.
Costa Rica stands as the most visited nation in the Central American region, with 2.2 million foreign visitors in 2011, followed by Panama with almost 1.5 million visitors.
There are 14 known volcanoes in Costa Rica, and six of them have been active in the last 75 years.
Costa Rica's inflation rate was an estimated 4.5% in 2012.
Costa Rica has successfully managed to diminish deforestation from some of the worst rates in the world from 1973 to 1989, to almost zero by 2005.
Universal public education is guaranteed in the constitution; primary education is obligatory, and both preschool and high school are free.
In 1993, laws were passed to enable elected health boards that represented health consumers, social insurance representatives, employers, and social organizations.
Costa Rican cuisine is a blend of Native American, Spanish, African and many other cuisine origins.
Costa Rica is known for its progressive environmental policies, being the only country to meet all five UNDP criteria established to measure environmental sustainability.
It has also been cited by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) as having attained much higher human development than other countries at the same income levels, with a better record on human development and inequality than the median of the region.
It was not long before Spanish settlers turned to the hills, where they found rich volcanic soil and a milder climate than that of the lowlands.
Economic growth in 2008 diminished to a 3% increase in the face of the global recession (down from 7% and 9% growth in the prior two years).
In 2002, there were 0.58 new general practitioner (medical) consultations and 0.33 new specialist consultations per capita, and a hospital admission rate of 8.1%.
This helped reorient the forestry sector away from commercial timber production and the resulting deforestation, and helped create awareness of the services it provides for the economy and society (i.e., carbon fixation, hydrological services such as producing fresh drinking water, biodiversity protection, and provision of scenic beauty).
These include the white-headed capuchin, the mantled howler, the endangered Geoffroy's spider monkey, and the Central American squirrel monkey, found only on the Pacific coast of Costa Rica and a small part of Panama, and considered endangered until 2008, when its status was upgraded to vulnerable.
Coffee production would remain Costa Rica's principal source of wealth well into the 20th century.
They mainly grew tubers and roots (like carrots).
The conflict was won by the Republicans and, as a consequence, the city of Cartago lost its status as the capital, which moved to San José.
Cocos Island () stands out because of its distance from the continental landmass,  from Puntarenas, but Calero Island is the largest island of the country ().
Preventive health care is also successful.
On July 14, 2009, the International Court of Justice in the Hague upheld Costa Rica's navigation rights for commercial purposes to subsistence fishing on their side of the river.
On October 16, 2006, a new currency exchange system was introduced, allowing the value of the CRC colón to float between two bands as done previously by Chile.
U.S. convicts, Italians and Chinese immigrants also participated in the construction project.
There are both state and private universities.
The earliest use of pottery appears around 2,000 to 3,000 BCE.
The year can be split into two periods, the dry season known to the residents as summer, and the rainy season, known locally as winter.
The Nicoya Peninsula is considered one of the Blue Zones in the world, where people commonly live active lives past the age of 100 years.
Spaniards brought many new ingredients to the country from other lands, especially spices and domestic animals.
Some Nicaraguans migrate for seasonal work opportunities and then return to their country.
An 1858 treaty extended navigation rights to Costa Rica, but Nicaragua denied passenger travel and fishing were part of the deal; the court ruled Costa Ricans on the river were not required to have Nicaraguan tourist cards or visas as Nicaragua argued, but, in a nod to the Nicaraguans, ruled that Costa Rican boats and passengers must stop at the first and last Nicaraguan port along their route.
), and a trade deficit of 5.2%.
The cantons are further divided into 473 districts ().
Some native languages are still spoken in indigenous reservations; the most numerically important are the Bribri, Maléku, Cabécar and Ngäbere languages, some of which have several thousand speakers in Costa Rica – others a few hundred.
Costa Rica is an active member of the United Nations and the Organization of American States.
The highest point in the country is Cerro Chirripó, at ; it is the fifth highest peak in Central America.
Often, people walking down the streets, or buying food at shops say hello by saying "''Pura Vida''", which means pure life, or good life.
The impact of indigenous peoples on modern Costa Rican culture has been relatively small compared to other nations, since the country lacked a strong native civilization to begin with.
Tortuguero National Park – the name ''Tortuguero'' can be translated as "Full of Turtles" – is home to spider, howler, and white-throated capuchin monkeys; the three-toed sloth and two-toed sloth; 320 species of birds; and a variety of reptiles.
However, as of August 2009, the value of the colón, Costa Rica's unit of currency, against the dollar has decreased to 86% of its late-2006 value (see commonly available forex trading charts).
They must also have an identity document or passport.
A pioneer of ecotourism, Costa Rica draws many tourists to its extensive national parks and protected areas.
Some languages, such as Teribe and Boruca, have fewer than a thousand speakers.
Nicaragua can also impose timetables on Costa Rican traffic.
The country also experienced well-being higher than many richer nations and a per capita ecological footprint one-third the size of the United States.
As a result of the immigration of Spaniards, their 16th-century Spanish culture and its evolution marked everyday life and culture until today, with Spanish language and the Catholic religion as primary influences.
The mean annual temperature on the coastal lowlands is around ,  in the main populated areas of the Central Cordillera, and below  on the summits of the highest mountains.
Since 2012, smoking in Costa Rica is subject to some of the most restrictive regulations in the world.
Having enacted these reforms, the junta relinquished its power on November 8, 1949, to the new democratic government.
Its healthcare system is ranked higher than that of the United States, despite having a fraction of its GDP.
However, they represent less than 1% of the population.
It borders the Caribbean Sea (to the east) and the Pacific Ocean (to the west), with a total of  of coastline,  on the Caribbean coast and  on the Pacific.
There are no provincial legislatures.
Costa Rica finished a term on the United Nations Security Council, having been elected for a nonrenewable, two-year term in the 2007 election.
In 2002, 96% of Costa Rican women used some form of contraception, and antenatal care services were provided to 87% of all pregnant women.
Some of the country's most notable avian species include the resplendent quetzal, scarlet macaw, three-wattled bellbird, bare-necked umbrellabird, and the keel-billed toucan.
Costa Rica was the first of the Central American nations to do so.
A main foreign policy objective of Costa Rica is to foster human rights and sustainable development as a way to secure stability and growth.
As a result of that and illegal immigration, an estimated 10–15% (400,000–600,000) of the Costa Rican population is made up of Nicaraguans.
It is also a member of many other international organizations related to human rights and democracy, such as the Community of Democracies.
Each health committee manages an area equivalent to one of the 83 administrative cantons of Costa Rica.
Football is the most popular sport in Costa Rica.
The country has consistently performed favourably in the Human Development Index (HDI), placing 69th in the world , among the highest of any Latin American nation.
Students who finish 11th grade receive a Costa Rican Bachillerato Diploma accredited by the Costa Rican Ministry of Education.
After the ''coup d'état'', Figueres became a national hero, winning the country's first democratic election under the new constitution in 1953.
On September 15, 1821, after the final Spanish defeat in the Mexican War of Independence (1810–21), the authorities in Guatemala declared the independence of all of Central America.
As is the case in much of Central America, the avian species in Costa Rica are a mix of North and South American species.
For the first and second millennia BCE there were already settled farming communities.
In a countrywide referendum on October 5, 2007, Costa Rican voters narrowly backed a free trade agreement, with 51.6% of "Yes" votes.
Colombia), and the lack of resources such as gold and silver, made Costa Rica into a poor, isolated, and sparsely inhabited region within the Spanish Empire.
Costa Rica is a center of biological diversity for reptiles and amphibians, including the world's fastest running lizard, the spiny-tailed iguana (''Ctenosaura similis'').
Costa Rica ranks third of sixty countries covered in the 2014 ''Global Green Economy Index''.
The 2011 census classified 83.6% of the population as white or mestizo.
Deforestation, illegal pet-trading, and hunting are the main reasons for its threatened status.
Since then, Costa Rica has remained among the most stable, prosperous, and progressive nations in Latin America.
According to NEF, Costa Rica's lead is due to its very high life expectancy which is second highest in the Americas, and higher than the United States.
The considerable distance and poor communication routes between Guatemala City and the Central Plateau, where most of the Costa Rican population lived then and still lives now, meant the local population had little allegiance to the federal government in Guatemala.
Its best performance in the regional CONCACAF Gold Cup was runner-up in 2002.
All children under one have access to well-baby clinics, and the immunization coverage rate in 2002 was above 91% for all antigens.
The guitar is popular, especially as an accompaniment to folk dances; however, the marimba was made the national instrument.
For this purpose, in the 1870s, the Costa Rican government contracted with U.S. businessman Minor C. Keith to build a railroad to the Caribbean port of Limón.
In total, Costa Rica comprises  plus  of territorial waters.
The Department of Culture, Youth, and Sports is in charge of the promotion and coordination of cultural life.
