One female adjacent to the San Andres Mountains, for instance, was found with a large range of 215&nbsp;km2 (83&nbsp;sq&nbsp;mi), necessitated by poor prey abundance.
Predation by cougars has been linked to changes in the species mix of deer in a region.
This cat prefers habitats with dense underbrush and rocky areas for stalking, but can also live in open areas.
To the Apache and Walapai of Arizona, the wail of the cougar was a harbinger of death.
By 2004, the count had climbed to 88 attacks and 20 deaths.
Claudio Gay, in his Natural History of Chili, says, "When attacked by man its energy and daring at once forsake it, and it becomes a weak, inoffensive animal, and trembling, and uttering piteous moans, and shedding abundant tears, it seems to implore compassion from a generous enemy".
This physique allows it great leaping and short-sprint ability.
According to the Anglo-Argentine naturalist William Henry Hudson "It does not attack man, and Azara is perfectly correct when he affirms that it never hurts, or threatens to hurt, man or child, even when it finds them sleeping.
A successful generalist predator, the cougar will eat any animal it can catch, from insects to large ungulates (over 500&nbsp;kg).
The mean weight of vertebrate prey (MWVP) that pumas attack increases with the puma's body weight; in general, MWVP is lower in areas closer to the equator.
Hudson adds that, except in relation to man, the puma is a ferocious animal, attacking even the much stronger jaguar.
Various accounts of cougars killing lone wolves, including a six-year-old female, have also been documented.
The head of the cat is round and the ears are erect.
The jaguar tends to take larger prey and the cougar smaller where they overlap, reducing the cougar's size and also further reducing the likelihood of direct competition.
The cougar is capable of breaking the neck of some of its smaller prey with a strong bite and momentum bearing the animal to the ground.
US state-level statistics are often more optimistic, suggesting cougar populations have rebounded.
Fighting back with sticks and rocks, or even bare hands, is often effective in persuading an attacking cougar to disengage.
Many attribute this to the protection cougars have from being hunted and are now becoming desensitized to humans; most are removed from the population after the attacks have already occurred.
Research has shown cougar abundances from 0.5 animals to as much as 7 (in one study in South America) per 100&nbsp;km2 (38&nbsp;sq&nbsp;mi).
Copulation is brief but frequent.
Home range sizes and overall cougar abundance depend on terrain, vegetation, and prey abundance.
The status of the Florida panther remains uncertain.
Attacks on humans are very rare, as cougar prey recognition is a learned behavior and they do not generally recognize humans as prey.
Like almost all cats, the cougar is a solitary animal.
The heavily populated state of California has seen a dozen attacks since 1986 (after just three from 1890 to 1985), including three fatalities.
The cougar is also protected across much of the rest of its range.
In a 2013 study the most important predictor of puma problems were remedial hunting of puma the previous year.
The first English record of "puma" was in 1777, where it had come from the Spanish, who in turn borrowed it from the Peruvian Quechua language in the 16th century, where it means "powerful".
Transient males have been verified in Minnesota, Missouri, Wisconsin, Iowa, the Upper Peninsula of Michigan, and Illinois, where a cougar was shot in the city limits of Chicago and, in at least one instance, observed as far east as coastal Connecticut.
The cougar and jaguarundi are most closely related to the modern cheetah of Africa and western Asia, but the relationship is unresolved.
Remedial hunting appears to have the paradoxical effect of increased livestock predation and complaints of human-puma conflicts.
It stalks through brush and trees, across ledges, or other covered spots, before delivering a powerful leap onto the back of its prey and a suffocating neck bite.
Life expectancy in the wild is reported at eight to 13 years, and probably averages eight to 10; a female of at least 18 years was reported killed by hunters on Vancouver Island.
The same study showed the highest proportion of attacks to have occurred in British Columbia, particularly on Vancouver Island where cougar populations are especially dense.
One report describes a large pack of 7 to 11 wolves killing a female cougar and her kittens.
Bears gained up to 113%, and cougars lost up to 26%, of their respective daily energy requirements from these encounters.
South of the Rio Grande, the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN) lists the cat in every Central and South American country.
This, however, is not a full statement of the facts; the puma will not even defend itself against man".
Primary food sources are ungulates, particularly deer, but also livestock.
According to figures in Texas in 1990, 86 calves (0.0006% of a total of 13.4&nbsp;million cattle & calves in Texas), 253 Mohair goats, 302 Mohair kids, 445 sheep (0.02% of a total of 2.0&nbsp;million sheep & lambs in Texas) and 562 lambs (0.04% of 1.2&nbsp;million lambs in Texas) were confirmed to have been killed by cougars that year.
One researcher in Oregon noted: "When there is a pack around, cougars are not comfortable around their kills or raising kittens&nbsp;... A lot of times a big cougar will kill a wolf, but the pack phenomenon changes the table."
* North American cougar  Kerr, 1792: includes the previous subspecies and synonyms ''arundivaga'', ''aztecus'', ''browni'', ''californica'', ''floridana'', ''hippolestes'', ''improcera'', ''kaibabensis'', ''mayensis'', ''missoulensis'', ''olympus'', ''oregonensis'', ''schorgeri'', ''stanleyana'', ''vancouverensis'', and ''youngi''
The term "black panther" is used colloquially to refer to melanistic individuals of other species, particularly jaguars and leopards.
The Vancouver Island marmot, an endangered species endemic to one region of dense cougar population, has seen decreased numbers due to cougar and gray wolf predation.
Lightly populated New Mexico reported an attack in 2008, the first there since 1974.
Cougars have large paws and proportionally the largest hind legs in the cat family.
Texas is the only state in the United States with a viable population of cougars that does not protect that population in some way.
Only the Florida panther showed variation, often preferring feral hogs and armadillos.
For example, multiple dogs have been attacked and killed, sometimes while with the owner.
Currently, it ranges across most western American states, the Canadian provinces of Alberta, Saskatchewan and British Columbia, and the Canadian territory of Yukon.
Other species such as the bighorn and Dall's sheep, horse, fallow deer, caribou, mountain goat, coyote, pronghorn, and domestic livestock such as cattle and sheep are also primary food bases in many areas.
Less common Portuguese terms are ''onça-parda'' (brown ''onça'', in distinction of the black-spotted yellow one, ''onça-pintada'', the jaguar) or ''leão-baio'' (lit.
Though capable of sprinting, the cougar is typically an ambush predator.
The sky and thunder god of the Inca, Viracocha, has been associated with the animal.
Taxonomic research on felids remains partial, and much of what is known about their evolutionary history is based on mitochondrial DNA analysis, as cats are poorly represented in the fossil record, and significant confidence intervals exist with suggested dates.
In both cases, sheep were the most frequently attacked.
Standing still may cause the cougar to consider a person easy prey.
Secretive and largely solitary by nature, the cougar is properly considered both nocturnal and crepuscular, although there are daytime sightings.
Until the late 1980s, as many as 32 subspecies were recorded; genetic study of mitochondrial DNA found many of these are too similar to be recognized as distinct at a molecular level.
Of this length,  is comprised by the tail.
A current form in Brazil is ''suçuarana''.
With its vast range across the length of the Americas, ''P.
Only females are involved in parenting.
It is the second-heaviest cat in the New World, after the jaguar.
Infants are spotted and born with blue eyes and rings on their tails; juveniles are pale, and dark spots remain on their flanks.
noted low microsatellite variation in the Florida panther, possibly due to inbreeding; responding to the research, one conservation team suggests, "the degree to which the scientific community has accepted the use of genetics in puma taxonomy is not resolved at this time."
Females typically weigh between 29 and 64&nbsp;kg (64 and 141&nbsp;lb), averaging 42&nbsp;kg (93&nbsp;lb).
Marcgrave's rendering was reproduced by his associate, Dutch naturalist Willem Piso, in 1648.
Remedial hunting enables younger males to enter the former territories of the older animals.
Breeding populations have moved east into the far western parts of the Dakotas, Nebraska, and Oklahoma.
Its preferred habitats include precipitous canyons, escarpments, rim rocks, and dense brush.
Its range spans 110 degrees of latitude, from northern Yukon in Canada to the southern Andes.
In the 17th century, German naturalist Georg Marcgrave named the cat the ''cuguacu ara''.
Most did not reach adulthood.
Kitten survival rates are just over one per litter.
The Quebec wildlife services (known locally as MRNF) also considers cougar to be present in the province as a threatened species after multiple DNA tests confirmed cougar hair in lynx mating sites.
concolor'' holds the Guinness record for the animal with the greatest number of names, with over 40 in English alone.
Individual territory sizes depend on terrain, vegetation, and abundance of prey.
Cougars are the largest of the small cats.
In 2009, the Michigan Department of Natural Resources confirmed a cougar sighting in Michigan's Upper Peninsula.
Research in New Mexico has shown that "males dispersed significantly farther than females, were more likely to traverse large expanses of non-cougar habitat, and were probably most responsible for nuclear gene flow between habitat patches."
The cat drags a kill to a preferred spot, covers it with brush, and returns to feed over a period of days.
Other eastern sightings since 2010 have occurred in locations such as Greene County, Indiana, Greenwich and Milford, Connecticut, Morgan County Pike County, and Whiteside County, Illinois, and Bourbon County, Kentucky.
They also state on their website that there is a healthy number of cougars in California.
chestnut lion), or unusually non-native ''puma'' or ''leão-da-montanha'', more common names for the animal when native to a region other than South America (especially for those who do not know that ''suçuaranas'' are found elsewhere but with a different name).
The lineages subsequently diverged in that order.
Litter size is between one and six cubs; typically two.
''Cuguacu ara'' was then adopted by English naturalist John Ray in 1693.
Females are in estrus for about 8 days of a 23-day cycle; the gestation period is approximately 91 days.
Detailed research into attacks prior to 1991 showed that 64% of all victims – and almost all fatalities – were children.
Because males disperse farther than females and compete more directly for mates and territory, they are most likely to be involved in conflict.
One male North American cougar (''P.
Conservation work in Texas is the effort of a non-profit organization, Balanced Ecology Inc (BEI), as part of their Texas Mountain Lion Conservation Project.
Chronic stress can result in low reproductive rates when in captivity as well as in the field.
The Algonquins and Ojibwe believe that the cougar lived in the underworld and was wicked, whereas it was a sacred animal among the Cherokee.
The Moche people represented the puma often in their ceramics.
* *  Another study on winter kills (November–April) in Alberta showed that ungulates accounted for greater than 99% of the cougar diet.
Fatal attacks on humans are rare, but have recently been increasing in North America as more people enter their territories.
Like all cats, it is an obligate carnivore, meaning it needs to feed exclusively on meat to survive.
Learned, individual prey recognition was observed, as some cougars rarely killed bighorn sheep, while others relied heavily on the species.
And: "All who have killed or witnessed the killing of the puma—and I have questioned scores of hunters on this point—agree that it resigns itself in this unresisting, pathetic manner to death at the hands of man.
When males encounter each other, they hiss, spit, and may engage in violent conflict if neither backs down.
Nevertheless, there is a measurable effect on the quality of deer populations by puma predation.
Each additional puma on the landscape increased predation and human-puma complaints by 5% but each additional animal killed on the landscape the previous year increased complaints by 50%, an order of magnitude higher.
A pumapard is a hybrid animal resulting from a union between a cougar and a leopard.
Its wide distribution stems from its adaptability to virtually every habitat type: it is found in all forest types, as well as in lowland and mountainous deserts.
The cougar's total breeding population is estimated at less than 50,000 by the IUCN, with a declining trend.
North America was then repopulated by a group of South American cougars.
Birds and small reptiles are sometimes preyed upon in the south, but this is rarely recorded in North America.
The largest recorded cougar, shot in 1901, weighed 105.2&nbsp;kg (232&nbsp;lb); claims of 125.2&nbsp;kg (276&nbsp;lb) and 118&nbsp;kg (260&nbsp;lb) have been reported, though they were most likely exaggerated.
The puma of the plains of South America (''P.
Between 1890 and 1990, in North America there were 53 reported, confirmed attacks on humans, resulting in 48 nonfatal injuries and 10 deaths of humans (the total is greater than 53 because some attacks had more than one victim).
Investigation in Yellowstone National Park showed that elk, followed by mule deer, were the cougar's primary targets; the prey base is shared with the park's gray wolves, with which the cougar competes for resources.
Other names include catamount (probably a contraction from "cat of the mountain"), mountain screamer, and painter.
The cougar was extirpated across much of its eastern North American range (with the exception of Florida) in the two centuries after European colonization, and faced grave threats in the remainder of its territory.
For example, a study in British Columbia observed that the population of mule deer, a favored cougar prey, was declining while the population of the less frequently preyed-upon white-tailed deer was increasing.
Adult males are around  long from nose to tail tip, and females average , with overall ranges between  nose to tail suggested for the species in general.
Hunting or relocation of the cougar may increase aggressive encounters by disrupting territories and bringing young, transient animals into conflict with established individuals.
Intensive hunting following European colonization of the Americas and the ongoing human development of cougar habitat has caused populations to drop in most parts of its historical range.
A similar hybrid in Berlin Zoo purchased from Hagenbeck was a cross between a male leopard and a female puma.
California has actively sought to protect the cat and a similar number of cougars has been suggested, between 4,000 and 6,000.
Attacks are most frequent during late spring and summer, when juvenile cougars leave their mothers and search for new territory.
They are the fourth-largest cat; adults stand about  tall at the shoulders.
This effect is attributed to the fact that inexperienced younger male pumas are most likely to approach human developments, whereas remedial hunting removes older pumas who have learned to avoid people in their established territories.
The cougar is more closely related to smaller felines, including the domestic cat (subfamily Felinae), than to any species of subfamily Pantherinae, of which only the jaguar is native to the Americas.
concolor'' has dozens of names and various references in the mythology of the indigenous Americans and in contemporary culture.
Certain taxonomic authorities have collapsed both designations into the North American cougar, with Eastern or Florida subspecies not recognized, while a subspecies designation remains recognized by some conservation scientists.
Coyotes also typically bite the throat region but do not inflict the claw marks and farmers will normally see the signature zig-zag pattern that coyotes create as they feed on the prey whereas cougars typically drag in a straight line.
One of these was purchased in 1898 by Berlin Zoo.
In nearby Sun Valley, Idaho, a cougar/wolf encounter that resulted in the death of the cougar was documented.
As of 1996, cougar hunting was prohibited in Argentina, Brazil, Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, French Guiana, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Suriname, Venezuela, and Uruguay.
The cougar is territorial and survives at low population densities.
The cougar is an ambush predator and pursues a wide variety of prey.
There have been unconfirmed sightings in Elliotsville Plantation, Maine (north of Monson); and in New Hampshire, there have been unconfirmed sightings as early as 1997.
Conservation threats to the species include persecution as a pest animal, environmental degradation and habitat fragmentation, and depletion of their prey base.
When cougars are born, they have spots, but they lose them as they grow, and by the age of 21/2 years, they will be completely gone
Small to mid-sized mammals are preferred, including large rodents such as the capybara.
A cougar's killing bite is applied to the back of the neck, head, or throat and they inflict puncture marks with their claws usually seen on the sides and underside of the prey, sometimes also shredding the prey as they hold on.
As with any predator at or near the top of its food chain, the cougar impacts the population of prey species.
c. coryi'' in research works, including those directly concerned with its conservation.
Although it is not strongly associated with water, it can swim.
In the southern portion of its range, the cougar and jaguar share overlapping territory.
* Southern South American cougar  Molina, 1782: includes the previous subspecies and synonyms ''araucanus'', ''concolor'', ''patagonica'', ''pearsoni'', and ''puma''
Regulated cougar hunting is still common in the United States and Canada, although they are protected from all hunting in the Yukon; it is permitted in every U.S. state from the Rocky Mountains to the Pacific Ocean, with the exception of California.
Statistics from the Department of Fish and Game indicate that cougar killings in California have been on the rise since the 1970s with an average of over 112 cats killed per year from 2000 to 2006 compared to six per year in the 1970s.
The Canadian federal agency called Committee on the Status of Endangered Wildlife in Canada rates its current data as "insufficient" to draw conclusions regarding the eastern cougar's survival, and says on its Web site "Despite many sightings in the past two decades from eastern Canada, there are insufficient data to evaluate the taxonomy or assign a status to this cougar."
Cougars can be almost as large as jaguars, but are less muscular and not as powerfully built; where their ranges overlap, the cougar tends to be smaller on average.
The Inca city of Cusco is reported to have been designed in the shape of a cougar, and the animal also gave its name to both Inca regions and people.
As of 1993, it is now placed in ''Puma'' along with the jaguarundi, a cat just a little more than a tenth its weight.
The size of the tooth puncture marks also helps distinguish kills made by cougars from those made by smaller predators.
Due to the expanding human population, cougar ranges increasingly overlap with areas inhabited by humans.
Preceding attacks on humans, cougars display aberrant behavior, such as activity during daylight hours, a lack of fear of humans, and stalking humans.
DNA evidence has suggested its presence in eastern North America, while a consolidated map of cougar sightings shows numerous reports, from the mid-western Great Plains through to eastern Canada.
They have a puma-like long body (proportional to the limbs, but nevertheless shorter than either parent), but short legs.
Following the research, the canonical ''Mammal Species of the World'' (3rded.)
Permits are issued when owners can prove property damage on their livestock or pets.
Born blind, cubs are completely dependent on their mother at first, and begin to be weaned at around three months of age.
In Nevada in 1992, cougars were confirmed to have killed 9 calves, 1 horse, 4 foals, 5 goats, 318 sheep and 400 lambs.
The grace and power of the cougar have been widely admired in the cultures of the indigenous peoples of the Americas.
c. couguar''), named Scratch, was two months short of his 30th birthday when he died in 2007.
The larger front feet and claws are adaptations to clutching prey.
In the United States, very large ranges have been reported in Texas and the Black Hills of the northern Great Plains, in excess of 775&nbsp;km2 (300&nbsp;sq&nbsp;mi).
It is still regularly listed as subspecies ''P.
recognizes six subspecies, five of which are solely found in Latin America:
Although cougars can kill coyotes, the latter have been documented attempting to prey on cougar cubs.
Males typically weigh 53 to 100&nbsp;kg (115 to 220&nbsp;lb), averaging 62&nbsp;kg (137&nbsp;lb).
Females reach sexual maturity between one-and-a-half to three years of age.
It has five retractable claws on its forepaws (one a dewclaw) and four on its hind paws.
Those reported grew to only half the size of the parents.
Children are at greatest risk of attack, and least likely to survive an encounter.
The family Felidae is believed to have originated in Asia about 11 million years ago.
In the United States east of the Mississippi River, the only unequivocally known cougar population is the Florida panther.
It also hunts species as small as insects and rodents.
The coat is variously described as sandy, tawny or greyish with brown, chestnut or "faded" rosettes.
On average, adult male cougars in British Columbia weigh 56.7&nbsp;kg (125&nbsp;lb) and adult females 45.4&nbsp;kg (100&nbsp;lb), though several male cougars in British Columbia weighed between 86.4 and 95.5&nbsp;kg (190 to 210&nbsp;lb).
Exaggerating the threat to the animal through intense eye contact, loud shouting, and any other action to appear larger and more menacing, may make the animal retreat.
Its powerful forequarters, neck, and jaw serve to grasp and hold large prey.
Besides the jaguar, the cougar is on average larger than all felids apart from lions and tigers.
Compared to "big cats", cougars are often silent with minimal communication through vocalizations outside of the mother-offspring relationship.
* Costa Rican cougar  Merriam, 1901
People in rural regions often refer to both the cougar and  the jaguar as simply ''gata'' (she-cat), and outside of the Amazon, both are colloquially referred to as simply ''onça'' by many people (that is also a name for the leopard in Angola).
Ungulates accounted for only 35% of prey items in one survey, about half that of North America.
The cougar has the largest range of any wild land animal in the Americas.
concolor cabrerae'', called the Argentine cougar by North Americans) is noted for its extreme unwillingness to attack humans.
In Oregon, a healthy population of 5,000 was reported in 2006, exceeding a target of 3,000.
In Pacific Rim National Park Reserve, scat samples showed raccoons to make up 28% of the cougar's diet, harbor seals and blacktail deer 24% each, North American river otters 10%, California sea lion 7%, and American mink 4%; the remaining 3% were unidentified.
The '''cougar''' (''Puma concolor''), also commonly known as the '''mountain lion''', '''puma''', '''panther''',  or '''catamount''', is a large felid of the subfamily Felinae native to the Americas.
DNA tests were consistent with cougars from the Black Hills of South Dakota.
A high level of genetic similarity has been found among North American cougar populations, suggesting they are all fairly recent descendants of a small ancestral group.
As few as one to four new animals entering a population per decade markedly increases persistence, foregrounding the importance of habitat corridors.
The effect had a dose-response relationship with very heavy (100% removal of adult puma) remedial hunting leading to a 150% – 340% increase in livestock and human conflicts.
During the early years of ranching, cougars were considered on par with wolves in destructiveness.
This uncertainty has been recognized by Canadian authorities.
Male ranges may include or overlap with those of females but, at least where studied, not with those of other males, which serves to reduce conflict between cougars.
Currently, it is referred to as "puma" by most scientists and by the populations in 21 of the 23 countries in the Americas where "puma" is the common name in Spanish or Portuguese.
A survey of North America research found 68% of prey items were ungulates, especially deer.
There have been widely debated reports of possible recolonization of eastern North America.
The coat is typically tawny, but ranges to silvery-grey or reddish, with lighter patches on the underbody, including the jaws, chin, and throat.
Not all of their prey is listed here due to their large range.
Scrape marks, urine, and feces are used to mark territory and attract mates.
