:#Counterintelligence Force Protection Source Operations  (CFSO) are human source operations, conducted abroad that are intended to fill the existing gap in national level coverage in protecting a field station or force from terrorism and espionage.
As espionage became more widely used, it became imperative to expand the role of existing police and internal security forces into a role of detecting and countering foreign spies.
Do not give the agent material, attractive to the other service, but that they might realize he could not have obtained on his own.
This is in part due to the fact that many terrorist groups, whose members “often mistrust and fight among each other, disagree, and vary in conviction.”, are not as internally cohesive as foreign intelligence services, potentially leaving them more vulnerable to both deception and manipulation.
Enough information can ordinarily be obtained in one or two sessions with the candidate 
The unwitting double agent is an extremely rare bird.
Ironically, he told them of suspicious actions by Robert Hanssen, which were not taken seriously at the time.
:Defects and tells B all he knows (defector)
:Actually is recruited by B and sends false information to C
:The A recruit, a citizen of C, volunteers to B
:#interviewees (individuals contacted in the course of an investigation)
In any event, the significant information that he is withholding, in compliance with A's orders, is the fact that his offer is being made at A's instigation.
The best security system in the world cannot provide an adequate defense against it because the technique involves people.
It is vital that double agents be run within the framework of their own materials—the information which they themselves supply.
In this situation the necessity of assessing the candidate conflicts also with the preservation of security, particularly if the officer approached is in covert status.
Depending on whether the operation is being run in one's own country, an allied country, or hostile territory, the case officer needs to know the relevant laws.
In many governments, the responsibility for protecting these things is split.
Offensive counterespionage is the most powerful tool for finding penetrators and neutralizing them, but it is not the only tool.
:#Developing, maintaining, and disseminating multidiscipline threat data and intelligence files on organizations, locations, and individuals of CI interest.
This "Ease of accomplishment" further reinforces his resolve.
DND further makes the useful clarification,
Wisner emphasized his own, and Dulles', views that the best defense against foreign attacks on, or infiltration of, intelligence services is active measures against those hostile services.
If he is skillful and well trained, he can do valuable work by exploiting the weaknesses of others: all intelligence officers of any service, despite their training, have some weaknesses.
The provocation might be aimed at identifying members of the other service, at diverting it to less important objectives, at tying up or wasting its assets and facilities, at sowing dissension within its ranks, at inserting false data into its files to mislead it, at building up in it a tainted file for a specific purpose, at forcing it to surface an activity it wanted to keep hidden, or at bringing public discredit on it, making it look like an organization of idiots.
In some circumstances, arrest may be a first step, in which the prisoner is given the choice of cooperating, or facing severe consequence up to and including a death sentence for espionage.
Those who are "Stressed out" want to confess.
Operations against a FIS might be against one's own nation, or another friendly nation.
&ndash; He finds that it is easy to go around security safeguards (he is able to solve that problem).
See Motives for spying for specific examples.
If the agent reports a crisis with his service, do not take it at face value; always look for the plot within a plot, but keep perspective.
In the United States, there is a very careful line drawn between intelligence and law enforcement.
While it is possible such an individual created a romanticized fantasy of democracy, it is more likely that he is saying what he thinks the CI officer wants to hear.
At the same time, use judgment to keep him motivated.
Can you control his communications both ways?
Opposition might indeed be a country, but it could be a transnational group or an internal insurgent group.
The potential for multiple turnings of agents and perhaps worse, the turning of one’s own intelligence officers (especially those working within counterintelligence itself), poses a serious risk to any intelligence service wishing to employ these techniques.
They have above-average intelligence.
CNI, which reports directly to the Prime Minister, is staffed principally by which is subordinated directly to the Prime Minister’s office.
A person such as a clerk or courier, who photographs many documents but is not really in a position to explore enemy thinking, is more generically an asset.
News reports indicate that in hindsight, red flags were flying but not noticed.
:#Physical security
Due to its success, the Government Committee on Intelligence, with support from Richard Haldane and Winston Churchill, established the Secret Service Bureau in 1909 as a joint initiative of the Admiralty, the War Office and the Foreign Office to control secret intelligence operations in the UK and overseas, particularly concentrating on the activities of the Imperial German Government.
::Provides disinformation from A to B via X
Any effort that does not start with a sympathetic person will take a long-term commitment, and creative thinking to overcome the defenses of someone who knows he is a counterintelligence target and also knows counterintelligence techniques.
Those wanting to reverse their role aren't confessing, they're negotiating.
Physical control of the double is likely only with agents captured in war.
They recognized American military personnel were billeted at Khobar Towers in the fall of 1994, and began surveillance of the facility, and continued to plan, in June 1995.
'''False flag double agent'''
The intelligence priority sometimes comes into conflict with the instincts of one's own law enforcement organizations, especially when the foreign threat combines foreign personnel with citizens of one's country.
Volunteers who are “warmly welcomed” do not take into consideration the fact that they are despised by hostile intelligence agents.
&ndash; After a relationship with espionage activity and HOIS develops, the process becomes much more bearable, espionage continues  (even flourishes).
Where appropriate, use a polygraph or newer techniques for detecting emotional stress.
Information on capabilities comes indirectly, from the level of technology and manufacturing quality with the country-specific equipment with which he was provided.
Many British journalists find that this system is used fairly, although there will always be arguments.
He might be retired and given an advisory position where he handles no secrets, but might be useful as an occasional reference.
'''Passive Provocateur'''
This is often called '''counterespionage''': measures taken to detect enemy espionage or physical attacks against friendly intelligence services, prevent damage and information loss, and, where possible, to turn the attempt back against its originator.
A double agent is a person who engages in clandestine activity for two intelligence or security services (or more in joint operations), who provides information about one or about each to the other, and who wittingly withholds significant information from one on the instructions of the other or is unwittingly manipulated by one so that significant facts are withheld from the adversary.
Successes such as the British Double Cross System or the German Operation North Pole show that these types of operations are indeed feasible.
If he lacks stayability he may still be useful, but the operation must then be planned for short range.
This may be the reason that triple-agent operations appear not to have been undertaken by U.S. counterintelligence in some espionage cases that have come to light in recent years, particularly among those involving high-level penetrations.
It created an antenna in Paris run by Pyotr Rachkovsky to monitor their activities.
It might want to tie up the facilities of the opposition.
In modern practice, several missions are associated with counterintelligence from the national to the field level.
:#Operations security (OPSEC)
Deception in operations security
Although the arrest and prosecution of Aldrich Ames of the CIA and Robert Hanssen of the FBI, both of whom were senior counterintelligence officers in their respective agencies who volunteered to spy for the Russians, hardly qualifies as conclusive evidence that triple-agent operations were not attempted throughout the community writ large, these two cases suggest that neutralization operations may be the preferred method of handling adversary double agent operations vice the more aggressive exploitation of these potential triple-agent sources.
:*the officer's own inferences from his story and behavior.
Indications of adversary trust can be found in the level of the communications system given him, his length of service, the seniority of the adversary case officer, the nature and level of requirements, and the kind and extent of training provided.
In US doctrine, although not necessarily that of other countries, CI is now seen as primarily a counter to FIS HUMINT.
They are ambitious only in a short range sense: they want much and they want it now.
In the specific context of counterintelligence, note that Peter Wright, a former senior member of the Security Service who left their service without his pension, moved to Australia before publishing his book Spycatcher.
They are good verbalizers—sometimes in two or more languages
Offensive counterintelligence seeks to damage the long-term capability of the adversary.
Risk management must constantly reflect those assessments, since effective intelligence operations are often risk-taking.
It makes sense, therefore, to monitor trusted personnel for risks in these areas, such as financial stress, extreme political views, potential vulnerabilities for blackmail, and excessive need for approval or intolerance of criticism.
Its first director was Captain Sir George Mansfield Smith-Cumming alias "C".
For the first time, governments had access to a peace-time, centralized independent intelligence and counterintelligence bureaucracy with indexed registries and defined procedures, as opposed to the more ad hoc methods used previously.
Other countries also deal with the proper organization of defenses against FIS, often with separate services with no common authority below the head of government.
A double agent may serve as a means through which a provocation can be mounted against a person, an organization, an intelligence or security service, or any affiliated group to induce action to its own disadvantage.
Terrorists on the other hand, although they engage in deception as a function of security appear to be more prone to manipulation or deception by a well-placed adversary than are foreign intelligence services.
For example, while offensive counterintelligence is a mission of the US CIA's National Clandestine Service, defensive counterintelligence is a mission of the U.S.
:Offers his communications with A to B, so B may gain operational data about A and send disinformation to A
The agent also could make deliberate and subtle changes in his keying, to alert his side that he had been turned.
The latter was headed by Sir Vernon Kell and was originally aimed at calming public fears of large scale German espionage.
Personnel in sensitive positions, who have difficulty getting along with peers, may become risks for being compromised with an approach based on ego.
A creative agent can tell his case office, even if he had not been tripled, that he had been loyal all along, and the case officer would, at best, be revealed as a fool.
Even while taking calculated risks, the services need to mitigate risk with appropriate countermeasures.
Rather than confiscating payments to him, you might deposit them in a third-country bank account of which he is aware, and that he can access on termination.
Other than for the most important of agents, a service is not apt to invent new communications techniques, either for hard-copy passed by dead drop or courier, or for electronic transmission.
This term combines two concepts—his ability to maintain access to the counterintelligence target for the foreseeable future, and his psychological stamina under the constant (and sometimes steadily increasing) pressure of the double agent's role.
Briefings could then be used to familiarize supported commands with the nature of the multidiscipline threat posed against the command or activity.
The full scope of US military counterintelligence doctrine has been moved to a classified publication, Joint Publication (JP) 2-01.2, ''Counterintelligence and Human Intelligence Support to Joint Operations''.
If the requests all turn out to be for information that service B could not use against A, and this becomes a pattern, service A may have realized their agent has been turned.
Their reliability as agents is largely determined by the extent to which the case officer's instructions coincide with what they consider their own best interests.
While clandestine HUMINT sources can give the greatest insight into the adversary's thinking, they may also be most vulnerable to the adversary's attacks on one's own organization.
Modern tactics of espionage and dedicated government intelligence agencies were developed over the course of the late 19th century.
The target service (A) inevitably exercises some control over the double agent, if only in his performance of the tasks that it assigns to him.
Before even considering double agent operations, a service has to consider its own resources.
:#"Security intelligence  (''renseignement de sécurité'') means intelligence on the identity, capabilities and intentions of hostile intelligence services, organizations or individuals, who are or may be engaged in espionage, sabotage, subversion, terrorist activities, organized crime or other criminal activities."
Many detected and doubled agents degenerate into what are sometimes called "piston agents" or "mailmen," who change their attitudes with their visas as they shunt from side to side.
Sometimes, the preventive and neutralization tasks overlap, as in the case of Earl Edwin Pitts.
CI roles against Intelligence Collection Disciplines, 1995 doctrine
::operates in place (Agent doubled in place) and continues to tell B about A
"Avoid interference."
It may be more difficult to determine the reason why the agent presented himself than to establish who he is and what service he represents, because motivation is a complex of mental and emotional drives.
All kinds of mechanisms have been used to mount provocation operations; the double agent is only one of them.
A concern with triple agents, of course, is if they have changed loyalties twice, why not a third or even more times?
Depending on the country, there can be various mixtures of civilian and military in foreign operations.
Full knowledge of the agent's past (and especially of any prior intelligence associations), a solid grasp of his behavior pattern (both as an individual and as a member of a national grouping), and rapport in the relationship with him.
The Soviet operational officer, having seen a great deal of the ugly face of communism, very frequently feels the utmost repulsion to those who sell themselves to it willingly.
Do not, however, improve his intelligence collection skills.
::B actually gets disinformation about A's operational techniques
In such a situation, the other side may expose additional resources either to support the agent or to provide alternate means of collection.
At one point, the counterintelligence unit operated quite autonomously, under the direction of James Jesus Angleton.
This may not be purely a matter of his assignment; Oleg Penkovsky had social ties to high-ranking generals.
Another special case is a "deep cover" or "sleeper" mole, who may enter a service, possibly at a young age, but definitely not reporting or doing anything that would attract suspicion, until reaching a senior position.
What should you do if the joint service(s) change their priorities?
As mentioned above, after the fallout from the Dreyfus Affair in France, responsibility for military counter-espionage was passed in 1899 to the Sûreté générale—an agency originally responsible for order enforcement and public safety—and overseen by the Ministry of the Interior.
Force protection, for forces deployed in host countries, occupation duty, and even at home, may not be supported sufficiently by a national-level counterterrorism organization alone.
The last thing you want to do is leave an angry agent in place, in a hostile service.
:Starts in A and is actually loyal to A
The initial assessment comes from friendly debriefing or interview.
It can be informative to leave such things as luxury catalogs where the agent can see them, and observe if he reacts with desire, repugnance, or disbelief.
Manipulating an intelligence professional, himself trained in counterintelligence, is no easy task, unless he is already predisposed toward the opposing side.
Anomalies might simply show that an especially creative analyst has a trained intuition possible connections, and is trying to research them.
Characteristics of sociopaths
This also applies to imaging on aircraft and UAVs, although the more direct expedient of shooting them down, or attacking their launch and support area, is an option in wartime.
T, but only as a double."
:#defectors and enemy prisoners of war (EPW)
Subversion, treason, and leaks expose our vulnerabilities, our governmental and commercial secrets, and our intelligence sources and methods.
However, this process can be quite convoluted and fraught with uncertainty and suspicion.
If it can lead a national adversary into putting large resources into protecting a nonexistent threat, or if it can lead terrorists to assume that all of their "sleeper" agents in a country have become unreliable and must be replaced (and possibly killed as security risks), there is a greater level of success than can be seen from defensive operations alone, To carry out offensive counterintelligence, however, the service must do more than detect; it must manipulate persons associated with the adversary.
Both for protecting your service and yourself, keep careful notes about who approved the release.
Complexity goes up astronomically when the service cannot put physical controls on its doubles, as did the Double Cross System in World War II.
Without revealing the penetration, cross-check the information from the agents, including technical analysis of documents and equipment, surveillance, and further research into verifying the agent's story (i.e., "legend" in tradecraft) While  "name traces cannot be run on every person mentioned by the agent, do not be stingy with them on persons who have familial, emotional, or business ties with him" in verifying his legend.
:Starts out working for B
Teaching him resistance to interrogation may improve his security, but it also may make his service suspicious if his manner, to them, changes.
Another result of lengthy prior clandestine service is that the agent may be hard to control in most operations the case officer's superior training and experience give him so decided an edge over the agent that recognition of this superiority makes the agent more tractable.
The effects of years of clandestine association with the adversary are deep and subtle; the Service B case officer working with a double agent of service A is characterized by an ethnicity or religion may find those bonds run deep, even if the agent hates the government of A.
Force protection is defined to be a defense against deliberate attack, not accidents or natural disasters.
Such "side-commo" enables A to keep in full touch while sending through the divulged communications channel only messages meant for adversary eyes.
Volunteers and walk-ins are tricky customers, and the possibility of provocation is always present.
The double agent channel can be used by the controlling service to insert data into the mechanisms of the other service with a number of possible objectives—for example, to detect its activities in some field.
For other mission areas, we will examine collection, analysis, dissemination practices, and other intelligence activities and will recommend improvements, best practices, and common standards.
If a double agent wants to come home to Service A, how can he offer a better way to redeem himself than recruiting the Service B case officer that was running his double agent case, essentially redoubling the direction of the operation?
A rare agent may actually understand the thinking of the highest levels of government policy.
This is a delicate balance.
A key background to this development was the Great Game, a period denoting the strategic rivalry and conflict that existed between the British Empire and the Russian Empire throughout Central Asia.
In March 1996, Saudi Arabian border guards arrested a Hizballah member attempting plastic explosive into the country, leading to the arrest of two more Hizballah members.
Let the other service solve&mdash;or not solve&mdash;agent problems in their usual manner.
"The Hizballah operatives believed to have conducted this attack began intelligence collection and planning activities in 1993.
"Mirror-read" Constantly think about the operation as if you were in the opposing service.
Offensive counterespionage (and counterterrorism) is done one of two ways, either by manipulating the adversary (FIS or terrorist) in some manner or by disrupting the adversary’s normal operations.
From the point of view of the double agent operation, here are their key traits:
The following principles apply to the handling of all double agent operations in varying degrees.
with their diplomatic status or exploit them as an unwitting channel for deception, or turn them into witting double agents.
In the World War II Double Cross System, another way the British controllers (i.e., service B in this example) kept the Nazis believing in their agent, was that the British let true information flow, but too late for the Germans to act on it.
According to a press report about Project Slammer and Congressional oversight of counterespionage, one fairly basic function is observing one's own personnel for behavior that either suggests that they could be targets for foreign HUMINT, or may already have been subverted.
The discovery of an adversary intelligence officer who has succeeded in penetrating one’s own organization offers the penetrated intelligence service the possibility of “turning” this officer in order to use him as a “double agent”.
as a result, the National Anti-Terrorism Coordination Center was created.
Any service B controlling, or believing it controls, a double agent, must constantly evaluate the information that agent is providing on service A.
For predictive purposes the most important clue imbedded in the origins of an operation is the agent's original or primary affiliation, whether it was formed voluntarily or not, the length of its duration, and its intensity.
Governments try to protect three things:
But they are ground for requiring some unusually high entries on the credit side of the ledger.
Some of the overarching CI tasks are described as
"If the operation is joint, weigh, its probable effect upon the liaison relationship."
Therefore, despite the obviously very risky and extremely complex nature of double agent operations, the potentially quite lucrative intelligence windfall – the disruption or deception of an adversary service – makes them an inseparable component of exploitation operations.
:*the agent's professed reasons
Accordingly, each counterintelligence organization will validate the reliability of sources and methods that relate to the counterintelligence mission in accordance with common standards.
They are naturally clandestine and enjoy secrecy and deception for its own sake.
"Insurgent" could be a group opposing a recognized government by criminal or military means, as well as conducting clandestine intelligence and covert operations against the government in question, which could be one's own or a friendly one.
The last are often the best double agents: they get pleasure out of deceiving their comrades by their every act day after day.
:*Provocation agent
It is not always clear, under this doctrine, who is responsible for all intelligence collection threats against a military or other resource.
This mandate is a good statement of a mandate to conduct offensive counterintelligence.
Gives B access to his communications channel with A
'''Active penetrator'''
As long as the Germans found those deceptions credible, which they did, they reinforced the other locations.
The US tends to rely more on technical collection and OSINT than many other world services; the USSR regarded espionage as the most important collection technique, even when they could have used OSINT to collect the same information.
Consider the possibility of false-flag agents in such circumstances.
The case officer has to consider that the double from country A still has contact with country B.
One's own side may triple an agent, or turn even more times than that.
Think about what they are receiving from your agent, their satisfaction with it, and their perception of the agent and his capabilities.
France, for example, builds its domestic counterterror in a law enforcement framework.
:*either the agent is telling the truth
They are unusually calm and stable under stress but cannot tolerate routine or boredom
CI officers should make it comfortable for the agent to mention more base motivations: money or revenge.
The British Secret Service Bureau was founded in 1909 as the first independent and interdepartmental agency fully in control over all government counterintelligence activities.
"The security intelligence process ''should not be confused with'' the liaison conducted by members of the Canadian Forces National Investigation Service (CFNIS) for the purpose of ''obtaining criminal intelligence,'' as the collection of this type of information is within their mandate."
Even if the positive side is being run so poorly that the misguided agent is in danger of coming to the attention of local authorities whose intervention would spoil the CI aspect too, the case officer must restrain his natural impulse to button up the adversary's operation for him.
All of these actions apply to non-national threats as well as to national organizations.
In particular, counterintelligence has a significant relationship with the collection discipline of HUMINT and at least some relationship with the others.
Does the adversary trust him?
Counterintelligence and counterterrorism analyses provide strategic assessments of foreign intelligence and terrorist groups and prepare tactical options for ongoing operations and investigations.
The question why a service sometimes does this is a valid one.
Working under cover from a flat in London, Melville ran both counterintelligence and foreign intelligence operations, capitalizing on the knowledge and foreign contacts he had accumulated during his years running Special Branch.
Adding these new tools and techniques to national arsenals, the counterintelligence community will seek to manipulate foreign spies, conduct aggressive investigations, make arrests and,
He is also very likely to conceal one channel of communication with A-for example, a second secret writing system.
Aldrich Ames was in the Counterintelligence Branch of Europe Division, where he was responsible for directing the analysis of Soviet intelligence operations.
