In 2000, Cash, covered Cave's "The Mercy Seat" on the album ''American III: Solitary Man'', seemingly repaying Cave for the compliment he paid by covering Cash's "The Singer" (originally "The Folk Singer") on his ''Kicking Against the Pricks'' album.
In 2005, country singer Carrie Underwood rose to fame as the winner of the fourth season of ''American Idol'' and has since become one of the most prominent recording artists of 2006 through 2016, with worldwide sales of more than 65 million records and seven Grammy Awards.
Bob Wills was one of the first country musicians known to have added an electric guitar to his band, in 1938.
By the early 1960s, however, it was rare that a country band didn't have a drummer.
1 singles in the past four decades.
Other significant country music festivals include the Whittlesea Country Music Festival (near Melbourne) and the Mildura Country Music Festival for "independent" performers during October, and the Canberra Country Music Festival held in the national capital during November.
Attempts to combine punk and country were pioneered by Jason and the Scorchers, and in the 1980s Southern Californian cowpunk scene with bands like the Long Ryders.
Another genre of country music grew out of hardcore honky tonk with elements of Western swing and originated  north-northwest of Los Angeles in Bakersfield, California.
The September 11 attacks of 2001 and the economic recession sparked Country music back into the spotlight.
Country pop or soft pop, with roots in the countrypolitan sound, folk music, and soft rock, is a subgenre that first emerged in the 1970s.
1s and breaking her own ''Guinness Book'' record of ten.
Rockabilly was most popular with country fans in the 1950s, and 1956 could be called the year of rockabilly in country music.
Bob Wills and His Texas Playboys personified this music which has been described as "a little bit of this, and a little bit of that, a little bit of black and a little bit of white&nbsp;... just loud enough to keep you from thinking too much and to go right on ordering the whiskey."
Rock-and-roll artists got hit songs, but Western artists also got country hits.
Some alt-country songs have been crossover hits, including Ryan Adams's "When The Stars Go Blue," which charted when performed by Tim McGraw.
By the late 1960s, Western music, in particular the cowboy ballad, was in decline.
Held in Tamworth, New South Wales (country music capital of Australia), it celebrates the culture and heritage of Australian country music.
The show ''Don Messer's Jubilee'' significantly affected country music in Canada; for instance, it was the program that launched Anne Murray's career.
Reba McEntire is the only artist to amass No.
Singer-songwriter Paul Kelly, whose music style straddles folk, rock, and country, is often described as the poet laureate of Australian music.
CMC (the Country Music Channel), a 24‑hour music channel dedicated to non-stop country music, can be viewed on pay TV and features once a year the Golden Guitar Awards, CMAs and CCMAs alongside international shows such as ''The Wilkinsons'', ''The Road Hammers'', and ''Country Music Across America''.
The cancellation of the show by the public broadcaster in 1969 caused a nationwide protest, including the raising of questions in the Parliament of Canada.
The whole outlaw thing, it had nothing to do with the music, it was something that got written in an article, and the young people said, 'Well, that's pretty cool.'
In the past, country music had an extensive presence, especially on the Canadian national broadcaster, CBC Television.
1, but was kept out of the spot by the pop ballad juggernaut "Endless Love" by Diana Ross and Lionel Richie.
Singer-songwriter Unknown Hinson became famous for his appearance in the Charlotte television show ''Wild, Wild, South'', after which Hinson started his own band and toured in southern states.
She also made history by becoming the seventh woman to win Entertainer of the Year at the Academy of Country Music Awards, and the first woman in history to win the award twice, as well as twice consecutively.
One of the first Americans to perform country music abroad was George Hamilton IV.
Like the southern United States and Appalachia, all four regions are of heavy British Isles stock and rural; as such, the development of traditional music in the Maritimes somewhat mirrored the development of country music in the US South and Appalachia.
They make common use of fiddle and pedal steel guitar styles.
In 2009 country music was the most listened to rush hour radio genre during the evening commute, and second most popular in the morning commute in the United States.
The most important was the ''Grand Ole Opry'', aired starting in 1925 by WSM in Nashville and continuing to the present day.
After ''Taking the Long Way'', the band broke up for a decade (with two of its members continuing as the Court Yard Hounds) before embarking on a reunion tour in 2016.
A recent success in the Irish arena has been Crystal Swing.
Hip-hop also made its mark on country music with the emergence of country rap.
In addition to Lady Antebellum, groups such as The Quebe Sisters Band, Little Big Town, The Band Perry, Gloriana, Thompson Square, Eli Young Band, Zac Brown Band and British duo The Shires have emerged to occupy a large portion of the new country artists in the popular scene along with solo singers Kacey Musgraves and Miranda Lambert.
James Kilbane like many other Irish artists are today working closer with Nashville.
Garth Brooks ("Friends in Low Places") in particular attracted fans with his fusion of neotraditionalist country and stadium rock.
Alison Krauss sang background vocals to Marx's single "Straight from My Heart."
Notable artists associated with this genre are Luke Bryan, Jason Aldean, Blake Shelton, and Florida Georgia Line whose song "Cruise" became the best-selling country song of all time.
(A number of "classic rock" artists, especially Southern rock ones such as Charlie Daniels and Lynyrd Skynyrd, are more closely associated with the modern country music scene than that of the modern rock scene.)
Artists who typified this sound included Travis Tritt, Keith Whitley, Alan Jackson, Ricky Skaggs, Patty Loveless, Kathy Mattea, Randy Travis and The Judds.
Influenced by American country music, it has developed a distinct style, shaped by British and Irish folk ballads and Australian bush balladeers like Henry Lawson and Banjo Paterson.
In 1944, ''The Billboard'' replaced the term "hillbilly" with "folk songs and blues," and switched to "country" or "country and Western" in 1949.
WSM's 50,000-watt signal (in 1934) could often be heard across the country.
The year before, Olivia Newton-John, an Australian pop singer, won the "Best Female Country Vocal Performance" as well as the Country Music Association's most coveted award for females, "Female Vocalist of the Year".
In 1948, Arthur "Guitar Boogie" Smith achieved top ten US country chart success with his MGM Records recordings of "Guitar Boogie" and "Banjo Boogie", with the former crossing over to the US pop charts.
During the mid-1980s a group of new artists began to emerge who rejected the more polished country-pop sound that had been prominent on radio and the charts in favor of more traditional "back-to-basics" production.
Nowadays, television takes us everywhere, and country music records and sheet music sell as well in large cities as anywhere else."
In Canada it out-performed ''The Ed Sullivan Show'' broadcast from the United States and became the top-rated television show throughout much of the 1960s.
The only network dedicated to country music in Australia is the Country Music Channel owned by Foxtel.
5, 1984, a duet with Julio Iglesias), and Newton achieved success with "Queen of Hearts" (No.
As the culture of the region is western and frontier in nature, the specific genre of country and western is more popular today in the Prairies than in any other part of the country.
This strain of Australian country, with lyrics focusing on Australian subjects, is generally known as "bush music" or "bush band music".
Pioneers of a more Americanised popular country music in Australia included Tex Morton (known as "The Father of Australian Country Music") in the 1930s.
During the 1930s and 1940s, cowboy songs, or Western music, which had been recorded since the 1920s, were popularized by films made in Hollywood.
Eric Bogle's 1972 folk lament to the Gallipoli Campaign "And the Band Played Waltzing Matilda" recalled the British and Irish origins of Australian folk-country.
Many musicians performed and recorded songs in any number of styles.
Female artists such as Reba McEntire, Patty Loveless, Faith Hill, Martina McBride, Deana Carter, LeAnn Rimes, Mindy McCready, Lorrie Morgan, Shania Twain, and Mary Chapin Carpenter all released platinum-selling albums in the 1990s.
At the same time there was a lack of enthusiasm in the country sector for Nashville-produced music.
After their third album, ''Home'', was released in 2003, the band made political news in part because of lead singer Natalie Maines's comments disparaging then-President George W. Bush while the band was overseas (Maines stated that she and her bandmates were ashamed to be from the same state as Bush, who had just commenced the Iraq War a few days prior).
And Bombo Radyo Baguio has a segment on Sunday slot for Igorot, Ilocano and country music.
A scene in the movie ''O Brother, Where Art Thou?''
''Country HQ'' showcases new talent on the rise in the country music scene down under.
5, 1982) and "To All the Girls I've Loved Before" (No.
In the aftermath of the British Invasion, many desired a return to the "old values" of rock n' roll.
Country musicians began recording boogie in 1939, shortly after it had been played at Carnegie Hall, when Johnny Barfield recorded "Boogie Woogie".
Rockabilly was most popular with country fans in the 1950s, and 1956 could be called the year of rockabilly in country music.
In India, the Anglo-Indian community is well known for enjoying and performing country music.
Many country artists, such as Alan Jackson with his ballad on terrorist attacks, "Where Were You (When the World Stopped Turning)", wrote songs that celebrated the military, highlighted the gospel, and rearranged home values over wealth.
During the mid-1950s a new style of country music became popular, eventually to be referred to as rockabilly.
It is also thought that the popularity of bro-country helped country music to surpass classic rock as the most popular genre in America in 2012.
Also, Bon Jovi had a hit single, "Who Says You Can't Go Home", with Jennifer Nettles of Sugarland.
Sales in record stores rocketed to $250 million in 1981; by 1984, 900 radio stations began programming country or neocountry pop full-time.
In 2008, Taylor Swift released her second studio album, ''Fearless'', which made her the second-longest Number One charted on Billboard 200 and the second best-selling album (just behind Adele's ''21'') within the past 5 years.
By the end of the decade, however, at least one line dance choreographer complained that good country line dance music was no longer being released.
Kid Rock's collaboration with Sheryl Crow, "Picture," was a major crossover hit in 2001 and began Kid Rock's transition from hard rock to a country-rock hybrid that would later produce another major crossover hit, 2008's "All Summer Long."
These "honky tonk" songs associated barrooms, were performed by the likes of Ernest Tubb, Kitty Wells (the first major female country solo singer), Ted Daffan, Floyd Tillman, and the Maddox Brothers and Rose, Lefty Frizzell and Hank Williams, would later be called "traditional" country.
Blues modes have been used extensively throughout its recorded history.
Also rising in the late 2000s and early 2010s was the insertion of rap and spoken-word elements into country songs; artists such as Cowboy Troy and Colt Ford have focused almost exclusively on country rap (also known as hick hop) while other, more mainstream artists (such as Big & Rich and Jason Aldean) have used it on occasion.
And started listening."
Celtic traditional music developed in Atlantic Canada in the form of Scottish, Acadian and Irish folk music popular amongst Irish, French and Scottish immigrants to Canada's Atlantic Provinces (Newfoundland, Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, and Prince Edward Island).
Webb Pierce was the top-charting country artist of the 1950s, with 13 of his singles spending 113 weeks at number one.
During World War II, many of Buddy Williams recording sessions were done whilst on leave from the Army.
Another type of stripped-down and raw music with a variety of moods and a basic ensemble of guitar, bass, dobro or steel guitar (and later) drums became popular, especially among poor whites in Texas and Oklahoma.
Historians have also noted the influence of the less-known Johnson City sessions of 1928 and 1929, and the Knoxville sessions of 1929 and 1930.
It ended with "Till We Meet Again".
Fourth generation (1970s–1980s) music included outlaw country with roots in the Bakersfield sound, and country pop with roots in the countrypolitan, folk music and soft rock.
Vernon Dalhart was the first country singer to have a nationwide hit in May 1924 with "Wreck of the Old 97".
In the United States, Olivia Newton-John, Sherrié Austin and Keith Urban have attained great success.
Williams' influence in particular would prove to be enormous, inspiring many of the pioneers of rock and roll, such as Elvis Presley and Jerry Lee Lewis, as well as Chuck Berry and Ike Turner, while providing a framework for emerging honky tonk talents like George Jones.
No other area of the country embraces all aspects of the culture, from two-step dancing, to the cowboy dress, to rodeos, to the music itself, like the Prairies do.
The move of country music toward neotraditional styles led to a marked decline in country/pop crossovers in the late 1980s, and only one song in that period—Roy Orbison's "You Got It", from 1989—made the top 10 of both the ''Billboard'' Hot Country Singles" and Hot 100 charts, due largely to a revival of interest in Orbison after his sudden death.
Dusty recorded and released his one-hundredth album in the year 2000 and was given the honour of singing "Waltzing Matilda" in the closing ceremony of the Sydney 2000 Olympic Games.
Newton's "Queen of Hearts" almost reached No.
Some record companies in Atlanta turned away early artists such as Fiddlin' John Carson, while others realized that his music would fit perfectly with the lifestyle of the country's agricultural workers.
Teen sitcoms also have influenced modern country music; in 2008, actress Jennette McCurdy (best known as the sidekick Sam on the teen sitcom ''iCarly'') released her first single, "So Close", following that with the single "Generation Love" in 2011.
Most of the best-selling country songs of this era however were in the country pop genre, such as those by Lady Antebellum, Florida Georgia Line, and Taylor Swift.
As with most sudden trends, however, by 1984 sales had dropped below 1979 figures.
Slim Dusty (1927–2003) was known as the "King of Australian Country Music" and helped to popularise the Australian bush ballad.
What resulted was a crossbred genre known as country rock.
In Brazil, a musical genre known as música sertaneja, a very popular genre of music in Brazil, is very similar to American country music, sharing the music's rich history of development in the countryside.
The "slip note" piano style of session musician Floyd Cramer was an important component of this style.
Outside of the United States, Canada has the largest country music fan and artist base, something that is to be expected given the two countries' proximity and cultural parallels.
In 1952, Dawson began a radio show and went on to national stardom as a singing cowboy of radio, TV and film.
Wills was one of the first country musicians known to have added an electric guitar to his band, in 1938.
The late 1960s in American music produced a unique blend as a result of traditionalist backlash within separate genres.
Patsy Montana opened the door for female artists with her history-making song "I Want To Be a Cowboy's Sweetheart".
Prior to these, pioneer settlers, in the Great Smoky Mountains region, had developed a rich musical heritage.
The term ''country music'' is used today to describe many styles and subgenres.
Only a handful of folk artists, such as Burl Ives, John Denver and Canadian musician Gordon Lightfoot, would cross over into country music after the folk revival died out.
Cash and Presley placed songs in the top 5 in 1958 with No.
The trio formed in 2006, when singer-songwriters Hillary Scott (daughter of country star LINDA DAVIS) and Charles Kelley (brother of pop singer JOSH KELLEY) met in Nashville and began writing together.
A decade later (1948) Arthur Smith achieved top 10 US country chart success with his MGM Records recording of "Guitar Boogie", which crossed over to the US pop chart, introducing many people to the potential of the electric guitar.
His successful career spanned almost six decades, and his 1957 hit "A Pub with No Beer" was the biggest-selling record by an Australian to that time, and with over seven million record sales in Australia he is the most successful artist in Australian musical history.
He was the first country musician to perform in the Soviet Union; he also toured in Australia and the Middle East.
But he also said, "My stuff is just hopped-up country."
Chad Morgan, who began recording in the 1950s, has represented a vaudeville style of comic Australian country; Frank Ifield achieved considerable success in the early 1960s, especially in the UK Singles Charts, and Reg Lindsay was one of the first Australians to perform at Nashville's Grand Ole Opry in 1974.
Spade Cooley and Tex Williams also had very popular bands and appeared in films.
In South America, on the last weekend of September, the yearly San Pedro Country Music Festival takes place in the town of San Pedro, Argentina.
Columbia Records began issuing records with "hillbilly" music (series 15000D "Old Familiar Tunes") as early as 1924.
It takes its roots from the southeastern genre of United States, such as folk music (especially Appalachian folk music), and blues music.
Hank Snow, Wilf Carter (also known as Montana Slim), and Anne Murray are the three most notable.
The first American country music video cable channel was The Nashville Network, launched in the early 1980s.
The Dixie Chicks became one of the most popular country bands in the 1990s and early 2000s.
lang, Gordon Lightfoot, Buffy Sainte-Marie, George Canyon, Blue Rodeo, Tommy Hunter, Rita MacNeil, Stompin' Tom Connors, Stan Rogers, Ronnie Prophet, Carroll Baker, The Rankin Family, Ian Tyson, Johnny Reid, Paul Brandt, Jason McCoy, George Fox, Carolyn Dawn Johnson, Hank Snow, Don Messer, Wilf Carter, Michelle Wright, Terri Clark, Prairie Oyster, Family Brown, Johnny Mooring, Marg Osburne, Doc Walker, Emerson Drive, The Wilkinsons, Corb Lund and the Hurtin' Albertans, Crystal Shawanda, Dean Brody, Shane Yellowbird, Gord Bamford, Chad Brownlee, The Road Hammers, Rowdy Spurs and The Higgins.
The Eagles would become the most successful of these country rock acts, and their compilation album ''Their Greatest Hits (1971–1975)'' remains the second best-selling album of all time in the US with 29 million copies sold.
Although radio stations devoted to country are among the most popular in other Anglophone nations, none of the top 10 most-listened-to stations in the UK are country stations, and national broadcaster BBC Radio does not offer a country station.
Certain areas often are viewed as embracing one strain or the other more openly.
Leading practitioners of this style were Buck Owens, Merle Haggard, Tommy Collins, Gary Allan, and Wynn Stewart, each of whom had his own style.
Country music was "introduced to the world as a Southern phenomenon."
The flip side of the record was "Lonesome Road Blues", which also became very popular.
The number two, three and four songs on ''Billboard's'' charts for that year were Elvis Presley, "Heartbreak Hotel"; Johnny Cash, "I Walk the Line"; and Carl Perkins, "Blue Suede Shoes".
Other popular songs from this tradition include "The Wild Colonial Boy", "Click Go the Shears", "The Queensland Drover" and "The Dying Stockman".
One notable release from this period was The Delmore Brothers' "Freight Train Boogie", considered to be part of the combined evolution of country music and blues towards rockabilly.
French rock and roll superstar Eddy Mitchell is also very inspired by Americana and country music.
In the mid-1940s, the Grand Ole Opry did not want the Playboys' drummer to appear on stage.
This would begin a movement toward opportunities for women to have successful solo careers.
Rockabilly was an early form of rock and roll, an upbeat combination of blues and country music.
Other country boogie artists included Moon Mullican, Merrill Moore and Tennessee Ernie Ford.
Other influential bands included Blue Mountain, Whiskeytown and Ryan Adams, Blood Oranges, Bright Eyes, Lucinda Williams, and Drive-By Truckers.
Led by Reba McEntire and George Strait, many of the artists during the latter half of the 1980s drew on traditional honky-tonk, bluegrass, folk and western swing.
In 1975, author Paul Hemphill stated in the ''Saturday Evening Post'', "Country music isn't really country anymore; it is a hybrid of nearly every form of popular music in America."
As Webb Pierce put it in 1956, "Once upon a time, it was almost impossible to sell country music in a place like New York City.
The comments caused a rift between the band and the country music scene, and the band's fourth (and most recent) album, 2006's ''Taking the Long Way'', took a more rock-oriented direction; the album was commercially successful overall but largely ignored among country audiences.
Country musicians began recording boogie in 1939, shortly after it had been played at Carnegie Hall, when Johnny Barfield recorded "Boogie Woogie".
The crossover influence of Australian country is also evident in the music of successful contemporary bands The Waifs and the John Butler Trio.
Willie Nelson and Juice Newton each had two songs in the top 5 of the Billboard Hot 100 in the early eighties: Nelson charted "Always on My Mind" (No.
Other artists such as Brooks and Dunn ("Boot Scootin' Boogie") also combined conventional country with slick, rock elements, while Lorrie Morgan, Mary Chapin Carpenter, and Kathy Mattea updated neotraditionalist styles.
The origins of country music are the folk music of mostly white, working-class Americans, who blended popular songs, Irish and Celtic fiddle tunes, traditional ballads, and cowboy songs, and various musical traditions from European immigrant communities.
Many traditional country artists are present in eastern and western Canada.
The most important was the ''Grand Ole Opry'', aired starting in 1925 by WSM in Nashville and continuing to the present day.
In 2010, the group Lady Antebellum won five Grammys, including the coveted Song of the Year and Record of the Year for "Need You Now a UK No28 hit in the mainstream single chart, rare for a country song ".
Some of the popular singing cowboys from the era were Gene Autry, the Sons of the Pioneers, and Roy Rogers.
Tom Jones, by this point near the end of his peak success as a pop singer, had a string of country hits in the late 1970s and early 1980s.
The trickle of what was initially called hillbilly boogie, or okie boogie (later to be renamed country boogie), became a flood beginning in late 1945.
Relegated to the "country and Western" genre by marketing agencies, popular Western recording stars released albums to only moderate success.
In Poland an international country music festival, known as Piknik Country, has been organized in Mrągowo in Masuria since 1983.
Nashville's pop song structure became more pronounced and it morphed into what was called countrypolitan.
Underwood's debut album, ''Some Hearts'', became the best-selling solo female debut album in country music history, the fastest-selling debut country album in the history of the SoundScan era and the best-selling country album of the last 10 years, being ranked by ''Billboard'' as the #1 Country Album of the 2000–2009 decade.
The Dixie Chicks became one of the most popular country bands in the 1990s and early 2000s.
In 2006, Taylor released her first studio album, ''Taylor Swift'', which spent 275 weeks on Billboard 200, one of the longest runs of any album on that chart.
The country music scene largely kept the music of the folk revival and folk rock at a distance, despite the similarity in instrumentation and origins (see, for instance, The Byrds' negative reception during their appearance on the ''Grand Ole Opry'').
Subsequently, Cave cut a duet with Cash on a version of Hank Williams' "I'm So Lonesome I Could Cry" for Cash's ''American IV: The Man Comes Around'' album (2002).
Cliff Bruner, Moon Mullican, Milton Brown and Adolph Hofner were other early Western swing pioneers.
Another teen sitcom star, Miley Cyrus (of ''Hannah Montana''), also had a crossover hit in the late 2000s with "The Climb" and another with a duet with her father, Billy Ray Cyrus, with "Ready, Set, Don't Go."
The festival features bands from different places of Argentina, as well as international artists from Brazil, Uruguay, Chile, Peru and the United States.
East Texan Al Dexter had a hit with "Honky Tonk Blues", and seven years later "Pistol Packin' Mama".
The influence of rock music in country has become more overt during the late 2000s and early 2010s.
Waylon and I had that outlaw image going, and when it caught on at colleges and we started selling records, we were O.K.
The steel guitar entered country music as early as 1922, when Jimmie Tarlton met famed Hawaiian guitarist Frank Ferera on the West Coast.
5 by Presley "Don't/I Beg of You."
The Country Music Association undertakes various initiatives to promote country music internationally.
The songwriting tandem of Roger Cook and Roger Greenaway wrote a number of country hits, in addition to their widespread success in pop songwriting; Cook is notable for being the only Briton to be inducted into the Nashville Songwriters Hall of Fame.
Gospel music remained a popular component of country music.
During the mid-1980s, a group of new artists began to emerge who rejected the more polished country-pop sound that had been prominent on radio and the charts, in favor of more, traditional, "back-to-basics" production.
Presley acknowledged the influence of rhythm and blues artists and his style, saying "The colored folk been singin' and playin' it just the way I'm doin' it now, man for more years than I know."
From within the UK, few country musicians achieved widespread mainstream success.
''Don Messer's Jubilee'' followed a consistent format throughout its years, beginning with a tune named "Goin' to the Barndance Tonight", followed by fiddle tunes by Messer, songs from some of his "Islanders" including singers Marg Osburne and Charlie Chamberlain, the featured guest performance, and a closing hymn.
The term ''outlaw country'' is traditionally associated with Willie Nelson, Jerry Jeff Walker, Hank Williams, Jr., Merle Haggard, Waylon Jennings, Joe Ely, Steve Young, David Allan Coe, Whitey Morgan and the 78's, John Prine, Billy Joe Shaver, Gary Stewart, Townes Van Zandt, Kris Kristofferson, Michael Martin Murphey, Tompall Glaster, Steve Earle, and the later career renaissance of Johnny Cash, with a few female vocalists such as Jessi Colter, Sammi Smith, Tanya Tucker and Rosanne Cash.
In contrast, more rock-oriented country singers took more direct aim at the attacks' perpetrators; Toby Keith's "The Angry American (Courtesy of the Red, White and Blue)" threatened to "a boot in" the posterior of the enemy, while Charlie Daniels's "This Ain't No Rag, It's a Flag" promised to "hunt" the perpetrators "down like a mad dog hound."
Country instruments, including the guitar, banjo, fiddle and harmonica, create the distinctive sound of country music in Australia and accompany songs with strong storyline and memorable chorus.
It became known as honky tonk, and had its roots in Western swing and the ranchera music of Mexico and the border states.
At the 2010 Grammys, Taylor Swift was 20 and won Album of the Year for ''Fearless'', which made her the youngest artist to win this award.
Country music and western music were frequently played together on the same radio stations, hence the term ''country and western'' music.
The arrival of exceptionally talented artists coincided with new marketing strategies to engage fans, technology that more accurately tracked the popularity of country music, and a political and economic climate that focused attention on the genre.
Toby Keith began his career as a more pop-oriented country singer in the 1990s, evolving into an outlaw persona in the late 1990s with ''Pull My Chain'' and its follow-up, ''Unleashed''.
Over the past ten years country and gospel recording artist James Kilbane has reached multi-platinum success with his mix of Christian and traditional country influenced albums.
'''Country music''' is a genre of United States popular music that originated in the Southern United States in the 1920s.
depicts a similar occurrence in the same timeframe.
In 2007, Underwood won the Grammy Award for Best New Artist, becoming only the second Country artist in history (and the first in a decade) to win it.
In the process, country and western music as a genre lost most of its southwestern, ranchera, and Tejano musical influences.
At this point, country music was mainly heard on rural AM radio stations; the expansion of FM was particularly helpful to country music, which migrated to FM from the AM band as AM became overcome by talk radio (the country music stations that stayed on AM developed the classic country format for the AM audience).
Dudley is known as the father of truck driving country.
The late 1950s saw the emergence of Buddy Holly, but by the end of the decade, backlash as well as traditional artists such as Ray Price, Marty Robbins, and Johnny Horton began to shift the industry away from the rock n' roll influences of the mid-1950s.
Subsequent to the initial blending of the two polar opposite genres, other offspring soon resulted, including Southern rock, heartland rock and in more recent years, alternative country.
The year 2003 brought home - grown Indian, Bobby Cash to the forefront of the country music culture in India when he became India's first international country music artist to chart singles in Australia.
2, 1981) and "Angel of the Morning" (No.
There are more and more country music artists in France.
Popular contemporary performers of Australian country music include John Williamson (who wrote the iconic "True Blue"), Lee Kernaghan (whose hits include "Boys from the Bush" and "The Outback Club"), Gina Jeffreys, Forever Road and Sara Storer.
