Today, some Native Americans in the western United States own cattle and small ranches, and many are still employed as cowboys, especially on ranches located near Indian Reservations.
By the early 19th century, Capt.
With the expansion of the meat packing industry, the demand for beef increased significantly.
However, farmers in eastern Kansas, afraid that Longhorns would transmit cattle fever to local animals as well as trample crops, formed groups that threatened to beat or shoot cattlemen found on their lands.
The word may also have developed with influences from the English word "buck" or bucking, the behavior of young, untrained horses.
While most ''hacendados'' (ranch owners) were ethnically Spanish ''criollos'', many early ''vaqueros'' were Native Americans trained to work for the Spanish missions in caring for the mission herds.
Since the Florida cowhunter did not need a saddle horn for anchoring a lariat, many did not use Western saddles, instead using a McClellan saddle.
By the late 1860s, following the American Civil War and the expansion of the cattle industry, former soldiers from both the Union and Confederacy came west, seeking work, as did large numbers of restless white men in general.
In the 18th century, Creek, Seminole, and other Indian people moved into the depopulated areas of Florida and started herding the cattle left from the Spanish ranches.
The industry grew slowly under the reign of Kamehameha's son Liholiho (Kamehameha II).
Following the Civil War, Charles Goodnight modified the traditional English sidesaddle, creating a western-styled design.
Although there were substantial numbers of cattle on Long Island, as well as the need to herd them to and from common grazing lands on a seasonal basis, no consistent "cowboy" tradition developed amongst the cattle handlers of Long Island, who actually lived with their families in houses built on the pasture grounds.
There was also a limited market for hides, horns, hooves, and tallow in assorted manufacturing processes.
The period between 1840 and 1870 marked a mingling of cultures when English and French-descended people began to settle west of the Mississippi River and encountered the Spanish-descended people who had settled in the parts of Mexico that later became Texas and California.
It ran through present-day Oklahoma, which then was Indian Territory.
In the 18th century, the residents of Spanish Texas began to herd cattle on horseback to sell in Louisiana, both legally and illegally.
Ranching in Canada has traditionally been dominated by one province, Alberta.
In today's rodeos, men and women compete equally together only in the event of team roping, though technically women now could enter other open events.
Later, particularly after 1890, when American policy promoted "assimilation" of Indian people, some Indian boarding schools also taught ranching skills.
In 1960, one etymologist suggested that ''buckaroo'' derives, through , from the Ibibio and , meaning "white man, master, boss".
'''Cowgirls''', first defined as such in the late 19th century, had a less-well documented historical role, but in the modern world have established the ability to work at virtually identical tasks and obtained considerable respect for their achievements.
In antiquity, herding of sheep, cattle and goats was often the job of minors, and still is a task for young people in various third world cultures.
Cowboys were armed against both predators and human thieves, and often used their guns to run off people of any race who attempted to steal, or ''rustle'' cattle.
In the late 1950s, a Congolese youth subculture calling themselves the Bills based their style and outlook on Hollywood's depiction of cowboys in movies.
''Buckaroo'' first appeared in American English in 1827.
While a steer roping horse may need to be larger and weigh more in order to hold a heavy adult cow, bull or steer on a rope, a smaller, quick horse is needed for herding activities such as cutting or calf roping.
Raids into Spanish Florida by the Province of Carolina and its Native American allies, which wiped out the native population of Florida, led to the collapse of the Spanish mission and ranching systems.
As the ever-practical cowboy adapted to the modern world, the cowboy's equipment and techniques also adapted to some degree, though many classic traditions are still preserved today.
The historic American cowboy of the late 19th century arose from the ''vaquero'' traditions of northern Mexico and became a figure of special significance and legend.
From this beginning, ''vaqueros'' of mestizo heritage drove cattle from New Mexico and later Texas to Mexico City.
A modern working cowgirl wears jeans, close-fitting shirts, boots, hat, and when needed, chaps and gloves.
American style open range dryland ranching began to dominate southern Alberta (and, to a lesser extent, southwestern Saskatchewan) by the 1880s.
Snaps, used in lieu of buttons on the cowboy's shirt, allowed the cowboy to escape from a shirt snagged by the horns of steer or bull.
In order to find young calves for branding, and to sort out mature animals intended for sale, ranchers would hold a roundup, usually in the spring.
Beginning in the 1920s and continuing to the present day, Western movies popularized the cowboy lifestyle but also formed persistent stereotypes, both positive and negative.
The words "buckaroo" and ''vaquero'' are still used on occasion in the Great Basin, parts of California and, less often, in the Pacific Northwest.
However, some men were also drawn to the frontier because they were attracted to men.
Something similar occurred with the term "Apache", which in early 20th century Parisian society was a slang term for an outlaw.
After 1925, when Eastern promoters started staging indoor rodeos in places like Madison Square Garden, women were generally excluded from the men's events and many of the women's events were dropped.
George Vancouver's gift of cattle to Pai`ea Kamehameha, monarch of the Hawaiian Kingdom, had multiplied astonishingly, and were wreaking havoc throughout the countryside.
However, other cowboys became aware of the need to treat animals in a more humane fashion and modified their horse training methods, often re-learning techniques used by the ''vaqueros,'' particularly those of the ''Californio'' tradition.
On the Eastern Shore of Virginia, the "Salt Water Cowboys" are known for rounding up the feral Chincoteague Ponies from Assateague Island and driving them across Assateague Channel into pens on Chincoteague Island during the annual Pony Penning.
In a subsequent work, Jordan also noted that the influence of post-War Texas upon the whole of the frontier Western cowboy tradition was likely much less than previously thought.
Cattle and horses were introduced into Florida in the 16th century.
In many cases, different ranchers formed "associations" and grazed their cattle together on the same range.
Variations on the word "cowboy" appeared later.
He was impressed with the skill of the Mexican vaqueros, and invited several to Hawai`i in 1832 to teach the Hawaiian people how to work cattle.
The traditional Hawaiian saddle, the ''noho lio,'' and many other tools of the cowboy's trade have a distinctly Mexican/Spanish look and many Hawaiian ranching families still carry the names of the vaqueros who married Hawaiian women and made Hawai`i their home.
Styles were often adapted from the early movie industry for the rodeo.
Florida cowboys did not use lassos to herd or capture cattle.
Elsewhere, the term "cowboy" is more common.
Similar usage is seen in the United States to describe someone in the skilled trades who operates without proper training or licenses.
In the beginning there was no difference between the working cowboy and the rodeo cowboy, and in fact, the term ''working cowboy'' did not come into use until the 1950s.
Likewise, cowboys in movies were often shown fighting with American Indians.
Cowboys worked in shifts to watch the cattle 24 hours a day, herding them in the proper direction in the daytime and watching them at night to prevent stampedes and deter theft.
Florida cowboys continue to use dogs and bullwhips for controlling cattle.
Rodeo competition for women changed in the 1920s due to several factors.
The cowboy often worked in an all-male environment, particularly on cattle drives, and in the frontier west, men often significantly outnumbered women.
(The Hawaiian language has no /s/ sound, and all syllables and words must end in a vowel.)
The word cowboy also had English language roots beyond simply being a translation from Spanish.
From shortly after 1565 until the end of the 17th century, cattle ranches owned by Spanish officials and missions operated in northern Florida to supply the Spanish garrison in St. Augustine and markets in Cuba.
Although that derivation was later rejected, another possibility advanced was that "buckaroo" was a pun on ''vaquero,'' blending both Spanish and African sources.
In the same period, a number of guerilla bands operated in Westchester County, which marked the dividing line between the British and American forces.
However, in slightly different ways, both areas contributed to the evolution of the iconic American cowboy.
The largely undocumented contributions of women to the west were acknowledged in law; the western states led the United States in granting women the right to vote, beginning with Wyoming in 1869.
One writer states that cowboys were "... of two classes—those recruited from Texas and other States on the eastern slope; and Mexicans, from the south-western region..." Census records suggest that about 15% of all cowboys were of African-American ancestry—ranging from about 25% on the trail drives out of Texas, to very few in the northwest.
Other estimates suggest that in the late 19th century, one out of every three cowboys was a Mexican vaquero, and 20% may have been African-American.
Many breeds of horse make good stock horses, but the most common today in North America is the American Quarter Horse, which is a horse breed developed primarily in Texas from a combination of Thoroughbred bloodstock crossed on horses of Mustang and other Iberian horse ancestry, with influences from the Arabian horse and horses developed on the east coast, such as the Morgan horse and now-extinct breeds such as the Chickasaw and Virginia Quarter-Miler.
Large numbers of cattle lived in a semi-feral, or semi-wild state on the open range and were left to graze, mostly untended, for much of the year.
Cattle drives had to strike a balance between speed and the weight of the cattle.
In the early Wild West shows and rodeos, women competed in all events, sometimes against other women, sometimes with the men.
On average, a herd could maintain a healthy weight moving about 15 miles per day.
For example, a "drugstore cowboy" means someone who wears the clothing but does not actually sit upon anything but the stool of the drugstore soda fountain—or, in modern times, a bar stool.
In the north, overgrazing stressed the open range, leading to insufficient winter forage for the cattle and starvation, particularly during the harsh winter of 1886–1887, when hundreds of thousands of cattle died across the Northwest, leading to collapse of the cattle industry.
Later, Liholiho's brother, Kauikeaouli (Kamehameha III), visited California, then still a part of Mexico.
Regardless of ethnicity, most cowboys came from lower social classes and the pay was poor.
The Australian droving tradition was influenced by Americans in the 19th century, and as well as practices imported directly from Spain.
It is used to pull stock trailers transporting cattle and livestock from one area to another and to market.
Before the Mexican-American War in 1848, New England merchants who traveled by ship to California encountered both ''hacendados'' and ''vaqueros'', trading manufactured goods for the hides and tallow produced from vast cattle ranches.
To herd the cattle, a crew of at least 10 cowboys was needed, with three horses per cowboy.
Such youths, by their late teens, are often given responsibilities for "cowboy" work on the ranch, and ably perform work that requires a level of maturity and levelheadedness that is not generally expected of their urban peers.
The idea of horse riders who guard herds of cattle, sheep or horses is common wherever wide, open land for grazing exists.
Modern riders in "rough stock" events such as saddle bronc or bull riding may add safety equipment such as kevlar vests or a neck brace, but use of safety helmets in lieu of the cowboy hat is yet to be accepted, in spite of constant risk of injury.
The Asturian pastoral population is referred to as ''Vaqueiros de alzada.''
By 1866, cattle could be sold to northern markets for as much as $40 per head, making it potentially profitable for cattle, particularly from Texas, to be herded long distances to market.
Cowboys are included in the 2003 category, ''Support activities for animal production'', which totals 9,730 workers averaging $19,340 per annum.
This type of vacation was popularized by the 1991 movie ''City Slickers,'' starring Billy Crystal.
The Florida Cracker Horse, which is still used by some Florida cowboys, is descended from horses introduced by the Spanish.
The long history of the West in popular culture tends to define those clothed in Western clothing as cowboys or cowgirls whether they have ever been on a horse or not.
The arrival of English-speaking settlers in Texas began in 1821.
Originally, the English word "cowherd" was used to describe a cattle herder, (similar to "shepherd," a sheep herder) and often referred to a preadolescent or early adolescent boy, who usually worked on foot.
Though anti-sodomy laws were common in the Old West, they often were only selectively enforced.
Arguably, the modern rodeo competitor is much closer to being an actual cowboy, as many were actually raised on ranches and around livestock, and the rest have needed to learn livestock-handling skills on the job.
It appears to be a direct English translation of ''vaquero'', a Spanish word for an individual who managed cattle while mounted on horseback.
The "Indian Cowboy" also became a commonplace sight on the rodeo circuit.
However, these theories have been called into question by some reviewers.
Though popularly considered American, the traditional cowboy began with the Spanish tradition, which evolved further in what today is Mexico and the Southwestern United States into the ''vaquero'' of northern Mexico and the ''charro'' of the Jalisco and Michoacán regions.
The term also lent itself to the British 1980s TV sitcom, ''Cowboys''.
In Hungary, csikós guard horses and gulyás tend to cattle.
Meanwhile, ranches multiplied all over the developing West, keeping cowboy employment high, if still low-paid, but also somewhat more settled.
In some cases, extremely brutal methods were used to tame horses, and such animals tended to never be completely reliable.
Such a pace meant that it would take as long as two months to travel from a home ranch to a railhead.
"Cowboy" is sometimes used today in a derogatory sense to describe someone who is reckless or ignores potential risks, irresponsible or who heedlessly handles a sensitive or dangerous task.
On average, a single herd of cattle on a drive numbered about 3,000 head.
By the middle of the 19th century white ranchers were running large herds of cattle on the extensive open range of central and southern Florida.
Over the centuries, differences in terrain, climate and the influence of cattle-handling traditions from multiple cultures created several distinct styles of equipment, clothing and animal handling.
The traditions of Spain were transformed by the geographic, environmental and cultural circumstances of New Spain, which later became Mexico and the Southwestern United States.
By 1900, skirts split for riding astride became popular, and allowed women to compete with the men without scandalizing Victorian Era audiences by wearing men's clothing or, worse yet, bloomers.
While some individuals wore boots that reached above the knees for protection from snakes, others wore brogans.
As English-speaking traders and settlers expanded westward, English and Spanish traditions, language and culture merged to some degree.
The Florida "cowhunter" or "cracker cowboy" of the 19th and early 20th centuries was distinct from the Texas and California traditions.
Of those 9,730 workers, 3,290 are listed in the subcategory of ''Spectator sports'' which includes rodeos, circuses, and theaters needing livestock handlers.
Boys and girls are more apt to compete against one another in all events in high-school rodeos as well as O-Mok-See competition, where even boys can be seen in traditionally "women's" events such as barrel racing.
Horses, along with mules and burros, also serve as pack animals.
It was derived from ''vaca,'' meaning "cow," which came from the Latin word ''vacca.''
Corral and the resulting Earp Vendetta Ride.
While Texas contained vast herds of stray, free-ranging cattle available for free to anyone who could round them up, prior to 1865, there was little demand for beef.
By the 1890s, barbed wire fencing was also standard in the northern plains, railroads had expanded to cover most of the nation, and meat packing plants were built closer to major ranching areas, making long cattle drives from Texas to the railheads in Kansas unnecessary.
The most common motorized vehicle driven in modern ranch work is the pickup truck.
The Hawaiian style of ranching originally included capturing wild cattle by driving them into pits dug in the forest floor.
In the 19th century, most tribes in the area were dispossessed of their land and cattle and pushed south or west by white settlers and the United States government.
The traditional ''charras'' of Mexico preserve a similar tradition and ride sidesaddles today in ''charreada'' exhibitions on both sides of the border.
Once tamed somewhat by hunger and thirst, they were hauled out up a steep ramp, and tied by their horns to the horns of a tame, older steer (or ox) that knew where the paddock with food and water was located.
In some cases, the cowboy and the violent gunslinger are often associated with one another.
Cowgirls such as Fannie Sperry Steele rode the same "rough stock" and took the same risks as the men (and all while wearing a heavy split skirt that was more encumbering than men's trousers) and competed at major rodeos such as the Calgary Stampede and Cheyenne Frontier Days.
Another English word for a cowboy, ''buckaroo,'' is an anglicization of ''vaquero.''
The term "cowboy" was used during the American Revolution to describe American fighters who opposed the movement for independence.
"Cowboy" is a term common throughout the west and particularly in the Great Plains and Rocky Mountains, "Buckaroo" is used primarily in the Great Basin and California, and "cowpuncher" mostly in Texas and surrounding states.
The California vaquero or buckaroo, unlike the Texas cowboy, was considered a highly skilled worker, who usually stayed on the same ranch where he was born or had grown up and raised his own family there.
This style of cattle ranching spread throughout much of the Iberian peninsula and later, was imported to the Americas.
Some ranches also offer vacationers the opportunity to actually perform cowboy tasks by participating in cattle drives or accompanying wagon trains.
TIME Magazine referred to President George W. Bush's foreign policy as "Cowboy diplomacy", and Bush has been described in the press, particularly in Europe, as a "cowboy".
However, in the United States and the Canadian West, as well as Australia, guest ranches offer people the opportunity to ride horses and get a taste of the western life—albeit in far greater comfort.
Additional influences developed out of Texas as cattle trails were created to meet up with the railroad lines of Kansas and Nebraska, in addition to expanding ranching opportunities in the Great Plains and Rocky Mountain Front, east of the Continental Divide.
The crew also included a cook, who drove a chuck wagon, usually pulled by oxen, and a horse wrangler to take charge of the ''remuda,'' or herd of spare horses.
In the movies that followed from the early 20th century on, cowgirls expanded their roles in the popular culture and movie designers developed attractive clothing suitable for riding Western saddles.
Smaller cattle drives continued at least into the 1940s, as ranchers, prior to the development of the modern cattle truck, still needed to herd cattle to local railheads for transport to stockyards and packing plants.
The horse has to be intelligent, calm under pressure and have a certain degree of 'cow sense" -- the ability to anticipate the movement and behavior of cattle.
Such hazardous work in isolated conditions also bred a tradition of self-dependence and individualism, with great value put on personal honesty, exemplified in songs and poetry.
Some rodeo competitors, particularly women, add sequins, colors, silver and long fringes to their clothing in both a nod to tradition and showmanship.
Early photographers such as Evelyn Cameron documented the life of working ranch women and cowgirls during the late 19th and early 20th century.
The cowboy is also portrayed as a masculine ideal via images ranging from the Marlboro Man to the Village People.
Many of these items show marked regional variations.
This led to modifications in the bridling and bitting traditions used by the vaquero.
Particularly with the arrival of railroads and an increased demand for beef in the wake of the American Civil War, older traditions combined with the need to drive cattle from the ranches where they were raised to the nearest railheads, often hundreds of miles away.
The average cowboy earned approximately a dollar a day, plus food, and, when near the home ranch, a bed in the bunkhouse, usually a barracks-like building with a single open room.
Mexican traditions spread both South and North, influencing equestrian traditions from Argentina to Canada.
Claudius Smith, an outlaw identified with the Loyalist cause, was referred to as the "Cow-boy of the Ramapos" due to his penchant for stealing oxen, cattle and horses from colonists and giving them to the British.
The Florida cowhunter or cracker cowboy tradition gradually assimilated to western cowboy tradition during the 20th century (although the vaquero tradition has had little influence in Florida).
There are also cattle handlers in many other parts of the world, particularly South America and Australia, who perform work similar to the cowboy in their respective nations.
However, in spite of modern mechanization, there remain jobs, particularly those involving working cattle in rough terrain or in close quarters that are best performed by cowboys on horseback.
On western ranches today, the working cowboy is usually an adult.
On a smaller ranch with fewer cowboys—often just family members, cowboys are generalists who perform many all-around tasks; they repair fences, maintain ranch equipment, and perform other odd jobs.
They also move the livestock to different pasture locations, or herd them into corrals and onto trucks for transport.
In 1598, Don Juan de Oñate sent an expedition across the Rio Grande into New Mexico, bringing along 7000 head of cattle.
Usually they were taken shorter distances each day, allowed periods to rest and graze both at midday and at night.
In areas with heavy snowfall, snowmobiles are also common.
Horses can travel over terrain that vehicles cannot access.
Settlers from the United States did not enter California until after the Mexican-American War, and most early settlers were miners rather than livestock ranchers, leaving livestock-raising largely to the Spanish and Mexican people who chose to remain in California.
In addition, the geography and climate of much of California was dramatically different from that of Texas, allowing more intensive grazing with less open range, plus cattle in California were marketed primarily at a regional level, without the need (nor, until much later, even the logistical possibility) to be driven hundreds of miles to railroad lines.
Canada's first rodeo, the Raymond Stampede, was established in 1902.
They caught the Mustangs that roamed the Great Plains and the San Joaquin Valley of California, and later in the Great Basin, from the 18th century to the early 20th century.
By 1877, the largest of the cattle-shipping boom towns, Dodge City, Kansas, shipped out 500,000 head of cattle.
A good stock horse is on the small side, generally under 15.2 hands (62&nbsp;inches) tall at the withers and often under 1000 pounds, with a short back, sturdy legs and strong muscling, particularly in the hindquarters.
However, both boys and girls growing up in a ranch environment often learn to ride horses and perform basic ranch skills as soon as they are physically able, usually under adult supervision.
The Mustang and other colonial horse breeds are now called "wild," but in reality are feral horses—descendants of domesticated animals.
Rip Ford described the country between Laredo and Corpus Christi as inhabited by "...countless droves of mustangs and...wild cattle...abandoned by Mexicans when they were ordered to evacuate the country between the Nueces and the Rio Grande by General Valentin Canalizo...the horses and cattle abandoned invited the raids the Texians made upon this territory.
The Texas cowboy was typically a bachelor who hired on with different outfits from season to season.
Over time, the cowboys of the American West developed a personal culture of their own, a blend of frontier and Victorian values that even retained vestiges of chivalry.
The popular "horse whisperer" style of natural horsemanship was originally developed by practitioners who were predominantly from California and the Northwestern states, clearly combining the attitudes and philosophy of the California vaquero with the equipment and outward look of the Texas cowboy.
Montauk, New York, on Long Island makes a somewhat debatable claim of having the oldest cattle operation in what today is the United States, having run cattle in the area since European settlers purchased land from the Indian people of the area in 1643.
Geography, climate and cultural traditions caused differences to develop in cattle-handling methods and equipment from one part of the United States to another.
The traditions of the working cowboy were further etched into the minds of the general public with the development of Wild West Shows in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, which showcased and romanticized the life of both cowboys and Native Americans.
Each cowboy would require three to four fresh horses in the course of a day's work.
The word "cowboy" appeared in the English language by 1725.
Also, the public had difficulties with seeing women seriously injured or killed, and in particular, the death of Bonnie McCarroll at the 1929 Pendleton Round-Up led to the elimination of women's bronc riding from rodeo competition.
Women such as Annie Oakley became household names.
On a very large ranch (a "big outfit"), with many employees, cowboys are able to specialize on tasks solely related to cattle and horses.
Similar attacks also occurred with the Apache, Cheyenne and Ute Indians.
Today's working cowgirls generally use clothing, tools and equipment indistinguishable from that of men, other than in color and design, usually preferring a flashier look in competition.
The only actual "cattle drives" held on Long Island consisted of one drive in 1776, when the Island's cattle were moved in a failed attempt to prevent them from being captured by the British during the American Revolution, and three or four drives in the late 1930s, when area cattle were herded down Montauk Highway to pasture ground near Deep Hollow Ranch.
Early cowboys both worked on ranches and displayed their skills at the roundups.
The word "dude" (or the now-archaic term "greenhorn") indicates an individual unfamiliar with cowboy culture, especially one who is trying to pretend otherwise.
Cowboys who train horses often specialize in this task only, and some may "Break" or train young horses for more than one ranch.
In English-speaking regions outside North America, such as the British Isles and Australasia, "cowboy" can refer to a tradesmen whose work is of shoddy and questionable value, e.g., "a cowboy plumber".
This is especially true when applied to entertainers and those in the public arena who wear western wear as part of their persona.
Cowboys are more often associated with (mostly fictitious) Indian-fighting than with their actual life of ranch work and cattle-tending.
American cowboys were drawn from multiple sources.
In the 1860s, for example, the Comanche created problems in Western Texas.
Names for a cowboy in American English include ''buckaroo, cowpoke, cowhand,'' and ''cowpuncher''.
Thus, a horse- and livestock-handling culture remained in California and the Pacific Northwest that retained a stronger direct Spanish influence than that of Texas.
The word ''buckaroo'' is generally believed to be an anglicized version of ''vaquero'' and shows phonological characteristics compatible with that origin.
Homosexual acts between young, unmarried men occurred, but cowboys culture itself was and remains deeply homophobic.
There were also "wild" herds, often known as Mustangs.
Horses themselves were also rounded up.
In order to determine the ownership of individual animals, they were marked with a distinctive brand, applied with a hot iron, usually while the cattle were still young calves.
A subtype, called a wrangler, specifically tends the horses used to work cattle.
Parameters such as hat brim width, or chap length and material were adjusted to accommodate the various environmental conditions encountered by working cowboys.
The herders in the region of Maremma, in Tuscany (Italy) are called butteri (singular: ''buttero'').
Experts in Hawaiian etymology believe "Paniolo" is a Hawaiianized pronunciation of ''español.''
