This species was encountered several times during the Lewis and Clark Expedition (1804–1806), though it was already well known to European traders on the upper Missouri.
Great Plains from Alberta, Manitoba, and Saskatchewan south to New Mexico and the Texas Panhandle
It is often difficult in early post-Columbian historical records to distinguish between coyotes and wolves.
About three to five pets attacked by coyotes are brought into the Animal Urgent Care hospital of South Orange County (California) each week, the majority of which are dogs, since cats typically do not survive the attacks.
The coyote's characteristic vocalization is a howl made by solitary individuals.
Barks can be classed as both long-distance threat vocalizations and as alarm calls.
Excluding the insects, fruit, and grass eaten, the coyote requires an estimated  of food daily, or  annually.
Small or young prey may be completely carried off, leaving only blood as evidence of a kill.
Contact calls include lone howls and group howls, as well as the previously mentioned group yip howls.
Northern subspecies, which average , tend to grow larger than the southern subspecies of Mexico, which average .
By the age of four to five weeks, pups have established dominance hierarchies, and are by then more likely to play rather than fight.
Data from United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Wildlife Services, the California Department of Fish and Game, and other sources show that while 41 attacks occurred during the period of 1988–1997, 48 attacks were verified from 1998 through 2003.
l. incolatus''), a brightening of ochraceous tones towards the Pacific coast (''C.
In Aztec mythology, Huehuecóyotl (meaning "old coyote"), the god of dance, music and carnality, is depicted in several codices as a man with a coyote's head.
Among large North American carnivores, the coyote probably carries the largest number of diseases and parasites, likely due to its wide range and varied diet.
The red wolf may have originated later, about 287–430 years ago, when much of the southeastern United States was being converted to agriculture and predators were targeted for extermination.
l. latrans'' and ''C.
Only old and experienced coyotes can successfully prey on porcupines, with many predation attempts by young coyotes resulting in them being injured by their prey's quills.
Northern Baja California and southwestern California
Coyotes living at high elevations tend to have more black and gray shades than their desert-dwelling counterparts, which are more fulvous or whitish-gray.
The coyote readily cannibalizes the carcasses of conspecifics, with coyote fat having been successfully used by coyote hunters as a lure or poisoned bait.
''estor'' (Merriam, 1897)
The basic social unit of a coyote pack is a family containing a reproductive female.
The coyote represents a more primitive form of ''Canis'' than the gray wolf, as shown by its relatively small size and its comparatively narrow skull and jaws, which lack the grasping power necessary to hold the large prey in which wolves specialize.
Low-frequency whines are emitted by submissive animals, and are usually accompanied by tail wagging and muzzle nibbling.
The proposed timing of the wolf/coyote divergence conflicts with the finding of a coyote-like specimen in strata dated to 1 million years before present.
This is further corroborated by the coyote's sagittal crest, which is low or totally flattened, thus indicating a weaker bite than the wolf's.
caninum'' is particularly dangerous, as it damages the coyote through blood loss and lung congestion.
The fur of northern subspecies is longer and denser than in southern forms, with the fur of some Mexican and Central American forms being almost hispid (bristly).
Biologist Stanley Paul Young noted that in his entire trapping career, he had never successfully saved a captured bobcat from being killed by coyotes, and wrote of two incidents wherein coyotes chased bobcats up trees.
Prey species include bison, deer, sheep, rabbits, rodents, birds, amphibians (except toads), lizards, snakes, fish, crustaceans, and insects.
l. mearnsi'', it has heavier teeth, a large skull, and long ears.
l. latrans'' in size, but has a shorter muzzle.
Tracks are also an important factor in distinguishing coyote from dog predation.
Like the golden jackal, the coyote is gregarious, but not as dependent on conspecifics as more social canid species like wolves are.
Combatants approach each other waving their tails and snarling with their jaws open, though fights are typically silent.
According to the National Agricultural Statistics Service USDA report, "All sheep and lamb inventory in the United States on July 1, 2005, totaled 7.80&nbsp;million head, 2% above July 1, 2004.
The wolf-coyote admixture resulting in the development of the eastern wolf may have occurred on the order of 600–900 years ago between gray wolves and a now-extinct pre-Columbian coyote population.
Epigrapher David H. Kelley argued that the god Quetzalcoatl owed its origins to pre-Aztec Uto-Aztecan mythological depictions of the coyote, which is portrayed as mankind's "Elder Brother", a creator, seducer, trickster, and culture hero linked to the morning star.
They proposed that the progression from ''Eucyon davisi'' to ''C lepophagus'' to the coyote was linear evolution.
It sometimes eats unusual items such as cotton cake, soybean meal, domestic animal droppings, beans, and cultivated grain such as corn, wheat, and sorghum.
The largest subspecies, it has rather pale fur and bears large molars and carnassials.
Johnston describes ''C.
Some tribes, such as the Chinook, Maidu, Paiute, Pawnee, Tohono O'odham, and Ute portray the coyote as the companion of the creator.
Aside from its size, the eastern coyote is physically similar to the western coyote; both have erect ears, a straight and bushy tail, a conspicuous supracaudal gland, and a narrow chest.
Both F1 and F2 hybrids resemble their coyote parents in terms of shyness and intrasexual aggression.
Coyotes walk around 5–16&nbsp;km per day, often along trails such as logging roads and paths; they may use iced-over rivers as travel routes in winter.
At the time of the European colonization of the Americas, coyotes were largely confined to open plains and arid regions of the western half of the continent.
Coyotes are presently the most abundant livestock predators in western North America, causing the majority of sheep, goat, and cattle losses.
The upper surface of the hind foot is whitish, while the belly is sprinkled with black-tipped hairs.
Coyotes rarely kill healthy adult red foxes, and have been observed to feed or den alongside them, though they often kill foxes caught in traps.
The incisors erupt at about 12 days, the canines at 16, and the second premolars at 21.
The den is continuously dug and cleaned out by the female until the pups are born.
'''Northwest Coast coyote'''''C.
Lewis, writing on May 5, 1805, in northeastern Montana, described the coyote in the following terms:
Modern coyotes arose 1,000 years after the Quaternary extinction event.
Southeastern and extreme eastern Kansas, Oklahoma, Texas, Missouri, and Arkansas
Scattered bits of wool, skin, and other parts are characteristic where coyotes feed extensively on larger carcasses.
l. latrans'', or larger, but darker in color, it has a broader skull.
Also, coyote scat tends to be smaller than wolf scat.
Should the den be disturbed or infested with fleas, the pups are moved into another den.
Such matings are rare in the wild, as the mating cycles of dogs and coyotes do not coincide, and coyotes are usually antagonistic towards dogs, with even captive specimens having shown reluctance to mate with them.
Although coyotes are rarely host to flukes, they can nevertheless have serious effects on coyotes, particularly ''Nanophyetus salmincola'', which can infect them with salmon poisoning disease, a  disease with a 90% mortality rate.
The gestation period is 63 days, with an average litter size of six, though the number fluctuates depending on coyote population density and the abundance of food.
It has a varied diet consisting primarily of animal meat, including deer, rabbits, hares, rodents, birds, reptiles, amphibians, fish, and invertebrates, though it may also eat fruits and vegetables on occasion.
An aggressive coyote arches its back and lowers its tail.
Southern Sonora, extreme southwestern Chihuahua, western Durango, western Zacatecas, and Sinaloa
In areas where the ranges of coyotes and gray wolves overlap, interference competition and predation by wolves has been hypothesized to limit local coyote densities.
Yelps are emitted as a sign of submission, while high-frequency whines are produced by dominant animals acknowledging the submission of subordinates.
Hybridization usually only occurs when coyotes are expanding into areas where conspecifics are few, and dogs are the only alternatives.
Like other canids, the coyote caches excess food.
When attacking smaller prey, such as young lambs, the kill is made by biting the skull and spinal regions, causing massive tissue and bone damage.
A small subspecies, it has dark, rufous-tinged fur, a comparatively small skull, and weak dentition.
Because coyote populations are typically many times greater and more widely distributed than those of wolves, coyotes cause more overall predation losses.
In California, coyote and bobcat populations are not negatively correlated across different habitat types, but predation by coyotes is an important source of mortality in bobcats.
The amicable interactions between coyotes and badgers were known to pre-Columbian civilizations, as shown on a Mexican jar dated to 1250–1300 CE depicting the relationship between the two.
Geographic variation in coyotes is not great, though taken as a whole, the eastern subspecies (''C.
The coyote is a prominent character in Native American folklore (Southwestern United States and Mexico), usually depicted as a trickster that alternately assumes the form of an actual coyote or a man.
A small subspecies, it has small teeth and rather dark fur.
In such situations, some coyotes have begun to act aggressively toward humans, chasing joggers and bicyclists, confronting people walking their dogs, and stalking small children.
Scent glands are located at the upper side of the base of the tail and are a bluish-black color.
l. lestes'' in size, but has smaller teeth and darker fur.
Livestock guardian dogs are commonly used to aggressively repel predators and have worked well in both fenced pasture and range operations.
Prior to the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire, the coyote played a significant role in Mesoamerican cosmology.
Coyotes usually attack smaller-sized dogs, but they have been known to attack even large, powerful breeds such as the Rottweiler in exceptional cases.
Coyote kills can be distinguished from wolf kills by less damage to the underlying tissues in the former.
The coyote is more closely related to the common ancestor of wolves and other canids (more "basal") than its relative the gray wolf.
Individual feeding territories vary in size from , with the general concentration of coyotes in a given area depending on food abundance, adequate denning sites, and competition with conspecifics and other predators.
Wolves have been observed to not tolerate coyotes in their vicinity, though coyotes have been known to trail wolves to feed on their kills.
This changed with the diminution of beavers, and by 1860, the hunting of coyotes for their fur became a great source of income (75 cents to $1.50 per skin) for wolfers in the Great Plains.
The relationship between the two species may occasionally border on apparent friendship, as some coyotes have been observed laying their heads on their badger companions or licking their faces without protest.
By this time, its range encompassed all of the United States and Mexico, southward into Central America, and northward into most of Canada and Alaska.
l. lestes'', and ''C.
As long as it was not in direct competition with the wolf, the coyote ranged from the Sonoran Desert to the alpine regions of adjoining mountains or the plains and mountainous areas of Alberta.
Coyotes sometimes urinate on their food, possibly to claim ownership over it.
Similar in size and color to ''C.
lepophagus'' as having a more slender skull and skeleton than the modern coyote.
Calves and heavily fleeced sheep are killed by attacking the flanks or hindquarters, causing shock and blood loss.
Woofs are used as low-intensity threats or alarms, and are usually heard near den sites, prompting the pups to immediately retreat into their burrows.
Mite infestations are rare and incidental in coyotes, while tick infestations are more common, with seasonal peaks depending on locality (May–August in the Northwest, March–November in Arkansas).
As with other trickster figures, the coyote acts as a picaresque hero which rebels against social convention through deception and humor.
He is sometimes depicted as a womanizer, responsible for bringing war into the world by seducing Xochiquetzal, the goddess of love.
The Navajo coyote brings death into the world, explaining that without death, too many people would exist, thus no room to plant corn.
Vocalizations of the first category include woofs, growls, huffs, barks, bark howls, yelps, and high-frequency whines.
The Maidu creation myth has the coyote introducing work, suffering, and death to the world.
A large subspecies, it equals ''C.
The most frequent ascaroid roundworm in coyotes is ''Toxascaris leonina'', which dwells in the coyote's small intestine and has no ill effects, except for causing the host to eat more frequently.
The coyote has been described as "the most vocal of all wild North American mammals".
C. E. H. Smith, 1839
l. orcutti'') were larger and more robust, likely in response to larger competitors and prey.
Although it was once widely believed that coyotes are recent immigrants to southern Mexico and Central America, aided in their expansion by deforestation, Pleistocene and Early Holocene records, as well as records from the pre-Columbian period and early European colonization show that the animal was present in the area long before modern times.
Group howls are used as both substitute group yip howls and as responses to either lone howls, group howls, or group yip howls.
Conflicts between coyotes can arise during times of food shortage.
With the extermination of the wolf, the coyote's range expanded to encompass broken forests from the tropics of Guatemala and the northern slope of Alaska.
The coyote's fur consists of short, soft underfur and long, coarse guard hairs.
Another account from the early 1800s in Edwards County mentioned wolves howling at night, though these were likely coyotes.
Coyote pelts were of significant economic importance during the early 1950s, ranging in price from $5 to $25 per pelt, depending on locality.
l. thamnos'' and ''C.
This is likely because the coyote is not a specialized hunter of large prey as the latter species is.
'''Durango coyote'''''C.
Although some squabbling may occur among the males, once the female has selected a mate and copulates, the rejected males do not intervene, and move on once they detect other estrous females.
Coyote predation can usually be distinguished from dog or coydog predation because coyotes partially consume their victims.
The study found that coyote ancestry was highest in red wolves from the southeast of the United States and lowest among the Great Lakes region wolves.
l. frustor'') are large, dark colored animals, with a gradual paling in color and reduction in size westward and northward (''C.
The animal was especially respected in Mesoamerican cosmology as a symbol of military might, with some scholars having traced the origin of the Aztec god Quetzalcoatl to a pre-Aztec coyote deity.
l. lestes'', but smaller, darker, more brightly colored, it has larger ears and smaller skull and teeth.
'''Southeastern coyote'''''C.
The coyote features prominently as a trickster figure in the folktales of America's indigenous peoples, alternately assuming the form of an actual coyote or a man.
The parents begin supplementing the pup's diet with regurgitated solid food after 12–15 days.
The female may line the den with dried grass or with fur pulled from her belly.
The majority of these incidents occurred in Southern California near the suburban-wildland interface.
By the age of four to six weeks, when their milk teeth are fully functional, the pups are given small food items such as mice, rabbits, or pieces of ungulate carcasses, with lactation steadily decreasing after two months.
Coyotes were occasionally eaten by trappers and mountain men during the western expansion.
Success in killing large ungulates depends on factors such as snow depth and crust density.
After the Great Mystery creates humanity, the coyote and Montezuma teach people how to live.
Coyotes may kill fox kits, but this is not a major source of mortality.
A tame coyote named "Butch", caught in the summer of 1945, had a short-lived career in cinema, appearing in ''Smoky'' and ''Ramrod'' before being shot while raiding a henhouse.
Coyotes usually leave the hide and most of the skeleton of larger animals relatively intact, unless food is scarce, in which case they may leave only the largest bones.
The newly mated pair then establishes a territory and either constructs their own den or cleans out abandoned badger, marmot, or skunk earths.
The coyote is highly versatile in its choice of food, but is primarily carnivorous, with 90% of its diet consisting of animal meat.
'''Colima coyote'''''C.
southwestern Colorado, extreme southern Utah and Nevada, southeastern California, northeastern Baja California, Arizona, west of the Rio Grande in New Mexico, northern Sonora and Chihuahua
The largest of the Mexican coyotes, it approaches ''C.
Coyote pups are born in dens, hollow trees, or under ledges, and weigh  at birth.
When hunting large prey, the coyote often works in pairs or small groups.
Some 19th-century writers wrote of coyotes being kept in native villages in the Great Plains.
Coyote tracks tend to be more oval-shaped and compact than those of domestic dogs, and their claw marks are less prominent and the tracks tend to follow a straight line more closely than those of dogs.
The blood-drinking ''A.
Nevertheless, range expansion did occur south of Costa Rica during the late 1970s and northern Panama in the early 1980s, following the expansion of cattle-grazing lands into tropical rainforests.
It is smaller than its close relative, the gray wolf, being roughly the North American equivalent to the Old World golden jackal, though it is larger and more predatory.
Body length ranges on average from , and tail length , with females being shorter in both body length and height.
The animal was especially respected in Mesoamerican cosmology as a symbol of military might, with some scholars having traced the origin of the Aztec god Quetzalcoatl to a pre-Aztec coyote deity.
Coyotes (both single individuals and groups) have been known to occasionally kill bobcats – in most cases, the bobcats were relatively small specimens, such as adult females and juveniles.
About the same size as ''C.
The coyote's fur is not durable enough to make rugs, but can be used for coats and jackets, scarves, or muffs.
This fear was partially confirmed in January 2013, when the species was recorded in eastern Panama's Chepo District, beyond the Panama Canal.
A 10-day-old pup can die from being host to as few as 25 ''A.
This hybrid is smaller than the wolf, and holds smaller territories, but is in turn larger and holds more extensive home ranges than the typical western coyote.
most of Texas, eastern New Mexico, and northeastern Mexico
The scent glands are smaller than the gray wolf's, but are the same color.
Coyote ranges expanded during the 19th and 20th centuries following the extirpation of wolves, while coyotes were driven to extinction on Isle Royale after wolves colonized the island in the 1940s.
It is highly flexible in social organization, living either in a family unit or in loosely knit packs of unrelated individuals.
He had the first edition of the Lewis and Clark journals in hand, which contained Biddle's edited version of Lewis's observations dated May 5, 1805.
Coyotes catch mouse-like rodents by pouncing, whereas ground squirrels are chased.
l. cagottis'' in color, but much larger.
The coyote symbolized military might in pre-Aztec Teotihuacan, with warriors dressing up in coyote costumes to call upon its predatory power.
l. ochropus'' in size and features, but has darker, redder fur.
Unlike dogs, the upper canines of coyotes extends past the mental foramina.
aureus'' form together a small clade and because ''C.
dirus''), as it was rapidly filled by gray wolves, which likely actively killed off the large coyotes, with natural selection favoring the modern gracile morph.
During the pregnancy, the male frequently hunts alone and brings back food for the female.
l. nebracensis'' (Merriam, 1898)''C.
The coyote is not a specialized carnivore as the wolf is, as shown by the larger chewing surfaces on the molars, reflecting the species' relative dependence on vegetable matter.
'''Plains coyote'''''C.
Their reduction in size occurred within 1000 years of the Quaternary extinction event, when their large prey died out.
A small subspecies with medium-sized ears, a small skull and small teeth, its  fur is richly and brightly colored.
Unlike wolf pups, coyote pups begin seriously fighting prior to engaging in play behavior.
However, unrelated coyotes may join forces for companionship, or to bring down prey too large to attack singly.
As with other trickster figures, the coyote acts as a picaresque hero which rebels against social convention through deception and humor.
lupus,'' not fully coyotes.
Coyotes have occasionally mated with dogs, sometimes producing crosses colloquially known as "coydogs".
A small subspecies, it has reddish summer fur and a short, broad skull.
The aggressive behavior of the coyote bears more similarities to that of foxes than it does that of wolves and dogs.
Pups may leave their families in August, though can remain for much longer.
The largest coyote on record was a male killed near Afton, Wyoming on November 19, 1937, which measured  from nose to tail, and weighed .
This expansion is ongoing, and the species now occupies the majority of areas between 8°N (Panama) and 70°N (northern Alaska).
southern British Columbia and southeastern Alberta, Washington east of the Cascade Range, Oregon, northern California, western Montana, Wyoming, Colorado (except the southeastern corner), north-central Nevada, and north-central Utah
l. latrans'', it has brighter, more fulvous fur closely approaching the richness found in ''C.
This subspecies is similar to ''C.
A 1986 survey of sheep producers in the USA found that 82% reported the use of dogs represented an economic asset.
The coyote was first scientifically described by Thomas Say in September 1819 on the site of Lewis and Clark's Council Bluffs, fifteen miles up the Missouri River from the mouth of the Platte during a government-sponsored expedition with Major Stephen Long.
Eastern coyotes tend to reach sexual maturity at two years of age, much later than in western coyotes.
Non-rabid coyotes in these areas  sometimes target small children, mostly under the age of 10, though some adults have been bitten.
Zuni folklore has the coyote bringing winter into the world by stealing light from the kachinas.
The male plays an active role in feeding, grooming, and guarding the pups, but abandons them if the female goes missing before the pups are completely weaned.
More unusual prey include fishers, young black bear cubs, harp seals and rattlesnakes.
No significant differences are seen between eastern and western coyotes in expressing aggression and fighting, though eastern coyotes tend to fight less, and are more playful.
Items such as garbage, pet food, and sometimes feeding stations for birds and squirrels attract coyotes into backyards.
As with other trickster figures, the coyote acts as a picaresque hero which rebels against social convention through deception and humor.
Known only from the open country northeast of Archaga, north of Tegucigalpa
