This bet typically pays more (2:1 or 3:1) if 2 or 12 is rolled, and 1:1 if 3, 4, 9, 10 or 11 is rolled.
Similar to buy betting, some casinos only take commission on win reducing house edge.
That is, it can be shown mathematically that a player will (with probability 100%) lose all his or her money to the casino in the long run, while in the short run the player is more likely to lose money than make money.
In order for this bet to win, the chosen number must be rolled the "hard way" (as doubles) before a 7 or any other non-double combination ("easy way") totaling that number is rolled.
The expected value of all bets is usually negative, such that the average player will always lose money.
Conversely, it is desirable to have the dealers make change from a bet, rather than make change and then pay correct change for a bet (e.g.
In this game variation, one red deck and one blue deck of six cards each (A through 6), and a red die and a blue die are used.
On the come out roll each player may only make one bet on the Pass or Don't Pass, but may bet both if desired.
If a player chooses to remove the initial don't come and/or don't pass line bet, he or she can no longer lay odds behind the bet and cannot re-bet the same don't pass and/or don't come number (players must make a new don't pass or come bets if desired).
The second round wins if the shooter rolls the come bet point again before a seven.
(NOT $2 based on the $40 bet as the way buy bet commissions are figured.)
Another slang for a hard ten is "moose head", because it resembles a moose's antlers.
The maximum bet is based on the maximum allowed win from a single roll.
A player may wish to make multiple different bets.
Unlike a standard lay bet on a point, lay odds behind a don't come point does not charge commission (vig) and gives the player true odds.
“All or Nothing at All” wins if the shooter hits all 10 numbers before a seven is rolled.
In the online and offline gambling circuits, this variation of craps is considered an illegal game.
Since there is no correlation between die rolls, there is normally no possible long-term winning strategy in craps.
Hardway and other proposition bets are tracked by the stickman and will be paid after the regular bets by the dealer to the player directly based on instructions from the stickman.
Players feel it is bad luck for the shooter to leave the table after a successful come-out roll.
If, instead, the seven is rolled before the come-bet point, the come bet (and any odds bet) loses.
In Atlantic City and Pennsylvania, the combine odds and pass bet must be table minimum so players can bet the minimum single unit on odds depending on the point.
** If, with a point established, a 7 is rolled before the point is rolled again ("seven out"), the bet wins.
2-6, 3-5, 4-4, 5-3, 6-2
The theory, based on probability mechanics, is that given exactly the same throw from exactly the same starting configuration, the dice will tumble in the same way and therefore show the same or similar values every time.
Simplified Craps is a variation that can be won by rolling 2, 3, 4, 10, 11 or 12, but if a 5, 6, 7, 8 or 9 is rolled, the player loses.
The overall house edge in New York craps is 5%.
When presented, hop bets are located at the center of the craps layout with the other proposition bets.
And additional variation uses a single set of 6 cards, and regular dice.
For example, the gambler's fallacy indicates that a craps player should bet on eleven if an eleven has not appeared or has appeared too often in the last 20 rolls.
The dice are usually required to hit the back wall of the table, which is normally faced with an angular texture such as pyramids, making controlled spins more difficult.
$6 place bet on a $3 minimum game.)
Typically, the CSM will hold approximately 264 cards, or 44 sets of 1 through 6 spot cards.
The shooter shoots what looks like a red and a blue die, called "cubes".
Other bets may be working or not working depending whether a point has been established or player's choice.
The place bets on the outside numbers (4,5,9,10) should be made in units of $5, (on a $5 minimum table), in order to receive the correct exact payout of $5 paying $7 or $5 paying $9.
The first three points will not pay out on the fire bet, but the fourth, fifth and sixth will pay out at increasing odds.
If a 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, or 10 is thrown on the come-out roll (i.e., if a point is established), most casinos allow pass line players to ''take odds'' by placing up to some predetermined multiple of the pass line bet, behind the pass line.
The boxman simply deals one card from each shoe and that is the roll on which bets are settled.
'''Yo:''' Wins if the shooter rolls 11.
There may be players who are lucky and get ahead for a period of time, but in the long run these winning streaks are eroded away.
New York Craps Players bet on box numbers like 4, 5, 6, 8, 9 or 10.
After the come-out roll, it is considered bad luck to say the word "seven".
The player should instead wait until a natural break in play (such as the shooter sevening out) and then place the stack of chips on the playing surface and asking the dealer to "color up".
shooting for a point, and Big 6 and 8 bets always work.
It is considered bad luck to change dice in the middle of a roll.
The shooter is required to make either a Pass Line bet or a Don't Pass bet if he wants to shoot.
Eleven is called out as "yo" or "yo-leven" to prevent being misheard as "seven".
If the come-bet point is rolled on the come-out roll, the odds do not win but the come bet does and the odds bet is returned (along with the come bet and its payoff).
If a player is playing don't pass instead of pass, they may also ''lay odds'' by placing chips behind the don't pass line.
"Aces; double the field" would be a more common call when not on the comeout roll to remind the dealers to pay double on the field bets and encourage the field bettor to place subsequent bets and/or when no crap bets have been placed.
The only exception is the "odds" bet that the player is allowed to make after a point is established on a pass/come don't pass/don't come bet (the odds portion of the bet has a long-term expected value of 0).
The fourth point pays at 24-to-1, the fifth point pays at 249-to-1 and the 6th point pays at 999-to-1.
A "two-way" bet is one that is part for the player and part for the dealers (for example, tossing two chips and stating "Two Way Hard Eight" will place a bet for the player and the same bet for the dealer).
It can also be known as a "square pair", "mom and dad", or "Ozzie and Harriet".
In other casinos such as those in Atlantic City, hard ways are not working when the point is off unless the player requests to have it working.
During promotional periods, a casino may even offer 100x odds bets, which reduces the house edge to almost nothing, but dramatically increases variance, as the player will be betting in large betting units.
Before the shooter begins, some casinos will allow a bet known as a fire bet to be placed.
If a 12 is rolled, it is a push (subject to the same 2/12 switch described above for the don't pass bet).
Four, usually hard, is sometimes referred to as "Little Joe from Kokomo."
The roll of the dice maps to the card in that position, and if a pair is rolled, then the mapped card is used twice, as a pair.
* $1 Single Hardways 2.78% per roll, $2.84 per hour, $56.71 per trip
The minimum bet on C & E is double the lowest unit bet allowed at the table.
The place bets and buy bets differ from the pass line and come line, in that place bets and buy bets can be removed at any time, since, while they are multi-roll bets, their odds of winning do not change from roll to roll,  whereas pass line bets and come line bets are a combination of different odds on their first roll and subsequent rolls.
An additional group of bets, referred to as proposition bets, is in the middle of the layout and used for bets by players from both sides.
Each employee also watches for mistakes by the others because of the sometimes large number of bets and frantic pace of the game.
Players can bet on the various options by placing chips directly on the appropriately-marked sections of the layout, or asking the base dealer or stickman to do so, depending on which bet is being made.
Single bets are always working by default unless the player specifies otherwise.
While entirely permissible, excessive late betting will generally garner a warning as it slows play.
The Field bet is a "Self-Service" Bet.
Once a Pass line bet is made, it is always working and cannot be turned "Off", taken down or reduced unless it wins or loses.
Like the Don't Pass each player may only make one Don't Come bet per roll, this does not exclude a player from laying odds on an already established Don't Come points.
If the point is a 4 or 10 players can bet as little as $1 if the table minimum is low such as $5, $10 or $15 minimums.
During World War II, street-style craps became popular among soldiers, who often played it using an Army blanket as a shooting surface.
The roll is invalid if either or both dice land in the boxman's bank, the stickman's bowl (where the extra three dice are kept between rolls), or in the rails around the top of the table where players chips are kept.
If a player wishes to take the bet down after a win the player would receive the whole bet not half even though only one of the two bets can win per roll.
Like the Pass Line each player may only make one Come bet per roll, this does not exclude a player from betting odds on an already established Come point.
This bet is also nicknamed ''Big Red,'' since the 7 on its betting space on the layout is usually large and red, and it is considered bad luck and a breach of etiquette to speak the word "seven" at the table.
The biggest difference between crapless craps and original craps, is that the shooter (person throwing the dice) is at a far greater disadvantage and has a house edge of 5.38%.
Whether it is possible for human beings to consistently exercise the precise physical control necessitated by the theory is a source of controversy.
The 5% vig would be $1 based on the $20 win.
Other systems depend on the gambler's fallacy, which in craps terms is the belief that past dice rolls influence the probabilities of future dice rolls.
In rare cases, some casinos require all players to make a minimum Pass Line or Don't Pass bet (if they want to make any other bet), whether they are currently shooting or not.
Lay odds behind a Don't Come are subject to the same rules as Don't Pass lay odds.
In Atlantic City, a 4-5 is called a "railroad nine".
The payout is determine by the number of points which have been established and hit after the shooter sevens out.
If the player requests the pass odds be not working ("Off") and the shooter sevens-out or hits the point, the pass line bet will be lost or doubled and the pass odds returned.
Come bets can only be made '''''after''''' a point has been established since, on the come-out roll, a Come bet would be the same thing as a pass line bet.
Place bet payouts are slightly worse than the true odds: 9-to-5 on points 4 or 10, 7-to-5 on points 5 or 9, and 7-to-6 on points 6 or 8.
The prayer/invocation "Baby needs a new pair of shoes!"
Dice are passed to the left.
Players can bet table minimum odds if desired and win less than table minimum.
In Las Vegas, players generally must lay at least table minimum on odds if desired and win less than table minimum, in Atlantic City and Pennsylvania players combined bet must be at least table minimum, so depending on the point number players may lay as little as 2 minimum units (e.g.
Horn bets are generally required to be in multiples of 4 or 5 with the minimum bet being 4 times the minimum unit allowed.
A player betting don't pass and don't come every roll and laying 10x odds receives a 2% profit on the initial don't pass / don't come bet each roll.
If the initial amount is small, the payout from each Martingale sequence will be just as small.
However, the odds taken behind a Come bet can be turned "Off" (not working), removed or reduced anytime before the bet loses.
In either case, all single or multi roll proposition bets may be placed in either of the two rounds.
All bets besides the '''pass line''' and '''come''' bet may be removed or reduced anytime before the bet loses, this is known as "taking it down" in craps.
Dice are considered "in play" if they land on players' bets on the table, the dealer's working stacks, on the marker puck or with one die resting on top of the other.
For example, tables with minimums of $5 or $10 generally allow minimum single roll bets of $1.
Each round has two phases: "come-out" and "point".
Some casino do not allow new pass line bets while a point has been established.
Rolls of 4, 6, 8, and 10 are called "hard" or "easy" (e.g.
In all the above scenarios, whenever the Pass line wins, the Don't Pass line loses, and vice versa, with one exception: on the come-out roll, a roll of 12 will cause Pass Line bets to lose, but Don't Pass bets are pushed (or "barred"), neither winning nor losing.
In Las Vegas generally odds bets are required to be the table minimum.
Many players, in order to eliminate the confusion of tossing four chips to the center of the table or having change made while bets are being placed, will make a five-unit ''Horn High'' bet, which is a four-way bet with the extra unit going to one specific number.
New York Craps is one of the variations of craps played mostly in the Eastern coast of the USA, true to its name.
The wagers are made in cash, never in chips, and are usually thrown down onto the ground by the players.
If the shooter leaves the game before a decision is reached on a point number, the dice will be passed to the next player to continue where the shooter left off.
That means that if the shooter rolls a 7 on the come-out roll, any players with active come bets waiting for a come-bet point lose their initial wager but will have their odds bets returned to them.
The opposite is also allowed.
Most casinos usually charge only $1 for a $25 green-chip bet (4% commission), or $2 for $50 (two green chips), reducing the house advantage a bit more.
If removed, the player can no longer lay odds behind the don't come point and cannot restore or increase the same don't come bet.
No casino currently runs a craps table with a bet that yields a player edge full-time.
Simplified Craps has an overall house edge of 2.8%.
Prior to the initial "come out roll", players may place an optional wager (usually a $1 minimum to a maximum $25) on one or more of the three Bonus Craps wagers, "All Small", "All Tall", or "All or Nothing at All."
"six the hard way", "easy eight", "hard ten") depending on whether they were rolled as a "double" or as any other combination of values, because of their significance in center table bets known as the "hard ways".
If a die leaves the table, the shooter will usually be asked to select another die from the remaining three but can request using the same die if it passes the boxman's inspection.
Casinos may allow a few warnings before enforcing the dice to hit the back wall and is generally lenient if at least one die hits the back wall.
If the shooter rolls one of these numbers on the come-out roll, this establishes the '''"point"''' - to "pass" or "win", the point number must be rolled again before a seven.
There are many variations of street craps.
Currently there has been no independent conclusive evidence that such methods can be successfully applied in a real casino.
The place bet to lose typically carries a lower house edge than a place bet.
A 5% commission (vigorish, vig, juice) is charged up front on the possible winning amount.
1-6, 2-5, 3-4, 4-3, 5-2, 6-1
Both methods of calculation yield the same result so either method can be used.
If an 11 was rolled the player would receive 15:1 minus $1 for the bet on craps so the player's total profit is $14.
Unlike place and buy bets, lay bets are always working even when no point has been established.
Buy bets like place bets are not working when no point has been established unless the player specifies otherwise.
For example, if you toss a $5 chip into the center and say "horn high yo", you are placing four $1 bets on each of the horn numbers and the extra dollar will go on the yo (11).
If only one die is thrown the shot is invalid.
The bets are located in the corners behind the pass line, and bets may be placed directly by players.
Even though players are allow to remove the don't pass line bet after a point has been established, the bet cannot be turned "Off" without being removed.
The part of the bet for the dealer is called a "toke" bet; this is from the $1 slot machine coins or tokens that are sometimes used to place bets for the dealers in a casino.
Players must bet against each other by covering or ''fading'' each other's bets for the game to be played.
Despite the fact that no such system exists (indeed, it is a mathematical impossibility), several gambling-related web sites have retold the 'parity hedge' story without attribution.
The shooter must shoot toward the farther back wall and is generally required to hit the farther back wall with both dice.
During the comeout, eleven is typically followed by "front line winner".
'''Any Craps (Three-Way):''' Wins if the shooter rolls 2, 3 or 12.
One can reduce, but not eliminate, one's average losses by only placing bets with the smallest house advantage.
These requirements are meant to keep the game fair (preventing switching the dice or making a "controlled shot").
The Pass Line and Don't Pass bet is optional for any player not shooting.
Players can places bets on the 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, pass, don't pass, any field number, hard or easy ways, come or don't come (as long as a point is established), increase odds behind pass and don't pass lines or make any other bet the table offers.
In practice this can be observed as players respond to a roll such as a Hard Six with an immediate wager on the Hard Six.
For example: A $40 Lay Bet on the 4 would pay $20 on a win.
Bank craps uses a special table layout and all bets must be made against the house.
The table is run by up to four casino employees: a '''boxman''', seated (usually the only seated employee) behind the casino's bank, who manages the chips, supervises the dealers, and handles "coloring up" players (exchanging small chip denominations for larger denominations in order to preserve the chips at a table); two '''base dealers''' who stand to either side of the boxman and collect and pay bets to players around their half of the table; and a '''stickman''' who stands directly across the table from the boxman, takes and pays (or directs the base dealers to do so) the bets in the center of the table, announces the results of each roll (usually with a distinctive patter), and moves the dice across the layout with an elongated wooden stick.
Nine can also be referred to as "Old Mike", named after NBA Hall-of-Famer Michael Jordan.
These bets pay 35-for-1, for a house advantage of 7.76%.
Like the don't pass line bet, don't come bets can be removed or reduced after a don't come point has been established, but cannot be turned off ("not working") without being removed.
Besides the rules of the actual game, certain unwritten rules of etiquette exist while playing craps and are expected to be followed.
Only the stickman or a dealer can place a service bet.
The selected cards are replaced and the decks are reshuffled for the next roll.
If the bet is one handled by the dealers, such as a Place bet or one of the proposition bets handled by the stick-man, the chip(s) should be placed, or thrown, and announced as a dealer bet, such as "Dealer's hard eight", or "Place the eight for the dealers".
Two shoes are used, each containing some number of regular card decks that have been stripped down to just the Aces and deuces through sixes.
After a point is established, a player may take down or reduce a don't pass bet and any corresponding odds at any time because odds of rolling a 7 before the point is in the player's favor.
'''Fire Bet:''' Is a registered trademark owned by SHFL entertainment.
Unlike the pass line bet itself, the pass line odds bet can be turned "Off" (not working), removed or reduced anytime before it loses.
A player may increase any corresponding odds (up to the table limit) behind the Pass line at any time after a point is established.
Another player must choose to cover the shooter to create a stake for the game to continue.
While the come-out roll may specifically refer to the first roll of a new shooter, any roll where no point is established may be referred to as a come-out.
Ten the hard way is "a hard ten", "dos equis" (Spanish, meaning "two X's", because the pip arrangement on both dice on this roll resembles "XX"),  or "Hard ten - a woman's best friend", an example of both rhyming slang and sexual double entendre.
Unlike other systems, this one is mathematically plausible, because if it were possible to alter the probabilities of each outcome, then winning systems could be devised.
A call bet is made when a player is allowed to make a bet without first placing the necessary chips in the right spot on the table.
Therefore, players get 1 to 2 for the numbers 4 and 10, 2 to 3 for the numbers 5 and 9, and 5 to 6 for the numbers 6 and 8.
Also like a pass line bet, the come bet is always working and cannot be turned "Off", removed or reduced until it wins or loses.
To start a round, the shooter makes one or more "come-out" rolls.
Players can place bet any point number (4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10) by placing their wager in the come area and telling the dealer how much and on what number(s), "30 on the 6", "5 on the 5" or "25 buy the 10".
For example, if you bet on "5 and 1" on the hop, you are betting that the next roll will have a 5 on one die and a 1 on the other die.
Players may make a put bet on the Pass line and take odds immediately or increase odds behind if a player decides to add money to an already existing Pass line bet.
After the point is established, "good field and come" is often added.
If a new player feels that he or she needs assistance in learning the rules of craps, it is recommended to approach an empty craps table at a slow time of day (for example, between 9 a.m. and 11 a.m.).
* If the roll is any other value, it establishes a '''''point'''''.
This number becomes the "come-bet point" and the player is allowed to take odds, just like a pass line bet.
The red card in the red-numbered box corresponding to the red die, and the blue card in the blue-numbered box corresponding to the blue die are then turned over to form the roll on which bets are settled.
Some casinos in Las Vegas allow players to lay table minimum plus vig if desired and win less than table minimum.
Even if the dice are actually biased toward particular results ("loaded"), each roll is still independent of all the previous ones.
The buy bet must be at least table minimum excluding commission, however some casinos require the minimum buy bet amount to be at least $20 to match the $1 charged on the 5% commission.
The dealers are likely to be approachable and friendly and will explain the betting process.
If the player requests the Come odds to be not working ("Off") and the shooter sevens-out or hits the Come bet point, the Come bet will be lost or doubled and the Come odds returned.
Players may only bet the pass line on the come out roll when no point has been established, unless the casino allows put betting where the player can bet Pass line or increase an existing Pass line bet whenever desired and may take odds immediately if the point is already on.
Casinos may charge the vig up front thereby requiring the player to pay a vig win or lose, other casinos may only take the vig if the bet wins.
The maximum allowed single roll bet is based on the maximum allowed win from a single roll.
The initial roll of a 2 or a 3 in High Point Craps is ignored.
Two cards are dealt from the CSM for each roll.
This rule simplifies the calculation of winnings: a maximum pass odds bet on a 3-4-5X table will always be paid at six times the pass line bet regardless of the point.
The don't pass bet pays even money.
The book keeps a specific percentage of the total amount of money wagered (5%-7%) and this is called vigorish.
The remaining dice are returned to the stickman's bowl and are not used.
If "buying in" (paying cash for chips) at the table, players are expected to lay the cash down on the layout, which the dealer will take and then place chips in front of the player.
Players must hit the established point in order for it to count toward the fire bet.
This system fails because the player will either run out of money after having to double his bet several times in a row after a streak of losing bets, or he will be unable to bet the amount dictated by the system because it would exceed the maximum bet allowed by the casino.
Seven rolled as 6-1 is sometimes called "six ace" or "up pops the Devil".
For players to win the "All Small" wager, the shooter must hit all five small numbers (2, 3, 4, 5, 6) before a seven is rolled; similarly, "All Tall" wins if all five high numbers (8, 9, 10, 11, 12) are hit before a seven is rolled.
The shooter then shoots the dice.
Both dice must be tossed in one throw.
If a player wins the bet he can take down all four bets instead of a single bet even though only one bet can win per roll.
Players must wait until next roll as long as a pass line point has been established (players cannot bet don't come on come out rolls) before they can make a new don't come bet.
As mentioned above, care should be taken when tossing chips.
