The location of Crazy Horse Monument is about 8 miles away from Mount Rushmore.
Crazy Horse lived in the Lakota camp with his younger brother, High Horse (son of Iron Between Horns and ''Waglula'') and a cousin Little Hawk.
He was taken to the adjutant's office, where he was tended by the assistant post surgeon at the post, Dr. Valentine McGillycuddy, and died late that night.
As compensation for the shooting, No Water gave Crazy Horse three horses.
In 1924, Korczak Ziółkowski had worked under master sculptor Gutzon Borglum on the Mount Rushmore memorial.
In the summer of 1844, "Waglula" (Worm) went on a buffalo hunt.
The English version is not an accurate translation from the Lakota language, "Hóka-héy!"
Rumors of Crazy Horse's desire to slip away and return to the old ways of life started to spread at the Red Cloud and Spotted Tail agencies.
Curly’s father later interpreted the vision and said that the warrior was going to be him.
Black Shawl gave birth to Crazy Horse's only child, a daughter named They Are Afraid Of Her, who died in 1873.
Little Big Man, standing behind him, seized Crazy Horse by both elbows, pulling his arms up behind him.
He wore simple clothing, no face paint, he wore his hair down with just a feather in it, and he wore a small brown stone behind his ear.
When he found her with Crazy Horse, he fired at him, injuring him in the face and leaving a noticeable scar.
He was generous to the poor, the elderly, and children.
The soldiers suffered only five killed and two wounded, while the Lakota suffered between 50 and 120 casualties.
Plans call for the completed monument to be  wide and  high.
The evidence includes the individual's attire (such as the length of the hair pipe breastplate and the ascot tie), which closely resembles the attire of Buffalo Bill's Wild West Indian performers active from 1883 to the early 1900s.
With the growing trouble at the Red Cloud Agency, General George Crook was ordered to stop at Fort Robinson.
For the next four months, Crazy Horse resided in his village near the Red Cloud Agency.
He knocked the pistol upward as No Water fired, deflecting the bullet to Crazy Horse's upper jaw.
The identity of the soldier responsible for the bayoneting of Crazy Horse is also debatable.
Some of the people who knew the history of Crazy Horse likened the monument to pollution and desecration of the landscape and environment of the national park and its vicinity.
His mother's nickname for him was "Curly" or "Light Hair"; as his light curly hair resembled that of his mother.
Only Black Shawl bore him any children: a daughter named They Are Afraid of Her, who died at age three.
The foundation generates most of its funds from its visitor fees, with visitors numbering more than a million yearly.
His final resting place remains unknown.
When he was challenged over his interpretation, Grouard left the council.
The soldiers killed American Horse and much of his family after they holed up in a cave for several hours.
Crazy Horse was married two times: first to Black Shawl, and second to Nellie Larrabee (Laravie).
Black Shawl outlived Crazy Horse.
The interview took place over a year after Crazy Horse's death.
The elders sent her to heal Crazy Horse after his altercation with No Water.
Grummond's cavalry followed the other six decoys along Peno Head Ridge and down toward Peno Creek, where several Cheyenne women taunted the soldiers.
To this day, the identification remains questionable.
All the soldiers were shooting at him, but he was never hit."
Although some compensation might be required to smooth over hurt feelings, the rejected husband was expected to accept his wife's decision.
When he found them in a tipi, he called Crazy Horse's name from outside.
But his words were apparently misinterpreted by a half-Tahitian scout, Frank Grouard (not be confused with Fred Gerard, another U.S. Cavalry scout during the summer of 1876), who reported that Crazy Horse had said that he would "go north and fight until not a white man is left".
Crazy Horse is said to have exhorted his warriors before the fight with the battle cry "Hóka-héy!
One account said that after the son had reached maturity and shown his strength, his father gave him his name and took a new one, ''Waglula'' (Worm).
The warrior broke their hold and then lightning struck him leaving a lightning symbol on his cheek and white marks like hailstones appeared on his body.
The Lakota warriors swept over the hill and attacked the infantry.
His Lakota name was ''Woptura'' and he was given, by the government, the name Chips, and was referred to as Old Man Chips.
The Lakota told accounts of him in their oral histories.
Crazy Horse was named at birth ''Cha-O-Ha'' ("In the Wilderness" or "Among the Trees", meaning he was one with nature.)
One knife was reportedly fashioned from an army bayonet.
In November 2010, Nebraska Governor Dave Heineman approved designating US-20 from Hay Springs to Fort Robinson in honor of Crazy Horse, capping a year-long effort by citizens of Chadron.
The photograph had belonged to the family of the scout Baptiste "Little Bat" Garnier.
When the Crazy Horse Monument is finished, the head of  Crazy Horse will be the world’s largest sculpture of the human head measuring approximately 87 feet (27 meters) tall, more than 27 feet taller than the 60-foot faces of the US Presidents carved in the side of Mount Rushmore.
(Little Hawk was the nephew of his maternal step-grandfather, Corn.)
According to one version of events, Crazy Horse finally agreed, saying that he would fight "till all the Nez Perce were killed".
A week later at 3:00 p.m. on June 25, 1876, Custer's 7th Cavalry attacked a large encampment of Cheyenne and Lakota bands along the Little Bighorn River, marking the beginning of his last battle.
Crazy Horse fled to the nearby Spotted Tail Agency with his sick wife (who had become ill with tuberculosis).
Other experts point out that the gradient lighting in the photo indicates a skylight studio portrait, common in larger cities.
Because Crazy Horse was with a married man's wife, he was stripped of his title as Shirt Wearer (leader).
Another interpreter, William Garnett, was brought in but quickly noted the growing tension.
When Bourke asked about the popular account of the guard bayoneting Crazy Horse first, Little Big Man said that the guard had thrust with his bayonet, but that Crazy Horse's struggles resulted in the guard's thrust missing entirely and lodging his bayonet into the frame of the guardhouse door.
In gratitude he gave ''Waglula'' his two eldest daughters as wives: Iron Between Horns (age 18) and Kills Enemy (age 17).
Curly was to follow the warrior’s role to dress modestly and to do as the warrior's prophecy said so he would be unharmed in battle.
Subsequently, Crazy Horse was never wounded by a bullet.
On September 10, 1876, Captain Anson Mills and two battalions of the Third Cavalry captured a Miniconjou village of 36 tipis in the Battle of Slim Buttes, South Dakota.
The sculpted likeness of Crazy Horse is dedicated to the spirit of Crazy Horse and all Native Americans.
Crazy Horse and his followers attempted to rescue the camp and its headman, (Old Man) American Horse but they were unsuccessful.
Five warrior cousins sacrificed blood and flesh for Crazy Horse at the Last Sun Dance of 1877.
Crazy Horse was present at the Battle of Platte Bridge and the Battle of Red Buttes in July 1865.
He was also shown his "face paint" for battle, to consist of a yellow lightning bolt down the left side of his face, and white powder.
The blasting continues and the memorial is a work in progress, dependent upon donations and private funding only.
In ''Black Elk Speaks,'' Neihardt relays:
Sioux battle participant, Little Soldier, said, "The greatest fighter in the whole battle was Crazy Horse."
She died in 1927 during the influenza outbreaks of the 1920s.
Once inside, Crazy Horse struggled with the guard and Little Big Man and attempted to escape.
A red-tailed hawk led them to their respective spots in the hills; as the trees are tall in the Black Hills, they could not always see where they were going.
According to Frederick Hoxie's ''Encyclopedia of North American Indians'' (1996), Crazy Horse was the third in his male line to bear the name of Crazy Horse, which in Lakota is ''Tasunke Witko''.
Two decades later, the portrait was published with further details about how the photograph was produced at Fort Robinson, though the editor of the book "remained unconvinced of the authenticity of the photograph".
The sculpture was begun by Ziółkowski in 1948.
His people struggled through the winter, weakened by hunger and the long cold.
Crazy Horse is commemorated by the incomplete Crazy Horse Memorial in the Black Hills of South Dakota near the town of Berne—a monument carved into a mountain, in the tradition of the Mount Rushmore National Memorial.
Crazy Horse decided to surrender with his band to protect them, and went to Fort Robinson in Nebraska.
Among the Oglala winter counts, the stealing of 100 horses is noted by Cloud Shield, and possibly by American Horse and Red Horse owner, as equivalent to the year 1840–41.
There is no target completion date at this time; however, in 1998, the face of Crazy Horse was completed and dedicated.
In addition, no other photograph with the same painted backdrop has been found.
They had been sent out from Fort Phil Kearny to follow up on an earlier attack on a wood train.
He came across a Minneconjou Lakota village under attack by Crow warriors.
Garnett's first-hand account of Crazy Horse's surrender alludes to Larrabee as the "half blood woman" who caused Crazy Horse to fall into a "domestic trap which insensibly led him by gradual steps to his destruction".
His father ''Waglula'' took him to what today is Sylvan Lake, South Dakota, where they both sat to do a ''hemblecha'' or vision quest.
She was the wife of No Water, who had a reputation for drinking too much.
Crook ordered Crazy Horse's arrest and then departed, leaving the military action to the post commander at Fort Robinson, Lieutenant Colonel Luther P. Bradley.
After the death of Crazy Horse, Private Charles Howard produced at least two images of the famed war leader's alleged scaffold grave, located near Camp Sheridan, Nebraska.
No Water ran his horse until it died and continued on foot until he reached the safety of his own village.
Lakota forces numbering between 1000 and 2000 attacked a wood-cutting crew near the fort.
Several photographers passed through Fort Robinson and the Red Cloud Agency in 1877—including James H. Hamilton, Charles Howard, David Rodocker and possibly Daniel S. Mitchell—but none used the backdrop that appears in the tintype.
It was the Army's worst defeat on the Great Plains up to that time.
"but the quotation is inaccurately attributed.
On December 21, 1866, Crazy Horse and six other warriors, both Lakota and Cheyenne, decoyed Capt.
His first kill was a Shoshone raider who had murdered a Lakota woman washing buffalo meat along the Powder River.
On the evening of his son's death, the elder Crazy Horse told Lieutenant H. R. Lemly 1840".
At one point, Crazy Horse persuaded Black Buffalo Woman to run away with him.
Red Cloud also arranged to send a young woman, Nellie Larrabee, to live in Crazy Horse's lodge.
Crazy Horse and Black Shawl Woman were married in 1871.
On August 2, 1867, Crazy Horse participated in the Wagon Box Fight, also near Fort Phil Kearny.
He placed the stone behind the horse's ear so that the medicine from his vision quest and Horn Chips would combine—he and his horse would be one in battle.
No Water borrowed a pistol and ran after his wife.
For the most part, the vision was true and Crazy Horse was rarely harmed in battle, except for when he was struck by an arrow after taking two enemy scalps.
Several elders convinced Crazy Horse and No Water that no more blood should be shed.
Lastly, he was given a sacred song that is still sung by the Oglala people today and he was told he would be a protector of his people.
Interpreter William Garnett described Larrabee as "a half-blood, not of the best frontier variety, an invidious and evil woman".
Black Elk, a contemporary and cousin of Crazy Horse, related the vision in ''Black Elk Speaks: Being the Life Story of a Holy Man of the Oglala Sioux'', from talks with John G. Neihardt.
On the morning of September 5, 1877, Crazy Horse and Lieutenant Lee, accompanied by Touch the Clouds as well as a number of Indian scouts, departed for Fort Robinson.
"I have never seen a photo of Crazy Horse," Agent Brennan replied, "nor am I able to find any one among our Sioux here who remembers having seen a picture of him.
In the late 1990s the original tintype was on exhibit at the Custer Battlefield Museum in Garryowen, Montana.
The designation may extend east another 100 miles through Cherry County to Valentine.
Crazy Horse lured Fetterman's infantry up a hill.
Crazy Horse's actions during the battle are unknown.
The Crazy Horse Memorial Foundation regularly takes the lead in cultural, social and educational events, including the Volksmarch, the occasion on which the public is allowed into the actual monument grounds.
A council of the Oglala leadership was called, then canceled, when Crook was incorrectly informed that Crazy Horse had said the previous evening that he intended to kill the general during the proceedings.
Tasunke Witko III (1840–77) was the son of Rattling Blanket Woman and Tasunke Witko II.
Crazy Horse has also been honored by having two highways named the Crazy Horse Memorial Highway.
The finished dimensions of the Crazy Horse memorial are expected to be approximately 641 feet (195 meters) wide and 563 feet (172 meters) tall.
One of his animal protectors would be the white owl which, according to Lakota spirituality, would give extended life.
She did so by moving in with relatives or with another man, or by placing the husband's belongings outside their lodge.
Touch the Clouds, Crazy Horse's first cousin and son of Lone Horn, was sitting in the tipi nearest the entry.
Crazy Horse had left the hostiles but a short time before he was killed and it's more than likely he never had a picture taken of himself."
With the help of the foundation the work continues and is overseen by a number of their 10 children.
He ranks among the most notable and iconic of Native American tribal members and was honored by the U.S.
Corn's youngest daughter, Red Leggins, who was 15 at the time, requested to go with her sisters; all became Waglula's wives.
The camp was entered by Lieutenant Grattan and 28 other US troopers, who intended to arrest a Minniconjou man for having stolen a cow.
According to a close friend, he and Crazy Horse "were both born in the same year at the same season of the year", which census records and other interviews place in 1842.
Ziółkowski was inspired to create the Crazy Horse Monument after receiving a letter from native Indian Chief Henry Standing Bear, who asked if Ziolkowski would be interested in creating a monument for the native North Americans to show that the Indian nations also have their heroes.
His personal courage was attested to by several eye-witness Indian accounts.
On June 17, 1876, Crazy Horse led a combined group of approximately 1,500 Lakota and Cheyenne in a surprise attack against brevetted Brigadier General George Crook's force of 1,000 cavalry and infantry, and allied 300 Crow and Shoshone warriors in the Battle of the Rosebud.
His face paint was similar to that of his father, who used a red lightning strike down the right side of his face and three red hailstones on his forehead.
Crazy Horse's vision first took him to the South where, in Lakota spirituality, one goes upon death.
The historian George Hyde wrote that Rattling Blanket Woman was Miniconjou and the sister of Spotted Tail, who became a Brulé head chief.
In 1956, a small tintype portrait purportedly of Crazy Horse was published by J. W. Vaughn in his book ''With Crook at the Rosebud''.
The chief fell and surrendered to the guards.
When asked by Lieutenant Clark to join the Army against the Nez Perce, Crazy Horse and the Miniconjou leader Touch the Clouds objected, saying that they had promised to remain at peace when they surrendered.
Corn, the head man of the village, had lost his wife in the raid.
After having witnessed the death of the Lakota leader Conquering Bear at the Grattan Massacre, Crazy Horse began to get trance visions.
Crazy Horse fought in numerous battles between the Lakota and their traditional enemies, the Crow, Shoshone, Pawnee, Blackfeet, and Arikara, among Plains tribes.
There are at least four possible locations as noted on a state highway memorial near Wounded Knee, South Dakota.
The Native Americans consider Thunderhead Mountain, where the monument is being carved, to be sacred ground.
He saved Crazy Horse's life at least once and was with him when he died.
John Gregory Bourke's memoir of his service in the Indian wars, ''On the Border with Crook'', describes a different account of Crazy Horse's death.
Postal Service in 1982 with a 13¢ Great Americans series postage stamp.
The five warrior cousins were braves considered vigorous battle men of distinction.
Crazy Horse's tactical and leadership role in the battle remains ambiguous.
Just outside the door, Crazy Horse was stabbed with a bayonet by one of the members of the guard.
As Crazy Horse struggled, Little Big Man lost his grip on one elbow, and Crazy Horse drove his own knife deep into his own lower back.
Historians continue to dispute the identification.
Water Man, one of only five Arapaho warriors who fought, said Crazy Horse "was the bravest man I ever saw.
Both phrases are used in context by Black Elk in Black Elk Speaks.
When Crazy Horse answered, No Water stuck a pistol into the tipi and aimed for Crazy Horse.
He based his account on an interview with Crazy Horse's rival, Little Big Man, who was present at Crazy Horse's arrest and wounding.
It is well known that Crazy Horse did not want to be photographed during his lifetime and is reportedly buried in an undisclosed location.
It was Lakota custom to allow a woman to divorce her husband at any time.
Crazy Horse attended the Sun Dance as the honored guest but did not take part in the dancing.
In his vision, a warrior on his horse rode out of a lake and the horse seemed to float and dance throughout the vision.
In South Dakota, the SDDOT designated US-16/US-385 between Custer and Hill City, which passes by the Crazy Horse Memorial.
In the view of author Chris Hedges, "there are few resistance figures in American history as noble as Crazy Horse", while adding that "his ferocity of spirit remains a guiding light for all who seek lives of defiance."
While Lakota Chief Henry Standing Bear believed in the sincerity of the motives, many Native Americans are still against this memorial.
His mother Rattling Blanket Woman (born 1814) died when Crazy Horse was only four years old.
Her older siblings were Lone Horn (born 1790, died 1877) and Good Looking Woman (born 1810).
No Water left, with Crazy Horse's relatives in hot pursuit.
Rattling Blanket Woman was the daughter of Black Buffalo and White Cow (also known as Iron Cane).
In August 1877, officers at Camp Robinson received word that the Nez Perce of Chief Joseph had broken out of their reservation in Idaho and were fleeing north through Montana toward Canada.
He was given a medicine bundle to protect him for life.
Crazy Horse was known to have a personality characterized by aloofness, shyness, modesty and aloneness.
Bradley had received orders that Crazy Horse was to be arrested and taken under the cover of darkness to Division Headquarters.
A conflict known as the Grattan massacre ensued and the Sioux killed the US Army forces.
In 1864, after the Third Colorado Cavalry decimated Cheyenne and Arapaho in the Sand Creek Massacre, Lakota Oglala and Minneconjou bands allied with them against the US military.
Her younger sister was named Looks At It (born 1815), later given the name They Are Afraid of Her.
(The cow had wandered into the camp, and after a short time someone butchered it and passed the meat out among the people).
The guard stabbed Crazy Horse with his bayonet in the back.
The following morning, Crazy Horse's body was turned over to his elderly parents; they took it to Camp Sheridan and placed it on a burial scaffold.
After witnessing the Grattan Massacre in 1854, Curly went out on a vision quest to seek guidance but without going through the traditional procedures first.
Waglula sat south of Black Elk Peak but north of his son.
On the morning of September 4, 1877, two columns moved against Crazy Horse's village, only to find that it had scattered during the night.
Only one eyewitness account actually identifies the soldier as Private William Gentles.
Crazy Horse married Black Shawl, a member of the Oglala Lakota and relative of Spotted Tail.
Horn Chips was one of his sons, who was also known as Charles Chips.
Crazy Horse put no makeup on his forehead and did not wear a war bonnet.
The Lakota took substantial losses, as the soldiers were firing new breech-loading rifles.
Seeing that they were surrounded, Grummond headed his cavalry back to Fetterman.
No Water was away from camp when Crazy Horse and Black Buffalo Woman left for the buffalo hunt.
He rode closest to the soldiers, yelling to his warriors.
As the vision ended, he heard a red-tailed hawk shrieking off in the distance.
The battle, although not substantial in terms of human losses, delayed Crook's joining  with the 7th Cavalry under George A. Custer.
No Water tracked down Crazy Horse and Black Buffalo Woman in the Slim Buttes area.
In addition, it should be noted that "Horn Chips" is not the correct name of this medicine man, and it has become a repeated error since 1982 in subsequent publications.
Crazy Horse sat between two humps at the top of a hill north and to the east of the lake.
Lee turned the Oglala war chief over to Captain James Kennington, in charge of the post guard, who accompanied Crazy Horse to the post guardhouse.
The earliest published reference is from 1881, in which the phrase is attributed to Low Dog.
The love of his life was Black Buffalo Woman, whom he courted, but she married another man named No Water.
Additional Cheyenne and Lakota hiding in the buckbrush along Peno Creek effectively surrounded the soldiers.
A thunderstorm came over the warrior and his people grabbed hold of his arms trying to hold him back.
Dr. McGillycuddy doubted any photograph of the war leader had been taken.
Most of the soldiers fled to a circle of wagon boxes without wheels, using them for cover as they fired at the Lakota.
Although the US Government has offered to help fund the construction of the Crazy Horse Monument on several occasions, Ziokowski and his successors have declined.
In the fall of 1870, Crazy Horse invited Black Buffalo Woman to accompany him on a buffalo hunt in the Slim Buttes area of present-day northwestern South Dakota.
Many Lakota were buried in the hills surrounding Fort Phil Kearny in Wyoming.
