The 1917 Code of Canon Law incorporated this ban, but in 1963, recognizing that, in general, cremation was being sought for practical purposes and not as a denial of bodily resurrection, the choice of cremation was permitted in many circumstances.
The cost of pet cremation depends on location, where the cremation is done, and time of cremation.
Refractory bricks are typically replaced every five years, because thermal fatigue gradually introduces fissures that reduce the insulating strength.
This is sometimes done for religious reasons, such as in traditional Hindu and Jain funerals.
They may also be sold as precious metal scrap.
For low cost, a plain, particle-board coffin (known in the trade as a "chippie") can be used.
Cremation remained common, but not universal, in both ancient Greece and ancient Rome.
Religions such as Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism, and Sikhism practice cremation.
Most casket manufacturers provide lines of caskets that are specially built for cremation.
In a Japanese funeral and in Taiwan, the bones are not pulverised, unless requested beforehand.
The basic sealed plastic container bag may be contained within a further cardboard box or velvet sack, or they may be contained within an urn if the family had already purchased one.
There are various types of Cremulators, including rotating devices, grinders, and older models using heavy metal balls.
Hinduism obliges the closest male relative (son, grandson, etc.)
This option is charged for in England in an Anglican church where the fee is set by the Table of Parochial Fees (£36 to incumbent and £78 to church council) a total of £114 in 2010 with a marker charged as extra.
LeMoyne built the crematory to cremate bodies in a controlled environment primarily for sanitary reasons.
Cremated remains can be scattered or buried.
Most large crematoria have small cremators installed for the cremation of fetal and infant remains.
Their weight is approximately  for adult human females and  for adult human males.
Some religions, such as Roman Catholicism, require the burial or entombment of cremated remains, but burial of cremated remains may often be accomplished in the burial plot of another person, such as a family member, without any additional cost.
Other groups also support cremation.
Criticism of burial rites is a common form of aspersion by competing religions and cultures, including the association of cremation with fire sacrifice or human sacrifice.
In the Middle East and Europe, both burial and cremation are evident in the archaeological record in the Neolithic era.
They started building crematories with stained-glass windows and marble floors with frescoed walls.
The soul (Atman, Brahman) is the essence and immortal that is released at the ''Antyeshti'' ritual, but both the body and the universe are vehicles and transitory in various schools of Hinduism.
For them, the body was not a mere receptacle for a spirit that was the real person, but an integral part of the human person.
In the United Kingdom, and possibly other countries, the undertaker is required to remove such devices prior to delivering the body to the crematorium, and sign a declaration stating that no hazardous device remains in place.
In the Iron Age, inhumation again becomes more common, but cremation persisted in the Villanovan culture and elsewhere.
In some countries including the United States, there is increasing use of the alkaline hydrolysis process, trademarked as "Resomation", which involves the use of lye heated with the body at high pressure, allowing the body to be broken down into its chemical compounds.
However, for some even cremation is still relatively expensive, especially as a lot of fuel is required to perform it.
Handles (if fitted) are plastic and approved for use in a cremator.
In Europe, there are traces of cremation dating to the Early Bronze Age (c. 2000 BCE) in the Pannonian Plain and along the middle Danube.
Christians preferred to bury the dead rather than to cremate the remains, as was common in Greek and Roman culture.
Some contemporary adhererents of the faith have opted for cremation.
Although the Holy See has in some cases authorized bishops to grant permission for funeral rites to be carried out in the presence of cremated remains, it is preferred that the rites be carried out before cremation, in the presence of the still intact body.
Judaism traditionally disapproved of cremation in the past (it was the traditional means of disposing the dead in the neighboring Bronze Age cultures).
The ancient Egyptians developed an intricate transmigration of soul theology, which prohibited cremation, and this was adopted widely among other Semitic peoples.
The reason given is that "cremains" is thought to have less connection with the deceased, whereas a loved one's "cremated remains" has a more identifiable human connection.)
The default container used by most crematoriums, when nothing more expensive has been selected, is usually a hinged, snap-locking plastic box.
The legalization of cremation came about through the eccentric activities of Welsh Neo-Druidic priest, William Price.
Some persons choose to have a small part of their ashes (usually less than 1 part in 1000, because of cost constraints) scattered in space (known as space burial and offered by companies such as Elysium Space and Celestis).
During the cremation process, the greater portion of the body (especially the organs and other soft tissues) is vaporized and oxidized by the intense heat; gases released are discharged through the exhaust system.
The process usually takes 90 minutes to two hours, with larger bodies taking longer time.
Rare mentions of such cremations in aristocratic circles appear in texts dated to be before the 9th century AD, where the widow of a king had the choice to burn with him or abstain.
natural gas or propane, compared to wood) and by using an incinerator (Retort) (closed cabin) rather than an open fire.
That custom was also very widespread among the Germanic peoples of the northern continental lands from which the Anglo-Saxon migrants are supposed to have been derived, during the same period.
Some denominations, like Lutheran churches in Scandinavia, favour the urns being buried in family graves.
the UK, legislations now requires that cremators be fitted with abatement equipment (filters) that remove serious pollutants such as mercury.
In 1885, the first official cremation in the UK took place in Woking.
For surviving kin, cremation is preferred because of simple portability.
Islam has specific rites for the treatment of the body after death.
This small building, resembling the buildings at Woking, remained largely unchanged from its 19th-century style and was in full operation until the late 1950s.
When cremation is finished, the remains are passed through a magnetic field to remove any metal, which will be interred elsewhere in the crematorium grounds or, increasingly, recycled.
It then reappeared in the 5th and 6th centuries during the migration era, when sacrificed animals were sometimes included with the human bodies on the pyre, and the deceased were dressed in costume and with ornaments for the burning.
It was first tested on 17 March 1879, when the body of a horse was cremated.
In Orthodoxy, cremation is perceived by some a rejection of the dogma of the general resurrection.
In 1963,at Second Vatican Council Pope Paul VI lifted the ban on cremation, and in 1966 allowed Catholic priests to officiate at cremation ceremonies.
Balinese funerals are very expensive and the body may be interred until the family can afford it or until there is a group funeral planned by the village or family when costs will be less.
These furnaces, based around a design commonly used for hospital incinerators, instead vented the gasses down through a series of ducts embedded in the floor, with the help of a draft fan located at the far end of the structure.
A particular point of objection was that the bodies of Westerners were kept separate from those of Asian descent, who were mostly locals.
In many countries, cremation is usually done in a crematorium.
In early 2002, 334 corpses that were supposed to have been cremated in the previous few years at the Tri-State Crematory were found intact and decaying on the crematorium's grounds in the U.S. state of Georgia, having been dumped there by the crematorium's proprietor.
The first modern crematory in the U.S. was built in 1876 by Francis Julius LeMoyne after hearing about its use in Europe.
After the funeral service, the box is removed from the shell before cremation, permitting the shell to be re-used.
In Christian countries and cultures, cremation has historically been discouraged, but now in many denominations it is accepted.
In the United States, the cremated remains are almost always contained in a thick watertight polyethylene plastic bag contained within a hard snap-top rectangular plastic container, which is labeled with a printed paper label.
A specific variety of bone nail used in the femur and humerus is a hollow shell which is inflated with saline under high pressure to grip the interior of the bone, and constitutes a bomb in the cremator.
An official certificate of cremation prepared under the authority of the crematorium accompanies the remains, and if required by law, the permit for disposition of human remains, which must remain with the cremated remains.
The mean weight of adult cremated remains in a Florida, U.S. sample was 5.3&nbsp;lb (approx.
The layer of fire bricks in contact with the combustion process protects the outer layer and must be replaced from time to time.
Cremated remains may also be incorporated, with urn and cement, into part of an artificial reef, or they can also be mixed into paint and made into a portrait of the deceased.
In modern India, the last known case of Sati was in 1987, by Roop Kanwar in Rajasthan.
The first crematoria in the Protestant countries were built in the 1870s, and in 1908, the Dean and Chapter of Westminster Abbey—one of the most famous Anglican churches—required that remains be cremated for burial in the abbey's precincts.
Throughout parts of Europe, cremation was forbidden by law, and even punishable by death if combined with Heathen rites.
Each cremation uses about 28 gallons of fuel and releases about 540 pounds of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere.
Cremation accounts for about 20% of the $13.4 billion funeral industry in the U.S.
The minority Jurchen and their Manchu descendants originally practiced cremation as part of their culture.
The rite of passage is performed in harmony with the Hindu religious view that the microcosm of all living beings is a reflection of a macrocosm of the universe.
In the United Kingdom, the body is not removed from the coffin and is not placed into a container as described above.
Some countries, such as India and Nepal, prefer different methods, such as open-air cremation.
Since that incident, cremation has taken place in Israel without interruption.
Another environmental concern is that traditional burial takes up a great deal of space.
The act of ''sati'' refers to a funeral ritual in which a widowed woman committed suicide on the husband's funeral pyre.
However, Protestant churches welcomed  the use of cremation at a much earlier date than the Catholic Church; pro-cremation sentiment was not unanimous among Protestants, however.
Therefore, in the United Kingdom, bodies are cremated in the same coffin that they are placed in at the undertaker's, although the regulations allow the use of an approved "cover" during the funeral service.
The last rite of passage returns the body to the five elements and origins.
In early Roman Britain, cremation was usual but diminished by the 4th century.
Those crack surfaces may be held together and closed by the lining compressive stresses that develop from thermal expansion when the cremator is heated to operating temperatures.
When the lease expires, the remains are disinterred and a specialist bundles the bones, inscribes the forehead of the skull with the information that was on the headstone, and places the remains in a special crypt.
In 1917, ''Volume 6 of the American Lutheran Survey'' stated that "The Lutheran clergy as a rule refuse" and that "Episcopal pastors often take a stand against it."
Except where required by law, the family of the deceased may decide whether the body should be cremated, though the Church "does not normally encourage cremation."
Pet cremation is practiced internationally.
However, coal and coke were used until the early 1960s.
Cremated remains can be kept in an urn, stored in a special memorial building (columbarium), buried in the ground at many locations or sprinkled on a special field, mountain, or in the sea.
The traditional method of corpse disposal is through ritual exposure in a "Tower of Silence", but both burial and cremation are increasingly popular alternatives.
During that time it was thought that people were getting sick by attending funerals of those recently deceased and that decomposing bodies were leaking into the water systems.
The body is cremated in the coffin.
The Vrba–Wetzler report  offers the following description.
The deceased was Mrs Jeannette C. Pickersgill, a well-known figure in literary and scientific circles.
The current 1983 Code of Canon Law, states: "The Church earnestly recommends the pious custom of burial be retained; but it does not forbid cremation, unless this is chosen for reasons which are contrary to Christian teaching."
There are no universal rules governing Catholic funeral rites in connection with cremation, but episcopal conferences have laid down rules for various countries.
The cremated remains are available for the owner to pick up in seven to ten business days.
Cremated remains, which do not constitute a health risk, may be buried or interred in memorial sites or cemeteries, or they may be retained by relatives and dispersed in various ways.
It has also disapproved of preservation of the dead by means of embalming and mummifying, a practice of the ancient Egyptians.
They can also be scattered on private property with the permission of the owner.
The coffin or container is inserted (charged) into the retort as quickly as possible to avoid heat loss through the top door.
Not to be left behind, crematories had an idea of making cremation beautiful.
Phoenicians practiced both cremation and burial.
The final disposition depends on the personal preferences of the deceased as well as their cultural and religious beliefs.
In a traditional burial, the body is buried in a casket made from a variety of materials.
From the Cycladic civilisation in 3000 BCE until the Sub-Mycenaean era in 1200–1100 BCE, Greeks practiced inhumation.
2.4&nbsp;kg) for adults (range ).
For heavy duty cremators having an inner sacrificial layer of refractory material, often cracks, slagging, bulging and dislocation can be seen on this layer shortly after the cremator is put into use.
They can also have them come to remove the animals body from the home themselves to take to a crematorium to be cremated.
Today, "scattering", or "strewing," is an acceptable practice in many Protestant denominations, and some churches have their own "garden of remembrance" on their grounds in which remains can be scattered.
The Holocaust furnaces were supplied by a number of manufacturers, with the best known and most common being Topf and Sons as well as Kori Company of Berlin, whose ovens were elongated to accommodate two bodies, slid inside from the back side.
A crematorium may be part of a chapel or a funeral home or may be an independent facility or a service offered by a cemetery.
When some Masonic groups advocated cremation as a means of rejecting Christian belief in the resurrection, the Holy See forbade Catholics to practice cremation in 1886.
In addition, there are several services in which the cremated remains will be scattered in a variety of ways and locations.
After gaining independence from British colonial era, India passed a series of additional laws.
The Rigveda contains a reference to the emerging practice, in RV 10.15.14, where the forefathers "both cremated (''agnidagdhá-'') and uncremated (''ánagnidagdha-'')" are invoked.
The American Humane Society’s cost for cremation of 22.5&nbsp;kg (50&nbsp;lb).
The environmental impact may be reduced by using cremators for longer periods and not cremating on the same day as the coffin is received which reduces the use of fossil fuel and hence carbon emissions.
Cultural groups had their own preferences and prohibitions.
Cremation is not an alternative to a funeral, but rather an alternative to burial or other forms of disposal.
Romans practiced both, with cremation generally associated with military honors.
The 1908 Catholic Encyclopedia was critical about these efforts, referring to them as a "sinister movement" and associating them with Freemasonry, although it said that "there is nothing directly opposed to any dogma of the Church in the practice of cremation."
During 1888, in which 28 cremations took place, the Cremation Society planned to provide a chapel, waiting rooms and other amenities there.
The time required for cremation varies from body to body, and, in modern furnaces, the process may be as fast as one hour per 50&nbsp;kg (100&nbsp;lb) of body weight.
In Germany, the process is mostly similar to that of the United Kingdom.
By the end of the year, the Cremation Society of Great Britain had overseen two more cremations, a total of 3 out of 597,357 deaths in the UK that year.
The custom became dominant throughout Bronze Age Europe with the Urnfield culture (from c. 1300 BCE).
Laws against cremation were challenged and invalidated in 1915 (two years after the construction of the first crematorium in the Netherlands), though cremation did not become legally recognised until 1955.
Refractory bricks are designed in several layers.
Civil suits were filed against the Marsh family as well as a number of funeral homes who shipped bodies to Tri-State; these suits were ultimately settled.
Meaning that there was no visible duct work for the exhaust gases.
The Ultra-Orthodox Hasidic Jews have maintained a stricter line on cremation, and disapprove of it as Halakha (Jewish law) forbids it.
Delivery-only is sometimes called ''west chapel service'' in industry jargon.
Bahá’u’lláh has laid down as a law, in the Aqdas, the manner of Bahá’í burial, and it is so beautiful, befitting and dignified, that no believer should deprive himself of it."
The rise of Christianity saw an end to cremation, being influenced by its roots in Judaism, the belief in the resurrection of the body, and following the example of Christ's burial.
This practice was made illegal in 1829 during the British colonial rule of India.
Cremated remains are returned to the next of kin in different manners according to custom and country.
Several implanted devices are required to be removed.
In 1873 Professor Gorini of Lodi and Professor Brunetti of Padua published reports or practical work they had conducted.
(The Cremation Association of North America prefers that the word "cremains" not be used for referring to "human cremated remains".
Islam strictly forbids cremation.
In Australia, the deceased is cremated in a coffin supplied by the undertaker.
Cremation was used to destroy any organic matter that could cause illness and give families a better way to preserve ashes.
This was found to be distributed bimodally according to sex, with the mean being  for men (range ) and  for women (range ).
On November 19, 2004, Marsh pleaded guilty to all charges.
Large items such as titanium hip replacements (which tarnish but do not melt) or casket hinges are usually removed before processing, as they may damage the processor.
Anthropologists have been able to track the advance of Christianity throughout Europe with the appearance of cemeteries.
A model of Professor Brunetti's cremating apparatus, together with the resulting ashes, was exhibited at the Vienna Exposition in 1873 and attracted great attention, including that of Sir Henry Thompson, 1st Baronet, a surgeon and Physician to the Queen Victoria, who returned home to become the first and chief promoter of cremation in England.
The container may be mounted on a charger (motorised trolley) that can quickly insert it, or on a fixed or movable hopper that allows the container to slide into the cremator.
Exceptions are made for circumstances where it may not be avoided (when civil authority demands it, or epidemics) or if it may be sought for good cause, but when a cremation is willfully chosen for no good cause by the one who is deceased, he or she is not permitted a funeral in the church and may also be permanently excluded from liturgical prayers for the departed.
This meant that the bodies of tourists from other Asian nations, such as Japan and South Korea, were mass cremated, rather than being returned to their country of origin for funeral rites.
Reusable or cardboard coffins are becoming popular, with several manufacturers now supplying them.
The Act imposed procedural requirements before a cremation could occur and restricted the practice to authorised places.
He was arrested by the police for the illegal disposal of a corpse.
Cremation may serve as a funeral or post-funeral rite as an alternative to the interment of an intact dead body in a coffin, casket or shroud.
In Tokyo, for example, traditional burial plots are extremely scarce and expensive, and in London, a space crisis led Harriet Harman to propose reopening old graves for "double-decker" burials.
In the United States federal law does not dictate any container requirements for cremation.
This is rooted in Rig Veda's section 10.18, where the hymns mourn the death of the child, praying to deity Mrityu to "neither harm our girls nor our boys", and pleads the earth to cover, protect the deceased child as a soft wool.
Ancient texts of Hinduism make no mention of Sati; its early medieval era texts forbid it, while post 10th century medieval era texts partly justify it and criticize the practice.
Balinese Hindu dead are generally buried inside the container for a period of time, which may exceed one month or more, so that the cremation ceremony (Ngaben) can occur on an auspicious day in the Balinese-Javanese Calendar system ("Saka").
or less pet is $110 while 23&nbsp;kg (51&nbsp;lb).
After the incineration is completed, the dry bone fragments are swept out of the retort and pulverised by a machine called a ''Cremulator''&nbsp;— essentially a high-capacity, high-speed blender&nbsp;— to process them into "ashes" or "cremated remains", although pulverisation may also be performed by hand.
The oldest operating crematorium in Australia is at Rookwood Cemetery, in Sydney.
The box containing the body is placed in the retort and incinerated at a temperature of 760 to 1150 °C (1400 to 2100 °F).
A cremator is an industrial furnace that is able to generate temperatures of  to ensure disintegration of the corpse.
Funeral homes may also offer rental caskets, which are traditional caskets used only during the services, after which the bodies are transferred to other containers for cremation.
But now, the atheist Communist party enforces a strict cremation policy on Han Chinese.
Sir Henry Thompson's main reason for supporting cremation was that "it was becoming a necessary sanitary precaution against the propagation of disease among a population daily growing larger in relation to the area it occupied".
Cremation was sometimes used by Catholic authorities as part of punishment for Protestant heretics, and this did not only include burning at the stake.
Burial is a known source of certain environmental contaminants, with the coffin itself being the major contaminant, however in some countries e.g.
In ''The Lutheran Pastor'', George Henry Gerberding stated:
By 2008, the cremation rate was 36.2% and was growing about 1 percentage point a year, according to CANA.
Cremations can be "delivery only", with no preceding chapel service at the crematorium (although a church service may have been held) or preceded by a service in one of the crematorium chapels.
In Japan and Taiwan, the remaining bone fragments are given to the family and are used in a burial ritual before final interment.
Even in Medieval Europe, cremation was practiced in situations where there were multitudes of corpses simultaneously present, such as after a battle, after a pestilence or famine, and where there was an imminent fear of diseases spreading from the corpses, since individual burials with digging graves would take too long and body decomposition would begin before all the corpses had been interred.
In the United States, the casket is often placed inside a concrete vault or liner before burial in the ground.
A portion of the cremated remains may be retained in a specially designed locket known as cremation jewelry, or even blown into special glass keepsakes and glass orbs.
There may be melted metal lumps from missed jewellery; casket furniture; dental fillings; and surgical implants, such as hip replacements.
However, the inner sacrificial lining needs to be replaced on a regular basis to offer proper protection to the outer layers.
Practices that show insufficient respect for the ashes of the dead such as turning them into jewelry or scattering them are forbidden for Catholics.
One service sends a lipstick-tube sized sample of the cremated remains into low earth orbit, where they remain for years (but not permanently) before reentering the atmosphere.
Some religions, such as Roman Catholicism, prefer to either bury or entomb the remains.
Exceptions may be made in special cases, such as with still-born twins or with a still-born baby and a mother who died during childbirth.
Because the weight of dry bone fragments is so closely connected to skeletal mass, their weight varies greatly from person to person.
A pacemaker could explode, damage the cremator, and potentially injure nearby staff; spinal cord stimulators have similar power sources, and implanted drug reservoirs may produce smaller explosions.
These systems automatically monitor the interior to tell when the cremation process is complete, after which the furnace automatically shuts down.
In August 2007, an orthodox youth group in Israel was accused of burning down the country's sole crematorium.
Cremation is therefore becoming more friendly toward the environment though natural burials are also possible.
Because of this incident and the potential for further incidents, a number of new crematoria like the B&L Cremation Systems model Phoenix II-1 are being built to hold individuals weighing up to 450&nbsp;kg.
The Indian Sati Prevention Act from 1988 further criminalised any type of aiding, abetting, and glorifying of ''sati''.
However, exceptions are made for Hui who do not cremate their dead due to Islamic beliefs.
Although in current-day Australia, pet owners could purchase services to have their companion animal cremated and placed in a pet cemetery or taken home.
Beginning in the Middle Ages, and even more so in the 18th century and later, rationalists and classicists began to advocate cremation again as a statement denying the resurrection and/or the afterlife, although the pro-cremation movement more often than not took care to address and refute theological concerns about cremation in their works.
In the U.S. only about one crematory per year was built in the late 19th century.
'''Cremation''' is the combustion, vaporization and oxidation of dead bodies to basic chemical compounds, such as gases, ashes and mineral fragments retaining the appearance of dry bone.
Some families prefer to have the deceased present at the funeral with cremation to follow; others prefer that the cremation occur prior to the funeral or memorial service.
