By April 1854, the Russians had reached the lines of Trajan's Wall where they were finally halted.
A Kiev cossack revolt that began in the Vasylkiv county of Kiev Governorate (province) in February 1855 spread across the whole Kiev and Chernigov governorates.
Minor naval skirmishes also occurred in the Far East, where at Petropavlovsk on the Kamchatka Peninsula a British and French Allied squadron including  under Rear Admiral David Price and a French force under Counter-Admiral Auguste Febvrier Despointes besieged a smaller Russian force under Rear Admiral Yevfimy Putyatin.
On 14 November a storm sank thirty allied transport ships including  which was carrying a cargo of winter clothing.
In response an Anglo-French fleet bombarded the port, causing much damage to the town.
The Ottoman army lost to the Egyptians at the Battle of Nezib on 24 June 1839.
The Corps of Royal Engineers sent men to the Dardanelles while Burgoyne went to Paris, meeting the British Ambassador and the French Emperor.
According to historian Shepard Clough, the war:
Tsar Nicholas&nbsp;I then deployed his 4th and 5th army corps along the River Danube in Wallachia, as a direct threat to the Ottoman lands south of the river, and had Count Karl Nesselrode, his foreign minister, undertake talks with the Ottomans.
McCallum points out the war was enthusiastically supported by the British populace as it was happening, but the mood changed very dramatically afterwards.
Learning of the fall of Kars he withdrew to the Ingur.
The British were also concerned that Russia might make advances toward India, or move toward Scandinavia, or Western Europe.
In compliance with article III, Russia restored to the Ottoman Empire the city and citadel of Kars in common with "all other parts of the Ottoman territory of which the Russian troop were in possession".
When the allies chose a land attack on Sebastopol any plan for a landing in the east was abandoned.
The Crimean War also led to the eventual realisation by the Russian government of its technological inferiority, in military practices as well as weapons.
In July 1853, the Tsar sent his troops into the Danubian Principalities.
When Russia attacked the Ottoman Empire in 1853, King Otto of Greece saw an opportunity to expand North and South into Ottoman areas that had large Greek Christian majorities.
The battle saw the Russians defeated and led to a change in command.
The war opened in the Balkans, when Russian troops occupied Ottoman provinces situated in modern Romania and began to cross the Danube.
In September 8000 Turks landed at Batum, but the main concentration was at Sukhum Kale.
Part of the Russian resistance was credited to the deployment of newly invented blockade mines.
Some credit Russell with prompting the resignation of the sitting British government through his reporting of the lacklustre condition of British forces deployed in Crimea.
The principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia were nominally returned to the Ottoman Empire; in practice they became independent.
They were defeated, losing 8000 men to the Russian 3000.
One of the aims of the Russian advance had been to encourage the Orthodox Christian Serbs and Bulgarians living under Ottoman rule to rebel.
The naval operations of the Crimean war commenced with the dispatch, in the summer of 1853, of the French and British fleets to the Black Sea region, to support the Ottomans and to dissuade the Russians from encroachment.
A massive new fleet of more than 350 gunboats and mortar vessels was prepared, but before the attack was launched, the war ended.
Campbell had seen the effectiveness of the new Minie rifles, with which his troops were armed, at the Battle of the Alma a month before, and was confident his men could beat back the Russians.
Russia and the Ottoman Empire massed forces on two main fronts, the Caucasus and the Danube.
After the French extended the telegraph to the coast of the Black Sea during the winter of 1854, the news reached London in two days.
French sappers were working on one half of the line which was finished in May.
This caused a more widespread Russian retreat, including a number of their artillery units.
As the legend of the "Charge of the Light Brigade" demonstrates, the war quickly became an iconic symbol of logistical, medical and tactical failures and mismanagement.
The charge of the Light Brigade had so unnerved the Russian cavalry, which had previously been routed by the Heavy Brigade, that the Russians were set to full-scale flight by the subsequent charge of the Light Brigade.
Despite the shelling, the sailors of the 120-gun ship ''Rossiya'', led by Captain Viktor Poplonsky, defended the entrance to the harbor.
Isolation from European entanglements seemed more than ever desirable.
Determined to address the Eastern Question by putting an end to the Russian threat to the Ottoman Empire, the allies in August 1854 proposed the "Four Points" for ending the conflict, in addition to the Russian withdrawal:
The outbreak of the Sepoy Mutiny in 1857 shifted attention to the heroic defense of British interest by the army, and further talk of reform went nowhere.
Prince Orbeliani tried to drive them off and found himself trapped.
* The Straits Convention of 1841, which allowed only Ottoman and Russian warships in the Black Sea, was to be revised;
However, Greece did not coordinate its plans with Russia, did not declare war, and received no outside military or financial support.
On 13 July 1841, after the expiry of the Treaty of Hünkâr İskelesi, the London Straits Convention was signed under pressure from European countries.
At the start of the battle, a large body of Russian cavalry charged the 93rd&nbsp;Highlanders, who were posted north of the village of Kadikoi.
The United Kingdom could not tolerate Russian dominance of Ottoman affairs, as that would challenge the British domination of the eastern Mediterranean.
The siege was lifted on 23 June 1854.
According to the Treaty of Adrianople (1829) Russian and European commercial ships were authorized to freely pass through Black Sea straits, Serbia received autonomy, and Danubian Principalities (Moldavia and Wallachia) became territories under Russian protection.
The blockade continued and Kars surrendered on 8 November.
The demand for professionalization was, however, achieved by Florence Nightingale, who gained worldwide attention for pioneering and publicizing modern nursing while treating the wounded.
In April 1855, they supported an invasion of Kerch and operated against Taganrog in the Sea of Azov.
Newspaper readership informed public opinion in the United Kingdom and France as never before.
Sweden and Prussia were willing to join the UK and France, and Russia was isolated.
'''1855:Kars:''' In the year up to May 1855 Turkish forces in the east were reduced from 120,000 to 75,000, mostly by disease.
The local commanders ignored the demands, leading to the British aide-de-camp personally delivering a quickly written and confusing order to attack the artillery.
By previous treaties, the sultan was committed "to protect the (Eastern Orthodox) Christian religion and its churches."
As the result of that Russian military operation, the Treaty of Hünkâr İskelesi was signed.
In September they moved against Russian installations in the Dnieper estuary, attacking Kinburn in the first use of ironclad ships in naval warfare.
On 5 September, another French bombardment (the sixth) was followed by an assault by the French Army on 8 September resulting in the capture of the Malakoff by the French, and following their failure to retake it, the collapse of the Russian defences.
In June, a third bombardment was followed after two days by a successful attack on the Mamelon, but a follow-up assault on the Malakoff failed with heavy losses.
The European powers continued to pursue diplomatic avenues.
Several commanders on both sides were either incompetent or unlucky and few fought aggressively.
The local Armenian population kept Muravyev well-informed about the Turks at Kars and he judged they had about five months of supplies.
The Royal Navy also wanted to undermine the threat of a powerful Russian navy.
Karl Marx quipped that "there they are, the French doing nothing and the British helping them as fast as possible".
While Alaska attracted little interest at the time, the population of nearby British Columbia started to increase rapidly a few years after hostilities ended.
Sinop provided the United Kingdom and France with the ''casus belli'' ("cause for war") for declaring war against Russia.
Frustrated by the wasted effort, and with demands for action from their citizens, the allied force decided to attack the center of Russian strength in the Black Sea at Sevastopol on the Crimean peninsula.
On 12 May 1855, British-French warships entered the Kerch Strait and destroyed the coast battery of the Kamishevaya Bay.
In the Battle of Sinop on 30 November 1853 they destroyed a patrol squadron of Ottoman frigates and corvettes while they were anchored in port.
The Russians retreated to the north, blowing up their magazines and the city fell on 9 September 1855 after a 337-day-long siege.
At the same time, the British and French commanders Sir Charles Napier and Alexandre Ferdinand Parseval-Deschenes—although they led the largest fleet assembled since the Napoleonic Wars—considered the Sveaborg fortress too well-defended to engage.
Taylor argues that the war resulted not from aggression but from the interacting fears of the major players:
Several weeks of fighting saw little change in the front line, and the Mamelon remained in Russian hands.
The Anglo-French forces in the Far East also made several small landings on Sakhalin and Urup, one of the Kuril Islands.
The Greek Uprising (began in the spring of 1821) evidenced internal and military weakness of Ottoman Empire and the performance of severe atrocities by Ottoman military forces (see Chios massacre).
In this later Russo-Turkish War the states of Romania, Serbia, Montenegro gained international recognition of their independence and Bulgaria achieved its autonomy from direct Ottoman rule.
Greece played a peripheral role in the war.
The main objective of the siege, the destruction of the Russian fleet and docks took place over winter.
* Russia was to abandon any claim granting it the right to interfere in Ottoman affairs on behalf of Orthodox Christians.
Many more artillery pieces had arrived and been dug into batteries.
In 1827 the allied Anglo-Franco-Russian fleet destroyed almost all the Ottoman naval forces during the Battle of Navarino.
On 21 May 1855, the gunboats and armed steamers attacked the seaport of Taganrog, the most important hub near Rostov on Don.
The front settled into a siege and led to horrible conditions for troops on both sides.
Orbeliani lost about 1000 men out of 5000.
There he convinced the Sultan to reject the Russian treaty proposal, as compromising the independence of the Turks.
The peace terms arrived at by the four powers at the Vienna Conference were delivered to the Russians by the Austrian Foreign Minister Count Karl von Buol on 5 December 1853.
By then, the Russian withdrawal was complete, except for the fortress towns of northern Dobruja, while their place in the Principalities was taken by the Austrians, as a neutral peacekeeping force.
During the siege, the Russians lost four 110- or 120-gun, three-decker ships of the line, twelve 84-gun two-deckers and four 60-gun frigates in the Black Sea, plus a large number of smaller vessels.
Additionally, the telegraph reduced the independence of British overseas possessions from their commanders in London due to such rapid communications.
The battle outraged opinion in UK, which called for war.
Fewer than half of the 80,000 Russian soldiers who crossed the Pruth in 1853 survived.
More than 1000 enemy guns tested the strength of the fortress for two days.
Returning, they reported that they believed there were 15,000–20,000 troops encamped.
By far, most of the deaths would result from sickness rather than combat, for the Russian army still suffered from medical services that ranged from bad to none.
Fearing an Ottoman collapse, France and Britain rushed forces to Gallipoli.
When Parliament passed a bill to investigate by the vote of 305 to 148, Aberdeen said he had lost a vote of no confidence and resigned as prime minister on 30 January 1855.
Britain and France desired more than any other state to preserve the integrity of the Ottoman Empire because they did not want to see Russia gaining access to the Mediterranean Sea.
In 1830 Greece became an independent state after 10 years of independence war and the Russo-Turkish War of 1828–1829.
Raglan having also died on 28 June.
Therefore, the Russian emperor, Alexander II, decided to sell Alaska.
The burning of tar warehouses and ships led to international criticism, and in London the MP Thomas Gibson demanded in the House of Commons that the First Lord of the Admiralty explain "a system which carried on a great war by plundering and destroying the property of defenceless villagers".
Russia lost the war and was forbidden from hosting warships in the Black Sea.
The deployment of Italian troops to the Crimea, and the gallantry shown by them in the Battle of the Chernaya (16 August 1855) and in the siege of Sevastopol, allowed the Kingdom of Sardinia to be among the participants at the peace conference at the end of the war, where it could address the issue of the ''Risorgimento'' to other European powers.
The third siege attempt was made 19–31 August 1855, but the city was already fortified and the squadron could not approach close enough for landing operations.
On 4 August Russian scouts saw a movement which they thought was the start of a withdrawal, the Russians advanced and the Turks attacked first.
The war was officially ended by the Treaty of Paris, signed on 30 March 1856.
Being outnumbered the Russians abandoned Poti and Redut Kale and drew back to Marani.
In April 1854 an Anglo-French fleet entered the Baltic to attack the Russian naval base of Kronstadt and the Russian fleet stationed there.
Sevastopol fell after eleven months, and formerly neutral countries began to join the allied cause.
On 12 July 1855 HMS&nbsp;''Jasper'' grounded near Taganrog thanks to a fisherman who moved buoys into shallow water.
On Sunday, 21 January 1855, a "snowball riot" occurred in Trafalgar Square near St.&nbsp;Martin-in-the-Field in which 1,500 people gathered to protest against the war by pelting buses, cabs, and pedestrians with snow balls.
The Russians sent a fleet to Sinop in northern Anatolia.
In the west, the Russians were dissuaded from attacking Vidin by the presence of the Austrian forces, which had swelled to 280,000 men.
Encouraged by the decision of the French, and supported by the German minister Otto von Bismarck, Russia renounced the Black Sea clauses of the treaty agreed to in 1856.
A relieving force fell back and there was a possibility of taking Erzerum, but Muravyev chose not to.
Accordingly, the Austrians resisted Russian diplomatic attempts to join the war on the Russian side.
Shortly after he learned of the failure of Menshikov's diplomacy toward the end of June 1853, the Tsar sent armies under the commands of Field Marshal Ivan Paskevich and General Mikhail Gorchakov across the Pruth River into the Ottoman-controlled Danubian Principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia.
The bureaucracy was riddled with graft, corruption and inefficiency and was unprepared for war.
On 25 September the whole army marched southeast and encircled the city to the south.
Both slowly approached along the Kars-Gyumri road and faced each other, neither side choosing to fight (June–July).
111 medals were awarded.
In February 1855, the Russians attacked the allied base at Eupatoria, where an Ottoman army had built up and was threatening Russian supply routes.
Russia soon withdrew its troops from the Danubian principalities, which were then occupied by Austria for the duration of the war.
At sea the Turks sent a fleet east which was destroyed by Admiral Nakhimov at Sinope.
The Russians lost 1300, including Prince Orbeliani.
Nicholas insisted that he no longer wished to expand Imperial Russia but that he had an obligation to the Christian communities in the Ottoman Empire.
Both sides withdrew to their former positions.
Naval attacks on other ports, such as the ones in the island of Hogland in the Gulf of Finland, proved more successful.
The Russian fleet during this time declined to engage the allies, preferring to maintain a "fleet in being"; this strategy failed when Sevastopol, the main port and where most of the Black Sea fleet was based, came under siege.
When the police intervened, the snowballs were directed at them.
In April 1855, the allies staged a second all-out bombardment, leading to an artillery duel with the Russian guns, but no ground assault followed.
Thus, France abandoned its opposition to Russia after the establishment of a republic.
The Allies fired over 20,000 shells but failed to defeat the Russian batteries.
The Tsar, full of remorse for the disasters he had caused, caught pneumonia and died on 2 March.
This view of 'diplomatic drift' as the cause of the war was first popularised by A. W, Kinglake, who portrayed the British as victims of newspaper sensationalism and duplicitous French and Ottoman diplomacy.
Despite the setback at Chetatea, on 28 January 1854, Russian forces laid siege to Calafat.
There was little additional naval action until March 1854 when on the declaration of war the British frigate ''Furious'' was fired on outside Odessa harbour.
In July 1854, the Turks under Omar Pasha crossed the Danube into Wallachia and on 7 July 1854, engaged the Russians in the city of Giurgiu and conquered it.
Aside from a minor skirmish at Constanța, there was little for the allies to do.
More recently, the historians Andrew Lambert and Winfried Baumgart have argued that, first, Britain was following a geopolitical strategy in aiming to destroy a fledgling Russian Navy which might challenge the Royal Navy for control of the seas, and second, that the war was a joint European response to a century of Russian expansion not just southwards but also into western Europe.
10000 irregulars deserted to their villages.
was not the result of a calculated plan, nor even of hasty last-minute decisions made under stress.
About this time the Persians made a semi-secret agreement to remain neutral in exchange for the cancellation of the indemnity from the previous war.
Read, who replaced Vorontsov, fearing an Anglo-French landing in conjunction with Shamyl and the Persians, recommended withdrawal north of the Caucasus.
The United Kingdom's immediate fear was Russian expansion at the expense of the Ottoman Empire, which the UK desired to preserve.
In the 1820s and '30s the Ottoman Empire endured a number of setbacks which challenged the existence of the country.
On 31 December 1853, the Ottoman forces at Calafat moved against the Russian force at Chetatea or Cetate, a small village nine miles north of Calafat, and engaged them on 6 January 1854.
Perhaps the most influential contributor to the development of naval mining was a Swede resident in Russia, the inventor and civil engineer Immanuel Nobel (the father of Alfred Nobel).
Failing to pursue the retreating forces was one of many strategic errors made during the war, and the Russians themselves noted that had they pressed south that day they would have easily captured Sevastopol.
Indeed, like the British, the Austrians were now coming to see that an intact Ottoman Empire was necessary as a bulwark against the Russians.
In the same month, the Western Allied Baltic Fleet tried to destroy heavily defended Russian dockyards at Sveaborg outside Helsinki.
The Treaty of Paris stood until 1871, when France was defeated by Prussia in the Franco-Prussian War of 1870–1871.
They were defeated in the battle of Başgedikler, losing 6000 men, half their artillery and all their supply train.
Greece was not invited to the peace conference and made no gains out of the war.
The clash came on 30 November 1853 when a Russian fleet attacked an Ottoman force in the harbour at Sinop, and destroyed it at the Battle of Sinop.
Russia disputed this attempted change in authority.
Muhammad Ali of Egypt was not happy about his lack of control and power in Syria, and he resumed military action.
The resulting Battle of Oltenița was the first engagement following the declaration of war.
It had to compromise with Hungary; the two countries shared the Danubian Empire and Austria slowly became a little more than a German satellite.
Russia depended on imports - both for her domestic economy and for the supply of her military forces: the blockade forced Russia to rely on more expensive overland shipments from Prussia.
* The Danube was to be opened up to foreign commerce;
Thus, France's show of force presented a real threat, and when combined with aggressive diplomacy and money, induced the Ottoman Sultan Abdülmecid&nbsp;I to accept a new treaty, confirming France and the Roman Catholic Church as the supreme Christian authority with control over the Roman Catholic holy places and possession of the keys to the Church of the Nativity, previously held by the Greek Orthodox Church.
Russia, as a member of the Holy Alliance, had operated as the "police of Europe", maintaining the balance of power that had been established in the Treaty of Vienna in 1815.
The French, on the west had less to do than the British on the east with their siege lines and the large nine mile open wing back to their supply base on the south coast.
During this time the garrison commander, Admiral Nakhimov fell on 30 June 1855.
Having resigned the ambassadorship in January, he had been replaced by Colonel Rose as ''chargé d'affaires''.
The British bombardment worked better than the French, who had smaller caliber guns.
They crossed the border and set up artillery south of town.
On 24 May 1855, sixty ships containing 7000 French, 5000 Turkish and 3000 British troops set off for a raid on the city of Kerch east of Sevastopol in an attempt to open another front on the Crimean peninsula and to cut off Russian supplies.
It failed, the Russians losing 8000 men and the Turks 1500 (29 September).
Led by Omar Pasha, the Ottomans fought a strong defensive campaign and stopped the advance at Silistra.
The war also led to the establishment of the Victoria Cross in 1856 (backdated to 1854), the British Army's first universal award for valour.
When they relented in August most of the campaigning season was lost.
The claimed losses were 4000 Turks and 400 Russians.
Burgoyne and his team of engineers inspected and surveyed the Dardanelles area in February, being fired on by Russian riflemen when they went to Varna.
The longer-term causes involved the decline of the Ottoman Empire and the unwillingness of Britain and France to allow Russia to gain territory and power at Ottoman expense.
He started in May and by June was south and west of the town.
This required a 100-mile march south through a country with poor roads.
:in the end they won.
Russia ceded some land in Bessarabia at the mouth of the Danube to Moldavia.
The outnumbered Russian Baltic Fleet confined its movements to the areas around its fortifications.
This action was a violation of the London Straits Convention.
In the south about 30000 Turks slowly moved east to the main Russian concentration at Gyumri or Alexandropol (November).
The appointment was made with the intent of forcing the Ottomans to recognise France as the "sovereign authority" over the Christian population.
'''1855: Georgian coast:''' Omar Pasha, the Turkish commander at Crimea had long wanted to land in Georgia, but the western powers vetoed it.
The riot was finally put down by troops and police acting with truncheons.
To block further Greek moves, the British and French occupied the main Greek port at Piraeus from April 1854 to February 1857, and effectively neutralized the Greek army.
Nicholas began courting Britain by means of conversations with the British ambassador, George Hamilton Seymour, in January and February 1853.
A Russian army of 10,000 landed on the Bosphorus shores in 1833 and helped to prevent the capture of Constantinople; thus the possible dissolution of the Ottoman Empire was prevented.
The new treaty deprived Russia of its right to block warships from passing into the Black Sea in case of war.
A second counterattack, ordered personally by Nicholas, was defeated by Omar Pasha.
The events were contemporary with the popular movement of Chłopomania that laid the foundations of the Ukrainian national awakening and the creation of the Kiev Hromada (Kiev Community).
This scrutiny eventually led to the abolition of the sale of commissions.
Sevastopol remained invested by the allies, while the allied armies were hemmed in by the Russian army in the interior.
The Governor of Taganrog, Yegor Tolstoy, and lieutenant-general Ivan Krasnov refused the ultimatum, responding that "Russians never surrender their cities".
In 1838 the situation was similar to 1831.
The Russians did nothing and he evacuated to Batum in February of the following year.
Despite its grand ambitions toward the south, it had not built its railroad network in that direction, and communications were poor.
A secret additional clause allowed Ottomans not to send troops but to close the Straits to foreign warships if and when Russia was under threat.
While the churches eventually worked out their differences and came to an initial agreement, both Nicholas I of Russia and the French Emperor Napoleon III refused to back down.
Taylor says that from the British perspective:
