The number of requests for own copies increased from 40,000 to 199,000 between 2003 and 2012.
Data involving Minor offences are stored until five years after the irrevocable settlement of the case – extended to ten years if the individual was sentenced to prison or community service.
Many Canadian universities require a Criminal Records Check or other screening procedure (e.g.
80 years after the birth of the individual, all data is removed.
Individuals can obtain a national criminal history in through two ways:1.
Any individual with a criminal record can access the electronic version of the database to receive this information for free.
Crimes that can be disclosed through the certificate of criminal record:
A list of NPCS Accredited Agencies is available from the CrimTrac website.
If no recent convictions have been added to an individual's records, judgments will be removed upon death or when the individual reaches 90 years old.
Perspective employers are not allowed access to disclosure at any time.
According to the severity of the committed crime and, more importantly, the received sentence, most entries are deleted after 5, 10, 15 or 20 years, respectively.
Technically spoken all Dutch people do have an empty criminal record.
A person may be required to present a Police Certificate as part of employment screening, as a prerequisite for volunteer work, as preparation for a court appearance, to apply for a visa to enter/stay in some countries, or to satisfy a statutory requirement.
*For imprisonment of over 10 years: 15 years
Three levels of check are provided (limited, basic and extended).
Criminal convictions on the certificate include all violations of the Denmark Criminal Code.
Arrests that do not lead to an official finding of guilt, i.e.
In the case of minors and children, these are removed from the Bulletin 3 once the individual concerned has reached 18 years and/or three years from the date the crime was committed.
To cancel a conviction record the following requirements under Penal Code 47 (art.136.2) must be met: 1) A period of time after having served the sentence must have elapsed (6 months, 2 years, 3 years or 5 years depending on the sentence); 2) no further crime has been committed in the interim; 3) civil compensation has been paid or the person has been declared without money.
* Level 3: Level 2 + records of discharges which have not been removed (all charges regardless of disposition) (CPIC Level 2 Query + Persons Query)
The Criminal Record Extract for a Visa Applications contains information pertaining to custodial or suspended sentences, community service, fines, juvenile punishments, and overseas decisions against Finnish citizens or permanent residents.
Lexbase has become the subject of intense criticism from Swedish media, government and the general public, given its alleged infringement on the right to privacy and increased social alienation of offenders.
Low-level disclosures only reveal unspent convictions (convictions which have not yet been expunged under the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974), while enhanced disclosures normally include ''all'' convictions, cautions, reprimands and final warnings.
For example, an employer may request to see their possible employee's criminal record with their consent.
The criminal records and persona details of everyone held by the General Prosecutors office are lifelong, and continue to be updated throughout their life, every time they move address/change name etc.
employer) to view the current record.
Some misdemeanour cases with the main punishment being less than 200 Euros, and cases involving minors are not published by The Punishment Register.
Enhanced disclosures are typically used to screen applicants for positions such as police officer, social worker, teacher which involve contact with vulnerable groups and children.
Extensions can occur for non suspended prison sentences, mental hospital orders and youth detention.
*Imprisonment between of less than 3 years: 5 years
* Disciplinary proceedings against any judicial officer, members of disciplined services, probation officer, employees of Hong Kong Monetary Authority, Mandatory Provident Fund Schemes Authority, Office of the Commissioner of Insurance (insurance officers) and Securities and Futures Commission (executive grade only)
As per the Act on the National Criminal Register 2000, the length of time an outcome remains on the National Criminal Register is as follows:
The federal government maintains extensive criminal histories and acts as a central repository for all agencies to report their own data.
'''Creating and destroying a criminal record'''
Yet there have been two notable changes in Swedish regulation of criminal records.
* Fraud (including counts of forgery)
Under certain conditions, the Court will expunge convictions after 15 years in an exceptional sentence, 10 years if there conviction of the sentence does not exceed 5 years, 5 years if the sentence of imprisonment does not exceed one year.
This declaration will be given if the person:
Therefore, the record of their convictions will be sealed in the Central Criminal Records Registry and is likely made unavailable to the police.
* Criminal damage (vandalism)
On the state level, state police, troopers, highway patrol, correctional agencies, and other law enforcement agencies also maintain separate databases.
In Malta, criminal records are held by the Criminal Records Office which is maintained by the Malta Police.
* Custodial sentences of between 5 and 8 years = 7 years from the date of release
* Custodial sentences of more than 1 month: 10 years from the date of release
In the United States, these compilations are unlikely to be admissible in court as proof of arrest or conviction.
* Bulletin 2 – restricted to French administrative authorities and various private organisations through the sanctions of the penal code
* the complete list of any decisions acquitting the accused due to the incapacity of the individual to stand trial because of lack of culpability or for reasons of practical repentance, given that the offence was punishable by a minimum penalty of three months imprisonment;
Registered sex offenders have information about their crimes or misdemeanors readily available, and Department of Correctional Services in many states disseminate criminal records to the public, through media such as the Internet.
The Netherlands took part in the Network of Judicial Registers pilot project, with 10 other countries, exchanging information on criminal records electronically.
For a person with a clear criminal record, access to it is free and they may access it by email or post.
The legislation also provides for inclusion of a greater European Union sex offender registry.
*Imprisonment between 3 and 10 years: 10 years
Ireland remains the only country in the EU and one of the only countries in the Council of Europe area to not have such legislation.
Certain criminal records are not accessible at any time for instance the criminal record/record details of the President of the Republic of Slovakia are not available to anyone during his/her time in office.
In case of sexual crimes (article 240b-250) the criminal record will be destroyed after 80 years.
A '''criminal record''' or '''police record''' is a record of a person's criminal history, generally used by potential employers, lenders etc.
Essentially this legislation is allows individuals to move on from their convictions and ensuring that they are not socially and economically disadvantaged for the rest of their lives after serving their crimes.
Criminal records are kept for a maximum of 10 years.
* the complete listing of any irrevocable convictions issued by a court where a custodial penalty or a pecuniary sanction has been imposed;
* Drug offences (possession, trafficking, attempt to sell)
If the offence was committed recklessly, then the data will be removed 5 years after release
In other words, your conviction will become spent.
There are varying time frames for which convictions remain on an individual's criminal record.
Germany has a criminal record system holding all the information regarding past offences and sentences.
;Registering of sex offenders:
The data held by the Gardaí is not openly available to the public.
The registry is updated daily and holds information on approximately 6.3 million individuals.
Applications can be made in person at the Central Police Station in Nicosia.
* Sexual offences (sexual assault, sexual coercion, rape)
The final type of certificate is the Security Clearance Check whereby companies within the UK who have a branch office in Finland can apply for security clearance checks on prospective employees.
In Spain, conviction records are not ‘expunged’  as they are not erased completely but rather are ‘cancelled’ in a process known as ‘cancelling a conviction record’.
Some provinces may require high-risk professions to be screened to ensure public safety.
The Act states that personal data is protected and can only be used for the public interest.
Information contained in the Conduct certificate includes a declaration of whether the person is in good conduct or a declaration containing the convictions recorded against the person.
This is particularly important given that most domestic courts in European countries place significant weight on offenders’ past convictions during criminal sentencing (for example, under s 151(1) of the Powers of Criminal Courts (Sentencing) Act 2000 (UK) ).
Normally the traffic fine is given by a police officer, and the payment is generally done by banking.
This was brought about in order to reduce the manual labour associated with the previous system
Therefore, this certificate system is commonly referred to as the Sex Offenders Register, as it allows  the details of all sex offenders subject to the requirements of the Sex Offenders Act 2001 to be held centrally by the Gardaí.
The Chief Executive of Hong Kong has the sole power to pardon offences committed in Hong Kong under section 12 of article 48 Basic Law of Hong Kong.
Yes, Generally speaking, the record of an individual is expunged once the individual reaches 80years of age or death.
a conviction or the acceptance of a caution, are ''not'' considered part of a person's criminal record and are not typically disclosed as part of the process.
In accordance with Latvian law, most criminal records are terminated after several years.
If the sentence served exceeds one year, eight years after the completion of the sentence will the criminal act/s be struck from the record, unless a new conviction has been imposed in the meantime;
* has no criminal record;
* Custodial sentences of up to 3 years: 5 years from the date of release (at the Court's discretion)
* Applying to become a trustee or controller for Mandatory Provident Fund or a bank controller, executive or employee
'''Length of time that are individuals on the criminal record system'''
Some states have official "statewide repositories" that contain criminal history information contributed by the various county and municipal courts within the state.
Poland also participated in the pilot project for ‘Network of Judicial Registers’, along with ten other EU member states, for the electronic exchange of criminal records among member states.
All criminal offences are recorded on the Criminal Register.
* Burglary and robbery
The record will exist for 5 years in case of violations or 20 years for crimes.
As of 2004, the criminal record system of the Netherlands takes the form of a computerized system.
These state repositories are usually accurate so long as the state requires and supervises the uploading of data from the local courts.
* Custodial sentences of over 8 years = 10 years from the date of release
The Danish National Criminal Register of child sex abuse contains data relating to cases reported to the Danish police.
The length of time convictions are kept on the record varies according to type of conviction.
Austria maintains a sex offender registry, however this is for law enforcement and intelligence purposes only.
There are different procedures and protocols for the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus.
Individuals can ask for a copy of their own record once per year, or against a fee anytime.
Other cases where direct access can be granted include: Guardia Civil for gun permits and border control police.
Judicial Documentation Data can be requested firstly by the individual involved.
Denmark does not allow the transfer of criminal records to foreign authorities or to the Europol database for storage.
In 2001, it became mandatory for employers to check criminal records of teachers and childcare workers before they were hired, given the seriousness of sex offences against children.
The Bulgarian Penal Code allows the removal of conviction data for individuals, known as the ‘rehabilitation of individuals’.
Level 1 is the most basic check and level 4 being the most extensive.
However, under Section 258 of the Children Act 2001, offences committed by those under eighteen years of age can be expunged from the record once certain conditions are met:
Therefore, the Central Criminal Records Registry is only accessible to judges, public prosecutors and the judicial police for investigative purposes.
There is a centralised criminal record system, there is only one centralised database where the final criminal conviction issued by a Slovak criminal court is registered.
An employer may also apply directly for disclosure in relation to a prospective employee if this is permitted under Polish laws or regulations (for example, in relation to employment in the security industry or employment involving contact with children).
* in cases in which a criminal offence was committed as a minor, when the minor is 17 years old;
* Drug offences, and;
The categories of criminal conviction contained within the Extract from the Criminal Record includes those involving offences against children, sexual offences, violent offences and narcotics offences.
Malta has recently introduced a sex offenders register.
Some adults can also be eligible for non-disclosure of their records through the process of Record sealing or Expungement.
The time in which a conviction remains on a person's criminal record depends on the type of conviction received, i.e.
* Level 4: Level 3 + check on local police databases, court and law enforcement agency databases  (also known as "Police Record Check")The vulnerable sector screening includes a level 4 check plus any sexual offences and convictions which pardon was granted.
In 1989, access was given to employers with the implementation of the ‘subject access’ paragraph in Swedish criminal records legislation.
This legislation issue was brought into the spotlight during the 2007 media coverage of the Madeleine McCann case.
In Greece, criminal records are written certificates where entries are created according to the legal provisions provided for in Articles 573-580 of the Greek Code of Criminal Procedure (CCrP).
Portuguese legislation allows for all criminal convictions to be removed from an individual's record once the rehabilitation period has passed.
The criminal record system for citizens of Bulgaria are kept in the Criminal Records Office located at every Regional Court in Bulgaria, and the Central Office of Criminal Records at the Ministry of Justice.
* Level 1: Records of criminal convictions for which a pardon has not been granted (CPIC Level 1 Query)
The amount of time for this to occur is dependent on the nature and scope of the legal sanction for that crime.
Individuals can request An Excerpt from the Penal Register  for personal access only.
Therefore, there is not only information recorded for those who have had a criminal sanction place against them, covered by the database of offenders, but also for those that are in pre-trial detention (database for those under coercive measures) and those who are suspected and accused of a crime (database for those under criminal procedures).
In Cyprus, criminal records are held by the Criminal Investigation Office of Cyprus Police  which forms part of the Republic of Cyprus Minister of Justice and Public Order.
A citizen retains the right to access data from their own criminal record, only under the condition that the purpose is to exercise his rights in another state.
In most cases it lists all non-expunged criminal offences and may also include traffic offences such as speeding and drunk-driving.
The certificate can be expected to be received within approximately seven working days, taking into account postage time.
There is a criminal register for the Netherlands.
*the offence is not one required to be tried by the Central Criminal Court (such as murder or rape)
France in particular, takes into account the need for rehabilitation as well as the need for public safety.
In Denmark, child sex abuse information is contained in two registers, the National Patient Register and the Criminal Register.
In the past, individuals were prohibited from retrieving information about themselves to prevent being forced by employers or landlords to hand over the information.
* Fraud (including counts of forgery)
* Motoring offences and infractions
Their local police service.2.
The police can also gain access with the intention of discovering the perpetrator of a criminal act.
Unlike other countries listed on this article, Hong Kong authorities do not allow for access to criminal records by employers or school purposes.
There are 5 different databases, the database of offenders, the database of those under coercive measures, database of those under criminal procedures, the database of fingerprint, palm prints and photographs and the database of DNA profiles.
A second type of rehabilitation is known as rehabilitation de jure which enacts new legislation.
'''Registration of sex offenders'''
For employment involving children or for security guards etc., a check will be made against the criminal record.
In the event that the gender and date of birth of the applicant matches any sexual offence record in the system, he/she is required to submit fingerprints to the RCMP for a physical confirmation.
Additionally, judgments are removed from a criminal record after the sentence has been served and the following time has elapsed:
Applications can be submitted online, via email, in person or by post of fax but are limited to the CJN.
For high-risk recidivists (10 years from completion of sentence), very serious offences (8 years), serious offences (5 years), less serious offences (3 years), suspended sentences (immediately on completion of sentence).
Law No 290 governs the disclosure of criminal records in Romania.
This type of criminal record certificate contains details of all convictions.
Information supplied depends on the level of disclosure required.
Removal of Offences from the Record
The National Criminal Register also includes information on collective entities (or publicly registered organisations).
Judgements are able to be removed from an individual's criminal record if the legislation decriminalising the act for which the person has been sentenced is passed, in the event of amnesty or court rehabilitation, and for imprisonment of up to 3 years after 20 years from the date of the final decision.
*All remaining cases: 2 years
Data can only be transferred to other entities, such as other law enforcement agencies, if their data protection meets the same standards, and if it is necessary for the public interest, or for the establishment of a legal claim (Article 47(4)).
Since the beginning of 2012, the data providing for the criminal records of Estonian citizens is available online.
The longer the prison sentence served the longer the conviction remains on the record, up to 15 years.
The data is not publicly accessible, but a person can obtain the data held about themselves upon request
'''Declaration about Behaviour'''
*For life imprisonment without substitution or life imprisonment: 20 years
Usually, the only group in society that is not subject to dissemination of any criminal records is juveniles.
All Hong Kong residents who plan to adopt children or travel/emigrate to another country can request for a Certificate of No Criminal Conviction - a document that is issued directly to the Consulate and/or government agencies and not to the requester.
However, there still remain some restrictions on access to this register, including protecting access to information on the criminal records of minors.
These cancelled records are still held in Information Centre records, and are readily available if the individual involved authorises the disclosure of the entire record.
There is no official sex offender registry in Ireland.
Criminal records are not purged regardless of time or seriousness of the case.
'''Is the data publicly accessible'''
People were able to search criminal records of their friends, colleagues and neighbours, showing the location of convicted criminals in the past 5 years in their neighbourhood by plotting red dots on the map.
Another type of certificate which is issued for visa, work or permit applications is the Criminal Record Extract for a Visa Application.
A criminal database exists in Hungary which is allowed for under the 85th Act of 1999 on the criminal database and the official certificate of criminal record.
Generally speaking, the disclosure of a criminal record is only released to the individual who committed the offense and only when that individual has handed power of attorney to another or they are declared legally incompetent may another successfully apply to receive the disclosure.
The National Criminal Register Information Office provides individuals and employers with disclosure in one of two formats: as an Inquiry about an Individual ("Zapytanie o udzielenie informacji o osobie") in the event that no disclosable convictions are found; or a National Criminal Register's Information about an Individual ("Informacja o osobie z Krajowego Rejestru Karnego") in the event that disclosable information exists.
The Danish Data Protection Agency governs the legislation in relation to criminal records and provides certain restrictions.
In New Zealand, criminal records are administered by the Ministry of Justice.
An unrestricted disclosure certificate is exclusively for specific state agencies (for example, firearms licensing bodies, military and law enforcement agencies), and, even then, is only issued in specific circumstances.
* and any judicial decision suspending a custodial penalty.
* Level 2: Level 1 + outstanding charges that the police force is aware of (CPIC Level 1 Query + Persons Query)
Regular employers more and more often require applicants to get a record copy themselves and give the employer.
By sending an e-mail with required data, scan of your passport or ID card, and paying €4.54 it is possible to have access to your own criminal record (if you have one).
Chap 297), a criminal record is considered 'spent' if it was the first criminal offence, sentenced to less than 3 months in jail or fined less than $10,000 and a period of 3 years has elapsed since conviction and no new conviction is registered against the said person.
This can occur if the individually has been sentenced conditionally, the individual has been sentenced to up to three years imprisonment and has not committed any other crimes punishable by imprisonment, the individual was sentenced to a fine, public reprimand or deprivation of civil rights, and they have not committed another crime the year following.
Some private re-sellers claim to offer an NCIC record search.
The written consent of the individual is not required.
However, the application must be made in person.
* has data in the criminal record which is irrelevant for the person who requested it.
The relevant legislation for this is governed by the Act on Criminal Records.
The registry contains information on those who have been sentenced in criminal courts or summarily imposed a fine, who have had a restraining order issued against them, or in whose cases prosecution had been abstained from.
In the United States, criminal records are compiled and updated on local, state, and federal levels by various law enforcement agencies.
*the person has not been dealt with for another offence in that three-year period
The Verification of Conviction Status contains personal information about the concerned individual (full name, personal identification number, date and place of birth, nationality, names of parents), details of all convictions, including whether rehabilitation was required, and information about all imposed administrative sanctions.
* if a minor has served a sentence in a correctional institution less than one year, the certificate will cease to be in effect after five years.
In Canada, criminal records are stored in Criminal Records Information Management Services, a centralized database operated by the Royal Canadian Mounted Police under the Canadian Police Information Centre (CPIC) since 1972.
Police stations gather and keep the records of conviction status of individuals born in Romania, and it is their responsibility to keep these records up-to-date.
This Certificate is valid for 6 months from the date it was issued, and can only be applied for by the concerned individual, relative of individual, legal heir of the concerned individual, or a power of attorney.
These certificates of criminal records will no longer be in effect, according to Article 578, under the following conditions:
The information in the criminal record certificate includes prior offences, court citations and convictions.
* Theft (including possession of stolen property, attempt to sell stolen goods)
A criminal record can also prevent you to get a visa and certain permits.
Convictions are removed from the Criminal Register upon expiry of the penalty, which generally occurs when the penalty ends, but can extend to up fifteen years after the penalty has been completed.
