In 2009 only 13 Croatians had been infected with HIV/AIDS and 6 had died from the disease.
an additional 350 troops serve as part of the NATO-led ISAF force in Afghanistan and another 20 with the KFOR in Kosovo.
Since 2003, Croatian foreign policy has focused on achieving the strategic goal of becoming a member state of the European Union (EU).
Croatia's Adriatic Sea coast contains more than a thousand islands.
The karst geology harbours approximately 7,000 caves and pits, some of which are habitat of the only known aquatic cave vertebrate—the olm.
Croatia was almost exclusively a wine-consuming country up until the late 18th century when a more massive production and consumption of beer started, the annual consumption of beer in 2008 was 83.3&nbsp;litres per capita which placed Croatia on a relatively high 15th place among the world's countries.
The latter encompasses all the counties along the Adriatic coast.
The World Wide Fund for Nature divides Croatia between three ecoregions—Pannonian mixed forests, Dinaric Mountains mixed forests and Illyrian deciduous forests.
The first native Croatian ruler recognised by the Pope was Duke Branimir, who received papal recognition from Pope John VIII on 7 June 879.
Along the coast, the architecture is Mediterranean with a strong Venetian and Renaissance influence in major urban areas exemplified in works of Giorgio da Sebenico and Niccolò Fiorentino such as the Cathedral of St. James in Šibenik.
The Ottoman wars instigated great demographic changes.
The state controls a part of the economy, with substantial government expenditure.
Croatia covers  and has diverse, mostly continental and Mediterranean climates.
In 1918, after World War I, Croatia was included in the unrecognized State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs which seceded from Austria-Hungary and merged into the Kingdom of Yugoslavia.
Croatia has a universal health care system, whose roots can be traced back to the Hungarian-Croatian Parliament Act of 1891, providing a form of mandatory insurance of all factory workers and craftsmen.
Large squares named after culture heroes, well-groomed parks, and pedestrian-only zones, are features of these orderly towns and cities, especially where large scale Baroque urban planning took place, for instance in Osijek (Tvrđa), Varaždin and Karlovac.
According to 2004 data, 2.7% of the workforce were employed in agriculture, 32.8% by industry and 64.5% in services.
Croatia ranked around the 40th in the world in life expectancy with 74 years for men and 81 years for women, and it had a low infant mortality rate of 5 per 1,000 live births.
It has been a crossroad of influences of the western culture and the east—ever since division of the Western Roman Empire and the Byzantine Empire—as well as of the Mitteleuropa and the Mediterranean culture.
The system has a capacity of 20&nbsp;million tonnes per year.
The Baška tablet, a stone inscribed with the glagolitic alphabet found on the Krk island and dated to 1100, is considered to be the oldest surviving prose in Croatian.
Since 22 January 2016, the prime minister of the government is Tihomir Orešković.
Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics (NUTS) division of Croatia is performed in several tiers.
There are 37,000 known species in Croatia, but their actual number is estimated to be between 50,000 and 100,000.
In addition, there are also County, Municipal, Misdemeanor, Commercial, and Administrative courts.
The present-day border between the two countries is a remnant of this outcome.
Annual production of wine exceeds 140&nbsp;million litres.
The period saw increasing threat of Ottoman conquest and struggle against the Republic of Venice for control of coastal areas.
The country's population is 4.28&nbsp;million, most of whom are Croats, with the most common religious denomination being Roman Catholicism.
military spending was an estimated 2.39% of the country's GDP, which placed Croatia 64th in a ranking of all countries.
The book publishing market is dominated by several major publishers and the industry's centrepiece event—Interliber exhibition held annually at Zagreb Fair.
On 15 January 1992, Croatia gained diplomatic recognition by the European Economic Community members, and subsequently the United Nations.
In the meantime, tensions escalated into overt war when the Yugoslav People's Army (JNA) and various Serb paramilitary groups attacked Croatia.
The population is covered by a basic health insurance plan provided by statute and optional insurance.
The movement grew rapidly and at the Tehran Conference in December 1943 the Partisans gained recognition from the Allies.
Croatia has 175 museums, visited by nearly 2.2&nbsp;million people in 2009.
Pula Film Festival, the national film awards event held annually in Pula, is the most prestigious film event featuring national and international productions.
In 2008, 47.6% of Croatia's primary energy production structure comprised use of natural gas (47.7%), crude oil (18.0%), fuel wood (8.4%), hydro power (25.4%) and other renewable energy sources (0.5%).
Nationwide leaving exams () were introduced for secondary education students in the school year 2009–2010.
The latter was resolved through an Arbitration Agreement of 4 November 2009, approved by national parliaments and a referendum in Slovenia.
The counties subdivide into 127 cities and 429 municipalities.
In December 2011, Croatia completed the EU accession negotiations and signed an EU accession treaty on 9 December 2011.
The legal system of Croatia is civil law, strongly influenced, as is the institutional framework, by the legal heritage of Austria-Hungary.
The city of Dubrovnik was founded by such survivors from Epidaurum.
In 2012, annual healthcare related expenditures reached 21.0&nbsp;billion kuna (€2.8&nbsp;billion).
Croatia entered a personal union with Hungary in 1102.
The Chakavian and Kajkavian dialects are distinguished by their lexicon, phonology, and syntax.
Length of a tourist stay in Croatia averages 4.9 days.
The oldest preserved examples of Croatian architecture are the 9th-century churches, with the largest and the most representative among them being Donatus of Zadar.
With the waning of the Ottoman Empire, art flourished during the Baroque and Rococo.
However, in December 2013 Croatians voted in favour of a constitutional referendum, backed by conservative groups, defining marriage as a "life union of woman and man".
There are hundreds of healthcare institutions in Croatia, including 79 hospitals and clinics with 23,967 beds.
Croatia has a civil law legal system in which law arises primarily from written statutes, with judges serving merely as implementers, and not creators of law.
Since the conclusion of the Croatian War of Independence, the tourist industry has grown rapidly, recording a fourfold rise in tourist numbers, with more than 11&nbsp;million tourists each year.
The overall life expectancy in Croatia at birth was 78 years in 2012.
The two largest political parties in Croatia are the Croatian Democratic Union and the Social Democratic Party of Croatia.
Population at2011 Census
Forests are also significantly present in the country, as they cover  representing 44% of Croatian land surface.
The President of the Republic () is the head of state, directly elected to a five-year term and is limited by the Constitution to a maximum of two terms.
Inland areas offer mountain resorts, agrotourism and spas.
The various Serb paramilitary groups then began pursuing a campaign of killing, terror and expulsion against the non-Serb population in the rebel territories, killing hundreds of Croat civilians and forcing a further 170,000 from their homes.
The Croatian War of Independence was fought successfully during the four years following the declaration.
A unitary state, Croatia is a republic governed under a parliamentary system.
Nevertheless, despite the provisions fixed in the constitution, freedoms of press and speech in Croatia have been classified as partly free since 2000 by Freedom House, the independent nongovernmental organisation that monitors press freedom worldwide.
According to the Constantine VII Christianization of Croats began in the 7th century, but the claim is disputed and generally Christianization is associated with the 9th century.
There are more than a thousand endemic species, especially in Velebit and Biokovo mountains, Adriatic islands and karst rivers.
Other habitat types include wetlands, grasslands, bogs, fens, scrub habitats, coastal and marine habitats.
Croatian is written using the Latin alphabet.
As of October 2011, there are nine nationwide free-to-air DVB-T television channels, with Croatian Radiotelevision (HRT), Nova TV and RTL Televizija operating two of the channels each, and the remaining three operated by the Croatian Olympic Committee, Kapital Net d.o.o.
Besides Marulić, Renaissance playwright Marin Držić, Baroque poet Ivan Gundulić, Croatian national revival poet Ivan Mažuranić, novelist, playwright and poet August Šenoa, poet and writer Antun Gustav Matoš, poet Antun Branko Šimić, expressionist and realist writer Miroslav Krleža, poet Tin Ujević and novelist and short story writer Ivo Andrić are often cited as the greatest figures in Croatian literature.
The central and southern regions near the Adriatic coastline and islands consist of low mountains and forested highlands.
Efforts made to impose policies to alter Croatian into "Serbo-Croatian" or "South Slavic" language, met resistance from Croats in form of Croatian linguistic purism.
Some of Serbs in Croatia left Sabor and declared the autonomy of areas that would soon become the unrecognised Republic of Serbian Krajina, intent on achieving independence from Croatia.
Furthermore, there are 52 foreign embassies and 69 consulates in the Republic of Croatia in addition to offices of international organisations such as the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, International Organization for Migration, OSCE, World Bank, World Health Organization (WHO), International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), United Nations Development Programme, United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and UNICEF.
Croatian and Serbian variants of the language were not officially recognised as different at the time, but referred to as the west and east version, and had different alphabets: the Latin alphabet and Serbian Cyrillic.
The medieval Croatian kingdom reached its peak in the 11th century during the reigns of Petar Krešimir IV (1058–1074) and Dmitar Zvonimir (1075–1089).
'''Croatia''' ( ;  ), officially the '''Republic of Croatia''' (, ), is a sovereign state at the crossroads of Central Europe, Southeast Europe, and the Mediterranean.
The least precipitation is recorded in the outer islands (Vis, Lastovo, Biševo, Svetac) and in the eastern parts of Slavonia; however, in the latter case, it occurs mostly during the growing season.
The Kingdom of Croatia retained its sovereignty for nearly two centuries, reaching its peak during the rule of Kings Petar Krešimir IV and Dmitar Zvonimir.
On 22 June 1941, the 1st Sisak Partisan Detachment was formed near Sisak, as the first military unit formed by a resistance movement in occupied Europe.
Croatian estimates for the number of Croats killed by Chetniks in the whole of Yugoslavia range from 18,000 to 32,000 (both combatants and civilians).
There are also 146 radio stations and 21 TV stations operating in the country.
Opposition to the claim led to a war and personal union of Croatia and Hungary in 1102, ruled by Coloman.
Ottoman advances in the Croatian territory continued until the 1593 Battle of Sisak, the first decisive Ottoman defeat, and stabilisation of borders.
Croatia has an extensive rail network spanning , including  of electrified railways and  of double track railways.
There are 314 newspapers and 2,678 magazines published in Croatia.
It promotes disability rights.
Croatia has unpolluted marine areas reflected through numerous nature reserves and 116 Blue Flag beaches.
Subsequently, the emperor pledged to respect all privileges and political rights of Kingdom of Croatia and the empress Maria Theresa made significant contributions to Croatian matters.
Indigenous sorts of cultivated plants and breeds of domesticated animals are also numerous.
Velebit Nature Park is a part of the UNESCO Man and the Biosphere Programme.
The new constitution was opposed by the most widely supported national political party—the Croatian Peasant Party (HSS) led by Stjepan Radić.
According to the constitution, the President is commander-in-chief of the armed forces and in case of immediate threat during wartime he issues orders directly to the General Staff.
Elevation ranges from the mountains of the Dinaric Alps with the highest point of the Dinara peak at  near the border with Bosnia and Herzegovina in the south to the shore of the Adriatic Sea which makes up its entire southwest border.
The population decrease was also a result of the Croatian War of Independence.
Dalmatia and Istria draw upon culinary influences of Italian and other Mediterranean cuisines which prominently feature various seafood, cooked vegetables and pasta, as well as condiments such as olive oil and garlic.
After Austria-Hungary occupied Bosnia and Herzegovina following the 1878 Treaty of Berlin, the Croatian Military Frontier was abolished and the territory returned to Croatia in 1881, pursuant to provisions of the Croatian-Hungarian settlement.
A resistance movement soon emerged.
This sparked the beginning of the Yugoslav Partisan movement, a communist multi-ethnic anti-fascist resistance group led by Josip Broz Tito.
Annual tourist industry income for 2014 was estimated at €7.4&nbsp;billion.
Tomislav was the first ruler of Croatia who was styled a king in a letter from the Pope John X, dating kingdom of Croatia to year 925.
The Croatian Bureau of Statistics forecast that the population may shrink to 3.1&nbsp;million by 2051, depending on actual birth rate and the level of net migration.
The total fertility rate of 1.5 children per mother, is one of the lowest in the world.
The bulk of the tourist industry is concentrated along the Adriatic Sea coast.
After the war, Croatia became a founding member and a federal constituent of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, a constitutionally socialist state.
Croatian replaced Latin as the official language of the Croatian government in the 19th century.
In 2012, there were 146 radio stations and 25 TV stations in Croatia.
Those include five breeds of horses, five breeds of cattle, eight breeds of sheep, two breeds of pigs and a poultry breed.
The busiest motorways are the A1, connecting Zagreb to Split and the A3, passing east–west through northwest Croatia and Slavonia.
Austrian German, Hungarian, Italian and Turkish words were changed and altered to "Slavic" looking/sounding ones).
The European Union is Croatia's most important trading partner.
Croatia has established a high level of human development and gender equality in terms of the Human Development Index.
The period ends with Avar and Croat invasions in the first half of the 7th century and destruction of almost all Roman towns.
In recent years, the Croatian government has been pressured each year to add 40% to work permit quotas for foreign workers.
After World War II, Croatia became a single-party socialist federal unit of the SFR Yugoslavia, ruled by the Communists, but enjoying a degree of autonomy within the federation.
The greatest accomplishment by Croatian filmmakers was achieved by Dušan Vukotić when he won the 1961 Academy Award for Best Animated Short Film for ''Ersatz'' ().
It was also the first European country to develop commercial naturist resorts.
The claim is supported by nearly 400 new taxa of invertebrates discovered in Croatia in the first half of the 2000s (decade) alone.
French and Russian are spoken by 4% each, and 2% of Croatians speak Spanish.
Since 2005 the budget was kept below 2% of GDP, down from the record high of 11.1% in 1994.
Mean monthly temperature ranges between  (in January) and  (in July).
There are a number of deep caves in Croatia, 49 of which are deeper than , 14 of them deeper than  and three deeper than .
In 2008 it was estimated by the WHO that 27.4% of Croatians over age of 15 are smokers.
Croatia ranked 62nd in the 2010 Press Freedom Index report compiled by Reporters Without Borders.
The International Monetary Fund classified Croatia as an emerging and developing economy, and the World Bank identified it as a high-income economy.
More than half of Croatia's trade is with other European Union member states.
Because of its geographic position, Croatia represents a blend of four different cultural spheres.
The record represents the first document of Croatian realms, vassal states of Francia at the time.
This was accompanied by the exodus of about 200,000 Serbs from the rebel territories, whose lands were subsequently settled by Croat refugees from Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Following the decisive Ottoman victories, Croatia was split into civilian and military territories, with the partition formed in 1538.
Conversely, the ''Iranian'' theory proposes Iranian origin, based on Tanais Tablets containing Greek inscription of given names ''Χορούαθος'', ''Χοροάθος'' and ''Χορόαθος'' (Khoroúathos, Khoroáthos, and Khoróathos) and their interpretation as anthroponyms of Croatian people.
The country is consequently one of the richest in Europe in terms of biodiversity.
The print media market is dominated by Europapress Holding and Styria Media Group who publish their flagship dailies ''Jutarnji list'', ''Večernji list'' and ''24sata''.
The natural growth rate of the population is currently negative with the demographic transition completed in the 1970s.
As the executive branch, it is responsible for proposing legislation and a budget, executing the laws, and guiding the foreign and internal policies of the republic.
It is the 127th largest country in the world.
The largest trading partner is rest of the European Union.
Croatia has three major dialects of Serbo-Croatian represented, with standard Croatian based on the Shtokavian dialect.
The professional theatres employ 1,121 artists.
The military territories would become known as the Croatian Military Frontier and were under direct Imperial control.
Under its 1990 constitution, Croatia operated a semi-presidential system until 2000 when it switched to a parliamentary system.
In 2013, ''24sata'' was the most widely circulated daily newspaper, followed by ''Večernji list'' and ''Jutarnji list''.
Emperor Diocletian built a large palace in Split when he retired in AD 305.
The treaty left the issue of Croatia's status to Hungary, and the status was resolved by the Croatian–Hungarian Settlement of 1868, when kingdoms of Croatia and Slavonia were united.
Still, the 1974 Yugoslav Constitution gave increased autonomy to federal units, basically fulfilling a goal of the Croatian Spring, and providing a legal basis for independence of the federative constituents.
The Danube, Europe's second longest river, runs through the city of Vukovar in the extreme east and forms part of the border with Serbia.
Croatian-made weapons and vehicles used by CAF include the standard sidearm HS2000 manufactured by HS Produkt and the M-84D battle tank designed by the Đuro Đaković factory.
The Republic of Croatia is a unitary state using a parliamentary system of governance.
There are 84 elementary level and 47 secondary level music and art schools, as well as 92 schools for disabled children and youth and 74 schools for adults.
Serb migration into this region peaked during the Great Serb Migrations of 1690 and 1737–39.
Croatia is ranked as the 18th most popular tourist destination in the world.
In 2011 the country has been ranked 66th by Transparency International with a Corruption Perceptions Index of 4.0.
With the collapse of the ruling communist party in SFR Yugoslavia, Croatia organized its first multi-party elections and adopted its present constitution in 1990.
Communist-ruled Croatia, as a constituent part of post-WWII Yugoslavia, abolished earlier divisions and introduced municipalities, subdividing Croatia into approximately one hundred municipalities.
By September 2011, Croatia had completed more than  of motorways, connecting Zagreb to most other regions and following various European routes and four Pan-European corridors.
Roman survivors retreated to more favourable sites on the coast, islands and mountains.
The incidents were mainly perpetrated against journalists investigating war crimes and organised crime.
As of January 2011, Croatia complies with International Civil Aviation Organization aviation safety standards and the Federal Aviation Administration upgraded it to Category 1 rating.
Traditional division of the country into counties was abolished in the 1920s, when the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes and subsequent Kingdom of Yugoslavia introduced oblasts and banovinas respectively.
The NUTS Local administrative unit divisions are two-tiered.
The service sector dominates Croatia's economy, followed by the industrial sector and agriculture.
The political situation deteriorated further as Radić was assassinated in the National Assembly in 1928, leading to the dictatorship of King Alexander in January 1929.
Its population density stands at 75.9 inhabitants per square kilometre.
The NDH regime was led by Ante Pavelić and ultranationalist Ustaše.
Primary and secondary education are also available in languages of recognised minorities in Croatia, where classes are held in Czech, Hungarian, Italian, Serbian and German languages.
The 1830s and 1840s saw romantic nationalism inspire the Croatian National Revival, a political and cultural campaign advocating the unity of all South Slavs in the empire.
Consequently, temperature peaks are more pronounced in the continental areas—the lowest temperature of  was recorded on 3 February 1919 in Čakovec, and the highest temperature of  was recorded on 5 July 1950 in Karlovac.
It is estimated that out of 39,000 Jews in the country only 9,000 survived; the rest were either killed or deported to Germany, both by the local authorities and the German Army itself.
The beginning of more vigorous development of Croatian literature is marked by the Renaissance and Marko Marulić.
The 19th and the 20th centuries brought about affirmation of numerous Croatian artisans, helped by several patrons of the arts such as bishop Josip Juraj Strossmayer.
The bulk of Croatian imports are supplied by the Krško Nuclear Power Plant, 50% owned by Hrvatska elektroprivreda, providing 15% of Croatia's electricity.
following two world wars.
Parts of Dalmatia were annexed by Italy and the northern Croatian regions of Baranja and Međimurje were annexed by Hungary.
The freedom of the press and the freedom of speech are guaranteed by the constitution of Croatia.
There are 162 cinemas with attendance exceeding 4&nbsp;million.
The most serious threat to species is loss and degradation of habitats.
Architecture in Croatia reflects influences of bordering nations.
The warmest areas of Croatia are at the Adriatic coast and especially in its immediate hinterland characterised by the Mediterranean climate, as the temperature highs are moderated by the sea.
Croatia is inhabited mostly by Croats (90.4%) and is ethnically the most homogeneous of the six countries of former Yugoslavia.
According to the 2011 Census, 95.6% of citizens of Croatia declared Croatian as their native language, 1.2% declared Serbian as their native language, while no other language is represented in Croatia by more than 0.5% of native speakers among population of Croatia.
The Croatian Parliament supported Emperor Charles's Pragmatic Sanction and signed their own Pragmatic Sanction in 1712.
Even the indigenous breeds include nine endangered or critically endangered ones.
The Iron Age left traces of the early Illyrian Hallstatt culture and the Celtic La Tène culture.
By the end of 1991, a high-intensity conflict fought along a wide front reduced Croatia to control of only about two-thirds of its territory.
Austrian and Hungarian influence is visible in public spaces and buildings in the north and in the central regions, architecture found along coasts of Dalmatia and Istria exhibits Venetian influence.
According to 2003 WHO data, 22% of the Croatian adult population is obese.
As an active participant in the UN peacekeeping forces, Croatia has contributed troops to the NATO-led mission in Afghanistan and took a non-permanent seat on the UN Security Council for the 2008–2009 term.
Along the north coast, Istrian and Krk wines are similar to those produced in neighbouring Italy, while further south in Dalmatia, Mediterranean-style red wines are the norm.
A second chamber, the ''House of Counties'', set up in 1993 pursuant to the 1990 Constitution, was abolished in 2001.
The oldest preserved stone inscription is the 9th-century Branimir Inscription (found near Benkovac), where Duke Branimir is styled as ''Dux Cruatorvm''.
Law enforcement agencies are organised under the authority of the Ministry of the Interior which consist primarily of the national police force.
In June 2013, the national debt stood at 59.5% of the nation's GDP.
Since 1991, Croatia's death rate has continuously exceeded its birth rate.
The government is seated at Banski dvori in Zagreb.
Its capital city is Zagreb, which forms one of the country's primary subdivisions, along with its twenty counties.
Fossils of Neanderthals dating to the middle Palaeolithic period have been unearthed in northern Croatia, with the most famous and the best presented site in Krapina.
The Illyrian movement was the most significant period of national cultural history, as the 19th-century period proved crucial in emancipation of the Croatian language and saw unprecedented developments in all fields of art and culture, giving rise to a number of historical figures.
The largest islands are Cres and Krk, each of them having an area of around .
As of March 2016, registered unemployment rate in Croatia was 17.2%.
By the 1890s, it became one of the most significant European health resorts.
