They appear to have been based around Nin and Klis, down to the Cetina and south of Liburnia.
Also prominent in the territory of future Croatia was the polity of Prince Liutevid, who ruled the territories between the Drava and Sava rivers ("Pannonia Inferior"), centred from his fort at Sisak.
He acknowledged the supreme rule of Byzantine Emperor Basil I.
This led to Mladen's defeat at the battle of Bliska in 1322 by a coalition of several Croatian noblemen and Dalmatian coastal towns with support of King himself, exchange of Šubić's castle of Ostrovica for Zrin Castle in Central Croatia (thus this branch was named Zrinski) in 1347.
It mainly served as Byzantine propaganda praising Emperor Heraclius for repopulating the Balkans (previously devastated by the Avars) with Croats (and Serbs), who were seen by the Byzantines as tributary peoples living on what had always been 'Roman land'.
Croats are predominantly Roman Catholic, and before Christianity they adhered to Slavic paganism.
His supporters, bans John of Palisna, John Horvat and Stjepan Lacković planned a rebellion against them, and managed to capture and imprison Elizabeth and Mary.
Trpimir I managed to consolidate power over Dalmatia and much of the inland regions towards Pannonia, while instituting counties as a way of controlling his subordinates (an idea he picked up from the Franks).
Both ruled without the parliament, and inner nobility struggles only helped them in their intentions.
The first known written mention of the Croats, dates form 4 March 852, in statute by Trpimir.
Archaeological evidence shows population continuity in coastal Dalmatia and Istria.
In 1093, southern nobles elected a new ruler, King Petar Svačić ( 1093–1097), who managed to unify the Kingdom around his capital of Knin.
Pope Leo X called Croatia the ''forefront of Christianity (Antemurale Christianitatis)'' in 1519, given that several Croatian soldiers made significant contributions to the struggle against the Ottoman Turks.
There Croats under leadership of their king Tomislav completely defeated Bulgarian army led by military commander Alogobotur, and stopped Simeon's extension westwards.
However, as early as the 1970s, scholars questioned the reliability of Porphyrogenitus' work, written as it was in the 10th century.
Domagoj's son, of unknown name, ruled shortly between 876 and 878 with his brothers.
In the 19th century Croatian romantic nationalism emerged to counteract the non-violent but apparent Germanization and Magyarization.
When king Louis died, without successor the question of succession remained open.
His son, future ban and captain-general of Croatia, Nikola Zrinski, participated during the closing stages of the war.
The period from 1670 to the Croatian cultural revival in the 19th century was Croatia's political dark age.
The subsequent history of Savia again becomes mirky, and historians are not sure who controlled Savia during much of the 10th century.
This migration made it possible for communist Yugoslavia to achieve lower unemployment and at the same time the money sent home by emigrants to their families provided an enormous source of foreign exchange income.
The movement relied on a South Slavic and Panslavistic conception, and its national, political and social ideas were advanced at the time.
The beginnings of the Christianization are also disputed in the historical texts: the Byzantine texts talk of duke Porin who started this at the incentive of emperor Heraclius (610–641), then of duke Porga who mainly Christianized his people after the influence of missionaries from Rome, while the national tradition recalls Christianization during the rule of Dalmatian duke Borna (810–821).
Large fiefs were granted to individuals who would defend them against outside incursions thereby creating a system for the defence of the entire state.
Because of this pretensions, the constant struggles between Croats and Magyars emerged, and lasted until 1918.
This was especially significant to the papacy in the aftermath of the Great Schism of 1054.
Various types of kolo circular dance are also encountered throughout Croatia.
In an effort to halt their influence, the Franks sought alliance with the Magyars, and elevated the local Slavic leader Braslav in 892, as a more independent Duke over lower Pannonia.
The coastland areas of Dalmatia and Istria were subject to Roman Empire, Venetian and Italian rule; central regions like Lika and western Herzegovina were a scene of battlefield against the Ottoman Empire, and have strong epic traditions.
Another 553,000 live in Bosnia and Herzegovina, where they are one of the three constituent ethnic groups, predominantly living in Western Herzegovina, central Bosnia and Posavina.
In 1102, Coloman returned to the Kingdom of Croatia in force, and negotiated with the Croatian feudal lords resulting in joining of Hungarian and Croatian crowns (with the crown of Dalmatia held separate from that of Croatia).
The kingdom once again entered the time of internal unrest.
In the union with Hungary, institutions of separate Croatian statehood were maintained through the Sabor (an assembly of Croatian nobles) and the ban (viceroy).
As such, the arrival of the Croats was seen as a second wave of Slavic migrations, which liberated Dalmatia from Avar hegemony.
Besides King Louis's daughter Mary, Charles III of Naples as the closest king male relative pretended to the throne.
During the solemn divine service in St. Peter's church in Rome in 879, Pope gave his blessing to the duke and the whole Croatian people, about which he informed Branimir in his letters, in which Branimir was recognized as the Duke of the Croats (''Dux Chroatorum'').
Responding to political, social and economic pressure, many Croats have migrated throughout Europe (especially Germany, Austria, Switzerland, France and Italy) and the Americas (particularly the United States, Canada, Argentina, and Chile), establishing a diaspora.
There were numerous church synods held in Dalmatia in the 11th century, particularly after the East-West Schism, during the course of which the use of the Latin rite was continuously reinforced until it became dominant.
By a peace treaty in 845, the Franks were confirmed as rulers over Slavonia, whilst Srijem remained under Bulgarian clientage.
Eight years later they were restored to France as the Illyrian Provinces, but won back to the Austrian crown 1815.
After the First World War and dissolution of Austria-Hungary, most Croats were united within the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, created by unification of the short-lived State of SHS with the Kingdom of Serbia.
The Croatian Prince Trpimir I (845–864) succeeded Mislav.
Trpimir is remembered as the initiator of the Trpimirović dynasty, that ruled in Croatia, with interruptions, from 845 until 1091.
Traditionally, scholarship has placed the arrival of the Croats in the 7th century, primarily on the basis of the later Byzantine document ''De Administrando Imperio''.
During Domagoj's reign piracy was a common practice, and he forced the Venetians to start paying tribute for sailing near the eastern Adriatic coast.
Scholars have hypothesized the name Croat (''Hrvat'') to be Iranian, thus suggesting that the Croats were actually a Sarmatian tribe from the Pontic region who were part of a larger movement of Slavs toward the Adriatic.
In February 1386, two months after his coronation, was assassinated by order of queen Elizabeth of Bosnia.
Tomislav was succeeded by Trpimir II (928–935), and Krešimir I (935–945), this period, on the whole, however, is obscure.
Zdeslav deposed him in 878 with the help of the Byzantines.
Croatian Y chromosomal lineages testify to different migrational movements carrying mostly Palaeolithic European ancestry, a minor Neolithic impact from the Near East, as well as a Slavic influence from northwestern Europe.
The origin, timing and nature of the Slavic migrations remain controversial, however, all available evidence points to the nearby Danubian and Carpathian regions.
The beginning of more vigorous development of Croatian literature is marked by the Renaissance and Marko Marulić.
After Branimir's death, Prince Muncimir (892–910), Zdeslav's brother, took control of Dalmatia and ruled it independently of both Rome and Byzantium as ''divino munere Croatorum dux'' (with God's help, duke of Croats).
In Croatia (the nation state), 3.9 million people identify themselves as Croats, and constitute about 90.4% of the population.
However, the Hungarian-Croatian Kingdom was not enough well prepared and organized and the Ottoman Empire expanded further in the 16th century to include most of Slavonia, western Bosnia and Lika.
It mentions Zvonimir, the king of Croatia at the time.
In that period the stone portal of the Trogir Cathedral was made by Radovan, representing the most important monument of Romanesque sculpture in the Balkans.
Croats mainly live in Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, but are an officially recognized minority in Austria, Czech Republic, Hungary, Italy, Montenegro, Romania, Serbia, and Slovakia.
The beginning of the Croatian written language can be traced to the 9th century, when Old Church Slavonic was adopted as the language of the liturgy.
In such a time, with the fall of the Venetian Republic in 1797, its possessions in eastern Adriatic mostly came under the authority of France which passed its rights to Austria the same year.
Each vied for control of the Northwest Balkan regions.
Meanwhile, with the victories over Turks, Habsburgs all the more insistent they spent centralization and germanization, new regained lands in liberated Slavonia started giving to foreign families as feudal goods, at the expense of domestic element.
Neither side emerged victorious, and the outcome was the exchange of gifts and the establishment of peace.
The coat-of-arms consists of the traditional red and white squares or ''grb'', which simply means 'coat-of-arms'.
The current design added the five crowning shields, which represent the historical regions from which Croatia originated.
Petar Zrinski, along the conspirators, went on a wide secret diplomatic negotiations with a number of nations, including Louis XIV of France, the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, Sweden, the Republic of Venice and even the Ottoman Empire, to free Croatia from the Habsburg sovereignty.
This language was gradually adapted to non-liturgical purposes and became known as the Croatian version of Old Slavonic.
This abbot is recorded to have travelled through Dalmatia with the help of the Croatian leaders, and he established the foundation for the future relations between the Pope and the Croats.
The oldest known example of the ''šahovnica'' (chessboard in Croatian) in Croatia is to be found on the wings of four falcons on a baptismal font donated by king Peter Krešimir IV of Croatia (1058–1074) to the Archbishop of Split.
Aided by Vojnomir in 796, the first named Slavic Duke of Pannonia, the Franks wrested control of the region from the Avars before totally destroying the Avar realm in 803.
In 1525 it was used on a votive medal.
Coloman's successors continued to crown themselves as Kings of Croatia separately in Biograd na Moru.
In addition, some emigrants left for political reasons.
Evidence is rather scarce for the period between the 7th and 8th centuries, CE.
This resulted with Bloody Sabor of Križevci in 1397, lose of interest for the crown by Ladislaus and selling of Dalmatia to Venice in 1403, and spreading of Croatian name to the north, while of Slavonia to the east.
Because of this the Croatian Sabor was losing its significance, and the nobility less attended it, yet went only to the one in Hungary.
Though now part of the same empire, Dalmatia and Istria were part of Cisleithania while Croatia and Slavonia were in Hungarian part of the Monarchy.
Croatian Kingdom as an ally of Byzantine Empire was in conflict with the rising Bulgarian Empire ruled by Tsar Simeon I.
The Latin Rite prevailed over the Byzantine Rite rather early due to numerous interventions from the Holy See.
But the connection with Hungary soon adversely affected the position of Croats, because Magyars in the spring of their nationalism tried to Magyarize Croats, and make Croatia a part of a united Hungary.
The champion of the Illyrian movement was Ljudevit Gaj who also reformed and standardized the Croatian literary language.
Eventually, Babonić and Nelipić families also succumbed to king's offensive against nobility, but with the centralization of power, Louis managed to force Venice by the Treaty of Zadar in 1358 to give up their possessions in Dalmatia.
They continued the rebellion, attacked the western Istrian towns in 876, but were subsequently defeated by the Venetian navy.
During this period, the Knights Templar and the Knights Hospitaller also acquired considerable property and assets in Croatia.
In the Second World War, the Axis forces created the Independent State of Croatia led by the Ustaše movement which sought to create an ethnically pure Croatian state on the territory corresponding to present-day countries of Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina.
He was crowned on 8 October 1076 at Solin in the Basilica of Saint Peter and Moses (known today as ''Hollow Church'') by a representative of Pope Gregory VII.
The earliest known Croatian autographs from the 8th century are found in the Latin Gospel of Cividale.
In the second half of the 13th century, during the Árpád and Anjou dynasty struggle, Šubić family became hugely powerful under Paul I Šubić of Bribir who was the longest Croatian Ban (1274–1312), conquered Bosnia and declared himself "Lord of all of Bosnia" (1299–1312), appointed his brother Mladen I Šubić as Ban of Bosnia (1299–1304), and helped Charles I from House of Anjou to be the King of Hungary.
Krešimir was succeeded by his son Stjepan I (1030–1058), who tried to reinforce the alliance with Byzantine when 1032 sent a segment of naval fleet in war against Arabs, in favour for tolerance about conquering Zadar from Venice, another Byzantine ally.
He probably died  900 fighting against his former allies, the Magyars.
In contrast, much of the Dinaric hinterland appears to have been depopulated, as virtually all hilltop settlements, from Noricum to Dardania, were abandoned (only few appear destroyed) in the early 7th century.
The Croatian national revival began in the 1830s with the Illyrian movement.
Architecture in Croatia reflects influences of bordering nations.
Nevertheless, Ban Jelačić had succeeded in the abolition of serfdom in Croatia, which eventually brought about massive changes in society: the power of the major landowners was reduced and arable land became increasingly subdivided, to the extent of risking famine.
This caused unrest among the Croatian and Hungarian nobility which plotted against the emperor.
The local noble family from Krk island (latter took surname Frankopan) is often considered the second most important medieval family, as ruled over northern Adriatic and are responsible for adoption of one of oldest European statutes, Law codex of Vinodol (1288).
Large squares named after culture heroes, well-groomed parks, and pedestrian-only zones, are features of these orderly towns and cities, especially where large scale Baroque urban planning took place, for instance in Varaždin and Karlovac.
For much of the subsequent period, Savia was probably directly ruled by the Carinthian Duke Arnulf, the future East Frankish King and Emperor.
The area settled by Croats has a large diversity of historical and cultural influences, as well as diversity of terrain and geography.
The dynastic struggle didn't finish, and with the Ottoman invasion on Bosnia started the first short raids in Croatian territory, defended only by local nobles.
Hence, most modern day Croats are partly descended from the original European population of the region who have lived in the territory by other names, such as Illyrians, and their forebears.
Having been under Avar control, lower Pannonia became a march of the Carolingian Empire around 800.
In the peak of the fighting, around 550,000 ethnic Croats were displaced altogether during the Yugoslav wars.
The total number of Croatian descendants in the United States and Canada has been estimated to 2 millions.
After the death of Charlemagne in 814, Frankish influence decreased on the region, allowing Prince Ljudevit Posavski to raise a rebellion in 819.
After the war's end in 1995, most Croatian refugees returned to their previous homes, while some (mostly Croat refugees from Bosnia and Herzegovina and Janjevci from Kosovo) moved into the formerly-held Serbian housing.
Besides the architecture encompassing the oldest artworks in Croatia, there is a long history of artists in Croatia reaching to the Middle Ages.
Nevertheless, two independent Slavic dukedoms emerged sometime during the 9th century: the Croat Duchy and Principality of Lower Pannonia.
Post-WWII Yugoslavia became a federation consisting of 6 republics, and Croats became one of two ''constituent peoples'' of two – Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Croatia was later subject to Hungarian hegemony under ban Levin Rauch when the Empire was transformed into a dual monarchy of Austria-Hungary in 1867.
The lands which constitute modern Croatia fell under 3 major geographic-politic zones during the Middle Ages, which were influenced by powerful neighbour Empires – notably the Byzantines, the Avars and later Magyars, Franks and Bulgars.
Among them there were ban Petar Berislavić who won a victory at Dubica on the Una river in 1513, the captain of Senj and prince of Klis Petar Kružić, who defended the Klis Fortress for almost 25 years, captain Nikola Jurišić who deterred by a magnitude larger Turkish force on their way to Vienna in 1532, or ban Nikola Šubić Zrinski who helped save Pest from occupation in 1542 and fought in the Battle of Szigetvar in 1566.
The most important organizations of the Croatian diaspora are the Croatian Fraternal Union, Croatian Heritage Foundation and the Croatian World Congress.
Croats are mostly Roman Catholics.
Contemporary scholarship views the rise of "Croats" as an autochthonous, Dalmatian response to the demise of the Avar khanate and the encroachment of Frankish and Byzantine Empires into northern Dalmatia.
* The last large wave of Croat emigration occurred during and after the Yugoslav Wars (1991–1995).
The latter developed into what is referred to as the Croatian variant of Church Slavonic between the 12th and 16th centuries.
The modern Neo-Shtokavian standard that appeared in the mid 18th century was the first unified Croatian literary language.
Already Charles I tried to crash the aristocratic particularism, intention finished by his son Louis the Great (1342–1382), relying on lower nobility and towns.
Duke Branimir wrote to Pope John VIII affirming this split from Byzantine and commitment to the Roman Papacy.
Overseas, the United States contains the largest Croatian emigrant group (544,270 in the 1990 census; 374,271 in the 2000 census), mostly in Ohio, Pennsylvania, Illinois and California, with a sizable community in Alaska, followed by Australia (105,747 according to 2001 census, with concentrations in Sydney, Melbourne and Perth) and Canada (Southern Ontario, British Columbia and Alberta).
The chief piece of evidence that Tomislav was crowned king comes in the form of a letter dated 925, surviving only in 16th-century copies, from Pope John X calling Tomislav ''rex Chroatorum''.
Until the end of the 11th century Croatian medieval texts were written in three scripts: Latin, Glagolitic, and Croatian Cyrillic (''bosančica/bosanica''), and also in three languages: Croatian, Latin and Old Slavonic.
Aided by Borna the Guduscan, the Franks eventually defeated Ljudevit, who withdrew his forces to the "Serbs" and conquered them, according to the Frankish Annals.
After his death civil war and unrest broke out shortly afterward as northern nobles decided Ladislaus I for the Croatian King.
Although the dating of the earliest Slavic settlements is still disputed, there is a hiatus of almost a century.
The 19th and the 20th centuries brought about affirmation of numerous Croatian artisans, helped by several patrons of the arts such as bishop Josip Juraj Strossmayer.
Croats were fighting in unfavorable conditions, against both Vienna and Budapest, while divided on Banska Hrvatska, Dalmatia and Military Frontier.
The count for diaspora is approximate because of incomplete statistical records and naturalization.
In the revolutions of 1848 in the Austrian Empire, the Croatian Ban Jelačić cooperated with the Austrians in quenching the Hungarian Revolution of 1848 by leading a military campaign into Hungary, successful until the Battle of Pákozd.
These original inhabitants also served an important role in re-populating Europe after the last ice age.
The Baška tablet, a stone inscribed with the Glagolitic alphabet found on the Krk island which is dated to 1100, is considered to be the oldest surviving prose in Croatian.
He was in conflict with dukes of Istria, while historical records ''Annales Carinthiæ'' and ''Chronica Hungarorum'' note he invaded Carinthia to aid Hungary in war during 1079/83, but this is disputed.
With the waning of the Ottoman Empire, art flourished during the Baroque and Rococo.
In 879, the Pope ask for help from prince Zdeslav for an armed escort for his delegates across southern Dalmatia and Zahumlje, but on early May 879, Zdeslav was killed near Knin in an uprising led by Branimir, a relative of Domagoj, instigated by the Roman Pope fearing Byzantine power.
From the 14th and the 15th centuries, both secular and religious songs at church festivals were composed in the vernacular.
Post-war government's policy of easing the immigration of ethnic Croats from abroad encouraged a number of Croatian descendants to return to Croatia.
However, by enabling the nobility to seize more economic and military power, the kingdom itself lost influence to the powerful noble families.
Tomislav successfully repelled Magyar mounted invasions of the Arpads, expelled them over the Sava River, and united (western) Pannonian and Dalmatian Croats into one state.
As the Turkish incursion into Europe started, Croatia once again became a border area between two major forces in the Balkans.
Although the Chronicle of the Priest of Duklja has been dismissed as an unreliable record, the mentioned "Red Croatia" suggests that Croatian clans and families might have settled as far south as Duklja/Zeta and city of Drač in today's Albania.
The Venetians soon proceeded to battle with the independent Slavic pirates of the Pagania region, but failed to defeat them.
In the 18th century, Croatia was one of the crown lands that supported Emperor Charles's ''Pragmatic Sanction'' of 1713 and supported Empress Maria Theresa in the War of the Austrian Succession of 1741–48.
It has been used to symbolise the Croats for centuries; some speculate that it was derived from Red and White Croatia, historic lands of the Croatian tribe but there is no generally accepted proof for this theory.
He was succeeded by Dmitar Zvonimir, who was of the Svetoslavić branch of the House of Trpimirović, and a Ban of Slavonia (1064–1075).
This was officially sanctioned in 1248 by Pope Innocent IV, and only later did the Latin alphabet prevail.
Following the democratization  of society, accompanied with ethnic tensions that emerged in the post-Tito era, in 1991 the Republic of Croatia declared independence, which was followed by war with its Serb minority, backed up by Serbia-controlled Yugoslav People's Army.
These included the Guduscans (based in Liburnia), the Narentines (around the Cetina and Neretva) and the Sorabi (Serbs) who ruled some other eastern parts of ex-Roman "Dalmatia".
'''Croats''' (; , ) are a nation and South Slavic ethnic group at the crossroads of Central Europe, Southeast Europe, and the Mediterranean Sea.
The minority in Serbia number about 70,000, mostly in Vojvodina, where also vast majority of the Šokci consider themselves Croats, as well as many Bunjevci (the latter, as well as other nationalities, settled the vast, abandoned area after the Ottoman retreat; this Croat subgroup originates from the south, mostly from the region of Bačka).
In Croatia the Šubić were one of the oldest Croatian noble families and would become particularly influential and important, ruling area between Zrmanja and Krka rivers.
It is indeed at this time that sources first refer to a "Pannonian Croatia", appearing in the 10th century Byzantine work ''De Administrando Imperio''.
In the first half of the 17th century, Croats fought in the Thirty Years' War on the side of Holy Roman Empire, mostly as light cavalry under command of imperial generalissimo Albrecht von Wallenstein.
After the fall of Bihać fort in 1592, only small areas of Croatia remained unrecovered.
The Croatian interlace (''pleter'' or ''troplet'') is also a commonly used symbol which originally comes from monasteries built between the 9th and 12th century.
In the first years of the war, over 200,000 Croats were displaced from their homes as a result of the military actions.
Nikola Zrinski participated in launching the conspiracy which later became to be known as the Magnate conspiracy, but he soon died, and the rebellion was continued by his brother, Croatian ban Petar Zrinski, Fran Krsto Frankopan and Ferenc Wesselényi.
The most distinctive features of Croatian folklore include klapa ensembles of Dalmatia, tamburitza orchestras of Slavonia.
In addition, the Croatian nobles retained their lands and titles.
However, the luxurious and ornate representative texts of Croatian Church Slavonic belong to the later era, when they coexisted with the Croatian vernacular literature.
In the 1991 census Croats consisted 19.8% of the overall population of former Yugoslavia; there were around 4.6 million Croats in the entire country.
After his death in 1312, his son Mladen II Šubić was the Ban of Bosnia (1304–1322) and Ban of Croatia (1312–1322).
In 1886 it arrived to the Principality of Montenegro, followed by the Kingdom of Serbia in 1914, and the Republic of Czechoslovakia in 1920, but only for feast days of the main patron saints.
Krešimir IV (1058–1074) managed to get the Byzantine Empire to confirm him as the supreme ruler of the Dalmatian cities.
In 923, due to a deal of Pope John X and a Patriarch of Constantinopole, the sovereignty of Byzantine coastal cities in Dalmatia came under Tomislav's Governency.
Between 1670 and the revolution of 1848, there would be only 2 bans of Croatian nationality.
Migrant communities already established in countries such as Australia, the United States, and Germany grew as a result.
Croats are noted for their cultural diversity, which has been influenced by a number of other neighboring cultures through the ages.
Subsequent influence of the Art Nouveau was reflected in contemporary architecture.
The most important purely Shtokavian vernacular text is the Vatican Croatian Prayer Book (ca.
For the sake of stopping the Ottoman conquering and possible assault on the capital of Vienna, the large areas of Croatia and Slavonia (even Hungary and Romania) bordering the Ottoman Empire were organized as a Military Frontier which was ruled directly from Vienna military headquarters.
The Shtokavian dialect literature, based almost exclusively on Chakavian original texts of religious provenance (missals, breviaries, prayer books) appeared almost a century later.
By the royal order of 11 January 1843, originating from the chancellor Metternich, the use of the Illyrian name and insignia in public was forbidden.
Croats became one of the constituent nations of the new kingdom.
In the meantime, the Dalmatian Croats were recorded to have been subject to the Kingdom of Italy under Lothair I, since 828.
Both families gave many native bans of Croatia.
Austrian and Hungarian influence is visible in public spaces and buildings in the north and in the central regions, architecture found along coasts of Dalmatia and Istria exhibits Venetian influence.
The invasion caused migration of Croats, and the area which became deserted was subsequently settled by Serbs, Vlachs, Germans and others.
As King Zvonimir died in 1089 in unknown circumstances, with no direct heir to succeed him, Stjepan II ( 1089–1091) last of the main Trpimirović line came to the throne at an old age and reigned for two years.
the insignia of Croatia Airlines or the design of the shirt for the Croatia national football team), and partly because neighbouring countries like Slovenia and Serbia use the same Pan-Slavic colours on their flags as Croatia.
However, Frankish control was far from smooth.
On 25 March 1848, was conducted a political petition "''Zahtijevanja naroda''", which program included thirty national, social and liberal principles, like Croatian national independence, annexation of Dalmatia and Military Frontier, independence from Hungary as far as finance, language, education, freedom of speech and writing, religion, nullification of serfdom etc.
* Going abroad as immigrant workers, particularly to Germany, Austria, and Switzerland in the 1960s and 1970s.
The earliest record of contact between the Pope and the Croats dates from a mid-7th century entry in the ''Liber Pontificalis''.
By orders of John of Palisna, Elizabeth was strangled.
During his reign, Croatia retained its sovereignty from both Holy Roman imperial and Byzantine rule, and became a fully recognized state.
After Domagoj's death, Venetian's chronicles named him "The worst duke of Slavs", while Pope John VIII referred to Domagoj in letters as "Famous duke".
In 1097, in the Battle of Gvozd Mountain, the last native king Peter was killed and the Croats were decisively defeated (because of this, the mountain was this time renamed to Petrova Gora, "Peter's Mountain").
Whilst there is indeed evidence of population continuity between Gothic and Croat times in parts of Dalmatia, the idea of a Gothic origin of Croats was more rooted in 20th century Ustaše political aspirations than historical reality.
It is possible that these are all renditions of the same ruler's name.
The subgroups of Croats are commonly based on regional affiliation, like ''Dalmatians'', ''Slavonians'', ''Zagorci'', ''Istrani'' etc., while outside Croatia there exist several ethnic groups : ''Šokci'' (Croatia, Serbia, Hungary), ''Bunjevci'' (Serbia, Hungary), ''Burgenland Croats'' (Austria), ''Molise Croats'' (Italy), ''Croats of Boka Kotorska or Bokelji'' (Montenegro), ''Raci'' (Hungary), ''Krashovans'' (Romania), ''Janjevci'' (Kosovo).
However, it is likely that the strong ruler Tomislav, the first crowned King, was able to exert much control over Savia and adjacent areas during his reign.
It is a large stone tablet found in the small Church of St. Lucy, Jurandvor on the Croatian island of Krk which contains text written mostly in Chakavian, today a dialect of Croatian, and in Croatian angular Glagolitic script.
The Croatian language is official in Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as in the European Union, and is a recognised minority language within Croatian autochthonous communities and minorities in Montenegro, Austria (Burgenland), Italy (Molise), Romania (Carașova, Lupac) and Serbia (Vojvodina).
Many Croatians began emigrating to the New World countries in this period, a trend that would continue over the next century, creating a large Croatian diaspora.
He reassembled his forces in Croatia and advanced on Gvozd Mountain, where he met the main Hungarian army led by King Coloman I of Hungary.
Official language in Croatia has been Latin until 1847 when it became Croatian.
He married in 1063 Helen of Hungary, the daughter of King Bela I of the Hungarian Árpád dynasty, and the sister of the future King Ladislaus I.
To fight the Austrian centralization and absolutism, Croats passed their rights to the united government in Hungary, thus to together resist the intentions from Vienna.
