The skin is a largely effective barrier to both water and ions.
This enables them to open their mouths underwater without drowning.
Though mostly carnivorous, several species of crocodilian have been observed to consume fruit, and this may play a role in seed dispersal.
They had bony armor in the form of two rows of plates extending from head to tail, and this armor is retained by most modern crocodilians.
In other parts of the world, elephants and hippopotamuses may kill crocodiles defensively.
When he reaches the far side, he thanks them for helping him cross the river, and feasts on fruit.
Although many attacks go unreported, there are estimated to be over 300 per year, 63% of which are fatal.
The resulting data has increased understanding of penning, stocking rates, egg incubation, hatching, rearing, and diet, and this information has been used at other establishments around the world.
Eight species of crocodilians are known to have attacked humans.
For American alligators, groups of young associate with adults for one to two years, while juvenile saltwater and Nile crocodiles become independent in a few months.
All crocodilians need to maintain the concentration of salt in body fluids at suitable levels.
And in the night they dwell in the water, and on the day upon the land, in rocks and in caves.
The Florida red-bellied turtle specialises in this, and alligator mounds may have several clutches of turtle eggs developing alongside the owner's eggs.
The Chinese alligator was historically widespread throughout the eastern Yangtze River system but is currently restricted to some areas in southeastern Anhui province thanks to habitat fragmentation and degradation.
It is widely distributed, found in many habitats and cryptically coloured.
South American dwarf caimans inhabit cool, fast-flowing streams, often near waterfalls, and other caimans live in warmer, turbid lakes and slow-moving rivers.
The gharial population continues to be threatened by environmental hazards such as heavy metals and protozoan parasites, but as of 2013 numbers are rising, due to the protection of nests against egg predators.
Flooding is a major cause of failure of crocodilians to breed successfully, as nests are submerged, developing embryos are deprived of oxygen, and juveniles get washed away.
The wild population is believed to exist only in small fragmented ponds.
This long-term decline had a number of causes, including egg collection and hunting, such as for indigenous medicine.
Destruction of forest habitat is probably a greater threat to crocodilians than is hunting.
The story was repeated in later accounts such as that of Bartholomeus Anglicus in the 13th century.
In northern Australia, the survival rate for saltwater crocodile hatchlings is only twenty-five percent, but with each succeeding year of life this improves, reaching sixty percent by year five.
Crocodilians have some of the strongest bite forces in the animal kingdom.
Most crocodilians live in the lowlands, and few are found above , where the temperatures are typically about 5&nbsp;°C (9&nbsp;°F) lower than at the coast.
However, sex in crocodilians may be determined in a short interval, and nests are subject to changes in temperature.
Nests are typically found near dens or caves.
Mortality rates are fairly low among subadult and adults of small species, though they are occasionally preyed on by large cats and snakes.
Sang Kancil asks all the crocodiles to line up across the river so he can count them for the king, and makes them promise not to eat him as he counts.
As such, the alternate spellings Crocodilia and Crocodylia are still used interchangeably in the neontological literature.
The main threat to crocodilians around the world is human activity, including hunting and habitat destruction.
Crocodilians continue to grow throughout their lives.
Mortality is high for eggs and hatchlings, and nests face threats from floods, overheating, and predators.
When submerged, a crocodilian's heart rate slows down to one or two beats a minute, and blood flow to the muscles is reduced.
When a female is ready to mate, she arches her back while her head and tail submerge.
Protosuchians were small, mostly terrestrial animals with short snouts and long limbs.
This proved to be problematic in the 1980s, as crocodiles were abundant and dangerous to humans in some parts of Africa, and it was legal to hunt them.
Food is typically consumed by crocodilians with their heads above water.
This reflects the Egyptians' view of the crocodile both as a terrifying predator and an important part of the Nile ecosystem.
Newly hatched crocodilians gather together and stay close to their mother.
Intake of water and salts takes place across the lining of the mouth, when water is drunk, incidentally while feeding, and when present in foods.
Protection allowed the species to recuperate, and in 1987 it was removed from the endangered species list.
Crocodilians are polyphyodonts and able to replace each of their approximately 80 teeth up to 50 times in their 35 to 75-year lifespan.
They swim well and can move on land in a "high walk" and a "low walk", while smaller species are even capable of galloping.
Males in particular continue to gain in weight as they get older, but this is mostly in the form of extra girth rather than length.
A legend from East Timor tells how a boy rescues a gigantic crocodile that becomes stranded.
There are prominent paired integumentary glands in skin folds on the throat, and others in the side walls of the cloaca.
The roots of the trees absorb water when it rains, releasing it back slowly into the environment.
When a crocodilian inhales, air flows through the trachea and into two primary bronchi, or airways, which branch off into narrower secondary passageways.
Most species will eat anything suitable that comes within reach and are also opportunistic scavengers.
The eusuchians continued this process with the interior nostrils now opening through an aperture in the pterygoid bones.
Hunting and destructive fishing habits have reduced its population to around 100 individuals by 2009.
In 1972, the species was declared a Class I endangered species by the Chinese government and received the maximum amount of legal protection.
A study examining alligator farms in the United States showed that they have generated significant conservation gains, and poaching of wild alligators has greatly diminished.
Birds of prey take their toll, and in any clutch there may be malformed individuals that are unlikely to survive.
In J. M. Barrie's novel ''Peter and Wendy'' (1911), the character Captain Hook has lost his arm to the crocodile.
Those made by different females are sometimes close to each other, particularly in hole-nesting species.
The temperature at which the eggs incubate determines the sex of the hatchlings.
William Shakespeare refers to crocodile tears in ''Othello'' (Act IV, Scene i), ''Henry VI, Part 2'' (Act III, Scene i), and ''Antony and Cleopatra'' (Act II, Scene vii).
The blood of alligators and crocodiles contains peptides with antibiotic properties.
Most natural nests produce hatchlings of both sexes, though single-sex clutches do occur.
The Mayans also associated crocodilians with fertility and death.
The teeth of crocodiles and gharials tend to be more visible than those of alligators and caimans when the jaws are closed.
The air continues to move through these, then into even narrower tertiary airways, and then into other secondary airways which were bypassed the first time.
In Ancient Egyptian religion, Ammit, the demoniac devourer of unworthy souls, and Sobek, the god of power, protection, and fertility, are both represented as having crocodile heads.
When the animal completely submerges, the nictitating membranes cover its eyes.
This study also found no correlation between bite force and snout shape.
At night it remains submerged, and its temperature slowly falls.
The American alligator is an adaptable species and inhabits swamps, rivers, or lakes with clear or turbid water.
The vertebrae of eusuchians had one convex and one concave articulating surface, allowing for a ball and socket type joint between the vertebrae, bringing greater flexibility and strength.
In a 2012 study, a saltwater crocodile's bite force was measured even higher, at .
Dominant male crocodilians patrol and defend territories which contain several females.
Prior to 2003, Crocodilia/Crocodylia was a group that encompassed the modern-day animals (the crown group) as well as their more distant relatives now in the larger groups called Crocodylomorpha and Pseudosuchia.
Even recently hatched crocodiles are able to survive 58 days without food, losing 23% of their bodyweight during this time.
In Mesoamerica, the Aztecs had a crocodilian god of fertility named Cipactli who protected crops.
Though typically slow on land, crocodilians can produce brief bursts of speed, and some can run at   for short distances.
Despite the maternal care they receive, hatchlings commonly fall to predation.
Unlike many marine mammals, crocodilians have little myoglobin to store oxygen in their muscles.
Much of its success is due to its ability to swim out to sea and colonise new locations, but it is not restricted to the marine environment and spends much time in estuaries, rivers, and large lakes.
Members of the order's total group, the clade Pseudosuchia, appeared about 250 million years ago in the Early Triassic period, and diversified during the Mesozoic era.
The range and quantity of vocalisations vary between species.
Crocodilians can live 35–75 years, and their age can be determined by growth rings in their bones.
The teeth on the lower jaw of an alligator fit into sockets in the upper jaw, so only the upper teeth are visible when the mouth is closed.
In film and television, crocodilians are represented as dangerous obstacles in lakes and rivers, as in the 1986 Australian comedy film ''"Crocodile" Dundee'', or as monstrous man-eaters in horror films like ''Eaten Alive'' (1977), ''Alligator'' (1980), ''Lake Placid'' (1999), ''Primeval'' (2007), and ''Black Water'' (2007).
Crocodiles and gharials have these on large parts of their bodies, while alligators and caimans only have them on the head.
Analysis of attacks show that most take place during the breeding season or when crocodiles are guarding nests or newly hatched young.
By the early 1960s, the feasibility of farming these reptiles on a commercial scale was investigated in response to the decline of many crocodilian species around the world.
Humans are the greatest threat to crocodilian populations through activities that include hunting and habitat destruction, but farming of crocodilians has greatly reduced unlawful trading in wild skins.
Next, the hind limbs swing forward as the spine flexes dorso-ventrally, and this sequence of movements is repeated.
They appeared 83.5 million years ago in the Late Cretaceous period (Campanian stage) and are the closest living relatives of birds, as the two groups are the only known survivors of the Archosauria.
Broad-snouted species have teeth that vary in size, while those of slender-snouted species are more uniform.
The result is that the legs can be held almost vertically beneath the body when on land, and the foot can swivel during locomotion with a twisting movement at the ankle.
Those in marl prairies and rocky glades are usually small and shallow, while those in peat depressions of ridge and slough wetlands are more variable.
The other, the calcaneum, is functionally part of the foot, and has a socket into which a peg from the astragalus fits.
It became widely known in 1400 when the English traveller Sir John Mandeville wrote his description of "cockodrills":
When it rains, the reptiles gather at gueltas.
Their skin is thick and covered in non-overlapping scales.
Alligators are the noisiest, while some crocodile species are almost completely silent.
In Africa, mongooses, honey badgers, baboons, otters, warthogs, bushpigs, and spotted hyenas are all fond of crocodile eggs, but the monitor lizard is thought to be the most important nest raider.
The name may refer to the animal's habit of basking on the pebbled shores of the Nile.
Crocodilians are found mainly in lowlands in the tropics, but alligators also live in the southeastern United States and the Yangtze River in China.
These are nutrient-poor waters, and the urine and faeces of the caimans may have increased primary production by contributing plant nutrients.
The earliest known mention of the story that crocodiles weep for their victims was in the 9th century; it was later spread by Sir John Mandeville in 1400 and then by William Shakespeare in the late 16th century and early 17th century.
It comprises the Pseudosuchia, the "false crocodiles", and the Ornithosuchia, which in turn comprises the dinosaurs and their relatives, the pterosaurs and the birds.
Crocodilians are amphibious reptiles, spending part of their time in water and part on land.
They are largely carnivorous, the various species feeding on animals such as fish, crustaceans, molluscs, birds, and mammals; some species like the Indian gharial are specialised feeders, while others like the saltwater crocodile have generalised diets.
Desert crocodiles in Mauritania have adapted to their arid environment by staying in caves or burrows in a state of aestivation during the driest periods.
They may become more active on warm days, but do not usually feed at all during the winter.
For example, an alligator in temperate regions may start the day by basking in the sun on land.
Adults do not normally eat their own offspring, but there is some evidence of subadults feeding on juveniles and of adults attacking subadults.
The food is held with the tips of the jaws, tossed towards the back of the mouth by an upward jerk of the head and then gulped down.
From a waiting position with only its eyes and nostrils above the water, it can lunge at drinking animals, fishermen, bathers, or people collecting water or washing clothes.
The crocodylomorphs are the only pseudosuchians to have survived the Triassic–Jurassic extinction event, 201.3 million years ago.
In a Malay folk tale, the mouse deer Sang Kancil wants to cross a river to reach the fruit trees on the far side, but Sang Buaya, a crocodile, is waiting in the river to eat him.
During aquatic locomotion, the muscular tail undulates from side to side to drive the animal through the water while the limbs are held close to the body to reduce drag.
Typically they are creatures of the tropics; the main exceptions are the American and Chinese alligators, whose ranges extend as far north as the south-eastern United States and the Yangtze River, respectively.
Crocodilians also possess a ''tapetum lucidum'' which enhances vision in low light.
The scutes contain blood vessels and may act to absorb or radiate heat during thermoregulation.
These animals have also caused fatalities in Malaysia, New Guinea, and elsewhere.
Starting in 1973, CITES attempted to prevent trade in body parts of endangered animals, such as the skins of crocodiles.
Hatchlings of many species tend to bask in a group during the day and disperse at nightfall to feed.
They are the only non-mammalian vertebrates with tooth sockets.
Species whose snouts and teeth are intermediate between these two forms, such as the saltwater crocodile and American alligator, have generalised diets and opportunistically feed on invertebrates, fish,  amphibians, other reptiles, birds, and mammals.
However, it was not until the advent of cladistics and phylogenetic nomenclature that a more solid justification for assuming one spelling over the other was proposed.
Vocalisations are frequent as the juveniles disperse, and again as they congregate in the morning.
Crocodilians are largely carnivorous, and the diets of different species can vary with snout shape and tooth sharpness.
In cold weather, they remain submerged with their tails in deeper, less cold water and their nostrils just projecting through the surface.
The basking period is extended in winter and reduced in summer.
The stomach is more acidic than that of any other vertebrate and contains ridges for gastroliths, which play a role in the mechanical breakdown of food.
These scales are continually being produced by cell division in the underlying layer of the epidermis, the stratum germinativum, and the surface of individual scutes sloughs off periodically.
Crocodilians in animation include the Hanna-Barbera character Wally Gator, and Ben Ali Gator from the ''Dance of the Hours'' segment of Disney's 1940 film ''Fantasia''.
Females lay eggs in holes or in mounds and, unlike most other reptiles, care for their hatched young.
He further claimed that the crocodile may be killed by fish with serrated crests sawing into its soft underbelly, and that the male and female take turns guarding the eggs.
As their size increases, so does their need for larger mammalian prey; pigs, cattle, horses, and humans are all within the size range they seek.
Similar stories exist in Native American legends, and in the African American folktale of an alligator and Br'er Rabbit.
The gharial's wife demands that her husband bring home the monkey to eat, believing that the fruit made the monkey's heart sweet.
The skin of crocodilians is tough and can withstand damage from conspecifics, and the immune system is effective enough to heal wounds within a few days.
The Canton Crocodiles were a baseball team in the Frontier League, while the University of Florida sport teams are known as the Florida Gators, in reference to the American alligator, and their mascots are Albert and Alberta Gator.
Small animals can be killed by whiplash as the predator shakes its head.
These habitats also have a rich flora and provide plenty of food.
Australian freshwater crocodiles take ten years to reach maturity at .
This allows them to stalk their prey with most of their bodies underwater.
Adult crocodilians are typically territorial and solitary.
Crocodilian teeth are adapted for seizing and holding prey, and food is swallowed unchewed.
In 2012, Erickson ''et al''.
Sang Buaya does not fare as well, since the other crocodiles are angry with him for letting Sang Kancil trick them.
Florida, in the United States, is the only place that crocodiles and alligators live side by side.
This lizard is also a major hazard in Asia, where other egg predators include civets, mongooses, rats, sloth bears, jackals, and dogs.
The earliest stage of crocodilian evolution was the protosuchians, which evolved in the late Triassic and early Jurassic.
Some species then roar, while others slap the water with their tails.
Digestion takes place more quickly at higher temperatures.
Crocodilia appears to be a Latinizing of the Greek κροκόδειλος (''crocodeilos''), which means both lizard and Nile crocodile.
The main distinguishing characteristic of diapsid tetrapods is the presence of two openings (temporal fenestrae) on either side of the skull behind the eye.
Males create vibrations in the water to send out infrasonic signals that serve to attract females and intimidate rivals.
While the brain of a crocodilian is fairly small, it is capable of greater learning than most reptiles.
For crocodiles in the tropics, avoiding overheating is generally the main problem.
The tongue cannot move freely but is held in place by a folded membrane.
While dominant males usually monopolise reproductive females, multiple paternity is known to exist in American alligators, where as many as three different males may sire offspring in a single clutch.
An animal sinks when the lungs are pulled towards the tail and floats when they move back towards the head.
By the 1980s, farmed crocodile skins were produced in sufficient numbers to destroy the unlawful trade in wild crocodilians.
The side and belly skin make the best leather, the meat is eaten, the gall bladders are valued in East Asia, and the heads are sometimes made into ornaments.
Most attacks were in the warmer months of the year, though in Florida, with its warmer climate, attacks can happen at any time of year.
The high walk of crocodilians, with the belly and most of the tail being held off the ground, is unique among living reptiles.
The Leviathan described in the Book of Job may have been based on a crocodile.
During the dry season, caimans can be restricted to deep pools in rivers for several months; in the rainy season, much of the savannah in the Venezuelan llanos is flooded, and they disperse widely across the plain.
To tear a chunk of tissue from a large carcass, a crocodilian spins its body continuously while holding on with its jaws, a manoeuvre known as the "death roll".
Crocodilians have had prominent roles in the myths and legends of various cultures around the world and may even have inspired stories of dragons.
They often have prominent, lumpy ridges and are covered in hard-wearing beta-keratin.
When in bright light, the pupils of a crocodilian contract into narrow slits, whereas in darkness they become fully circular.
During terrestrial locomotion, a crocodilian can keep its back and tail straight, since the scales are attached to the vertebrae by muscles.
It also makes various grunts and hisses.
Gharials and other fish-eating species sweep their jaws sideways to snap up prey, and these animals can leap out of the water to catch birds, bats, and leaping fish.
In fresh water, the osmolality (the concentration of solutes that contribute to a solution's osmotic pressure) in the plasma is much higher than it is in the surrounding water.
Nile crocodiles may store carcasses underwater for later consumption.
By these means, the temperature range of crocodilians is usually maintained between , and mainly stays in the range .
Although the term 'crocodiles' is sometimes used to refer to all of these, a less ambiguous vernacular term for this group is '''crocodilians'''.
The muscles that close the jaws are much more massive and powerful than the ones that open them, and a crocodilian's jaws can be held shut by a person fairly easily.
The type of vegetation bordering the rivers and lakes inhabited by crocodilians is mostly humid tropical forest, with mangrove swamps in estuarine areas.
Gharials have snouts that are extremely elongated.
Adult female New Guinea crocodiles and Siamese crocodiles roar when approached by another adult, while Nile crocodiles grunt or bellow in a similar situation.
The Philippine crocodile is perhaps the most threatened crocodilian and is considered by the IUCN to be critically endangered.
Nevertheless, the gharial's extremely slender jaws are relatively weak and built more for quick jaw closure.
During cooperative feeding, some individuals may hold on to the prey, while others perform the roll.
Whether on land or in water, crocodilians can jump or leap by pressing their tails and hind limbs against the substrate and then launching themselves into the air.
Various types of aquatic habitats are used by different crocodilians.
At the Conference of the Parties in Botswana in 1983, it was argued on behalf of aggrieved local people that it was reasonable to sell the lawfully hunted skins.
Crocodiles have been reputed to weep for their victims since the 9th century ''Bibliotheca'' by Photios I of Constantinople.
Mating can last up to 15 minutes, during which time the pair continuously submerge and surface.
The male rubs across the female's neck and then grasps her with his hindlimbs, placing his tail underneath hers so their cloacas align and his penis can be inserted.
They are appealing when young, and pet-store owners can easily sell them, but crocodilians do not make good pets; they grow large and are both dangerous and expensive to keep.
This is typical for animals that hunt at night.
Their ankle joints flex in a different way from those of other reptiles, a feature they share with some early archosaurs.
Roald Dahl's ''The Enormous Crocodile'' (1978), illustrated by Quentin Blake, tells how a crocodile wanders the jungle looking for children to eat, trying one trick after another.
The Pseudosuchia–bird split is assumed to have occurred close to the Permian–Triassic mass extinction event.
When the animal needs to stop, steer, or manoeuvre in a different direction, the limbs are splayed out.
The spectacled caiman matures earlier, reaching its mature length of  in four to seven years.
By 2000, skins from twelve crocodilian species, whether harvested lawfully in the wild or farmed, were traded by thirty countries, and the unlawful trade in the products had almost vanished.
Some species are occasionally gregarious, particularly during droughts, when several individuals gather at remaining water sites.
A bulky animal, it warms up slowly, but at some time later in the day it moves into the water, still exposing its dorsal surface to the sun.
Individuals of some species may share basking sites at certain times of the day.
