This species sometimes displays pack-hunting behaviour, which might have been the key to hunting large species in the past, despite its small size.
Another trait is that most of the muscle in a crocodile's jaw is arranged for clamping down.
Crocworld Conservation Centre, in Scottburgh, South Africa, claims to have a male Nile crocodile that was born in .
Salt glands are present in the tongues of crocodiles and they have a pore opening on the surface of the tongue, which is a trait that separates them from alligators.
It has dark-grey to brown coloration with enlarged scutes around the neck, making it a considerably heavy armoured species.
The nostrils are closed during submergence.
They can easily digest bones, hooves and horns.
This makes it possible for crocodiles to detect prey, danger and intruders, even in total darkness.
Bearing these inaccuracies in mind, it can be safely said that all crocodile species have an average lifespan of at least 30–40 years, and in the case of larger species an average of 60–70 years.
Species of ''Osteolaemus'' grow to an adult size of just , whereas the saltwater crocodile can grow to sizes over  and weigh .
They are one of a few predators that can observe behaviour, such as patterns when animals come to the river to drink at the same time each day.
The armoured skin has scales and is thick and rugged, providing some protection.
The average incubation period is around 80 days, and also is dependent on temperature and species that usually ranges from 65 to 95 days.
Ancient Egypt had Sobek, the crocodile-headed god, with his cult-city Crocodilopolis, as well as Taweret, the goddess of childbirth and fertility, with the back and tail of a crocodile.
Studies in this area are not thorough, however, and many species are yet to be studied in greater detail.
The mother would then take care of her young for over a year before the next mating season.
It is a Critically Endangered species.
Females are highly protective of their nests and young.
It is Critically Endangered, and the remaining wild population is under threat of hybridization.
Mating always takes place in water, where the pair can be observed mating several times.
At the time of hatching, the young start calling within the eggs.
Crocodiles have a palatal flap, a rigid tissue at the back of the mouth that blocks the entry of water.
The palate has a special path from the nostril to the glottis that bypasses the mouth.
The eggshell structure is very conservative through evolution but there are enough changes to tell different species apart by their eggshell microstructure.
Crocodile meat is occasionally eaten as an "exotic" delicacy in the western world.
The space for the jaw muscle in the skull is very large, which is easily visible from the outside as a bulge at each side.
It is a small but extremely aggressive species of crocodile that prefers freshwater swamps.
Feeds on a wide array of vertebrates.
Crocodilians show pronounced sexual dimorphism, with males growing much larger and more rapidly than females.
The coloration is vibrant even as adults and the scales have a "pebbled" appearance.
An  long Deinosuchus would apply a force of , twice that of the latest, higher bite force estimations of Tyrannosaurus.
Vietnamese women who married Chinese men adopted the Chinese taboo.
Crocodiles can reach speeds of  when they "belly run", and often faster if slipping down muddy riverbanks.
The egg are hard shelled but translucent at the time of egg-laying.
They separated from other crocodilians during the Eocene epoch, about 55 million years ago.
Crocodiles were eaten by Vietnamese while they were taboo and off limits for Chinese.
Mugger crocodiles are also known to show toleration in group feedings and tend to congregate in certain areas.
This is one of the rare species that exhibits regular sea-going behaviour, which explains the great distribution throughout the Caribbean.
The nature of the muscle is so stiff, it is almost as hard as bone to touch, as if it were the continuum of the skull.
Unlike other reptiles, a crocodile has a cerebral cortex and a four-chambered heart.
Philippine crocodile ()
Lives in rivers with considerable distance from the sea, to avoid confrontations with saltwater crocodiles.
They have webbed feet which, though not used to propel the animal through the water, allow them to make fast turns and sudden moves in the water or initiate swimming.
They have an egg-tooth at the tip of their snouts, which is developed from the skin, helps them pierce out of the shell.
These sense organs are known as ''Domed Pressure Receptors'' (DPRs).
''Crocodilos'' or ''crocodeilos'' is a compound of ''krokè'' ("pebbles"), and ''drilos/dreilos'' ("worm"), although ''drilos'' is only attested as a colloquial term for "penis".
Feeds mostly on fish but also other small to medium sized vertebrates.
Prefers freshwater habitats, even though is tolerant to salt water, in order to avoid competition and predation by the saltwater crocodile.
For hard-to-distinguish specimens, the protruding tooth is the most reliable feature to define the family that the species belongs to.
The snout is broad with a thick upper-jaw and large teeth.
Aside from using sticks, crocodiles are also capable of cooperative hunting.
However, the authors suggested that the lack of differences was due to limited specimen sampling, and considered the two species to be distinct.
They use the disadvantage of most prey animals' poor nocturnal vision to their advantage.
This a modest sized crocodile with a very broad snout and an alligator-like appearance.
As cold-blooded predators, they have a very slow metabolism, so they can survive long periods without food.
The extraordinary bite of crocodilians is a result of their anatomy.
The land speed record for a crocodile is  measured in a galloping Australian freshwater crocodile.
Next to each full grown tooth, there is a small replacement tooth and an odontogenic stem cell in the dental lamina in standby that can be activated if required.
Herodotus claimed that Nile crocodiles had a symbiotic relationship with certain birds, such as the Egyptian plover, which enter the crocodile's mouth and pick leeches feeding on the crocodile's blood; with no evidence of this interaction actually occurring in any crocodile species, it is most likely mythical or allegorical fiction.
In captivity, some individuals are claimed to have lived for over a century.
A 2013 analysis by Jack L. Conrad, Kirsten Jenkins, Thomas Lehmann, and others did not support Osteolaeminae as a true clade but rather a paraphyletic group consisting of two smaller clades.
A small to medium sized crocodile with a rather broad snout.
Several other large species can reach over  long and weigh over .
Crocodiles have smooth skin on their bellies and sides, while their dorsal surfaces are armoured with large osteoderms.
What a crocodile eats varies greatly with species, size and age.
This is a large species with a relatively elongated snout and a pale tan coloration with scattered dark brown markings.
They informally called these clades "osteolaemins" and "mecistopins".
A (further) corrupted form ''cocodrille'' is found in Old French and was borrowed into Middle English as ''cocodril(le)''.
The larger species of crocodiles are very dangerous to humans, mainly because of their ability to strike before the person can react.
Crocodile embryos do not have sex chromosomes, and unlike humans, sex is not determined genetically.
The coloration is pale yellow with black stripes when young but dark greenish-drab coloured as adults.
'''Caudal''': The upper and lower jaws are covered with sensory pits, visible as small, black speckles on the skin, the crocodilian version of the lateral line organs seen in fish and many amphibians, though arising from a completely different origin.
Many extinct species of ''Crocodylus'' might represent different genera.
Crocodiles can hear well; their tympanic membranes are concealed by flat flaps that may be raised or lowered by muscles.
Behavioural and olfactometer experiments indicate that crocodiles detect both air-borne and water-soluble chemicals and use their olfactory system for hunting.
They often sleep with their mouths open and may pant like a dog.
porosus'' is estimated to live around 70 years on average, with limited evidence of some individuals exceeding 100 years.
"Osteolaemins" include ''Osteolaemus'', ''Voay'', ''Rimasuchus'', and ''Brochuchus'' and "mecistopins" include ''Mecistops'' and ''Euthecodon''.
A broader sense of the term crocodile, Crocodylidae that includes ''Tomistoma'', is not used in this article.
Varuna, a Vedic and Hindu god, rides a part-crocodile makara; his consort Varuni rides a crocodile.
Therefore most conspecific vocalization is made during the breeding season, with the exception being year-round territorial behaviour in some species and quarrels during feeding.
This might be why in alligators they are absent on the rest of the body.
''"Crocodylus" pigotti'', for example, was placed in the newly erected genus ''Brochuchus'' in 2013.
Similarly the goddess personifications of the Ganga and Yamuna rivers are often depicted as riding crocodiles.
Another possibility is that they are secretory, as they produce an oily substance which appears to flush mud off.
A large and aggressive species with a broad snout, especially in older animals.
Its external morphology is a sign of its aquatic and predatory lifestyle.
The young have a narrower V-shaped snout that becomes wider as the animal matures.
The word "crocodile" comes from the Ancient Greek κροκόδιλος (''crocodilos''), "lizard", used in the phrase ''ho krokódilos tou potamoú'', "the lizard of the (Nile) river".
A larger sized species, with a greyish colour and a prominent V-shaped snout.
When contact between the integument and the surrounding sea water solution is blocked, crocodiles are found to lose their ability to discriminate salinities.
Although they appear to be similar to the untrained eye, crocodiles, alligators and the gharial belong to separate biological families.
Despite their large adult sizes, crocodiles start their lives at around  long.
In one study by Vladimir Dinets of the University of Tennessee, he observed that crocodiles use twigs as bait for birds looking for raw materials in nesting.
The term crocodile here applies only to the species within the subfamily of Crocodylinae.
It is the smallest of all living crocodiles.
Crocodile oil has been used for various purposes.
Crocodiles have more webbing on the toes of the hind feet and can better tolerate saltwater due to specialized salt glands for filtering out salt, which are present but non-functioning in alligators.
Crocodiles have vertical-slit shaped pupils, similar to domestic cats.
A hole nest is usually excavated in sand and a mound nest is usually constructed out of vegetation.
Prefers brackish water, but also inhabits lower stretches of rivers and true marine environments.
However, males of all species are aggressive towards each other during mating season, to gain access to females.
Crocodiles do not have sweat glands and release heat through their mouths.
The study, led by Dr. Gregory M. Erickson, also shed light to the larger, extinct species of crocodilians.
Large numbers of crocodiles would swim in circles in order to trap fish and take turns snatching them.
It is ascribed to Herodotus, and supposedly describes the basking habits of the Egyptian crocodile.
The young is usually carried to the water in the mouth.
The unique characteristics and fossil record indicates a rather specialized diet in the past, preying on megafauna such as the giant sloth.
This species clearly displays all of these behaviours.
The form ''crocodrillus'' is attested in Medieval Latin.
It is listed as Least Concern.
Certain species can indeed gallop, including Cuban crocodiles, New Guinea crocodiles, African dwarf crocodiles, and even small Nile crocodiles.
Crocodiles may possess a form of homing instinct.
Most other species are more flexible.
Chemoreception in crocodiles is especially interesting because they hunt in both terrestrial and aquatic surroundings.
Named Kolya, he joined the zoo around 1913 to 1915, fully grown, after touring in an animal show, and lived until 1995.
Crocodiles lay eggs, which are either laid in hole or mound nests, depending on species.
It is a big-headed species and has a relatively broad snout, especially when older.
Crocodiles are polyphyodonts; they are able to replace each of their 80 teeth up to 50 times in their 35 to 75-year lifespan.
Freshwater crocodile ()
Despite having a rather narrow snout, preys on a wide variety of vertebrates, including large mammals.
Depending on the context, some species can communicate over 20 different messages through vocalizations alone.
West African crocodile ()
Western and Central Africa
The receptors flatten when exposed to increased osmotic pressure, such as that experienced when swimming in sea water hyper-osmotic to the body fluids.
Despite the strong muscles to close the jaw, crocodiles have extremely small and weak muscles to open the jaw.
However even with a sophisticated parental nurturing, young crocs have a very high mortality rate due to their vulnerability to predation.
However, they have many similarities in these areas as well.
The Jukun shrine in the Wukari Federation, Nigeria is dedicated to crocodiles in thanks for their aid during migration.
Farming has resulted in an increase in the saltwater crocodile population in Australia, as eggs are usually harvested from the wild, so landowners have an incentive to conserve their habitat.
Temperature also affects growth and survival rate of the young, which may explain the sexual dimorphism in crocodiles.
The saltwater crocodile and Nile crocodile are the most dangerous, killing hundreds of people each year in parts of Southeast Asia and Africa.
Prefers slow mowing rivers, swamps and lakes.
There is a certain form of hierarchy in crocodiles: the largest and heaviest males are at the top, having access to the best basking site, while females are priority during a group feeding of a big kill or carcass.
It has a dark bronze coloration and darkens as the animal matures.
A smaller species with a narrow and elongated snout.
In northern Australia, three rogue saltwater crocodiles were relocated  by helicopter, but had returned to their original locations within three weeks, based on data obtained from tracking devices attached to them.
Crocodiles are ambush predators, waiting for fish or land animals to come close, then rushing out to attack.
Crocodile leather can be made into goods such as wallets, briefcases, purses, handbags, belts, hats, and shoes.
It is also found in hypersaline lakes such as Lago Enriquillo, in the Dominican Republic, which has one of the largest populations of this species.
In the absence of the mother crocodile, the father would substitute itself to take care of the young.
'''Distress call''': A high-pitched call mostly used by younger animals that alerts other crocodiles to imminent danger or an animal being attacked.
Depending on the species crocodile, a number of 7-95 eggs are laid.
The fastest means by which most species can move is a kind of "belly run", where the body moves in a snake-like fashion, limbs splayed out to either side paddling away frantically while the tail whips to and fro.
All crocodiles are semiaquatic and tend to congregate in freshwater habitats such as rivers, lakes, wetlands and sometimes in brackish water and saltwater.
The most commonly farmed species are the saltwater and Nile crocodiles, while a hybrid of the saltwater and the rare Siamese crocodile is also bred in Asian farms.
A medium sized species with a narrow and elongated snout.
A fairly small crocodile that prefers freshwater habitats.
'''Hatching call''': Emitted by females when breeding to alert other crocodiles that she has laid eggs in her nest.
Listed as Critically Endangered, but might be already extinct in the wild; status is unknown.
It has light brown coloration with darker bands on body and tail.
Crocodiles are also known to be aggressive scavengers who feed upon carrion and steal from other predators.
Lives primarily in the Orinoco Basin.
The eyes, ears and nostrils are located on top of the head, allowing the crocodile to lie low in the water, almost totally submerged and hidden from prey.
It is derived from an ancient anecdote that crocodiles weep in order to lure their prey, or that they cry for the victims they are eating, first told in the ''Bibliotheca'' by Photios.
Females can build or dig several trial nests which appear incomplete and abandoned later.
Courtship takes place in a series of behavioural interactions that include a variety of snout rubbing and submissive display that can take a long time.
Found only in the Zapata Swamp of Cuba
Lives in freshwater habitats within tropical forests of the continent.
Maximum speed varies from species to species.
A good example of the hierarchy in crocodiles would be the case of the Nile crocodile.
The largest species of crocodile is the saltwater crocodile, found in eastern India, northern Australia, throughout South-east Asia, and in the surrounding waters.
In the Koine Greek of Roman times, ''crocodilos'' and ''crocodeilos'' would have been pronounced identically, and either or both may be the source of the Latinized form ''crocodīlus'' used by the ancient Romans.
Atlantic regions of Mexico, Belize and Guatemala
Crocodilians also have the functional equivalent of a diaphragm by incorporating muscles used for aquatic locomotion into respiration.
Even though they do not form social groups, many species congregate in certain sections of rivers, tolerating each other at times of feeding and basking.
'''Chirp''': When about to hatch, the young make a “peeping” noise, which encourages the female to excavate the nest.
It is a heavily armoured species with uniform black coloration in adults, while juveniles have a lighter brown banding.
It has a dark greyish-brown colour and is found in mostly various freshwater habitats.
It has heavy dorsal armour and a golden-brown colour that darkens as the animal matures.
In fact, crocodiles can and do generate tears, but they do not actually cry.
A crocodile’s physical traits allow it to be a successful predator.
Endemic to the Philippines
Feeds on mammals, birds and reptiles.
Lives in brackish and marine environments as well as lower stretches of rivers.
Crocodiles only do this in spring nesting seasons of the birds, when there is high demand for sticks to be used for building nests.
Hearing the calls, the female usually excavates the nest and sometimes takes the unhatched eggs in her mouth, slowly rolling the eggs to help the process.
Feeds on small vertebrates and large aquatic invertebrates.
Classified as Vulnerable, but certain local populations under greater threat.
Indonesia, Brunei, East Malaysia and southern Indochina
This tale was first spread widely in English in the stories of the travels of Sir John Mandeville in the 14th century, and appears in several of Shakespeare's plays.
Crocodiles have appeared in various forms in religions across the world.
These low-frequency vibrations travel great distances through both air and water to advertise the male's presence and are so powerful they result in the water appearing to 'dance’.
The cladogram below follows the topology from a 2012 analysis of morphological traits by Christopher A. Brochu and Glenn W. Storrs.
Colombia and Venezuela
Many large crocodilians swallow stones (called gastroliths or stomach stones), which may act as ballast to balance their bodies or assist in crushing food, similar to grit ingested by birds.
Saltwater crocodile ()
It has a relatively broad snout and olive-green to dark green coloration.
A male freshwater crocodile lived to an estimated age of 120–140 years at the Australia Zoo.
From the mostly fish-eating species, like the slender-snouted and freshwater crocodiles, to the larger species like the Nile crocodile and the saltwater crocodile that prey on large mammals, such as buffalo, deer and wild boar, diet shows great diversity.
Just before bellowing, males project an infrasonic signal at about 10&nbsp;Hz through the water which vibrates the ground and nearby objects.
This analysis found weak support for the clade Osteolaeminae.
The most common method is to measure lamellar growth rings in bones and teeth—each ring corresponds to a change in growth rate which typically occurs once a year between dry and wet seasons.
Egg laying usually takes place at night and about 30–40 minutes.
It has been proposed that the flattening of the sensory organ in hyper-osmotic sea water is sensed by the animal as “touch”, but interpreted as chemical information about its surroundings.
It can also be found in coastal swamps but avoids areas populated by saltwater crocodiles.
It was able to apply a bite force value of , and thus surpassed the previous record of  made by a  long American alligator.
'''Bellowing''': Male crocodiles are especially vociferous.
The largest crocodile ever held in captivity is an estuarine–Siamese hybrid named Yai (, meaning big) (born 10 June 1972) at the Samutprakarn Crocodile Farm and Zoo, Thailand.
Crocodilian scales have pores believed to be sensory in function, analogous to the lateral line in fishes.
