This same gene may reduce innate and adaptive immunity in gastrointestinal tissue and impair the ability to resist infection by the MAP bacterium.
The most common is iron deficiency anemia from chronic blood loss, reduced dietary intake, and persistent inflammation leading to increased hepcidin levels, restricting iron absorption in the duodenum.
Certain lifestyle changes can reduce symptoms, including dietary adjustments, elemental diet, proper hydration, and smoking cessation.
Involvement of the duodenum and jejunum can impair the absorption of many other nutrients including folate.
Adequate disease control usually improves anemia of chronic disease, but iron deficiency may require treatment with iron supplements.
Bile acid diarrhea is another complication following surgery for Crohn's disease in which the terminal ileum has been removed.
People with Crohn's disease often have anemia due to vitamin B12, folate, iron deficiency, or due to anemia of chronic disease.
The incidence of Crohn's disease is thought to be similar in Europe but lower in Asia and Africa.
Inflammation of the interior portion of the eye, known as uveitis, can cause blurred vision and eye pain, especially when exposed to light (photophobia).
Erythema nodosum is due to inflammation of the underlying subcutaneous tissue, and is characterized by septal panniculitis.
It usually reoccurs, although some people can remain disease free for years or decades.
The utility of capsule endoscopy for this, however, is still uncertain.
CT and MRI scans are useful for evaluating the small bowel with enteroclysis protocols.
'''Crohn's disease''' is a type of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) that may affect any part of the gastrointestinal tract from mouth to anus.
Crohn's disease is caused by a combination of environmental, immune and bacterial factors in genetically susceptible individuals.
One example of such metaplasia, ''Paneth cell metaplasia'', involves development of Paneth cells (typically found in the small intestine and a key regulator of intestinal microbiota) in other parts of the gastrointestinal system.
The later hypothesis describes impaired cytokine secretion by macrophages, which contributes to impaired innate immunity and leads to a sustained microbial-induced inflammatory response in the colon, where the bacterial load is high.
It usually affects female children more severely than males.
Smoking may increase Crohn's disease; stopping is recommended.
The most common of these are seizures, stroke, myopathy, peripheral neuropathy, headache and depression.
Crohn's disease begins most commonly in people in their teens and 20s, and people in their 50s through to their 70s.
Each individual risk mutation makes a small contribution to the overall risk of Crohn's (approximately 1:200).
Crohn's disease is one type of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).
Isotretinoin is associated with Crohn's.
Fatigue can be helped with regular exercise, a healthy diet, and enough sleep.
While the exact cause is unknown, Crohn's disease seems to be due to a combination of environmental factors and genetic predisposition.
Crohn's lesions are nearly always found at the site of the resected bowel.
Some people should follow a low dietary fiber diet to control symptoms especially if fibrous foods cause symptoms.
Further studies are required to determine the significance of this association.
Recent genome-wide association studies have shown that Crohn’s disease is genetically linked to coeliac disease.
Crohn's cannot be cured by surgery, as the disease eventually recurs, though it is used in the case of partial or full blockage of the intestine.
In Poland, it is still called Leśniowski-Crohn's disease ().
Macrophages that ingest the MAP bacterium are associated with high production of TNF-α.
This bacterium then produces mannins, which protect both itself and various bacteria from phagocytosis, which causes a variety of secondary infections.
NOD2 is a gene involved in Crohn's genetic susceptibility.
It is associated with macrophages' diminished ability to phagocytize MAP.
Treatment options help with symptoms, maintain remission, and prevent relapse.
Stricturing disease causes narrowing of the bowel that may lead to bowel obstruction or changes in the caliber of the feces.
In the setting of severe Crohn's colitis, bleeding may be copious.
All agree that severe anemia (hemoglobin under 10g/dL) should be treated with parenteral iron.
Alternatives include aminosalicylates alone, though only a minority are able to maintain the treatment, and many require immunosuppressive drugs.
For example, individuals with Crohn's disease involving the small bowel are at higher risk for small intestinal cancer.
Some advise parenteral iron as first line as it works faster, has fewer gastrointestinal side effects, and is unaffected by inflammation reducing enteral absorption.
CD colitis 2.jpg|This endoscopic image of Crohn's colitis showing diffuse loss of mucosal architecture, friability and exudate Crohn's disease—colon—high mag.jpg|Endoscopic biopsy showing granulomatous inflammation of the colon in a case of Crohn's disease.
Medications used to treat the symptoms of Crohn's disease include 5-aminosalicylic acid (5-ASA) formulations, prednisone, immunomodulators such as azathioprine (given as the prodrug for 6-mercaptopurine), methotrexate, infliximab, adalimumab, certolizumab and natalizumab.
* Homeopathy is frequently used in Germany as a treatment for Crohn's disease, though no clinical trials exist that demonstrate homeopathy is effective.
CT scan gastric CD.jpg|CT scan showing Crohn's disease in the fundus of the stomach
Trials of extracts from the worm ''Trichuris suis'' showed promising results when used in people with IBD.
Trials in human are pending.
In severe cases, an individual may have more than 20 bowel movements per day and may need to awaken at night to defecate.
At this time, evidence is insufficient to recommend the use of acupuncture.
There are no medications or surgical procedures that can cure Crohn's disease.
Ulceration is an outcome seen in highly active disease.
Rarely autoimmune hemolysis may occur.
In some cases, however, it may not be possible to tell the difference, in which case the disease is classified as indeterminate colitis.
The genetic data, and direct assessment of immunity, indicates a malfunction in the innate immune system.
Granulomas, aggregates of macrophage derivatives known as giant cells, are found in 50% of cases and are most specific for Crohn's disease.
Surgery may also be required for complications such as obstructions, fistulas, or abscesses, or if the disease does not respond to drugs.
These include diets, probiotics, fish oil and other herbal and nutritional supplements.
Crohn's is responsible for 10% of vesicoenteric fistulae, and is the most common cause of ileovesical fistulae.
A complete blood count may reveal anemia, which commonly is caused by blood loss leading to iron deficiency (a microcytic anemia) or by vitamin B deficiency (a macrocytic anemia), usually caused by ileal disease impairing vitamin B absorption.
The risk increases following resection of the small bowel.
Screening for colon cancer with colonoscopy is recommended for anyone who has had Crohn's colitis for at least eight years.
Similarly, people with Crohn's colitis have a relative risk of 5.6 for developing colon cancer.
Short bowel syndrome (SBS, also short gut syndrome or simply short gut) is caused by the surgical removal of part of the small intestine.
Crohn's disease may also involve the skin, blood, and endocrine system.
It can vary from being benign to very severe and people with CD could experience just one episode or have continuous symptoms.
Gastroduodenal Crohn's disease causes inflammation in the stomach and first part of the small intestine, called the duodenum.
There is no good evidence that thalidomide or lenalidomide is useful to bring about or maintain remission.
In the oral cavity people with Crohn's may develop cheilitis granulomatosa and other forms of orofacial granulomatosis, pyostomatitis vegetans, recurrent aphthous stomatitis, geographic tongue, and migratory stomatitis in higher prevalence than the general population.
Fewer lesions result in a lower grade.
The join (or anastomosis) after surgery may be inspected, usually during a colonoscopy, and disease activity graded.
The "cold-chain" hypothesis is that psychrotrophic bacteria such as ''Yersinia'' and ''Listeria'' species contribute to the disease.
Some scientists have suggested more research into these is needed to discriminate between effective therapies and those that have not been found to be effective.
This is particularly common after surgery to remove the ileum.
It is often accompanied by diarrhea, especially in those who have had surgery.
It typically manifests in the gastrointestinal tract and can be categorized by the specific tract region affected.
Other causes of anemia include medication used in treatment of inflammatory bowel disease, like azathioprine, which can lead to cytopenia, and sulfasalazine, which can also result in folate deficiency.
They may have specific dietary intolerances (not allergies).
Inflammation may also involve the white part of the eye (sclera), a condition called episcleritis.
There is considerable overlap between susceptibility loci for IBD and mycobacterial infections.
An anti-MAP vaccine appears effective in mice and cattle with MAP with no apparent side effects.
In cases where remission is possible, relapse can be prevented and symptoms controlled with medication, lifestyle and dietary changes, changes to eating habits (eating smaller amounts more often), reduction of stress, moderate activity and exercise.
More than half of people with Crohn's disease have tried complementary or alternative therapy.
It has been also suggested that antibiotics change the enteric flora, and their continuous use may pose the risk of overgrowth with pathogens such as ''Clostridium difficile''.
Although stress is sometimes claimed to exacerbate Crohn's disease, there is no concrete evidence to support such claim.
A fistulae can develop between two loops of bowel, between the bowel and bladder, between the bowel and vagina, and between the bowel and skin.
The most common disease that mimics the symptoms of Crohn's disease is ulcerative colitis, as both are inflammatory bowel diseases that can affect the colon with similar symptoms.
Crohn's disease can also cause neurological complications (reportedly in up to 15%).
The diagnosis of Crohn's disease can sometimes be challenging, and a number of tests are often required to assist the physician in making the diagnosis.
A few small trials have looked at medical cannabis but further evidence is required to determine its usefulness.
Crohn's disease also increases the risk of blood clots; painful swelling of the lower legs can be a sign of deep venous thrombosis, while difficulty breathing may be a result of pulmonary embolism.
Individuals with osteoporosis are at increased risk of bone fractures.
Biopsy samples taken from the colons of all three patient groups were found to produce elevated levels of a serine protease.
It also has a higher incidence in Ashkenazi Jews and smokers.
Penetrating disease creates abnormal passageways (fistulae) between the bowel and other structures, such as the skin.
In those newly diagnosed, a corticosteroid may be used for a brief period of time to quickly improve the disease with another medication such as either methotrexate or a thiopurine used to prevent recurrence.
Hydrocortisone should be used in severe attacks of Crohn's disease.
There is an apparent connection between Crohn's disease, ''Mycobacterium'', other pathogenic bacteria, and genetic markers.
Cannabinoids and/or modulation of the endocannabinoid system is a novel therapeutic means for the treatment of numerous GI disorders, including inflammatory bowel diseases like Crohn's disease.
Dietary microparticles, such as those found in toothpaste, have been studied as they produce effects on immunity, but they were not consumed in greater amounts in patients with Crohn's.
Jejunoileitis causes spotty patches of inflammation in the top half of the small intestine, called the jejunum.
This leads to the development of excessive watery diarrhea.
It is less common in Asia and Africa.
There is usually an abrupt transition between unaffected tissue and the ulcer—a characteristic sign known as skip lesions.
Diarrhea is the main symptom, but others may include weight loss, cramping, bloating, and heartburn.
Persistent vomiting and nausea may indicate stenosis from small bowel obstruction or disease involving the stomach, pylorus, or duodenum.
Crohn's disease may also be categorized by the behavior of disease as it progresses.
It usually develops in those patients who have had half or more of their small intestines removed.
Another skin lesion, pyoderma gangrenosum, is typically a painful ulcerating nodule.
There is a tentative association between ''Candida'' conlonization and Crohn's disease.
A "cobblestone"-like appearance is seen in approximately 40% of cases of Crohn's disease upon colonoscopy, representing areas of ulceration separated by narrow areas of healthy tissue.
Biopsies may also show chronic mucosal damage, as evidenced by blunting of the intestinal villi, atypical branching of the crypts, and a change in the tissue type (metaplasia).
Most people with Crohn's live a normal lifespan.
Inflammatory disease (or nonstricturing, nonpenetrating disease) causes inflammation without causing strictures or fistulae.
Based on the score, treatment plans can be designed to give the patient the best chance of managing recurrence of the disease.
About half of the overall risk is related to genetics with more than 70 genes found to be involved.
Ileitis typically results in large-volume, watery feces.
As Crohn's disease most commonly affects the terminal ileum where the vitamin B12/intrinsic factor complex is absorbed, B12 deficiency may be seen.
Such individuals may require oral supplements to increase their caloric intake, or in severe cases, total parenteral nutrition (TPN).
There are three categories of disease presentation in Crohn's disease: stricturing, penetrating, and inflammatory.
Biological therapies are medications used to avoid long-term steroid use, decrease inflammation, and treat people who have fistulas with abscesses.
The skin rashes may be due to infections as well as pyoderma gangrenosum or erythema nodosum.
The introduction of hormonal contraception in the United States in the 1960s is associated with a dramatic increase in incidence, and one hypothesis is that these drugs work on the digestive system in ways similar to smoking.
These neutrophils, along with mononuclear cells, may infiltrate the crypts, leading to inflammation (crypititis) or abscess (crypt abscess).
Crohn's disease also increases the risk of cancer in the area of inflammation.
* Acupuncture is used to treat inflammatory bowel disease in China, and is being used more frequently in Western society.
Testing for ''Saccharomyces cerevisiae'' antibodies (ASCA) and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) has been evaluated to identify inflammatory diseases of the intestine and to differentiate Crohn's disease from ulcerative colitis.
A disease of both the ileum (the last part of the small intestine that connects to the large intestine), and the large intestine, Ileocolic Crohn's accounts for fifty percent of cases.
Multinucleated giant cells, a common finding in the lesions of Crohn's disease, are less common in the lesions of lichen nitidus.
In this view, the chronic inflammation of Crohn's is caused when the adaptive immune system tries to compensate for a deficient innate immune system.
Vaccination against MAP is also being studied.
This typically occurs in the area overlying lymphoid aggregates.
Crohn's is the first genetically complex disease in which the relationship between genetic risk factors and the immune system is understood in considerable detail.
The most common type of skin manifestation, erythema nodosum, presents as raised, tender red nodules usually appearing on the shins.
On occasion, the colonoscope can travel past the terminal ileum, but it varies from person to person.
As it may manifest at the time of the growth spurt in puberty, up to 30% of children with Crohn's disease may have retardation of growth.
In 2007, the ATG16L1 gene has been implicated in Crohn's disease, which may induce autophagy and hinder the body's ability to attack invasive bacteria.
Colitis may result in a smaller volume of feces of higher frequency.
Some evidence supports the hypothesis that the bacterium ''Mycobacterium avium'' subspecies ''paratuberculosis'' (MAP) is a cause of Crohn’s disease (see also Johne's disease).
Infections with helminths may alter the autoimmune response that causes the disease.
Blood transfusion should be reserved for those who are cardiovascularly unstable, due to its relatively poor safety profile, lack of long term efficacy, and cost.
However, due to the precedence of Crohn's name in the alphabet, it later became known in the worldwide literature as Crohn's disease.
A small bowel follow-through may suggest the diagnosis of Crohn's disease and is useful when the disease involves only the small intestine.
The arthritis may also involve the spine, leading to ankylosing spondylitis if the entire spine is involved or simply sacroiliitis if only the sacroiliac joint is involved.
Barium enemas, in which barium is inserted into the rectum and fluoroscopy is used to image the bowel, are rarely used in the work-up of Crohn's disease due to the advent of colonoscopy.
Because colonoscopy and gastroscopy allow direct visualization of only the terminal ileum and beginning of the duodenum, they cannot be used to evaluate the remainder of the small intestine.
The Crohn's and Colitis Foundation of America cites this number as approx 149:100,000; NIH cites 28 to 199 per 100,000.
During a colonoscopy, biopsies of the colon are often taken to confirm the diagnosis.
In some cases of SBS, intestinal transplant surgery may be considered; though the number of transplant centres offering this procedure is quite small and it comes with a high risk due to the chance of infection and rejection of the transplanted intestine.
Bloody bowel movements typically come and go, and may be bright or dark red in color.
Consultation with an obstetrician and gastroenterologist about Crohn's disease and all medications facilitates preventative measures.
There is no cure for Crohn's disease and remission may not be possible or prolonged if achieved.
When symptoms are in remission, treatment enters maintenance, with a goal of avoiding the recurrence of symptoms.
People with Crohn's disease experience chronic recurring periods of flare-ups and remission.
As a result, researchers are looking at the eradication of MAP as a therapeutic option.
With treatment, most people achieve a healthy weight, and the mortality rate for the disease is relatively low.
Other conditions that can present similarly include irritable bowel syndrome and Behçet's disease.
Obstruction typically occurs from strictures or adhesions that narrow the lumen, blocking the passage of the intestinal contents.
Finally, Crohn's disease increases the risk of osteoporosis, or thinning of the bones.
Crohn's disease can be problematic during pregnancy, and some medications can cause adverse outcomes for the fetus or mother.
Prolonged use of corticosteroids has significant side-effects; as a result, they are, in general, not used for long-term treatment.
Mouse studies have suggested some symptoms of Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis, and irritable bowel syndrome have the same underlying cause.
Certain medications can also lower sperm count or otherwise adversely affect a man's fertility.
However, Crohn's disease is associated with a small increase in risk of small bowel and colorectal carcinoma (bowel cancer).
For patients with an obstruction due to a stricture, two options for treatment are strictureplasty and resection of that portion of bowel.
To manage symptoms have a balanced diet with proper portion control.
A statistical correlation was found between the advent of the use of refrigeration in the United States and various parts of Europe and the rise of the disease.
Tobacco smokers are two times more likely to develop Crohn's disease than nonsmokers.
CD colitis.jpg|Endoscopic image of Crohn's colitis showing deep ulceration
It also often begins after gastroenteritis.
Celiac disease can't be excluded if specific antibodies (anti-transglutaminase antibodies) are negative, nor in absence of intestinal villi atrophy.
Crohn's disease is more common in northern countries, and with higher rates still in the northern areas of these countries.
It is usually thought to be due to an inability of the ileum to reabsorb bile acids after resection of the terminal ileum and was the first type of bile acid malabsorption recognized.
In addition to systemic and gastrointestinal involvement, Crohn's disease can affect many other organ systems.
While surgery should be used as little as possible, it is necessary to address some abscesses, certain bowel obstructions, and cancers.
coli'' to the disease.
Among older individuals, Crohn's disease may manifest as weight loss, usually related to decreased food intake, since individuals with intestinal symptoms from Crohn's disease often feel better when they do not eat and might lose their appetite.
Irritable bowel syndrome is excluded when there are inflammatory changes.
The disease can attack any part of the digestive tract, from mouth to anus.
In these cases, re-operation rates were 31% and 27%, respectively, indicating that strictureplasty is a safe and effective treatment for selected people with duodenal involvement.
ResectedIleum.jpg|Resected ileum for a person with Crohn's disease
Activation of CB1 and CB2 receptors in animals has shown a strong anti-inflammatory effect.
If Crohn's disease affects the stomach, production of intrinsic factor can be reduced.
Besides other, problems include a limitation in possible daily resorption and an increased growth of intestinal bacteria.
The first type affects larger weight-bearing joints such as the knee (most common), hips, shoulders, wrists, or elbows.
Adequately controlled, Crohn's disease may not significantly restrict daily living.
The exact underlying immune problem is not clear; however, it may be an immunodeficiency state.
After the first surgery, Crohn's usually comes back at the site where the diseased intestine was removed and the healthy ends were rejoined, however it can come back in other locations.
However, only slightly more women than men have Crohn's disease.
However these trials (TRUST -I & TRUST -II)  failed in Phase 2 clinical trials and were then discontinued after consistent failure in both North America and Europe.
Symptoms caused by intestinal stenosis are also common in Crohn's disease.
A colonoscopy is the best test for making the diagnosis of Crohn's disease, as it allows direct visualization of the colon and the terminal ileum, identifying the pattern of disease involvement.
One in five people with the disease are admitted to hospital each year, and half of those with the disease will require surgery for the disease at some point over a ten-year period.
Treatment for Crohn's disease is only when symptoms are active and involve first treating the acute problem, then maintaining remission.
Serum iron, total iron binding capacity and transferrin saturation may be more easily interpreted in inflammation.
Acute treatment uses medications to treat any infection (normally antibiotics) and to reduce inflammation (normally aminosalicylate anti-inflammatory drugs and corticosteroids).
Eating small meals frequently instead of big meals may also help with a low appetite.
Burrill Bernard Crohn, an American gastroenterologist at New York City's Mount Sinai Hospital, described fourteen cases in 1932, and submitted them to the American Medical Association under the rubric of "Terminal ileitis: A new clinical entity".
Over thirty genes have been associated with Crohn's; a biological function is known for most of them.
