File:HJRK A 2269 - Crossbow windlass, late 15th century.jpg|Iron cranequin, South German, late 15th century
Today, the crossbow often has a complicated legal status due to the possibility of lethal use and its similarities to both firearms and archery weapons.
4th century) note repeatedly the use of arrow shooting weapons such as ''arcuballista'' and ''manuballista'' respectively ''cheiroballista''.
File:Gastraphetes - catapult ancestor - antica catapulta.jpg|Cocking of a Greek ''gastraphetes''
In Brazil the CIGS (Jungle Warfare Training Center) also trains soldiers in the use of crossbows.
The compound bow has the string attached to the pulleys, one or both of which has one or more cables attached to the opposite limb.
Spain's Green Berets still use the crossbow as well.
A bullet crossbow is a type of handheld crossbow which rather than arrows or bolts shoots spherical projectiles made of stone, clay or lead.
The Indian Navy's Marine Commando Force were equipped until the late 1980s with crossbows supplied with cyanide-tipped bolts, as an alternative to suppressed handguns.
A compound crossbow is a modern crossbow and is similar to a compound bow.
The transition to torsion catapults, which are not considered crossbows and came to dominate Greek and Roman artillery design, is first evident in inventories of the Athenian arsenal from between 338 and 326 BC.
According to the inventor Hero of Alexandria (fl.
A crossbow is a bow mounted on a stick (called a tiller or stock) with a mechanism in it which holds the drawn bow string.
Handheld crossbows with complex bronze trigger mechanisms have also been found with the Terracotta Army in the tomb of Qin Shihuang (r. 221–210 BC) that are similar to specimens from the subsequent Han Dynasty (202 BC–220 AD), while crossbowmen described in the Qin and Han Dynasty learned drill formations, some were even mounted as cavalry units, and Han Dynasty writers attributed the success of numerous battles against the Xiongnu to massed crossbow volleys.
Zopyrus has been plausibly equated with a Pythagorean of that name who seems to have flourished in the late 5th century BC.
The weapon uses several different bows instead of one bow with a tackle system to achieve a higher acceleration of the sinew via the multiplication with each bow's pulling effect.
These "roller nuts" were either free-floating in their close-fitting hole across the stock, tied in with a binding of sinew or other strong cording; or mounted on a metal axle or pins.
The limbs are usually much stiffer than those of a recurve crossbow.
The smallest crossbows are pistol crossbows.
Linguistically, it derives from non-Chinese languages of China's then neighbors in East Asia, who were often hired as marksmen mercenaries, while the first records and examples of representations as well as specimens are from China.
File:Ancient Mechanical Artillery.
These composite bows made of several layers are much stronger and more efficient in releasing energy than simple wooden bows.
Crossbows have a much smaller draw length than bows.
In many cultures, bowmen were considered a separate and superior caste, despite being usually drawn from the common class, as their archery skill-set was essentially developed from birth (similar to many horseman cultures) and was impossible to reproduce outside a pre-established cultural tradition, which many nations lacked.
File:French cross-bow grenade thrower Arbalète sauterelle type A d'Imphy circa 1915.jpg|French cross-bow grenade thrower Arbalète sauterelle type A d'Imphy circa 1915
File:FrenchCrossbowMan.JPG|15th-century French soldier carrying an arbalest and a pavise
These could be shot from under the arm.
Later footstrapped versions become very popular among the Muslim armies in Iberia.
The bow (called the "prod" or "lath" on a crossbow) of early crossbows was made of a single piece of wood, usually ash or yew.
It was cocked by resting the stomach in a concavity at the rear of the stock and pressing down with all strength.
Crossbows are used for shooting sports and bowhunting in modern archery and for blubber biopsy samples in scientific research.
This nut has a perpendicular center slot for the bolt, and an intersecting axial slot for the string, along with a lower face or slot against which the internal trigger sits.
The workings can be compared to a modern compound bow system.
The ballista has torsion springs replacing the elastic prod of the oxybeles, but later also developed into smaller versions.
These are technologically similar to the African derived crossbows, but have a different route of influence.
A detailed description of the ''gastraphetes'', along with a drawing, is found in Heron's technical treatise ''Belopoeica''.
In this way considerably more energy can be summoned up than by using only one arm of the archer as in the hand-bow.
In some countries such as Canada or the United Kingdom, they may be less heavily regulated than firearms, and thus more popular for hunting; some jurisdictions have bow and/or crossbow only seasons.
The ease of use of a crossbow allows it to be used effectively with little training, while other types of bows take far more skill to shoot accurately.
Historically, crossbows played a significant role in the warfare of East Asia, Europe, and the Mediterranean.
The province's original coat of arms (1560) was of a crossbow alone, the lion being added later.
Finally, the Qin and Han Dynasties also developed crossbow shooting lines, with alternating rows of crossbowmen shooting and reloading in a manner similar to a musket firing line.
A recurve crossbow is a bow that has tips curving away from the archer.
1, Glenferness, Shandwick, and Meigle.
Removable or integral plates of wood, ivory, or metal on the sides of the stock kept the nut in place laterally.
The Chinese repeating crossbow, Chu Ko Nu, is a handheld crossbow that accomplishes the task with a magazine containing a number of bolts on top.
Whipcord was very common; however linen, hemp, and sinew were used as well.
Recurved limbs also put greater strain on the materials used to make the bow, and they may make more noise with the shot.
There is an optimum weight for bolts to achieve maximum kinetic energy, which varies depending on the strength and characteristics of the crossbow, but most could pass through common mail.
In the North of Northern America, light hunting crossbows were traditionally used by the Inuit.
Furthermore, the thick prods are a bit less efficient at releasing energy, but more energy can be stored by a crossbow.
The weapon was mainly used as a weapon against lightly armored soldiers, since it shot small bolts that were often dipped in poison.
This kind of quiver is attached under the front of the crossbow, parallel to the string and is designed to be quickly detached and reattached.
The simplest version of mechanical cocking device is a hook attached to a belt, drawing the bow by straightening the legs.
File:The Martyrdom of St Sebastian (detail).jpg|Stirrup
In most cases, a newly bought crossbow will need to be "sighted" for accurate shooting.
The repeating crossbow automated the separate actions of stringing the bow, placing the projectile and shooting.
Reusable up to 20 times, the line can be reeled back in without exposing oneself.
The recurve bow's bent limbs have a longer draw length than an equivalent straight-limbed bow, giving more acceleration to the projectile and less hand shock.
For siege warfare the size of crossbows was further increased to hurl large projectiles such as rocks at fortifications.
The bronze triggers were designed in such a way that they were able to store a large amount of energy within the bow when drawn, but was easily shot with little recoil when the trigger were pulled (this allowed it for precision shooting).
Crossbow arrows are of similar construction to ordinary bow arrows, just shorter in length because of reduced power stroke.
Multiple bow systems have a special system of pulling the sinew via several bows (which can be recurve bows).
A direct comparison between a fast hand-drawn replica crossbow and a longbow show a 6:10 rate of shooting or a 4:9 rate within 30 seconds and comparable weapons.
One of the earliest reliable descriptions of this weapon in warfare is of an ambush in 341 BC, the Battle of Ma-Ling.
In Europe, British-based Barnett International supplied crossbows to Serbian forces which according to ''The Guardian'' were later used "in ambushes and as a counter-sniper weapon", against the Kosovo Liberation Army during the Kosovo War in the areas of Pec and Djakovica, south west of Kosovo.
The invention of pushlever and ratchet drawing mechanisms enabled the use of crossbows on horseback, leading to the development of new cavalry tactics.
The earliest designs featured a slot in the stock, down into which the string was placed.
While some jurisdictions regard crossbows the same as firearms, many others do not require any sort of license to own a crossbow.
In modern times, crossbows have been largely supplanted by firearms in most roles but are still widely used for shooting sports, hunting, and when shooting in relative silence is an important consideration.
The earliest handheld crossbow stocks with bronze trigger, dating from the 6th century BC, were found in Tomb 3 and 12 at Qufu, Shandong, previously the capital of Lu.
Despite strength training, there are physical limits to the longbow, unlike the crossbow, which can store several times the energy, but will be less efficient in translating stored into kinetic energy due to the thicker spring material.
Crossbows and archery while mounted were instructed to the Cham by a Chinese in 1171.
With lots of training, a longbowman can achieve a high degree of accuracy that is comparable to the much steeper learning curve in aimed shooting with the crossbow.
The concept is similar to the LGH device originally only fired from a rifle, as a plastic retrieval line is attached.
The disadvantage is the greater weight and clumsiness compared to a bow, as well as the slower rate of shooting and the lower efficiency of the acceleration system, but there would be reduced elastic hysteresis, making the crossbow a more accurate weapon.
The required crossbows needed a massive base frame and powerful windlass devices.
File:Crossbow pistol IMG 3841.jpg|Pistol crossbow for home recreational shooting.
Made by Frédéric Siber in Morges, early 19th century.
2nd century BC), whose reliability has been positively reevaluated by recent scholarship, described two advanced forms of the ''gastraphetes'', which he credits to Zopyros, an engineer from southern Italy.
It is used to probe for and detonate tripwire initiated mines and booby traps at up to 50 meters.
The mechanism is worked by moving a rectangular lever forward and backward.
Some of these riders would carry small, powerful all-metal crossbows of their own.
The crossbow is portrayed as a hunting weapon on four Pictish stones from early medieval Scotland (6th to 9th centuries): St. Vigeans no.
A later design implemented a rolling cylindrical pawl called a "nut" to retain the string.
A slurbow is a type of crossbow with a wood or metal barrel over the top of the stock that is arguably influenced by the emergence of the pistol.
Crossbow silencers are multiple components placed on high vibration parts, such as the string and limbs, to dampen vibration and suppress the sound of loosing the bolt.
In Asia, some Chinese armed forces use crossbows, including the special force Snow Leopard Commando Unit of the People's Armed Police and the People's Liberation Army.
In Vietnamese historical legend, the ruler and general Thục Phán who ruled over the ancient kingdom of Âu Lạc from 257 to 207 BC is said to have owed his power to a magic crossbow, capable of shooting thousands of bolts at once.
The legality of using a crossbow for hunting varies widely around the world, and even within different jurisdictions of some federal countries.
Such devices include the oxybeles.
He probably designed his bow-machines on the occasion of the sieges of Cumae and Milet between 421 BC and 401 BC.
The ancient Chinese crossbow often included a metal (i.e.
by mounting it on a defensive wall or using a portable prop.
On 15 February 2008 Serbian Minister of Defence Dragan Sutanovac was pictured testing a Barnett crossbow during a public exercise of the Serbian army's Special Forces in Nis, 200&nbsp;km south of capital Belgrade.
But in a crossbow the string is held back mechanically, so there is no advantage in providing a let off.
These are much shorter than arrows, but can be several times heavier.
File:Altarpiece of St Sebastian (detail).jpg|Cranequin (Rack & Pinion)
The earliest evidence of crossbows in ancient China and neighboring peoples dates back to at least the 6th century BC.
The device is of particular use in tactical situations where noise discipline is important.
Many crossbow scopes feature multiple crosshairs to compensate for the significant effects of gravity over different ranges.
Very light crossbows can be drawn by hand, but heavier types need the help of mechanical devices.
Knights and mercenaries deployed in triangular formations, with the most heavily armored knights at the front.
Quivers can be mounted to hold ammunition.
The medieval crossbow was called by many names, most of which were derived from the word ballista, a torsion siege engine resembling a crossbow.
A popular detachable design consists of a main arm that is attached to the weapon, a plate on one end that secures four or more individual bolts at a point on their shafts and at the other end a cover that secures their heads.
Traditionally the prod was often lashed to the stock with rope, whipcord, or other strong cording.
Most modern crossbows are designed to shoot arrows instead of bolts.
Arrow-shooting machines in action are reported from Philip II's siege of Perinthos in Thrace in 340 BC.
The rank of commanding officer of the crossbowmen corps was one of the highest positions in any army of this time.
A highly specialized type of bolt is employed to collect blubber biopsy samples used in biology research.
A third Greek author, Biton (fl.
File:Liannu.jpg|Chinese Lian Nu (連弩), multiple shot crossbow without a visible nut or cocking aid
The adapted crossbow was used by the Islamic armies in defence of their castles.
During the Xinjiang riots of July 2009, crossbows were used alongside modern military hardware to quell protests.
They often also have some form of strengthening internal "sear" or trigger face, usually of metal.
Therefore, compound crossbows generally use only pulleys that are both round and concentrically mounted, in order to capture the maximum available energy from the relatively short draw length.
In terms of archaeological evidence, bronze crossbow bolts dating from as early as the mid-5th century BC have been found at a Chu burial site in Yutaishan, Hubei.
This limb stiffness makes the compound bow more energy efficient than other bows, but the limbs are too stiff to be drawn comfortably with a string attached directly to them.
The traditional bow and arrow had long been a specialized weapons system which required a considerable degree of lifetime training, physical strength, and expertise to operate with any degree of efficiency.
File:Armborst 2, Nordisk familjebok.png|Push lever
Ammunition for crossbows could have also been spherical.
For example, in the Americas, the Peruvian army (Ejército) equips some soldiers with crossbows and rope, to establish a zip-line in difficult terrain.
Composite bows are made from layers of different material, often wood, horn, and sinew glued together and bound with animal tendon.
There is no record from the Middle Ages comparing longbowmen and crossbowmen shooting in one army from a similar position, although such occasions are known with visiting Englishmen in the Baltic and Scots in the French army.
Crossbows can also be adapted to shoot lead bullets or rocks, in which case they are called '''stone-bows'''.
The metal portions of the crossbow were also mass-produced with precision, with the bronze mechanisms being interchangeable.
Repeating crossbows, first mentioned in the ''Records of the Three Kingdoms'', were discovered in 1986 in Tomb 47 at Qinjiazui, Hubei, and were dated to around the 4th century BC.
Along with polearm weapons made from farming equipment, the crossbow was also a weapon of choice for insurgent peasants such as the Taborites.
Mounted knights armed with lances proved ineffective against formations of pikemen combined with crossbowmen whose weapons could penetrate most knights' armor.
Different varieties of crossbows were also developed, such as the repeating crossbow, multi-shot crossbow, and repeating multi-shot crossbow.
feathered ends like those commonly seen on arrows.
Other designs hold bolts underneath the crossbow parallel to the stock, sometimes on either side of the crossbow.
The earliest reasonably reliable date for the utilization of crossbows in Europe is in ancient Greece from the 5th century BC.
In modern times, crossbows are no longer used for assassinations, but there are still some applications.
The Saracens called the crossbow ''qaws Ferengi'', or "Frankish bow," as the Crusaders used the crossbow against the Arab and Turkic horsemen with remarkable success.
The arrow-like projectiles of a crossbow are called bolts.
File:Chuangzi Nu1.jpg|Chinese ''Chuangzi Nu'' stationary windlass device with triple-bow arcuballista
On display at Morges military museum.
These are often made from plastic and usually hold the bolts in fixed positions along the structure.
The use of crossbows in European warfare is again evident from the Battle of Hastings until about the year 1500.
When the string is drawn back, the string causes the pulleys to turn.
According to Sir Joseph Needham in his Science and Civilisation in China, it is not possible to pinpoint exactly which of the East Asian peoples invented the crossbow.
Crossbow technology for multi-proded crossbows was transferred from the Chinese to Champa, which Champa used in its invasion of the Khmer Empire's Angkor in 1177.
In contrast, the crossbow was the first projectile weapon to be simple, cheap, and physically undemanding enough to be operated by large numbers of conscript soldiers, thus enabling virtually any nation to field a potent force of ranged crossbowmen with little expense beyond the cost of the weapons themselves.
This cording is called the ''bridle''.
Bows could be kept taut and ready to shoot for some time with little effort, allowing crossbowmen to aim better.
In the American South, the crossbow was used for hunting and warfare when firearms or gunpowder were unavailable because of economic hardships or isolation.
As a result, it is possible to shoot at a faster rate compared to unmodified version.
File:Armborst 1, Nordisk familjebok.png|Pull lever
Crossbows were eventually replaced in warfare by more powerful gunpowder weapons, although early guns had slower rates of fire and much worse accuracy than contemporary crossbows.
bronze or steel) grid serving as iron sights.
To shoot this design, a vertical rod is thrust up through a hole in the bottom of the notch, forcing the string out.
With a crossbow, archers could release a draw force far in excess of what they could have handled with a bow.
An Athenian inventory from 330–329 BC includes catapults bolts with heads and flights.
As steel became more widely available in Europe around the 14th century, steel prods came into use.
In discussing the astronomical topics such as solar and lunar eclipses, the Western-Han era mathematician and music theorist Jing Fang (78-37 BC) wrote that the moon, shaped like a ball, produced no light and was illuminated only by the sun, which he compared to the shape of a round crossbow bullet.
Sculptural reliefs from Roman Gaul depict the use of crossbows in hunting scenes.
The strings for a crossbow are typically made of strong fibers that would not tend to fray.
Primarily used for hunting wildfowl, these usually have a double string with a pouch between the strings to hold the projectile.
At the same time, Greek fortifications began to feature high towers with shuttered windows in the top, presumably to house anti-personnel arrow shooters, as in Aigosthena.
The earliest textual evidence of the ''handheld'' crossbow used in battle dates to the 4th century BC.
While most scholars agree that one or more of these terms refer to handheld mechanical weapons, there is disagreement whether these were flexion bows or torsion powered like the recent Xanten find.
File:FrenchMountedCrossbowman.JPG|16th-century French mounted crossbowman ("cranequinier").
They almost completely superseded hand bows in many European armies in the 12th century for a number of reasons.
Modern bolts are stamped with a proof mark to ensure their consistent weight and do not have fletching, i.e.
Nuts were made of antler, bone, or metal.
The invention of the crossbow in ancient China caused a major shift in the role of projectile weaponry.
It shoots projectiles called bolts or quarrels.
The earliest Chinese document mentioning a crossbow were texts from the 4th to 3rd centuries BC attributed to the followers of Mozi.
Crossbowmen were also valuable in counterattacks to protect their infantry.
Usually they engaged the enemy in offensive skirmishes before an assault of mounted knights.
The next step in development was stocks of the shape that would later be used for firearms, which allowed better aiming.
The crossbow prod is very short compared to ordinary bows, resulting in a short draw length.
Roman authors like Vegetius (fl.
In the armies of Europe, mounted and unmounted crossbowmen, often mixed with slingers, javelineers and archers, occupied a central position in battle formations.
This rod is usually attached perpendicular to a rear-facing lever called a trigger or "tickler".
The arbalest was a heavy crossbow which required special systems for pulling the sinew via windlasses.
Montagnard fighters armed with crossbows proved a highly valuable asset to the US Special Forces operating in Vietnam, and it was not uncommon for the Green Berets to integrate Montagnard crossbowmen into their strike teams.
Even relatively small differences in arrow weight can have a considerable impact on its drop and, conversely, its flight trajectory.
1st century AD), who referred to the now lost works of the 3rd-century BC engineer Ctesibius, this weapon was inspired by an earlier hand crossbow, called the ''gastraphetes'' (''belly shooter''), which could store more energy than the Greek bows.
The native Montagnards of Vietnam's Central Highlands were also known to have used crossbows, as both a tool for hunting, and later, an effective weapon against the Viet Cong during the Vietnam War.
Later, similar competing tactics would feature harquebusiers or musketeers in formation with pikemen (pike and shot), pitted against cavalry firing pistols or carbines.
In modern tests, longbows showed a higher rate of shot than crossbows of the same energy, due to the difficulty of the shooter in handling the mechanical parts for loading in the same time as the bow was pulled.
During the Crusades, Europeans were exposed to Saracen composite bows, made from layers of different material—often wood, horn and sinew—glued together and bound with animal tendon.
Sun Tzu's influential treatise on war, ''The Art of War'' (first appearance dated to sometime between 500 BC to 300 BC) refers in chapter five to the traits of crossbows and in chapter twelve, to the usage of crossbows.
From the mid-4th century BC onwards, evidence of the Greek use of crossbows becomes more dense and varied: Arrow-shooting machines (''katapeltai'') are briefly mentioned by Aeneas Tacticus in his treatise on siegecraft written around 350 BC.
A major cause of the sound of shooting a crossbow is vibration of various components.
File:Småland vapen.svg|A lion holding a crossbow on the coat of arms of Småland, Sweden.
There are two variants; one has a double string with a pocket for the projectile, and the other has a barrel with a slot for the string.
The bows of these machines already featured a winched pull back system and could apparently throw two missiles at once.
1st century BC), described the invention of a mechanical arrow shooting catapult (''katapeltikon'') by a Greek task force in 399 BC.
File:Zhugenu-payne.jpg|Chinese repeating crossbow with pull lever and automatic reload magazine
Pic 01.jpg|Arsenal of ancient mechanical artillery in the Saalburg, Germany; left: polybolos reconstruction by the German engineer Erwin Schramm (1856-1935)
The historian Diodorus Siculus (fl.
Crossbow prods could be more easily waterproofed than hand bows, which was essential in the humid European climate.
File:Ballista-quadrirotis.jpeg|Early modern four-wheeled ballista drawn by armored horses (1552)
Other early finds of crossbows were discovered in Tomb 138 at Saobatang, Hunan, dating to the mid-4th century BC.
Others are simple long stocks with the crossbow mounted on them.
File:Armborst 4, Nordisk familjebok.png|Windlass
