Other parts of the Ethiopian regalia include a jewelled gold sword, a gold and ivory sceptre, a large gold orb with cross, a diamond studded ring, two gold filigreed lances of traditional Ethiopian form, and long scarlet robes heavily embroidered in gold.
Recent analysis of the sword has determined that it is a 15th-century design, and probably made in London.
After the marriage of Anne of Brittany to Charles VIII of France in 1513 Breton independence began to slip away.
For example, the personal crown used by Isabella I of Castile, her scepters, and her sword, are kept in the Royal Chapel in the Cathedral of Granada.
They were made in Paris by the famous Falise brothers jewellery company.
Neither Henry nor any of his successors bothered to get crowned separately as Duke of Brittany but did use the title.
He died in 1536 and was succeeded as dauphin by his brother Henry.
The Romanian Communist dictator Nicolae Ceaușescu also sometimes made use of a scepter in his public appearances.
The Aachen City Hall houses copies of several important items of the Imperial regalia, now in Vienna, which had previously been kept in their city.
In its essential form it followed the pattern of crown associated with a sovereign in European heraldry and had four arches which intersected at the top of the crown, while the circlet was made of openwork and set with precious stones and from the circlet between the arches were triangular leaf-like ornaments which also were set with precious stones (pearls?).
A 'golden royal crown' pre-dating the existing 'Honours' had been in existence.
In 1660 when a replacement crown called ''St Edward's Crown'' was cast for the coronation of Charles II the gold from the aforementioned ''King Alfred's Crown'' (the original crown of Edward the Confessor) was used, so presumably even after the various jewels had been melted down strenuous efforts were made to recover their components.
Richard had it in his possession when he surrendered to his cousin, the future Henry IV of England in Wales in 1399.
The crown jewels of the Kingdom of Man consist of a ceremonial sword known as the Manx Sword of State.
The royal regalia of Brunei are kept in the Royal Regalia Building, which was completed in Bandar Seri Begawan in 1992.
This sapphire was once part of a ring owned by Edward the Confessor, which was buried with him in 1066.
After the battle it came into the hands of the canton of Basle who hid it.
There is no information about any crown for Kartli-Kakheti predating 1798 although presumably there was one.
It was first called the Holy Crown in 1256.
The location of the Breton crown is unknown but it is thought to have been moved to Paris at some point.
*A silver chain with the relic of the holy cross
One example of this is an ancient relic called the Comerford or "Ikerrin" Crown that was discovered in 1692 but may have since been lost.
They usually have the form of a cylinder of gold (although some of the crowns at the Church of Our Lady Mary of Zion in Axum have the form of a gold cube) with a convex dome on the top with usually some form of cross on a pedestal.
Several replicas exist in Albania, most notably at Kruja Castle.
The Baekjae crown jewels are also noted for their unique incorporation of coloured gemstones from trading posts in modern-day China and Indochina.
For one example, see Golden hat.
The original is housed in the "Musée de Tahiti et des Îles" in Punaauia.
The Kingdom of Tahiti had a crown.
Today they are kept by the ''Patrimonio Nacional'' (the National Heritage).
The most famous examples of which are probably certain of Heinrich Schleman's finds, artifacts of ancient Crete, and the burials of the Macedonian Dynasty.
The regalia of Laos are kept in the Royal Palace Museum in Luang Prabang.
The guard is a thin steel band, 11&nbsp;inches across, surmounted where the guard intersects the blade with shields carrying the 'Three Legs of Man', which also appear on the flattened pommel.
The signs of the imperial power of the Nguyen Emperors were the Great Imperial Seal and the Sword.
They are a collection of imperial regalia and jewels dating from the 10th century to the 19th.
The Hungarian coronation insignia consists of the Holy Crown, the sceptre, the orb, and the mantle.
The jewel encrusted royal crown was lost after the Cambodian coup d'état of 1970 by Cambodian prime minister Lon Nol in 1970.
One such place is in Gitega, location of the ''ibwami'' royal court.
Presumably, after this it was kept for a while by successive emperors (particularly Emperor Charles V who was also the Duke of Burgundy) but at some point it was lost or broken up.
Among the original crown jewels were ''Alfred the Great's State Crown'' described as ''"Gould wyerworke set with slight stones and two little bells"'' which once melted down the gold that it contained fetched £248 and 10 shillings, while the little 11th-century crown of Queen Edith only realised £16.
Inner circumference of the crown is approximately 58 centimeters and it weighs about 2 kilograms.
The Regalia consists of the Great Crown of Victory, the Sword of Victory, the Royal Staff, the Royal Fan or (Flywhisk), and the Royal Slippers.
The only surviving part of the Polish Crown Jewels is from the Piast dynasty and consists of the coronation sword known as the Szczerbiec.
The crown, sceptre, sword and throne of the last King of Sri Lanka, King Sri Wickrama Rajasinghe of the Kingdom of Kandy, in the National Museum of Colombo, Sri Lanka.
These items were almost certainly intended for personal use by the emperor and his retinue, making them unique surviving examples of their type.
Most of the Crown Jewels of the Mehmet Ali Dynasty are at the Museum at Abdin Palace in Cairo.
The vendors were the trustees of an estate whose identity remained undisclosed.
It was commissioned during the Habsburg era to better fit with the other jewels.
Other objects associated with the coronation of Holy Roman Emperors can be found in Aachen, in the treasury of the Aachen Cathedral.
The last recorded coronation ceremony in what would become Spain occurred in the 15th century; since then, the monarchs were not crowned, but proclaimed.
Most of the crown jewels were stolen and destroyed by US army officers after the end of World War II.
The Joseon dynasty regalia consist of formal jewel-encrusted wigs for the queen and everyday crowns encrusted with various precious gems.
What happened to the hat after this is not known.
A replacement crown was commissioned by George XII of Georgia for his coronation in 1798.
With his new status, the King ordered new regalia to be made, which included the  Wittelsbach Diamond, an oval Old Mine cut blue diamond.
* Grand Dukes of Tuscany
Many crown jewels are kept in a museum setting except when in use, and can be seen by the public.
In January 1962 Joseph Komkommer, a leading figure in the Belgian diamond industry, received a phone call asking him to look at an Old Mine cut diamond with a view of its recutting.
Mr. Komkommer at once recognized that the diamond was one of historical significance and that it would be a tragedy to recut it.
Of the imperial regalia of the Roman Emperors, previous to the Byzantine era, little remains.
Numerous crowns, robes, jewels and headwear were made especially for coronations and other official events for each individual emperor rather than being passed down.
The queen's crown can now be seen in the Musée de l'Armée in Paris.
The coronation regalia, such as the Imperial Crown of Russia, the Imperial Orb of Catherine the Great, the Imperial Sceptre with the Orlov Diamond, the Shah Diamond, and others are kept at the Kremlin Armoury and Diamond Fund in Moscow.
A document known as "The Swabian Mirror" or ''Schwabenspiegel'' (c. 1275) refers to the installation of the dukes of Carantania and in it mentions a crown of sorts called the "Slovenian Hat" (''windischer huot'').
'''A list of some of the kingdoms'''
They are kept, amongst other royal items, at the Grand Palace in Bangkok.
The original, plain gold, is kept in the Vienna treasury.
The Austrian Crown Jewels (de: ''Insignien und Kleinodien'') are kept at the ''Schatzkammer (Vienna)'', the Imperial Treasury located in the Hofburg Palace.
Most of the Crown Jewels were plundered by retreating Prussian troops from Kraków in 1794.
The Dukes of Brittany were crowned with a royal crown said to be that of the former kings of Brittany in a ceremony designed to emphasise the royal ancestry and sovereignty of the reigning duke.
Over the nine centuries of Portuguese history, the Portuguese Crown Jewels have lost and gained many pieces.
Several countries outside Europe have crown jewels that are either in traditional forms for the country, or a synthesis of European and local forms and styles.
The current monarch is Tuheitia Paki.
It is popularly said to be the sword of Olaf the Black, who became King of Mann and the Isles in 1226.
Remarkably, it still survives and Montezuma's headdress can be seen at the Museum of Ethnology, Vienna (inventory number 10402VO) along with other ancient Mexican artifacts.
Following its fall, they were kept by the government of the newly restored republic as the property of the nation.
The second distinctive feature is the representation of a falcon at the very top of the crown in the position a cross would occupy on the top of an orb in the traditional crown of a Christian sovereign.
In May 26, 1861, Sophia Cracroft, the niece of Lady Franklin, also described the crown during a visit to Pohukaina.
In 1923 it was presented to the National Museum of Georgia in Tbilisi but in 1930 it was once again sent back to Moscow where this time it was broken up or sold abroad.
He thereupon formed a consortium of diamond buyers from Belgium and the USA which purchased the diamond, then valued at £180,000.
They are often only used for the coronation of a monarch and a few other ceremonial occasions, though the monarch may also be often shown wearing them in portraits, as they symbolize the power and continuity of the monarchy.
The oldest Czech surviving crown of Ottokar II was made in 1296 probably in Břevnov Monastery.
Also the ''Kiha-pu'' or the War Trumpet (Conch Shell) of '''Kihanuilulumoku''' which is one generation older than Liloa's Kaei.
Since the 12th century, kings have been crowned with the still extant crown.
There is a painting of Radama II standing next to the state crown, and another of Queen Ranavalona III — the last monarch — wearing it.
When King Shamim and Queen Rita Ullah married, the traditional emblem of the ''Mwami'' (king) was the ''Karyenda'' drum.
The two royals crowns were ordered from England in 1883 during Kalakaua's coronation.
*Szczerbiec, the coronation sword that was used in crowning ceremonies of most kings of Poland
The sword has a two-edged steel blade, 29&nbsp;inches long, with a hardwood hilt, 9&nbsp;inches long, which tapers from the guard to the pommel.
During ceremonies of accession with a new monarch, the crown and scepter are also present, but the crown itself is never placed on the monarch's head.
This hat was lost by Charles the Bold at the Battle of Grandson in 1476 when his army was routed and his baggage train was captured by the Swiss.
The crown jewels of many former monarchies can also be seen in museums, and may still represent national cultural icons even for countries that are now republics, as for example in Hungary, where the Holy Crown of Hungary has been re-incorporated in the coat of arms of Hungary.
There are conflicting legends that this ancient Crown of England still exists; that it was secreted by some Royalist and its hiding place was never revealed, although official sources state that the gold from this crown was recovered and used to make the present ''St Edward's Crown''.
Henry became King Henry II of France in 1547 when his father, Francis I, died.
*The Ruthenian crosses and relics
It is most likely it was stolen and melted down during the reign of terror and the chaos of the French Revolution starting in 1789.
Prior to the Spanish conquest (1519–1522) most of present-day Mexico formed the Aztec Empire, a Native American empire ruled from Tenochtitlán (present day Mexico City) by a ''tlatoani'' or "emperor".
Kingitanga is an unofficial kingdom, but one that has become an important one to the Māori people today.
* The Holy Roman Empire
The crown jewels and other royal regalia of Denmark are kept in Rosenborg Castle in Copenhagen.
It is likely that the ancient crown or crowns, traditionally kept at Mtskheta, were lost in 1795 when Shah Agha Mohammed Khan of Persia invaded Kartli and ravaged the kingdom.
Nevertheless, it is not in existence today.
The stone was similarly worn in the crown of Richard III of England at the Battle of Bosworth Field in 1485.
What happened to them after this is not known, but presumably they took them away, perhaps to Hanoi.
In the history of Hungary, more than fifty kings were crowned with it (the two kings who were not so crowned were John II Sigismund and Joseph II).
The later fate of this crown is not entirely clear, but it may have been returned to Scotland during the negotiations between Robert I of Scotland and Edward II of England (following the English defeat at Bannockburn in 1314) or perhaps was returned to Scotland for use in the coronation of Edward Balliol when he was installed as king of Scots by England in 1332.
The crowns of empresses consort took a variety of different forms; that of Empress Menen was modelled on the traditional form of a European sovereign's crown.
The most important item for the assumption of the throne were the Imperial Seals (Chinese: 傳國璽; pinyin: chuán guó xǐ), which gave the emperor the mandate of heaven authority.
*The sword of Bolesław the Bold
Previously, the Royal House had no crown.
Above the circlet are two arches.
Grand Duke Karl II of Baden was the person to commission the grand ducal crown, although he died before its completion in 1811.
Older pre-conquest items relevant to the ancient Gaelic dynasties that once ruled Ireland probably also existed.
The early paintings of Charles I show the front fleur-de-lis, (as, for example, in the painting by Daniel Mytens), while later paintings show the cross on the back of the crown (i. e., the crown shown from the back), which some suggest might have been a concession to Puritan objections to the representation of saints on the state crown.
The treasures of the Kings of Württemberg are kept in the Württemberg State Museum in Stuttgart.
Though additions to them may be made, since medieval times the existing items are typically passed down unchanged as they symbolize the continuity of the monarchy.
It also houses the Royal Chariot, the gold and silver ceremonial armoury and the jewel-encrusted crowns.
The crown or hat is described as "a grey Slovenian Hat with a grey cord and four leaves suspended from the brim".
This crown (termed "the massive gold state crown") and many other royal artifacts were saved when the Rova of Antananarivo (the royal palace and royal tomb complex) burned on November 6, 1995 and are now kept in the Andafiavaratra Palace museum nearby.
Topping the arches is not a globus cruciger like in most European crowns, but a gold rampant lion in the form as found in the coat of arms of Finland.
It is recorded as remaining there until at least 1917 after which it disappears from the record, presumably stolen or destroyed during the communist revolution, but perhaps hidden.
A new crown design was created for the new German empire, and used extensively in heraldic and other national emblems; however the actual crown itself was never constructed, aside from models.
These holy drums were kept at special drum-sanctuaries throughout the country and were brought out for special ceremonies only.
There were also various sceptres, swords, coronets, rings and an Anglo-Saxon comb, Some of the pieces were probably reclaimed burial regalia, including those stripped from the rich shrine of Edward the Confessor in Westminster Abbey by Henry VIII.
In the 18th century, King Charles III ordered a new crown and sceptre to be made.
The Karađorđević Crown Jewels of Serbia were created in 1904 for the coronation of King Peter I.
''See archducal hat for further information.''
It is used for the enthronement and symbolizes the very soul of the Ashanti as a people.
We know the appearance of the later State Crown of Henry VII, which shared their fate, as it is depicted in some of the portraits of Charles I by Daniel Mytens and Van Dyck.
A recent picture of the massive gold state crown as it is today in the museum can be seen here: The smaller queen's crown last worn by Ranavalona III was taken with her into exile, first to Réunion and then later to Algiers, where she eventually died in 1917.
The crown of Skanderbeg, believed to have been created for the medieval king in the 15th century, was smuggled out of Albania by members of the Kastrioti family following the occupation of Albania by the Ottoman Empire.
* The Insignia of the Austrian Hereditary Homage
The jewels have always played an important role as a symbol of Bohemian statehood.
The Imperial Crown of Brazil along with other regalia and mementos of the Brazilian Empire are kept at the Imperial Museum of Brazil (''Museu Imperial'') in the former palace of Brazilian emperor Pedro II, in Petrópolis, Brazil.
The state crown of Henry VII had five fleurs-de-lis, five crosses and two arches topped by a gold orb and cross.
The enthronement ceremony is traditionally held in Kyoto.
Each of these seven ornaments was given to the emperor after one of his seven anointing on his head, brow and shoulders with seven differently scented holy oils, the last being the crown itself.
Some crowns also appear to have a semi-circular platform for additional ornaments attached to the lower front edge of the crown (on two of the crowns of Menelik II these platforms each support a small gold statuette of St. George fighting the dragon).
The treasures of Burma´s Konbaung Dynasty are kept in the National Museum in Yangon.
Typical items in Europe include crowns, sceptres, orbs, swords, rings, all usually in gold and heavily decorated with jewels, in styles which go back to the Middle Ages and are normally very conservative to emphasize the continuity of the monarchy.
It was made for King Charles IV in 1346.
More historically important elements are kept as pieces of cultural interest in different parts of Spain.
Henry's son, Henry V of England, wore this stone in the crown he wore around his helmet at the Battle of Agincourt.
The ceremonial feathered headdress or ''quetzalāpanecayōtl'' that was worn by Montezuma II '''(the last reigning emperor) ''' was seized by the Spanish Conquistadors in c. 1520 and sent back to Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor and King of Spain as a gift.
It is thought likely to have been lost during the Ottoman invasions of the Balkans in the 16th century.
Although they do not wield any political powers anymore, they are still a symbol of unity and continuance to their people.
The crown eventually found its way into the collections of the Habsburg dynasty (via an Italian noble family) and currently resides in the Schatzkammer in Vienna, Austria.
Many artifacts have been found, at various locations, which date to European pre-history, and appear to have been associated with ruling and/or priestly elites.
The distinctive crown adorns several local flags in Croatia and Dalmatia.
A globe surmounted by a cross rested on the top of the crown.
An earlier crown belonging to the Kamehameha Dynasty may have existed.
the Queen's Cloak, the cloak won by Kamehameha during his battle with Kiwalao, and used to drape the throne of the Queen; and Liloa's Kaei, the feather belt of Liloa, the 14th-century King of Hawaii.
The Crown jewels of the Kingdom of Italy (1861–1946) are in the custody of the Bank of Italy, due to legal controversy between the Italian Republic and the Savoia family.
The Imperial Crown of State also contains pearls worn as earrings by Queen Elizabeth I of England; these are suspended from the arches of the crown.
During the 14th century royal power came to be represented not simply by a crown, but by just one specific object: the Holy Crown.
The ancient crown jewels of England were destroyed by Oliver Cromwell in 1649 when he established the Commonwealth of England.
Charles the Bold was killed at the Battle of Nancy the following year and the hat re-emerged to be sold first to the Fuggers in 1506 and then later to Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor.
Later in the 1950s his son and successor, Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, decreed that the most spectacular of these items be put on public display at the Central Bank of Iran.
Examples of ancient-classical Greek regalia have been found among royal burial-goods in tombs at various archaeological sites.
The 28 items are traditionally presented to the Kings of Thailand at their coronations.
Various medieval garments used in past coronation ceremonies were also sold off at the time, an irreparable loss.
The kingdoms that would consolidate to form Spain during the 15th and 16th centuries, namely the Kingdoms of Castile and Aragon, did not have consistent coronation ceremonies.
The Crown Jewels used at the coronation of Emperor Haile Selassie are kept at the museum in the National Palace (formerly the Jubilee Palace) in Addis Ababa.
During the period of the Great Korean Empire under Emperor Gojong, the imperial family commissioned many brooches, western-style diadems and tiaras to suit western-style clothes.
It is not clear who is the legal owner.
Later research indicated that the gem had actually been sold in Belgium in 1951 and that it had changed hands again in 1955.
Copies of the thrones can be seen at Iolani Palace.
These include ''Edward the Confessor's Sapphire'', which is set in a Maltese cross at the top of the crown.
The falcon is a traditional symbol of the Malagasy sovereign.
It is considered that both these crowns date from the 11th century and the crown described as that of Alfred the Great is, in fact, the Crown of St Edward the Confessor and was renamed thus following the Reformation.
It was made in Russia and deviated from the traditional Georgian design.
The surviving regalia derive mainly from the Silla, Gaya, Baekje and Joseon dynasties.
The Crown of Imereti dating from the 12th century and believed to have been commissioned by David IV of Georgia was known to have been kept at the monastery at Gelati after the last king Solomon II was deposed in 1810 and Imereti occupied by Russia.
When Richard was killed during the fighting it famously rolled under a hawthorn bush to be retrieved by Lord Stanley and placed on the head of the victorious Henry Tudor, later Henry VII of England.
In 1968 the city of Huế was the scene of fierce fighting between the communist People's Army of Vietnam and Vietcong and US Marines and the Army of the Republic of Vietnam.
* The ducal hat of Styria is kept at the Landesmuseum Joanneum in Graz, Styria.
During the battle a bejewelled gold fleuron was struck from this same crown and lost.
During the upheavals after gaining independence, the monarchies were abolished.
It resembled the Imperial Crown of the Holy Roman Empire, although not intended as an exact copy.
In 1855, missionary Samuel C. Damon, who attended the funeral of Kamehameha III, mentioned "At the foot and in front of the coffin was the Royal Crown, covered with crape, resting upon a velvet cushion" at the foot of the King's casket.
In 1806, Napoleon I of France conquered the Holy Roman Empire.
However, in the early 20th century, the first Pahlavi Shah transferred ownership of the crown jewels to the state as part of a massive restructuring of the country's financial system.
One of many royal crowns was made for King Augustus II, Elector of Saxony when he became King of Poland in 1697.
The gem was offered with other Bavarian Crown Jewels in a 1931 auction at Christie's in London, but apparently it did not sell, nor did it return to its display in Munich.
Some of the Crown Jewels and the original Thrones of the Kingdom of Hawaii reside within the custody of the Bishop Museum.
The crown which exists today was made by goldsmith Teuvo Ypyä in the 1990s, based on the original drawings, and is kept in a museum in Kemi where it can be seen today.
He restructured the many German states and the Duchy of Bavaria was promoted to a Kingdom.
The Regalia, Royal Utensils, and the Royal Eight Weapons of Sovereignty comprise a total of 28 items.
Traditionally Ethiopian emperors were crowned at the Church of Our Lady Mary of Zion in Axum, the site of the chapel in which is kept what is believed to be the Ark of the Covenant, in order to validate the new emperor's legitimacy by reinforcing his claim to descent from Menelik I, the son of King Solomon and the Queen of Sheba, who is believed to have brought the Ark from Jerusalem to Axum.
Its original Golden Fleece ornament can be seen today in the Treasury of the Residenz Palace in Munich, a blue glass replica of the Wittelsbach in place of where the diamond was set.
The crown was a gift from the London Missionary Society to King Pōmare III for his coronation in 1824.
The last person known to have been crowned in Brittany with their royal crown was Francis III, Duke of Brittany in 1524.
This crown is made of golden silver, and it features half-arches resting on 8 plates bearing the emblems of the Kingdom.
The crown jewels of England, and now of the United Kingdom, are kept in the Tower of London.
If there ever was such a crown, it was either interred in the Royal Mausoleum with the last of the Kamehameha kings or became lost by 1883.
The orb has the coat-of-arms of Charles I of Hungary (1310–1342); the other insignia can be linked to Saint Stephen.
These are kept either in the Forbidden City or the National Palace Museum.
The present ''Imperial Crown of State'' is decorated with the principal surviving historic jewels, which were recovered at the time of the Restoration.
The treasures of the Kings of Saxony are kept in Dresden.
There have been a number of crown jewels present in Korea since ancient times, spanning from the ancient Gojoseon Dynasty to the last Joseon Dynasty.
In 1949 the former emperor became "Head of State" of the State of Vietnam, was not crowned, and was ousted by his Prime Minister Ngo Dinh Diem in a fraudulent 1955 referendum, and spent the rest of his life in exile.
