Also, a series of Patrol Frigates of the , originally designated PFG, were redesignated into the FFG line.
The first London treaty did touch off a period of the major powers building 6-inch or 6.1-inch gunned cruisers, nominally of 10,000 tons and with up to fifteen guns, the treaty limit.
In 1942 through mid-1943 US and other Allied cruisers were the heavy units on their side of the numerous surface engagements of the Dutch East Indies campaign, the Guadalcanal Campaign, and subsequent Solomon Islands fighting; they were usually opposed by strong Japanese cruiser-led forces equipped with Long Lance torpedoes.
The British Cruiser and Convoy Acts were an attempt by mercantile interests in Parliament to focus the Navy on commerce defence and raiding with cruisers, rather than the more scarce and expensive ships of the line.
Some large liners were armed in the same way.
The resulting ship would have had a waterline length of 700 feet, a waterline beam of 97 feet, and a displacement of about 25,000 tons.
Another variant is the ''helicopter cruiser''.
The Russian Navy's  is nominally designated as an aviation cruiser but otherwise resembles a standard medium aircraft carrier, albeit with a surface-to-surface missile battery.
A night surface action on 12-13 November was the first phase.
Initially, all cruisers built under the Washington treaty had torpedo tubes, regardless of nationality.
After building smaller light cruisers with six or eight 6-inch guns launched 1931-35, the British Royal Navy followed with the 12-gun  in 1936.
The Japanese were surprised because their admiral was anticipating sighting the Tokyo Express force, and withheld fire while attempting to confirm the US ships' identity.
On the night of 8-9 August 1942 the Japanese counterattacked near Guadalcanal in the Battle of Savo Island with a cruiser-destroyer force.
The British force that sank her was led by Vice Admiral Bruce Fraser in the battleship , accompanied by four cruisers and nine destroyers.
Battlecruisers were in many cases larger and more expensive than contemporary battleships, due to their much-larger propulsion plants.
Frigates under this scheme were almost as large as the cruisers and optimized for anti-aircraft warfare, although they were capable anti-surface warfare combatants as well.
By putting a relatively thin layer of steel armor above the vital parts of the ship, and by placing the coal bunkers where they might stop shellfire, a useful degree of protection could be achieved without slowing the ship too much.
Along with their superior torpedoes, the opening Japanese gunfire was accurate and very damaging.
On 10 December 1941 HMS ''Prince of Wales'' and the battlecruiser HMS ''Repulse'' were sunk by land-based torpedo bombers northeast of Singapore.
The engagement is notable for being one of only two occasions in which battleships fired on battleships in the Pacific Theater, the other being the Naval Battle of Guadalcanal.
The Second London Naval Treaty attempted to reduce the tonnage of new cruisers to 8,000 or less, but this had little effect; Japan and Germany were not signatories, and some navies had already begun to evade treaty limitations on warships.
The first protected cruiser was the Chilean ship ''Esmeralda'', launched in 1883.
Although her main battery remained in action for most of the battle, ''South Dakota'' spent much of the action dealing with major electrical failures that affected her radar, fire control, and radio systems.
Cruisers were one of the workhorse types of warship during World War I.
The armored cruisers of the 1890s greatly resembled the battleships of the day; they tended to carry slightly smaller main armament ( rather than 12-inch) and have somewhat thinner armor in exchange for a faster speed (perhaps  rather than 18).
In addition, 24 members of the ''Spruance'' were upgraded with the vertical launch system (VLS) for Tomahawk cruise missiles due to its modular hull design, and along with the ( with VLS, this gave them anti-surface strike capabilities beyond those 1960s-70s cruisers that received Tomahawk armored-box launchers as part of the New Threat Upgrade.
The United States Navy, the Russian Navy, and the Peruvian Navy are the only remaining navies which operate cruisers.
They had also learned of the defeat a few hours before at Surigao Strait, and did not hear that Halsey's force was busy destroying the decoy fleet.
The remaining four transports and four destroyers approached Guadalcanal at night, but stopped to await the results of the night's action.
''Bismarck'' (accompanied by the heavy cruiser ''Prinz Eugen'') previously sank the battlecruiser HMS ''Hood'' and damaged the battleship  with gunfire in the Battle of the Denmark Strait.
Until the 1890s armored cruisers were still built with masts for a full sailing rig, to enable them to operate far from friendly coaling stations.
The cruiser-destroyer-frigate realignment and the deletion of the Ocean Escort type brought the US Navy's ship designations into line with the rest of the world's, eliminating confusion with foreign navies.
Although the Tokyo Express often ran unopposed, most surface actions in the Solomons revolved around Tokyo Express missions.
The guided missile frigates and cruisers served in the Cold War and the Vietnam War; off Vietnam they performed shore bombardment and shot down enemy aircraft or, as Positive Identification Radar Advisory Zone (PIRAZ) ships, guided fighters to intercept enemy aircraft.
Even though the Peruvian vessel was obsolescent by the time of the encounter, it stood up well to roughly 50 hits from British shells.
In British service these were known as Armed Merchant Cruisers (AMC).
Other features included an integrated electric drive and advanced computer systems, both stand-alone and networked.
The Allies had three light cruisers (one New Zealand) and ten destroyers; the Japanese had one small light cruiser and five destroyers, a Tokyo Express run for Vila.
Thus, beginning with  launched in 1933, new cruisers were built without torpedoes, and torpedoes were removed from older heavy cruisers due to the perceived hazard of their being exploded by shell fire.
Then they encountered the battleship and cruiser guns.
In 1969-79 Soviet cruiser numbers more than tripled with ten s and seven s entering service.
The battleship (''Hiei'') was sunk by aircraft (or possibly scuttled), one destroyer was sunk by the damaged , and the other destroyer was attacked by aircraft but was able to withdraw.
Beginning with the  launched in 1925, every Japanese heavy cruiser was armed with  torpedoes, larger than any other cruisers'.
''Washington'' went undetected by the Japanese for most of the battle, but withheld shooting to avoid "friendly fire" until ''South Dakota'' was illuminated by Japanese fire, then rapidly set ''Kirishima'' ablaze with a jammed rudder and other damage.
The Americans suffered significant damage to three destroyers and light damage to a cruiser, but no losses.
However, the term was nonetheless used to mean a smaller, faster warship suitable for such a role.
During the 18th century the frigate became the preeminent type of cruiser.
Steel also offered the cruiser a way of acquiring the protection needed to survive in combat.
The next day the Japanese Navy proposed abandoning Guadalcanal; this was approved by the Imperial General Headquarters on 31 December and the Japanese left the island in early February 1943.
On 27 May 1941,  attempted to finish off the German battleship ''Bismarck'' with torpedoes, probably causing the Germans to scuttle the ship.
Terrier was initially deployed on two converted ''Baltimore''-class cruisers (CAG), with conversions completed in 1955-56.
The Soviet combat doctrine of saturation attack meant that their cruisers (as well as destroyers and even missile boats) mounted multiple missiles in large container/launch tube housings and carried far more ASCMs than their NATO counterparts, while NATO combatants instead used individually smaller and lighter missiles (while appearing under-armed when compared to Soviet ships).
The attack on Pearl Harbor on 7 December 1941 brought the United States into the war, but with eight battleships sunk or damaged by air attack.
In 1937-41 the Japanese, having withdrawn from all naval treaties, upgraded or completed the  and es as heavy cruisers by replacing their  triple turrets with  twin turrets.
These convoys were called the "Tokyo Express" by the Allies.
The U.S. Navy's guided-missile cruisers were built upon destroyer-style hulls (some called "destroyer leaders" or "frigates" prior to the 1975 reclassification).
Also, US air operations had commenced from Henderson Field, the airfield on Guadalcanal.
Unarmored cruising warships, built out of wood, iron, steel or a combination of those materials, remained popular until towards the end of the 19th century.
Both sides were plagued by collisions, shells that failed to explode, and mutual skill in dodging torpedoes.
Because of this, in 1975 the Navy performed a massive redesignation of its forces:
;Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands
The US built cruisers in quantity through the end of the war, notably 14  heavy cruisers and 27  light cruisers, along with eight  anti-aircraft cruisers.
The Japanese transport force was rescheduled for the 14th and a new cruiser-destroyer force (belatedly joined by the surviving battleship ''Kirishima'') was sent to bombard Henderson Field the night of the 13th.
Around this time the Terrier ships were upgraded with the RIM-67 Standard ER missile.
Their goal was to head north through Surigao Strait and attack the invasion fleet off Leyte.
On 26 December 1943 the German large cruiser (officially designated a "battleship") ''Scharnhorst'' was sunk while attempting to intercept a convoy in the Battle of the North Cape.
In 1975 the ''Farragut''s were reclassified as guided missile destroyers (DDG) due to their small size, and the remaining DLG/DLGN ships became guided missile cruisers (CG/CGN).
And although their displacement and scale of armor protection was that of a heavy cruiser, their 280&nbsp;mm main armament was heavier than the 203&nbsp;mm guns of other nations' heavy cruisers, and the latter two members of the class also had tall conning towers resembling battleships.
In the middle of the 19th century, ''cruiser'' came to be a classification for the ships intended for cruising distant waters, commerce raiding, and scouting for the battle fleet.
The Japanese had two heavy cruisers, two small light cruisers, and six destroyers.
The quick-firing dual-purpose gun anti-aircraft cruiser concept was embraced in several designs completed too late to see combat including  and  completed in 1948 and 1949, two s completed in 1953,  and  completed in 1955 and 1959, and ,  and  completed between 1959 and 1961.
On 7 December PT boats interrupted a Tokyo Express run, and the following night sank a Japanese supply submarine.
The mission systems were Aegis, SQS-53 sonar, 12 SV-22 ASW aircraft and 200 VLS cells.
These had launchers for eight large-diameter missiles whose purpose was initially unclear to NATO.
Twenty-three British cruisers were lost to enemy action, mostly to air attack and submarines, in operations in the Atlantic, Mediterranean, and Indian Ocean.
Currently only three nations operate cruisers: the United States, Russia, and Peru.
Talos and Terrier were nuclear-capable and this allowed their use in anti-ship or shore bombardment roles in the event of nuclear war.
It included six battleships (all but one previously damaged in 1941 at Pearl Harbor), four heavy cruisers (one Australian), four light cruisers, and 28 destroyers, plus a force of 39 PT boats.
Therefore, most cruisers of today are equipped with surface-to-air missiles as their main armament.
The Japanese force included five heavy cruisers, two light cruisers, and one destroyer.
From time to time, some navies have experimented with aircraft-carrying cruisers.
The heavy cruiser's immediate precursors were the light cruiser designs of the 1910s and 1920s; the US lightly-armored 8-inch "treaty cruisers" of the 1920s (built under the Washington Naval Treaty) were originally classed as light cruisers until the London Treaty forced their redesignation.
The Naval Battle of Guadalcanal occurred 12-15 November 1942 in two phases.
The next day the Japanese Navy proposed stopping all destroyer runs to Guadalcanal, but agreed to do just one more.
Numerous circumstances combined to reduce Allied readiness for the battle.
In spite of their great speed, they would have been wasted in a cruising role.
The heavy cruiser was a type of cruiser designed for long range, high speed and an armament of naval guns around 203&nbsp;mm (8&nbsp;in) in calibre.
Steel meant that new designs of battleship, later known as pre-dreadnought battleships, would be able to combine firepower and armor with better endurance and speed than ever before.
These U.S. cruisers that were built in the 1960s and 1970s were larger, often nuclear-powered for extended endurance in escorting nuclear-powered fleet carriers, and carried longer-range surface-to-air missiles (SAMs) than early ''Charles F. Adams'' guided-missile destroyers that were tasked with the short-range air defense role.
The US suspended major carrier operations until sufficient carriers could be completed to destroy the entire Japanese fleet at once should it appear.
The term "cruiser" or "cruizer" was first commonly used in the 17th century to refer to an independent warship.
Two heavy cruisers (one the "pocket battleship" ''Lützow''), accompanied by six destroyers, attempted to intercept the convoy near North Cape after it was spotted by a U-boat.
This change led to the end of independent operations by single ships or very small task groups, and for the second half of the 20th century naval operations were based on very large fleets believed able to fend off all but the largest air attacks, though this was not tested by any wars in that period.
In the immediate post-war era it built a fleet of gun-armed light cruisers, but replaced these beginning in the early 1960s with large ships called "rocket cruisers", carrying large numbers of anti-ship cruise missiles (ASCMs) and anti-aircraft missiles.
The British included cruisers and anti-aircraft cruisers among convoy escorts in the Mediterranean and to northern Russia due to the threat of surface and air attack.
In a controversial move, the US carrier task forces were withdrawn from the area on the 8th due to heavy fighter losses and low fuel.
Aircraft from six additional escort carriers also participated for a total of around 330 US aircraft, a mix of F6F Hellcat fighters and TBF Avenger torpedo bombers.
Only two cruisers actually bombarded the airfield, as ''Kirishima'' had not arrived yet and the remainder of the force was on guard for US warships.
The Battle of Cape Esperance occurred on the night of 11-12 October 1942.
A US cruiser-destroyer force was deployed in advance of a convoy of US Army troops for Guadalcanal that was due on 13 October.
Modern armored cruisers, almost as powerful as battleships, were also fast enough to outrun older protected and unarmored cruisers.
The Japanese force had earlier been driven off by air attack, losing ''Yamato''s sister ''Musashi''.
Generally, both sides avoided risking their battleships until the desperate Japanese attack at Leyte Gulf in 1944.
It was part of the U.S. Navy's "Revolution At Sea" effort.
Almost all cruisers in World War II were vulnerable to submarine attack due to a lack of anti-submarine sonar and weapons.
Although the transport force had fighter cover from the carrier ''Jun'yō'', six transports were sunk and one heavily damaged.
In a surface engagement, long-range gunfire and destroyer torpedoes would decide the issue, and under air attack numerous cruisers would be lost before getting within torpedo range.
The Americans achieved initial surprise, damaging one destroyer with gunfire which later sank, but the Japanese torpedo counterattack was devastating.
Besides a vast array of armament, ''Kirov''-class cruisers are also outfitted with many sensors and communications equipment, allowing them to lead the fleet.
While superficially appearing similar to a battleship/battlecruiser and mounting three triple turrets of 12-inch guns, their actual protection scheme and design resembled a scaled-up heavy cruiser design.
''Kirishima'' sank or was scuttled before the night was out, along with two Japanese destroyers.
The Japanese were able to keep the Type 93's performance and oxygen power secret until the Allies recovered one in early 1943, thus the Allies faced a great threat they were not aware of in 1942.
During the two following decades, this cruiser type came to be the inspiration for combining heavy artillery, high speed and low displacement.
The initial response was to upgrade the light AA armament of new cruisers from 40&nbsp;mm and 20&nbsp;mm weapons to twin 3 inch (76 mm)/50 caliber gun mounts.
;Battle of Cape Esperance
The last example in service was the Soviet Navy's , whose last unit  was converted to a pure aircraft carrier and sold to India as .
These "station ironclads" were the beginning of the development of the armored cruisers, a type of ironclad specifically for the traditional cruiser missions of fast, independent raiding and patrol.
Even the fastest cruisers could not maneuver quickly enough to evade aerial attack, and aircraft now had torpedoes, allowing moderate-range standoff capabilities.
The next day US aircraft from Henderson Field attacked several of the Japanese ships, sinking two destroyers and damaging a third.
The Japanese were desperately short of aircraft and pilots at this point in the war, and Leyte Gulf was the first battle in which ''kamikaze'' suicide attacks were used.
The US had three light cruisers and four destroyers; the Japanese had ten destroyers loaded with 2,600 troops destined for Vila to oppose a recent US landing on Rendova.
Some light cruisers were built specifically to act as the leaders of flotillas of destroyers.
One Japanese cruiser and one destroyer were sunk and one cruiser damaged, against one US destroyer sunk with one light cruiser and one destroyer damaged.
The unexpected level of damage, and maneuvering to avoid the torpedoes and air attacks, disorganized the Japanese and caused them to think they faced at least part of the Third Fleet's main force.
Germany and eventually Japan followed suit to build these vessels, replacing armored cruisers in most frontline roles.
They were followed at a considerable distance by another small force of two heavy cruisers, a small light cruiser, and four destroyers.
The modern equivalent of the anti-aircraft cruiser is the '''guided missile cruiser''' (CAG/CLG/CG/CGN).
Convinced that the rest of the Third Fleet would arrive soon if it hadn't already, the Japanese withdrew, eventually losing three heavy cruisers sunk with three damaged to air and torpedo attacks.
The World War II conversions were gradually retired 1970-1980; in 1980 the Talos missile was withdrawn as a cost-saving measure and the ''Albany''s were decommissioned.
She began a conversion process to mount six  guns instead of nine  guns, but in early 1943 Hitler (angered by the recent failure at the Battle of the Barents Sea) ordered her disarmed and her armament used as coast defence weapons.
In both world wars the Germans also used small merchant ships armed with cruiser guns to surprise Allied merchant ships.
The ''Spruance'' hull design was used as the basis for two classes; the  which had comparable anti-air capabilities to cruisers at the time, and then the DDG-47-class destroyers which were redesignated as the  guided missile cruisers to emphasize the additional capability provided by the ships' Aegis combat systems, and their flag facilities suitable for an admiral and his staff.
Produced by a shipyard at Elswick, in Britain, owned by Armstrong, she inspired a group of protected cruisers produced in the same yard and known as the "Elswick cruisers".
The only major Japanese carrier operation after Guadalcanal was the disastrous (for Japan) Battle of the Philippine Sea in June 1944, nicknamed the "Marianas Turkey Shoot" by the US Navy.
Despite their tactical victory, this battle caused the Japanese to use a different route in the future, where they were more vulnerable to destroyer and PT boat attacks.
In 1922, the Washington Naval Treaty placed a formal limit on these cruisers, which were defined as warships of up to 10,000 tons displacement carrying guns no larger than 8&nbsp;inches in calibre; heavy cruisers had 8&nbsp;inch guns while those with 6-inch or 5-inch guns were light cruisers, which shaped cruiser design until the end of World War II.
The 1840s saw the construction of experimental steam-powered frigates and sloops.
By 1933 Japan had developed the Type 93 torpedo for these ships, eventually nicknamed "Long Lance" by the Allies.
Soviet submarine-launched cruise missiles at the time were primarily for land attack; but by 1964 anti-ship missiles were deployed in quantity on cruisers, destroyers, and submarines.
Losing 20 cruisers in 1940-42, the British completed no heavy cruisers, thirteen light cruisers (Crown Colony and ''Minotaur'' classes), and sixteen anti-aircraft cruisers () during the war.
The Japanese had eight destroyers on a Tokyo Express run to deliver food and supplies in drums to Guadalcanal.
The Germans and French used them in World War I as raiders because of their high speed (around 30&nbsp;knots (56&nbsp;km/h)), and they were used again as raiders early in World War II by the Germans and Japanese.
Fear of air power on both sides resulted in all surface actions in the Solomons being fought at night.
All save one——were converted from World War II cruisers of the ,  and  classes.
The US Navy became centered around carrier groups, with cruisers and battleships primarily providing anti-aircraft defense and shore bombardment.
In a return to the thoughts of the independent operations cruiser-carriers of the 1930s and the Soviet ''Kiev''-class, the ship was to be fitted with a hangar, elevators, and a flight deck.
The results of the battle were three American heavy cruisers sunk by torpedoes and gunfire, one Australian heavy cruiser disabled by gunfire and scuttled, one heavy cruiser damaged, and two US destroyers damaged.
* DLG/DLGN (Frigates/Nuclear-powered Frigates) of the , , ,  and  classes were redesignated CG/CGN (Guided Missile Cruiser/Nuclear-powered Guided Missile Cruiser).
The unarmored cruiser - often a screw sloop or screw frigate - could continue in this role.
A German destroyer was lost and a heavy cruiser damaged.
The first heavy cruisers were built in 1915, although it only became a widespread classification following the London Naval Treaty in 1930.
This was on 11 December and was also intercepted by PT boats, which sank a destroyer; only 200 of 1,200 drums dropped off the island were recovered.
It was a pivotal battle, as it left the US and Japanese with only two large carriers each in the South Pacific (another large Japanese carrier was damaged and under repair until May 1943).
After the Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands in October 1942, both sides were short of large aircraft carriers.
''Scharnhorst''s sister ''Gneisenau'', damaged by a mine and a submerged wreck in the Channel Dash of 13 February 1942 and repaired, was further damaged by a British air attack on 27 February 1942.
''Washington'', finally spotted by the Japanese, then headed for the Russell Islands to hopefully draw the Japanese away from Guadalcanal and ''South Dakota'', and was successful in evading several torpedo attacks.
Prior to the introduction of the ''Ticonderoga''s, the US Navy used odd naming conventions that left its fleet seemingly without many cruisers, although a number of their ships were cruisers in all but name.
It could reach a speed of , and was propelled by steam alone.
Cruisers came in a wide variety of sizes, from the medium-sized protected cruiser to large armored cruisers that were nearly as big (although not as powerful or as well-armored) as a pre-dreadnought battleship.
The four Kongō class ships performed shore bombardment in Malaya, Singapore, and Guadalcanal and escorted the raid on Ceylon and other carrier forces in 1941-42.
The Americans had four of the new  cruisers and eight destroyers.
Generally, the Japanese held their capital ships out of all surface actions in the 1941-42 campaigns or they failed to close with the enemy; the Naval Battle of Guadalcanal in November 1942 was the sole exception.
Chief of Naval Operations Admiral Arleigh Burke is credited with speeding the development of these systems.
For closer range targets, AK-630 or Kashtan CIWSs are used.
A '''cruiser''' is a type of warship.
Sources state that ''Yamato'' sat out the entire Guadalcanal Campaign due to lack of high-explosive bombardment shells, poor nautical charts of the area, and high fuel consumption.
In the Royal Navy, Jackie Fisher cut back hugely on older vessels, including many cruisers of different sorts, calling them "a miser's hoard of useless junk" that any modern cruiser would sweep from the seas.
This was the most lopsided outcome of the surface actions in the Solomon Islands.
In August 1942 ''Admiral Scheer'' conducted Operation Wunderland, a solo raid into northern Russia's Kara Sea.
From the 1950s to the 1970s, US Navy cruisers were large vessels equipped with heavy offensive missiles (including the Regulus nuclear cruise missile) for wide-ranging combat against land-based and sea-based targets.
* DE/DEG (Ocean Escort/Guided Missile Ocean Escort) were redesignated to FF/FFG (Guided Missile Frigates), bringing the US "Frigate" designation into line with the rest of the world.
Lacking aircraft carriers, the Soviet Navy depended on anti-ship cruise missiles; in the 1950s these were primarily delivered from heavy land-based bombers.
The auxiliary cruiser was a merchant ship hastily armed with small guns on the outbreak of war.
The ''Jeune Ecole'' school of naval doctrine suggested that a fleet of fast unprotected steel cruisers were ideal for commerce raiding, while the torpedo boat would be able to destroy an enemy battleship fleet.
All three Allied cruisers were heavily damaged, with the New Zealand cruiser put out of action for 25 months by a Long Lance hit.
Due to the German pocket battleships, the , and rumored Japanese "super cruisers", all of which carried guns larger than the standard heavy cruiser's 8-inch size dictated by naval treaty limitations, the ''Alaska''s were intended to be "cruiser-killers".
The American force consisted of two heavy cruisers, one light cruiser, two anti-aircraft cruisers, and eight destroyers.
One of the cruisers was the preserved .
Along with lack of knowledge of the capabilities of the Long Lance torpedo, the US Navy was hampered by a deficiency it was initially unaware of: the unreliable Mark 15 torpedo for destroyers.
However, on 15 September she was torpedoed while escorting a carrier group and had to return to the US for repairs.
For the longer term, it was thought that gun systems would be inadequate to deal with the missile threat, and by the mid-1950s three naval SAM systems were developed: Talos (long range), Terrier (medium range), and Tartar (short range).
The remaining Japanese ships withdrew, except for the four transports, which beached themselves in the night and started unloading.
The Dutch navy was noted for its cruisers in the 17th century, while the Royal Navy—and later French and Spanish navies—subsequently caught up in terms of their numbers and deployment.
Like the ''Ticonderaga'' ships with VLS, the  and  despite being classified as destroyers actually have much heavier anti-surface armament than previous U.S. ships classified as cruisers.
While originally designed for anti-submarine warfare, a ''Spruance'' destroyer was comparable in size to existing U.S. cruisers, while having the advantage of an enclosed hangar (with space for up to two medium-lift helicopters) which was a considerable improvement over the basic aviation facilities of earlier cruisers.
The Royal Navy's aircraft-carrying  and the Italian Navy's aircraft-carrying  vessels were originally designated 'through-deck cruisers', but have since been designated as small aircraft carriers.
These had two Talos and two Tartar launchers plus ASROC and two 5-inch (127&nbsp;mm) guns for self-defense, and were primarily built to get greater numbers of Talos launchers deployed.
The first purpose built anti-aircraft cruiser was the British , completed shortly before the beginning of World War II.
Among the dead were the five Sullivan brothers.
Outside the US and Soviet navies, new cruisers were rare following World War II.
The French constructed a number of smaller ironclads for overseas cruising duties, starting with the , commissioned 1865.
courageously closed with the battleship ''Hiei'', firing all torpedoes (though apparently none hit or detonated) and raking the battleship's bridge with gunfire, wounding the Japanese admiral and killing his chief of staff.
The US had four heavy cruisers, one light cruiser, and four destroyers.
The Japanese lost one light cruiser and a destroyer, with four other ships damaged.
Cruisers participated in a number of surface engagements in the early part of World War II, along with escorting carrier and battleship groups throughout the war.
Naval construction in the 1920s and 1930s was limited by international treaties designed to prevent the repetition of the Dreadnought arms race of the early 20th century.
Until the Harpoon missile entered service in the late 1970s, the US Navy was almost entirely dependent on carrier based-aircraft and submarines for conventionally attacking enemy warships.
;Naval Battle of Guadalcanal
The Allied force, known as the 7th Fleet Support Force, guarding the strait was overwhelming.
She bombarded Dikson Island but otherwise had little success.
