She also has the amenities of contemporary cruise ships and sees significant service on cruises.
Cruise ships are organized much like floating hotels, with a complete hospitality staff in addition to the usual ship's crew.
Smaller markets, such as the Asia-Pacific region, are generally serviced by older ships.
Regent Seven Seas Cruises operates medium-sized vessels—smaller than the "megaships" of Carnival and Royal Caribbean—designed such that 90% of their suites are balconies.
Collaboration with the CDC’s Vessel Sanitation Program and the development of Outbreak Prevention and Response Plans have helped to generally decrease the incidence of norovirus outbreaks on ships.
Individuals who are immunocompromised and those with pre-existing chronic respiratory and cardiac disease are more susceptible.
The ''Freedom''-class ships were in turn overtaken by RCI's ''Oasis''-class vessels which entered service in 2009 and 2010.
Causes of E. Coli infection include the consumption of contaminated food and the ingestion of water in swimming pools contaminated by human waste.
The Cruise industry Vessel Sanitation Program has specific public health requirements to control and prevent Legionella.
Some ships have had a dozen or more identities.
China's first luxury cruise ship, Henna, made her maiden voyage from Sanya Phoenix Island International Port in late January.
It underwent a period of rapid expansion in the latter half of the 19th century, commissioning larger and more luxurious ships to serve the steadily expanding market.
Whereas the golden age of ocean liners has faded, the golden age of cruise ships may well be these recent decades and decades to come.
The seaport of St. Petersburg, the main Baltic port of call, received 426,500 passengers during the 2009 cruise season.
A handful of old ocean liners also remain in service as cruise ships.
Many cruise lines have a common naming scheme they use for their ships.
Christian Wilhelm Allers published an illustrated account of it as ''Backschisch'' (Baksheesh).
Operators of cruise ships are known as cruise lines.
The estimated likelihood of contracting gastroenteritis from any cause on an average 7-day cruise is less than 1%.
The addition of these prefixes and suffixes allows multiple cruise lines to use the same popular ship names while maintaining a unique identifier for each ship.
While several cruise lines are headquartered in the United States, like most international shipping company, ships are registered in countries including the Netherlands, the UK, the Bahamas, and Panama.
So outbreaks are found and reported more quickly on a cruise ship than on land; (2) Close living quarters may increase the amount of group contact; and (3) New passenger arrivals may bring the virus to other passengers and crew."
She was built in 1831 and sailed from Naples in early June 1833, preceded by an advertising campaign.
Although often luxurious, ocean liners had characteristics that made them unsuitable for cruising, such as high fuel consumption, deep draught that prevented their entering shallow ports, enclosed weatherproof decks that were not appropriate for tropical weather, and cabins designed to maximize passenger numbers rather than comfort (such as a high proportion of windowless suites).
There are even "cruises to nowhere" or "nowhere voyages" where the ship makes 2–3 night round trips without any ports of call.
The modern cruise ships, while sacrificing qualities of seaworthiness, have added amenities to cater to water tourists, and recent vessels have been described as "balcony-laden floating condominiums".
Cruising has become a major part of the tourism industry, accounting for U.S.$29.4 billion with over 19&nbsp;million passengers carried worldwide in 2011.
Having two different dinner services can cause some conflicts with some of the ship's events (such as shows and performances) for the late diners, but this problem is usually fixed by having a shorter version of the event take place before late dinner.
The birth  of leisure cruising began with the formation of the ''Peninsular & Oriental Steam Navigation Company'' in 1822.
A distinctive feature of Oasis-class ships is the split "open-atrium" structure, made possible by the hull's extraordinary width, with the 6-deck high "Central Park" and "Boardwalk" outdoor areas running down the middle of the ship and verandas on all decks.
The second most popular region was continental Europe (13%), where the fastest growing segment is cruises in the Baltic Sea.
They also had a single deck devoted entirely to cabins with private balconies instead of oceanview cabins.
Another ship to make this transition was SS ''Norway'', originally the ocean liner SS ''France'' and later converted to cruising duties as the Caribbean's first "super-ship."
However, it was restricted to the aristocracy of Europe and was not a commercial endeavour.
In 2009, ships undergoing unannounced inspections in U.S. ports received an average CDC Vessel Sanitation Program score of approximately 97 out of a total possible 100 points.
Guests dress "formally", however that is defined for the ship, often suits and ties or even tuxedos for men, and formal dresses for women.
Some of them built specialized ships designed for easy transformation between summer crossings and winter cruising.
As the veranda suites were particularly lucrative for cruise lines, something which was lacking in older ocean liners, recent cruise ships have been designed to maximize such amenities and have been described as "balcony-laden floating condominiums."
CCTV cameras are mounted frequently throughout the ship.
In 2004, Carnival Corporation had merged Cunard's headquarters with that of Princess Cruises in Santa Clarita, California so that administrative, financial and technology services could be combined, ending Cunard's history where it had operated as a standalone company (subsidiary) regardless of parent ownership.
This number is diminishing.
Fare also includes one night's hotel stay before boarding and airfare to and from the cruise's origin and destination ports.
The cruise lines operate their ships virtually 24 hours a day, seven days a week, 52 weeks a year.
Transportation is not the only purpose of cruising, particularly on cruises that return passengers to their originating port, with the ports of call usually in a specified region of a continent.
Among cruise lines, some are direct descendants of the traditional passenger shipping lines (such as Cunard), while others were founded from the 1960s specifically for cruising.
As a result, there have been concerns about the stability of modern passenger ships especially in heavy weather.
Some cruise lines have specialties; for example, Saga Cruises only allows passengers over 50 years old aboard their ships, and Star Clippers and formerly Windjammer Barefoot Cruises and Windstar Cruises only operate tall ships.
The ship departed from Southampton for Bilbao on 21 April, and returned on 23 April.
Until 1975-1980, cruises offered shuffleboard, deck chairs, "drinks with umbrellas and little else for a few hundred passengers."
There is a set of facilities for the crew separate from that of passengers, such as mess rooms and bars, recreation rooms, prayer rooms/mosques, and fitness center, with some larger ships even having a crew deck with a swimming pool and hot tubs.
There is often a central galley responsible for serving all major restaurants aboard the ship, though specialty restaurants may have their own separate galleys.
The CDC states that the reasons why noroviruses are associated with cruise ships is because "(1) Health officials track illness on cruise ships.
In general two employees share a cabin with a shower, commode and a desk with a television set, while senior officers are assigned single cabins.
It is not uncommon for the most luxurious ships to have more crew and staff than passengers.
Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli is a form of E. Coli and the leading bacterial cause of diarrhea in the developing world, as well as the most common cause of diarrhea for travelers to those areas.
In other words, Carnival Cruise Line and Holland America Line.
Several specialty lines offer "expedition cruising" or only operate small ships, visiting certain destinations such as the Arctic and Antarctica, or the Galápagos Islands.
Norovirus is the most common cause of gastroenteritis in developed countries and is so widespread that only the common cold is reported more frequently.
Following the retirement of her running mate ''''Queen Elizabeth 2'''' in November 2008, ''Queen Mary 2'' is the only liner operating on transatlantic routes, though she also sees significant service on cruise routes.
These wastes, if not properly treated and disposed of, can be a significant source of pathogens, nutrients, and toxic substances with the potential to threaten human health and damage aquatic life.
In 1906, the number had increased to seven.
Symptoms usually last between 1 and 3 days and generally resolve without treatment or long term consequences.
for example, are the cruise lines from this common industry practice point of view; whereas Carnival Corporation & plc and Royal Caribbean Cruises Ltd., for example, can be considered holding corporations of cruise lines.
The company was incorporated by Royal Charter the same year, becoming the ''Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Company''.
The International Labour Organization's 2006 Maritime Labour Convention, also known as the "Seafarers' Bill of Rights," provides comprehensive rights and protections for all crewmembers.
In just over three months, the ship sailed to Taormina, Catania, Syracuse, Malta, Corfu, Patras, Delphi, Zante, Athens, Smyrna, Constantinople, delighting passengers with excursions and guided tours, dancing, card tables on the deck and parties on board.
Passengers entering the cruise ship are screened by ''metal detectors''.
A ship which is out of service for routine maintenance means the loss of tens of millions of dollars.
Since 2008 there has been at least one reported incident each year of E. Coli on international cruise ships reported to the Vessel Sanitation Program of the Centers for Disease Control, though there were none in 2015.
A large number of cruise ships have been built by other shipyards, but no other individual yard has reached the large numbers of built ships achieved by the four above.
The ship's high-pressure fire hoses can be used to keep boarders at bay, and often the vessel itself can be maneuvered to ram pirate craft.
Crew members do not have any expenses while on board as food and accommodation, medical care, and transportation for most employees, are included.
This revitalized the market as the appeal of luxury cruising began to catch on, on both sides of the Atlantic.
There have been nine or more new cruise ships added every year since 2001, including some in the ''Vista''-class, and all at 100,000GT or greater.
Security has been considerably tightened since September 11, 2001, such that these measures are similar to airport security.
The cruise ship was boarded by nobles, authorities, and royal princes from all over Europe.
The ILO sets rigorous standards regarding hours of work and rest, health and safety, and living conditions for crewmembers and requires governments to ensure ships are in compliance.
Notable ships of the era include the SS ''Ravenna'' built in 1880, which became the first ship to be built with a total steel superstructure, and the SS ''Valetta'' built in 1889, which was the first ship to use electric lights.
Cruise lines earn significantly from selling onshore excursions (keeping 50 percent or more of what passengers spend for these tours) offered by local contractors.
This is due to large open spaces and the extensive use of aluminium, high-strength steel and other lightweight materials in the upper parts, and the fact that the heaviest components&nbsp;— engines, propellers, fuel tanks and such&nbsp;— are located in the lower parts of the ship.
Larger cruise ships have also engaged in longer trips such as transoceanic voyages which may not return to the same port for months (longer round trips).
Some former ocean liners operate as cruise ships, such as ''Marco Polo''.
Ocean liner services aimed at passengers ceased in 1986, with the notable exception of transatlantic crossings operated by the British shipping company Cunard Line, catering to a niche market of those who appreciated the several days at sea.
The design of cruise ships has changed dramatically during the past decades.
As with any vessel, adequate provisioning is crucial, especially on a cruise ship serving several thousand meals at each seating.
Base fare on Regent Seven Seas ships includes most alcoholic beverages onboard ship and most shore excursions in ports of call, as well as all gratuities that would normally be paid to hotel staff on the ship.
As a result, cruise ships have implemented various security measures.
"puffer machines"), to prevent weapons and contraband on board.
The common practice in the cruise industry in listing cruise ship transfers and orders is to list the smaller operating company, not the larger holding corporation, as the recipient cruise line of the sale, transfer, or new order.
From 2005 to the ''Costa Concordia'' disaster in 2012, out of more than 100,000,000 people worldwide who had taken cruises, there had been 16 fatalities.
Other companies followed suit.
The practice of luxury cruising made steady inroads on the more established market for transatlantic crossings.
Because cruise ships tend to concentrate their activities in specific coastal areas and visit the same ports repeatedly (especially Florida, California, New York, Galveston, Seattle, and the waters of Alaska), their cumulative impact on a local scale could be significant, as can impacts of individual large-volume releases (either accidental or intentional)."
One of the biggest changes has been moving the passenger cabins from inside the hull to the superstructure and adding individual balconies both due to customer demand and because, from a business standpoint, the cruise line can charge passengers much more than for inside staterooms.
The "luxury cruise lines" such as Regent Seven Seas Cruises and Crystal Cruises provide "the most all-inclusive" cruises.
For cruise routes around Hawaii, operators are required to register their ships in the United States and the crew is unionized, so these cruises are typically much more expensive than Caribbean and Mediterranean.
In 2009, during which more than 13 million people took a cruise, there were nine reported norovirus outbreaks on cruise ships.
The only dedicated transatlantic ocean liner in operation as a liner (as of December 2013) is ''Queen Mary 2'' of the Cunard fleet.
If the maintenance is unscheduled, it can result, potentially, in thousands of dissatisfied customers.
Most cruise lines since the 2000s have priced the cruising experience, to some extent, a la carte, as passengers spending aboard generates significantly more from ticket sales.
In the competition for passengers, ocean liners added luxuries — ''Titanic'' being the most famous example — such as fine dining, luxury services, and staterooms with finer appointments.
In 1840, it began mail delivery to Alexandria, Egypt, via Gibraltar and Malta.
The number of cruise tourists worldwide in 2005 was estimated at some 14 million.
Currently the five largest cruise line holding companies and operators in the world are Carnival Corporation & plc, Royal Caribbean Cruises Ltd., Star Cruises (which owns 50% of Norwegian Cruise Line; NCL in its own right is the third largest line), MSC Cruises, and Louis Cruise Lines.
Ships also feature numerous bars and nightclubs for passenger entertainment; the majority of cruise lines do not include alcoholic beverages in their fares and passengers are expected to pay for drinks as they consume them.
A persistent decrease in bookings can put a company in financial jeopardy.
The industry's rapid growth has seen nine or more newly built ships catering to a North American clientele added every year since 2001, as well as others servicing European clientele.
Particular types of wastes, such as sewage, graywater, and solid waste, may be of greater concern for cruise ships relative to other seagoing vessels, because of the large numbers of passengers and crew that cruise ships carry and the large volumes of wastes that they produce.
Having two dinner times allows the ship to have enough time and space to accommodate all of their guests.
it is usual for the transfer of ownership to entail a refitting and a name change.
Historically, the cruise ship business has been volatile.
2013 saw the entrance of the first Chinese company into the cruise market.
Travel to and from the port of departure are the passengers' responsibility, although purchasing a transfer pass from the cruise line for the trip between the airport and cruise terminal will guarantee that the ship will not leave until the passenger is aboard.
Cunard Line ships maintain the class tradition of ocean liners and have separate dining rooms for different types of suites, while Celebrity Cruises and Princess Cruises have a standard dining room and "upgrade" specialty restaurants that require pre-booking and cover charges.
As of 2010, city-sized ships have dozens of amenities.
A recent CDC report showed that from 2008 to 2014, only 0.18% of more than 73 million cruise passengers and 0.15% of some 28 million crew members reported symptoms of the illness.”
The distinction between ocean liners and cruise ships has blurred, particularly with respect to deployment.
In addition, cruise ships earn significant commissions for sales from onshore stores that are promoted on board as "preferred" (as much as 40 percent of gross sales).
Other lines use a unique word or phrase (such as the prefix of "Pacific" for P&O Cruises Australia or the suffixes of "of the Seas" for Royal Caribbean International or "-dam" for ships of the Holland America Line).
Older cruise ships have had multiple owners.
The ships are large capital investments with high operating costs.
Data for the year 2015 shows that there were just 11 outbreaks of norovirus illnesses on cruise ships.'
Most cruise lines also prohibit passengers from bringing aboard and consuming their own beverages, including alcohol, while aboard.
The passenger's ticket includes the stateroom accommodation, room service, unlimited meals in the main dining room (or main restaurant) and buffet, access to shows, and use of pool and gym facilities.
The Cruise Ship ID cards are also used as the passenger's room key.
Because there is much more ship above the surface than beneath it, modern cruise ships may appear top-heavy to some.
Legionnaires' has been infrequently associated with cruise ships.
The most visited ports in Mediterranean Sea are Barcelona (Spain), Civitavecchia (Italy), Palma (Spain) and Venice (Italy).
In addition to security checkpoints, passengers are often given a ship-specific identification card, which must be shown in order to get on or off the ship.
For the largest cruise operators, most "hotel staff" are hired from under-industrialized countries in Asia, Eastern Europe, the Caribbean, and Central America.
The British Inman Line owned ''City of Paris'', the Cunard Line had ''Compania'' and ''Lucania''.
For instance, Carnival Corporation & plc owns both Carnival Cruise Line, whose former image were vessels that had a reputation as "party ships" for younger travelers, but have become large, modern, yet still profitable, and Holland America Line, whose ships cultivate an image of classic elegance.
Expedition cruise lines, which usually operate small ships, visit certain more specialized destinations such as the Arctic and Antarctica, or the Galápagos Islands.
The world's largest cruise ship is currently Royal Caribbean International's ''Harmony of the Seas'' beating her sister ships (''Allure of the Seas'' and ''Oasis of the Seas'') by about 2.15 meters.
''Queen Mary 2'' was for a time the largest passenger ship before being surpassed by Royal Caribbean International's ''Freedom''-class vessels in 2006.
In 1896, there were three luxury liners for transportation, for the Europe to North America trip.
Outbreak investigations by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention have shown that transmission among cruise ship passengers is primarily person-to-person; potable water supplies have not been implicated.
The ''Sovereign''-class ships were the first "megaships" to be built for the mass cruising market, they also were the first series of cruise ships to include a multi-story atrium with glass elevators.
A '''cruise ship''' or '''cruise liner''' is a passenger ship used for pleasure voyages, where the voyage itself and the ship's amenities are a part of the experience, as well as the different destinations, i.e., ports of call, along the way.
Thus, even though modern cruise ships may appear top-heavy, proper weight distribution ensures they are not.
A cruise ship that is moving from one of these regions to another will commonly operate a repositioning cruise while doing so.
This industry practice of using the smaller operating company, not the larger holding corporation, is also followed in the list of cruise lines and in member-based reviews of cruise lines.
Besides the dining room, modern cruise ships often contain one or more casual buffet-style eateries, which may be open 24 hours and with menus that vary throughout the day to provide meals ranging from breakfast to late-night snacks.
After 1980, they offered increasing amenities.
Furthermore, large cruise ships also tend to be very wide, which considerably increases their initial stability by increasing the metacentric height.
However, there are extra charges for alcohol and soft drinks, official cruise photos, Internet and wi-fi access, and specialty restaurants; it has been reported that the casino and photos have high profit margins.
Louis Cruises has largely grown its fleet through purchasing older second- or third-hand ships, while the other four operators have largely constructed their own vessels and combined own the majority of the "megaships".
Brands exist partly because of repeat customer loyalty, and also to offer different levels of quality and service.
While most merchant shipping firms have generally avoided arming crew or security guards for reasons of safety, liability and conformity with the laws of the countries where they dock, cruise ships have small arms (usually semi-automatic pistols) stored in a safe accessible only by the captain who distributes them to authorized personnel such as security or the master-at-arms.
The 1970s television series ''Love Boat'', helped to popularize the concept as a romantic opportunity for couples.
It won its first contract to deliver mail in 1837.
Ports of call have often oriented their own businesses and facilities towards meeting the needs of visiting cruise ships.
Some cruise lines, such as Cunard, are taking steps to reduce environmental impact by refraining from discharges (RMS Queen Mary 2 has a zero-discharge policy) and reducing their CO2 output every year.
The most visited Baltic ports are Copenhagen, St. Petersburg, Tallinn, Stockholm and Helsinki.
In 2010, in response to the shutdown of UK airspace due to the eruption of Iceland's Eyjafjallajökull volcano, the newly completed ''Celebrity Eclipse'' was used to rescue 2000 British tourists stranded in Spain as an act of goodwill by the owners.
The gradual evolution of passenger ship design from ocean liners to cruise ships has seen passenger cabins shifted from inside the hull to the superstructure with private verandas.
Cruise ships represent a small&nbsp;— although highly visible&nbsp;— portion of the entire international shipping industry, and the waste streams described here are not unique to cruise ships.
Traditionally, the ships' restaurants organize two dinner services per day, early dining and late dining, and passengers are allocated a set dining time for the entire cruise; a recent trend is to allow diners to dine whenever they want.
By contrast, dedicated transport oriented ocean liners do "line voyages" and typically transport passengers from one point to another, rather than on round trips.
Although most passenger ships utilize stabilizers to reduce rolling in heavy weather, they are only used for crew and passenger comfort and do not contribute to the overall intact stability of the vessel.
Some sources mention ''Francesco I'', flying the flag of the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies (Italy), as the first cruise ship.
International celebrities were hired to perform cabaret acts onboard and the crossing was advertised as a vacation in itself.
The main region for cruising was North America (70% of cruises), where the Caribbean islands were the most popular destinations.
The ships must fulfill all stability requirements even with the stabilizer fins retracted.
Also, the "megaships" went from a single deck with verandas to all decks with verandas.
The menu is more upscale than usual.
The company started out as a shipping line with routes between England and the Iberian Peninsula, adopting the name ''Peninsular Steam Navigation Company''.
Despite the large superstructure, the center of mass of modern cruise ships is relatively low.
Most cruise ships sail the Caribbean or the Mediterranean.
Differences in construction remain.
Others operate elsewhere in places like Alaska, the South Pacific, the Baltic Sea and New England.
In its coverage of a 2016 CDC study regarding norovirus on cruise ships, the Journal of the American Medical Association reported that, “Perceptions that cruise ships can be luxury breeding grounds for acute gastroenteritis outbreaks don’t hold water.
Many cruises schedule one or more "formal dining" nights.
Other pathogens which can colonise pools and spas including those on cruise ships include Legionella, the bacteriium which causes Legionnaires' disease.
In an attempt to shift the focus of the market from passenger travel to cruising with entertainment value, Cunard Line pioneered the luxury cruise transatlantic service on board the ''Queen Elizabeth 2'' ocean liner.
Cruise lines have sold, renovated, or renamed their ships to keep up with travel trends.
In two short decades (1988-2009), the largest class cruise ships have grown a third longer (268 m to 360 m), almost doubled their widths (32.2 m to 60.5 m), doubled the total passengers (2,744 to 5,400), and tripled in weight (73,000 GT to 225,000 GT).
File:Overall room view of Sky Suite 1198 aboard the Celebrity Equinox (6686283819).jpg|A luxury suite aboard the ''Celebrity Equinox''
The White Star Line owned ''Majestic'' and ''Teutonic''.
A wave of failures and consolidations in the 1990s has led to many cruise lines to be bought by much larger holding companies and to operate as "brands" within larger holding corporations, much as a large automobile company holding several makes of cars.
The forerunner of modern cruise holidays, these voyages were the first of their kind, and P&O Cruises has been recognised as the world's oldest cruise line.
This prevents people boarding who are not entitled to do so, and also ensures the ship's crew are aware of who is on the ship.
Traditionally, an ocean liner for the transoceanic trade will be built to a higher standard than a typical cruise ship, including high freeboard and stronger plating to withstand rough seas and adverse conditions encountered in the open ocean, such as the North Atlantic.
:"Cruise ships generate a number of waste streams that can result in discharges to the marine environment, including sewage, graywater, hazardous wastes, oily bilge water, ballast water, and solid waste.
The minimum passing inspection score is 85.
The only comparable ocean liner to be completed in recent years has been Cunard Line's ''Queen Mary 2'' in 2004.
In one case, Icy Strait Point in Alaska, the entire destination was created explicitly and solely for cruise ship visitors.
''La Lorraine'' and ''La Savoie'' were owned by the French Compagnie Générale Transatlantique.
Living arrangements vary by cruise line, but mostly by shipboard position.
Cruise lines have a dual character; they are partly in the transportation business, and partly in the leisure entertainment business, a duality that carries down into the ships themselves, which have both a crew headed by the ship's captain, and a hospitality staff headed by the equivalent of a hotel manager.
These were European-owned.
Some lines use their name as a prefix or suffix in the ship name (such as the prefixes of "Carnival", "AIDA", "Disney", or "Norwegian" and the suffix of "Princess").
''Queen Elizabeth 2'' also inaugurated "one-class cruising" where all passengers received the same quality berthing and facilities.
Facilitating this practice are modern cruise terminals with establishments of duty-free shops inside a perimeter accessible only by passengers and not locals.
Explosive detection machines used include X-ray machines and explosives trace-detection portal machines (a.k.a.
This has considerably increased the overall height of the ships, making them more susceptible to side wind and waves.
Ocean liners also usually have larger capacities for fuel, food, and other stores for consumption on long voyages, compared to dedicated cruise ships.
The cruise of the German ship ''Augusta Victoria'' in the Mediterranean and the Near East from 22 January to 22 March 1891, with 241 passengers including Albert Ballin and wife, popularized the cruise to a wider market.
Alcohol purchased duty-free is sealed and returned to passengers when they debark.
A '''cruise line''' is a company that operates cruise ships and markets cruises to the public.
