A common term for Muslim was ''Saracen''; before the 16th century, the words "Muslim" and "Islam" were rarely used by Europeans.
Different perspectives of the actions carried out, at least nominally, under Papal authority during the crusades have polarised historians.
describes four different perspectives among scholars: ''traditionalists'', for example, restrict their definition of crusades to campaigns directed  geographically  to the Levant, "either to assist the Christians there or to liberate Jerusalem and the Holy Sepulcher".
In contrast the Muslim world took little from the Crusaders beyond military tactics and did not take any real interest in European culture until the 16th century.
Under the papacies of Calixtus&nbsp;II, Honorius&nbsp;II, Eugenius&nbsp;III and Innocent&nbsp;II smaller scale crusading continued around the Crusader States in the early 12th century.
In Speyer, Worms, Mainz and Cologne the range of anti-Jewish activity was broad, extending from limited, spontaneous violence to full-scale military attacks.
In the long run, the sole beneficiary was Venice.
He returned to Europe in 1240 but Richard of Cornwall arrived in Acre a few weeks later and completed the enforcement.
In response Louis IX of France organised a crusade to attack Egypt, arriving in 1249.
Led by Conrad of Wittelsbach, Archbishop of Mainz the army captured the cities of Sidon and Beirut but after Henry died, most of the crusaders returned to Germany.
Non-aristocratic women also served in positions such as washerwomen.
In 1266, he seized Sicily, parts of the eastern Adriatic, Corfu, Butrinto, Avlona, and Suboto.
Michael also provided Genoa with funds to encourage revolt in Charles' northern Italian territories.
In 1095 at the Council of Piacenza, Byzantine Emperor Alexios&nbsp;I Komnenos requested military aid from Urban&nbsp;II to fight the Turks, probably in the form of mercenary reinforcements.
The term was established in its historiographical sense in  French,  English and German only in the early modern period.
Urban's wider strategy may have been to unite the Eastern and Western branches of Christendom, which had been divided since their split in the East–West Schism of 1054, and establish himself as head of the unified Church.
There were campaigns by Fulk&nbsp;V of Anjou between 1120 and 1129, the Venetians in 1122–24 and Conrad&nbsp;III of Germany in 1124.
From 1265 to 1271, Baibars drove the Franks to a few small coastal outposts.
Defeated at Gaza, Theobald agreed treaties with Damascus and Egypt that returned territory to the crusader states.
Pilgrimages by Catholics to sacred sites were permitted, resident Christians were given certain legal rights and protections under Dhimmi status, and interfaith marriages were not uncommon.
When crusaders swore a vow to reach Jerusalem, they received a cloth cross called a crux to be sewn onto their clothing.
Historian Paul Everett Pierson asserts that Urban also hoped that aiding the Eastern Church would lead to its reunion with the Western under his leadership.
Similarly, Norman Housley  viewed the persecution of Jews in the First Crusade—a pogrom in the Rhineland and the massacre of thousands of Jews in Central Europe—as part of the long history of anti-Semitism in Europe.
Both sides used Muslim soldiers, particularly Turcopoles.
The Crusader states were not unified and various powers competed for influence.
Three crusading efforts were made by peasants during the mid-1250s and the early 14th century.
The 1281 election of a French pope, Martin&nbsp;IV, brought the full power of the papacy into line behind Charles.
''Frank'' and '' Latin '' were used during the crusades for Western Europeans, distinguishing them from ''Greeks''.
Further efforts by the crusaders ended in the Battle of Varna on 10 November, a decisive Ottoman victory which led to the withdrawal of the crusaders.
The popes ordered that collection boxes be placed in churches and, beginning in the mid-twelfth century, granted indulgences in exchange for donations and bequests.
Gathering in Venice, the crusade fell under the ambitions of Doge Enrico Dandolo and Philip of Swabia.
John Hunyadi and Giovanni da Capistrano organised a 1456 crusade to lift the Ottomon siege of Belgrade.
The war significantly weakened the kingdom with most fortified buildings in Acre destroyed.
Leopold and John of Brienne besieged and captured Damietta but an invasion further into Egypt was compelled to surrender.
Within sight of Jerusalem supply shortages forced them to retreat without taking the city.
In 1240 the Novgorod army defeated the Swedes in the Battle of the Neva, and two years later they defeated the Livonian Order in the Battle on the Ice.
When Pope Celestine III called for a crusade against Northern European pagans in 1193, Bishop Berthold of Hanover led a large army to defeat and his death in 1198.
In response the crusaders sacked the city, pillaged churches, and killed many citizens.
The Livonian Knights were defeated by the Lithuanians so Pope Gregory&nbsp;IX merged the remainder of the order into the Teutonic Order as the Livonian Order.
Most remaining Latin Christians left for destinations in the ''Frankokratia'' or were killed or enslaved.
The disruption of pilgrimages by the Seljuk Turks prompted support for the crusades in Western Europe.
Richard&nbsp;I of England conquered the island of Cyprus from the Byzantines in 1191 after his sister were taken prisoner by the island's ruler, Isaac Komnenos.
''Generalists'' see crusades as any and all holy wars connected with the Latin Church and fought in defence of their faith.
Following the Gregorian Reform an assertive, reformist papacy attempted to increase its power and influence.
Martin compromised the papacy by supporting Charles of Anjou, and tarnished its spiritual lustre with botched secular "crusades" against Sicily and Aragon.
After the initial success in taking Byzantium, the original purpose of the campaign was defeated by the assassination of Alexios&nbsp;IV Angelos.
The Order of Santiago, Order of Calatrava, Order of Alcántara, and Order of Montesa concentrated on the Iberian Peninsula and its Reconquista.
According to Jonathan Riley-Smith the kingdom of Jerusalem was the first experiment in European colonialism creating a 'Europe Overseas' or Outremer.
This "crusade" is primarily seen as a revolt against the French monarchy.
Louis' army was devastated by disease in the hot-summer Mediterranean climate, and Louis himself died at Tunis on 25 August.
In addition to the motivations of the landed classes academic Norman Cohn has identified a "messianism of the poor" inspired by an expected mass apotheosis at Jerusalem.
It is also likely he exaggerated the danger facing the Eastern Empire while making his appeal.
For ''pluralists'' the only true crusades are those that were explicitly sanctioned by the Pope of their era.
He then recaptured Acre after a long siege, travelled south along the Mediterranean coast, defeated the Muslims near Arsuf and recaptured the port city of Jaffa.
Protestants saw them as a manifestation of the evils of the papacy, and Catholics viewed them as forces for good.
This trade was sustained through the middle Byzantine and Ottoman eras and the communities were often assimilated to be known as Levantines or Franco-Levantines.
The first recorded use of the term in English was by William Shenstone in 1757.
The wars ended in 1436 with the ratification of the compromise Compacts of Basel by the Church and the Hussites.
Violating their oath to restore land to the Byzantines, they often kept the land for themselves.
Indeed, the Crusades were of little interest to the Muslim world: there was no history of the crusades translated into Arabic until 1865 and no published work by a Muslim until 1899.
This led to the legitimisation of seizing land and possessions from pagans on religious grounds and was debated through to the Age of Discovery in the 15th and 16th centuries.
By the middle of the century the Teutonic Knights completed their conquest of the Old Prussians and went on to conquer and convert the Lithuanians in the subsequent decades.
This made the reunification of the Christian church impossible and created a perception of the Westerners of being both aggressors and losers.
The crusades had a profound impact on Western civilisation: they reopened the Mediterranean to commerce and travel (enabling Genoa and Venice to flourish); consolidated the collective identity of the Latin Church under papal leadership; and were a wellspring for accounts of heroism, chivalry and piety.
Finally, ''popularists'' limit the crusades to only those that were characterised by popular groundswells of religious fervour&nbsp;–  that is, only the First Crusade and perhaps the People's Crusade.
Sigismund advised the crusaders to focus on defence when they reached the Danube, but they besieged the city of Nicopolis.
Andrew&nbsp;II of Hungary waged the Bosnian Crusade against the Bosnian church that was theologically Catholic but in long term schism with the Roman Catholic Church.
After a meeting with Blanche of Castile, it became disorganised and was disbanded by the government.
The order was less successful in the Northern Crusades against Orthodox Russia, the Pskov Republic and the Novgorod Republic.
Historians contend that the most significant role played by women in the West was in maintaining the ''status quo''.
Genoa finally regained its quarter in Acre in 1288.
In response to the defeat, Pope Innocent III issued a papal bull declaring a crusade against the mostly pagan Livonians, who were conquered and converted between 1202 and 1209.
These expeditions forced the Hussite forces, who disagreed on many doctrinal points, to unite to drive out the invaders.
In Northern Europe, the Germans used crusading as a method to expand Christianity and their territories at the expense of the non-Christian Slavs, and Sicily was conquered by Norman adventurer Roger De Hauteville in 1091.
The raising, transportation and supply of large armies led to flourishing trade between Europe and the ''outremer''.
The '''Crusades''' were a series of religious wars sanctioned by the Latin Church between the 11th and 16th centuries, especially the campaigns in the Eastern Mediterranean with the aim of capturing Jerusalem from Islamic rule.
He delayed Charles by beginning negotiations with Pope Gregory&nbsp;X for union of the Greek and the Latin churches with Charles and Philip of Courtenay compelled to form a truce with Byzantium.
The Hussite Wars, also known as the "Hussite Crusade", involved military action against the Bohemian Reformation in the Kingdom of Bohemia and the followers of early Czech church reformer Jan Hus, who was burned at the stake in 1415.
The majority view was that non-Christians could not be forced to accept Christian baptism or be physically assaulted for having a different faith, although a minority believed that vengeance and forcible conversion were justified for the denial of Christian faith and government.
In 1270, Charles turned his brother King Louis IX's last crusade to his own advantage, persuading Louis to ignore his advisers and direct the Eighth Crusade against Charles' rebel Arab vassals in Tunis.
Conflict resumed in 1264 with the Genoese now supported by Michael&nbsp;VIII Palaiologos, Emperor of Nicaea the Egyptian sultan Baibars.
By the early Romantic period in the 19th century, that harsh view of the Crusades and their era had softened; scholarship later in the century emphasised specialisation and detail.
In 1071 they defeated the Byzantine army at the Battle of Manzikert and the rapidly expanding Great Seljuk Empire gained nearly all of Anatolia while the empire descended into frequent civil wars.
He attempted to gain Byzantium politically through the Treaty of Viterbo.
According to Norman Davies, the crusades contradicted the Peace and Truce of God supported by Urban and reinforced the connection between Western Christendom, feudalism, and militarism.
When Christian women fought in battle (counter to assumptions about feminine nature), their role was more controversial; accounts of female warriors were primarily recorded by Muslim historians, who portrayed these women as barbarous and ungodly characters.
During the 16th-century Reformation and Counter-Reformation, Western historians saw the crusades through the lens of their own religious beliefs.
The third, in 1320, became a series of attacks on clergy and Jews and was forcibly suppressed.
The crusades provided an enormous amount of source material, stories of heroism and interest that underpinned growth in medieval literature, romance and philosophy.
The Rhineland massacres were the first major outbreak of European Antisemitism.
This broad definition subsumes attacks on paganism and heresy, such as the Albigensian Crusade in Southern France, the Northern Crusades in the Baltic, and Hussite Wars against the Czech population of the Kingdom of Bohemia; and wars for political or territorial advantage, such as the Aragonese Crusade in Sicily, a crusade declared by Pope Innocent&nbsp;III against Markward of Anweiler in 1202, one against the Stedingers, several (declared by several popes) against Emperor Frederick&nbsp;II and his sons, two crusades against opponents of King Henry&nbsp;III of England, and the Christian re-conquest of Iberia.
Since the Church recognised that risk to families and estates might discourage crusaders, special papal protection was a crusading privilege.
The First Crusade arose after a call to arms in a 1095 sermon by Pope Urban&nbsp;II.
But the fleet was destroyed in an uprising fomented by Michael&nbsp;VIII Palailogos and Peter&nbsp;III of Aragon.
Almost immediately thereafter Peter the Hermit began preaching to thousands of mostly poor Christians, whom he led out of Europe in what became known as the People's Crusade.
The People's Crusade included the Rhineland massacres: the murder of thousands of Jews.
Similarly, some of the hundreds of thousands of people who became crusaders by taking a public vow and receiving plenary indulgences from the church were peasants hoping for Apotheosis at Jerusalem, or forgiveness from God for all their sins.
In return, an alliance was made with Al-Kamil, Sultan of Egypt, against all of his enemies of whatever religion.
Dandolo's aim was expand Venice's power in the Eastern Mediterranean and Philip aimed to restore his exiled nephew, Alexios&nbsp;IV Angelos, to the throne of Byzantium.
The total cost to King Louis&nbsp;IX of France of the 1284–85 crusades was estimated at six times the king's annual income.
This ended the last significant attempt to take the Holy Land.
Crusades were declared five times during that period: in 1420, 1421, 1422, 1427, and 1431.
The Italian city states of Genoa and Venice flourished, creating profitable trading colonies in the eastern Mediterranean.
In the Iberian Peninsula crusaders continued to make gains with the king of Portugal, Afonso&nbsp;I, retaking Lisbon and Raymond Berenguer&nbsp;IV of Barcelona conquering the city of Tortosa In Northern Europe the Saxons and Danes fought against Wends in the Wendish Crusade, although no official papal bulls were issued authorising new crusades.
Historians in this period often echoed Enlightenment-era criticism: Runciman wrote during the 1950s, "High ideals were besmirched by cruelty and greed&nbsp;... the Holy War was nothing more than a long act of intolerance in the name of God".
The heirs of Baldwin&nbsp;II of Constantinople and William&nbsp;II Villehardouin married Charles' children.
In 1217 Pope Honorius III declared a crusade against the Prussians, and Konrad of Masovia gave Chelmno to the Teutonic Knights in 1226 as a base for the crusade.
On this view the crusades ended when the Crusader States fell.
Although one of Urban's stated aims was to guarantee pilgrims access to the holy sites in the Holy Land that were under Muslim control, scholars disagree whether this was the primary motivation for Urban or for the majority of those who heeded his call.
Crusades were expensive; as the number of wars increased, their costs escalated.
The crusaders were unable to pay the Venetians for a fleet when too few knights arrived in Venice, so they agreed to divert to Constantinople and share what could be looted as payment.
Venice conquered the disputed territory but was unable to expel the Genoese.
Bernard of Clairvaux, who had encouraged the Second Crusade in his preaching, was upset with the violence and slaughter directed towards the Jewish population of the Rhineland.
In April 1487, Pope Innocent&nbsp;VIII called for a crusade against the Waldensians of Savoy, the Piedmont, and the Dauphiné in southern France and northern Italy.
The conflict only ended with the Mongol invasion of Hungary in 1241.
The term ''crusade'' itself is modern, and has in more recent times been extended to include religiously motivated Christian military campaigns in the Late Middle Ages.
Antipope Clement III was an alternative pope for most of this period, and Pope Urban spent much of his early pontificate in exile from Rome.
Others, historians argue, participated to satisfy feudal obligations, gain glory and honour, or find opportunities for economic and political gain.
The Wends were finally defeated in 1162.
Landholders left for the Holy Land, leaving control of their estates to regents who were often wives or mothers.
The formation of military religious orders scandalised the Orthodox Byzantines, and crusaders pillaged countries they crossed on their journey east.
Peter had with him a letter he claimed had fallen from heaven instructing Christians to seize Jerusalem in anticipation of the apocalypse.
In 1236 the Livonian Knights were defeated by the Lithuanians at Saule, and in 1237 Pope Gregory IX merged the remainder of the military order into the Teutonic Knights as the Livonian Order.
The Jews had been allowed to return to France, after being expelled in 1306; any debts owed to the Jews before their expulsion were collected by the monarchy.
Regional remains of the order was merged with the Knights Hospitallers and other military orders.
The numbering of the crusades is somewhat arbitrary; while the First Crusade is universally so named, a total number of between seven and nine major crusades for the period of 1096 to 1291  is recognized by various historians.
Cultures and creeds coexisted and competed, but the frontier conditions became increasingly inhospitable to Catholic pilgrims and merchants.
This was not a success.
This reflects the view of the Roman Catholic Church (including medieval contemporaries such as Saint Bernard of Clairvaux) that every military campaign given Papal sanction is equally valid as a crusade, regardless of its cause, justification, or geographic location.
Crusading resumed against Saladin's Ayyubid successors in Egypt and Syria in 1217, following Innocent&nbsp;III's Fourth Council of the Lateran.
For example, the Fatimid caliph al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah destroyed the Church of the Holy Sepulchre but his successor allowed the Byzantine Empire to rebuild it.
This "taking of the cross" became associated with the entire journey with crusaders seeing themselves as undertaking an armed pilgrimage.
The Muslims also had classical Greek and Roman texts in their libraries, allowing Europe to rediscover pre-Christian philosophy.
The Hospitallers and the Templars became international organisations with depots beyond the Levant, spreading across Europe.
This began the period of Greek history known as ''Frankokratia'' or ''Latinokratia'' ("Frankish or Latin rule"), when Catholic Western European nobles—primarily from France and Italy—established states on former Byzantine territory and ruled over the Orthodox Byzantine Greeks.
Regardless of the motivation, the response to Urban's preaching by people of many different classes across Western Europe established the precedent for later crusades.
Konrad of Masovia gave Chelmno to the Teutonic Knights in 1226 as a base for crusade.
When he purchased the rights to Jerusalem from Maria of Antioch, the surviving grandchild of Queen Isabella, he created a claim to rival that of Isabella's great grandson, Hugh&nbsp;III of Cyprus.
The first, the Shepherds' Crusade of 1251, was preached in northern France.
Participation in such a war was seen as a form of penance which could counterbalance sin.
After the fall of Acre they relocated to Cyprus, conquering and ruling Rhodes (1309–1522) and Malta (1530–1798).
Two factions embarked on a 14-month siege: on one side was Genoa, Philip of Monfort, John of Arsuf and the Knights Hospitaller; the other was Venice, the Count of Jaffa and the Knights Templar.
In 1187 Saladin united the enemies of the Crusader States, was victorious at the Battle of Hattin and retook Jerusalem.
In Germany the Crusaders massacred Jewish communities.
David Nicolle called the Fourth Crusade controversial in its "betrayal" of Byzantium.
This assertiveness and the behaviour of the crusaders appalled the Greeks and Muslims providing a lasting barrier between the Latin world and both the Islamic and Orthodox religions.
The French form  ''croisade'' and Spanish ''cruzada'' are recorded in the 16th century.
Charles' planned crusade to restore the Latin Empire alarmed Michael&nbsp;VIII Palailogos.
Jonathan Riley-Smith considers that much of the popular understanding of the crusades derives from the novels of Walter Scott and the French histories by Joseph François Michaud.
Other than that, original medieval military orders persists until this day, in modern organisations with modified charters.
The traditional narrative is probably conflated from some factual and mythical notions of the period including visions by a French or German boy, an intention to peacefully convert Muslims in the Holy Land to Christianity, a band of several thousand youths set out for Italy, and children being sold into slavery.
King Louis VII and Conrad&nbsp;III led armies from France and Germany to Jerusalem and also Damascus without winning any major victories.
Alongside contact in Sicily and Spain the crusades led to knowledge exchange with Christians learning new ideas from the Muslims in literature and hygiene.
The crusades also reinforced the connection between Western Christendom, feudalism, and militarism.
Rulers demanded subsidies from their subjects, and alms and bequests prompted by the conquest of Palestine were additional sources of income.
According to contemporary reports 20,000 men died in the conflict.
Led by Andrew&nbsp;II and Leopold&nbsp;VI, Duke of Austria, forces drawn mainly from Hungary, Germany, Flanders, and Frisia achieved little.
These tales consequently galvanised medieval romance, philosophy and literature.
Louis remained in Syria until 1254 to consolidate the Crusader states.
In 1244 a band of Khwarezmian mercenaries travelling to Egypt captured Jerusalem en-route and defeated a combined Christian and Syrian army at the La Forbie.
The status quo was disrupted by the western migrating Turks.
The 20th century produced three important histories of the crusades: by Steven Runciman, Rene Grousset and a multi-author work edited by .
Over the early decades of the century the Cathars were driven underground while the French monarchy asserted control over the region.
The Poor Knights of Christ and its Temple of Solomon were founded in 1118 to protect pilgrims en route to Jerusalem.
As collateral the crusaders seized the Christian city of Zara; Innocent was appalled, and excommunicated them.
The Fourth Crusade had resulted in the sacking of Constantinople, effectively ending any chance of reconciling the East–West Schism and leading to the fall of the Byzantine Empire to the Ottomans.
The first, in 1396, was led by Sigismund of Luxemburg, king of Hungary; many French nobles joined Sigismund's forces, including the crusade's military leader, John the Fearless (son of the Duke of Burgundy).
Several crusades were launched during the 14th and 15th centuries to counter the expansion of the Ottoman Empire.
A treaty was negotiated that allowed unarmed Catholics to make pilgrimages to Jerusalem and permitted merchants to trade.
Martin excommunicated Peter and called for a crusade against Aragon before Charles died in 1285, allowing Henry&nbsp;II of Cyprus to reclaim Jerusalem.
The term evolved to include Arab tribes, and by the 12th century it was an ethnic and religious marker synonymous with "Muslim" in Medieval Latin literature.
Historians do not agree on any single definition of a crusade.
After the Genoese were expelled in 1261, Pope Urban&nbsp;IV brokered a peace to support the defence against the Mongols.
Innocent&nbsp;III also began preaching what became the Fourth Crusade in 1200, primarily in France, but also in England and Germany.
The Ottomans defeated them in the Battle of Nicopolis on 25&nbsp;September, capturing 3,000 prisoners.
Richard left, never to return, but Henry&nbsp;VI, Holy Roman Emperor initiated the German Crusade to fulfil the promises made by his father, Frederick.
In 1256 Genoa and Venice went to war over territory in Acre and Tyre.
If there were no offspring Charles would receive the empire and principality.
Urban urged military support for the Byzantine Empire and its Emperor, Alexios&nbsp;I, who needed reinforcements for his conflict with westward migrating Turks in Anatolia.
The loss of Aleppo in 1128 and Edessa (Urfa) in 1144 to Imad ad-Din Zengi, governor of Mosul led to preaching for what subsequently became known as the Second Crusade.
In addition the growth of the system of indulgences later was a catalyst for the Protestant Reformation in the early 16th century.
In Greek and Latin, "Saracen" originated in the early first millennium to refer to non- Arab peoples inhabiting the desert areas around the Roman province of Arabia.
The French, led by Louis&nbsp;IX's brother Charles of Anjou, similarly sought to expand their influence.
Peter was proclaimed king, and the House of Charles of Anjou was exiled from Sicily.
As a result of the First Crusade, four primary crusader states were created: the Kingdom of Jerusalem, the County of Edessa, the Principality of Antioch, and the County of Tripoli.
The Latin emperor controlled one-fourth of the Byzantine territory, Venice three-eighths (including three-eighths of the city of Constantinople), and the remainder was divided among the other crusade leaders.
Louis was defeated at Mansura and captured as he retreated back to Damietta.
Crusades were also fought for many other reasons such as to recapture Christian territory or defend Christians in non-Christian lands, resolve conflict among rival Roman Catholic groups, gain political or territorial advantage, or to combat paganism and heresy.
Women were intimately connected to the Crusades; they aided in recruitment, took over the crusaders' responsibilities in their absence, and provided financial and moral support.
Tolerance, trade, and political relationships between the Arabs and the Christian states of Europe waxed and waned.
The only efforts undertaken were in the Dauphiné, resulting in little change.
Some aristocratic women participated in crusades, such as Eleanor of Aquitaine (who joined her husband, Louis VII).
A study published in 1977 casts doubt on the existence of these events, and many historians came to believe that they were not (or not primarily) children but multiple bands of "wandering poor" in Germany and France, some of whom tried to reach the Holy Land and others who never intended to do so.
Polish-Hungarian King Władysław Warneńczyk invaded the recently conquered Ottoman territory, reaching Belgrade in January 1444; a negotiated truce was repudiated by Sultan Murad&nbsp;II within days of its ratification.
This led to a rapid expansion of Arab power, the influence of which stretched from the northwest Indian subcontinent, across Central Asia, the Middle East, North Africa, southern Italy, and the Iberian Peninsula, to the Pyrenees.
On a popular level, the First Crusade unleashed a wave of impassioned, pious Catholic fury which was expressed in the massacres of Jews that accompanied the crusades and the violent treatment of the "schismatic" Orthodox Christians of the east.
The papacy declared frequent Iberian crusades and from 1212 to 1265, and the Christian kingdoms drove the Muslims back to the Emirate of Granada, which held out until 1492 when the Muslims and Jews were expelled from the peninsula.
Damietta was returned and an eight-year truce agreed.
Richard then quarrelled with Philip&nbsp;II of France and Philip returned to France, leaving most of his forces behind.
In ''The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire ''Edward Gibbon wrote that the crusaders' efforts could have been more profitably directed towards improving their own countries.
