The mobility of interstitial ions depends strongly on temperature.
There are many mechanisms involved.
Increase of series resistance degrades Q; too high increase can stop the oscillations.
Temperature coefficient is 35.4 ppm/°C.
The maximum ''Q'' for a high stability quartz oscillator can be estimated as ''Q'' = 1.6 &times; 107/''f'', where ''f'' is the resonance frequency in megahertz.
aging of the oscillator circuitry (and e.g.
Temperature coefficient is 20 ppm/°C.
Another defect of importance is the hydrogen containing growth defect, when instead of a Si−O−Si structure, a pair of Si−OH HO−Si groups is formed; essentially a hydrolyzed bond.
Too low drive level may cause problems with starting the oscillator.
The mounting and contacts may undergo relief of the built-in stresses.
High-frequency crystals are typically cut in the shape of a simple, rectangular plate.
These include single crystals of lithium tantalate, lithium niobate, lithium borate, berlinite, gallium arsenide, lithium tetraborate, aluminium phosphate, bismuth germanium oxide, polycrystalline zirconium titanate ceramics, high-alumina ceramics, silicon-zinc oxide composite, or dipotassium tartrate.
Irradiation with higher doses (over 105 rad) lowers sensitivity to subsequent doses.
Using frequency dividers, frequency multipliers and phase locked loop circuits, it is practical to derive a wide range of frequencies from one reference frequency.
Other early innovators in quartz crystal oscillators include G. W. Pierce and Louis Essen.
A double rotated cut.
Magnetic fields have little effect on the crystal itself, as quartz is diamagnetic; eddy currents or AC voltages can however be induced into the circuits, and magnetic parts of the mounting and housing may be influenced.
Aluminium inclusions transform into color centers with gamma-ray irradiation, causing a darkening of the crystal proportional to the dose and level of impurities; the presence of regions with different darkness reveals the different growth regions.
Acceleration effects including gravity are also reduced with SC-cut crystals as is frequency change with time due to long term mounting stress variation.
*'''DTCXO''' — Digital temperature compensated crystal oscillator
Temperature-sensitive.
Aging decreases logarithmically with time, the largest changes occurring shortly after manufacture.
Quartz crystals with high levels of alkali metal impurities lose Q with irradiation; Q of swept artificial crystals is unaffected.
Other factors influencing the frequency are the power supply voltage, load impedance, magnetic fields, electric fields (in case of cuts that are sensitive to them, e.g., SC cuts), the presence and absorbed dose of γ-particles and ionizing radiation, and the age of the crystal.
The crystal oscillator circuit sustains oscillation by taking a voltage signal from the quartz resonator, amplifying it, and feeding it back to the resonator.
This is generally minimized by ensuring that the maintaining circuit has insufficient gain to activate unwanted modes.
Thickness-shear crystals typically operate in fundamental mode at 1–30&nbsp;MHz, 3rd overtone at 30–90&nbsp;MHz, and 5th overtone at 90–150&nbsp;MHz; according to other source they can be made for fundamental mode operation up to 300&nbsp;MHz, though that mode is usually used only to 100&nbsp;MHz and according to yet another source the upper limit for fundamental frequency of the AT cut is limited to 40&nbsp;MHz for small diameter blanks.
Many applications call for a crystal oscillator frequency conveniently related to some other desired frequency, so hundreds of standard crystal frequencies are made in large quantities and stocked by electronics distributors.
Far fewer activity dips.
The impurities have a negative impact on radiation hardness, susceptibility to twinning, filter loss, and long and short term stability of the crystals.
Has faster warm-up speed, higher Q, better close-in phase noise, less sensitivity to spatial orientation against the vector of gravity, and less sensitivity to vibrations.
The Q value is calculated only for the z region; crystals containing other regions can be adversely affected.
Moreover, the effective inductive reactance of the crystal can be reduced by adding a capacitor in series with the crystal.
A number of firms started producing quartz crystals for electronic use during this time.
The Al3+ site can also trap hydrogen atoms.
When the field is removed, the quartz generates an electric field as it returns to its previous shape, and this can generate a voltage.
In a real application, this means that a clock built using a regular 32&nbsp;kHz tuning-fork crystal keeps good time at room temperature, but loses 2 minutes per year at 10&nbsp;°C above or below room temperature and loses 8 minutes per year at 20&nbsp;°C above or below room temperature due to the quartz crystal.
Crystals suffer from minor short-term frequency fluctuations as well.
Using what are now considered primitive methods, about 100,000 crystal units were produced in the United States during 1939.
Both left and right-handed crystals can be used for oscillators, if the cut angle is correct.
Care must be taken during manufacturing and processing to avoid phase transformation.
For a crystal to operate at its specified frequency, the electronic circuit has to be exactly that specified by the crystal manufacturer.
Through World War II crystals were made from natural quartz crystal, virtually all from Brazil.
The first crystal-controlled oscillator, using a crystal of Rochelle salt, was built in 1917 and patented in 1918 by Alexander M. Nicholson at Bell Telephone Laboratories, although his priority was disputed by Walter Guyton Cady.
Some cuts are less sensitive to stresses; the SC (Stress Compensated) cut is an example.
The large ones are large enough to allow some mobility of smaller ions and molecules through the crystal.
Oscillators, whether they are crystal oscillators or others, are designated with the class letter ''G'' (G1, G2, etc.).
In 1968, Juergen Staudte invented a photolithographic process for manufacturing quartz crystal oscillators while working at North American Aviation (now Rockwell) that allowed them to be made small enough for portable products like watches.
Other common impurities of concern are e.g.
The crystal is then left to cool, while the electric field is maintained.
Used in one of the first crystal oscillators in 1921 by W.G.
Temperature-sensitive, can be used as a sensor.
The electronic grade crystals, grade C, have Q of 1.8 million or above; the premium grade B crystals have Q of 2.2 million, and special premium grade A crystals have Q of 3.0 million.
A varactor, a diode with capacitance depending on applied voltage, is often used in voltage-controlled crystal oscillators, VCXO.
Its frequency constant is 1.797&nbsp;MHz⋅mm.
An oscillator crystal has two electrically conductive plates, with a slice or tuning fork of quartz crystal sandwiched between them.
Exposition of silver-plated crystal to iodine vapors can also be used in amateur conditions for lowering the crystal frequency slightly; the frequency can also be increased by scratching off parts of the electrodes, but that carries risk of damage to the crystal and loss of Q.
Other dynamic stress inducing factors are shocks, vibrations, and acoustic noise.
The series resonance is a few kilohertz lower than the parallel one.
The average value of as-grown synthetic quartz in 1994 was
Neutron radiation induces frequency changes by introducing dislocations into the lattice by knocking out atoms, a single fast neutron can produce many defects; the SC and AT cut frequency increases roughly linearly with absorbed neutron dose, while the frequency of the BT cuts decreases.
The mechanical stress causes a short-term change in the oscillator frequency due to the stress-sensitivity of the crystal, and can introduce a permanent change of frequency due to shock-induced changes of mounting and internal stresses (if the elastic limits of the mechanical parts are exceeded), desorption of contamination from the crystal surfaces, or change in parameters of the oscillator circuit.
Sensitive to electric fields.
The architecture eliminates the effects of the surface contacts between the electrodes, the constraints in the mounting connections, and the issues related to ion migration from the electrodes into the lattice of the vibrating element.
A badly designed oscillator circuit may suddenly begin oscillating on an overtone.
This latter technique can provide a useful method of trimming the oscillatory frequency within a narrow range; in this case inserting a capacitor in series with the crystal raises the frequency of oscillation.
Silver and aluminium are often used as electrodes; however both form oxide layers with time that increases the crystal mass and lowers frequency.
The composition of the crystal can be gradually altered by outgassing, diffusion of atoms of impurities or migrating from the electrodes, or the lattice can be damaged by radiation.
*'''MCXO''' — Microcomputer-compensated crystal oscillator
Has several times lower motional capacitance than the corresponding AT cut, reducing the possibility to adjust the crystal frequency by attached capacitor; this restricts usage in conventional TCXO and VCXO devices, and other applications where the frequency of the crystal has to be adjustable.
The helixes are aligned along the z-axis and merged, sharing atoms.
the '''BVA resonator''' (Boîtier à Vieillissement Amélioré, Enclosure with Improved Aging), developed in 1976; the parts that influence the vibrations are machined from a single crystal (which reduces the mounting stress), and the electrodes are deposited not on the resonator itself but on the inner sides of two condenser discs made of adjacent slices of the quartz from the same bar, forming a three-layer sandwich with no stress between the electrodes and the vibrating element.
The impurities are concentrated at the cathode region of the crystal, which is cut off afterwards and discarded.
The resulting configuration is rugged, resistant to shock and vibration, resistant to acceleration and ionizing radiation, and has improved aging characteristics.
Temperature-sensitive.
While AT cuts tend to be fairly forgiving, with only their electrical parameters, stability and aging characteristics being degraded when overdriven, low-frequency crystals, especially flexural-mode ones, may fracture at too high drive levels.
Depending on the manufacturer, the highest available fundamental frequency may be 25&nbsp;MHz to 66&nbsp;MHz.
It has well known and repeatable characteristics.
A consequence of these activity dips  is that the oscillator may lock at a spurious frequency at specific temperatures.
The annealing is faster at higher temperatures.
The most common material for oscillator crystals is quartz.
A quartz crystal provides both series and parallel resonance.
Frequency change at low ionizing radiation doses is proportionally higher than for higher doses.
This modulates the resonance frequency to a small degree by the frequency of the vibrations.
Operates in thickness shear mode.
The temperature coefficient is lower than the CT cut; where the frequency range permits, DT is preferred over CT.
Crystals undergo slow gradual change of frequency with time, known as aging.
Also called '''perpendicular''', '''normal''', '''Curie''', '''zero-angle''', or '''ultrasonic'''.
Infrared spectrophotometry is used as one of the methods for measuring the quality of the grown crystals.
*'''OCVCXO''' — oven-controlled voltage-controlled crystal oscillator
Matrix defects can also be present; oxygen vacancies, silicon vacancies (usually compensated by 4 hydrogens or 3 hydrogens and a hole), peroxy groups, etc.
The main causes of such noise are e.g.
The temperature coefficient is linear.
The SiO4 tetrahedrons form parallel helices; the direction of twist of the helix determines the left- or right-hand orientation.
All crystals have a transient negative frequency shift after exposure to an X-ray pulse; the frequency then shifts gradually back; natural quartz reaches stable frequency after 10–1000 seconds, with a negative offset to pre-irradiation frequency, artificial crystals return to a frequency slightly lower or higher than pre-irradiation, swept crystals anneal virtually back to original frequency.
This frequency is commonly used to keep track of time, as in quartz wristwatches, to provide a stable clock signal for digital integrated circuits, and to stabilize frequencies for radio transmitters and receivers.
chromium or aluminium, can react with the crystal, creating layers of metal oxide and silicon; these interface layers can undergo changes in time.
Some other piezoelectric materials than quartz can be employed.
Artificially aging a crystal by prolonged storage at 85 to 125&nbsp;°C can increase its long-term stability.
Ionization produces electron-hole pairs; the holes are trapped in the lattice near the Al atom, the resulting Li and Na atoms are loosely trapped along the Z axis; the change of the lattice near the Al atom and the corresponding elastic constant then causes a corresponding change in frequency.
Different-cut seeds in different orientations may provide other kinds of growth regions.
There are disadvantages with  SC-cut shear mode crystals, such as the need for the  maintaining oscillator to discriminate against other closely related unwanted modes and increased frequency change due to temperature when subject to a full ambient range.
They are also often incorporated in a single package with the crystal oscillator circuit, shown on the righthand side.
The mass of the helixes forms a mesh of small and large channels parallel to the z-axis.
Has frequency constant 1.661&nbsp;MHz⋅mm.
After the power-up, the crystals take several seconds to minutes to "warm up" and stabilize their frequency.
Natural quartz is much more sensitive than artificially grown crystals, and sensitivity can be further reduced by sweeping the crystal – heating the crystal to at least 400&nbsp;°C in a hydrogen-free atmosphere in an electric field of at least 500&nbsp;V/cm for at least 12 hours.
For this reason, atomic oscillators are used for applications requiring better long-term stability and accuracy.
Paul Langevin first investigated quartz resonators for use in sonar during World War I.
Quartz can be swept in both α and β phase; sweeping in β phase is faster, but the phase transition may induce twinning.
A DC voltage bias between the electrodes can accelerate the initial aging, probably by induced diffusion of impurities through the crystal.
iron(III) (interstitial), fluorine, boron(III), phosphorus(V) (substitution), titanium(IV) (substitution, universally present in magmatic quartz, less common in hydrothermal quartz), and germanium(IV) (substitution).
More than two billion crystals are manufactured annually.
Due to the higher frequency constant, can be used for crystals with higher frequencies than the AT cut, up to over 50&nbsp;MHz.
Neutrons also alter the temperature-frequency characteristics.
The most common cut, developed in 1934.
Has reasonably low temperature coefficient, widely used for low-frequency crystal filters.
Used extensively for wideband filters.
When the energy of the generated output frequencies matches the losses in the circuit, an oscillation can be sustained.
Operates in thickness-shear mode.
The frequency-temperature curve is a downward parabola.
These are small downward frequency or upward resistance excursions localized at certain temperatures, with their temperature position dependent on the value of the load capacitors.
Such swept crystals have a very low response to steady ionizing radiation.
This can be disastrous for systems employing PLL or FSK technologies.
The relative orientation of the acceleration vector to the crystal dramatically influences the crystal's vibration sensitivity.
Failures may be, however, introduced by faults in bonding, leaky enclosures, corrosion, frequency shift by aging, breaking the crystal by too high mechanical shock, or radiation-induced damage when nonswept quartz is used.
Crystals have no inherent failure mechanisms; some have operated in devices for decades.
*'''RbXO''' — Rubidium crystal oscillators (RbXO), a crystal oscillator (can be an MCXO) synchronized with a built-in rubidium standard which is run only occasionally to save power
Sweeping can also be used to introduce one kind of an impurity into the crystal.
SC-cut crystals are most advantageous where temperature control at their temperature of zero temperature coefficient (turnover) is possible, under these circumstances an overall stability performance from premium units can approach the stability of Rubidium frequency standards.
These designs, particularly the OCXO, often produce devices with excellent short-term stability.
The measured value is based on the absorption bands of the OH radical and the infrared Q value is calculated.
A frequency multiplication by 10 times multiplies the magnitude of the phase error by 10 times.
Operates in thickness shear mode.
The frequency-temperature curve is a third order downward parabola with inflection point at 52&nbsp;°C.
Crystals above 30&nbsp;MHz (up to >200&nbsp;MHz) are generally operated at series resonance where the impedance appears at its minimum and equal to the series resistance.
The overtone modes are at frequencies which are approximate, but not exact odd integer multiples of that of the fundamental mode, and overtone frequencies are therefore not exact harmonics of the fundamental.
This means that a quartz clock, filter or oscillator remains accurate.
Special high-Q crystals, for use in highly stable oscillators, are grown at constant slow speed and have constant low infrared absorption along the entire Z axis.
Twinning can be mitigated by subjecting the crystal to compression stress in the X direction, or an AC or DC electric field along the X axis while the crystal cools through the phase transformation temperature region.
Series resistance of unswept crystals increases after an X-ray dose, and anneals back to a somewhat higher value for a natural quartz (requiring a corresponding gain reserve in the circuit) and back to pre-irradiation value for synthetic crystals.
The appropriate drive levels are about 5 μW for flexural modes up to 100&nbsp;kHz, 1 μW for fundamental modes at 1–4&nbsp;MHz, 0.5 μW for fundamental modes 4–20&nbsp;MHz and 0.5 μW for overtone modes at 20–200&nbsp;MHz.
Quartz crystal oscillators were developed for high-stability frequency references during the 1920s and 1930s.
A major reason for the wide use of crystal oscillators is their high Q factor.
BVA resonators are often used in spacecraft applications.
Can be manufactured either as a conventional round disk, or as a strip resonator; the latter allows much smaller size.
For more accurate higher frequencies it is better to use a crystal with lower fundamental frequency, operating at an overtone.
*'''TCVCXO''' — Temperature-compensated voltage-controlled crystal oscillator
Factors outside of the crystal itself are e.g.
The third overtone is about 3 times the fundamental frequency; the overtones are higher than the equivalent multiple of the fundamental frequency by about 25&nbsp;kHz per overtone.
Sodium and iron ions can cause inclusions of acnite and elemeusite crystals.
*'''OCXO''' — Oven-controlled crystal oscillator
The trapped charge carriers can be released by heating; their recombination is the cause of thermoluminescence.
The migration of impurities and the gradual replacement of alkali metal ions with hydrogen (when swept in air) or electron holes (when swept in vacuum) causes a weak electric current through the crystal; decay of this current to a constant value signals the end of the process.
The plane of the plate is perpendicular to the X axis of the crystal.
At the beginning of the technology, natural quartz crystals were used but now synthetic crystalline quartz grown by hydrothermal synthesis is predominant due to higher purity, lower cost and more convenient handling.
Since broadcast stations were assigned frequencies only 10&nbsp;kHz apart, interference between adjacent stations due to frequency drift was a common problem.
Some of the defects produce localized levels in the forbidden band, serving as charge traps; Al(III) and B(III) typically serve as hole traps while electron vacancies, titanium, germanium, and phosphorus atoms serve as electron traps.
Temperature coefficient is about 90 ppm/°C.
Strip resonators, usually AT cuts, are smaller and therefore less sensitive to mechanical shocks.
Helium can cause similar issues when it diffuses through glass enclosures of rubidium standards.
for nuclear and space technology.
Mechanical stresses also influence the frequency.
Several resonator configurations are possible, in addition to the classical way of directly attaching leads to the crystal.
J cut is made of two quartz plates bonded together, selected to produce out of phase motion for a given electrical field.
The crystals possess temperature hysteresis; the frequency at a given temperature achieved by increasing the temperature is not equal to the frequency on the same temperature achieved by decreasing the temperature.
Temperature coefficient is about 14 ppm/°C.
An inappropriate value of the tank capacitor caused the crystal in a control board to be overdriven, jumping to an overtone, and causing the train to speed up instead of slowing down.
A special cut, is a double-rotated cut with improved characteristics for oven-stabilized oscillators.
Suitable for OCXOs in e.g.
The stresses can be induced by mounting, bonding, and application of the electrodes, by differential thermal expansion of the mounting, electrodes, and the crystal itself, by differential thermal stresses when there is a temperature gradient present, by expansion or shrinkage of the bonding materials during curing, by the air pressure that is transferred to the ambient pressure within the crystal enclosure, by the stresses of the crystal lattice itself (nonuniform growth, impurities, dislocations), by the surface imperfections and damage caused during manufacture, and by the action of gravity on the mass of the crystal; the frequency can therefore be influenced by position of the crystal.
Aluminium oxidizes readily but slowly, until about 5&nbsp;nm thickness is reached; increased temperature during artificial aging does not significantly increase the oxide forming speed; a thick oxide layer can be formed during manufacture by anodizing.
The growth speed of the −X direction is slowest due to the effect of adsorption of water molecules on the crystal surface; aluminium impurities suppress growth in two other directions.
The result is that a quartz crystal behaves like an RLC circuit, composed of an inductor, capacitor and resistor, with a precise resonant frequency.
The trapped holes can be measured by electron spin resonance.
Operates in thickness shear mode, in b-mode (fast quasi-shear).
*'''VCXO''' — Voltage-controlled crystal oscillator
Crystals can be also damaged by overdriving.
Even if the series resistances at the spurious resonances appear higher than the one at wanted frequency a rapid change in the main mode  series resistance can occur at specific temperatures when the two frequencies are coincidental.
The frequency-temperature curve is a downward parabola.
Series resistance of swept crystals is unaffected.
SC-cut crystals are designed to minimize the frequency effect of mounting stress and they are therefore less sensitive to vibration.
Plastic housings can be used as well, but those are not hermetic and another secondary sealing has to be built around the crystal.
A double rotated cut.
Quartz exists in several phases.
Adding capacitance across a crystal causes the (parallel) resonance frequency to decrease.
Crystals tend to suffer anomalies in their frequency/temperature and resistance/temperature characteristics, known as activity dips.
The reverse process however is not entirely homogeneous and crystal twinning occurs.
Most (estimated over 90%) of all crystals are this variant.
Low-frequency crystals, such as those used in digital watches, are typically cut in the shape of a tuning fork.
The crystals were ground using a fine abrasive slurry, or even a toothpaste, to increase their frequency.
Some materials may be more suitable for specific applications.
Some of the radiation-induced defects during their thermal annealing produce thermoluminescence; defects related to aluminium, titanium, and germanium can be distinguished.
These cuts operate at bulk acoustic wave (BAW); for higher frequencies, surface acoustic wave (SAW) devices are employed.
Most are used for consumer devices such as wristwatches, clocks, radios, computers, and cellphones.
Special cuts can be made with linear temperature characteristics; the LC cut is used in quartz thermometers.
Inclusions of water may be present in fast-grown crystals; interstitial water molecules are abundant near the crystal seed.
The limitations in short-term stability are due mainly to noise from electronic components in the oscillator circuits.
High magnitudes of shocks may tear the crystals off their mountings (especially in the case of large low-frequency crystals suspended on thin wires), or cause cracking of the crystal.
35°15', 0° (&lt;25&nbsp;MHz)35°18', 0°(&gt;10&nbsp;MHz)
