The native Taíno were forced to work under the encomienda system, which resembled a feudal system in Medieval Europe.
After the French took Havana in 1555, the governor's son, Francisco de Angulo, went to Mexico.
The Cuban Ministry of Higher Education operates a scheme of distance education which provides regular afternoon and evening courses in rural areas for agricultural workers.
Cuba's prior 35% supply of the world's export market for sugar has declined to 10% due to a variety of factors, including a global sugar commodity price drop that made Cuba less competitive on world markets.
Carlos Prío Socarrás, a protégé of Grau, became president in 1948.
The cause and responsibility for her sinking remained unclear after a board of inquiry.
According to the official census of 2010, Cuba's population was 11,241,161, comprising 5,628,996 men and 5,612,165 women.
Cuban literature began to find its voice in the early 19th century.
Under Cuba's new constitution, the U.S. retained the right to intervene in Cuban affairs and to supervise its finances and foreign relations.
Many are descendants of farm laborers brought to the island by Spanish and American contractors during the 19th and early 20th century.
Cuba's life expectancy at birth is 78 years.
On August 2, 2011, ''The New York Times'' reported Cuba as reaffirming their intent to legalize "buying and selling" of private property before the year's end.
Allegations of widespread sex tourism are downplayed by the Cuban Justice minister.
Cuba is an archipelago of islands located in the northern Caribbean Sea at the confluence with the Gulf of Mexico and the Atlantic Ocean.
Cuba also provides a national team that competes in the Olympic Games.
According to experts, the private sale of property could "transform Cuba more than any of the economic reforms announced by President Raúl Castro's government".
It has continued to call regularly for social and economic reform in Cuba, along with the unconditional release of all political prisoners.
A monument in Havana honours the Cuban Chinese who fell in the war.
Cuban cuisine is a fusion of Spanish and Caribbean cuisines.
The Spaniards began a campaign of suppression.
Cuba's capital, Havana, was a "glittering and dynamic city".
its reserves were estimated at 5.5 million tons, over 7% of the world total.
From 1975 until the late 1980s, Soviet military assistance enabled Cuba to upgrade its military capabilities.
The government's vastly superior numbers eventually crushed the insurgency.
Venezuela supplies Cuba with an estimated  a day of oil in exchange for money and the services of some 44,000 Cubans, most of them medical personnel, in Venezuela.
He was replaced by Carlos Manuel de Céspedes y Quesada.
The assembly meets twice a year; between sessions legislative power is held by the 31 member Council of Ministers.
His government carried out major social reforms.
In addition, there was a high demand for slaves, and Virginia planters sold many in the internal domestic slave trade, to be shipped or taken overland to the Deep South, which had greatly expanded its cotton production.
By 1963, Cuba was moving towards a full-fledged Communist system modeled on the USSR.
The warm temperatures of the Caribbean Sea and the fact that Cuba sits across the entrance to the Gulf of Mexico combine to make the country prone to frequent hurricanes.
General Valeriano Weyler, military governor of Cuba, herded the rural population into what he called ''reconcentrados'', described by international observers as "fortified towns".
Rumba ("de cajón o de solar") music originated in the early Afro-Cuban culture, mixed with Hispanic elements of style.
Under the Platt Amendment, the U.S. leased the Guantánamo Bay naval base from Cuba.
Spain's alliance with the French pitched them into direct conflict with the British, and in 1762 a British expedition of five warships and 4,000 troops set out from Portsmouth to capture Cuba.
Cuban dissidents face arrest and imprisonment.
In the 1990s, Human Rights Watch reported that Cuba's extensive prison system, one of the largest in Latin America, consists of 40 maximum-security prisons, 30 minimum-security prisons, and over 200 work camps.
Other languages spoken by immigrants include Galician and Corsican.
Cuba has a dual currency system, whereby most wages and prices are set in Cuban pesos (CUP), while the tourist economy operates with Convertible pesos (CUC), set at par with the US dollar.
Several well-known Cuban religious figures have operated outside the island, including the  humanitarian and author Jorge Armando Pérez.
After the loss of Soviet subsidies, Cuba scaled down the numbers of military personnel, from 235,000 in 1994 to about 60,000 in 2003.
Popular Cuban music of all styles has been enjoyed and praised widely across the world.
The remaining positions are filled by candidates nominally without party affiliation.
Though Havana, which had become the third-largest city in the Americas, was to enter an era of sustained development and increasing ties with North America during this period, the British occupation of the city proved short-lived.
A point of contention during the Cold War between the Soviet Union and the United States, a nuclear war nearly broke out during the Cuban Missile Crisis of 1962.
Cuban recipes share spices and techniques with Spanish cooking, with some Caribbean influence in spice and flavor.
The revision comprises an action plan with time limits for each item, and an indication of the governmental body responsible for delivery.
The vast majority of those executed following the 1959 revolution were policemen, politicians, and informers of the Batista regime accused of crimes such as torture and murder, and their public trials and executions had widespread popular support among the Cuban population.
On December 27, 1868, he issued a decree condemning slavery in theory but accepting it in practice and declaring free any slaves whose masters present them for military service.
Garlic, cumin, oregano, and bay leaves are the dominant spices.
Cuba's major exports are sugar, nickel, tobacco, fish, medical products, citrus fruits, and coffee; imports include food, fuel, clothing, and machinery.
As a fragile republic, Cuba attempted to strengthen its democratic system, but mounting political radicalization and social strife culminated in the dictatorship of Fulgencio Batista in 1952.
An exiled dissident named José Martí founded the Cuban Revolutionary Party in New York in 1892.
In February 1960, Castro signed a commercial agreement with Soviet Vice-Premier Anastas Mikoyan.
Dominant themes of independence and freedom were exemplified by José Martí, who led the Modernist movement in Cuban literature.
The currently recorded number of Cubans with Chinese ancestry is 114,240.
De Céspedes, a sugar planter, freed his slaves to fight with him for an independent Cuba.
Cuba is the principal island, surrounded by four smaller groups of islands: the Colorados Archipelago on the northwestern coast, the Sabana-Camagüey Archipelago on the north-central Atlantic coast, the Jardines de la Reina on the south-central coast and the Canarreos Archipelago on the southwestern coast.
The leadership of Cuba has called for reforms in the country's agricultural system.
The Republic of Cuba is one of the world's last remaining socialist countries following the Marxist-Leninist ideology.
The United States declined to recognize the new Cuban government, although many European and Latin American nations did so.
Cuban armed forces were not greatly involved in combat during World War&nbsp;II, although president Batista suggested a joint U.S.-Latin American assault on Francoist Spain in order to overthrow its authoritarian regime.
The Cuban government has reportedly welcomed the decision as "fair".
In March 1960, Eisenhower gave his approval to a CIA plan to arm and train a group of Cuban refugees to overthrow the Castro regime.
The new economic reforms effectively created a new economic system, referred by some as the "New Cuban Economy".
The main island consists mostly of flat to rolling plains apart from the Sierra Maestra mountains in the southeast, whose highest point is Pico Turquino ().
The vaccine has been available for free to the Cuban population since 2011.
Other common destinations include Spain, the United Kingdom, Canada, Mexico, and Sweden, among others.
In 1956, Fidel Castro and about 80 supporters landed from the yacht ''Granma'' in an attempt to start a rebellion against the Batista government.
Cuban historians have characterized Magoon's governorship as having introduced political and social corruption.
Lucumí, a dialect of the West African language Yoruba, is also used as a liturgical language by practitioners of Santería, and so only as a second language.
Cuba is the largest island in the Caribbean, with an area of , and the second-most populous after Hispaniola, with over 11 million inhabitants.
Cuba considers the embargo itself to be in violation of human rights.
This group also handles the exporting of pharmaceuticals, and provide technical information for the production of these drugs.
In Santería, she has been syncretized with the goddess Oshun.
Other estimates for the total number of political executions range from 4,000 to 33,000.
Estimates place Venezuelan assistance at over 20% of the Cuban GDP for 2008–2010, similar to the aid flows from the Soviet Union in 1985–1988.
Cuba's high school graduation rate is 94 percent.
Two thousand Cuban Chinese joined the rebels.
Writers such as Reinaldo Arenas, Guillermo Cabrera Infante, and more recently Daína Chaviano, Pedro Juan Gutiérrez, Zoé Valdés, Guillermo Rosales and Leonardo Padura have earned international recognition in the post-revolutionary era, though many of these writers have felt compelled to continue their work in exile due to ideological control of media by the Cuban authorities.
Cuba took limited free market-oriented measures to alleviate severe shortages of food, consumer goods, and services.
In the 1820s, when the rest of Spain's empire in Latin America rebelled and formed independent states, Cuba remained loyal.
Immigration and emigration have played a prominent part in Cuba's demographic profile.
Between 1933 and 1958, Cuba extended economic regulations enormously, causing economic problems.
As a member of the Cubasolar Group, there was also a mention of 10 additional plants in 2013.
The Seven Years' War, which erupted in 1754 across three continents, eventually arrived in the Spanish Caribbean.
Between 1899-1930 alone, close to a million Spaniards entered the country, though many would eventually return to Spain.
The British arrived on June 6, and by August had Havana under siege.
After first landing on an island then called Guanahani, Bahamas on October 12, 1492, Christopher Columbus commanded his three ships: ''La Pinta,'' ''La Niña'' and the ''Santa María,'' to land on Cuba's northeastern coast on October 28, 1492.
In 1961 the Cuban government had imposed broad restrictions on travel to prevent the mass emigration of people after the 1959 revolution; it approved exit visas only on rare occasions.
By 1860, Cuba had 213,167 free people of color, 39% of its non-White population of 550,000.
Cuba has provided state subsidized education to a limited number of foreign nationals at the Latin American School of Medicine.
Batista stayed in power until he was forced into exile in December 1958.
Later he went into exile on the Portuguese island of Madeira and finally settled in Estoril, near Lisbon.
Castro's rule was severely tested in the aftermath of the Soviet collapse in 1991 (known in Cuba as the Special Period).
In 2011, the Cuban state denounced reggaeton as degenerate, directed reduced "low-profile" airplay of the genre (but did not ban it entirely) and banned the megahit ''Chupi Chupi'' by Osmani García, characterizing its description of sex as "the sort which a prostitute would carry out".
The University of Havana was founded in 1728 and there are a number of other well-established colleges and universities.
The standard of living in the 1970s was "extremely spartan" and discontent was rife.
As of August 2016, the dual currency system remains in force.
Cuba's national legislature, the National Assembly of People's Power (''Asamblea Nacional de Poder Popular''), is the supreme organ of power; 609 members serve five-year terms.
It lies between latitudes 19° and 24°N, and longitudes 74° and 85°W.
Many of the meat dishes are cooked slowly with light sauces.
During the 1970s, Fidel Castro dispatched tens of thousands of troops in support of Soviet-supported wars in Africa.
As of September 2014 there are around 50,000 Cuban-trained health care workers aiding 66 nations.
The name ''Cuba'' comes from the Taíno language.
All law enforcement agencies are maintained under Cuba's Ministry of the Interior which is supervised by the Revolutionary Armed Forces.
The constitution describes the Communist Party of Cuba as the "leading force of society and of the state".
Tourism was initially restricted to enclave resorts where tourists would be segregated from Cuban society, referred to as "enclave tourism" and "tourism apartheid".
The police force, which is referred to as "Policía Nacional Revolucionaria" or PNR is then expected to provide help.
The period from 1933 to 1937 was a time of "virtually unremitting social and political warfare".
Haiti is 77&nbsp;km (48&nbsp;mi) to the east, Jamaica (140&nbsp;km/87&nbsp;mi) and the Cayman Islands to the south.
Cuba is a founding member of the Bolivarian Alliance for the Americas.
No political party is permitted to nominate candidates or campaign on the island, including the Communist Party.
The numbers recorded from Cuba for those groups are therefore likely to be close to the numbers which actually occur in Cuba.
Writers such as Nicolás Guillén and José Z. Tallet focused on literature as social protest.
ETECSA operates 118 cybercafes in the country.
Christianity is often practiced in tandem with Santería, a mixture of Catholicism and mostly African faiths, which include a number of cults.
Hugo Chávez, former President of Venezuela, and Evo Morales, President of Bolivia, have become allies and both countries are major oil and gas exporters.
Post-revolution Cuba has been characterized by significant levels of emigration, which has led to a large and influential diaspora community.
Mexico lies 210 kilometers (130 miles) across the Yucatán Channel to the west (to the closest tip of Cabo Catoche in the State of Quintana Roo).
Batista adhered to the 1940 constitution's strictures preventing his re-election.
Fidel Castro's forces entered the capital on January 8, 1959.
Indeed, this drop in fertility is among the largest in the Western Hemisphere, and is attributed largely to unrestricted access to legal abortion: Cuba's abortion rate was 58.6 per 1000 pregnancies in 1996, compared to an average of 35 in the Caribbean, 27 in Latin America overall, and 48 in Europe.
The official language of Cuba is Spanish and the vast majority of Cubans speak it.
The main island, named Cuba, is  long, constituting most of the nation's land area () and is the largest island in the Caribbean and 17th-largest island in the world by land area.
About 1,400 Cuban exiles disembarked at the Bay of Pigs, but failed in their attempt to overthrow Castro.
Romanticist Miguel Barnet, who wrote ''Everyone Dreamed of Cuba'', reflects a more melancholy Cuba.
Spain and the United States declared war on each other in late April 1898.
, Cuba spent about  on its armed forces.
In 1985, Cuba devoted more than 10% of its GDP to military expenditures.
The rapid growth of tourism during the Special Period had widespread social and economic repercussions in Cuba, and led to speculation about the emergence of a two-tier economy.
According to Amnesty International, death sentences from 1959–87 numbered 237 of which all but 21 were actually carried out.
It is south of both the U.S. state of Florida and the Bahamas, west of Haiti, and north of Jamaica.
The U.S. State Department has estimated that 3,200 people were executed from 1959 to 1962.
In September 1933, the Sergeants' Revolt, led by Sergeant Fulgencio Batista, overthrew Cespedes.
Cuba is located in the northern Caribbean where the Caribbean Sea, the Gulf of Mexico, and the Atlantic Ocean meet.
The temperature is also shaped by the Caribbean current, which brings in warm water from the equator.
In 2008, Raúl Castro began enacting agrarian reforms to boost food production, as at that time 80% of food was imported.
This was a much higher proportion of free blacks to slaves than in Virginia, for instance, or the other Caribbean islands.
Cuba ranked 5th in the hemisphere in per capita income, 3rd in life expectancy, 2nd in per capita ownership of automobiles and telephones, and 1st in the number of television sets per inhabitant.
After Castro's fighters captured Santa Clara, Batista fled with his family to the Dominican Republic on January 1, 1959.
School attendance is compulsory from ages six to the end of basic secondary education (normally at age 15), and all students, regardless of age or gender, wear school uniforms with the color denoting grade level.
'''Cuba''', officially the '''Republic of Cuba''' (), is a unitary sovereign state comprising the island of Cuba as well as Isla de la Juventud and several minor archipelagos.
(This was near what is now Bariay, Holguin province.)
Cuba presently holds debt in an amount estimated to be , approximately 38% of GDP.
Isolated from the West, Cuba developed the successful lung cancer vaccine, Cimavax, which now is available to US researchers for the first time, along with other novel Cuban cancer treatments.
After the Cuban revolution and before the collapse of the Soviet Union, Cuba depended on Moscow for substantial aid and sheltered markets for its exports.
Full independence from Spain was the goal of a rebellion in 1868 led by planter Carlos Manuel de Céspedes.
Those who left the country typically did so by sea, in small boats and fragile rafts.
The Cuban government and Communist Party of Cuba control almost all media in Cuba.
When Havana surrendered, the admiral of the British fleet, George Keppel, the 3rd Earl of Albemarle, entered the city as a conquering new governor and took control of the whole western part of the island.
American and European protests against Spanish conduct on the island followed.
Its infant mortality rate is 5.13.
Independent observers have accused the Cuban government of numerous human rights abuses, including arbitrary imprisonment and torture.
Several members of the Communist Party held office under his administration.
Primary education lasts for six years, secondary education is divided into basic and pre-university education.
In 1878, the Pact of Zanjón ended the conflict, with Spain promising greater autonomy to Cuba.
As of December 2014, talks with Cuban officials and American officials including President Barack Obama have resulted in the exchange of releasing Alan Gross, fifty-two political prisoners, and an unnamed non-citizen agent of the United States in return for the release of three Cuban agents currently imprisoned in the United States.
The religious landscape of Cuba is also strongly defined by syncretisms of various kinds.
In the antebellum years, Virginia discouraged manumissions after the Nat Turner's Slave Rebellion of 1831 and strengthened restrictions against free blacks, as did other southern states.
On the other hand, Cuba was affected by perhaps the largest labor union privileges in Latin America, including bans on dismissals and mechanization.
The average temperature is  in January and  in July.
The government of Cuba provides an online encyclopedia website called EcuRed that operates in a "wiki" format.
Recovery occurred by the 1980s, and the country's healthcare has been widely praised.
After the Spanish–American War, Spain and the United States signed the Treaty of Paris (1898), by which Spain ceded Puerto Rico, the Philippines, and Guam to the United States for the sum of .
It was not until 1958 that Castro's July 26th Movement emerged as the leading revolutionary group.
Today, Cuba has universal health care and although shortages of medical supplies persist, there is no shortage of medical personnel.
In August 2012, a specialist of the "Cubaenergia Company" announced the opening of Cuba's first Solar Power Plant.
The Taíno were farmers, while the Ciboney were farmers as well as fishers and hunter-gatherers.
Fidel Castro restated his position that he was not interested in joining after the OAS resolution had been announced.
Ramon Grau San Martin was the winner of the next election, in 1944.
The typical meal could consist of plantains, black beans and rice, ''ropa vieja'' (shredded beef), Cuban bread, pork with onions, and tropical fruits.
Prison sentences range from 7 to 25 years."
Its birth rate (9.88 births per thousand population in 2006) is one of the lowest in the Western Hemisphere.
Its area is  including coastal and territorial waters.
In 2005, Cuba had exports of , ranking 114 of 226 world countries, and imports of , ranking 87 of 226 countries.
Black beans and rice, referred to as ''Moros y Cristianos'' (or ''moros'' for short), and plantains are staples of the Cuban diet.
This ranks Cuba 37th in the world and 3rd in the Americas, behind only Canada and Chile, and just ahead of the United States.
The United States continues an embargo against Cuba "so long as it continues to refuse to move toward democratization and greater respect for human rights", though the UN General Assembly has, since 1992, passed a resolution every year condemning the ongoing impact of the embargo and claiming it to be in violation of the Charter of the United Nations and international law.
Oil exploration in 2005 by the US Geological Survey revealed that the North Cuba Basin could produce approximately  to  of oil.
In December 2012, the Cuban government officially banned sexually explicit reggaeton songs and music videos from radio and television.
The country's fourth national report to the CBD, however, contains a detailed breakdown of the numbers of species of each kingdom of life recorded from Cuba, the main groups being: animals (17,801 species), bacteria (270 species), chromista (707 species), fungi, including lichen-forming species (5844 species), plants (9107 species) and protozoa (1440 species).
The labor unions supported Batista until the very end.
He outlawed the Cuban Communist Party in 1952.
They imported food, horses and other goods into the city, as well as thousands of slaves from West Africa to work on the under developed sugar plantations.
Cuba has developed a unique urban farm system (the ''organopónicos'') to compensate for the end of food imports from the Soviet Union.
Before Fidel Castro's 1959 revolution, Cuba was one of the most advanced and successful countries in Latin America.
Chinese had been imported as indentured laborers.
Cuba also ranked 11th in the world in the number of doctors per capita.
The poetry and novels of Dulce María Loynaz and José Lezama Lima have been influential.
Estimates suggest that between 1790 and 1820 some 325,000 Africans were imported to Cuba as slaves, which was four times the amount that had arrived between 1760 and 1790.
In Cuba, citizens can receive police assistance by dialing "106" on their telephones.
For most if not all of the other groups, however, the true numbers of species occurring in Cuba are likely to exceed, often considerably, the numbers of those recorded so far.
The output of Cuba's nickel mines that year was 71,000 tons, approaching 4% of world production.
The Wall Street Crash of 1929 led to a collapse in the price of sugar, political unrest, and repression.
Due to a shortage of white labor, blacks dominated urban industries "to such an extent that when whites in large numbers came to Cuba in the middle of the nineteenth century, they were unable to displace Negro workers."
It was announced in 2008 that wage caps would be abandoned to improve the nation's productivity.
In response, between 1960 and 1964 the U.S imposed a range of sanctions, eventually including a total ban on trade between the countries and a freeze on all Cuban-owned assets in the U.S.
In general (with local variations), there is a drier season from November to April, and a rainier season from May to October.
On September 1, 1548, Dr. Gonzalo Perez de Angulo was appointed governor of Cuba.
