In France, offshoots of Cubism developed, including Orphism, Abstract art and later Purism.
The assertion that the Cubist depiction of space, mass, time, and volume supports (rather than contradicts) the flatness of the canvas was made by Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler as early as 1920, but it was subject to criticism in the 1950s and 1960s, especially by Clement Greenberg.
In literature, the written works of Gertrude Stein employ repetition and repetitive phrases as building blocks in both passages and whole chapters.
The Salon Cubists used the faceted treatment of solid and space and effects of multiple viewpoints to convey a physical and psychological sense of the fluidity of consciousness, blurring the distinctions between past, present and future.
There were also parallels in the development of literature and social thought.
Juan Gris, a new addition to the Salon scene, exhibited his ''Portrait of Picasso'' (Art Institute of Chicago), while Metzinger's two showings included ''La Femme au Cheval (Woman with a horse)'' 1911-1912 (National Gallery of Denmark).
The exhibition was reviewed in the October 8, 1911 issue of ''The New York Times''.
Picasso in turn was an important influence on Stein's writing.
One even wonders why the artist has not used cubes of solid matter diversely colored: they would make pretty revetments."
But "this view of Cubism is associated with a distinctly restrictive definition of which artists are properly to be called Cubists," wrote the art historian Christopher Green: "Marginalizing the contribution of the artists who exhibited at the Salon des Indépendants in 1911 ..."
The conjunction of such subject matter with simultaneity aligns Salon Cubism with early Futurist paintings by Umberto Boccioni, Gino Severini and Carlo Carrà; themselves made in response to early Cubism.
Considerations manifested by Cubists prior to the outset of World War I—such as the fourth dimension, dynamism of modern life, the occult, and Henri Bergson's concept of duration—had now been vacated, replaced by a purely formal frame of reference.
English art historian Douglas Cooper proposed another scheme, describing three phases of Cubism in his book, ''The Cubist Epoch''.
:In spite of the crazy nature of the "Cubist" theories the number of those professing them is fairly respectable.
The most innovative period of Cubism was before 1914.
The Impressionists had used a double point of view, and both Les Nabis and the Symbolists (who also admired Cézanne) flattened the picture plane, reducing their subjects to simple geometric forms.
2'', which itself caused a scandal, even amongst the Cubists.
Thus, what had become a revolution in both painting and sculpture was applied as part of "a profound reorientation towards a changed world".
The indignation of the politician Jean Pierre Philippe Lampué made the front page of ''Le Journal'', 5 October 1912.
The controversy spread to the Municipal Council of Paris, leading to a debate in the Chambre des Députés about the use of public funds to provide the venue for such art.
Between 1905 and 1908, a conscious search for a new style caused rapid changes in art across France, Germany, Holland, Italy, and Russia.
There was a distinct difference between Kahnweiler’s Cubists and the Salon Cubists.
The most extreme forms of Cubism were not those practiced by Picasso and Braque, who resisted total abstraction.
The impact of Cubism was far-reaching and wide-ranging.
The Cubo-Futurist ideas of Filippo Tommaso Marinetti influenced attitudes in avant-garde architecture.
Alternative interpretations of Cubism have therefore developed.
"It is by no means clear, in any case," wrote Christopher Green, "to what extent these other Cubists depended on Picasso and Braque for their development of such techniques as faceting, 'passage' and multiple perspective; they could well have arrived at such practices with little knowledge of 'true' Cubism in its early stages, guided above all by their own understanding of Cézanne."
De Stijl was also linked by Gino Severini to Cubist theory through the writings of Albert Gleizes.
The original Cubist architecture is very rare.
Picasso worked in Montmartre until 1912, while Braque and Gris remained there until after the First World War.
Beginning in 1912 Delaunay painted a series of paintings entitled ''Simultaneous Windows'', followed by a series entitled ''Formes Circulaires'', in which he combined planar structures with bright prismatic hues; based on the optical characteristics of juxtaposed colors his departure from reality in the depiction of imagery was quasi-complete.
Francis Picabia exhibited his abstractions ''La Danse à la source'' and ''La Procession, Seville'' (both of 1912).
These positive/negative reversals were ambitiously exploited by Alexander Archipenko in 1912–13, for example in ''Woman Walking''.
In France, however, Cubism experienced a decline beginning in about 1925.
Exhibited, 1912 Salon d'Automne, Paris.jpg|Francis Picabia, 1912, ''La Source'' (''The Spring''), oil on canvas, 249.6 x 249.3&nbsp;cm, Museum of Modern Art, New York
Not only were they the first important patrons of Cubism, Gertrude Stein and her brother Leo were also important influences on Cubism as well.
"Mare's ensembles were accepted as frames for Cubist works because they allowed paintings and sculptures their independence", writes Christopher Green, "creating a play of contrasts, hence the involvement not only of Gleizes and Metzinger themselves, but of Marie Laurencin, the Duchamp brothers (Raymond Duchamp-Villon designed the facade) and Mare's old friends Léger and Roger La Fresnaye".
File:Marcel Duchamp, 1911, La sonate (Sonata), oil on canvas, 145.1 x 113.3 cm, Philadelphia Museum of Art.jpg|Marcel Duchamp, 1911, ''La sonate (Sonata)'', oil on canvas, 145.1 x 113.3&nbsp;cm, Philadelphia Museum of Art
Jacques Villon exhibited seven important and large drypoints, his brother Marcel Duchamp shocked the American public with his painting ''Nude Descending a Staircase, No.
In 1913–14 Léger produced a series entitled ''Contrasts of Forms'', giving a similar stress to color, line and form.
The term Cubism did not come into general usage until 1911, mainly with reference to Metzinger, Gleizes, Delaunay, and Léger.
File:Henri Le Fauconnier, 1910-11, L'Abondance (Abundance), oil on canvas, 191 x 123 cm (75.25 x 48.5 in.
It was an example of ''L'art décoratif'', a home within which Cubist art could be displayed in the comfort and style of modern, bourgeois life.
Cubism as a publicly debated movement became relatively unified and open to definition.
Artists such as Paul Gauguin, Henri Matisse, and Pablo Picasso were intrigued and inspired by the stark power and simplicity of styles of those foreign cultures.
Also labeled an Orphist by Apollinaire, Marcel Duchamp was responsible for another extreme development inspired by Cubism.
The result, not solely a collaboration between its two authors, reflected discussions by the circle of artists who met in Puteaux and Courbevoie.
(Robert Herbert, 1968, p.&nbsp;221)
The terms "analytical" and "synthetic" which subsequently emerged have been widely accepted since the mid-1930s.
The reemergence of Cubism coincided with the appearance from about 1917–24 of a coherent body of theoretical writing by Pierre Reverdy, Maurice Raynal and Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler and, among the artists, by Gris, Léger and Gleizes.
File:Pablo Picasso, 1918, Arlequin au violon (Harlequin with Violin), oil on canvas, 142 x 100.3 cm, The Cleveland Museum of Art, Ohio.jpeg|Pablo Picasso, 1918, ''Arlequin au violon (Harlequin with Violin)'', oil on canvas, 142 x 100.3&nbsp;cm, The Cleveland Museum of Art, Ohio
They were followed by Raymond Duchamp-Villon and then in 1914 by Jacques Lipchitz, Henri Laurens and Ossip Zadkine.
Neo-Impressionist structure and subject matter, most notably to be seen in the works of Georges Seurat (e.g., ''Parade de Cirque'', ''Le Chahut'' and ''Le Cirque''), was another important influence.
Delaunay's monumental ''La Ville de Paris'' (Musée d'art moderne de la Ville de Paris) and Léger's ''La Noce, The Wedding'' (Musée National d'Art Moderne, Paris) were also exhibited.
Cubist sculpture developed in parallel to Cubist painting.
Amongst the Cubist works presented, Robert Delaunay exhibited his ''Eiffel Tower, Tour Eiffel'' (Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York).
Both Duchamp in 1912 and Picabia from 1912 to 1914 developed an expressive and allusive abstraction dedicated to complex emotional and sexual themes.
Most of Stein's important works utilize this technique, including the novel ''The Making of Americans'' (1906–08).
As American poet Kenneth Rexroth explains, Cubism in poetry "is the conscious, deliberate dissociation and recombination of elements into a new artistic entity made self-sufficient by its rigorous architecture.
In one scheme, the first phase of Cubism, known as ''Analytic Cubism'', a phrase coined by Juan Gris a posteriori, was both radical and influential as a short but highly significant art movement between 1910 and 1912 in France.
Spectators at the Salon d'Automne passed through the full-scale 10-by-3-meter plaster model of the ground floor of the facade, designed by Duchamp-Villon.
The first public controversy generated by Cubism resulted from Salon showings at the Indépendants during the spring of 1911.
Apollinaire had been closely involved with Picasso beginning in 1905, and Braque beginning in 1907, but gave as much attention to artists such as Metzinger, Gleizes, Delaunay, Picabia, and Duchamp.
Over 200 works were displayed, and the fact that many of the artists showed artworks representative of their development from 1909 to 1912 gave the exhibition the allure of a Cubist retrospective.
Picasso's paintings of 1907 have been characterized as Protocubism, as notably seen in ''Les Demoiselles d'Avignon'', the antecedent of Cubism.
Private collection.jpg|Albert Gleizes, 1920, ''Femme au gant noir (Woman with Black Glove)'', oil on canvas, 126 x 100&nbsp;cm, National Gallery of Australia
They represented all the surfaces of depicted objects in a single picture plane, as if the objects had all their faces visible at the same time.
Georges Braque's 1908 ''Houses at L’Estaque'' (and related works) prompted the critic Louis Vauxcelles to refer to ''bizarreries cubiques'' (cubic oddities).
The movement was pioneered by Georges Braque and Pablo Picasso, joined by Andre Lhote, Jean Metzinger, Albert Gleizes, Robert Delaunay, Henri Le Fauconnier, Fernand Léger and Juan Gris.
It was against this background of public anger that Jean Metzinger and Albert Gleizes wrote ''Du "Cubisme"'' (published by Eugène Figuière in 1912, translated to English and Russian in 1913).
Cubism has been considered the most influential art movement of the 20th century.
This article was published a year after Gelett Burgess' ''The Wild Men of Paris'', and two years prior to the Armory Show, which introduced astonished Americans, accustomed to realistic art, to the experimental styles of the European avant garde, including Fauvism, Cubism, and Futurism.
2'', oil on canvas, 146 x 114&nbsp;cm, Musée National d'Art Moderne, Paris
Both terms are historical impositions that occurred after the facts they identify.
Czech Cubist architects also designed Cubist furniture.
File:Francis Picabia, 1912, La Source, The Spring, oil on canvas, 249.6 x 249.3 cm, Museum of Modern Art, New York.
In addition to Seurat, the roots of cubism are to be found in the two distinct tendencies of Cézanne's later work: first his breaking of the painted surface into small multifaceted areas of paint, thereby emphasizing the plural viewpoint given by binocular vision, and second his interest in the simplification of natural forms into cylinders, spheres, and cones.
), Gemeentemuseum Den Haag.jpeg|Henri Le Fauconnier, 1910–11, ''L'Abondance (Abundance)'', oil on canvas, 191 x 123&nbsp;cm, Gemeentemuseum Den Haag
In ''Du "Cubisme"'' Metzinger and Gleizes explicitly related the sense of time to multiple perspective, giving symbolic expression to the notion of ‘duration’ proposed by the philosopher Henri Bergson according to which life is subjectively experienced as a continuum, with the past flowing into the present and the present merging into the future.
A significant modification of Cubism between 1914 and 1916 was signaled by a shift towards a strong emphasis on large overlapping geometric planes and flat surface activity.
Have those responsible for them taken leave of their senses?
2, oil on canvas, 146 x 114 cm, Musée National d'Art Moderne, Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris.jpg|Robert Delaunay, 1910–11, ''La ville no.
14, April 2, 1917.jpg|Albert Gleizes (with ''Chal Post'', 1915); Marcel Duchamp (with his brother Jacques Villon's ''Portrait de M. J.
At the Salon d'Automne of the same year, in addition to the Indépendants group of ''Salle 41'', were exhibited works by André Lhote, Marcel Duchamp, Jacques Villon, Roger de La Fresnaye, André Dunoyer de Segonzac and František Kupka.
Neither phase was designated as such at the time corresponding works were created.
Historians have divided the history of Cubism into phases.
However, the word "cube" was used in 1906 by another critic, Louis Chassevent, with reference not to Picasso or Braque but rather to Metzinger and Delaunay:
During the autumn of 1909 Picasso sculpted ''Head of a Woman (Fernande)'' with positive features depicted by negative space and vice versa.
Decorative work, to them, was the "antithesis of the picture".
The ''Section d'Or'', also known as ''Groupe de Puteaux'', founded by some of the most conspicuous Cubists, was a collective of painters, sculptors and critics associated with Cubism and Orphism, active from 1911 through about 1914, coming to prominence in the wake of their controversial showing at the 1911 Salon des Indépendants.
The concept developed in ''Du "Cubisme"'' of observing a subject from different points in space and time simultaneously, i.e., the act of moving around an object to seize it from several successive angles fused into a single image (multiple viewpoints, mobile perspective, simultaneity or multiplicity), is a generally recognized device used by the Cubists.
Other Cubists, by contrast, especially František Kupka, and those considered Orphists by Apollinaire (Delaunay, Léger, Picabia and Duchamp), accepted abstraction by removing visible subject matter entirely.
File:Portrait of Josette 1916 Juan Gris.jpg|Juan Gris, October 1916, ''Portrait of Josette'', oil on canvas, 116 x 73&nbsp;cm, Museo Reina Sofia, Madrid
In Cubist artwork, objects are analyzed, broken up and reassembled in an abstracted form—instead of depicting objects from a single viewpoint, the artist depicts the subject from a multitude of viewpoints to represent the subject in a greater context.
The group's title was suggested by Villon, after reading a 1910 translation of Leonardo da Vinci's ''Trattato della Pittura'' by Joséphin Péladan.
The history of the term "Cubism" usually stresses the fact that Matisse referred to "cubes" in connection with a painting by Braque in 1908, and that the term was published twice by the critic Louis Vauxcelles in a similar context.
During the late 19th and early 20th centuries, Europeans were discovering African, Polynesian, Micronesian and Native American art.
Indeed, Cubist construction was as influential as any pictorial Cubist innovation.
The term is broadly used in association with a wide variety of art produced in Paris (Montmartre, Montparnasse and Puteaux) during the 1910s and extending through the 1920s.
Exhibited at the 1913 Armory Show
In their theoretical rules, the Cubist architects expressed the requirement of dynamism, which would surmount the matter and calm contained in it, through a creative idea, so that the result would evoke feelings of dynamism and expressive plasticity in the viewer.
Diverse elements could be superimposed, made transparent or penetrate one another, while retaining their spatial relationships.
This is quite different from the free association of the Surrealists and the combination of unconscious utterance and political nihilism of Dada."
Cubism had become an influential factor in the development of modern architecture from 1912 (''La Maison Cubiste'', by Raymond Duchamp-Villon and André Mare) onwards, developing in parallel with architects such as Peter Behrens and Walter Gropius, with the simplification of building design, the use of materials appropriate to industrial production, and the increased use of glass.
In the Armory show Pablo Picasso exhibited ''La Femme au pot de moutarde'' (1910), the sculpture ''Head of a Woman (Fernande)'' (1909–10), ''Les Arbres'' (1907) amongst other cubist works.
Cubism formed an important link between early-20th-century art and architecture.
Laurens designed the fountain, Csaky designed Doucet's staircase, Lipchitz made the fireplace mantel, and Marcoussis made a Cubist rug.
They became friendly rivals and competed with each other throughout their careers, perhaps leading to Picasso entering a new period in his work by 1907, marked by the influence of Greek, Iberian and African art.
Apollinaire supported these early developments of abstract Cubism in ''Les Peintres cubistes'' (1913), writing of a new "pure" painting in which the subject was vacated.
The best-known Cubist building is the House of the Black Madonna in the Old Town of Prague built in 1912 by Josef Gočár with the only Cubist café in the world, Grand Café Orient.
There is only one country in the world where Cubism was really applied to architecture – namely Bohemia (today Czech Republic) and especially its capital, Prague.
Louis Vauxcelles, in his review of the 26th Salon des Indépendants (1910), made a passing and imprecise reference to Metzinger, Gleizes, Delaunay, Léger and Le Fauconnier as "ignorant geometers, reducing the human body, the site, to pallid cubes."
File:Jean Metzinger, 1912-1913, L'Oiseau bleu, (The Blue Bird) oil on canvas, 230 x 196 cm, Musée d'Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris..jpg|Jean Metzinger, 1912-1913, ''L'Oiseau bleu (The Blue Bird)'', oil on canvas, 230 x 196&nbsp;cm, Musée d'Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris.
The group seems to have adopted the name Section d'Or to distinguish themselves from the narrower definition of Cubism developed in parallel by Pablo Picasso and Georges Braque in the Montmartre quarter of Paris, and to show that Cubism, rather than being an isolated art-form, represented the continuation of a grand tradition (indeed, the golden ratio had fascinated Western intellectuals of diverse interests for at least 2,400 years).
The occasional return to classicism—figurative work either exclusively or alongside Cubist work—experienced by many artists during this period (called Neoclassicism) has been linked to the tendency to evade the realities of the war and also to the cultural dominance of a classical or Latin image of France during and immediately following the war.
Kupka’s two entries at the 1912 Salon d'Automne, ''Amorpha-Fugue à deux couleurs'' and ''Amorpha chromatique chaude'', were highly abstract (or nonrepresentational) and metaphysical in orientation.
It does not harmonize with this or that ensemble; it harmonizes with things in general, with the universe: it is an organism...".
In 1913 he attached a bicycle wheel to a kitchen stool and in 1914 selected a bottle-drying rack as a sculpture in its own right.
Early Futurist paintings hold in common with Cubism the fusing of the past and the present, the representation of different views of the subject pictured at the same time, also called multiple perspective, simultaneity or multiplicity, while Constructivism was influenced by Picasso's technique of constructing sculpture from separate elements.
After the war, the architectural style called ''Rondo-Cubism'' was developed in Prague fusing the Cubist architecture with round shapes.
Crystal Cubism, and its associative ''rappel à l’ordre'', has been linked with an inclination—by those who served the armed forces and by those who remained in the civilian sector—to escape the realities of the Great War, both during and directly following the conflict.
Several years after World War I, in 1927, Cubists Joseph Csaky, Jacques Lipchitz, Louis Marcoussis, Henri Laurens, the sculptor Gustave Miklos, and others collaborated in the decoration of a Studio House, rue Saint-James, Neuilly-sur-Seine, designed by the architect Paul Ruaud and owned by the French fashion designer Jacques Doucet, also a collector of Post-Impressionist and Cubist paintings (including ''Les Demoiselles d'Avignon'', which he bought directly from Picasso's studio).
This showing by Metzinger, Gleizes, Delaunay, le Fauconnier and Léger brought Cubism to the attention of the general public for the first time.
Contemporary views of Cubism are complex, formed to some extent in response to the "Salle 41" Cubists, whose methods were too distinct from those of Picasso and Braque to be considered merely secondary to them.
Essentially independent, necessarily complete, it need not immediately satisfy the mind: on the contrary, it should lead it, little by little, towards the fictitious depths in which the coordinative light resides.
It was in fact rejected by the hanging committee, which included his brothers and other Cubists.
Léonce Rosenberg exhibited not only the artists stranded by Kahnweiler’s exile but others including Laurens, Lipchitz, Metzinger, Gleizes, Csaky, Herbin and Severini.
Yet, Cubism itself remained evolutionary both within the oeuvre of individual artists, such as Gris and Metzinger, and across the work of artists as different from each other as Braque, Léger and Gleizes.
Together with other young artists, the group wanted to emphasise a research into form, in opposition to the Neo-Impressionist emphasis on color.
Prior to 1914, Picasso, Braque, Gris and Léger (to a lesser extent) gained the support of a single committed art dealer in Paris, Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler, who guaranteed them an annual income for the exclusive right to buy their works.
File:Fernand Léger, 1911-1912, Les Fumeurs (The Smokers), oil on canvas, 129.2 x 96.5 cm, Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York..jpg|Fernand Léger, 1911-1912, ''Les Fumeurs (The Smokers)'', oil on canvas, 129.2 x 96.5&nbsp;cm, Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York
Aimed at a large public, these works stressed the use of multiple perspective and complex planar faceting for expressive effect while preserving the eloquence of subjects endowed with literary and philosophical connotations.
Most often the connections are made by reference to shared formal characteristics: faceting of form, spatial ambiguity, transparency, and multiplicity.
The first organized group exhibition by Cubists took place at the Salon des Indépendants in Paris during the spring of 1911 in a room called 'Salle 41'; it included works by Jean Metzinger, Albert Gleizes, Fernand Léger, Robert Delaunay and Henri Le Fauconnier, yet no works by Picasso or Braque were exhibited.
In essence, Cubism was the origin of an evolutionary process that produced diversity; it was the antecedent of diverse art movements.
According to Daniel Robbins, "To suggest that merely because these artists developed differently or varied from the traditional pattern they deserved to be relegated to a secondary or satellite role in Cubism is a profound mistake."
The art historian Douglas Cooper states that Paul Gauguin and Paul Cézanne "were particularly influential to the formation of Cubism and especially important to the paintings of Picasso during 1906 and 1907".
File:Jean Metzinger, 1916, Femme au miroir (Femme à sa toilette, Lady at her Dressing Table), oil on canvas, 92.4 x 65.1 cm, private collection.jpg|Jean Metzinger, April 1916, ''Femme au miroir (Femme à sa toilette, Lady at her Dressing Table)'', oil on canvas, 92.4 x 65.1&nbsp;cm, private collection
Between 1918 and 1922, Le Corbusier concentrated his efforts on Purist theory and painting.
The Cubist contribution to the 1912 Salon d'Automne created scandal regarding the use of government owned buildings, such as the Grand Palais, to exhibit such artwork.
Albert Gleizes exhibited ''La Femme aux phlox'' (1910) and ''L'Homme au balcon'' (1912), two highly stylized and faceted cubist works.
After World War I, with the support given by the dealer Léonce Rosenberg, Cubism returned as a central issue for artists, and continued as such until the mid-1920s when its avant-garde status was rendered questionable by the emergence of geometric abstraction and Surrealism in Paris.
The Cubists were defended by the Socialist deputy, Marcel Sembat.
Cubist architecture flourished for the most part between 1910–1914, but the Cubist or Cubism-influenced buildings were also built after the World War I.
In the field of American fiction, William Faulkner's 1930 novel ''As I Lay Dying'' can be read as an interaction with the cubist mode.
The next logical step, for Duchamp, was to present an ordinary object as a self-sufficient work of art representing only itself.
A second phase, ''Synthetic Cubism'', remained vital until around 1919, when the Surrealist movement gained popularity.
They were inevitably more aware of public response and the need to communicate.
Cooper goes on to say: "The ''Demoiselles'' is generally referred to as the first Cubist picture.
Nevertheless, the ''Demoiselles'' is the logical picture to take as the starting point for Cubism, because it marks the birth of a new pictorial idiom, because in it Picasso violently overturned established conventions and because all that followed grew out of it."
A primary influence that led to Cubism was the representation of three-dimensional form in the late works of Paul Cézanne.
Around 1906, Picasso met Matisse through Gertrude Stein, at a time when both artists had recently acquired an interest in primitivism, Iberian sculpture, African art and African tribal masks.
'''Cubism''' is an early-20th-century avant-garde art movement that revolutionized European painting and sculpture, and inspired related movements in music, literature and architecture.
The 1911 ''New York Times'' article portrayed works by Picasso, Matisse, Derain, Metzinger and others dated before 1909; not exhibited at the 1911 Salon.
At the 1912 Salon d'Automne an architectural installation was exhibited that quickly became known as ''Maison Cubiste'' (Cubist House), signed Raymond Duchamp-Villon and André Mare along with a group of collaborators.
14, April 2, 1917, p.&nbsp;14
Many Cubists, including Picasso, Braque, Gris, Léger, Gleizes, and Metzinger, while developing other styles, returned periodically to Cubism, even well after 1925.
According to Cooper there was "Early Cubism", (from 1906 to 1908) when the movement was initially developed in the studios of Picasso and Braque; the second phase being called "High Cubism", (from 1909 to 1914) during which time Juan Gris emerged as an important exponent (after 1911); and finally Cooper referred to "Late Cubism" (from 1914 to 1921) as the last phase of Cubism as a radical avant-garde movement.
The influence of cubism extended to other artistic fields, outside painting and sculpture.
Gertrude Stein referred to landscapes made by Picasso in 1909, such as ''Reservoir at Horta de Ebro'', as the first Cubist paintings.
Douglas Cooper's restrictive use of these terms to distinguish the work of Braque, Picasso, Gris (from 1911) and Léger (to a lesser extent) implied an intentional value judgement.
The 1912 manifetso ''Du "Cubisme"'' by Metzinger and Gleizes was followed in 1913 by ''Les Peintres Cubistes'', a collection of reflections and commentaries by Guillaume Apollinaire.
His theoretical studies soon advanced into many different architectural projects.
The poets generally associated with Cubism are Guillaume Apollinaire, Blaise Cendrars, Jean Cocteau, Max Jacob, André Salmon and Pierre Reverdy.
One of the major theoretical innovations made by the Salon Cubists, independently of Picasso and Braque, was that of ''simultaneity'', drawing to greater or lesser extent on theories of Henri Poincaré, Ernst Mach, Charles Henry, Maurice Princet, and Henri Bergson.
His support gave his artists the freedom to experiment in relative privacy.
The most serious objection to regarding the ''Demoiselles'' as the origin of Cubism, with its evident influence of primitive art, is that "such deductions are unhistorical", wrote the art historian Daniel Robbins.
:"Among all the paintings on exhibition at the Paris Fall Salon none is attracting so much attention as the extraordinary productions of the so-called "Cubist" school.
The subsequent 1912 Salon des Indépendants was marked by the presentation of Marcel Duchamp's ''Nude Descending a Staircase, No.
File:Albert Gleizes, 1912-13, Les Joueurs de football (Football Players), oil on canvas, 225.4 x 183 cm, National Gallery of Art.jpg|Albert Gleizes, 1912–13, ''Les Joueurs de football (Football Players)'', oil on canvas, 225.4 x 183&nbsp;cm, National Gallery of Art, Washington D.C.
Exhibited at the Salon des Indépendants, 1913
"The metaphorical model of Cubism is the diagram: The diagram being a visible symbolic representation of invisible processes, forces, structures.
A diagram need not eschew certain aspects of appearance but these too will be treated as signs not as imitations or recreations."
However, the cubists explored this concept further than Cézanne.
The Cubism of Picasso, Braque and Gris had more than a technical or formal significance, and the distinct attitudes and intentions of the Salon Cubists produced different kinds of Cubism, rather than a derivative of their work.
Among the works exhibited were Le Fauconnier's vast composition ''Les Montagnards attaqués par des ours (Mountaineers Attacked by Bears)'' now at Rhode Island School of Design Museum, Joseph Csaky's ''Deux Femme, Two Women'' (a sculpture now lost), in addition to the highly abstract paintings by Kupka, ''Amorpha'' (The National Gallery, Prague), and Picabia, ''La Source, The Spring'' (Museum of Modern Art, New York).
Léger’s ''The Wedding'', also shown at the Salon des Indépendants in 1912, gave form to the notion of simultaneity by presenting different motifs as occurring within a single temporal frame, where responses to the past and present interpenetrate with collective force.
Nonetheless, the Cubist poets' influence on both Cubism and the later movements of Dada and Surrealism was profound; Louis Aragon, founding member of Surrealism, said that for Breton, Soupault, Éluard and himself, Reverdy was "our immediate elder, the exemplary poet."
These ambitious works are some of the largest paintings in the history of Cubism.
:What do they mean?
File:Jacques Villon, 1912, Girl at the Piano, oil on canvas, 129.2 x 96.4 cm, Museum of Modern Art, New York...jpg|Jacques Villon, 1912, ''Girl at the Piano (Fillette au piano)'', oil on canvas, 129.2 x 96.4&nbsp;cm, oval, Museum of Modern Art, New York.
File:Fernand Léger, 1912-13, Nude Model in the Studio (Le modèle nu dans l'atelier), oil on burlap, 128.6 x 95.9 cm, Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York, Solomon R. Guggenheim.jpg|Fernand Léger, 1912–13, ''Nude Model in the Studio (Le modèle nu dans l'atelier)'', oil on burlap, 128.6 x 95.9&nbsp;cm, Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York
The tightening of the compositions, the clarity and sense of order reflected in these works, led to its being referred to by the critic Maurice Raynal as 'crystal' Cubism.
The fact that the 1912 exhibition had been curated to show the successive stages through which Cubism had transited, and that ''Du "Cubisme"'' had been published for the occasion, indicates the artists' intention of making their work comprehensible to a wide audience (art critics, art collectors, art dealers and the general public).
It is difficult to apply to painters such as Jean Metzinger, Albert Gleizes, Robert Delaunay and Henri Le Fauconnier, whose fundamental differences from traditional Cubism compelled Kahnweiler to question their right to be called Cubists at all.
The influential De Stijl movement embraced the aesthetic principles of Neo-plasticism developed by Piet Mondrian under the influence of Cubism in Paris.
Other common threads between these disparate movements include the faceting or simplification of geometric forms, and the association of mechanization and modern life.
Cubism spread rapidly across the globe and in doing so evolved to a greater or lesser extent.
Joseph Csaky, after Archipenko, was the first sculptor in Paris to join the Cubists, with whom he exhibited from 1911 onwards.
Thus, new forms of windows and doors were also created, e. g. hexagonal windows.
The works exhibited by these Cubists at the 1911 and 1912 Salons extended beyond the conventional Cézanne-like subjects—the posed model, still-life and landscape—favored by Picasso and Braque to include large-scale modern-life subjects.
This should be achieved by shapes derived from pyramids, cubes and prisms, by arrangements and compositions of oblique surfaces, mainly triangular, sculpted facades in protruding crystal-like units, reminiscent of the so-called diamond cut, or even cavernous that are reminiscent of the late Gothic architecture.
These soirées often included writers such as Guillaume Apollinaire and André Salmon.
Is it art or madness?
The historical study of Cubism began in the late 1920s, drawing at first from sources of limited data, namely the opinions of Guillaume Apollinaire.
Cubism was relevant to an architecture seeking a style that needed not refer to the past.
The critical use of the word "cube" goes back at least to May 1901 when Jean Béral, reviewing the work of Henri-Edmond Cross at the Indépendants in ''Art et Littérature'', commented that he "uses a large and square pointillism, giving the impression of mosaic.
It came to rely heavily on Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler's book ''Der Weg zum Kubismus'' (published in 1920), which centered on the developments of Picasso, Braque, Léger, and Gris.
In 1918 Rosenberg presented a series of Cubist exhibitions at his Galerie de l’Effort Moderne in Paris.
Cubism reemerged during the 1920s and the 1930s in the work of the American Stuart Davis and the Englishman Ben Nicholson.
