Mao believed that Khrushchev was not adhering to Marxism–Leninism, but was instead a revisionist, altering his policies from basic Marxist–Leninist concepts, something Mao feared would allow capitalists to eventually regain control of the country.
Although Hua Guofeng publicly denounced the Gang of Four in 1976, he continued to invoke Mao's name to justify Mao-era policies.
This marked Deng's second purge in ten years.
Starting in 1967, eight Model Dramas (6 operas and 2 ballets) were produced in the first three years, and the most notable of the operas was ''The Legend of the Red Lantern''.
In July, senior Party leaders convened at the scenic Mount Lu to discuss policy.
The ideology that drove these factions was vague and sometimes non-existent, with the struggle for local authority being the only motivation for mass involvement.
Liu was "forever expelled" from the Communist Party at the 12th Plenum of the Eighth Central Committee in September 1968, and labelled the "headquarters of the bourgeoisie", seemingly alluding to Mao's ''Bombard the Headquarters'' ''dazibao'' written two years earlier.
Mao personally mingled with Red Guards and threw his weight behind their cause, donning a Red Guard armband himself.
MacFarquhar and Schoenhals, writing in ''Mao's Last Revolution'', paint the movement as neither a ''bona fide'' war over ideological purity ''nor'' a mere power struggle to remove Mao's political rivals.
350&nbsp;million copies of the book had been printed by December 1967.
While the party leadership was relatively united in approving the general direction of Mao's agenda, many Politburo members were not especially enthusiastic, or simply confused about the direction of the movement.
It also separated Mao's personal mistakes from the correctness of the theory that he created, going as far as to rationalize that the Cultural Revolution contravened the spirit of Mao Zedong Thought, which remains an official guiding ideology of the Party.
Millions of people in China were violently persecuted during the Cultural Revolution.
On September 13, the Politburo met in an emergency session to discuss Lin Biao.
Writers, artists and intellectuals who were the recipients and disseminators of the "old culture" would be comprehensively eradicated.
Foreign Minister Chen Yi and Vice-Premier Tan Zhenlin vocally denounced the turn of events in Shanghai, stating that the movement was going to destroy the party.
The consensus within the Politburo was that Mao should assume the office with Lin becoming Vice-Chairman; but for unknown reasons, Mao had voiced his explicit opposition to the recreation of the position and his assuming it.
She allied herself with Wang Hongwen and propaganda specialists Zhang Chunqiao and Yao Wenyuan, forming a political clique later pejoratively dubbed as the "Gang of Four".
The groups violently fought over the control of the city.
For example, the slogan "to rebel is justified" (造反有理, zàofǎn yǒulǐ) became a unitary theme.
The people of Beijing honored Zhou by laying wreaths, banners, poems, placards, and flowers at the foot of the Monument.
In April, at Mao's behest, Jiang Qing attempted to rein in Red Guard groups by issuing an order to stop all "unhealthy activity."
Zhao Ziyang, who was sympathetic to the protestors, later accused his political opponents of illegally removing him from office by using "Cultural Revolution-style" tactics, including "reversing black and white, exaggerating personal offenses, taking quotes out of context, issuing slander and lies... innundating the newspapers with critical articles making me out to be an enemy, and casual disregard for my personal freedoms."
Many local governments followed Shanghai's example, with red guards or other revolutionary groups "seizing power" from the established party and government organs.
Some are still trusted by us and are being trained as our successors, persons like Khruschev for example, who are still nestling beside us.
With army backing and the support of Marshal Ye Jianying, on October 10, the Special Unit 8341 had all members of the Gang of Four arrested in a bloodless coup.
The revolution aimed to destroy the "Four Olds" (old customs, old culture, old habits, and old ideas) and establish the corresponding "Four News", and this can ranged from changing of names and cutting of hair, to the ransacking of homes, vandalizing cultural treasures, and desecrating temples.
Initially verbal struggles among activist groups became even more violent, especially when activists began to seize weapons from the Army in 1967.
They range upwards to several millions, but an estimate of around 400,000 deaths is a widely accepted minimum figure.
The artists for these posters may be amateurs or uncredited professionals, and the posters were largely in a Socialist Realist visual style with certain conventions – for example, images of Mao should be depicted as "red, smooth, and luminescent".
Amidst the tension, Lin Biao issued what appeared to be an executive order to prepare for war to the PLA's eleven Military Regions on October 18 without passing through Mao.
The Central Committee kept information under wraps, and news of Lin's death was not released to the public until two months following the incident.
It is disputed whether Lin Biao was involved in this process.
In August, the Party's Eleventh Congress was held in Beijing, officially naming (in ranking order) Hua Guofeng, Ye Jianying, Deng Xiaoping, Li Xiannian, and Wang Dongxing as new members of the Politburo Standing Committee.
Many monks and nuns were killed, and the general population were subjected to physical and psychological torture.
Chinese traditional arts and ideas were ignored and publicly attacked, with praise for Mao being practiced in their place.
Uneducated farmers attempted to produce steel on a massive scale, partially relying on backyard furnaces to achieve the production targets set by local cadres.
These include China's relationship with the global Communist movement, geopolitical concerns, the ideological rift between China and the Soviet Union, Khrushchev's ouster, and the failures of the Great Leap Forward.
Nevertheless, the most prominent symbol of academic research in archaeology, the journal ''Kaogu'', did not publish during the Cultural Revolution.
Sinologists Lowell Dittmer and Chen Ruoxi point out that the Chinese language had historically been defined by subtlety, delicacy, moderation, and honesty, as well as the "cultivation of a refined and elegant literary style".
Historian Anne F. Thurston wrote that it "led to loss of culture, and of spiritual values; loss of hope and ideals; loss of time, truth and of life".
Leaving the country in grinding poverty would do no favours to the positive legacy of the Cultural Revolution, which Mao worked hard to protect.
For example, the upheavals of the Cultural Revolution and the hostility to the intellectual elite is widely accepted to have damaged the quality of education in China, especially at the upper end of education system.
The "commercial" propaganda posters were artworks produced by the government and sold cheaply in store to be displayed in homes.
The attacks on Zhang found favour with many attendees at the Plenum, and may have been construed by Mao as an indirect attack on the Cultural Revolution itself.
The most obvious purpose of this memorial was to eulogize Zhou, but the Gang of Four were also attacked for their actions against the Premier.
Liu and Deng kept their seats on the Politburo Standing Committee but were in fact sidelined from day-to-day party affairs.
Instead of dying, he became paraplegic.
After seeking Mao's guidance in Hangzhou, Liu Shaoqi and Deng Xiaoping decided to send in "work teams" (工作组) – effectively 'ideological-guidance' squads of cadres – to the city's schools and ''People's Daily'' to restore some semblance of order and re-establish party control.
Textbooks on the subject continue to abide by the "official view" (see above) of the events.
The leaders of China at the time denied that there were any illiteracy problems from the start.
On February 12, 1966, the "Five Man Group" issued a report known as the ''February Outline'' ().
As a result, the work teams came under increasing suspicion for being yet another group aimed at thwarting revolutionary fervour.
The event did not appear to have coordinated leadership but rather seemed to be a reflection of public sentiment.
Much like the post-Great Leap restructuring led by Liu Shaoqi, Deng streamlined the railway system, steel production, and other key areas of the economy.
The proletariat must do just the opposite: It must meet head-on every challenge of the bourgeoisie ... to change the outlook of society.
At the plenum, Mao showed outright disdain for Liu, repeatedly interrupting Liu as he delivered his opening day speech.
Following the Cultural Revolution, a new genre of literature known as "Scar literature" (''Shanghen Wenxue'') emerged, being encouraged by the post-Mao government.
Zheng was criticized in China for reliance on unpublished interviews and for negative portrayal of a Chinese ethnic minority,  although senior party historians corroborated allegations of cannibalism.
The Resolution frankly noted Mao's leadership role in the movement, stating that "chief responsibility for the grave 'Left' error of the 'Cultural Revolution,' an error comprehensive in magnitude and protracted in duration, does indeed lie with Comrade Mao Zedong."
The prospect of war elevated the PLA to greater prominence in domestic politics, increasing the stature of Lin Biao at the expense of Mao.
Classes were promptly cancelled in Beijing primary and secondary schools, followed by a decision on June 13 to expand the class suspension nationwide.
Although being undertaken by some of the Revolution's enthusiastic followers, the destruction of historical relics was never formally sanctioned by the Communist Party, whose official policy was instead to protect such items.
Although no names were mentioned, this provocative statement by Mao has been interpreted as a direct indictment of the party establishment under Liu Shaoqi and Deng Xiaoping – the purported "bourgeois headquarters" of China.
Only on September 30 was Lin's death confirmed in Beijing, which led to the cancellation of the National Day celebration events the following day.
On January 8, 1976, Zhou Enlai died of bladder cancer.
In May 1966, an "expanded session" of the Politburo was called in Beijing.
Following this article, Hua began to shift his tone in support of Deng.
One internal report alleged that Lin had planned to bomb a bridge that Mao was to cross to reach Beijing; Mao reportedly avoided this bridge after receiving intelligence reports.
Some changes associated with the "Four Olds" campaign were largely benign, such as assigning new names to city streets, places, and even people; millions of babies were born with "revolutionary"-sounding names during this period.
The damage was particularly pronounced in the capital, Beijing, a city rich in history and full of cultural relics, where thousands of designated sites of historical interest were destroyed.
This drew the ire of the Chairman, who saw it as evidence that his authority was prematurely usurped by his declared successor.
On July 22, Jiang Qing directed the Red Guards to replace the People's Liberation Army if necessary, as the loyalty of local Army units to the "revolutionary cause" was no longer assured.
The factory worker was eventually sentenced to ten years in prison, where he died soon after "without any apparent cause."
Those in the police force who defied this notice were labeled "counter-revolutionaries."
For several days, Mao repeatedly insinuated that the Party's leadership had contravened his revolutionary vision.
They acted through the media to impose a set of restrictions on overt public displays of mourning for Zhou.
The effects of the Cultural Revolution directly or indirectly touched essentially all of China's population.
In the course of about two weeks, the violence left some one hundred teachers, school officials, and educated cadres dead in Beijing's western district alone.
The Cultural Revolution wreaked much havoc on minority cultures in China.
The focus of the Chinese government on maintaining political and social stability has been a top priority since the Tiananmen crackdown on reformers on June 4, 1989, and the current government has no interest in re-evaluating any issue that might lead to a split in the Chinese leadership, or which might polarize the Party on ideological grounds.
In the central city of Wuhan, like in many other cities, two major revolutionary organizations emerged, one supporting the establishment and the other opposed to it.
Without pointing fingers at the Soviet Union, Mao criticized their ideological ally, the League of Communists of Yugoslavia, while the Soviets returned the favour by proxy via criticizing the Party of Labour of Albania, a Chinese ally.
Liu Shaoqi insisted on continuing work-team involvement and suppressing the movement's most radical elements, fearing that the movement would spin out of control.
It became increasingly clear to Hua that, without Deng Xiaoping, it was difficult to continue daily affairs of state.
Public security in China deteriorated rapidly as a result of central officials lifting restraints on violent behavior.
Revolution-themed songs instead were promoted, and songs such as "Ode to the Motherland", "Sailing the Seas Depends on the Helmsman", "The East Is Red" and "Without the Communist Party, There Would Be No New China" were either written or became extremely popular during this period.
Similar incidents occurred in other major cities.
Mao promptly endorsed Nie's ''dazibao'' as "the first Marxist big-character poster in China."
After the communist takeover in China, much of the popular music from Shanghai was condemned as Yellow Music and banned, and during the Cultural Revolution, composers of such popular music such as Li Jinhui were persecuted.
The party leadership subsequently became divided over whether or not work teams should remain in place.
It elevated what was previously a student movement to a nationwide mass campaign that would galvanize workers, farmers, soldiers and lower-level party functionaries to rise up, challenge authority, and re-shape the "superstructure" of society.
Lin's speeches, heavy on rhetoric but light on details, did not specify what needed to be "destroyed" as part of this campaign.
Red Guards also laid siege to the Temple of Confucius in Qufu, Shandong province.
Yang's dismissal likely emboldened Mao's allies to move against their factional rivals.
At least hundreds of thousands of people were murdered, starved, or worked to death.
Following the Conference, Mao had Peng removed from his posts, and accused him of being a "right-opportunist".
The Chinese government continues to prohibit news organizations from mentioning details of the Cultural Revolution, and online discussions and books about the topic are subject to official scrutiny.
This text, which became known as the "May 16 Notification" (), summarized Mao's ideological justification for the Cultural Revolution.
Artifacts were seized, museums and private homes ransacked, and any item found that was thought to represent bourgeois or feudal ideas was destroyed.
Zhou said that the artworks were for meant for foreigners, therefore were "outer" art not be under the obligations and restrictions placed on "inner" art meant for Chinese citizens.
This effect was amplified by the elimination of qualified teachers—many districts were forced to rely on selected students to educate the next generation.
These directives could be interpreted to suit personal interests, in turn aiding factions' goals in being most loyal to Mao Zedong.
The entire generation of tormented and inadequately educated individuals is often referred to in the West as well as in China as the 'lost generation'.
Some farmers were given informal medical training, and health-care centers were established in rural communities.
People were encouraged to criticize cultural institutions and to question their parents and teachers, which had been strictly forbidden in traditional Chinese culture.
After Mao's death and the arrest of the Gang of Four in 1976, reformers led by Deng Xiaoping gradually began to dismantle the Maoist policies associated with the Cultural Revolution.
The world belongs to you.
She held tremendous influence with the radical camp.
Official attempts to enforce the mourning restrictions included removing public memorials and tearing down posters commemorating Zhou's achievements.
For instance, in 1985, a young shoe-factory worker put up a poster on a factory wall in Xianyang, Shaanxi, which declared that "The Cultural Revolution was Good" and led to achievements such as "the building of the Nanjing Yangtze River Bridge, the creation of hybrid rice crops and the rise of people's consciousness."
According to ''Mao: The Unknown Story'', an estimated 100,000 people died in one of the worst factional struggles in Guangxi in January–April 1968, before Premier Zhou sent the PLA to intervene.
While the Lushan Conference served as a death knell for Peng, Mao's most vocal critic, it led to a shift of power to moderates led by Liu Shaoqi and Deng Xiaoping, who took effective control of the economy following 1959.
Sinologist Gang Yue questioned how "systematic" the cannibalism could have been, given the inherent factionalism of the Cultural Revolution.
One of the most famous cases of attempted suicide due to political persecution involved Deng Xiaoping's son, Deng Pufang, who jumped (or was thrown) from a four-story building after being "interrogated" by Red Guards.
However, the Gang's radical ideas also clashed with influential elders and a large segment of party reformers.
In addition, Mao had also lost confidence in the ability of the Gang of Four to manage the economy and saw Deng as a competent and effective leader.
Mao wanted to use Deng as a counterweight to the military faction in government to suppress any remaining influence of those formerly loyal to Lin Biao.
In ''Mao's Last Revolution'' (2006), MacFarquhar and Schoenhals also dispute that it was communism that compelled the Zhuang in this area towards cannibalism, noting that similar incidents occurred under pressure from the Kuomintang secret police in the republican period.
Many intellectuals were sent to rural labor camps, and many of those who survived left China shortly after the revolution ended.
Some people were not able to stand the torture and, losing hope for the future, committed suicide.
Shortly before dying, Mao had allegedly written the message "With you in charge, I'm at ease", to Hua.
In a few years, countless ancient buildings, artifacts, antiques, books, and paintings were destroyed by Red Guards.
After the conference, Liu, once the most powerful man in China after Mao, was placed under house arrest in Beijing, then sent to a detention camp, where he rotted away, was denied medicine, and died in 1969.
Nie insinuated that the university leadership, much like Peng Zhen, were trying to contain revolutionary fervour in a "sinister" attempt to oppose the party and advance revisionism.
This movement was in part a means of moving Red Guards from the cities to the countryside, where they would cause less social disruption.
While they had initially been mutually supportive, disagreements arose following the ascendancy of Nikita Khrushchev to power in the Soviet Union after the death of Joseph Stalin.
In 1968, youths were mobilized to go to the countryside in the Down to the Countryside Movement so they may learn from the peasantry, and the departure of millions from the cities helped end the most violent phase of the Cultural Revolution.
Moreover, Chen launched an assault on Zhang Chunqiao, a staunch Maoist who embodied the chaos of the Cultural Revolution, over the evaluation of Mao's legacy.
On July 16, the 72-year-old Chairman Mao took to the Yangtze River in Wuhan, with the press in tow, in what became an iconic "swim across the Yangtze" to demonstrate his battle-readiness.
This activity, which could not be stopped by army generals, continued through to the autumn of 1968.
During his meeting with U.S. President Richard Nixon in 1972, Mao hinted that Lin had opposed seeking better relations with the U.S.
To him, landscape paintings should also not be considered one of the "Four Olds".
Hua had been widely considered to be lacking in political skill and ambitions, and seemingly posed no serious threat to the Gang of Four in the race for succession.
Students everywhere began to revolt against their respective schools' party establishment.
The personnel changes at the Plenum reflected a radical re-design of the party's hierarchy to suit this new ideological landscape.
Mao officially declared the Cultural Revolution to have ended in 1969, but its active phase lasted until the death of the military leader Lin Biao in 1971.
Of the 80 cultural heritage sites in Beijing under municipal protection, 30 were destroyed, and of the 6,843 cultural sites under protection by Beijing government decision in 1958, 4,922 were damaged or destroyed.
The official account has been put to question by foreign scholars, who have raised doubts over Lin's choice of the Soviet Union as a destination, the plane's route, the identity of the passengers, and whether or not a coup was actually taking place.
Zhou, who was demoted in rank, voiced his unequivocal support for Lin at the Congress.
Even a casual remark by Mao, "Sweet potato tastes good; I like it" became a slogan everywhere in the countryside.
Young people from the cities were forcibly moved to the countryside, where they were forced to abandon all forms of standard education in place of the propaganda teachings of the Communist Party of China.
Factional rivalries intensified at the Second Plenum of the Ninth Congress in Lushan held in late August 1970.
The Plenum officially marked the beginning of the economic reform era.
During this movement, which lasted for the next decade, young intellectuals living in cities were ordered to go to the countryside.
One of these documents, released on May 16, was prepared with Mao's personal supervision, and was particularly damning:
These propaganda efforts at smearing Zhou's image, however, only strengthened public attachment to Zhou's memory.
While Mao initially praised the play, in February 1965 he secretly commissioned his wife Jiang Qing and Shanghai propagandist Yao Wenyuan to publish an article criticizing it.
Many were sent to the countryside to work in labor camps.
Meanwhile, Mao also sacked Propaganda Department director Lu Dingyi, a Peng Zhen ally.
In the meantime, chaos in the collectives, bad weather, and exports of food necessary to secure hard currency resulted in the Great Chinese Famine.
After Zhou withdrew from active politics in January 1975, Deng was effectively put in charge of the government, party, and military, earning the additional titles of PLA General Chief of Staff, Vice-Chairman of the Communist Party, and Vice-Chairman of the Central Military Commission in a short time span.
The overall failure of the Red Guards' and radical assimilationists' goals was largely due to two factors.
On April 6, 1967, Liu Shaoqi was openly and widely denounced by a Zhongnanhai faction whose members included Jiang Qing and Kang Sheng, and ultimately, Mao himself.
The situation was quickly spinning out of control; there existed no checks and balances on local revolutionary activities.
However, the party's core became heavily dominated by Cultural Revolution beneficiaries and leftist radicals, whose focus remained upholding ideological purity over economic productivity.
The Cultural Revolution Group (CRG), Mao's ideological 'Praetorian Guard', was catapulted to prominence to propagate his ideology and rally popular support.
This process led to a marked improvement in the health and the life expectancy of the general population.
Lastly, the Congress elected a new Politburo with Mao Zedong, Lin Biao, Chen Boda, Zhou Enlai, and Kang Sheng as the members of the new Politburo Standing Committee.
Peng was replaced by Lin Biao, another revolutionary army general who became a more staunch Mao supporter later in his career.
During these months of iconoclasm, Red Guards from Beijing Normal University desecrated and badly damaged the burial place of Confucius himself and numerous other historically significant tombs and artifacts.
The only way to identify these people was through "the telescope and microscope of Mao Zedong Thought."
Concessions given to minorities were abolished during the Cultural Revolution as part of the Red Guards' attack on the "Four Olds".
In Mainland China, the official view of the party now serves as the dominant framework for Chinese historiography of the time period; alternative views (see below) are discouraged.
Hua spearheaded what became known as the Two Whatevers, namely, "Whatever policy originated from Chairman Mao, we must continue to support," and "Whatever directions were given to us from Chairman Mao, we must continue to follow."
Mao was troubled by the PLA's newfound prominence, and the purge of Chen Boda marked the beginning of a gradual scaling-down of the PLA's political involvement.
A booklet titled "Four Hundred Films to be Criticized" was distributed, and film directors and actors/actresses were criticized with some tortured and imprisoned.
The authority of the Red Guards surpassed that of the army, local police authorities, and the law in general.
While Mao's personal motivations were certainly pivotal to the Cultural Revolution, they reasoned that a multitude of other complex factors contributed to the way events unfolded.
On January 8, Mao praised these actions through the party-run ''People's Daily'', urging all local government leaders to rise in self-criticism, or the criticism of others suspected of "counterrevolutionary activity".
By the early 1960s, many of the Great Leap's economic policies were reversed by initiatives spearheaded by Liu, Deng, and Zhou Enlai.
According to official sources, sensing the reduction of Lin's power base and his declining health, Lin's supporters plotted to use the military power still at their disposal to oust Mao in a coup.
At the Plenum, the Party reversed its verdict on the Tiananmen Incident.
Wang Dongxing, a trusted ally of Mao, was also criticized.
The charges against esteemed party leaders like Peng Zhen rang alarm bells in China's intellectual community and among the eight non-Communist parties.
There are no records of exactly how much was destroyed—Western observers suggest that much of China's thousands of years of history was in effect destroyed, or, later, smuggled abroad for sale, during the short ten years of the Cultural Revolution.
On May 25, under the guidance of Cao Yi'ou – wife of Maoist henchman Kang Sheng – Nie Yuanzi, a philosophy lecturer at Peking University, authored a big-character poster (''dazibao'') along with other leftists and posted it to a public bulletin.
The ''Outline'', sanctioned by the Party centre, defined ''Hai Rui'' as constructive ''academic'' discussion, and aimed to formally distance Peng Zhen from any ''political'' implications.
Millions more were forcibly displaced.
Lin's son, Lin Liguo, and other high-ranking military conspirators formed a coup apparatus in Shanghai, and dubbed the plan to oust Mao by force ''Outline for Project 571'', which sounds similar to "Military Uprising" in Mandarin.
Mao directed Deng to write self-criticisms in November 1975, a move lauded by the Gang of Four.
The Congress solidified the central role of Maoism within the party psyche, re-introducing Mao Zedong Thought as an official guiding ideology of the party in the party constitution.
In Albania, Communist leader and Chinese ally Enver Hoxha began a "Cultural and Social Revolution" organized along the same lines as the Cultural Revolution.
According to the documents for the prosecution of the Gang of Four, 142,000 cadres and teachers in the education circles were persecuted, and noted academics, scientists, and educators who died included Xiong Qinglai, Jian Bozan, Rao Yutai, Wu Dingliang and Zhao Jiuzhang.
In the post-Mao period, many of those forcibly moved attacked the policy as a violation of their human rights."
Many of those arrested were later sentenced to prison work camps.
Meanwhile, in September 1972, Mao transferred a thirty-eight-year-old cadre from Shanghai, Wang Hongwen, to Beijing and made him Vice-Chairman of the Party.
These quotes directly from Mao led to other actions by the Red Guards in the views of other Maoist leaders.
The model operas were also broadcast on the radio, made into films, blared from public loudspeakers, taught to students in schools and workers in factories, and became ubiquitous as a form of popular entertainment and the only theatrical entertainment for millions in China.
In Beijing, Liu Shaoqi and Deng Xiaoping were once again the targets of criticism; others attacked Vice Premier Tao Zhu, signalling that even central government officials were now 'fair game' for attacks.
Once conditions are ripe, they will seize political power and turn the dictatorship of the proletariat into a dictatorship of the bourgeoisie.
The institutional framework of the Party established two decades earlier had broken down almost entirely: delegates for this Congress were effectively selected by Revolutionary Committees rather than through election by party members.
Propaganda art in posters was used as a campaigning tool and mass communication device, and often served as the main source of information for the people.
Hua used this message to substantiate his position as successor.
Because of the chaotic political environment, local governments lacked organization and stability, if they existed at all.
Disgraced former leader Liu Shaoqi was allowed a belated state funeral.
One of many quotations in the Little Red Book (''Mao's Quotations'') that the Red Guards would later follow as a guide, provided by Mao, was "The world is yours, as well as ours, but in the last analysis, it is yours.
"The East Is Red", especially, became popular; it ''de facto'' supplanted "The March of the Volunteers" as the national anthem of China, though the latter was restored to its previous place after the Cultural Revolution ended.
With a fragile economy and Zhou falling ill to cancer, Deng Xiaoping returned to the political scene, taking up the post of Vice-Premier in March 1973, in the first of a series of promotions approved by Mao.
Many of the Cultural Revolution's goals in minority areas were simply too unreasonable to be implemented.
