The ''Rua da Cidadania'' ("Street of Citizenship") is the symbol of administrative decentralization; it is a reference point and a meeting place.
They intermarried with the native people and with the African slaves.
Physicist César Lattes and former mayors Jaime Lerner and Saul Raiz were Jewish.
In the 1940s and 1950s, Alfred Agache, co-founder of the French Society for Urban Studies, was hired to produce its first city plan.
This used two one-way streets moving in opposite directions that surround a smaller, two-lane street where the express buses have an exclusive lane.
The Fundação Cultural de Curitiba has been hosting the largest music workshop in South America every year since 1982.
The Paraná pines are in private and public areas and are protected from logging.
Eventually, coffee was completely wiped out in the region's worst frost, known as the Black Frost of July, 1975.
During summertime, the average temperature is around  at daytime, but it can get above  on the hottest days.
Immigrant manual labor was heavily used.
Five of these roads form a star that converges on the city centre.
The owners (known as ''"Maté Barons"'') built mansions in the capital.
It is located in the nearby city of São José dos Pinhais.
In 2007, the city placed third in a list of "15 Green Cities" in the world, according to "Grist" magazine, after Reykjavík in Iceland and Portland, Oregon in the United States.
Curitiba was recently recommended by UNESCO as a model for the reconstruction of the cities of Afghanistan.
In January 1973, the Fundação Cultural de Curitiba was officially set up, with the aim of promoting culture and of acting as a facilitating agent in the cultural production of the city.
* Museu Paranaense ("Paranaense Museum") – dedicated to arts and history;
Afonso Pena International Airport is Curitiba's main airport.
The city has an average altitude of  above sea level.
The cost is estimated at 4.62&nbsp;billion reals.
The yellow ipê is the city's most common tree.
Some 1,100 buses make 12,500 trips every day, serving more than 1.3&nbsp;million passengers, 50 times the number from 20 years ago.
The City Council of Curitiba has 38 councillors elected since 2004.
Architect Jaime Lerner, who later became mayor, led a team from the Universidade Federal do Paraná that suggested strict controls on urban sprawl, reduced traffic in the downtown area, preservation of Curitiba's Historic Sector and a convenient and affordable public transit system.
* Oscar Niemeyer Museum – the largest museum of South America, dedicated to plastic arts;
It opened the world's first bus rapid transit (BRT) system, Rede Integrada de Transporte, in 1974.
At the same time, the city began building the "Faróis de Saber" (''Lighthouses of Knowledge'') educational centres.
Coffee was important the capital's economy.
The first group of Polish arrived in Cutitiba around 1871.
The Cultural Complex Solar do Barão, located in Downtown Curitiba, features the Photography Museum, the Engravings Museum and the Posters Museu.
Coffee crops suffered from the relentless effects of bad weather.
At the Open University, residents can take courses in subjects such as mechanics, hair styling and environmental protection for a small fee.
Mountain ranges and sets of rocky hills surround parts of the city, including the ''Serra do Mar'', a hill range between the shores and the First Plateau in Paraná.
Visitors will always find a permanent exhibit of the famous pysanky (Ukrainian decorated Easter eggs), religious icons and embroidered items.
It lasts 20 days and around 2,000 students take part in its activities, while a total public of 21,000 people attend the more than 100 concerts.
Economic growth occurred in parallel to a substantial inward flow of Brazilians from other cities of the country, as approximately half of the city's population was not born in Curitiba.
This railroad was the first link between the capital of Paraná and the coast.
Curitiba was Brazil's first city to have an IMAX movie theatre.
They can move very quickly, with no more than one day between the start of the southern winds and the start of rain.
The cycle of cattle drives lasted for more than two centuries.
The biggest expansion occurred after the 1960s, with innovative urban planning that changed the population size from some hundreds of thousands to more than a million people.
The city receives more than two million tourists every year.
It is indispensable in revitalizing interventions to make the organism work in a different way.''
Curitiba also hold the famous Psycho Carnival, a three-day festival that happens during the Brazilian Carnival, but devoted to psychobilly and rockabilly genres, attracting people from all over the world.
The seven wooden log houses are parts of this memorial area, as a souvenir of the Polish immigrants' struggles and faith.
In the 1970s, when people were still talking about preserving individual buildings, Curitiba passed a law to preserve the city's entire historical sector, an innovative policy which later was adopted throughout the entire country.
It was followed in part, but the plan was too expensive to complete.
In the 1980s, the RIT (Rede Integrada de Transporte, ''Integrated Transport Network'') was created.
Buses charge one price regardless of distance.
These campsites would be dismantled when the cold season gave way to spring.
Performers that have been on its stage include names such as the Spanish tenor José Carreras, stars from the Brazilian Popular Music movement, Paul McCartney and others.
The Portuguese who founded a settlement on the site in 1693 named it "Vila da Nossa Senhora da Luz dos Pinhais" (Village of "Our Lady of the Light" of the Pines).
Some avenues are spacious and laid out in a grid.
By the 1960s, Curitiba's population had reached 430,000.
Curitiba has built parks instead of canals to reduce flooding; used parks to make the city more liveable; pedestrianised the downtown area; invented and built Bus Rapid Transit (BRT), a bus system that works like a light rail system but is 10 times cheaper; and started a massive recycling scheme that included giving people bus tokens in return for waste.
The Oscar Niemeyer Museum is one of the most impressive projects created and carried out by one of Brazil's architecture masterminds, Oscar Niemeyer.
Retired city buses are often used as mobile schools or offices.
Curitiba's economy is based on industry and services and is the fourth largest in Brazil.
In the 1850s waves of European immigrants arrived in Curitiba, mainly Germans, Italians, Poles and Ukrainians, contributing to the city's economic and cultural development.
According to US magazine ''Reader's Digest'', Curitiba is the best "Brazilian Big City" in which to live.
The city's paper recycling saves the equivalent of 1,200 trees a day.
His leadership was crucial to some major changes in the city.
On 20–31 March 2006 the Convention on biodiversity took place in Pinhais (a city near Curitiba), addressing items of the 1993 Convention on Biological Diversity adopted by 188 countries.
These lighthouses are free educational centres that include libraries, Internet access and other cultural resources.
An example is the construction of parks along the rivers with artificial lakes, which absorb and retain water for longer periods of time, minimizing floods.
The Autódromo Internacional de Curitiba (Curitiba International Raceway) is located in nearby Pinhais.
Nearly 20,000 Ukrainian immigrants settled there between 1895 and 1897, consisting mostly of peasants from Galicia who emigrated to Brazil to become farmers.
Time magazine listed this former mayor among the world's most influential thinkers of 2010.
About 15,000 new jobs were generated by 2013.
A Holocaust memorial is present in the city.
Cidade Industrial de Curitiba, the industrial district, is home to many multinational industries, such as Nissan, Renault, Volkswagen, Philip Morris, Audi, Volvo, HSBC, Siemens, ExxonMobil, Electrolux and Kraft Foods, as well as many well-known national industries, such as Sadia, O Boticário and Positivo Informática.
While landowners built the houses themselves, each received a pair of trees and an hour's consultation with an architect to help them develop their plan.
The city preserves and cares for its green areas, boasting  of green space per inhabitant.
Curitiba sports one of the few high Brazilian Human Development Index readings at 0.856, and in 2010 was awarded the Global Sustainable City Award, given to cities and municipalities that excel in sustainable urban development.
Its economy is based on industry, commerce and services.
Both Coritiba and Atlético Paranaense have won Campeonato Brasileiro Série A, in 1985 and 2001, respectively.
As with most of Southern Brazil's population, Curitiba is mostly inhabited by European descendents.
* Museu do Expedicionário ("Museum of Expeditionary") – dedicated to Brazilian participation in World War II;
Low-income families living in shantytowns unreachable by truck bring their trash bags to neighborhood centres, where they exchange them for bus tickets and food.
Several units are annexed to public transport terminals.
Arena da Baixada is one of the three privately owned stadiums of the 2014 FIFA World Cup.
The cultural spaces that Curitiba boasts are tourist attractions in themselves.
At the Tingüi Park you will find the Ukrainian Memorial.
In the days before free, direct elections, mayors were political appointees who were no more than pawns in the game of power politics and were subject to replacement at any time.
It has more than 10,000 members and around 45,000 books.
The name was changed to "Curitiba" in 1721.
According to IPEA data, the GDP in 2006 was 32&nbsp;billion reals, without including agriculture and livestock (0.03%).
It emphasises pinpoint interventions that can be accomplished quickly to create a make an immediate impact.
Since 1990, the Municipal Housing Fund has provided financial support to housing for lower income populations.
The Gibiteca, inaugurated in 1982, is a national pioneer and holds exhibits, comic strips contests, fairs and workshops.
So, farmers gradually replaced coffee by soybeans.
Arena da Baixada is considered one of the most modern stadiums in Brazil (it was the first to offer free Wi-Fi, and one of the few with a central surveillance system).
The city government has been planning to introduce an underground metro for a number of years and in 2014 announced opened tenders for a 35-year public private partnership contract to build and operate a 17.6&nbsp;km, 14 station north-south line.
The terrain's flatness hinders water drainage after rain, therefore providing water vapor for the atmosphere.
The Curitiba Metropolitan area comprises 26 municipalities with a total population of over 3.2&nbsp;million (IBGE estimate in 2010), making it the seventh most populous in the country.
The Municipal Secretariat of the Environment maintains a botanical garden and three greenhouses that produce 150,000 native and exotic seedlings: 16,000 fruit trees, 260,000 flowers, foliage and underbrush specimens and the maintenance of another 350,000 seedlings.
The Rua das Flores (Street of Flowers) is home to the majority of stores.
The Pope himself blessed the first replica of the traditional Polish houses that beautifully make up the Bosque do Papa when he visited the city in 1980.
The city has the second largest Japanese community in Brazil, behind only São Paulo, according to IBGE.
He has been mayor three times, the first time in the early 1970s.
It is located  west of the seaport of Paranaguá and is served by the Afonso Pena International and Bacacheri airports.
In 1964, Mayor Ivo Arzua solicited proposals for urban design.
The MuMA - Museu Metropolitano de Arte (Museum of Metropolitan Art) displays its permanent collection of artists from the state of Paraná as well as renowned Brazilian painters such as Pancetti, Guignard, Di Cavalcanti, Djanira, Portinari, Mário Cravo, Burle Marx.
Located in Southern Brazil, the humid city lies in a temperate zone.
Up until the 19th century, the inhabitants of the city of Curitiba were natives, mixed-raced, Portuguese and Spanish immigrants.
It emphasised a star of boulevards, with public amenities downtown, an industrial district and sanitation.
Curitiba officially became a town in 1812, spelling its name as "Curityba."
Once a week, a truck collects paper, cardboard, metal, plastic and glass that has been sorted by residents.
The Fundação Cultural de Curitiba currently has a broad infrastructure, made up of a specialized staff, 150 sites for cultural events in 50 different buildings throughout the city.
The traditions of wearing wool ponchos, roasting meat and drinking a bitter mate tea called ''"chimarrão"'', encouraged a common culture that led people to form groups and settle.
In 1937 with the rise of Nazi Germany, notable German Jewish academics migrated to Brazil, some settling in Curitiba.
The chapel is adorned with a golden dome and is made of wood, in a typical Byzantine style.
The Frans Krajcberg Cultural Space lies in the Botanical Gardens, one of the city's most famous parks.
In the Foundation's courtyard, there is the Piá Theater (piá being a local term used to refer to youngsters).
A state decree in 1919 settled the dispute by adopting "Curitiba."
Curitiba has municipal health, education and day care networks, neighborhood libraries shared by schools and citizens and Citizenship Streets, where buildings provide essential public services, sports and cultural facilities near transportation terminals.
Although both cities have around the same proportion of Japanese descendants, other large cities in the countryside, such as Maringá and Londrina, have an even higher rate.
It was built in five years (from 1880 to 1885).
In a number of areas subject to floods, buildings were condemned and the land became parks.
Eighty percent of travelers use the express or direct bus services.
Open University, created by the city, lets residents take courses in many subjects such as mechanics, hair styling and environmental protection for a small fee.
Clube Atlético Paranaense (Brazilian champion of 2001, several times champion of the state of Paraná).
The city has  of bike routes, used by around 30&nbsp;thousand bikers daily.
Snowfall was experienced in 1889, 1892, 1912, 1928 (two days), 1942, 1955, 1957, 1962, 1975 and again in 2013.
Japanese immigrants began arriving in 1915, with a larger contingent arriving in 1924.
During the 20th century, especially after 1950, the city's population rapidly increased.
In Curitiba it is possible to find steppes, forests and other formations.
The city elected in 1996 Brazil's first Japanese descendant mayor of a state capital.
Land farther from these roads is zoned for lower density development, to pull traffic away from the main roads.
When it comes to music, the Brazilian Popular Music Conservatory deserves all the attention.
Their nuclei offer services in the local, state and federal areas.
* Museu do Holocausto ("Holocaust Museum")
Immigration became appealing as of 1808, when in a decree promulgated by the then Ruling Prince Dom João VI, foreigners were granted the right to ownership of land.
Its main economic activities were mineral extraction.
City streets carry almost one million vehicles, of which 2,253 are orange Taxis.
In June 1996, the chairman of the Habitat II summit of mayors and urban planners in Istanbul praised Curitiba as "the most innovative city in the country."
As a result, according to one survey, 99% of Curitibans are happy with their hometown.
During this period, European immigrants began arriving in hordes.
The foundation is also responsible for the preservation, conservation and research of the cultural heritage of Curitiba.
Later, between 1850 and 1950, it grew due to logging and agricultural expansion in the Paraná State (first Araucaria logging, later mate and coffee cultivation and in the 1970s wheat, corn and soybean cultivation).
In the 1940s and 1950s, Alfred Agache, cofounder of the French Society for Urban Studies, was hired to produce the first city plan.
This means less city litter and less disease, less garbage in sensitive areas such as rivers and a better life for the undernourished poor.
Estádio Joaquim Américo Guimarães was one of the 12 stadiums to host games of the 2014 FIFA World Cup held in Brazil.
Money raised from selling materials goes into social programs and the city employs the homeless and alcoholics in its garbage separation plant.
Among Brazilian capitals, Curitiba has the highest literacy rate, and also rank number 1 in education among the Brazilian capitals.
The expanded use of the mate plant and wood at the end of the 19th century stimulated the construction of the Paranaguá-Curitiba railroad.
It consolidated its position as a regional hub for trade and services, becoming one of the richest cities in the Southern Cone and a pioneer in urban solutions.
Around the beginning of the 20th century, Curitiba benefited from the wealth of the yerba mate mills.
Urban "acupuncture" reclaims land for the public and emphasizes the importance of community development through small interventions in design of cities.
Curitiba has more car owners per capita than anywhere else in Brazil.
The 2nd Best City to Work in Southern Brazil, according to Você S.A. Magazine of 2005.
Specifically, the goal is to provide jobs and income for the unemployed among 400,000 people living in 15 peripheral towns, and to structure and develop the region according to integrated planning principles.
Most of the original stadium was preserved, and just an expansion is planned; today's capacity is 25,000, which should be increasead to about 42,000.
COHAB also built Technology Street, an avenue of 24 homes in the centre of Novo Bairro, each built using different construction techniques.
With it, came many distinct cultural features of the Paraná region, especially the unique accent noticeable by pronounced Es.
Curitiba has the biggest colony of Polish immigrants in Brazil.
The 3rd position among the Champions of Infrastructure, Exame Magazine of 2006.
The area is pedestrianized, with no cars around the centre.
There is also the Bacacheri Airport, a smaller general aviation facility.
After Independence of Brazil in 1822, the country began to worry even more about its territory and the settlers on its lands.
Several association football teams play in Curitiba, Coritiba plays at Estádio Major Antônio Couto Pereira, Clube Atlético Paranaense at Estádio Joaquim Américo Guimarães.
The first ten years of the 16th century had a war of conquest by Europeans (Portuguese colonists) against the Kaingang and Guarani who inhabited the area of the city.
The "capacity building job line" was created to accelerate economic development.
In July 2001, Curitiba became Brazil's first city to receive the prize "Pole of Information Technology", granted by ''InfoExame'' magazine.
Its design includes a gravity-defying construction that was intended to look like a Paraná Pine, one of the city's symbols, but is widely interpreted by locals as an eye, which gave the Museum its nickname – ''Museu do Olho'', or Museum of the Eye.
The city is Brazil's second largest car manufacturer.
Curitiba invested in urban planning and in city management focused on its residents.
Since it was declared capital of the State of Paraná in 1853, the city has gone through several major urban planning projects to avoid uncontrolled growth and thus has become an international role model in dealing with issues including transportation and the environment.
The Curitiba museum includes the Oscar Niemeyer auditorium.
Curitiba's infrastructure makes bus travel fast and convenient, effectively creating demand for bus use in the same way that the infrastructure of traditional cities creates demand for private motor vehicles.
Nowadays, only smaller numbers of foreign immigrants arrive, primarily from Middle Eastern and other South American countries.
The highest point is to the north at , and with lower altitudes at  to the south.
Curitiba's birth is 29 March 1693, when its City Council was founded.
From there, the herds were then taken to the state of Minas Gerais.
In addition Colégio Suíço-Brasileiro de Curitiba is in nearby Pinhais.
As it turned out, he was no milquetoast, and subsequently set about enthusiastically pursuing reform.
Compared to eight other Brazilian cities of its size, Curitiba uses about 30 percent less fuel per capita, resulting in one of the country's lowest rates of ambient air pollution.
Much of the early Jewish congregation has been assimilated.
''I believe that some medicinal "magic" can and should be applied to cities, as many are sick and some nearly terminal.
It emphasized a "star" of boulevards, with public amenities downtown, an industrial district and sanitation.
Other alternatives developed to minimize the negative effects of urbanization are the implementation of programs for environmental education, inspection and monitoring, elaboration and application of legislation and infrastructure works.
This plan, known as the Curitiba Master Plan, was adopted in 1968.
There's also a program for children where they can exchange recyclable garbage for school supplies, chocolate, toys and tickets for shows.
Curitiba is divided into nine regional governments (equivalent to subprefecture), who manage the municipality's 75 districts.
The stadium Vila Capanema have hosted the 1950 FIFA World Cup which still is home to Paraná Clube.
Moving around in a car can be difficult in and around the city centre because of the many one-way streets and frequent traffic jams.
The first Europeans to arrive were of Portuguese origin, during the 17th century.
Curitiba is located in the area of the Ombrophilous Mixed Forest (also known as Araucaria moist forests), a sub-type of the Atlantic Forest.
Objects like an old wagon, pipe of cabbage and a print of the Black Madonna of Częstochowa (patron saint of Polish people), form parts of the memorial.
The Best Destination for Business, according to Veja Magazine of 2007.
Curitiba is the 2nd Pole on Technological Innovation in Brazil, according to IPEA (Applied Economic Research Institute).
After national housing finance collapsed in 1985, just as people from the countryside poured into Curitiba, the city's public housing program bought one of the few remaining large plots of land, "Novo Bairro" (New Neighborhood), as home for 50,000 families.
* Museu de Arte Sacra ("Religious Art Museum") – the focus is Christian art;
Curitiba has a planned transportation system, which includes lanes on major streets devoted to a bus rapid transit system.
In Curitiba, this concern became even worse as of 1853, when Paraná, which belonged to the Judicial District of São Paulo, became an independent Province.
This trade helped found cities in the northern region of the state of Paraná.
This was used in press and state documents.
This space holds 114 large-scale sculptures and three carvings in relief made out of trunks of trees, these works are in the process of being donated to the city.
In the same occasion the Zombie Walk also happens.
Some estimates suggest that more than 40,000 Japanese-Brazilians living in the Curitiba.
