'''The baseball-style scoreboard''' was created for televised games for audiences not familiar with the club scoreboard.
Real curlers Randy Ferbey and David Nedohin had cameo appearances.
At this point, a team will opt for "peels", meaning that the stones they throw will be to not only hit their opposition stones, but to roll out of play as well.
It currently includes men's and women's tournaments.
When a stone is touched when stones are in play, the remedies vary between placing the stones as they end up after the touch, replacing the stones as they would have been if no stone were touched, or removal of the touched stone from play.
Scoring an eight-ender against a relatively competent team is very difficult; in curling, it is considered the equivalent of pitching a perfect game in baseball.
The playing surface or ''curling sheet'' is defined by the World Curling Federation Rules of Curling.
When a player is not throwing, the player's slider shoe can be temporarily rendered non-slippery by using a slip-on gripper.
The new brooms "isolate the friction caused by brushing only where the running surface of the rock has contact with ice––on top of the pebble––with little resistance", which makes sweepers have unprecedented control over the direction the stone goes.
Only stones that are ''in the house'' are considered in the scoring.
The last harvest of Ailsa Craig granite by Kays took place in 2013, after a hiatus of 11 years; 2,000 tons were harvested, sufficient to fill anticipated orders through at least 2020.
The ''Corner Gas'' episode "Hurry Hard" (2nd season) centered around curling.
One of the basic technical aspects of curling is knowing when to sweep.
The first curling club in the United States was established in 1830, and the game was introduced to Switzerland and Sweden before the end of the 19th century, also by Scots.
This style of corn broom was referred to as ''the Blackjack''.
An end is complete when all eight rocks from each team have been delivered, a total of sixteen stones.
The speed of the ice is measured in seconds.
This rule is known as the ''four-rock rule'' or the ''free guard zone rule'' (for a while in Canada, a "three-rock rule" was in place, but that rule has been replaced by the four-rock rule).
The ice in the game may be ''fast (keen)'' or ''slow''.
Some shoes have small disc sliders covering the front and heel portions or only the front portion of the foot, which allow more flexibility in the sliding foot for curlers playing with tuck deliveries.
The film inspired a sequel TV sitcom that aired in 2010 and 2011.
Curling has been an official sport in the Winter Olympic Games since the 1998 Winter Olympics.
The first world championship for curling was limited to men and was known as the ''Scotch Cup'', held in Falkirk and Edinburgh, Scotland, in 1959.
Rising slightly from the hack, the thrower pulls the stone back (some older curlers may actually raise the stone in this backward movement) then lunges smoothly out from the hack pushing the stone ahead while the slider foot is moved in front of the gripper foot, which trails behind.
Modern curling brush handles are usually hollow tubes made of fibreglass or carbon fibre instead of a solid length of wooden dowel.
Ideally, the strategy in an end for a team with the hammer is to score two points or more.
Many teams use the ''Number System'' to communicate in which of 10 playable zones it is estimated the stone will stop.
As an example, on keen ice, common times might be 16 seconds for guards, 14 seconds for draws, and 8 seconds for peel weight.
Curling is a game of strategy, tactics and skill.
Two teams, each with four players, take turns sliding heavy, polished granite stones, also called ''rocks'', across the ice ''curling sheet'' towards the ''house'', a circular target marked on the ice.
If a team has the hammer, they will try to keep this four-foot zone free so that they have access to the button area at all times.
A single moveable hack may also be used.
The thrower throws from the ''hack''.
+ Baseball-style scoreboard
The stones curl more as they slow down, so sweeping early in travel tends to increase distance as well as straighten the path, and sweeping after sideways motion is established can increase the sideways distance.
While a sound strategy, this made for an unexciting game.
Unlike today, the thrower had little control over the 'curl' or velocity and relied more on luck than on precision, skill and strategy.
Kays of Scotland has been making curling stones since 1851 and has the exclusive rights to the Ailsa Craig granite, granted by the Marquess of Ailsa, whose family has owned the island since 1560.
Last-rock or last-stone advantage in an end is called the ''hammer''.
Prior to the late sixties, ''Scottish'' curling brushes were used primarily by some of the Scots, as well as by recreational and elderly curlers as a substitute for corn brooms, since the technique was easier to learn.
The Swedish heavy metal band Hammerfall released a music video to their song "Hearts on Fire" featuring the band engaged in a curling competition of sorts with the Swedish women's curling team.
Curling tournaments may use the Schenkel system for determining the participants in matches.
Canada kept to the traditional rules until a three-rock Free Guard Zone rule was adopted for the 1993-94 season.
Kays has been the exclusive manufacturer of curling stones for the Olympics since the 2006 Winter Olympics.
Since the 1998 Olympics, Canada has dominated the sport with their men's teams winning gold in 2006, 2010, and 2014, and silver in 1998 and 2002.
+ Curling club-style scoreboard
There are two current types of delivery, the common flat-foot deliver as well as the Manitoba tuck delivery where the curler slides on the front ball of his foot.
As an example, on keen ice, common times might be 4.0 seconds for guards, 3.8 seconds for draws, 3.2 for normal hit weight, and 2.9 seconds for peel weight.
Much of the yelling that goes on during a curling game is the skip calling the ''line'' of the shot and the sweepers calling the ''weight''.
Curling is the provincial sport of Saskatchewan.
When the '''skip''' throws, the ''third'', or vice-skip, takes his role.
Perhaps most importantly, the Spirit of Curling dictates that one never cheers mistakes, misses or gaffes by one's opponent (unlike most team sports) and one should not celebrate one's own good shots during the game beyond modest acknowledgement of the shot such as a head nod, fist bump or thumbs-up gesture.
The ice in a match will be somewhat consistent and thus this measure of speed can also be used to measure how far down the ice the rock will travel.
''Trefor'' granite comes in shades of pink, blue and grey.
These are easier to make because they impart less speed on the object stone, therefore increasing the chance that it remains in play even if a bigger chunk of it is hit.
There are specialized devices to make these determinations, but these cannot be brought out until after an end is completed.
The word ''curling'' first appears in print in 1620 in Perth, Scotland, in the preface and the verses of a poem by Henry Adamson.
The precise amount of pressure may vary from relatively light brushing ("just cleaning" - to ensure debris will not alter the stone's path) to maximum-pressure scrubbing.
A team with the hammer may throw a ''corner guard'' as their first stone of an end placed in front of the house but outside the four-foot zone to utilize the free guard zone.
Since the bottom of the stone is rounded, a stone just barely in the house will not have any actual contact with the ring, which will pass under the rounded edge of the stone, but it still counts.
Aggressive playing will put a lot of stones in play by throwing mostly draws; this makes for an exciting game and is very risky but the reward can be very great.
These hollow tube handles are lighter and stronger than wooden handles, allowing faster sweeping and also enabling more downward force to be applied to the broom head with reduced shaft flex.
It may not be obvious to the eye which of two rocks is closer to the button (center) or if a rock is actually biting or not.
Once the leading edge of a team stone crosses the tee line only one player may sweep it.
Scoring on this board only requires the use of (up to) 11 digit cards, whereas with baseball-type scoring an unknown number of multiples of the digits (especially low digits like ''1'') may be needed.
For example, a stone may have too much weight, but require sweeping to prevent curling into a guard.
''Blue Hone'' has very low water absorption, which prevents the action of repeatedly freezing water from eroding the stone.
The lights on the stone handle will either light up green, indicating that the stone has been legally thrown, or red, in which case the illegally thrown stone will be immediately pulled from play instead of waiting for the stone to come to rest.
'''''Takeouts''''' are intended to remove stones from play and include the ''peel'', ''hit-and-roll'' and ''double'' shots.
This scoreboard works because only one team can get points in an end.
The Canadian Curling Association ''Rules of Curling'' allows the use of a delivery stick in club play but does not permit it in championships.
The Tournament of Hearts and the Brier are contested by provincial and territorial champions, and the world championships by national champions.
The stone is placed in front of the foot now in the hack.
The free guard zone was originally called the Modified Moncton Rule and was developed from a suggestion made by Russ Howard for the Moncton 100 cashspiel (with the richest prize ever awarded at the time in a tournament) in Moncton, New Brunswick, in January 1990.
The ice may be natural but is usually frozen by a refrigeration plant pumping a brine solution through numerous pipes fixed lengthwise at the bottom of a shallow pan of water.
Modest congratulation, however, may be exchanged between winning team members after the match.
After several years of having the three-rock rule used for the Canadian championships and the winners then having to adjust to the four-rock rule in the World Championships, the Canadian Curling Association adopted the now-standard Free Guard Zone in the 2002-2003 season.
Top curling championships are typically played by all-male or all-female teams.
International competitive games are generally ten ends, so most of the national championships that send a representative to the World Championships or Olympics also play ten ends.
Kilsyth Curling Club claims to be the first club in the world, having been formally constituted in 1716; it is still in existence today.
The thrower's ''gripper'' shoe (with the non-slippery sole) is positioned against one of the hacks; for a right-handed curler the right foot is placed against the left hack and vice versa for a left-hander.
A game may be conceded if considered unwinnable.
Defensive playing will throw a lot of hits preventing a lot of stones in play; this tends to be less exciting and less risky.
Occasionally, players may accidentally touch a stone with their broom or a body part.
The following example illustrates the difference between the two types.
If the red team scores three points in the first end (called a ''three-ender''), then a 1 (indicating the first end) is placed beside the number 3 in the red row.
Players from either team alternate in taking shots from the far side of the sheet.
However, some confusion may arise if neither team scores points in an end, this is called a ''blank end''.
The first world title was won by the Canadian team from Regina, Saskatchewan, skipped by Ernie Richardson.
On-the-ice celebration is usually reserved for the winners of a major tournament after winning the final game of the championship.
In competition, an electronic handle known as the ''eye on the hog'' may be fitted to detect hog line violations.
However, some curlers make a considerable portion of their income from curling.
There's also a greater chance that the shot will miss the guard entirely because of the greater accuracy required to make the shot.
This is often referred to as ''burning'' a stone.
The delivery stick was specifically invented for elderly curlers in Canada in 1999.
Guards can be drawn around by the other team, and stones in the house can be tapped back (if they are in front of the tee line) or frozen onto (if they are behind the tee line).
Improvements in ice making and changes in the rules to increase scoring and promote complex strategy have increased the already high popularity of the sport in Canada, and large television audiences watch annual curling telecasts, especially the Scotties Tournament of Hearts (the national championship for women), the Tim Hortons Brier (the national championship for men), and the women's and men's world championships.
''The back line to hog line speed'' is used principally by sweepers to get an initial sense of the weight of a stone.
Sweeping is allowed anywhere on the ice up to the ''tee line'', as long as it is only for one's own team stones.
Usually, the two sweepers will be on opposite sides of the stone's path, although depending on which side the sweepers' strengths lie this may not always be the case.
In Darvel, East Ayrshire, the weavers relaxed by playing curling matches using the heavy stone weights from the looms' ''warp beams'', fitted with a detachable handle for the purpose.
The thrower, now ''in the hack'', lines the body up with shoulders square to the skip's broom at the far end for ''line''.
New,  "directional fabric" brooms, which players are worried will alter the fundamentals of the sport by reducing the level skill required, have been accused of giving players an unfair advantage.
A team in the lead would often employ this strategy during the game.
Balance may be assisted by a broom held in the free hand with the back of the broom down so that it slides.
It is not uncommon at any level for a losing team to terminate the match before all ends are completed if it believes it no longer has a realistic chance of winning.
The game is known as mixed curling when a team consists of two men and two women.
The house consists of a centre circle (the ''button'') and three concentric rings, of diameters 4, 8 and 12 feet, formed by painting or laying coloured vinyl sheet under the ice and are usually distinguished by colour.
Kilsyth also claims the oldest purpose-built curling pond in the world at Colzium, in the form of a low dam creating a shallow pool some 100 × 250 metres in size.
In 1958, Fern Marchessault of Montreal inverted the corn straw in the centre of the broom.
Curling was one of the first sports that was popular with women and girls.
Today, brushes have replaced traditional corn brooms at every level of curling; it is rare now to see a curler using a corn broom on a regular basis.
The verbal noun ''curling'' is formed from the Scots (and English) verb ''curl'', which describes the motion of the stone.
These lines divide the house into quarters.
The "thinking time" system was implemented after it was recognized that teams playing aggressively (using draws and other low-weight shots which take more time for the stones to come to rest) were essentially being penalized in terms of the time they had available compared to teams which primarily use hits which require far less time per shot.
A stone must at least touch the outer ring in order to score (see Scoring below), otherwise the rings are merely a visual aid for aiming and judging which stone is closer to the button.
Many a wife would keep her husband's brass curling stone handle on the mantelpiece, brightly polished until the next time it was needed.
On indoor rinks, there are usually two fixed hacks, rubber-lined holes, one on each side of the centre line, with the inside edge no more than  from the centre line and the front edge on the hack line.
Another player, usually the skip, is stationed behind the ''button'' to determine the tactics, ''weight'', ''turn'', and ''line'', and the other two may sweep in front of the stone to influence the trajectory (see Sweeping, below).
Concession is an honourable act and does not carry the stigma associated with quitting, and also allows for more socializing.
Most shoes have a full-sole sliding surface, but some shoes have a sliding surface covering only the outline of the shoe and other enhancements with the full-sole slider.
Each team is also allowed two minute-long timeouts per 10-end game.
Curling has been adapted for wheelchair users and people otherwise unable to throw the stone from the hack.
Touching a stationary stone when no stones are in motion (there is no delivery in progress) is not an infraction (unless the stationary stone is struck in such a manner that its position is altered), and is a common way for the skip to indicate a stone that is to be taken out.
However, there are many young teams who turn heads, and junior curling is quite popular, with national finals being televised nationwide in Canada.
The ''ends'' are marked by columns 1 through 10 (or 11 for the possibility of an extra end to break ties) plus an additional column for the total.
In the past, most curling stones were made from ''Blue Hone'' but the island is now a wildlife reserve and the quarry is restricted by environmental conditions that exclude blasting.
(The ''skip'' is the team member who calls the shots; see below.)
It is a rectangular area of ice, carefully prepared to be as flat and level as possible,  in length by  in width.
This system allows each team 38 minutes per 10 ends, or 30 minutes per 8 ends, to make strategic and tactical decisions, with 4 minutes and 30 seconds an end for extra ends.
Scotland is home to the international governing body for curling, the World Curling Federation, Perth, which originated as a committee of the Royal Caledonian Curling Club, the mother club of curling.
While Canadian bonspiels (tournaments) offer cash prizes, there are very few full-time professional curlers.
It is also traditional in some areas for the winning team to buy the losing team a drink and a hot dog after the game.
However, in major tournaments it is strictly enforced; the "eye on the hog" sensor in the stone will indicate whether the stone has been legally thrown or not.
Until four stones have been played (two from each side), stones in the ''free guard zone'' (those stones left in the area between the hog and tee lines, excluding the house) may not be removed by an opponent's stone (although they can be moved as long as they are not taken out of play).
By knocking all stones out, the opponents could at best score one point (if they had the hammer).
It is worn by the thrower during delivery from the hack and by sweepers or the skip to glide down the ice when sweeping or otherwise traveling down the sheet quickly.
The ''hacks'' are fixed  behind each button; a hack gives the thrower something to push against when making the throw.
At the end of delivery, the curler pulls back on the cue, which releases it from the stone.
Despite the Canadian province of Manitoba's small population (ranked 5th of 10 Canadian provinces), Manitoban teams have won the Brier more times than teams from any other province.
Scoring without the hammer is commonly referred to as ''stealing'', or ''a steal'', and is much more difficult.
If the ice is keen, a rock will travel farther with a given amount of weight (throwing force) on it.
If only one point is possible, the skip will often try to avoid scoring at all in order to retain the hammer until the next end, when two or more points may lie.
Prior to the 1950s, most curling brooms were made of corn strands and were similar to household brooms of the day.
A stone is in the house if it lies within the  zone or any portion of its edge lies over the edge of the ring.
If they score two more in the second end, then a 2 will be placed beside the 5 in the red row, indicating that the red team has five points in total (3+2).
Most curling clubs have an ice maker whose main job is to care for the ice.
As the stone moves over the pebble, any rotation of the stone causes it to ''curl'' to the inside or outside.
Because of the difficulty of making this type of shot, only the best teams will normally attempt it, and it does not dominate the game the way the peel formerly did.
However, all scoring disputes are handled by the vice skip.
The strategy depends on the team's skill, the opponent's skill, the conditions of the ice, the score of the game, how many ends remain and whether the team has last-stone advantage (the ''hammer'').
Draw shots include ''raise'' and ''angle-raise'', ''come-around'', and ''freeze'' shots.
When she died two years later from cancer, over 15,000 people attended her funeral, and it was broadcast on national television.
During that time period, there was much debate in competitive curling circles as to which sweeping device was more effective: brush or broom.
If extra ends are required, each team is allowed 10 minutes of playing time to complete its throws and one added 60-second timeout for each extra end.
In gripping the broom, one hand should be one third of the way from the top (non-brush end) of the handle while the other hand should be one third of the way from the head of the broom.
This arrangement often suits casual or beginning players.
The film grossed over $4.2 million, almost all of it in Canada, making it the top-grossing Canadian English-language film subsidized by Telefilm Canada between 1997 and 2002.
A game usually consists of eight or ten ends.
The example illustrates the men's final at the 2006 Winter Olympics.
The players, with the exception of the skip, take turns throwing and sweeping; when one player (e.g., the '''lead''') throws, the players not throwing (the '''second''' and '''third''') sweep.
This method of play was altered by restricting the area in which a stone was protected to the free guard zone only for the first four rocks thrown and adopted as a Four-rock Free Guard Zone for international competition shortly after.
Peels are hits that are thrown with the most amount of power.
The effect is functionally identical to peeling the guard but significantly harder, as a shot that hits the guard too hard (knocking it out of play) results in its being replaced, while not hitting it hard enough can result in its still being tactically useful for the opposition.
The purpose is to accumulate the highest score for a ''game''; points are scored for the stones resting closest to the centre of the house at the conclusion of each ''end'', which is completed when both teams have thrown all of their stones.
These are known as ''guard rocks''.
This rule, a relatively recent addition to curling, was added in response to a strategy of "peeling" opponents' guard stones (knocking them out of play at an angle that caused the shooter's stone to also roll out of play, leaving no stones on the ice).
"Howard's Rule" (later known as the Moncton Rule), used for the tournament and based on a practice drill his team used, had the first four rocks in play unable to be removed no matter where they were at any time during the end.
In some situations, one of the two alterations in path is not desirable.
Curling is particularly popular in Canada.
A good drawing team will usually opt to play aggressively, while a good hitting team will opt to play defensively.
This type of stone is known as a ''biter''.
'''''Guards''''' are thrown in front of the house in the ''free guard zone'', usually to protect the ''shot-rock'' (the stone closest to the button at the time) or to make the opposing team's shot difficult.
The winner is the team with the highest score after all ends have been completed (see Scoring below).
This is the only case that a stone may be swept by an opposing team member.
A key part of the preparation of the playing surface is the spraying of water droplets onto the ice, which form ''pebble'' on freezing.
Thus, the first Olympic medals in curling, which at the time was played outside, were awarded for the 1924 Winter Games, with the gold medal won by Great Britain and Ireland, two silver medals by Sweden, and the bronze by France.
In the late sixties, competitive curlers from Calgary, such as John Mayer, Bruce Stewart, and, later, the world junior championship teams skipped by Paul Gowsell, proved that the curling brush could be just as (or more) effective without all the blisters common to corn broom use.
The ''gripper'' is worn by the thrower on the hack foot during delivery and is designed to grip the ice.
Guard shots include the ''centre-guard'', on the centreline and the ''corner-guards'' to the left or right sides of the centre line.
One such measure, known as "hog-to-hog" time, is the speed of the stone and is the time in seconds the rock takes from the moment it crosses the near hog line till it crosses the far hog line.
One strategy that has been developed by curlers in response to the Free Guard Zone (Kevin Martin from Alberta is one of the best examples) is the "tick" game, where a shot is made attempting to knock (tick) the guard to the side, far enough that it is difficult or impossible to use but still remaining in play while the shot itself goes out of play.
Speed and pressure are vital to sweeping.
It is mandatory in high-level national and international competition, but its cost, around US$650 each, currently puts it beyond the reach of most club curling.
After the stone is delivered, its trajectory is still influenced by the two sweepers under instruction from the skip.
The surface of the ice is maintained at a temperature of around .
It is common for each sheet of ice to have multiple sensors embedded in order to monitor surface temperature, as well as probes set up in the seating area (to monitor humidity) and in the compressor room (to monitor brine supply and return temperatures).
If the guard rocks are removed, they are replaced to where they were before the shot was thrown, and the opponent's stone is removed from play and cannot be replayed.
Scoring one point is often a wasted opportunity, as they will then lose last-rock advantage for the next end.
This can be done by throwing "centre line" guards in front of the house on the centre line, which can be tapped into the house later or drawn around.
By hitting all of the opponent's stones, it removes opportunities for their getting multiple points, therefore defending the lead.
Therefore, a team may make strategic decisions during an end based on assumptions of rock position that turn out to be incorrect.
If the leading team is quite comfortable, leaving their own stones in play can also be dangerous.
When no independent officials are available, the vice skips measure the distances.
From there Ernie Richardson and his family team dominated Canadian and international curling during the late 1950s and early 1960s and have been considered to be the best male curlers of all time.
In 2010 electro band LMFAO released the video for their song "Yes", which portrays a satirical curling match.
The amount of curl (commonly referred to as the ''feet of curl'') can change during a game as the pebble wears; the ice maker must monitor this and be prepared to scrape and re-pebble the surface prior to each game.
The shorter borders of the sheet are called the backboards.
It is not uncommon for a team to concede a curling match after it believes it no longer has any hope of winning.
Central Canadian curlers often used 'irons' rather than stones until the early 1900s, Canada is the only country known to have done so, while others experimented with wood or ice-filled tins.
