Most were run by migrants from East Pakistan, which became Bangladesh in 1971.
This is followed by the addition of other ingredients.
Mustard seeds and mustard oil are added to many recipes, as are poppy seeds.
Pork is not used in accordance with Islamic dietary laws.
In the West, some of the Thai curries are described by colour; red curries use red chilies while green curries use green chilies.
In Pakistan, the provinces of Sindh and Balochistan border the Arabian Sea.
Rendang was mentioned in Malay literature Hikayat Amir Hamzah (1550s) is popular among Indonesians, Singaporeans and Malaysians.
Sometimes potatoes or vegetables are also added to curries to increase volume and make them more nutritious.
Almost every food can be curried with the exception of dark green leafy vegetables.
The tandoor was introduced into Britain in the 1960s, and tandoori and tikka chicken became popular dishes.
Once the onion and garlic have turned slightly golden then turmeric and garam masala are added.
Curry was adopted and anglicised from the Tamil word '''' (கறி) meaning "sauce", which is usually understood to mean vegetables and/or meat cooked with spices with or without a gravy.
Often coconut cream is added to seafood curries for example prawn, crab or fish curries.
Malay satay seems to have been introduced to China with wider success by the ethnic Teochew, who make up the second largest group of Chinese of Singapore and are the dominant group in Thailand.
In addition, curry powder is almost never used in a Pakistani curry.
* Dhansak – in the curry house, it may be made with either lamb or chicken and frequently contains pineapple, though this is not original.
Barbecue style or roasted meats are also very popular in the form of kebabs.
According to this theory, ''kari'' was first encountered in the mid-17th century by members of the British East India Company trading with Tamil (Indian) merchants along the Coromandel Coast of southeast India, particularly at Fort St. George (later called Madras and renamed Chennai in 1996).
The British, who may refer to any Indian main dish as "curry," are fans (curry has its own committee in Parliament) with a curry house in nearly every village.
By the fourth edition of the book, other ingredients such as turmeric and ginger were called for.
* Sambar – medium-heat, sour curry made with lentils and tamarind.
The establishment of the Mughal Empire, in the early 16th century, influenced the Indian cuisine, especially in the north.
The daily food in most Sindhi households consists of wheat-based flatbread (phulka) and rice accompanied by two dishes, one gravy and one dry.
Black pepper is native to South Asia and Southeast Asia and has been known to Indian cooking since at least 2000 BCE.
Other dishes such as gulai and opor are dishes based on curry.
The province still produces a large amount of nuts which are used abundantly in traditional cooking, along with cereals like wheat, maize, barley, and rice.
Most working people take roti and curry for their lunch.
The curries of Karnataka are typically vegetarian and with meat and fish around mostly coastal areas.
They use local ingredients such as chili peppers, kaffir lime leaves, lemongrass, galangal, Indonesian bay leaves (salam leaf), candlenuts, turmeric, turmeric leaves, asam gelugur and asam kandis (sour mangosteens similar to tamarind), shrimp paste (terasi), cumin, coriander seed and coconut milk.
Everything else is called by its proper name.
Pakistani curries, especially in the provinces of Punjab and Sindh are basically similar to their counterparts in northern India.
It seems to have descended from a Singaporean and Malaysian variety, countries which also introduced the satay sauce to the Chinese.
The curries of Nepalese cuisine have been influenced by its neighbours, mainly India  and Tibet.
If coriander leaves are available then it is added to add extra flavour.
Malaysian curries typically use curry powders rich in turmeric, coconut milk, shallots, ginger, belacan (shrimp paste), chili peppers, and garlic.
By contrast, curry powders and curry pastes produced and consumed in India are extremely diverse; some red, some yellow, some brown; some with five spices and some with as many as 20 or more.
In London, they settled in the East End.
There is nothing like it in India — it is pure invention."
Curry can be found at both inexpensive and upscale Caribbean restaurants, and ingredients can range from chicken or vegetables to shellfish such as shrimp and scallops.
Sometimes carrots and leafy vegetables like ''chauraiya'' or ''saijan'' are added for extra flavour and nutrients.
Lunch is often dal and rice with some side dishes.
The ingredients commonly used are besan (gram flour), or chickpea flour, and groundnut powder.
Most of the non-vegetarian dishes are heavily spiced.
Currently, the dominance of Bangladeshi restaurants is generally declining in some parts of London and the further north one travels.
It consists of either lamb, chicken or bean curry poured into a tunnelled-out loaf of bread to be eaten with one's fingers.
Archaeological evidence dating to 2600 BCE from Mohenjo-daro suggests the use of mortar and pestle to pound spices including mustard, fennel, cumin, and tamarind pods with which they flavoured food.
In the northern areas, a linear range of curry recipes could be seen.
Bengali cuisine, which refers to the cuisine of Bangladesh and the West Bengal state of India, includes curries, including seafood and fresh fish.
Burmese curries are quite oily, as the extra oil helps the food to last longer.
Burmese cuisine is based on a very different understanding of curries.
Many curry recipes are contained in 19th century cookbooks such as those of Charles Elmé Francatelli and Mrs Beeton.
The inclusion of potatoes was a later Indian addition, thought to be the result of confusion with the Hindi word for potato, ''aloo''.
Besides the previously mentioned spices, other commonly found spices in different curry powders in India are allspice, white pepper, ground mustard, ground ginger, cinnamon, roasted cumin, cloves, nutmeg, mace, green cardamom seeds or black cardamom pods, bay leaves and coriander seeds.
Peshawari karahi is another very popular version made with just meat, salt, tomatoes, and coriander.
There are many different varieties of Chinese curry, depending on each restaurant.
Curry powder is used as an incidental ingredient in other cuisines, including for example a "curry sauce" (''sauce au curry'', sometimes even ''au cari'') variation of the classic French béchamel.
For every 1 tsp turmeric normally 2 tsp masala is added.
They are often highly localised and reflect the meat and vegetables available.
From the culinary point of view, it is useful to consider the Indian subcontinent to be the entire historical region encompassed prior to independence since August 1947; that is, the modern countries of India, Sri Lanka, Pakistan, and Bangladesh.
Newa cuisine is a type of cuisine developed over centuries by the Newars of Nepal.
Most preparations start with the frying of a masala which is a concoction of ginger, garlic, onions and tomatoes with some dried spices.
Until 1998, as many as 85% of curry restaurants in the UK were British Bangladeshi restaurants, but in 2003 this figure declined to just over 65%.
A typical Pakistani lunch or dinner often consists of some form of bread (such as naan or roti) or rice with a meat or vegetable-based curry.
Vidharba's cuisine is usually spicier than that of the coastal and southern regions.
''Kadhi'' is a popular gram flour curry, usually served with steamed rice and bread.
Among Pakistani food, the Sindhi curries generally tend to be the hottest.
Fresh or canned tomatoes and bell peppers are a common addition.
In northern and eastern Japan including Tokyo, pork is the most popular meat for curry.
Beef is more common in western Japan, including Osaka, and in Okinawa, chicken is favoured.
The standard Japanese curry contains onions, carrots, potatoes, and sometimes celery, and a meat that is cooked in a large pot.
In Thai cuisine, curries are called ''kaeng'', and usually consist of meat, fish and/or vegetables in a sauce based on a paste made from chilies, onions or shallots, garlic, and shrimp paste.
In the West Indies, curry is a very popular dish.
Undhiyu, a Gujarati specialty, is a spicy 'wet' mixed-vegetable 'casserole' cooked in an earthenware pot, often eaten during the winter months.
Brick Lane in the East London Borough of Tower Hamlets is famous for its many curry houses.
Meat, including mutton and beef, are often an ingredient.
Authentic rendang uses water buffalo meat slow-cooked in thick coconut milk for a number of hours to tenderise, caramelise, and flavour the meat.
In Sri Lankan cuisine, rice, which is usually consumed daily, can be found at any special occasion, while spicy curries are favourite dishes for lunch and dinner.
More modest establishments are more likely to resort to frozen or dried ingredients and pre-packaged spice mixtures.
Dishes of highly spiced meat are thought to have originated in pre-historic times among the inhabitants of the Indus Valley Civilization.
Additional spices and herbs define the type of curry.
"Galimian," (from Malaysian "curry mee" or "curry noodles,") is also a popular Chinese curry dish.
The name derives from a Parsi dish of mutton cooked with lentils (''dal'') and vegetables.
European recipes have also evolved alongside Indian South African curries.
Emigrants from the Sylhet district of Bangladesh founded the curry house industry in Britain and in Sylhet some restaurants run by expatriates specialise in British style Indian food.
A spaghetti equivalent called Nan gyi thohk exists, in which wheat or rice noodles are eaten with thick chicken curry.
Curry seasoning is commonly sold in the form of a condensed brick which dissolves in the mixture of meat and vegetables.
British people brought curry from the Indian colony back to Britain and introduced it to Japan during the Meiji period, after Japan ended its policy of national self-isolation (Sakoku), and curry in Japan was categorised as a Western dish.
It is now available on Intercity rail trains, as a flavour for crisps and even as a pizza topping.
* Pathia – a hot curry, generally similar to a "Madras" with the addition of lemon juice and tomato purée.
Curries may be either 'dry' or 'wet'.
Although the names may derive from traditional dishes, often the recipes do not.
* Biryani – spiced rice and meat cooked together and usually served with vegetable curry sauce.
There are certain dishes that are exclusive to Punjab, such as maash di dal and saron da saag (sarson ka saag).
Other British curry derivatives include "Coronation chicken", a cold dish, often used as a sandwich filling, invented to commemorate the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II in 1953 – and '''curry sauce''' (or '''curry gravy'''), usually served warm with traditional British fast food dishes such as chips.
Bunny chow, a South African standard, has spread in popularity throughout the country and into other southern African countries and countries with large South African immigrant populations.
Northern and northeastern Thai curries generally do not contain coconut milk.
Most of the people are farmers so their traditional food is very simple.
The food in general from Andhra Pradesh and Telangana, both with Telugu-speaking natives, is considered the hottest in India.
During the 19th century, curry was also carried to the Caribbean by Indian indentured workers in the British sugar industry.
In Jamaica and Trinidad, curried goat is prominently featured.
Accompanying these staples are dairy products (yoghurt, whey), various nuts, native vegetables, and fresh and dried fruits.
It is usually eaten as ''karē raisu'' — curry, rice, and often pickled vegetables, served on the same plate and eaten with a spoon, a common lunchtime canteen dish.
For the meat, pork, beef, and chicken are the most popular, in order of decreasing popularity.
Onion is chopped or slices and garlic crushed and added to the pot.
As a result of the Mughal rule in the region, the cuisine of Aurangabad has been highly influenced by the North Indian method of cooking.
Many popular Punjabi dishes such as Butter Chicken and Rajma are curry-based.
Curry powder, a commercially prepared mixture of spices, is largely a Western creation, dating to the 18th century.
Tamarind is also often used.
* Kofta – refers to dishes containing meatballs (most frequently lamb), or vegetable substitutes (most often ground nuts).
Burmese curries can be generalised into two types – the hot spicy dishes which exhibit north Indian or Pakistani influence, and the milder "sweet" curries.
Although wet curries play a smaller role in Gujarat than elsewhere, there are a number of vegetarian examples with gravies based on buttermilk or coconut milk.
Regardless of the ethnic origin of a restaurant's ownership, the menu will often be influenced by the wider South Asia (sometimes including Nepalese dishes), and sometimes cuisines from further afield (such as Persian dishes).
Following World War II, curry became even more popular in Britain owing to the large number of immigrants from South Asia.
In Aceh and North Sumatra roti cane is often eaten with ''kari kambing''.
Laal maans is a popular meat curry from Rajasthan.
Curry was introduced to English cuisine starting with Anglo-Indian cooking in the 17th century as spicy sauces were added to bland boiled and cooked meats.
Dishes called 'curry' may contain fish, meat, poultry, or shellfish, either alone or in combination with vegetables.
* Jamaica: Especially curried chicken, goat, fish and shrimp.
Dal is often cooked with only turmeric and then fried in cumin, onion, and garlic.
Salt and chillies are added according to taste.
These Mindanaoan curries include ''Kulma'', synonymous with Korma, ''Tiyula Itum'' which is a beef curry blackened with burned coconut-meat powder, and Rendang, also eaten in Indonesia and Malaysia.
It is also used as the filling in a fried curry bread pastry.
Restaurants in Great Britain have adopted a number of Indian terms to identify popular dishes.
Curry has become an integral part of British cuisine, so much so that, since the late 1990s, chicken tikka masala has been referred to as "a true British national dish".
The first edition of her book used only black pepper and coriander seeds for seasoning of "currey".
The roti roll is another classic take-away curry that could either be a curry in a very flat roti bread (similar to a kebab bread) or the classic "chip, cheese and curry" roll which basically consists of fried chips with melted cheese and curry gravy rolled into a roti roll.
is one of the most popular dishes in Japan, where people eat it an average of 78 times a year.
Roti (circle or square) is mainly eaten for breakfast with vegetable curries.
In Indonesia curry is called ''kari'' or ''kare''.
Traditionally vegetarian foods dominate the menu with a range of non-vegetarian dishes including freshwater fish and seafood cooked with spices and seasoning.
The state, being the leading producer of red chilli and green chilli, influences the liberal use of spices, making their curries, chutneys, savories and pickles the hottest and spiciest in taste.
In Aceh, curries use ''daun salam koja'' or ''daun kari'' (''Murraya koenigii'') translated as "curry leaves".
Some British variations on Indian food are now being exported from the U.K. to India.
Lesser ingredients in these Western yellow curry powders are often coriander, cumin, fenugreek, mustard, chili, black pepper and salt.
This cuisine is characterised by the use of a common base for all the sauces to which spices are added when individual dishes are prepared.
Malayali curries of Kerala typically contain shredded coconut paste or coconut milk, curry leaves, and various spices.
The standard "feedstock" is usually a sautéed mixture of onion, garlic and fresh ginger, to which various spices are added, depending on the recipe, but which may include: cloves, cinnamon, cardamom, chilies, peppercorns, cumin and mustard seeds.
The 1758 edition of Hannah Glasse's ''The Art of Cookery'' contains a recipe "To make a currey the Indian way".
Examples of curries in the West Indies include:
Bengalis in the UK settled in big cities with industrial employment.
Kerala is known for its traditional sadya, a vegetarian meal served with boiled rice and a host of side dishes such as parippu (green gram), papadum, ghee, sambar, rasam, aviyal, kaalan, kichadi, pachadi, injipuli, Koottukari, pickles (mango, lime), thoran, one to four types of payasam, boli, olan, pulissery, moru (buttermilk), upperi, and banana chips.
The cuisine from the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province of Pakistan is somewhat similar to the cuisine of neighbouring Afghanistan.
Sometimes grated apples or honey are added for additional sweetness and other vegetables are sometimes used instead.
While the curry may have initially found its way to Malaysian shores via the Indian population, it has since become a staple among the Malays and Chinese too.
Traditionally, spices are used both whole and ground; cooked or raw; and they may be added at different times during the cooking process to produce different results.
is a kind of street snack and curry brisket is a typical main course in cha chaan teng and fast food restaurants.
Curry dishes are usually thick and spicy and are eaten along with steamed rice and variety of Indian breads.
Such mixtures are commonly thought to have first been prepared by Indian merchants for sale to members of the British Colonial government and army returning to Britain.
It is less spicy and seasoned than Indian and Southeast Asian curries, being more of a thick stew than a curry.
The first curry recipe in Britain appeared in ''The Art of Cookery made Plain and Easy'' by Hannah Glasse in 1747.
Better quality restaurants will normally make up new sauces on a daily basis, using fresh ingredients wherever possible and grinding their own spices.
European versions use mainly traditional recipes with the addition of red wine, milk, cream, vanilla or butter instead of ghee.
Lentils, vegetables and dairy products are essential accompaniments and are often served with rice.
The main ingredient may variously be brinjal (eggplant or aubergine), potatoes, fresh corn kernels, okra, tomatoes, etc.
Another influence was the establishment of the Portuguese trading centre in Goa in 1510, resulting in the introduction of chili pepper to India from the Americas, as a byproduct of the Columbian Exchange.
Spice level varies greatly depending on the sub-region as well as the household itself.
Due to this, the Sindhi cuisine often has abundant use of fish in curries.
Ghee and Mustard oil are the most commonly used cooking fat.
Meats used in these curries include beef, lamb and chicken.
For centuries, the East End has been the first port of call for many immigrants working in the docks and shipping from east Bengal.
The use of hot spices was not mentioned, which reflected the limited use of chili in India — chili plants had only been introduced into India around the late 15th century and at that time were only popular in southern India.
In the West, the best-known Kashmiri curry is ''rogan josh'', a wet curry of lamb with a brilliant red gravy whose colour is derived from a combination of Kashmiri chillies and an extract derived from the red flowers of the cockscomb plant (''mawal'').
Most curries are water based, with occasional use of dairy and coconut milk.
Pieces of Maldive fish are normally added to give the vegetable curry a certain flavour.
* Naga curry – relatively new extremely hot dish with unique savoury taste made with the highly aromatic Naga Morich or Bhut Jolokia chilli pepper.
The name was derived from a Mughlai dish of lamb strips beaten to make them tender.
Most Punjabi dishes are prepared using ''Tadka'', which is made with the frying of a masala which is a concoction of ginger, garlic, onions and tomatoes with some dried spices, this is followed by the addition of other ingredients, water, and occasionally milk.
There are dry and sauce-based curries.
* Phaal – "this is the hottest curry the restaurants can make.
In southern areas of Mindanao, the Sulu Archipelago and southern Palawan, various curries are seen, and owe their origins to their non-colonised histories and thus centuries of continued contact with Indonesia, the Malay Peninsula and the South Asia.
Mustard seeds are used in almost every dish, along with onions, curry leaves, and sliced red chilies fried in hot oil.
Additionally, many instead are entirely vegetarian, eaten especially among those who hold ethical or religious proscriptions against eating meat or seafood.
Examples are "Chicken Curries and Pork Curries.
Common spices include garam masala, dried chili powder, cumin powder, turmeric and ngapi, a fermented paste made from either fish or prawns.
A portion of curry would be about 1 cup cooked curry.
Coastal Maharashtrian – Konkani – curries use coconut extensively along with spices.
A favourite Pakistani curry is karahi, which is either mutton or chicken cooked in a cooking utensil called karahi, which is similar in shape to a wok.
Local ingredients, such as chili peppers, kaffir lime leaves, lemon grass, galangal are used and, in central and southern Thai cuisine, coconut milk.
Others include वांग्याचे भरीत (wangyache bhareet), उडदाची डाळ (udidachi dal), भरलेली वांगी (bharleli wangi), ठेचा भाकरी (thecha bhaakari) etc.
Water is added so that it can be mixed with rice.
Food that could last for several days and could be eaten without heating was preferred.
"Rice and curry" refers to a range of Sri Lankan dishes.
* Vindaloo – generally regarded as the classic "hot" restaurant curry.
The name "vindaloo" derives from the Portuguese ''vinha d'alhos'' or wine (''vinho'') and garlic (''alho''), the two definitive flavour ingredients.
Opor is also often part of a family meal around Lebaran, while gulai can be commonly found in Padang restaurants.
* Jalfrezi – onion, green chili and a thick sauce.
Dinner is usually curry, rice with some chutneys.
Burmese curries almost overwhelmingly lack coconut milk, setting them apart from most southeast Asian curries.
* Trinidad and Tobago: Especially curried chicken, duck, goat, beef, shrimp, and "aloo" (potato), along with wild meats.
In western Maharashtra, curries are very spicy, often with peanut powder.
To decrease the use of water in this desert state they use a lot of milk and milk products to cook curries.
A typical Punjabi meal consists of some form of bread or rice with a ''salan'' (curry).
A popular cooking fat is pure desi ghee, and some dishes are often enriched with liberal amounts of butter and cream.
Masala refers to spices, and this is the name given to the thick and pasty sauce based on a combination of spices with ghee (clarified butter), butter, palm oil or coconut milk.
Several different types of curries exist, depending on the cooking style, such as bhuna, bharta, roghan josh, qorma, qeema, and shorba.
Throughout the 19th and early 20th centuries, curry grew increasingly popular in Britain owing to the large number of British civil servants and military personnel associated with the British Raj.
Being at the crossroads of ancient trade routes has left a mark on the Malaysian cuisine.
In ''Mrs Beeton's Book of Household Management'', a recipe for curry powder is given that contains coriander, turmeric, cinnamon, cayenne, mustard, ginger, allspice and fenugreek; although she notes that it is more economical to purchase the powder at "any respectable shop".
Malaysian curries differ from state to state, even within similar ethnic groupings, as they are influenced by many factors, be it cultural, religious, agricultural or economical.
In general the food offered is Indian food cooked to British taste; although, there is increasing demand for authentic Indian food.
