Subsequent rule by Ptolemaic Egypt, the Classical and Eastern Roman Empire, Arab caliphates for a short period, the French Lusignan dynasty and the Venetians, was followed by over three centuries of Ottoman rule between 1571 and 1878 (''de jure'' until 1914).
Cyprus is also well known for its desserts, including ''lokum'' (also known as Turkish Delight) and Soutzoukos.
24 seats are allocated to the Turkish community but remain vacant since 1964.
Although after the Zürich and London conferences Turkey seemed to accept the existence of the Cypriot state and to distance itself from its policy of favouring the partition of the island, the goal of the Turkish and Turkish Cypriot leaders remained that of creating an independent Turkish state in the northern part of the island.
The Republic of Cyprus is a member of the following international groups: Australia Group, CN, CE, CFSP, EBRD, EIB, EU, FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICCt, ITUC, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Interpol, IOC, IOM, IPU, ITU, MIGA, NAM, NSG, OPCW, OSCE, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WCO, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTO.
* Third Support Brigade (ΙΙΙη Ταξιαρχία ΥΠ)
Cucumber and tomato are used widely in salads.
The art history of Cyprus can be said to stretch back up to 10,000 years, following the discovery of a series of Chalcolithic period carved figures in the villages of Khoirokoitia and Lempa.
In addition on the Greek side of the island there are the private channels ANT1 Cyprus, Plus TV, Mega Channel, Sigma TV, Nimonia TV (NTV) and New Extra.
In 1777–78, 47,000 Muslims constituted a majority over the island's 37,000 Christians.
In 1985 the TRNC adopted a constitution and held its first elections.
In January 1950, the Church of Cyprus organised a referendum under the supervision of clerics and with no Turkish Cypriot participation, where 96% of the participating Greek Cypriots voted in favour of ''enosis'', The Greeks were 80.2% of the total island' s population at the time (census 1946).
During March, Limassol has average temperatures of  during the day and  at night, in other coastal locations in Cyprus is generally  during the day and  at night.
The country's first ever Olympic medal, a silver medal, was won by the sailor Pavlos Kontides, at the 2012 Summer Olympics in the Men's Laser class.
As of the year 2000, the annual amount set aside in the national budget stands at Cy Pounds 500,000 (about 850,000 Euros).
These religious officials, together with Greek military officers and professionals, some of whom still pursued the ''Megali Idea'', would later found the guerrilla organisation ''Ethniki Organosis Kyprion Agoniston or'' National Organisation of Cypriot Fighters (EOKA).
Ottoman forces capturing Cyprus massacred many Greek and Armenian Christian inhabitants.
The second, the majority of the population, consisted of Greek Cypriots, serfs and laborers.
Russian, after English and Greek, is the third language used on many signs of shops and restaurants, particularly in Limassol and Paphos.
Cyprus was settled by Mycenaean Greeks in two waves in the 2nd millennium BC.
Tennis player Marcos Baghdatis was ranked 8th in the world, was a finalist at the Australian Open, and reached the Wimbledon semi-final, all in 2006.
On 15 July 1974, a coup d'état was staged by Greek Cypriot nationalists and elements of the Greek military junta in an attempt at ''enosis'', the incorporation of Cyprus into Greece.
In 1828, modern Greece's first president Ioannis Kapodistrias called for union of Cyprus with Greece, and numerous minor uprisings took place.
One year later, in 1974, the Cypriot government's Department of Statistics and Research estimated the total population of Cyprus at 641,000; of whom 506,000 (78.9%) were Greeks, and 118,000 (18.4%) Turkish.
In return for a €10 billion bailout from the European Commission, the European Central Bank and the International Monetary Fund, often referred to as the "troika", the Cypriot government was required to impose a significant haircut on uninsured deposits, a large proportion of which were held by wealthy Russians who used Cyprus as a tax haven.
The Ottomans abolished the feudal system previously in place and applied the millet system to Cyprus, under which non-Muslim peoples were governed by their own religious authorities.
In response to the coup,   five days later, on 20 July 1974, the Turkish army invaded the island, citing a right to intervene to restore the constitutional order from the 1960 Treaty of Guarantee.
In addition to this, the Republic of Cyprus is home to 110,200 foreign permanent residents and an estimated 10,000–30,000 undocumented illegal immigrants currently living in the south of the island.
They were the only athletes who managed to qualify and thus represented Cyprus at the 2010 Winter Olympics.
The earliest known human activity on the island dates to around the 10th millennium BC.
This new community also included banished Anatolian tribes, "undesirable" persons and members of various "troublesome" Muslim sects, as well as a number of new converts on the island.
Several traditional food (such as souvla and halloumi) and beverages are similar, as well as expressions and ways of life.
Although a determined effort was made to supplant native traditions and culture, the effort failed.
Cyprus was due to host the international art festival Manifesta in 2006 but this was cancelled at the last minute following a dispute between the Dutch organizers of Manifesta and the Cyprus Ministry of Education and Culture over the location of some of the Manifesta events in the Turkish sector of the capital Nicosia.
Cyprus was accepted into the EU as a whole, although the EU legislation is suspended in Northern Cyprus until a final settlement of the Cyprus problem.
The terms ''Cypriote'' and ''Cyprian'' are also used, though less frequently.
With an advanced, high-income economy and a very high Human Development Index, the Republic of Cyprus is a member of the Commonwealth since 1961 and was a founding member of the Non-Aligned Movement until it joined the European Union on 1 May 2004.
Tensions were heightened when Cypriot President Archbishop Makarios III called for constitutional changes, which were rejected by Turkey and opposed by Turkish Cypriots.
The average annual temperature on the coast is around  during the day and  at night.
There is an increasingly strong presence of both temporary and permanent emigre Cypriot writers in world literature, as well as writings by second and third -generation Cypriot writers born or raised abroad, often writing in English.
Also notable for a Mediterranean island, the siblings Christopher and Sophia Papamichalopoulou qualified for the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver, Canada.
Following the outbreak of the First World War and the decision of the Ottoman Empire to join the war on the side of the Central Powers, on 5 November 1914 the British Empire formally annexed Cyprus and declared the Ottoman ''Khedivate'' of Egypt and Sudan a ''Sultanate'' and British protectorate.
This followed earlier measures to quickly give immigration permits to third country nationals investing in Cyprus property.
The slogan "Partition or Death" was frequently used in Turkish Cypriot and Turkish protests starting in the late 1950s and continuing throughout the 1960s.
On 3 April 2008, Ledra Street was reopened in the presence of Greek and Turkish Cypriot officials.
Greek Cypriots have influences from Greece and Christianity, while Turkish Cypriots have influences from Turkey and Islam.
In that sense the buffer zone turns the Paralimni area on the southeast corner of the island into a ''de facto'', though not ''de jure'', exclave.
The southern part, even though located by the sea, is also an exclave because it has no territorial waters of its own, those being U.K. waters.
Over the preceding ten years, civilian transfer by Turkey had "reached new heights", in the words of one US ambassador.
Many Cypriot scholars fled Cyprus at troubled times such as Ioannis Kigalas (c. 1622–1687) who migrated from Cyprus to Italy in the 17th century, several of his works have survived in books of other scholars.
Greece dispatched 10,000 troops to Cyprus to counter a possible Turkish invasion.
The remarkably well-preserved Neolithic village of Khirokitia is a UNESCO World Heritage Site dating to approximately 6800 BC.
Insured deposits of €100,000 or less were not affected.
In both communities, music, dance and art are integral parts of social life and many artistic, verbal and nonverbal expressions, traditional dances such as tsifteteli, similarities in dance costumes and importance placed on social activities are shared between the communities.
During the Second World War, many enlisted in the Cyprus Regiment.
International pressure led to a ceasefire, and by then 37% of the island had been taken over by the Turks and 180,000 Greek Cypriots had been evicted from their homes in the north.
According to this census, the Greek Cypriot population was 482,000.
Intercommunal violence erupted on 21 December 1963, when two Turkish Cypriots were killed at an incident involving the Greek Cypriot police.
Frequently used vegetables include courgettes, green peppers, okra, green beans, artichokes, carrots, tomatoes, cucumbers, lettuce and grape leaves, and pulses such as beans, broad beans, peas, black-eyed beans, chick-peas and lentils.
In many ways these two artists set the template for subsequent Cypriot art and both their artistic styles and the patterns of their education remain influential to this day.
The northern part is the EAC refugee settlement.
There is also a Jewish community on Cyprus.
Cyprus occupies an important role in Greek mythology being the birthplace of Aphrodite and Adonis, and home to King Cinyras, Teucer and Pygmalion.
Only a small number of foreign films have been made in Cyprus.
High jumper Kyriakos Ioannou achieved a jump of 2.35&nbsp;m at the 11th IAAF World Championships in Athletics in Osaka, Japan, in 2007, winning the bronze medal.
Initially, the Turkish Cypriots favoured the continuation of the British rule.
Water wells discovered by archaeologists in western Cyprus are believed to be among the oldest in the world, dated at 9,000 to 10,500 years old.
As a result, Anastasiades was sworn in on and has been President since 28 February 2013.
Dams remain the principal source of water both for domestic and agricultural use; Cyprus has a total of 107 dams (plus one currently under construction) and reservoirs, with a total water storage capacity of about .
Per capita private car ownership is the 29th-highest in the world.
The main harbours of the island are Limassol and Larnaca, which service cargo, passenger and cruise ships.
Another nearly 4% of the island's area is covered by the UN buffer zone.
In 58&nbsp;BC Cyprus was acquired by the Roman Republic.
In addition to government grants, Cypriot co-productions are eligible for funding from the Council of Europe's Eurimages Fund, which finances European film co-productions.
Cyprus had a total population of 573,566; of whom 442,138 (77.1%) were Greeks, 104,320 (18.2%) Turks, and 27,108 (4.7%) others.
Cyprus is a presidential republic.
The Mesaoria plain is drained by the Pedieos River, the longest on the island.
Meanwhile, by 1964, ''enosis'' was a Greek policy that could not be abandoned; Makarios and the Greek prime minister Georgios Papandreou agreed that ''enosis'' should be the ultimate aim and King Constantine wished Cyprus "a speedy union with the mother country".
The coup ousted president Makarios III and replaced him with pro-enosis nationalist Nikos Sampson.
At the same time, around 50,000 Turkish Cypriots moved to the areas under the control of the Turkish Forces and settled in the properties of the displaced Greek Cypriots.
The Republic of Cyprus occupies the southern two-thirds of the island (59.74%).
Average annual temperature of sea is , from  in February to  in August (depending on the location).
The air force includes the 449th Helicopter Gunship Squadron (449 ΜΑΕ) – operating Aérospatiale SA-342L and Bell 206 and the 450th Helicopter Gunship Squadron (450 ME/P) – operating Mi-35P helicopters and the Britten-Norman BN-2B and Pilatus PC-9 fixed-wing aircraft.
Following his death and the subsequent division of his empire and wars among his successors, Cyprus became part of the Hellenistic empire of Ptolemaic Egypt.
It was during this period that the island was fully Hellenized.
In the Turkish-controlled area of Cyprus, three different companies are present: Turkcell, KKTC Telsim and Turk Telekom.
Cypriot rock music and ''Éntekhno'' rock is often associated with artists such as Michalis Hatzigiannis and Alkinoos Ioannidis.
In recent years significant quantities of offshore natural gas have been discovered in the area known as Aphrodite in Cyprus' exclusive economic zone (EEZ), about  south of Limassol at 33°5′40″N and 32°59′0″E.
A third airport, Ercan International Airport, operates in the Turkish Cypriot administered area with direct flights only to Turkey (Turkish Cypriot ports are closed to international traffic apart from Turkey).
Cyprus is one of only four EU nations in which vehicles drive on the left-hand side of the road, a remnant of British colonisation (the others being Ireland, Malta and the United Kingdom).
One source claims that the population in the north has reached 500,000, 50% of which are thought to be Turkish settlers or Cypriot-born children of such settlers.
In 2008, Dimitris Christofias became the country's first Communist head of state.
Cyprus' drilling efforts have the support of the US, EU, and UN, and on 19 September 2011 drilling in Block 12 began without any incidents being reported.
These violations include  looting of cultural treasures, deliberate destruction of churches, neglect of works of art, and altering the names of important historical sites, which was condemned by the International Council on Monuments and Sites.
According to the Republic of Cyprus's latest estimate, in 2005, the number of Cypriot citizens currently living in the Republic of Cyprus is around 871,036.
The Government has invested heavily in the creation of water desalination plants which have supplied almost 50 per cent of domestic water since 2001.
The grave is estimated to be 9,500 years old (7500&nbsp;BC), predating ancient Egyptian civilisation and pushing back the earliest known feline-human association significantly.
Hasan Hilmi Efendi, a Turkish Cypriot poet, was rewarded by the Ottoman sultan Mahmud II and said to be the "sultan of the poems".
'''Largest groups of foreign residents'''
The Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus occupies the northern third (34.85%), and the United Nations-controlled Green Line provides a buffer zone that separates the two and covers 2.67% of the island.
While a high-school diploma is mandatory for university attendance, admissions are decided almost exclusively on the basis of scores at centrally administered university entrance examinations that all university candidates are required to take.
On 1 January 2008, the Republic of Cyprus joined the eurozone.
The theme song to ''The Road to Ithaka'' was composed by Costas Cacoyannis and sung by Alexia Vassiliou.
Archaeological remains from this period include the well-preserved Neolithic village of Khirokitia, and Cyprus is home to some of the oldest water wells in the world.
The first two are the villages of Ormidhia and Xylotymvou.
The first consisted of Frankish nobles and their retinue, as well as Italian merchants and their families.
However, Turkey's offshore drilling companies have accessed both natural gas and oil resources since 2013.
80.4% of Cypriots are proficient in the English language as a second language.
In late 2013, the Cyprus Town Planning Department announced a series of incentives to stimulate the property market and increase the number of property developments in the country's town centres.
In April 2003, Northern Cyprus unilaterally eased border restrictions, permitting Cypriots to cross between the two sides for the first time in 30 years.
Three days later, when a ceasefire had been agreed, Turkey had landed 30,000 troops on the island and captured Kyrenia, the corridor linking Kyrenia to Nicosia, and the Turkish Cypriot quarter of Nicosia itself.
British officials also tolerated the creation of the Turkish underground organisation T.M.T.
According to the latest International Monetary Fund estimates, its per capita GDP (adjusted for purchasing power) at $30,769  Cyprus has been sought as a base for several offshore businesses for its low tax rates.
Russian is widely spoken among the country's minorities, residents and citizens of post-Soviet countries, and Pontic Greeks.
In some areas, Greek Cypriots prevented Turkish Cypriots from travelling and entering government buildings, while some Turkish Cypriots willingly withdrew due to the calls of the Turkish Cypriot administration.
Historically all men were required to spend 24 months serving in the National Guard after their 17th birthday, but in 2016 this period of compulsory service was reduced to 14 months.
The Evangelos Florakis Naval Base explosion, which occurred on 11 July 2011, was the most deadly military accident ever recorded in Cyprus.
The wall had cut across Ledra Street in the heart of Nicosia and was seen as a strong symbol of the island's 32-year division.
It was ruled by Assyria for a century starting in 708&nbsp;BC, before a brief spell under Egyptian rule and eventually Persian rule in 545&nbsp;BC.
The British had also adopted at the time a policy of "divide and rule".
Cyprus is a major tourist destination in the Mediterranean.
The previous Latin elite were destroyed and the first significant demographic change since antiquity took place with the formation of a Muslim community.
* Second Infantry Division (ΙΙα Μεραρχία ΠΖ)
Snow is possible only in the Troodos Mountains in the central part of island.
In 1994, cinematographic production received a boost with the establishment of the Cinema Advisory Committee.
The third is the Dhekelia Power Station, which is divided by a British road into two parts.
In December, London receives about 50 hours of sunshine while coastal locations in Cyprus about 180 hours (almost as much as in May in London).
Restricted autonomy under a constitution was proposed by the British administration but eventually rejected.
Fitch said Cyprus would need an additional € to support its banks and the downgrade was mainly due to the exposure of Bank of Cyprus, Cyprus Popular Bank and Hellenic Bank, Cyprus's three largest banks, to the Greek financial crisis.
In response, the Ottoman governor of Cyprus arrested and executed 486 prominent Greek Cypriots, including the Archbishop of Cyprus, Kyprianos and four other bishops.
Hospitality and buying or offering food and drinks for guests or others are common among both.
Many Greek and Turkish Cypriots fought in the British Army during both world wars.
The Greek Cypriot leadership believed that the rights given to Turkish Cypriots under the 1960 constitution were too extensive and designed the Akritas plan, which was aimed at reforming the constitution in favour of Greek Cypriots, persuading the international community about the correctness of the changes and violently subjugating Turkish Cypriots in a few days should they not accept the plan.
The instruments commonly associated with Cyprus folk music are the bouzouki, oud ("outi"), violin ("fkiolin"), lute ("laouto"), accordion, Cyprus flute ("pithkiavlin") and percussion (including the "toumperleki").
Cyprus has several heliports and two international airports: Larnaca International Airport and Paphos International Airport.
On 15 July 1974, the Greek military junta under Dimitrios Ioannides carried out a coup d'état in Cyprus, to unite the island with Greece.
In a reversal from the days of Latin rule, the head of the Church of Cyprus was invested as leader of the Greek Cypriot population and acted as mediator between Christian Greek Cypriots and the Ottoman authorities.
Rain occurs mainly in winter, with summer being generally dry.
The Turkish Cypriots subsequently declared independence in 1983 as the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus but were recognised only by Turkey.
Metal also has a small following in Cyprus represented by bands such as Armageddon (rev.16:16), Blynd, Winter's Verge and Quadraphonic.
Costas holds a 6–3 record in UFC bouts, and recently defeated "The Monsoon" Lorenz Larkin with a Knockout in the 1st round.
Dimitris Lipertis, Vasilis Michaelides and Pavlos Liasides are folk poets who wrote poems mainly in the Cypriot-Greek dialect.
On 16 August 1960, Cyprus attained independence after the Zürich and London Agreement between the United Kingdom, Greece and Turkey.
The narrow Kyrenia Range, extending along the northern coastline, occupies substantially less area, and elevations are lower, reaching a maximum of .
During the late Bronze Age the island experienced two waves of Greek settlement.
The earliest confirmed site of human activity on Cyprus is Aetokremnos, situated on the south coast, indicating that hunter-gatherers were active on the island from around 10,000 BC, with settled village communities dating from 8200 BC.
Reporters Without Borders rank the Republic of Cyprus 24th out of 180 countries in the 2015 World Press Freedom Index, with a score of 15.62
It is also the world's 80th largest by area and world's 51st largest by population.
Nevertheless, the Greek Cypriots conducted one in 1973, without the Turkish Cypriot populace.
Efforts have also been made to raise public awareness of the situation and to encourage domestic water users to take more responsibility for the conservation of this increasingly scarce commodity.
The Greek Cypriots viewed the island as historically Greek and believed that union with Greece was a natural right.
In 2009 the Greek director, writer and producer Vassilis Mazomenos filmed in Cyprus Guilt.
In 1191, during the Third Crusade, Richard I of England captured the island from Isaac Komnenos of Cyprus He used it as a major supply base that was relatively safe from the Saracens.
In September 1999, ''To Tama'' (''The Promise'') by Andreas Pantzis also received funding from the Eurimages Fund.
Cyprus and Israel demarcated their maritime border in 2010, and in August 2011, the US-based firm Noble Energy entered into a production-sharing agreement with the Cypriot government regarding the block's commercial development.
In 1570, a full-scale Ottoman assault with 60,000 troops brought the island under Ottoman control, despite stiff resistance by the inhabitants of Nicosia and Famagusta.
The junta in Athens, and then the Sampson regime in Cyprus fell from power.
English was the sole official language during British colonial rule and the lingua franca until 1960, and continued to be used (''de facto'') in courts of law until 1989 and in legislation until 1996.
The middle of summer is hot – in July and August on the coast the average temperature is usually around  during the day and around  at night (inland, in the highlands average temperature exceeds ) while in the June and September on the coast the average temperature is usually around  during the day and around  at night in Limassol, while is usually around  during the day and around  at night in Paphos.
The first President of Cyprus, Makarios III, was an archbishop.
This is about double that of cities in the northern half of Europe; for comparison, London receives about 1,540 per year.
The United Nations recognises the sovereignty of the Republic of Cyprus over the entire island of Cyprus.
Among all cities in the Mediterranean part of the European Union, Limassol has one of the warmest winters, in the period January – February average temperature is  during the day and  at night, in other coastal locations in Cyprus is generally  during the day and  at night.
The Cypriot government adopted the euro as the national currency on 1 January 2008.
His brother and successor Amalric was recognised as King of Cyprus by Henry VI, Holy Roman Emperor.
Fresh vegetables and fruits are common ingredients.
Hadjisavvas has asserted that these actions are motivated by a Turkish policy of erasing the Greek presence in Northern Cyprus within a framework of ethnic cleansing, as well as by greed and profit-seeking on the part of the individuals involved.
Cyprus has two official languages, Greek and Turkish.
In 2010 the new bus network was implemented.
In Northern Cyprus, the local channels are BRT, the Turkish Cypriot equivalent to the Cyprus Broadcasting Corporation, and a number of private channels.
The Secretary of State for the Colonies in a letter dated 15 July 1958 had advised the Governor of Cyprus not to act against T.M.T despite its illegal actions so as not to harm British relations with the Turkish government.
Outside Cyprus there is a significant and thriving Greek Cypriot diaspora and Turkish Cypriot diaspora in the United Kingdom, Australia, Canada, the United States, Greece and Turkey.
More recently British writer Victoria Hislop used Cyprus as the setting for her 2014 novel ''The Sunrise.''
In addition to these languages, 12% speak French and 5% speak German.
The occupation is viewed as illegal under international law, amounting to illegal occupation of EU territory since Cyprus became a member of the European Union.
In 2014, a group of Cypriot refugees and a European parliamentarian, later joined by the Cypriot government, filed a complaint to the International Court of Justice, accusing Turkey of violating the Geneva Conventions by directly or indirectly transferring its civilian population into occupied territory.
Although without official status, English is widely spoken and it features widely on road signs, public notices, and in advertisements, etc.
The Greek Cypriot population, meanwhile, had become hopeful that the British administration would lead to ''enosis''.
The Turkish Cypriots also viewed themselves as a distinct ethnic group of the island and believed in their having a separate right to self-determination from Greek Cypriots.
This includes writers such as Stephen Laughton, Michael Paraskos, Stel Pavlou and Stephanos Stephanides.
After the partition of the island in 1974, Greeks conducted four more censuses: in 1976, 1982, 1992 and 2001; these excluded the Turkish population which was resident in the northern part of the island.
But after the peace negotiations in Geneva, the Turkish government reinforced their Kyrenia bridgehead and started a second invasion on 14 August.
Among a variety of sanctions against Turkey, in mid-1975 the US Congress imposed an arms embargo on Turkey for using American-supplied equipment during the Turkish invasion of Cyprus in 1974.
Turkish leaders for a period advocated the annexation of Cyprus to Turkey as Cyprus was considered an "extension of Anatolia" by them; while since the 19th century, the majority Greek Cypriot population and its Orthodox church had been pursuing union with Greece, which became a Greek national policy in the 1950s.
The highest point on Cyprus is Mount Olympus at , located in the centre of the Troodos range.
Arguably the two founding fathers of modern Cypriot art were Adamantios Diamantis (1900–1994) who studied at London's Royal College of Art and Christopheros Savva (1924–1968) who also studied in London, at Saint Martin's School of Art.
The head of state and of the government is elected by a process of universal suffrage for a five-year term.
Two chronicles, one written by Leontios Machairas and the other by Georgios Voustronios, cover the entire Middle Ages until the end of Frankish rule (4th century–1489).
Efforts have been made to enhance freedom of movement between the two sides.
However, the value of a state high-school diploma is limited by the fact that the grades obtained account for only around 25% of the final grade for each topic, with the remaining 75% assigned by the teacher during the semester, in a minimally transparent way.
This action precipitated the Turkish invasion of Cyprus, which led to the capture of the present-day territory of Northern Cyprus the following month, after a ceasefire collapsed, and the displacement of over 150,000 Greek Cypriots and 50,000 Turkish Cypriots.
Water desalination plants are gradually being constructed to deal with recent years of prolonged drought.
Cyprus demarcated its maritime border with Egypt in 2003, and with Lebanon in 2007.
The physical relief of the island is dominated by two mountain ranges, the Troodos Mountains and the smaller Kyrenia Range, and the central plain they encompass, the Mesaoria.
Turkey, which does not recognise the border agreements of Cyprus with its neighbours, threatened to mobilise its naval forces if Cyprus proceeded with plans to begin drilling at Block 12.
Between 2001 and 2004, exceptionally heavy annual rainfall pushed water reserves up, with supply exceeding demand, allowing total storage in the island's reservoirs to rise to an all-time high by the start of 2005.
The event which is very popular in Cyprus was introduced in the 20th century.
In modern times Cypriot art history begins with the painter Vassilis Vryonides (1883–1958) who studied at the Academy of Fine Arts in Venice.
Nicosia International Airport has been closed since 1974.
The 2012–2013 Cypriot financial crisis led to an agreement with the Eurogroup in March 2013 to split the country's second largest bank, the Cyprus Popular Bank (also known as Laiki Bank), into a "bad" bank which would be wound down over time and a "good" bank which would be absorbed by the Bank of Cyprus.
