Just as Alexander the Great before him, the Shah of Iran wanted to appeal to Cyrus's legacy to legitimize his own rule by extension.
With Astyages out of power, all of his vassals (including many of Cyrus's relatives) were now under his command.
Cyrus's conquest of Media was merely the start of his wars.
The policies of Cyrus with respect to treatment of minority religions are well documented in Babylonian texts as well as Jewish sources and the historians accounts.
The empire over which Cyrus ruled was the largest the Ancient World had ever seen and may be to this day the largest empire ever."
The United Nations has declared the relic to be an "ancient declaration of human rights" since 1971, approved by then Secretary General Sithu U Thant, after he "was given a replica by the sister of the Shah of Iran".
This system lasted for centuries, and was retained both by the invading Seleucid dynasty during their control of Persia, and later Iranian dynasties including the Parthians and Sasanians.
On December 10, 2003, in her acceptance of the Nobel Peace Prize, Shirin Ebadi evoked Cyrus, saying:
However it has been suggested by M. Waters that Cyrus is unrelated to the Achaemenids or Darius the Great and that his family was of Teispid and Anshanite origin instead of Achaemenid.
There are several inscriptions of Cyrus the Great and later kings that refer to Cambyses I as the "great king" and "king of Anshan".
Cyrus occupied the capital at Sardis, conquering the Lydian kingdom in 546 BC.
His personality as seen by the Greeks influenced them and Alexander the Great, and, as the tradition was transmitted by the Romans, may be considered to influence our thinking even now."
These agree with Cyrus's own inscriptions, as Ashan and Parsa were different names of the same land.
The Battle of Pteria was effectively a stalemate, with both sides suffering heavy casualties by nightfall.
Astyages, last king of the Median Empire and Cyrus' grandfather, may have ruled over the majority of the Ancient Near East, from the Lydian frontier in the west to the Parthians and Persians in the east.
Mazares continued the conquest of Asia Minor but died of unknown causes during his campaign in Ionia.
Within this edifice was a golden coffin, resting on a table with golden supports, inside of which the body of Cyrus the Great was interred.
Before returning to the capital, a Lydian named Pactyas was entrusted by Cyrus the Great to send Croesus's treasury to Persia.
In fact, the administration of the empire through satraps and the vital principle of forming a government at Pasargadae were the works of Cyrus.
Arsames would live to see his grandson become Darius the Great, Shahanshah of Persia, after the deaths of both of Cyrus's sons.
After her death, Cyrus insisted on public mourning throughout the kingdom.
The account of Herodotus from his ''Histories'' provides the second-longest detail, in which Cyrus met his fate in a fierce battle with the Massagetae, a tribe from the southern deserts of Khwarezm and Kyzyl Kum in the southernmost portion of the steppe regions of modern-day Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan, following the advice of Croesus to attack them in their own territory.
Herodotus notes that Cyrus also subdued and incorporated Sogdia into the empire during his military campaigns of 546-539 BC.
Achaemenes built the state Parsumash in the southwest of Iran and was succeeded by Teispes, who took the title "King of Anshan" after seizing Anshan city and enlarging his kingdom further to include Pars proper.
The Babylonian army was routed, and on October&nbsp;10, Sippar was seized without a battle, with little to no resistance from the populace.
However, Alexander admired Cyrus, from an early age reading Xenophon's ''Cyropaedia'', which described Cyrus's heroism in battle and governance as a king and legislator.
The name and its meaning has been recorded in ancient inscriptions in different languages.
These folk stories are, however, contradicted by Cyrus's own testimony, according to which he was preceded as king of Persia by his father, grandfather and great-grandfather.
According to Herodotus, Astyages had two dreams in which a flood, and then a series of fruit bearing vines, emerged from her pelvis, and covered the entire kingdom.
On October 29, Cyrus himself entered the city of Babylon and detained Nabonidus.
Cyrus sent Harpagus to complete Mazares's conquest of Asia Minor.
A satrapy was an administrative unit, usually organized on a geographical basis.
Though his father died in 551 BC, Cyrus the Great had already succeeded to the throne in 559&nbsp;BC; however, Cyrus was not yet an independent ruler.
''In the first year of King Cyrus, Cyrus the king issued a decree: "Concerning the house of God at Jerusalem, let the temple, the place where sacrifices are offered, be rebuilt and let its foundations be retained, its height being 60 cubits and its width 60 cubits; with three layers of huge stones and one layer of timbers.
Ancient documents mention that Teispes had a son called Cyrus I, who also succeeded his father as "king of Anshan".
"His anointed one") (), and is the only non-Jew to be called so: "So said the Lord to His anointed one, to Cyrus".
After his father's death, Cyrus inherited the Persian throne at Pasargadae which was a vassal of Astyages.
Cyrus the Great's remains were interred in his capital city of Pasargadae, where today a limestone tomb (built around 540–530 BC) still exists which many believe to be his.
However Cambyses II's maternal grandfather Pharnaspes is named by Herodotus as "an Achaemenian" too.
So nobly beautifying the hanging Gardens of Babylon, that he was also thought to be the author thereof."
In the Bible, he is known as Koresh ().
This view has been criticized by some historians as a misunderstanding of the Cylinder's generic nature as a traditional statement that new monarchs make at the beginning of their reign.
() As the text suggests, Cyrus did ultimately release the nation of Israel from its exile without compensation or tribute.
Shortly before the final Battle of Thymbra between the two rulers, Harpagus advised Cyrus the Great to place his dromedaries in front of his warriors; the Lydian horses, not used to the dromedaries' smell, would be very afraid.
He ended his conquest of the area in 542 BC and returned to Persia.
The Lydians first attacked the Achaemenid Empire's city of Pteria in Cappadocia.
Pasargadae was a place for two magnificent palaces surrounded by a majestic royal park and vast formal gardens; among them was the four-quartered wall gardens of "Paradisia" with over 1000 meters of channels made out of carved limestone, designed to fill small basins at every 16 meters and water various types of wild and domestic flora.
Cyrus had a general policy of religious tolerance throughout his vast empire.
Cyrus the Great was ultimately killed, and his forces suffered massive casualties in what Herodotus referred to as the fiercest battle of his career and the ancient world.
Cambyses continued his father's policy of expansion, and captured Egypt for the Empire, but soon died after only seven years of rule.
It is probable that Cyrus engaged in negotiations with the Babylonian generals to obtain a compromise on their part and therefore avoid an armed confrontation.
Sending him a warning to cease his encroachment in which she stated she expected he would disregard anyway, Tomyris challenged him to meet her forces in honorable warfare, inviting him to a location in her country a day's march from the river, where their two armies would formally engage each other.
This may also point to a fascinating relationship to the mythological "first king" of Persia, Jamshid, whose name also incorporates the element "sun" ("shid").
The Jewish Bible's Ketuvim ends in Second Chronicles with the decree of Cyrus, which returned the exiles to the Promised Land from Babylon along with a commission to rebuild the temple.
The rise of Persia under Cyrus's rule had a profound impact on the course of world history.
He accepted her offer, but, learning that the Massagetae were unfamiliar with wine and its intoxicating effects, he set up and then left camp with plenty of it behind, taking his best soldiers with him and leaving the least capable ones.
The text of the cylinder denounces Nabonidus as impious and portrays the victorious Cyrus pleasing the god Marduk.
An alternative account from Xenophon's ''Cyropaedia'' contradicts the others, claiming that Cyrus died peaceably at his capital.
According to the Nabonidus Chronicle, Astyages launched an attack against Cyrus, "king of Ansan."
Also let the gold and silver utensils of the house of God, which Nebuchadnezzar took from the temple in Jerusalem and brought to Babylon, be returned and brought to their places in the temple in Jerusalem; and you shall put them in the house of God."
Near the beginning of October, Cyrus fought the Battle of Opis in or near the strategic riverside city of Opis on the Tigris, north of Babylon.
However, near the end of the winter, before the allies could unite, Cyrus the Great pushed the war into Lydian territory and besieged Croesus in his capital, Sardis.
The ancient Greek historians Ctesias and Plutarch noted that Cyrus was named from ''Kuros'', the Sun, a concept which has been interpreted as meaning "like the Sun" (Khurvash) by noting its relation to the Persian noun for sun, ''khor'', while using ''-vash'' as a suffix of likeness.
Through his military savvy, Cyrus created an organized army including the Immortals unit, consisting of 10,000 highly trained soldiers.
The edifice has survived the test of time, through invasions, internal divisions, successive empires, regime changes and revolutions.
According to him, this event took place northeast of the headwaters of the Syr Darya.
Karl Hoffmann has suggested a translation based on the meaning of an Indo-European-root "to humiliate" and accordingly "Cyrus" means "humiliator of the enemy in verbal contest".
His views are believed expressed in the content of the Cylinder:
Neil MacGregor, Director of the British Museum, has stated that the cylinder was "the first attempt we know about running a society, a state with different nationalities and faiths — a new kind of statecraft."
According to Herodotus, Cyrus the Great spared Croesus's life and kept him as an advisor, but this account conflicts with some translations of the contemporary Nabonidus Chronicle (the King who was himself subdued by Cyrus the Great after conquest of Babylonia), which interpret that the king of Lydia was slain.
In 600 BC, Cyrus I was succeeded by his son, Cambyses I, who reigned until 559 BC.
The text of the cylinder denounces the deposed Babylonian king Nabonidus as impious and portrays Cyrus as pleasing to the chief god Marduk.
Nabonidus was staying in the city at the time and soon fled to the capital, Babylon, which he had not visited in years.
The offer was rebuffed, and thus Cyrus levied an army and marched against the Lydians, increasing his numbers while passing through nations in his way.
Whether this was a new policy or the continuation of policies followed by the Babylonians and Assyrians (as Lester Grabbe maintains) is disputed.
In the Persian language and especially in Iran, Cyrus's name is spelled as  .
Ctesias, in his ''Persica'', has the longest account, which says Cyrus met his death while putting down resistance from the Derbices infantry, aided by other Scythian archers and cavalry, plus Indians and their elephants.
Meanwhile, the Persians invited the citizens of Ionia who were part of the Lydian kingdom to revolt against their ruler.
The cylinder emphasizes Cyrus's continuity with previous Babylonian rulers, asserting his virtue as a traditional Babylonian king while denigrating his predecessor.
From the Mediterranean Sea and Hellespont in the west to the Indus River in the east, Cyrus the Great created the largest empire the world had yet seen.
Cyrus the Great was a son of Cambyses I, who named his son after his father, Cyrus I.
Either before or after Babylon, he led an expedition into central Asia, which resulted in major campaigns that were described as having brought "into subjection every nation without exception".
Many of the Iranian dynasties following the Achaemenid Empire and their kings saw themselves as the heirs to Cyrus the Great and have claimed to continue the line begun by Cyrus.
However, there are different opinions among scholars whether this is also the case for the Sassanid Dynasty.
After taking Babylon, Cyrus the Great proclaimed himself "king of Babylon, king of Sumer and Akkad, king of the four corners of the world" in the famous Cyrus Cylinder, an inscription deposited in the foundations of the Esagila temple dedicated to the chief Babylonian god, Marduk.
This marriage pacified several vassal including the Bactrians, Parthians, and Saka.
It goes on to describe how Cyrus had improved the lives of the citizens of Babylonia, repatriated displaced peoples and restored temples and cult sanctuaries.
Many of the thinkers and rulers of Classical Antiquity as well as the Renaissance and Enlightenment era, and the forefathers of the United States of America sought inspiration from Cyrus the Great through works such as Cyropaedia.
Philip R. Davies called the authenticity of the decree "dubious", citing Grabbe and adding that J. Briend argued against "the authenticity of Ezra 1.1–4 is J. Briend, in a paper given at the Institut Catholique de Paris on 15 December 1993, who denies that it resembles the form of an official document but reflects rather biblical prophetic idiom."
Cyrus lived in secrecy, but when he reached the age of 10, during a childhood game, he had the son of a nobleman beaten when he refused to obey Cyrus's commands.
One of the few surviving sources of information that can be dated directly to Cyrus's time is the Cyrus cylinder, a document in the form of a clay cylinder inscribed in Akkadian cuneiform.
At the end of Cyrus's rule, the Achaemenid Empire stretched from Asia Minor in the west to the northwestern areas of India in the east.
On some accounts, Alexander's decision to put the Magi on trial was more about his attempt to undermine their influence and his show of power in his newly conquered empire, than a concern for Cyrus's tomb.
According to the historians Herodotus and Ctesias, Cyrus spared the life of Astyages and married his daughter, Amytis.
The details of Cyrus's death vary by account.
And let the cost be paid from the royal treasury.
Another inscription (from CM's) mentions Cambyses I as "mighty king" and "an Achaemenian", which according to the bulk of scholarly opinion was engraved under Darius and considered as a later forgery by Darius.
Frye writes, "He became the epitome of the great qualities expected of a ruler in antiquity, and he assumed heroic features as a conqueror who was tolerant and magnanimous as well as brave and daring.
Iranologist, Ilya Gershevitch explains this statement by Herodotus and its connection with the four winged bas-relief figure of Cyrus the Great in the following way:
Harpagus delegated the task to Mithradates, one of the shepherds of Astyages, who raised the child and passed off his stillborn son to Harpagus as the dead infant Cyrus.
Cyrus has been known for his innovations in building projects; he further developed the technologies that he found in the conquered cultures and applied them in building the palaces of Pasargadae.
Although not mentioned specifically in the text, the repatriation of the Jews from their "Babylonian captivity" has been interpreted as part of this general policy.
Xenophon's account in Cyropædia further names Cambyses's wife as Mandane and mentions Cambyses as king of Iran (ancient Persia).
When Alexander reached the tomb, he was horrified by the manner in which the tomb was treated, and questioned the Magi and put them to court.
Having originated from Persis, roughly corresponding to the modern Iranian province of Fars, Cyrus has played a crucial role in defining the national identity of modern Iran.
Cyrus's conquests began a new era in the age of empire building, where a vast superstate, comprising many dozens of countries, races, religions, and languages, were ruled under a single administration headed by a central government.
Although some have asserted that the cylinder represents a form of human rights charter, historians generally portray it in the context of a long-standing Mesopotamian tradition of new rulers beginning their reigns with declarations of reforms.
However, this transfer of power within the family seems to have been smooth, and it is likely that Arsames was still the nominal governor of Parsa, under Cyrus's authority—more of a Prince or a Grand Duke than a King.
Astyages summoned his daughter Mandane, at the time pregnant with Cyrus, back to Ectabana to have the child killed.
He was also famous for his love of gardens; the recent excavations in his capital city has revealed the existence of the Pasargad Persian Garden and a network of irrigation canals.
Prior to Cyrus's invasion of Babylon, the Neo-Babylonian Empire had conquered many kingdoms.
What is sometimes referred to as the Edict of Restoration (actually two edicts) described in the Bible as being made by Cyrus the Great left a lasting legacy on the Jewish religion, where, because of his policies in Babylonia, he is referred to by the Jewish Bible as Messiah (lit.
'''Cyrus II of Persia''' ( ''Kūruš''; New Persian:  ''Kūrosh'' &thinsp;; c.&nbsp;600 or 576&nbsp;– 530&nbsp;BC), commonly known as '''Cyrus the Great'''&thinsp; and also called '''Cyrus the Elder''' by the Greeks, was the founder of the Achaemenid Empire.
Cyrus the Great's dominions comprised the largest empire the world had ever seen.
Thomas Jefferson, for example, owned two copies of ''Cyropaedia'', one with parallel Greek and Latin translations on facing pages showing substantial Jefferson markings that signify the amount of influence the book has had on drafting the United States Declaration of Independence.
Cyrus and, indeed, the Achaemenid influence in the ancient world also extended as far as Athens, where many Athenians adopted aspects of the Achaemenid Persian culture as their own, in a reciprocal cultural exchange.
This edict is also fully reproduced in the Book of Ezra.
They accused the Jews of conspiring to rebel, so Cyrus in turn stopped the construction, which would not be completed until 515&nbsp;BC, during the reign of Darius&nbsp;I.
In addition to Babylonia itself, Cyrus probably incorporated its subnational entities into his Empire, including Syria, Judea, and Arabia Petraea, although there is no direct evidence of this fact.
However, soon after Cyrus's departure, Pactyas hired mercenaries and caused an uprising in Sardis, revolting against the Persian satrap of Lydia, Tabalus.
The final version of Cyrus's death comes from Berossus, who only reports that Cyrus met his death while warring against the Dahae archers northwest of the headwaters of the Syr Darya.
The reign of Cyrus the Great lasted between 29 and 31 years.
Further organization of newly conquered territories into provinces ruled by satraps, was continued by Cyrus's successor Darius the Great.
Elsewhere in Isaiah, God is described as saying, "I will raise up Cyrus in my righteousness: I will make all his ways straight.
Mazares marched his troops into the Greek country and subdued the cities of Magnesia and Priene.
Upon his return, Cyrus married Cassandane who was an Achaemenian and the daughter of Pharnaspes who bore him two sons, Cambyses II and Bardiya along with three daughters, Atossa, Artystone, and Roxane.
It was common in the past to give 547 BC as the year of the conquest due to some interpretations of the Nabonidus Chronicle, but this position is currently not much held.
Babylonian texts suggest that the hostilities lasted for at least three years (553-550), and the final battle resulted in the capture of Ecbatana.
He was succeeded either by Cyrus's other son Bardiya or an impostor posing as Bardiya, who became the sole ruler of Persia for seven months, until he was killed by Darius the Great.
Pierre Briant wrote that given the poor information we have, "it seems quite reckless to try to reconstruct what the religion of Cyrus might have been."
However, Harpagus contacted Cyrus and encouraged his revolt against Media, before eventually defecting along with several of the nobility and a portion of the army.
The Jews honored him as a dignified and righteous king.
Alexander the Great was himself infatuated with and admired Cyrus the Great, from an early age reading Xenophon's ''Cyropaedia'', which described Cyrus's heroism in battle and governance and his abilities as a king and a legislator.
They were successfully defeated, and, although he was taken prisoner, Spargapises committed suicide once he regained sobriety.
He was succeeded by his son, Cambyses II, who managed to add to the empire by conquering Egypt, Nubia, and Cyrenaica during his short rule.
Cyrus founded the empire as a multi-state empire governed by four capital states; Pasargadae, Babylon, Susa and Ecbatana.
In one Biblical passage, Isaiah refers to him as Messiah (lit.
Cyrus the Great thus united the twin Achamenid kingdoms of Parsa and Anshan into Persia proper.
Iranian philosophy, literature and religion all played dominant roles in world events for the next millennium.
The British Museum describes the cylinder as "an instrument of ancient Mesopotamian propaganda" that "reflects a long tradition in Mesopotamia where, from as early as the third millennium BC, kings began their reigns with declarations of reforms."
Strabo and Arrian give nearly identical descriptions of the tomb, based on the eyewitness report of Aristobulus of Cassandreia, who at the request of Alexander the Great visited the tomb two times.
He will rebuild my city and set my exiles free, but not for a price or reward, says God Almighty."
The general of Tomyris's army, Spargapises, who was also her son, and a third of the Massagetian troops, killed the group Cyrus had left there and, finding the camp well stocked with food and the wine, unwittingly drank themselves into inebriation, diminishing their capability to defend themselves when they were then overtaken by a surprise attack.
In the 1970s, the Shah of Iran Mohammad Reza Pahlavi identified his famous proclamation inscribed onto Cyrus Cylinder as the oldest known declaration of human rights, and the Cylinder has since been popularized as such.
During his visit to Pasargadae he ordered Aristobulus to decorate the interior of the sepulchral chamber of his tomb.
During his reign, Cyrus maintained control over a vast region of conquered kingdoms, achieved through retaining and expanding the satrapies.
According to the Bible it was King Artaxerxes who was convinced to stop the construction of the temple in Jerusalem.
These particular passages (Isaiah 40–55, often referred to as ''Deutero-Isaiah'') are believed by most modern critical scholars to have been added by another author toward the end of the Babylonian exile
Though it is generally believed that Zarathushtra's teachings maintained influence on Cyrus's acts and policies, so far no clear evidence has been found to indicate that Cyrus practiced a specific religion.
Cyrus's empire was based on tribute and conscripts from the many parts of his realm.
He also wrote that "appeals to Marduk in the cylinder and to Yahweh in the biblical decree demonstrate the Persian tendency to co-opt local religious and political traditions in the interest of imperial control."
However, there was Jewish criticism of him after he was lied to by the Cuthites, who wanted to halt the building of the Second Temple.
The historical nature of this decree has been challenged.
This view has been disputed by some as "rather anachronistic" and tendentious, as the modern concept of human rights would have been quite alien to Cyrus's contemporaries and is not mentioned by the cylinder.
Regardless, Alexander the Great ordered Aristobulus to improve the tomb's condition and restore its interior.
Croesus retreated to Sardis the following morning.
Upon his resting place, was a covering of tapestry and drapes made from the best available Babylonian materials, utilizing fine Median worksmanship; below his bed was a fine red carpet, covering the narrow rectangular area of his tomb.
The general and the state secretary reported directly to the satrap as well as the central government.
The eponymous founder of this dynasty was Achaemenes (from Old Persian ''Haxāmaniš'').
Cyrus did not venture into Egypt, as he himself died in battle, fighting the Massagetae along the Syr&nbsp;Darya in December 530 BC.
This became a very successful model for centralized administration and establishing a government working to the advantage and profit of its subjects.
Achaemenids are "descendants of Achaemenes" as Darius the Great, the ninth king of the dynasty, traces his genealogy to him and declares "for this reason we are called Achaemenids".
Herodotus also recounts that Cyrus saw in his sleep the oldest son of Hystaspes (Darius I) with wings upon his shoulders, shadowing with the one wing Asia, and with the other wing Europe.
The Massagetae were related to the Scythians in their dress and mode of living; they fought on horseback and on foot.
However, some scholars question this version, mostly because Herodotus admits this event was one of many versions of Cyrus's death that he heard from a supposedly reliable source who told him no one was there to see the aftermath.
The strategy worked; the Lydian cavalry was routed.
Like his predecessors, Cyrus had to recognize Median overlordship.
pray daily before Bêl and Nabû for long life for me, and may they speak a gracious word for me and say to Marduk, my lord, "May Cyrus, the king who worships you, and Cambyses, his son," (Cylinder, English Translation line:35)
However, in some other passages, Herodotus's account is wrong also on the name of the son of Chishpish, which he mentions as Cambyses but, according to modern scholars, should be Cyrus I.
Cuneiform evidence from Babylon proves that Cyrus died around December 530 BC, and that his son Cambyses II had become king.
Professor Lester L Grabbe argues that there was no decree but that there was a policy that allowed exiles to return to their homelands and rebuild their temples.
Cyrus the Great is also well recognized for his achievements in human rights, politics, and military strategy, as well as his influence on both Eastern and Western civilizations.
While in Sardis, Croesus sent out requests for his allies to send aid to Lydia.
The Nabonidus Chronicle records that, prior to the battle(s), Nabonidus had ordered cult statues from outlying Babylonian cities to be brought into the capital, suggesting that the conflict had begun possibly in the winter of 540 BC.
In the 1970s the Shah of Iran adopted the Cyrus cylinder as a political symbol, using it "as a central image in his celebration of 2500 years of Iranian monarchy."
Cyrus was born to Cambyses I, King of Anshan and Mandane, daughter of Astyages, King of Media during the period of 600-599 BC or 576-575 BC.
It is also noted that Strabo has said that Cyrus was originally named Agradates by his step-parents; therefore, it is probable that, when reuniting with his original family, following the naming customs, Cyrus's father, Cambyses I, named him Cyrus after his grandfather, who was Cyrus I.
"His anointed one") (), making him the only gentile to be so referred.
By the year 540 BC, Cyrus captured Elam (Susiana) and its capital, Susa.
On another account, Professor Patrick Hunt states, "If you are looking at the greatest personages in History who have affected the World, 'Cyrus the Great' is one of the few who deserves that epithet, the one who deserves to be called 'the Great'.
Despite the Islamic conquest of Persia in the 7th century CE by the Islamic Caliphate, Persia continued to exercise enormous influence in the Middle East during the Islamic Golden Age, and was particularly instrumental in the growth and expansion of Islam.
He also formed an innovative postal system throughout the empire, based on several relay stations called Chapar Khaneh.
According to Plutarch, his epitaph said,
These were interpreted by his advisers as a foretelling that his grandson would one day rebel and supplant him as king.
He also argues that the archaeology suggests that the return was a "trickle", taking place over perhaps decades, resulting in a maximum population of perhaps 30,000.
According to the historian Herodotus, it is known that Astyages placed Harpagus in command of the Median army to conquer Cyrus.
He allowed a certain amount of regional autonomy in each state, in the form of a satrapy system.
His son, Hystaspes, who was also Cyrus's second cousin, was then made satrap of Parthia and Phrygia.
With recommendations from Croesus that he should turn the minds of the Lydian people to luxury, Cyrus sent Mazares, one of his commanders, to subdue the insurrection but demanded that Pactyas be returned alive.
Years later, in the chaos created by Alexander the Great's invasion of Persia and after the defeat of Darius III, Cyrus the Great's tomb was broken into and most of its luxuries were looted.
However, Astyages summoned the son of Harpagus, and in retribution, chopped him to pieces, roasted some portions while boiling others, and tricked his adviser into eating his child during a large banquet.
Upon learning of what had transpired, Tomyris denounced Cyrus's tactics as underhanded and swore vengeance, leading a second wave of troops into battle herself.
Cyrus and Cassandane were known to love each other very much - Cassandane said that she found it more bitter to leave Cyrus than to depart her life.
and asserting that it was "the first human rights charter in history".
The Nabonidus Chronicle states that Babylonia mourned Cassandane for six days (identified from 21–26 March 538 BC).
Whosoever there is among you of all His people – the , his God, be with him – let him go there.''
This mutiny is confirmed by the Nabonidus Chronicle.
This theory was proposed by Sunni scholar Abul Kalam Azad and endorsed by Shi'a scholars Allameh Tabatabaei, in his ''Tafsir al-Mizan'' and Makarem Shirazi.
Herodotus explains that to accomplish this feat, the Persians, using a basin dug earlier by the Babylonian queen Nitokris to protect Babylon against Median attacks, diverted the Euphrates river into a canal so that the water level dropped "to the height of the middle of a man's thigh", which allowed the invading forces to march directly through the river bed to enter at night.
As it was unheard of for the son of a shepherd to commit such an act, Astyages had the boy brought to his court, and interviewed him and his adopted father.
