The most stable and prosperous of the post-Communist states, the Czech Republic saw growth of over 6% annually in the three years before the outbreak of the recent global economic crisis.
The former Czech prime minister, Jan Fischer, is of Jewish origin and faith.
Czechia was approved by the Czech government on 2 May 2016  as the Czech Republic's official short name  and was published in the United Nations UNTERM  and UNGEGN  country name databases on 5 July 2016.
It is drained mainly by the Morava River, but it also contains the source of the Oder River ().
The country's reputation has suffered with guidebooks and tourists reporting overcharging by taxi drivers and pickpocketing problems mainly in Prague, though the situation has improved recently.
Bohemian lands became part of the Austrian Empire and later of Austria–Hungary.
It also has jurisdiction over many political matters, such as the formation and closure of political parties, jurisdictional boundaries between government entities, and the eligibility of persons to stand for public office.
* ''Pečená kachna'': roast duck with bread or potato dumplings and braised red cabbage
Influential Czech authors who wrote in Latin include Cosmas of Prague († 1125), Peter of Zittau († 1339), John Hus († 1415), Bohuslav Hasištejnský z Lobkovic (1461–1510), Jan Dubravius (1486–1553), Tadeáš Hájek (1525–1600), Johannes Vodnianus Campanus (1572–1622), and Bohuslav Balbín (1621–1688).
In 2009, there were about 70,000 Vietnamese in the Czech Republic.
Spring is also characterized by high water levels in the rivers, due to melting snow with occasional flooding.
The Czech Republic joined NATO on 12 March 1999 and the European Union on 1 May 2004.
*Josef Hlavka (15 February 1831 – 11 March 1908), was a Czech architect, builder, philanthropist and founder of the oldest Czech foundation for sciences and arts.
The president is a formal head of state with limited and specific powers, most importantly to return bills to the parliament, appoint members to the board of the Czech National Bank, nominate constitutional court judges for the Senate's approval and dissolve the Chamber of Deputies under certain special and unusual circumstances.
There are several centres of tourist activity.
Emphasis was placed on comfort, and buildings that were built for entertainment purposes also appeared.
Czechoslovakia uneasily tried to play the role of a "bridge" between the West and East.
Miloš Zeman was the first directly elected Czech President.
Original Czech cultural phenomenon came into being at the end of the 1950s.
The first significant pieces of Czech music include two chorales, which in their time performed the function of anthems: "Hospodine pomiluj ny" (Lord, Have Mercy on Us) from around 1050, unmistakably the oldest and most faithfully preserved popular spiritual song to have survived to the present, and the hymn "Svatý Václave" (Saint Wenceslas) or "Saint Wenceslas Chorale" from around 1250.
The Government of the Czech Republic's exercise of executive power derives from the Constitution.
Karlovy Vary International Film Festival is one of the oldest in the world and has become Central and Eastern Europe's leading film event.
The Prime Minister is the head of government and wields considerable powers, such as the right to set the agenda for most foreign and domestic policy and choose government ministers.
Slavic people from the Black Sea–Carpathian region settled in the area (a movement that was also stimulated by the onslaught of peoples from Siberia and Eastern Europe: Huns, Avars, Bulgars and Magyars).
The geographical name still has not reached general recognition, but its usage is increasing.
The Czechoslovakia national football team was a consistent performer on the international scene, with eight appearances in the FIFA World Cup Finals, finishing in second place in 1934 and 1962.
In 2010, it handled 11.6&nbsp;million passengers, which makes it the fifth busiest airport in Central and Eastern Europe.
The warmest month of the year is July, followed by August and June.
The first brewery is known to have existed in 993 and the Czech Republic has the highest beer consumption per capita in the world.
Between 1583–1611 Prague was the official seat of the Holy Roman Emperor Rudolf II and his court.
Filmmakers have come to Prague to shoot scenery no longer found in Berlin, Paris and Vienna.
The largest Czech power resource is Temelín Nuclear Power Station, another nuclear power plant is in Dukovany.
The first Czechoslovak president T. G. Masaryk invited the prominent Slovene architect Jože Plečnik to Prague, where he modernized the Castle and built some other buildings.
Puppetry and marionette exhibitions are very popular, with a number of puppet festivals throughout the country.
The coldest temperature ever measured was in Litvínovice near České Budějovice in 1929, at  and the hottest measured, was at  in Dobřichovice in 2012.
Newspapers are quite popular in the Czech Republic.
He also appoints the prime minister, as well the other members of the cabinet on a proposal by the prime minister.
Most decide to stay in the country permanently.
The reigns of Maria Theresa of Austria and her son Joseph II, Holy Roman Emperor and co-regent from 1765, were characterized by enlightened absolutism.
The Revolution of 1848 in Prague, striving for liberal reforms and autonomy of the Bohemian Crown within the Austrian Empire, was suppressed.
According to some estimates, there are about 250,000 Romani people in the Czech Republic.
The Bible translations played an important role in the development of Czech literature and standard Czech language.
* Jan Marek Marci (1595–1667), mathematician, physicist and imperial physician, one of the founders of spectroscopy.
The Czech armed forces consist of the Czech Land Forces, the Czech Air Force and of specialized support units.
Since 2005, Prague's mayor, Pavel Bém, has worked to improve this reputation by cracking down on petty crime and, aside from these problems, Prague is a safe city.
Currently, as a member of NATO, the Czech military are participating in KFOR and ISAF (renamed to Resolute Support) operations and have soldiers in Afghanistan, Kosovo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Somalia, Israel and Mali.
The religious and social reformer Jan Hus formed a reform movement later named after him.
Christianity account 34% of Czech citizens, Catholics are the largest Christian group in Czech Republic, accounting for 29% of Czech citizens, while Protestants make up 2%, and Other Christian make up 3%.
After the Habsburgs regained control of Bohemia, they were forcibly converted to Roman Catholicism.
The life expectancy in 2013 was estimated at 77.56 years (74.29 years male, 81.01 years female).
The Mongols subsequently invaded and defeated Hungary.
On average, summer temperatures are about  –  higher than during winter.
* Stanislav Brebera (1925–2012), inventor of the plastic explosive Semtex in 1966.
In the summer of 1945, there were several massacres.
An outstanding example of the pure Renaissance architecture in Bohemia is the Royal Summer Palace, which was situated in a newly established garden of Prague Castle.
, the Slav Epic can be seen in the Veletržní Palace of the National Gallery in Prague, which manages the largest collection of art in the Czech Republic.
According to the 2011 census, 34% of the population stated they had no religion, 10.3% was Roman Catholic, 0.8% was Protestant (0.5% Czech Brethren and 0.4% Hussite), and 9% followed other forms of religion both denominational or not (of which 863 people answered they are Pagan).
He built a great empire stretching from the Danube river to the Baltic Sea.
In the early 2000s, a number of Czech games achieved international acclaim, including ''Hidden & Dangerous'', ''Operation Flashpoint'', ''Vietcong'' and ''Mafia''.
There were 437,581 foreigners residing in the country in September 2013, according to the Czech Statistical Office, with the largest groups being Ukrainian (106,714), Slovak (89,273), Vietnamese (61,102), Russian (32,828), Polish (19,378), German (18,099), Bulgarian (8,837), American (6,695), Romanian (6,425), Moldovan (5,860), Chinese (5,427), British (5,413), Mongolian (5,308), Kazakh (4,850), Belarusian (4,562).
King Přemysl Otakar II earned the nickname ''Iron and Golden King'' because of his military power and wealth.
* Karel Klíč (1841–1926), painter and photographer, inventor of the photogravure.
*Jan Zrzavý (1890–1977) – painter, graphic artist, illustrator
They formed a coalition government with other parties of the National Front and moved quickly to consolidate power.
Another internationally well-known author is Jan Švankmajer (in the beginning of the career conjoined with above mentioned project "Laterna Magika"), a filmmaker and artist whose work spans several media.
In 1620, the rebellion in Bohemia was crushed at the Battle of White Mountain, and the ties between Bohemia and the Habsburgs' hereditary lands in Austria were strengthened.
The Bohemian Crown lands became part of the so-called Cisleithania (officially "The Kingdoms and Lands represented in the Imperial Council").
Summer is also characterized by rain and storms.
Away from the towns, areas such as Český ráj, Šumava and the Krkonoše Mountains attract visitors seeking outdoor pursuits.
In 1960s, so called Czech New Wave (also Czechoslovak New Wave) received international acclaim.
In the 17th century, the Baroque style spread throughout the Crown of Bohemia.
The Communist government completely nationalized the means of production and established a command economy.
Czech judiciary has triumvirate system of the main courts, the Constitutional Court which oversees violations of the Constitution by either the legislature or by the government consisting of 15 constitutional judges, the Supreme Court is the court of highest appeal for almost all legal cases heard in the Czech Republic formed of 67 judges and the Supreme Administrative Court decides on issues of procedural and administrative propriety.
In the city of Brno, one of the most impressive functionalist works has been preserved – Villa Tugendhat, designed by the architect Ludwig Mies van der Rohe.
The events considered the most important by Czech fans are: the Ice Hockey World Championships, Olympic Ice hockey tournament, UEFA European Football Championship, UEFA Champions League, FIFA World Cup and qualification matches for such events.
Since the Middle Ages, the Czech lands have been using the same architectural styles as most of Western and Central Europe.
* ''Koprovka'': beef in dill sauce, traditionally served with dumplings
From 1991 to 2001 and further to 2011 the adherence to Roman Catholicism decreased from 39% to 27% and then to 10%; Protestantism similarly declined from 3.7% to 2% and then to 0.8%.
Czech Baroque architecture is considered to be a unique part of the European cultural heritage thanks to its extensiveness and extraordinariness.
After dissolution of Czechoslovakia, the Czech national football team finished in second (1996) and third (2004) place at the European Football Championship.
Also, the Czech Republic as a whole generally has a low crime rate.
In November 1989, Czechoslovakia returned to a liberal democracy through the peaceful "Velvet Revolution".
The Duchy of Bohemia emerged in the late 9th century, when it was unified by the Přemyslid dynasty.
In 2004 the army transformed itself into a fully professional organization and compulsory military service was abolished.
In total, the Czech Republic has 46 airports with paved runways, six of which provide international air services in Brno, Karlovy Vary, Mošnov (near Ostrava), Pardubice, Prague and Kunovice (near Uherské Hradiště).
Phytogeographically, the Czech Republic belongs to the Central European province of the Circumboreal Region, within the Boreal Kingdom.
The first complete printed Czech Bible was published in 1488 (Prague Bible).
a nomination: Loves of a Blonde (1966), The Fireman's Ball (1968), My Sweet Little Village (1986), The Elementary School (1991), Divided We Fall (2000) and Želary (2003).
* František Křižík (1847–1941), electrical engineer, inventor of the arc lamp.
Although Hus was named a heretic and burnt in Constance in 1415, his followers seceded from the Catholic Church and in the Hussite Wars (1419–1434) defeated five crusades organized against them by the Holy Roman Emperor Sigismund.
The wettest area in the Czech Republic is found around Bílý Potok in Jizera Mountains and the driest region is the Louny District to the northwest of Prague.
For beginners, thanks to the more than 100-year-old tradition, there is a unique system of waymarking, one of the best in Europe.
The Communist Party of Czechoslovakia won the 1946 elections.
Defense spending is approximately 1.04% of the GDP (2015).
The team also won the European Football Championship in 1976, came in third in 1980 and won the Olympic gold in 1980.
It has the lowest unemployment rate in the European Union.
The Czech Republic ranks as 37th most environmentally conscious country in the world in Environmental Performance Index.
* Václav Prokop Diviš (1698–1765), inventor of the first grounded lightning rod.
*Stanislav Kolíbal (1925) – sculptor, graphic artist
Czech Republic men's national volleyball team winner silver medal 1964 Summer Olympics and two gold medalist in FIVB Volleyball World Championship 1956, 1966.
Bohemia, to the west, consists of a basin drained by the Elbe () and the Vltava rivers, surrounded by mostly low mountains, such as the Krkonoše range of the Sudetes.
A number of other scientists are also connected in some way with the Czech lands, including astronomers Johannes Kepler and Tycho Brahe, the founder of the psychoanalytic school of psychiatry Sigmund Freud, physicists Christian Doppler, Ernst Mach, Nikola Tesla, Albert Einstein, engineer Viktor Kaplan, automotive engineer Ferdinand Porsche and logician Kurt Gödel.
The following period, from 1620 to the late 18th century, has often been called colloquially the "Dark Age".
On 1 January 1993, Czechoslovakia peacefully dissolved, with its constituent states becoming the independent states of the Czech Republic and Slovakia.
Early sound film era of Czech film was very productive, above all in mainstream genres with special role of comedies by Martin Frič or Karel Lamač, however more internationally
The bull declared that the King of Bohemia would be exempt from all future obligations to the Holy Roman Empire except for participation in imperial councils.
* Jan Janský (1873–1921), serologist and neurologist, discovered the ABO blood groups.
File:Makový koláček.jpg|Sweet roll (koláč) with poppy seed
By the beginning of 2008, there were over 800 mostly local WISPs, with about 350,000 subscribers in 2007.
*Josef Šíma (1891–1971) – painter
The Czech Republic became a member of the World Trade Organisation on 1 January 1995.
Following the Battle of Mohács in 1526, the whole Crown of Bohemia was gradually integrated into the Habsburg Monarchy alongside the Archduchy of Austria and the Kingdom of Hungary.
The Czech Republic includes its historical territories of Bohemia, Moravia, and Czech Silesia.
The official currency is the Czech crown, and it had been floating until 7.
The armed forces are managed by the Ministry of Defence.
Czech desserts include a wide variety of whipped cream, chocolate, and fruit pastries and tarts, crêpes, creme desserts and cheese, poppy-seed-filled and other types of traditional cakes such as ''buchty'', ''koláče'' and ''štrůdl''.
Czech president Miloš Zeman uses the name ''Czechia'' in his official speeches.
Ottokar's son Wenceslaus II acquired the Polish crown in 1300 for himself and the Hungarian crown for his son.
The Czech Republic possesses a developed, high-income economy with a per capita GDP rate that is 87% of the European Union average.
He acquired Austria, Styria, Carinthia and Carniola, thus spreading the Bohemian territory to the Adriatic Sea.
The Czech Republic has strong ties with Slovakia, Poland and Hungary as member of Visegrad Group, as well as with Germany, Israel, United States and European Union and their members.
The leaders of the Bohemian Revolt were executed in 1621.
The best-known representatives of Czech Art Nouveau architecture were Osvald Polívka, who designed the Municipal House in Prague, Josef Fanta, the architect of the Prague Main Railway Station, and Jan Kotěra.
* ''Bramboráky'': potato pancakes, traditionally served with sour cabbage
It is also one of few film festivals have been given competitive status by the FIAPF.
Czech music can be considered to have been beneficial in both the European and worldwide context, several times co-determined or even determined a newly arriving era in musical art, above all of Classical era, as well as by original attitudes in Baroque, Romantic and modern classical music.
* Otto Wichterle (1913–1998) and Drahoslav Lím (1925–2003), Czech chemists responsible for the invention of the modern contact lens and silon (synthetic fiber).
České dráhy (the Czech Railways) is the main railway operator in the Czech Republic, with about 180&nbsp;million passengers carried yearly.
File:Svíčková na smetaně.JPG|Svíčková: Sirloin steak with root vegetable and cream gravy, dumplings, and cranberries
The best-selling daily national newspapers are Blesk (average 1.15M daily readers), Mladá fronta DNES (average 752,000 daily readers) and Daily (average 72,000 daily readers).
The Austrian Habsburgs of the 16th century, the founders of the central European Habsburg Monarchy, were buried in Prague.
*Jiří Anderle (1936) – graphic artist
During the 19th century, the revival architectural styles were very popular in the Bohemian monarchy.
Sports play a part in the life of many Czechs, who are generally loyal supporters of their favorite teams or individuals.
The end of the Holy Roman Empire in 1806 led to degradation of the political status of the Kingdom of Bohemia.
The Czech Republic covers an area of  with mostly temperate continental climate.
Very outstanding are the architectural projects of the Czech nobleman and imperial generalissimo Albrecht von Wallenstein from the 1620s.
By the end of November, temperatures usually range around the freezing point.
Czech officials have supported dissenters in Burma, Belarus, Moldova and Cuba.
During the Middle Ages, many fortified castles were built by the king and aristocracy, as well as many monasteries.
*Emil Filla (1882–1953) – painter, cubism
The Kingdom of Bohemia was, as the only kingdom in the Holy Roman Empire, a significant regional power during the Middle Ages.
Petr Chelčický continued with the Hussite Reformation movement.
Most of the economy has been privatised, including the banks and telecommunications.
In the classical era, from the 3rd century BC Celtic migrations, the Boii and later in the 1st century, Germanic tribes of Marcomanni and Quadi settled there.
Following a Soviet-organised referendum, the Subcarpathian Rus never returned under Czechoslovak rule but became part of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, as the Zakarpattia Oblast in 1946.
It was depicted by Karel Steklý in two color films ''The Good Soldier Schweik'' in 1956 and 1957.
After the Battle of Legnica in Poland, the Mongols carried their raids into Moravia, but were defensively defeated at the fortified town of Olomouc.
Many churches were restored to their presumed medieval appearance and there were constructed many new buildings in the Neo-Romanesque, Neo-Gothic and Neo-Renaissance styles.
The 14th century, in particular, the reign of the Bohemian king Charles IV (1316–1378), who in 1346 became King of the Romans and in 1354 both King of Italy and Holy Roman Emperor, is considered the Golden Age of Czech history.
Russia, via pipelines through Ukraine and to a lesser extent, Norway, via pipelines through Germany, supply the Czech Republic with liquid and natural gas.
The research based on cooperation between universities, Academy of Sciences and specialised research centers brings new inventions and impulses in this area.
File:Budvar-mug.JPG|A mug of Budweiser Budvar
*Bohumil Kubišta (1884–1918) – painter, cubism
Both countries went through economic reforms and privatisations, with the intention of creating a market economy.
This and later privatisation of Český Telecom helped drive down prices.
The first complete Czech Bible translation from original languages was published between 1579–93 and is known as the Bible of Kralice.
Dissidents published Charter 77 in 1977, and the first of a new wave of protests were seen in 1988.
Their king Maroboduus is the first documented ruler of Bohemia.
Although the majority of Czech soldiers fought for the Austro-Hungarian Empire, more than 90,000 Czech volunteers formed the Czechoslovak Legions in France, Italy and Russia, where they fought against the Central Powers and later against Bolshevik troops.
Czech Republic has a civil law system based on the continental type, rooted in Germanic legal culture.
On both of these occasions, in the early 19th century and then again in the 1960s, the Czechs used their cultural and literary effort to strive for political freedom, establishing a confident, politically aware nation.
The protectorate was proclaimed part of the Third Reich, and the president and prime minister were subordinated to the Nazi Germany's ''Reichsprotektor''.
At the beginning of 2004, local-loop unbundling began and alternative operators started to offer ADSL and also SDSL.
* ''Guláš'': a variety of beef and pork goulash stews, served with dumplings or bread
Of particular significance was the founding of Charles University in Prague in 1348, Charles Bridge, Charles Square.
The famous "pilsner style beer" (pils) originated in the western Bohemian city of Plzeň, where the world's first-ever blond lager Pilsner Urquell is still being produced, making it the inspiration for more than two-thirds of the beer produced in the world today.
The first election was in 1996, for differing terms.
During this time, thousands of Germans were held in prisons and detention camps or used as forced labour.
František Benda, Jan Kubelík, Emma Destinnová, Rudolf Firkušný, Czech Philharmonic Orchestra, Panocha Quartet and many others.
* Bernard Bolzano (1781–1848), noted mathematician, logician, philosopher, and pacifist.
It is linked with names of Miloš Forman, Věra Chytilová, Jiří Menzel, Ján Kadár, Elmar Klos, Evald Schorm, Vojtěch Jasný, Ivan Passer, Jan Schmidt, Juraj Herz, Jan Němec, Jaroslav Papoušek, etc.
Most rain falls during the summer.
The armed forces are charged with protecting the Czech Republic and its allies, promoting global security interests, and contributing to NATO.
After 1526 Bohemia came increasingly under Habsburg control as the Habsburgs became first the elected and then in 1627 the hereditary rulers of Bohemia.
Following the dissolution of Czechoslovakia at the end of 1992, the Czech part of the former nation found itself without a common single-word geographical name in English.
The unique personality of 1960s and the beginning of 1970s with original manuscript, deep psychological impact and extraordinarily high quality art is the director František Vláčil.
The country has been traditionally divided into three lands, namely Bohemia (''Čechy'') in the west, Moravia (''Morava'') in the southeast, and Czech Silesia (''Slezsko''; the smaller, south-eastern part of historical Silesia, most of which is located within modern Poland) in the northeast.
The speed limit is 50&nbsp;km/h within towns, 90&nbsp;km/h outside of towns and 130&nbsp;km/h on motorways.
At the turn of the 19th and 20th centuries the new art style appeared in the Czech lands – Art Nouveau.
The flowering of Baroque culture shows the ambiguity of this historical period.
* Jan Evangelista Purkyně (1787–1869), anatomist and physiologist responsible for the discovery of Purkinje cells, Purkinje fibres and sweat glands, as well as Purkinje images and the Purkinje shift.
In 1212, King Přemysl Ottokar I (bearing the title "king" since 1198) extracted the Golden Bull of Sicily (a formal edict) from the emperor, confirming Ottokar and his descendants' royal status; the Duchy of Bohemia was raised to a Kingdom.
The most trusted media in the Czech Republic are public services.
The UNDP ranks the country 14th in inequality-adjusted human development.
As the 'nationality' was an optional item, a substantial number of people left this field blank (26.0%).
However, Slovak national aspirations strengthened and on 1 January 1993, the country peacefully split into the independent Czech Republic and Slovakia.
The Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867 and the never realized coronation of Franz Joseph as King of Bohemia led to a huge disappointment of Czech politicians.
According to the 2010 US census, there are 1,533,826 Americans of full or partial Czech descent.
The Czech lands have a long and rich scientific tradition.
The only Germans not expelled were some 250,000 who had been active in the resistance against the Nazi Germans or were considered economically important, though many of these emigrated later.
The Czech video game development scene has a long history, and a number of Czech games were produced for the ZX Spectrum, PMD 85 and Atari systems in the 1980s.
The Communist People's Militias secured control of key locations in Prague, and a single party government was formed.
* František Burian and Arnold Jirásek, founded the first plastic surgery in 1927.
The Czech ice hockey team won the gold medal at the 1998 Winter Olympics and has won twelve gold medals at the World Championships (including 6 as Czechoslovakia), including three straight from 1999 to 2001.
The Czech landscape is exceedingly varied.
In 2012, Nearly 80% of Czech exports went to, and more than 65% of Czech imports came from, other European Union member states.
Jaroslav Seifert was the only Czech writer awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature.
The roots of Czech theatre can be found in the Middle Ages, especially in cultural life of gothic period.
The many other sports with professional leagues and structures include basketball, volleyball, team handball, track and field athletics and floorball.
