tubulata'' and ''D.
And in colour as bright as your cheek."
Fimbriated dahlias were added in 2004, and two further groups (Single and Double orchid) in 2007.
* '''Pompom flowered cultivars''' have blooms with a diameter less than 50mm.
This was an entirely different type of flower, with a rich, red color and a high degree of doubling.
The majority of species do not produce scented flowers or cultivars.
— not usually exceeding  in height, ''e.g.''
The greatest effort was now directed to developing improved types of double dahlias.
In the following years Madrid sent seeds to Berlin and Dresden in Germany, and to Turin and Thiene in Italy.
The commonest pollinators are bees and small beetles.
congestifolia''), he placed them within his existing sections.
the Dahlia than George C. Thorburn, of New York, who yearly flowers many thousand plants at his place at Hallet's Cove, near Harlaem.
By 1826 double varieties were being grown almost exclusively, and there was very little interest in the single forms.
* '''Medium flowered cultivars''' have blooms with a diameter between 155mm-200mm.
It was probably Abbe Antonio Jose Cavanilles, Director of the Royal Gardens of Madrid, who should be credited with the attempt to scientifically define the genus, since he not only received the first specimens from Mexico in 1789, but named the first three species that flowered from the cuttings.
Spaniards reported finding the plants growing in Mexico in 1525, but the earliest known description is by Francisco Hernández, physician to Philip II, who was ordered to visit Mexico in 1570 to study the "natural products of that country".
This has to date not been accomplished.
The indigenous peoples variously identified the plants as "Chichipatl" (Toltecs) and "Acocotle" or "Cocoxochitl" (Aztecs).
'', though this is not an accepted name.
* '''Group 7 – Pompon dahlias''' (''Pom'') — Double spherical miniature flowers made up entirely from florets that are curved inwards (involute) for their entire length (longitudinal axis), resembling a pompon.
Dahlias are perennial plants, with mostly tuberous roots.
In 1835 Thomas Bridgeman, published a list of 160 double dahlias in his Florist's Guide.
'Twyning's After Eight')
To date dahlias have only developed five, so the closest that breeders have come to achieving a "blue" specimen are variations of mauve, purples and lilac hues.
Regardless of who bestowed it, the name was not so easily established.
The original wild ''D.
'Preston Park' (''Sin/DwB'')
* '''Group 4 – Waterlily dahlias''' (''WL'') — Double blooms, broad sparse curved, slightly curved or flat florets and very shallow in depth compared with other dahlias.
A year later, Buonaiuti produced two double flowers.
If the end of the ray floret was split, they were considered fimbriated.
The show there in the flowering season is a rich treat for the lovers of floriculture : for almost every variety can be seen growing in two large blocks or masses which lead from the road to the dwelling-house, and form a complete field of the Dahlia as a foreground to the house.
The inappropriate term ''D.
Some plant growers include their brand name in the cultivar name.
The stems are leafy, ranging in height from as low as  to more than  .
'''''Dahlia'''''  ( or ) is a genus of bushy, tuberous, herbaceous perennial plants native to Mexico.
In 1796 Cavanilles flowered a third plant from the parts sent by Cervantes, which he named ''Dahlia coccinea'' for its scarlet color.
* '''Group 9 – Semi cactus dahlias''' (''S–c'')— Double blooms, very pointed ray florets, revolute for greater than twenty five percent and less than fifty percent of their longitudinal axis.
At the same time they demonstrated that ''Dahlia pinnata'' should more properly be designated ''D.
Earwigs can also disfigure the blooms.
Through the interspecies cross of the Humboldt seeds and the Cavanilles species, 22 new species were reported by that year, all of which had been classified in different ways by several different taxonomists, creating considerable confusion as to which species was which.
William John Cooper Lawrence, who hybridized hundreds of families of dahlias in the 1920s, stated: "I have not yet seen any two plants in the families I have raised which were not to be distinguished one from the other.
In 1804, a new species, ''Dahlia sambucifolia'', was successfully grown at Holland House, Kensington.
* '''Lilliput dahlias (Lil)''' — not usually exceeding  in height, with single, semi-double or double florets up to  in diameter.
In investigating this idea Lawrence determined that with the exception of ''D.
The modern name Asteraceae refers to the appearance of a star with surrounding rays.
Nurserymen in Europe crossbred this plant with dahlias discovered earlier; the results became the progenitors of all modern dahlia hybrids today.
The other major grouping is the core ''Dahlia'' clade (CDC), which includes most of section ''Dahlia''.
Indeed so general has become the taste that almost every garden has its show of the Dahlia in the season."
In 1805, German naturalist Alexander von Humboldt sent more seeds from Mexico to Aiton in England, Thouin in Paris, and Christoph Friedrich Otto, director of the Berlin Botanical Garden.
Dahlias grow naturally in climates which do not experience frost (the tubers are hardy to USDA Zone 8), consequently they are not adapted to withstand sub-zero temperatures.
* '''Group 11 – Fimbriated dahlias''' (''Fim'') — ray florets evenly split or notched into two or more divisions, uniformly throughout the bloom, creating a fimbriated (fringed) effect.
Each floret is a flower in its own right, but is often incorrectly described as a petal, particularly by horticulturists.
''coccinea'', the third dahlia to bloom in Europe, was a single.
Outside of these three clades lie ''D.
These terms were based on shape or colour, and the National Dahlia Society included cactus, pompon, single, show and fancy in its 1904 guide.
She sent them back to England, to Lord Holland's librarian Mr Buonaiuti at Holland House, who successfully raised the plants.
which are officially registered through the Royal Horticultural Society (RHS).
Your praises for ever shall speak;
Three of his drawings showed plants with flowers: two resembled the modern bedding dahlia, and one resembled the species ''Dahlia merki''; all displayed a high degree of doubleness.
introduction of the Dahlia.
The central disc is absent.
merckii'' as a polytomy.
In 1805 Henry C. Andrews made a drawing of such a plant in the collection of Lady Holland, grown from seedlings sent that year from Madrid.
Horticulturally the sections retain some usage, section ''Pseudodendron'' being referred to as 'Tree Dahlias', ''Epiphytum'' as the 'Vine Dahlia'.
The exact date the dahlia was introduced in the United States is uncertain.
'Harvest Tiny Tot' (''Misc/Lil'')
Dahlias are a source of food for the larvae of some Lepidoptera species including angle shades, common swift, ghost moth and large yellow underwing.
Sørensen then issued a further revision in 1980, incorporating subsection ''Merckii'' in his original section ''Dahlia''.
* '''Group 2 – Anemone-flowered dahlias''' (''Anem'') — The centre of the flower consists of dense elongated tubular florets, longer than the disc florets of Single dahlias, while the outer parts have one or more rings of flatter ray florets.
The Aztecs used them to treat epilepsy, and employed the long hollow stem of the (''Dahlia imperalis'') for water pipes.
(published a year after Cavanilles's genus and now considered a synonym of ''Trichocladus'') was more widely accepted, changed the plants' genus from ''Dahlia'' to ''Georgina''; after the German-born naturalist Johann Gottlieb Georgi, a professor at the Imperial Academy of Sciences of St. Petersburg, Russia.
* '''Group 6 – Ball dahlias''' (''Ba'')— Double blooms that are ball shaped or slightly flattened.
To date these sectional divisions have not been fully supported phylogenetically, which demonstrate only section ''Entemophyllon'' as a distinct sectional clade.
In 1824, Lord Holland sent his wife a note containing the following verse:"The dahlia you brought to our isle
The ray florets are either involute or revolute.
Most species have limited ranges scattered throughout many mountain ranges in Mexico
The genus ''Dahlia'' is situated in the Asteroideae subfamily of the Asteraceae, in the Coreopsideae tribe.
* '''Large flowered cultivars''' have blooms with a diameter between 200mm-250mm.
He planted and carefully tended it; it grew into a plant that he identified as a dahlia.
The remaining two herbaceous sections being distinguished by their pinnules, opposing (''Dahlia'') or alternating (''Entemophyllon'').
At least 85 species have been reported: approximately 25 of these were first reported from the wild, the remainder appeared in gardens in Europe.
In 1787, the French botanist Nicolas-Joseph Thiéry de Menonville, sent to Mexico to steal the cochineal insect valued for its scarlet dye, reported the strangely beautiful flowers he had seen growing in a garden in Oaxaca.
Inulin is still used in clinical tests for kidney functionality.
* '''Group 14 – Peony-flowered dahlias''' (''P'') — Large flowers with three or four rows of rays that are flattened and expanded and arranged irregularly.
He also reclassified and renamed the first three species grown, and identified, by Cavanilles.
coronata'' was brought from Mexico to Germany in 1907.
The dahlia was declared the national flower of Mexico in 1963.
However, Linnaeus died in 1778, more than eleven years before the plant was introduced into Europe in 1789, so while it is generally agreed that the plant was named in 1791 in honor of Dahl, who had died two years before, Linnaeus could not have been the one who did so.
* '''Group 13 – Double Orchid dahlias''' (''DblO'') — Double blooms with triangular centres.
Within that tribe it is the second largest genus, after ''Coreopsis'', and appears as a well defined clade within the Coreopsideae.
No visible central disc.
He combined the Cavanilles species ''D.
australis'' occurs at least as far south as southwestern Guatemala, while ''D.
x pinnata'' was shown to actually be a variant of ''D.
The original 1969 registry published about 14,000 cultivars adding a further 1700 by 1986 and in 2003 there were 18,000.
Up to this time all the so-called double dahlias had been purple, or tinged with purple, and it was doubted if a variety untinged with that color was obtainable.
The last group to be added, Peony, first appeared in 2012.
The first plant was called ''Dahlia pinnata'' after its pinnate foliage; the second, ''Dahlia rosea'' for its rose-purple color.
While dahlias produce anthocyanin, an element necessary for the production of the blue, to achieve a true blue color in a plant, the anthocyanin delphinidin needs six hydroxyl groups.
Thus Fides (part of the Dümmen Orange Group) in the Netherlands developed a series of cultivars which they named the Dahlinova Series, for example Dahlinova 'Carolina Burgundy'.
Sizes can range from tiny micro dahlias with flowers less than 50mm to giants that are over 250mm in diameter.
crocea'', a fragrant variety grown from one of the Humboldt seeds, was probably interbred with the single ''D.
The double bloom cultivars were then subdivided according to the way in which they were folded along their longitudinal axis, flat, involute (curled inwards) or revolute (curling backwards).
In 1846 the Caledonia Horticultural Society of Edinburgh offered a prize of 2,000 pounds to the first person succeeding in producing a blue dahlia.
This culminated in the 1969 publication of ''The International Register of Dahlia Names'' by the Royal Horticultural Society which became the central registering authority.
In many cases the bloom diametre was then used to further label certain groups from miniature through to giant.
When in active growth, modern dahlia hybrids perform most successfully in well-watered yet free-draining soils, in situations receiving plenty of sunlight.
rosea'' under the name of ''Georgina variabilis''; ''D.
In 1829, all species growing in Europe were reclassified under an all-encompassing name of ''D.
Some Dahlia Societies have continued this practice, but this is neither official nor standardised.
Narrower than Semi cactus.
The plants raised in 1804 did not survive; new stock was brought from France in 1815.
That year, the Marchioness of Bute, wife of The Earl of Bute, the English Ambassador to Spain, obtained a few seeds from Cavanilles and sent them to Kew Gardens, where they flowered but were lost after two to three years.
According to Edward Sayers  "it attracted much admiration, and at that time was considered a very elegant flower, it was however soon eclipsed by that splendid scarlet, the Countess of Liverpool".
By contrast Giannasi (1975) using a phytochemical analysis based on flavonoids, reduced the genus to just two sections, ''Entemophyllon'' and ''Dahlia'', the latter having three subsections, ''Pseudodendron'', ''Dahlia'', and ''Merckii''.
Its form is very outstanding and different in every respect of all known dahlia flowers.
This great variety results from dahlias being octoploids—that is, they have eight sets of homologous chromosomes, whereas most plants have only two.
Broad at the base and straight or incurved, almost spiky in appearance.
As of 2013 The RHS uses two size descriptors
"Dahl" is a homophone of the Swedish word "dal", or "valley"; although it is not a true translation, the plant is sometimes referred to as the "valley flower".
However separation of the sections on morphological, cytologal and biocemical criteria has not been entirely satisfactory.
Cavanilles flowered one plant that same year, then the second one a year later.
* '''Group 8 – Cactus dahlias''' (''C'') — Double blooms, ray florets pointed, with majority revolute (rolled) over more than fifty percent of their longitudinal axis, and straight or incurved.
As a member of the Asteraceae the flower head is actually a composite (hence the older name Compositae) with both central disc florets and surrounding ray florets.
sorensenii'' that had acquired hybrid qualities before it was introduced to Europe in the sixteenth century and formally named by Cavanilles.
The other main pests likely to be encountered are aphids (usually on young stems and immature flower buds), red spider mite (causing foliage mottling and discolouration, worse in hot and dry conditions) and capsid bugs (resulting in contortion and holes at growing tips).
It was not until 1810, in a published article, that he officially adopted the Cavanilles' original designation of ''Dahlia''.
pinnata, D. rosea, D. coccinea'') to Swiss botanist Augustin Pyramus de Candolle at University of Montpelier in France, Andre Thouin at the Jardin des Plantes in Paris and Scottish botanist William Aiton at Kew Gardens.
Like other doubles of the time it did not resemble the doubles of today.
By 1969 Sørensen recognised 29 species and four sections by splitting off ''Entemophyllon'' from section ''Dahlia''.
* '''Small flowered cultivars''' have blooms with a diameter between 115mm-155mm.
It was thought to be a distinct mutation since no other plant that resembled it could be found in the wild.
Sayers stated that "No person has done more for the introduction and advancement of the culture of
imperialis'' also occur in parts of Central America and northern South America.
In addition to the official classification and the terminology used by various dahlia societies, individual horticulturalists use a wide range of other descriptions, such as 'Incurved' and abbreviations in their catalogues, such as CO for Collarette.
Dahlias were then described by Group and Subgroup, ''e.g.''
* '''Group 10 – Miscellaneous dahlias''' (''Misc'') —  not described in any other group.
By the beginning of the twentieth century a number of different types were recognised.
Flower forms are variable, with one head per stem; these can be as small as  diameter or up to  ("dinner plate").
This system depended primarily on the visibility of the central disc, whether it was open centred or whether only ray florets were apparent centrally (double bloom).
Based on these characteristics, nine groups were defined plua a tenth miscellaneous group for any cultivars not fitting the above characteristics.
During the years 1805 to 1810 several people claimed to have produced a double dahlia.
* '''Giant flowered cultivars''' have blooms with a diameter of over 250mm.
Several of these were soon discovered to be identical with earlier reported species, but the greatest number are new varieties.
There are currently 42 accepted species in the ''Dahlia'' genus, but new species continue to be described.
The asterid eudicots contain two economically important geophyte genera, ''Dahlia'' and ''Liatris''.
In 1578 the manuscript, entitled ''Nova Plantarum, Animalium et Mineralium Mexicanorum Historia'', was sent back to the Escorial in Madrid;  they were not translated into Latin by Francisco Ximenes until 1615.
Horticulturally the garden dahlia is usually treated as the cultigen ''D.
van der Berg of Utrecht in the Netherlands, received a shipment of seeds and plants from a friend in Mexico.
'Starsister', 'Lilian Alice', 'Apple Blossom').
In 1874 van der Berg catalogued it for sale, calling it ''Dahlia juarezii'' to honor Mexican President Benito Pablo Juarez, who had died the year before, and described it as "...equal to the beautiful color of the red poppy.
In 1640, Francisco Cesi, President of the ''Academia Linei'' of Rome, bought the Ximenes translation, and after annotating it, published it in 1649-1651 in two volumes as ''Rerum Medicarum Novae Hispaniae Thesaurus Seu Nova Plantarium, Animalium et Mineraliuím Mexicanorum Historia''.
Larger than Pompons.
In the early days of the dahlia in Europe, the word "double" simply designated flowers with more than one row of petals.
Ray florets blunt or rounded at the tips, margins arranged spirally, involute for at least seventy five percent of the length of the florets.
'Mick's Peppermint')
* '''Dwarf Bedder (Dw.B.)'''
variabilis'', all dahlia species may be assigned to one of two groups for flower-colour: Group I (ivory-magenta) or Group II (yellow-orange-scarlet).
In Europe and America, prior to the discovery of insulin in 1923, diabetics—as well as consumptives—were often given a substance called ''Atlantic starch'' or ''diabetic sugar'', derived from inulin, a naturally occurring form of fruit sugar, extracted from dahlia tubers.
In 1805, German botanist Carl Ludwig Willdenow, asserting that the genus ''Dahlia'' Thunb.
A member of the Asteraceae (or Compositae), dicotyledonous plants, related species include the sunflower, daisy, chrysanthemum, and zinnia.
Predominantly Mexico, but some species are found ranging as far south as northern South America.
juarezii'' had, at one
("baby" or "top-mix" dahlias), ''e.g.''
* '''Miniature flowered cultivars''' have blooms with a diameter between 50mm-115mm.
Planting the tubers quite deep (10 – 15&nbsp;cm) also provides some protection.
5(d) ‘Ace Summer Sunset’.
They were considered hybrids, the results of crossing between previously reported species, or developed from the seeds sent by Humboldt from Mexico in 1805, or perhaps from some other undocumented seeds that had found their way to Europe.
He made cuttings from the plant during the winter of 1872-1873.
Sherff (1955), in the first modern taxonomy described three sections for the 18 species he recognised, ''Pseudodendron'', ''Epiphytum'' and ''Dahlia''.
Many sources state that the name "Dahlia" was bestowed by the pioneering Swedish botanist and taxonomist Carl Linnaeus to honor his late student, Anders Dahl, author of ''Observationes Botanicae''.
60 of the choicest were supplied by Mr. G. C. Thornburn of Astoria, N.Y. who got most of them from contacts in the UK.
However 9 cultivars were already listed in the catalog from Thornburn, 1825.
Willdenow now reclassified the rapidly growing number of species, changing the genus from ''Dahlia'' to ''Georgina''; after naturalist Johann Gottlieb Georgi.
All these refer to the
In addition, dahlias also contain many transposons—genetic pieces that move from place to place upon an allele—which contributes to their manifesting such great diversity.
The ray florets are narrowly lanceolate and are either involute or revolute.
The entire shipment was badly rotted and appeared to be ruined, but van der Berg examined it carefully and found a small piece of root that seemed alive.
The first modern double, or full double, appeared in Belgium; M. Donckelaar, Director of the Botanic Garden at Louvain, selected plants for that characteristic, and within a few years secured three fully double forms.
'Moonfire', 'Carolina Burgundy')
One of the first Dahlias in the USA may be the D. coccinea speciosissima grown by Mr William Leathe, of Cambridgeport, near Boston, around 1929.
Further species continue to be described, Saar (2003) describing 35 species.
Constant reclassification of the 85 reported species has resulted in a considerably smaller number of distinct species, as there is a great deal of disagreement today between systematists over classification.
In 1830 William Smith suggested that all dahlia species could be divided into two groups for color, red-tinged and purple-tinged.
When he described two new species in the 1980s (''Dahlia tubulata'' and ''D.
In 1798, Cavanilles sent D. Pinnata seeds to Parma, Italy.
''Dahlia'' is a genus of the uplands and mountains, being found at elevations between 1,500 and 3,700 meters, in what has been described as a "pine-oak woodland" vegetative zone.
The tubers were grown as a food crop by the Aztecs, but this use largely died out after the Spanish Conquest.
A further species, ''Dahlia sorensenii''  was added by Hansen and Hjerting in (1996).
A new scented species would not be introduced until the next century when the ''D.
* '''Group 3 – Collerette dahlias''' (''Col'') — Large flat florets forming a single outer ring around a central disc and which may overlap a smaller circle of florets closer to the centre, which have the appearance of a collar.
Today it is assumed that ''D.
Hernandez described two varieties of dahlias (the pinwheel-like ''Dahlia pinnata'' and the huge ''Dahlia imperialis'') as well as other medicinal plants of New Spain.
coccinea'' was still held to be a separate species, which he renamed ''Georgina coccinea''.
Depth less than half the diameter of the bloom.
But two of the three drawings of dahlias by Dominguez, made in Mexico between 1570–77, showed definite characteristics of doubling.
From Hernandez' perception of Aztec, to Spanish, through various other translations, the word is "water cane", "water pipe", "water pipe flower", "hollow stem flower" and "cane flower".
The official RHS classification lists fourteen groups, grouped by flower type, together with the abbreviations used by the RHS;
Slugs and snails are serious pests in some parts of the world, particularly in spring when new growth is emerging through the soil.
Whilst in Madrid in 1804, Lady Holland was given either dahlia seeds or tubers by Cavanilles.
