Once all of the milking machines have been removed from the milked row, the milker releases the cows to their feed.
Every time the cow enters the milking unit she is fed concentrates and her collar is scanned to record production data.
Milk replacer has climbed in cost US$15–20 a bag in recent years, so early weaning is economically crucial to effective calf management.
Many modern facilities, and particularly those in tropical areas, keep all animals inside at all times to facilitate herd management.
This is fed directly to the cows, or is stored as silage for use during the winter season.
With farms of hundreds of cows producing large volumes of milk, the larger and more efficient dairy farms are more able to weather severe changes in milk price and operate profitably, while "traditional" very small farms generally do not have the equity or cash flow to do so.
These plans encourage producers to monitor all nutrients coming onto the farm as feed, forage, animals, fertilizer, etc.
Small farms need several people to milk and care for only a few dozen cows, though for many farms these employees have traditionally been the children of the farm family, giving rise to the term "family farm".
Dairy farming has been part of agriculture for thousands of years.
The milking of cows was traditionally a labor-intensive operation and still is in less developed countries.
The milking process for these dairies is similar to a smaller dairy with a single milking parlor but repeated several times.
The higher the energy levels (fat and protein), the less starter feed (feed which is given to young animals) the animal will consume.
Milk is extracted from the cow's udder by flexible rubber sheaths known as liners or inflations that are surrounded by a rigid air chamber.
Housing and management features common in modern dairy farms (such as concrete barn floors, limited access to pasture and suboptimal bed-stall design) have been identified as contributing risk factors to infections and injuries.
+ World total milk production in 2009
Weaning can take place when a calf is consuming at least two pounds of starter feed a day and has been on starter for at least three weeks.
These chiller systems can be made to incorporate large evaporator surface areas and high chilled water flow rates to cool high flow rates of milk.
For this reason, PHE's can result in drastically improved milk quality, reduced operating costs for the dairymen by reducing the refrigeration load on his bulk milk cooler, and increased milk production by supplying the cows with a source of fresh warm water.
In New Zealand slower growing winter pasture is rationed.
This device utilizes a number of specially designed stainless steel plates with small spaces between them.
On some dairies, in order for this to take place, the calves are fed milk replacer, a substitute for the whole milk produced by the cow.
A pulsating flow of ambient air and vacuum is applied to the inflation's air chamber during the milking process.
This method of milk cooling was popular before the arrival of electricity and refrigeration.
mastitis, endometritis and digital dermatitis), metabolic disease (e.g.
Because most milkers milk cattle in groups, the milker can only process a group of cows at the speed of the slowest-milking cow.
A small refrigeration compressor was used to remove heat from the evaporator coils.
By eliminating the need for the
Dean Foods says it buys 15% of the country's raw milk.
The milker device and collection tank hung underneath the cow from the strap.
He has requested the United States Department of Justice to pursue an anti-trust investigation.
Milk prices collapsed in 2009.
One such instance that is open for this is at Point Reyes National Seashore.
At pre-arranged times, a milk truck arrives and pumps the milk from the tank for transport to a dairy factory where it will be pasteurized and processed into many products.
A dairy cow named Kharta, was the world record holder giving  liters of milk.
Common ailments affecting dairy cows include infectious disease (e.g.
In these systems the cow has a high degree of autonomy to choose her time of milking freely during the day (some alternatives may apply, depending on cow-traffic solution used at a farm level).
When the vacuum is reapplied in the chamber the flexible rubber inflation relaxes and opens up, preparing for the next squeezing cycle.
The 954 Israeli dairy farms achieved a world leading average production of  a year per head, while the national average per head was .
It takes the average cow three to five minutes to give her milk.
Internal consumption is often in the form of liquid milk, while the bulk of international trade is in processed dairy products such as milk powder.
A second (and sometimes third) section of the PHE is added to remove the remaining heat with a mixture of chilled pure water and propylene glycol.
As herd sizes continued to increase, this evolved into the more efficient milking parlor.
As a result, proposals to develop dairies of this size can be controversial and provoke substantial opposition from environmentalists including the Sierra Club and local activists.
The size and concentration of cattle creates major environmental issues associated with manure handling and disposal, which requires substantial areas of cropland (a ratio of 5 or 6 cows to the acre, or several thousand acres for dairies of this size) for manure spreading and dispersion, or several-acre methane digesters.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration states that no "significant difference" has been found between milk from treated and non-treated cows but based on consumer concerns several milk purchasers and resellers have elected not to purchase milk produced with rBST.
Another device which has contributed significantly to milk quality is the plate heat exchanger (PHE).
Barns may also incorporate tunnel ventilation into the architecture of the barn structure.
Farmers with this type of structure keep cows inside during the summer months to prevent sunburn and damage to udders.
Although any mammal can produce milk, commercial dairy farms are typically one-species enterprises.
As more automated methods were developed for harvesting milk, hand milking was replaced and, as a result, the milk can was replaced by a bulk milk cooler.
Centralized dairy farming as we understand it primarily developed around villages and cities, where residents were unable to have cows of their own due to a lack of grazing land.
Proteins for the milk replacer come from different sources; the more favorable and more expensive all milk protein (e.g.
As measured in phosphorus, the waste output of 5,000 cows roughly equals a municipality of 70,000 people.
cheese, butter, etc.
It is carefully controlled by light weight portable electric break feeding fences run on mains power that can be easily repositioned.
Subsequently the New York Department of Environmental Conservation mandated a settlement package of $2.2 million against the dairy.
In rotary parlors, the cows are loaded one at a time onto the platform as it rotates.
This type of cooling utilizes an evaporator built directly into the inner wall of the storage tank to remove heat from the milk.
Depending on the size of the milking parlor, which normally is the bottleneck, these rows of cows can range from four to sixty at a time.
An important part of the dairy industry is the removal of the calves off the mother’s milk after the three days of needed colostrum, allowing for the collection of the milk produced.
Rotary cowsheds, as they are called in New Zealand, started in the 1980s but are expensive compared to Herringbone cowshed - the older New Zealand norm.
This may include corn, and "hay", which includes alfalfa, timothy, and clover.
Milking machines are held in place automatically by a vacuum system that draws the ambient air pressure down from  of vacuum.
Because of the danger of infection to humans, it is important to maintain the health of milk-producing cattle.
In herringbone and parallel parlors, the milker generally milks one row at a time.
In the last century or so larger farms doing only dairy production have emerged.
Plate heat exchangers have also evolved as a result of the increase of dairy farm herd sizes in the United States.
These were introduced in the early 20th century.
Lameness is commonly considered one of the most significant animal welfare issues for dairy cattle, and is best defined as any abnormality that causes an animal to change its gait.
Dairy farming is also an important industry in Florida, Minnesota, Ohio and Vermont.
The potential impact of large dairies was demonstrated when a massive manure spill occurred on a 5,000-cow dairy in Upstate New York, contaminating a  stretch of the Black River, and killing 375,000 fish.
The next innovation in automatic milking was the milk pipeline, introduced in the late 20th century.
The automatic take-off system was developed to remove the milker from the cow when the milk flow reaches a preset level, relieving the farmer of the duties of carefully watching over 20 or more animals being milked at the same time.
In the U.S., dairy operations with more than 1,000 cows meet the EPA definition of a CAFO (Concentrated Animal Feeding Operation), and are subject to EPA regulations.
or there is a substantial market of people with cash to buy milk, but no cows of their own.
For this reason, many farmers will group slow-milking cows so as not to stress the faster milking cows.
However, not all dairies use milk replacer - some continue to feed calves milk from the cows in the milking herd.
fungal infections that cause dermatitis) and physical damage causing bruising or lesions (e.g.
A milk lift pump draws the milk from the receiving can through large diameter stainless steel piping, through the plate cooler, then into a refrigerated bulk tank.
Israeli consumption is lower than other western countries with an average of  per person.
Pennsylvania has 8,500 farms with 555,000 dairy cows.
A new group of cows is then loaded into the now vacant side and the process repeats until all cows are milked.
In recent years, nutritionists have realized that requirements for phosphorus are much lower than previously thought.
The ideal levels for fat and protein in milk replacer are 10-28% and 18-30%, respectively.
Direct expansion is able to cool milk at a much faster rate than early ice bank type coolers and is still the primary method for bulk tank cooling today on small to medium-sized operations.
Typically, ground water is still utilized to provide some initial cooling to bring the milk to between 55 and .
In the southern hemisphere such as in Australia and New Zealand, cows spend most of their lives outside on pasture, although they may receive supplementation during periods of low pasture availability.
Prior to milking a cow, a large wide leather strap called a surcingle was put around the cow, across the cow's lower back.
This was a double wall vessel with evaporator coils and water located between the walls at the bottom and sides of the tank.
Production (106 kg/y)
These cans were placed into a cooled water bath to remove heat and keep them cool until they were able to be transported to a collection facility.
Until the late 19th century, the milking of the cow was done by hand.
As a dairyman increases the size of his herd, he must also increase the capacity of his milking parlor in order to harvest the additional milk.
Innovation in milking focused on mechanizing the milking parlor (known in Australia and New Zealand as a ''milking shed'') to maximize the number of cows per operator which streamlined the milking process to permit cows to be milked as if on an assembly line, and to reduce physical stresses on the farmer by putting the cows on a platform slightly above the person milking the cows to eliminate having to constantly bend over.
For example, a precision approach to animal feeding results in less overfeeding of nutrients and a subsequent decrease in environmental excretion of nutrients, such as phosphorus.
In developed countries, dairy farms typically consist of high producing dairy cows.
This innovation allowed the cow to move around naturally during the milking process rather than having to stand perfectly still over a bucket on the floor.
On 10 August 2005, a manure storage lagoon collapsed releasing  of manure into the Black River.
Large scale dairy farming is only viable where either a large amount of milk is required for production of more durable dairy products such as cheese, butter, etc.
Tall, ten-gallon metal containers filled with freshly obtained milk, which is naturally warm, were placed in this cooling bath.
vitamins and minerals).
Now most dairies must have more than one hundred cows being milked at a time in order to be profitable, with other cows and heifers waiting to be "freshened" to join the milking herd .
or there is a substantial market of people with cash to buy milk, but no cows of their own.
When the milking operation starts, only the milk agitator and the water circulation pump, which flows water across the ice and the steel walls of the tank, are needed to reduce the incoming milk to a temperature below 5 degrees.
This increase in parlor sizes has resulted in tremendous increases in milk throughput and cooling demand.
Some of the larger dairies have planned 10 or more series of loafing barns and milking parlors in this arrangement, so that the total operation may include as many as 15,000 or 20,000 cows.
Such examples of this method of dairy farming are difficult to locate, but some are preserved as a historic site for a glimpse into the days gone by.
In the United States, several large dairy operations existed in some northeastern states and in the west, that involved as many as several hundred cows, but an individual milker could not be expected to milk more than a dozen cows a day.
Typical supplementary feeds in Australasia are hay, silage or ground maize.
When ambient air is allowed to enter the chamber, the vacuum inside the inflation causes the inflation to collapse around the cow's teat, squeezing the milk out of teat in a similar fashion as a baby calf's mouth massaging the teat.
In Italy, donkey dairies are growing in popularity to produce an alternative milk source for human infants.
'Ice banks' were the first type of bulk milk cooler.
Ice eventually builds up around the coils, until it reaches a thickness of about three inches surrounding each pipe, and the cooling system shuts off.
milk fever and ketosis) and injuries caused by their environment (e.g.
The dairy farm on Sa'ad was the Israeli leader in 2011 for productivity with an average of  per head that year.
The common public perception of large corporate farms supplanting smaller ones is generally a misconception, as many small family farms expand to take advantage of economies of scale, and incorporate the business to limit the legal liabilities of the owners and simplify such things as tax management.
Historically it has been one part of small, diverse farms.
It can be caused by a number of sources, including infections of the hoof tissue (e.g.
For example, in the San Joaquin Valley of California a number of dairies have been established on a very large scale.
This uses a permanent milk-return pipe and a second vacuum pipe that encircles the barn or milking parlor above the rows of cows, with quick-seal entry ports above each cow.
Most dairy farms in the United States are required to develop nutrient management plans for their farms, to help balance the flow of nutrients and reduce the risks of environmental pollution.
Some cows are faster or slower.
These changes have allowed dairy producers to reduce the amount of phosphorus being fed to their cows with a reduction in environmental pollution.
Feeding could occur simultaneously with milking in the barn, although most dairy cattle were pastured during the day between milkings.
When properly managed, dairy and other livestock waste, due to its nutrient content (N, P, K), makes an excellent fertilizer promoting crop growth, increasing soil organic matter, and improving overall soil fertility and tilth characteristics.
'''Dairy farming''' is a class of agriculture for long-term production of milk, which is processed (either on the farm or at a dairy plant, either of which may be called a dairy) for eventual sale of a dairy product.
Slow-milking cows may take up to fifteen minutes to let down all their milk.
By the time the platform has completed almost a full rotation, another milker or a machine removes the cups and the cow steps backwards off the platform and then walks to its feed.
whey protein- a by-product of the cheese industry) and alternative proteins including soy, animal plasma and wheat gluten.
A dry period that falls outside this time frame can result in decreased milk production in subsequent lactation.
Milk replacers are classified by three categories: protein source, protein/fat (energy) levels, and medication or additives (e.g.
Modern dairy farmers use milking machines and sophisticated plumbing systems to harvest and store the milk from the cows, which are usually milked two or three times daily.
During the summer months, cows may be turned out to graze in pastures, both day and night, and are brought into the barn to be milked.
(including cow/buffalo/goat/sheep/camel milk)
Air pollution from methane gas associated with manure management also is a major concern.
The dairy farmers would fill barrels with milk in the morning and bring it to market on a wagon.
The milk is pulled up into the milk-return pipe by the vacuum system, and then flows by gravity to the milkhouse vacuum-breaker that puts the milk in the storage tank.
The milker will move a row of cows from the holding yard into the milking parlor, and milk each cow in that row.
The production of milk requires that the cow be in lactation, which is a result of the cow having given birth to a calf.
The milker stands near the entry to the parlor and puts the cups on the cows as they move past.
When refrigeration first arrived (the 19th century) the equipment was initially used to cool cans of milk, which were filled by hand milking.
In New Zealand the average herd size, for the 2009/2010 season, is 376 cows.
This developed into the Surge hanging milker.
During the winter months the cows may be kept in the barn, which is warmed by their collective body heat.
The cycle of insemination, pregnancy, parturition, and lactation, followed by a "dry" period of about two months of forty-five to fifty days, before calving which allows udder tissue to regenerate.
This ventilation system is highly efficient and involves opening both ends of the structure allowing cool air to blow through the building.
Dairy cows consume approximately 3 gallons of water for every gallon of milk production and prefer to drink slightly warm water as opposed to cold ground water.
It can be harmful to an animal for it to be over-milked past the point where the udder has stopped releasing milk.
The naturally cold underground water would be continuously pumped into a cooling tub or vat.
Milk replacer is generally a powder, which comes in large bags, and is added to precise amounts of water, and then fed to the calf via bucket or bottle.
Ground water is the most common source of cooling medium for this device.
In the US however, no such prohibition exists, and approximately 17.2% of dairy cows are treated in this way.
Worldwide, the largest milk producer is India (more than 55% buffalo milk), the largest cow milk exporter is New Zealand, and the largest importer is China.
The first milking machines were an extension of the traditional milking pail.
Dairy cows also eat byproducts from other industries, including cottonseed from textile manufacturing and dried distiller's grains from local breweries.
Even in winter, the heat produced by the cattle requires the barns to be ventilated for cooling purposes.
Other species used in commercial dairy farming include goats, sheep, and camels.
Milk is passed between every other set of plates with water being passed between the balance of the plates to remove heat from the milk.
In the 1980s and 1990s, robotic milking systems were developed and introduced (principally in the EU).
For most herds, milking took place indoors twice a day, in a barn with the cattle tied by the neck with ropes or held in place by stanchions.
There is a great deal of variation in the pattern of dairy production worldwide.
Each milking parlor is surrounded by a set of 3 or 4 loafing barns housing 1,500 or 2,000 cattle.
Consequently, the milking process involves not just applying the milker, but also monitoring the process to determine when the animal has been ''milked out'' and the milker should be removed.
milk container, the milking device shrank in size and weight to the point where it could hang under the cow, held up only by the sucking force of the milker nipples on the cow's udder.
This method of cooling can remove large amounts of heat from the milk in a very short time, thus drastically slowing bacteria growth and thereby improving milk quality.
Farmers typically grow their own food for their cattle.
Before large scale mechanization arrived in the 1950s, keeping a dozen milk cows for the sale of milk was profitable.
While parlor operations allowed a farmer to milk many more animals much more quickly, it also increased the number of animals to be monitored simultaneously by the farmer.
In New Zealand some farmers seeking a better life style, are milking only once per day, trading a slight reduction in production of milk for increased leisure time.
Milk produced in Pennsylvania yields an annual revenue of about US$1.5 billion.
The pipeline allowed barn length to keep increasing and expanding, but after a point farmers started to milk the cows in large groups, filling the barn with one-half to one-third of the herd, milking the animals, and then emptying and refilling the barn.
Many dairy farms also grow their own feed, typically including corn, and hay.
Herd size in the US varies between 1,200 on the West Coast and Southwest, where large farms are commonplace, to roughly 50 in the Midwest and Northeast, where land-base is a significant limiting factor to herd size.
Advances in technology have mostly led to the radical redefinition of "family farms" in industrialized countries such as Australia, New Zealand, and the United States.
The extracted milk passes through a strainer and plate heat exchangers before entering the tank, where it can be stored safely for a few days at approximately  .
Each dairy consists of several modern milking parlor set-ups operated as a single enterprise.
PHE's are typically utilized in this instance to rapidly cool the milk to the desired temperature (or close to it) before it reaches the bulk milk tank.
The vacuum is also used to lift milk vertically through small diameter hoses, into the receiving can.
Today's larger farms produce milk at a rate which direct expansion refrigeration systems on bulk milk coolers cannot cool in a timely manner.
Following each cow being milked, the bucket would be dumped into a holding tank.
ulcers or hemorrhage of the hoof).
Near the town, farmers could make some extra money on the side by having additional animals and selling the milk in town.
Many older and smaller farms still have tie-stall or stanchion barns, but worldwide a majority of commercial farms have parlors.
These systems are generally limited to intensively managed systems although research continues to match them to the requirements of grazing cattle and to develop sensors to detect animal health and fertility automatically.
In the United States, the top five dairy states are, in order by total milk production; California, Wisconsin, New York, Idaho,  and Pennsylvania.
In the mid-1950s direct expansion refrigeration was first applied directly to the bulk milk cooler.
Thousands of these systems are now in routine operation.
Some dairies even pasteurize extra milk from the main herd to feed calves.
Milking speed is only minorly related to the quantity of milk the cow produces&nbsp;— milking speed is a separate factor from milk quantity; milk quantity is not determinative of milking speed.
In 2011, a federal judge approved a settlement of $30 million to 9,000  farmers in the Northeast.
hoof and hock lesions).
This cooling method worked well for smaller dairies, however was fairly inefficient and was unable to meet the increasingly higher cooling demand of larger milking parlors.
New dairy farms being built now include non-slip flooring and other features designed to minimize risk to cows when moving between pens and to the milking parlor.
Senator Bernie Sanders accused Dean Foods of controlling 40% of the country's milk market.
Many countries which are large producers consume most of this internally, while others (in particular New Zealand), export a large percentage of their production.
The trend in New Zealand is towards feeding cows on a concrete pad to prevent loss of feed by trampling.
The European Union with its present 28 member countries produced  in 2013(96.8% cow milk), the most by any politico-economic union.
Smaller operations predominated.
The early milker device fit on top of a regular milk pail and sat on the floor under the cow.
and all nutrients exiting the farm as product, crop, animals, manure, etc.
