Beginning about 1950, and mostly since about 1980, lactose and many other products, mainly food additives, are made from both casein and cheese whey.
Government intervention in milk markets was common in the 20th century.
In New Zealand English the singular use of the word ''dairy'' almost exclusively refers to a corner shop, or superette.
(Cluster assembly) Claws are commonly made of stainless steel or plastic or both.
Milk producing animals have been domesticated for thousands of years.
While this technological tendency keeps manufacturing costs lower, the need for long-distance transportation often increases the environmental impact.
Swingover parlours are the same as herringbone parlours except they have only one set of milking cups to be shared between the two rows of cows, as one side is being milked the cows on the other side are moved out and replaced with unmilked ones.
By varying the amount of cream returned, producers can make a variety of low-fat milks to suit their local market.
This on-site processing is a traditional method of producing specialist milk products, common in Europe.
Monsanto Company developed a synthetic (recombinant) version of this hormone (rBST).
But having cows standing about in the yard and shed waiting to be milked is not good for the cow, as she needs as much time in the paddock grazing as is possible.
The cow could not move about excessively and the milker could expect not to be kicked or trampled while sitting on a (three-legged) stool and milking into a bucket.
The turntable is turned by an electric-motor drive at a rate that one turn is the time for a cow to be milked completely.
Commercial cheeses, however, are often manufactured by processes that do not have the same lactose-reducing properties.
The interior 'milk contact' surfaces of the machine are kept clean by a manual or automated  washing procedures implemented after milking is completed.
In New Zealand two approaches to this problem have been used.
The next cow moves into the next vacant stall and so on.
A portion of the population, including many vegans and Jains, object to dairy production as unethical, cruel to animals, and environmentally deleterious.
The advantage of this system is that it is less costly to equip, however it operates at slightly better than half-speed and one would not normally try to milk more than about 100 cows with one person.
Later large railway containers, such as the British Railway Milk Tank Wagon were introduced, enabling the transport of larger quantities of milk, and over longer distances.
Terminology differs between countries.
Protecting and feeding the animals were a big part of the symbiotic relationship between the animals and the herders.
The ratio of the time that the liner is open (milking phase) and closed (rest phase) is called the pulsation ratio.
Some small herds are milked once a day for about the last 20 days of the production cycle but this is not usual for large herds.
The four streams of milk from the teatcups are usually combined in the claw and transported to the milkline, or the collection bucket (usually sized to the output of one cow) in a single milk hose.
The word ''dairy'' harkens back to Middle English ''dayerie'', ''deyerie'', from ''deye'' (female servant or dairymaid) and further back to Old English ''dæge'' (kneader of bread).
Some farmers have devised their own ways to disinfect the clusters between cows.
Output of milk is growing rapidly in such countries and presents a major source of income growth for many farmers.
The building was a long, narrow, ''lean-to'' shed that was open along one long side.
Historically, the milking and the processing took place close together in space and time: on a dairy farm.
* Crohn's disease has been linked to infection with the bacterium ''M.
One person could milk more cows this way, as many as 20 for a skilled worker.
The Federal Milk Price Support Program began in 1949.
However, once-a-day milking is now being practised more widely in New Zealand for profit and lifestyle reasons.
This is notably the case in the United States, Europe, Australia and New Zealand.
Cheese is another product made from milk.
The entire process is computer controlled.
Brucellosis has been eradicated from certain countries by testing for the disease and culling suspected animals.
As herd numbers increased so did the problems of animal health.
The ''stripping'' action is repeated, using both hands for speed.
It was common in the U.S., but has lost popularity due to consumer demands for rBST-free cows.
As an empty stall passes the entrance a cow steps on, facing the center, and rotates with the turntable.
Milk is also processed by various drying processes into powders.
When milking is completed the vacuum to the milking unit is shut off and the teatcups are removed.
The skim milk was fed to pigs.
Plants manufacturing items with longer shelf life, such as butter, milk powders, cheese and whey powders, tend to be situated in rural areas closer to the milk supply.
Health Canada prohibited the sale of rBST in 1999; the recommendations of external committees were that, despite not finding a significant health risk to humans, the drug presented a threat to animal health and, for this reason, could not be sold in Canada.
Milk is then hauled (usually by truck) to a "dairy plant," also referred to as a "dairy", where raw milk is further processed and prepared for commercial sale of dairy products.
After washing the udder and teats the cups of the milking machine are applied to the cows, from the rear of their hind legs, on both sides of the working area.
Milk coming from the cow is transported to a nearby storage vessel by the airflow leaking around the cups on the cow or by a special "air inlet" (5-10 l/min free air) in the claw.
Traditionally made Emmental or Cheddar might contain 10% of the lactose found in whole milk.
paratuberculosis'', which has been found in pasteurized retail milk in the UK and the USA.
To make a consumable liquid a portion of cream is returned to the skim milk to make ''low fat milk'' (semi-skimmed) for human consumption.
Most yards have a powered gate that ensures that the cows are kept close to the shed.
Milk production is irregular, depending on cow biology.
The bottom of the claw is transparent to allow observation of milk flow.
While most countries produce their own milk products, the structure of the dairy industry varies in different parts of the world.
The two rigid stainless steel teatcup shells applied to the front two quarters of the udder are visible.
It is usual to restrict the twice-daily milking to a maximum of an hour and a half each time.
Rotary milking sheds (also known as Rotary milking parlor) consist of a turntable with about 12 to 100 individual stalls for cows around the outer edge.
Many countries have required government oversight and regulations regarding dairy production, including requirements for pasteurization.
* Cowpox is a virus that today is rarely found in either cows or humans.
The milking equipment was much as today, a vacuum from a pump, pulsators, a claw-piece with pipes leading to the four shells and liners that stimulate and suck the milk from the teat.
It is a historically important disease, as it led to the first vaccination against the now eradicated smallpox.
In the 1930s, some U.S. states adopted price controls, and Federal Milk Marketing Orders started under the Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act of 1937 and continue in the 2000s.
As recovery of this effect can take time, any land based application needs to be well managed and considered.
When it became necessary to milk larger cows, the cows would be brought to a shed or barn that was set up with bails (milking stalls) where the cows could be confined while they were milked.
Ageing of some cheeses is governed by regulations; in other cases there is no quantitative indication of degree of ageing and concomitant lactose reduction, and lactose content is not usually indicated on labels.
Artificial insemination (AI) is common in all high-production herds.
Dairy plants process the raw milk they receive from farmers so as to extend its marketable life.
The top of the flexible liner is visible at the top of the shells as are the short milk tubes and short pulsation tubes extending from the bottom of the shells to the claw.
A dairy farm produces milk and a dairy factory processes it into a variety of dairy products.
These proved impractical for transport by road or rail, and so the milk churn was introduced, based on the tall conical shape of the butter churn.
Cows are milked as the platform rotates.
Farmers soon realised that a milking shed was a good place to feed cows supplementary foods that overcame local dietary deficiencies or added to the cows' wellbeing and production.
* Leptospirosis is an infection that can be transmitted to people who work in dairy production through exposure to urine or to contaminated water or soil.
A European Union scientific commission was asked to report on the incidence of mastitis and other disorders in dairy cows, and on other aspects of the welfare of dairy cows.
With industrialisation and urbanisation, the supply of milk became a commercial industry, with specialised breeds of cattle being developed for dairy, as distinct from beef or draught animals.
Proper sanitation practices help to reduce the rate of bacterial contamination, and pasteurization greatly decreases the amount of contaminated milk that reaches the consumer.
Large application rates of milk onto land, or disposing in a hole, is problematic as the residue from the decomposing milk will block the soil pores and thereby reduce the water infiltration rate through the soil profile.
Using the same teat cups for successive cows has the danger of transmitting infection, mastitis, from one cow to another.
The rotary system is capable of milking very large herds—over a thousand cows.
It was in the vet's interest to keep the animals healthy and reduce the number of calls from farmers, rather than to ensure that the farmer needed to call for service and pay regularly.
In the more recent past, people in agricultural societies owned dairy animals that they milked for domestic and local (village) consumption, a typical example of a cottage industry.
When one was finished the machine's cups are swapped to the other cow.
When each cow was finished she backed out into the yard again.
* Listeria is a bacterial disease associated with unpasteurised milk, and can affect some cheeses made in traditional ways.
Initially, they were part of the subsistence farming that nomads engaged in.
The disease has been eradicated from many countries by testing for the disease and culling suspected animals.
However, there are claims that this practice can have negative consequences for the animals themselves.
In most other countries, the range of cheeses is smaller and the use of artificial cheese curing is greater.
It is made up of a claw, four teatcups, (Shells and rubber liners) long milk tube, long pulsation tube, and a pulsator.
Milk is refrigerated on the farm in most countries either by passing through a heat-exchanger or in the bulk tank, or both.
In earlier times, whey or '''milk serum''' was considered to be a waste product and it was, mostly, fed to pigs as a convenient means of disposal.
Current automatic milking sheds use the voluntary milking (VM) method.
Both methods result in the milk that was trapped in the milk duct being squirted out the end into a bucket that is supported between the knees (or rests on the ground) of the milker, who usually sits on a low stool.
The milker, or an automatic device, removes the milking machine cups and the cow backs out and leaves at an exit just before the entrance.
It makes no difference whether one milks 10 or 1000 cows, the milking time should not exceed a total of about three hours each day for any cow.
Continuous vacuum is applied inside the soft liner to massage milk from the teat by creating a pressure difference across the teat canal (or opening at the end of the teat).
The door was closed, the next cow walked into the bail and was secured.
This compares to some intensive farm systems in the United States that milk three or more times per day due to higher milk yields per cow and lower marginal labor costs.
The other was the creation of ''veterinary clubs'' where groups of farmers would employ a veterinarian (vet) full-time and share those services throughout the year.
As in the United States, sometimes milking sheds are referred to by their type, such as "herring bone shed" or "pit parlour".
In dairy-intensive areas, various methods have been proposed for disposing of large quantities of milk.
Vacuum also helps keep the machine attached to the cow.
Each bail might have a box into which such feed is delivered as the cow arrives so that she is eating while being milked.
The residual buttermilk goes on to further processing.
This is because some traditionally made hard cheeses, and soft ripened cheeses may create less reaction than the equivalent amount of milk because of the processes involved.
paratuberculosis'' causes a similar disorder, Johne's disease, in livestock.
Milk is then transported (manually in buckets) or with a combination of airflow and mechanical pump to a central storage vat or bulk tank.
Only about 25% of dairy cows receive rBST anymore.
In herringbone milking sheds, or parlours, cows enter, in single file, and line up almost perpendicular to the central aisle of the milking parlour on both sides of a central pit in which the milker works (you can visualise a fishbone with the ribs representing the cows and the spine being the milker's working area; the cows face outward).
The photo to the right shows a bucket milking system with the stainless steel bucket visible on the far side of the cow.
Originally, milking and processing took place on the dairy farm itself.
Usually the cows were restrained in the bail with a breech chain and a rope to restrain the outer back leg.
Originally milk was distributed in 'pails', a lidded bucket with a handle.
In developing countries, the past practice of farmers marketing milk in their own neighborhoods is changing rapidly.
Notable developments include considerable foreign investment in the dairy industry and a growing role for dairy cooperatives.
Other waste milk disposal methods commonly employed include solidification and disposal at a solid waste landfill, disposal at a wastewater treatment plant, or discharge into a sanitary sewer.
As processing plants grow fewer and larger, they tend to acquire bigger, more automated and more efficient equipment.
Automatic milking or 'robotic milking' sheds can be seen in Australia, New Zealand, the U.S., Canada, and many European countries.
The main difference between production of powders for human or for animal consumption is in the protection of the process and the product from contamination.
Yogurt (or yoghurt) making is a process similar to cheese making, only the process is arrested before the curd becomes very hard.
These allow the cows to voluntarily present themselves for milking at any time of the day or night, although repeat visits may be limited by the farmer through computer software.
Milking machines are used to harvest milk from cows when manual milking becomes inefficient or labour-intensive.
Another round of price fixing charges was settled in 2016.
Water can be warmed by heat transfer with milk.
As an attributive, the word ''dairy'' refers to milk-based products, derivatives and processes, and the animals and workers involved in their production: for example dairy cattle, dairy goat.
Most cream from New Zealand and Australian factories is made into butter.
This usage is historical as such shops were a common place for the public to buy milk products.
The butter is packaged (25 to 50&nbsp;kg boxes) and chilled for storage and sale.
Producers must adjust the mix of milk which is sold in liquid form vs. processed foods (such as butter and cheese) depending on changing supply and demand.
The animals might serve multiple purposes (for example, as a draught animal for pulling a plough as a youngster, and at the end of its useful life as meat).
Most large processing plants tend to specialise in a limited range of products.
Atmospheric air is admitted into the pulsation chamber about once per second (the pulsation rate) to allow the liner to collapse around the end of teat and relieve congestion in the teat tissue.
The milk is then stored in a large vat, or bulk tank, which is usually refrigerated until collection for processing.
A "good" rotary will be operated with 24–32 (~48–50+) stalls by one (two) milkers.
The milk went into churns, via a cooler.
These tasks were performed by a ''dairymaid'' (''dairywoman'') or ''dairyman''.
From there it is pumped by a mechanical pump and cooled by a heat exchanger.
The UK bail,  initially developed by Wiltshire dairy farmer Arthur Hosier, was a six standing mobile shed with steps that the cow mounted, so the herdsman didn't have to bend so low.
The product left after the cream is removed is called skim, or skimmed, milk.
Whole milk, skim milk, buttermilk, and whey products are dried into a powder form and used for human and animal consumption.
This is done by churning the cream until the fat globules coagulate and form a monolithic mass.
These establishments constitute the global dairy industry, a component of the food industry.
When milking machines were introduced bails were set in pairs so that a cow was being milked in one paired bail while the other could be prepared for milking.
As herd numbers increased it was easier to double-up the cup-sets and milk both cows simultaneously than to increase the number of bails.
The cows were held in a yard at the open side and when they were about to be milked they were positioned in one of the bails (stalls).
Other products, such as calcium, vitamin D, and flavouring, are also added to appeal to consumers.
This is the same as for ''Swingover Milking Parlours'' as described below except that the cups are loaded on the udder from the side.
Although it is traditionally made from mare's milk, modern industrial variants may use cow's milk instead.
In the United States a ''dairy'' can also be a place that processes, distributes and sells dairy products, or a room, building or establishment where milk is stored and processed into milk products, such as butter or cheese.
The operator, or milker, cleans the teats, attaches the cups and does any other feeding or whatever husbanding operations that are necessary.
Water is a vital commodity on a dairy farm: cows drink about 20 gallons (80 litres) a day, sheds need water to cool and clean them.
Traditionally the cow, or cows, would stand in the field or paddock while being milked.
This is done by mating cows outside their natural mating time so that the period when each cow in the herd is giving maximum production is in rotation throughout the year.
Transparent sections in the shell may allow viewing of liner collapse and milk flow.
Young stock, heifers, would have to be trained to remain still to be milked.
This daily milking routine goes on for about 300 to 320 days per year that the cow stays in milk.
At a later stage these packages are broken down into home-consumption sized packs.
The commission's statement, subsequently adopted by the European Union, stated that the use of rBST substantially increased health problems with cows, including foot problems, mastitis and injection site reactions, impinged on the welfare of the animals and caused reproductive disorders.
The holding yard at the entrance of the shed is important as a means of keeping cows moving into the shed.
Careful observance of the traditional cheesemaking methods achieves reasonable protection for the consumer.
Some people drink milk reconstituted from powdered milk, because milk is about 88% water and it is much cheaper to transport the dried product.
One early model was patented in 1907.
They do not consume dairy products.
It has a very wide range of uses from being a filler for human foods, such as in ice cream, to the manufacture of products such as fabric, adhesives, and plastics.
Later, cream was separated from the milk by machine on the farm, and transported to a factory to be made into butter.
In February 1994, rBST was approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for use in the U.S.
The development of refrigeration and better road transport, in the late 1950s, has meant that most farmers milk their cows and only temporarily store the milk in large refrigerated bulk tanks, from where it is later transported by truck to central processing facilities.
Farmers who are contracted to supply liquid milk for human consumption (as opposed to milk for processing into butter, cheese, and so on—see milk) often have to manage their herd so that the contracted number of cows are in milk the year round, or the required minimum milk output is maintained.
Some year-round milk farms are penalised financially for over-production at any time in the year by being unable to sell their overproduction at current prices.
The problem with this method is that it relies on quiet, tractable beasts, because the hind end of the cow is not restrained.
As the community moved about the country, their animals accompanied them.
The milking unit is the portion of a milking machine for removing milk from an udder.
If a cow is left unmilked just once she is likely to reduce milk-production almost immediately and the rest of the season may see her ''dried off'' (giving no milk) and still consuming feed.
In countries where milk is legally allowed to be processed without pasteurization, a wide range of cheeses can be made using the bacteria naturally in the milk.
For example, in the United States, the entire dairy farm is commonly called a "dairy."
Some people with lactose intolerance are surprisingly able to eat certain types of cheese.
A close alternative is to use 'out-of-parlour-feeders', stalls that respond to a transponder around the cow's neck that is programmed to provide each cow with a supplementary feed, the quantity dependent on her production, stage in lactation, and the benefits of the main ration
This butter mass is washed and, sometimes, salted to improve keeping qualities.
Milk contact surfaces must comply with regulations requiring  food-grade materials (typically stainless steel and special plastics and rubber compounds) and are easily cleaned.
The Northeast Dairy Compact regulated wholesale milk prices in New England from 1997 to 2001.
As herd sizes increased there was more need to have efficient milking machines, sheds, milk-storage facilities (vats), bulk-milk transport and shed cleaning capabilities and the means of getting cows from paddock to shed and back.
The report concluded that on the basis of the health and welfare of the animals, rBST should not be used.
This type of milking facility was the first development, after open-paddock milking, for many farmers.
A robot arm is used to clean teats and apply milking equipment, while automated gates direct cow traffic, eliminating the need for the farmer to be present during the process.
About 50 cows an hour can be milked in a shed with 8 bails by one person.
A limited anti-trust exemption was created for U.S. dairy cooperatives by the Capper-Volstead Act of 1922.
Plants producing liquid milk and products with short shelf life, such as yogurts, creams and soft cheeses, tend to be located on the outskirts of urban centres close to consumer markets.
This allowed for the high cost of transport (taking the smallest volume high-value product), primitive trucks and the poor quality of roads.
In many European countries, particularly the United Kingdom, milk is then delivered direct to customers' homes by a milk float.
Kumis is produced commercially in Central Asia.
In Ireland and Australia, for example, farmers' co-operatives own many of the large-scale processors, while in the United States many farmers and processors do business through individual contracts.
Whey is also the byproduct of this process.
People milked the animals by hand; on farms where only small numbers are kept, hand-milking may still be practiced.
In addition, the aging methods of traditional cheeses (sometimes over two years) reduce their lactose content to practically nothing.
Casein is the predominant phosphoprotein found in fresh milk.
Most milking machines are powered by electricity but, in case of electrical failure, there can be an alternative means of motive power, often an internal combustion engine, for the vacuum and milk pumps.
Northern hemisphere farmers who keep cows in barns almost all the year usually manage their herds to give continuous production of milk so that they get paid all year round.
