According to the FBI, a city to city comparison of crime rates is not meaningful, because recording practices vary from city to city, citizens report different percentages of crimes from one city to the next, and the actual number of people physically present in a city is unknown.
Male full-time workers had a median income of $32,265 versus $32,402 for female full-time workers.
Dallas' skyline contains several buildings over  in height.
In addition, the Park Cities and suburbs such as Plano also have their own community newspapers.
The Prado focuses on Spanish visual art and boasts the best collection of Spain's art in North America, with works by Picasso, Goya, Velasquez, El Greco, Murillo, Zurbaran, Ribera, Fortuny, Rico, de Juanes, Plensa and plenty of other Spaniards.
Cathie Adams, named chairman in October 2009 of the Republican Party of Texas, is a long-time conservative political activist from Dallas.
Further east, in the southeast quadrant of the city, is the large neighborhood of Pleasant Grove.
A sizable Sikh community resides in Dallas and its surrounding suburbs.
White Rock Lake, a reservoir constructed at the beginning of the 20th century, is Dallas' other significant water feature.
A number of nationally ranked steakhouses can be found in the Dallas area, including Bob's Steak & Chop House, currently ranked No.&nbsp;1 according to the USDA Prime Steakhouses chart.
The same building additionally houses United States Bankruptcy and Magistrate Courts and a United States Attorney office.
It is currently one of the few 5-level interchange in Dallas and is one of the largest freeway interchanges in the United States.
Vibrant wildflowers (such as the bluebonnet, Indian paintbrush and other flora) bloom in spring and are planted around the highways throughout Texas.
The lake and surrounding park is a popular destination for boaters, rowers, joggers, and bikers, as well as visitors seeking peaceful respite from the city at the  Dallas Arboretum and Botanical Garden, located on the lake's eastern shore.
Dallas, like many other cities, was founded along a river.
Neighboring cities Fort Worth, Arlington, and Denton are home to the Texas Christian University Horned Frogs, University of Texas at Arlington Mavericks, and University of North Texas Mean Green respectively.
The team plays at the American Airlines Center.
Kittrell/Riffkind Art Glass was first opened in October 1990 and merged with Southwest Gallery in October 2015.
The Oak Cliff Transit Authority took the lead with leaders envisioning a streetcar line that would link Union Station and the Dallas Convention Center in downtown to Oak Cliff, Methodist Medical Center, and the Bishop Arts District via the Houston Street Viaduct.
The Ritz-Carlton Dallas hotel was also named 2009 best US hotel by Zagat, and 2009 No.&nbsp;2 hotel in the world by Zagat, trailing only the Four Seasons King George V in Paris, France.
After hours of negotiation failed, police resorted to a robot-delivered bomb, killing Johnson inside El Centro College.
The team is named after the original Dallas Sidekicks that operated from 1984 to 2004.
In the northeast quadrant of the city is Lake Highlands, one of Dallas' most unified middle-class neighborhoods.
The upper two floors of the building from which alleged assassin Lee Harvey Oswald shot Kennedy, the Texas School Book Depository, have been converted into a historical museum covering the former president's life and accomplishments.
In 2003, HBC was acquired by Univision and became Univision Radio Inc., but the radio company remains headquartered in the city.
There is also a significant number of people from the Horn of Africa, immigrants from Ethiopia, Eritrea, and Somalia.
Currently Dallas is one of only 16 cities in the United States included in the Rugby Super League represented by Dallas Harlequins.
The team was originally called the Dallas Burn and used to play in the Cotton Bowl.
It is a home for International Network of Prison Ministries, Coalition of Prison Evangelists, Bill Glass Champions for Life, for more than 30 years to Chaplain Ray's  International Prison Ministry, and for more than  60 other prison ministries.
The trail currently terminates at Central Expressway, however extensions are under way to extend the trail to the White Rock Lake Trail in Lakewood.
According to the 2005–2007 American Community Survey, the median income for a household in the city was $40,147, and the median income for a family was $42,670.
In 2006, one of the district's magnet schools, The School for the Talented and Gifted in Oak Cliff, was named the best school in the United States (among public schools) by ''Newsweek'', retaining the title in 2007 and regaining the top spot in 2009.
Since 2013 Klyde Warren park is home to a free trolley stop on Olive St., which riders can connect to Downtown, McKinney Avenue, and West Village.
The health care complex includes within its bounds Parkland Memorial Hospital, Children's Medical Center, William P. Clements University Hospital (formerly St. Paul University Hospital), and the Zale Lipshy University Hospital.
The center is home to a Consolidated Mail Outpatient Pharmacy (CMOP), part of an initiative by the Department of Veterans Affairs to provide mail-order prescriptions to veterans using computerization at strategic locations throughout the United States.
Located in North Texas, Dallas is the main core of the largest metropolitan area in the South and the largest inland metropolitan area in the United States that lacks any navigable link to the sea.
* Dallas Theological Seminary, also within the city limits, is recognized as one of the leading seminaries in the evangelical faith.
According to the American Lung Association, Dallas has the 12th highest air pollution among U.S. cities, ranking it behind Los Angeles and Houston.
News & World Report'', in its 2004 edition on "America's Best Hospitals" gave Parkland Memorial Hospital one of the best overall ratings.
Irving is home to 6 Fortune 500 companies of its own, including ExxonMobil, the most profitable company in the world and the second largest by revenue for 2015, Kimberly-Clark, Fluor (engineering), Commercial Metals, Celanese, and Pioneer Natural Resources.
Dallas' flagship park is Fair Park.
Springtime weather can be quite volatile, but temperatures themselves are mild.
The median age was 31.8 years.
Trails along White Rock Creek are part of the extensive Dallas County Trails System.
Dallas is also home to two evangelical seminaries, the Dallas Theological Seminary and Criswell College and many Bible schools including Christ For The Nations Institute.
A sudden drop in the price of oil, starting in mid-2014 and accelerating throughout 2015, has not affected Dallas and its greater metro due to the highly diversified nature of its economy.
Dallas billionaire and entrepreneur Comer Cottrell, Jr., founder of ProLine Corporation, bought the campus of Bishop College and bequeathed it to Paul Quinn College in 1993.
This site was later discovered to be home to Native Americans who cherished the trees and natural spring water.
In the 2006–2007 fiscal year, the city's total budget (the sum of operating and capital budgets) was $2.3 billion.
It presently has around 400 students at both the undergraduate and graduate level studying different Biblical and Christian subjects.
'''Dallas''' () is a major city in the state of Texas and is the largest urban center of the fourth most populous metropolitan area in the United States.
DFW Airport Station is the terminus for the Orange Line and connects Skylink.
The Russian-speaking population of Dallas has continued to grow in the sector of "American husbands-Russian wives".
The end of World War II left Dallas seeded with a nexus of communications, engineering, and production talent by companies such as Collins Radio Corporation.
The city of Dallas and Dallas County have more Catholic than Protestant residents, while the converse is usually true for the suburban areas of Dallas.
North Dallas is many enclaves of predominantly white, black and especially Hispanic residents.
The Dallas-Fort-Worth Metroplex has an estimated 70,000 Russian-speakers, mostly immigrants from the former Soviet Bloc.
Dallas's oldest remaining fire station building still stands at the corner of McKinney Ave. and Leonard and was built in 1892.
According to ''Forbes'' magazine's annual list of "The Richest People in America" published September 21, 2011, the city itself is now home to 17 billionaires, up from 14 in 2009.
Fire protection and emergency medical services in the city are provided by Dallas Fire-Rescue, which has 1,800 firefighters and 58 working fire stations in the city limits.
These works, as well as Non-Spanish highlights like sculptures by Rodin and Moore have been so successful of a collaboration that the Prado and Meadows have agreed upon an extension of the partnership.
Most people in the city of Dallas are located within the Dallas Independent School District, the 12th-largest school district in the United States.
The "T. Boone Pickens Institute of Health Sciences-Dallas Center" (IHSD) was opened in 2011 and is a purpose-built educational facility that replaced the original building that TWU had used since 1966.
This marked the deadliest day for U.S. law enforcement since the September 11 attacks.
Downtown Dallas has a variety of named districts, including the West End Historic District, the Arts District, the Main Street District, Farmers Market District, the City Center business district, the Convention Center District, and the Reunion District.
"That gentle rejection of commonly held ideas fills many of those who will take part in the event.
Her work in raising money led to a grant from philanthropist and steel baron Andrew Carnegie, which enabled the construction of the first branch of the library system in 1901.
Several of Downtown Dallas' largest buildings are the fruit of this boom, but over-speculation, the savings and loan crisis and an oil bust brought the 80's building boom to an end for Dallas as well as its city sister Houston.
The Catholic Church is also a significant organization in the Dallas area and operates the University of Dallas, a liberal-arts university in the Dallas suburb of Irving.
Many residents have migrated to the city from other parts of the country, particularly the Midwest, Northeast, and California.
According to a 2014 study by the Pew Research Center, Christianity is the most prevalently practiced religion in Dallas (78%).
In the 1930s petroleum was discovered east of Dallas near Kilgore, Texas.
The city's previous mayor was Laura Miller, a liberal Jewish woman who had previously written for the ''Dallas Observer'', the city's most popular alternative newspaper, with an average monthly circulation of over 50,000 in 2014.
Northeast of the city is Lake Ray Hubbard, a vast  reservoir located in an extension of Dallas surrounded by the suburbs of Garland, Rowlett, Rockwall, and Sunnyvale.
In 2013, the metropolitan area led the nation with the largest year-over-year increase in employment and advanced to become the fourth-largest employment center in the nation (behind New York City, Los Angeles and Chicago) with more than three million non-farm jobs.
To the west of the city is Mountain Creek Lake, once home to the Naval Air Station Dallas (Hensley Field) and a number of defense aircraft manufacturers.
Dallas and the greater metro have been leading the nation in apartment construction and net leasing with rents reaching all time highs.
"Hot spots" in this area include Uptown, Victory Park, Oak Lawn, Dallas Design District, Trinity Groves, Turtle Creek, Cityplace, Knox/Henderson, Greenville and West Village.
Built in 1936 for the Worlds Fair and the Texas Centennial Exposition, Fair Park is the world's largest collection of Art Deco exhibit buildings, art, and sculptures; Fair Park is also home to the State Fair of Texas, the largest state fair in the United States.
About 18.7% of families and 21.7% of the population were below the poverty line, including 33.6% of those under age 18 and 13.4% of those aged 65 or over.
There are 337 public schools, 89 private schools, 38 colleges, and 32 libraries in Dallas.
Dallas was awarded a $23&nbsp;million TIGER grant towards the $58&nbsp;million Dallas Streetcar Project in February 2010.
It became an industrial city, attracting workers from Texas, the South and the Midwest.
According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of ,  of it being land and  of it (11.75%) water.
The Plano and Richardson school districts have the largest numbers of public school students in Dallas who are not in Dallas ISD.
South of the Trinity River, the flourishing Bishop Arts District in Oak Cliff is home to a number of studio artists living in converted warehouses.
Its historic district has one of the largest collections of Frank Lloyd Wright-inspired Prairie-style homes in the United States.
The Trinity River Audubon Center is a new addition to the park.
13 on its list of the Best Places for Business and Careers.
The specialties at Parkland Memorial Hospital were also rated among the best in the nation, in seven different categories.
However, the first stage of the Orange Line opened on December 6, 2010, extending its west end from Bachman to Belt Line Station in Irving.
The oldest mosque in Texas is located in Denton, about  north of Downtown Dallas.
Dallas' Jewish population of approximately 45,000 is the largest of any city in Texas.
The city of Dallas operates WRR 101.1 FM, the area's main classical music station, from city offices in Fair Park.
In addition, Dallas and its suburbs are home to a large number of Asian residents—Koreans, Taiwanese, Chinese, Filipinos, Vietnamese, Thai, Indians, Bangladeshis, Pakistanis, Sri Lankans, Nepalese, and Arabs all have large presences in the area, particularly in the suburbs of Arlington, Garland, Richardson, Plano, Carrollton, Irving, Frisco, Flower Mound, and Allen.
Dallas is surrounded by many suburbs; three enclaves are within the city boundaries—Cockrell Hill, Highland Park, and University Park
The southeastern portion of the city Pleasant Grove is chiefly inhabited by black and Hispanic residents, while the southern portion of the city is predominantly black.
The Dallas Fire & Rescue chief is Eddie Burns, Sr.
Situated  east of Downtown Dallas, it currently enrolls over 2,000 graduate students and has graduated over 12,000 alumni.
In 2009 (with 14 billionaires) the city placed 6th worldwide among cities with the most billionaires.
Plano, the largest of these suburbs, was ranked as the fifth most conservative city in America by the Bay Area Center for Voting Research, based on the voting patterns of middle-age adults.
On July 7, 2016, multiple shots were fired at a peaceful protest in downtown Dallas, held against the police killings of two black men from other states.
The project area will reach for over  in length within the city, while the overall geographical land area addressed by the Land Use Plan is approximately  in size—about 20% of the land area in Dallas.
Texas Instruments, a major manufacturer, employs 10,400 people at its corporate headquarters and chip plants in Dallas.
The glass gallery offers an array of sculpture, goblets, jewelry, scent bottles, paperweights, platters, and wall art.
Reverchon Park was named after botanist Julien Reverchon, who left France to live in the La Reunion colony in present-day West Dallas.
Over time, tornadoes have probably been the biggest natural threat to the city, as it is located near the heart of Tornado Alley.
In addition, Dallas is traversed by  of biking and jogging trails, including the Katy Trail, and is home to 47 community and neighborhood recreation centers, 276 sports fields, 60 swimming pools, 232 playgrounds, 173 basketball courts, 112 volleyball courts, 126 play slabs, 258 neighborhood tennis courts, 258 picnic areas, six 18-hole golf courses, two driving ranges, and 477 athletic fields.
Starting from the center of the city, a small freeway loop surrounds Downtown, followed by the Interstate 635 loop about  outside Downtown, and ultimately the tolled President George Bush Turnpike.
Dallas is a major destination for Mexican immigrants.
Immigrants from Thailand, Laos, Cambodia, Vietnam, Nepal, Tibet, Japan, China, Taiwan, and Sri Lanka have all contributed to the Buddhist population, which is concentrated in the northern suburbs of Garland, Plano and Richardson.
The recently completed interchange at the intersection of Lyndon B. Johnson Freeway (Interstate 635) and Central Expressway (U.S. Highway 75) contains 5 stacks and is aptly called the High Five Interchange.
UTSW is part of the University of Texas System.
The city is home to the third-largest concentration of Fortune 500 companies in the nation (behind New York City and Houston).
In terms of traffic, DFW is the busiest airport in the state, 5th busiest in the United States, and 6th busiest in the world.
Deep Ellum, immediately east of Downtown, originally became popular during the 1920s and 1930s as the prime jazz and blues hot spot in the South.
A few times each winter in Dallas, warm and humid air from the south will override cold, dry air, resulting in freezing rain or ice and causing disruptions in the city if the roads and highways become slick.
Green space along the river will encompass approximately , making it one of the largest and diverse urban parks in the world.
Following the close, the Texas Education Agency consolidated WHISD into Dallas ISD.
The multiple clubs, ranging from men's and women's clubs to collegiate and high school, are part of the Texas Rugby Football Union.
An open lesbian, Valdez is currently the only female sheriff in the state of Texas.
For decades, the Oak Lawn and Bishop Arts districts have been known as the epicenters of the LGBT community in Dallas.
Petroleum discoveries in the Permian Basin, the Panhandle, the Gulf Coast, and Oklahoma in the following years further solidified Dallas' position as the hub of the market.
The Republic of Texas was annexed by the United States in 1845 and Dallas County was established the following year.
It also publishes a major Spanish-language newspaper for the entire Metroplex known as La Estrella.
Iconic examples of modernist architecture include Reunion Tower, the JFK Memorial, I. M. Pei's Dallas City Hall and Morton H. Meyerson Symphony Center.
Stretching from Victory Park, the 30-acre Katy Trail passes through the Turtle Creek and Knox Park neighborhoods and runs along the east side of Highland Park.
The Casino Theater moved and the pool was demolished after a polio scare in 1959.
The oldest mosque in Dallas is Masjid Al-Islam located just south of Downtown Dallas.
The Blue Line has also been extended by 4.5 miles to serve Rowlett at the Rowlett Park & Ride facility.
The weather in Dallas is also generally pleasant from late September to early December and on many winter days.
* Paul Quinn College is a private, historically black college located in southeast Dallas.
See History of the Jews in Dallas, Texas for more information.
Plans are for the UNT College of Law to be based at the Old Municipal Building in downtown Dallas.
Readers can post stories and contribute content at the website.
The Church built the Dallas Texas Temple, the first temple in Texas, in the city in 1984.
The Dallas area freeway system is set up in the popular hub-and-spoke system, shaped much like a wagon wheel.
The city also hosts the State Fair Classic and Heart of Dallas Bowl at the Cotton Bowl.
The bulk of the city is in Dallas County, of which it is the county seat; however, sections of the city are located in Collin, Denton, Kaufman, and Rockwall counties.
The ''Dallas Times Herald'', started in 1888, was the ''Morning News''' major competitor until Belo purchased the paper on December 8, 1991 and closed the paper down the next day.
Within this building, Southside on Lamar hosts the Janette Kennedy Gallery with rotating gallery exhibitions featuring many local, national, and international artists.
Opened on July 4, 1906, Lake Cliff Park was called "the Southwest's Greatest Playground".
They play their home games in the Allen Event Center.
When only temperature itself is accounted for, the north central Texas region where Dallas is located is one of the hottest in the United States during the summer months, usually trailing only the Sonoran Desert of Arizona, the Chihuahuan Desert of west Texas and the Mojave Desert of southern Nevada.
The rapid expansion of population increased competition for jobs and housing.
In 2009 it joined up with "Prado on the Prairie" for a three-year partnership.
In the 2004 U.S. Presidential elections, 57% of Dallas voters voted for John Kerry over George W. Bush.
Parkland Memorial Hospital is named one of Modern Healthcare's "25 busiest community hospital emergency departments".
Today, the library operates 27 branch locations throughout the city, including the 8-story J. Erik Jonsson Central Library in the Government District of Downtown.
The school also maintains an Intensive English Program for international students wishing to enhance their knowledge of the English language.
Dallas developed as a strong industrial and financial center, and a major inland port, due to the convergence of major railroad lines, interstate highways, and the construction of Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport, one of the largest and busiest airports in the world.
North Lake, a small body of water in an extension of the city limits surrounded by Irving and Coppell, initially served as a water source for a nearby power plant but is now being targeted for redevelopment as a recreational lake due to its proximity to Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport, a plan that the lake's neighboring cities oppose.
The two lines service Cityplace Station, the only subway station in the Southwest.
* The University of North Texas at Dallas, located along Houston School Road.
With that in mind, Dallas' violent crime rate (12.06 per 1,000 people) is lower than that of St Louis (24.81), Detroit (24.22), Baltimore (16.96), Philadelphia (15.62), Cleveland (15.47), Miami (15.09), Washington, D.C. (14.48), Kansas City (14.44) and Boston (13.39).
Each spring, cold fronts moving south from the North will collide with warm, humid air streaming in from the Gulf Coast, leading to severe thunderstorms with lightning, torrents of rain, hail, and occasionally, tornadoes.
Dallas makes up one-fifth of the much larger urbanized area known as the Dallas–Fort Worth Metroplex, in which one quarter of all Texans live.
Recognized for having the sixth largest lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) population in the nation, the Dallas metropolitan is widely noted for being home to a thriving and diverse LGBT community.
The office is responsible for six cultural centers located throughout the city, funding for local artists and theaters, initiating public art projects, and running the city-owned classical radio station WRR.
Originally located in Waco, Texas, it moved to Dallas in 1993 and is housed on the campus of the former Bishop College, another private, historically black college.
Dallas and nearby Fort Worth were developed due to the construction of major railroad lines through the area allowing access to cotton, cattle, and later oil in North and East Texas.
DCCCD serves portions of Dallas in Dallas County.
* Texas Woman's University (TWU) has operated a nursing school in Dallas at Parkland Memorial Hospital since 1966.
Another beltway around the city upwards of  from Downtown is under plan in Collin County.
By the early 1900s Dallas was a hub for economic activity all over the Southern United States and was selected in 1914 as the seat of the Eleventh Federal Reserve District.
The Dallas Streetcar Project will link up with the current McKinney Avenue Transit Authority (MATA) trolley line (also known as the M-Line) in Uptown with a new alignment on Olive Street.
Today the non-Hispanic white population has declined to less than one-third of the city's population.
The city is served by the Dallas Public Library system.
The Green Line serves Carrollton, Farmers Branch, Love Field Airport, Stemmons Corridor, Victory Park, Downtown, Deep Ellum, Fair Park, South Dallas, and Pleasant Grove.
Between the late 1980s and the early 2000s, central Dallas went through a slow period of growth.
East Dallas is home to Deep Ellum, a trendy arts area close to Downtown, the homey Lakewood neighborhood (and adjacent areas, including Lakewood Heights, Wilshire Heights, Lower Greenville, Junius Heights, and Hollywood Heights/Santa Monica), historic Vickery Place and Bryan Place, and the architecturally significant neighborhoods of Swiss Avenue and Munger Place.
As Dallas grew and technology developed, cotton became its boon and by 1900 Dallas was the largest inland cotton market in the world, becoming a leader in cotton gin machinery manufacturing.
With so many immigrant groups, there are often multilingual signs in the linguistic landscape.
Radiating out of Downtown Dallas' freeway loop are the spokes of the area's highway system—Interstates 30, 35E, and 45, U.S. Highway 75, U.S. Highway 175, State Spur 366, the Dallas North Tollway, State Highway 114, U.S. Highway 80, and U.S. Highway 67.
Southwest Gallery has been open to the public since 1967 and is located in a  gallery that features fine art on a broad range including contemporary, hyper-realism, Texas landscape, western, and antique.
The United States Census Bureau's estimate for the city's population increased to 1,300,092 as of July 1, 2015.
In 1839, Warren Angus Ferris surveyed the area around present-day Dallas.
Dallas has a humid subtropical climate (Köppen: ''Cfa''), though it is located in a region that also tends to receive warmer, drier winds from the north and west in the summer, bringing temperatures to the  mark about 20 days annually, the majority in August, and heat indices easily breaking .
Conservative Republican Tom Leppert defeated liberal Democrat Ed Oakley in the city's 2007 mayoral race by a margin of 58% to 42%.
The Dallas area hosted the Final Four of the 2014 NCAA Men's Division I Basketball Tournament at AT&T Stadium.
Similarly, Love Field is located within the city limits of Dallas about  northwest of Downtown, and is headquarters to Southwest Airlines, the largest domestic airline in the United States.
The ghost town of La Reunion once occupied the northern tip of Oak Cliff.
Dallas was formally incorporated as a city on February 2, 1856.
The college Cotton Bowl Classic football game was played at the Cotton Bowl through its 2009 game, but has moved to AT&T Stadium.
Dallas' population was historically predominantly white (non-Hispanic whites made up 82.8% of the population in 1930), but its population has diversified due to immigration policies and "white flight" over the 20th century.
The Trinity River, though not usefully navigable, is the major waterway through the city.
The city's prominence arose from its historical importance as a center for the oil and cotton industries, and its position along numerous railroad lines.
Since it was rerouted in the late 1920s, the river has been little more than a drainage ditch within a floodplain for several miles above and below downtown Dallas, with a more normal course further upstream and downstream, but as Dallas began shifting towards postindustrial society, public outcry about the lack of aesthetic and recreational use of the river ultimately gave way to the Trinity River Project, which was begun in the early 2000s and is scheduled to be completed in the 2010s.
Known widely as "America's Team", the Dallas Cowboys are financially the most valuable sports franchise in the world, worth approximately 4&nbsp;billion dollars.
The department also operates the Dallas Firefighter's Museum built in 1907 along Parry Avenue near Fair Park.
About half of Dallas's population was born outside of Texas.
WHISD students started attending other Dallas ISD schools during that time.
It is part of the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, one of the largest grouping of medical facilities in the world.
There is a large Protestant Christian influence in the Dallas community.
Dallas is known for its barbecue, authentic Mexican, and Tex-Mex cuisine.
The preserve sits at an elevation of  above sea level, and contains a variety of outdoor activities, including  of hiking trails and picnic areas.
This provides passengers the convenience of disembarking the DART rail, proceeding to security check-in and immediately boarding Skylink to be quickly transported to their desired terminal.
The Praetorian Building of 15 stories, built in 1909, was the first skyscraper west of the Mississippi and the tallest building in Texas for some time.
The Cathedral Santuario de Guadalupe in the Arts District is home to the second-largest Catholic church membership in the United States, and oversees over 70 parishes in the Dallas Diocese.
The Gill Well was installed for nearby residents and drew people all across Texas who wanted to experience the water's healing powers.
