They can be constructed of a variety of materials to include bricks, stones, concrete, steel or PVC.
This design provides the concrete slab as an impervious wall to prevent leakage and also a structure without concern for uplift pressure.
A spillway is a section of a dam designed to pass water from the upstream side of a dam to the downstream side.
The lake called "Mer-wer" or Lake Moeris covered  and is known today as Berkat Qaroun.
The designer ensures that the dam is heavy enough that the dam's weight wins that contest.
Roman engineers made routine use of ancient standard designs like embankment dams and masonry gravity dams.
* Earthquake faults
It normally holds back no water and allows the channel to flow freely, except during periods of intense flow that would otherwise cause flooding downstream.
In the 10th century, Al-Muqaddasi described several dams in Persia.
The safety of an arch dam is dependent on the strength of the side wall abutments, hence not only should the arch be well seated on the side walls but also the character of the rock should be carefully inspected.
The CFRD concept originated during the California Gold Rush in the 1860s when miners constructed rock-fill timber-face dams for sluice operations.
Dams can be formed by human agency, natural causes, or even by the intervention of wildlife such as beavers.
* Removal of toxic materials and buildings from the proposed reservoir area
A notable case of deliberate dam failure (prior to the above ruling) was the Royal Air Force 'Dambusters' raid on Germany in World War II (codenamed "Operation Chastise"), in which three German dams were selected to be breached in order to damage German infrastructure and manufacturing and power capabilities deriving from the Ruhr and Eder rivers.
It is more easily regulated to store water as needed and generate high power levels on demand compared to wind power.
See: diversion dam.
A large earthen dam, made by Sunshu Ao, the prime minister of Chu (state), flooded a valley in modern-day northern Anhui province that created an enormous irrigation reservoir ( in circumference), a reservoir that is still present today.
In the last few decades, the design has become popular.
A dry dam, also known as a flood retarding structure, is a dam designed to control flooding.
A saddle dam is an auxiliary dam constructed to confine the reservoir created by a primary dam either to permit a higher water elevation and storage or to limit the extent of a reservoir for increased efficiency.
The designer does this because it is usually more practical to make a dam of material essentially just piled up than to make the material stick together against vertical tension.
Rankine theory provided a good understanding of the principles behind dam design.
A '''dam''' is a barrier that impounds water or underground streams.
Another one, the Band-i-Amir dam, provided irrigation for 300 villages.
As CFRD designs grew in height during the 1960s, the fill was compacted and the slab's horizontal and vertical joints were replaced with improved vertical joints.
Some of these purposes are conflicting, and the dam operator needs to make dynamic tradeoffs.
The majority of such dams are built with rock and/or gravel as the main fill material.
Based on structure and material used, dams are classified as easily created without materials, arch-gravity dams, embankment dams or masonry dams, with several subtypes.
The flexible properties of the asphalt make such dams especially suited in earthquake regions.
A steel dam is a type of dam briefly experimented with around the start of the 20th century which uses steel plating (at an angle) and load-bearing beams as the structure.
The most desirable place for an arch dam is a narrow canyon with steep side walls composed of sound rock.
Rarely built in modern times because of their relatively short lifespan and the limited height to which they can be built, timber dams must be kept constantly wet in order to maintain their water retention properties and limit deterioration by rot, similar to a barrel.
Occasionally, they are used to divert water to another drainage or reservoir to increase flow there and improve water use in that particular area.
Reservoirs held behind dams affect many ecological aspects of a river.
* Permeability of the surrounding rock or soil
For example, the Itaipu Dam on the Paraná River in South America generates 14 GW and supplied 93% of the energy consumed by Paraguay and 20% of that consumed by Brazil as of 2005.
An ''emergency spillway'' is designed for extreme conditions, such as a serious malfunction of the service spillway.
A similar type is the double-curvature or thin-shell dam.
In some cases they are also built to prevent saltwater from intruding into a freshwater aquifer.
Almost 100 dams of this design have now been built worldwide since the first such dam was completed in 1962.
Du Jiang Yan is the oldest surviving irrigation system in China that included a dam that directed waterflow.
To make the switch from the lower to upper sluice, the outlet of Sand Lake was blocked off.
Rock-fill dams are resistant to damage from earthquakes.
An auxiliary dam is constructed in a low spot or "saddle" through which the reservoir would otherwise escape.
To prevent internal erosion of clay into the rock fill due to seepage forces, the core is separated using a filter.
Following their 1882 invasion and occupation of Egypt, the British began construction in 1898.
Many dams in areas where precipitation fluctuates in an annual cycle will also see the reservoir fluctuate annually in an attempt to balance these difference purposes.
Water releases from a reservoir including that exiting a turbine usually contain very little suspended sediment, and this in turn can lead to scouring of river beds and loss of riverbanks; for example, the daily cyclic flow variation caused by the Glen Canyon Dam was a contributor to sand bar erosion.
The current use of the land to be flooded should be dispensable.
Since the fear of flood is a strong motivator in many regions, gravity dams are being built in some instances where an arch dam would have been more economical.
In engineering terms, that is true whenever the resultant of the forces of gravity acting on the dam and water pressure on the dam acts in a line that passes upstream of the toe of the dam.
The appearance is similar to a single-arch dam but with a distinct vertical curvature to it as well lending it the vague appearance of a concave lens as viewed from downstream.
An example of a rock-fill dam is New Melones Dam in California or the Fierza Dam in Albania.
When initially constructed between 1899 and 1902, nothing of its scale had ever been attempted; on completion, it was the largest masonry dam in the world.
The masonry arch dam wall was designed by Lieutenant Percy Simpson who was influenced by the advances in dam engineering techniques made by the Royal Engineers in India.
An example would be the eruptions of the Uinkaret volcanic field about 1.8 million–10,000 years ago, which created lava dams on the Colorado River in northern Arizona in the United States.
Unlike water retention dams, a tailings dam is raised in succession throughout the life of the particular mine.
There are three raised tailings dam designs, the ''upstream'', ''downstream'' and ''centerline'', named according to the movement of the crest during raising.
An upstream tailings dam consists of trapezoidal embankments being constructed on top but toe to crest of another, moving the crest further upstream.
Routine deformation monitoring and monitoring of seepage from drains in and around larger dams is useful to anticipate any problems and permit remedial action to be taken before structural failure occurs.
In 1928, Congress authorized the project to build a dam that would control floods, provide irrigation water and produce hydroelectric power.
Reservoirs created by dams not only suppress floods but also provide water for activities such  as irrigation, human consumption, industrial use, aquaculture, and navigability.
This is similar to a levee, which is a wall or embankment built along a river or stream to protect adjacent land from flooding.
The water may be redirected into a canal or tunnel for irrigation and/or hydroelectric power production.
The solid form is the more widely used of the two, though the hollow dam is frequently more economical to construct.
Rolled-earth dams may also employ a watertight facing or core in the manner of a rock-fill dam.
If the upstream face is vertical the entire weight of the dam must be carried to the foundation by gravity, while the distribution of the normal hydrostatic pressure between vertical cantilever and arch action will depend upon the stiffness of the dam in a vertical and horizontal direction.
The basic structure dates to the 2nd century AD and is considered one of the oldest water-diversion or water-regulator structures in the world which is still in use.
The structure is dated to 3000 BC.
Wildhorse Dam near Mountain City, Nevada, in the United States is an example of the type.
The word seems to be related to the Greek word ''taphos'', meaning "grave" or "grave hill".
This creates a relatively flat downstream side and a jagged upstream side which is supported by tailings slurry in the impoundment.
Such a large concrete structure had never been built before, and some of the techniques were unproven.
During the 2010 China floods, the dam held back a what would have been a disastrous flood and the huge reservoir rose by 4&nbsp;m (13&nbsp;ft) overnight.
Water was conducted from the back of the dam through a large pipe to drive a water wheel and watermill.
The inward compression of the dam by the water reduces the lateral (horizontal) force acting on the dam.
There are two types of underground dams: a ''sub-surface'' and a ''sand-storage'' dam.
* Reservoir silting
Natural disasters such as earthquakes and landslides frequently create landslide dams in mountainous regions with unstable local geology.
Two common variations of timber dams were the ''crib'' and the ''plank''.
For this type of dam, it is essential to have an impervious foundation with high bearing strength.
Rock-fill dams are embankments of compacted free-draining granular earth with an impervious zone.
Significant other engineering and engineering geology considerations when building a dam include:
Thus, the gravitation force required by the dam is lessened, i.e.
Gravity dams are classified as "solid" or "hollow" and are generally made of either concrete or masonry.
Because tailings dams often store toxic chemicals from the mining process, they have an impervious liner to prevent seepage.
Timber dams were once numerous, especially in the North American West, but most have failed, been hidden under earth embankments, or been replaced with entirely new structures.
Even the presence of a fish ladder does not always prevent a reduction in fish reaching the spawning grounds upstream.
meters) which makes it one of the largest man-made structures in the world.
The number of sites that can be economically developed for hydroelectric production is limited; new sites tend to be far from population centers and usually require extensive power transmission lines.
(See also causeway and retaining wall.)
Constant-radius dams are much less common than constant-angle dams.
Stabilize water flow / irrigation
The highest Roman dam was the Subiaco Dam near Rome; its record height of  remained unsurpassed until its accidental destruction in 1305.
They allow increasing the normal pool of the dam without compromising the security of the dam because they are designed to be gradually evacuated for exceptional events.
One of the first was the Roman-built dam bridge in Dezful, which could raise water 50 cubits in height for the water supply to all houses in the town.
A barrage dam is a special kind of dam which consists of a line of large gates that can be opened or closed to control the amount of water passing the dam.
Most hydroelectric power comes from the potential energy of dammed water driving a water turbine and generator; to boost the power generation capabilities of a dam, the water may be run through a large pipe called a penstock before the turbine.
They work as fixed weirs at times by allowing over-flow for common floods.
It has no fuel and low escape risk, and as an alternative energy source it is cheaper than both nuclear and wind power.
An ''auxiliary spillway'' releases flow in excess of the capacity of the service spillway.
The resulting lakes often flood inhabited areas, while a catastrophic failure of the dam could cause even greater damage, such as the failure of western Wyoming's Gros Ventre landslide dam in 1927, which wiped out the town of Kelly and resulted in the deaths of six people.
A large dam can cause the loss of entire ecospheres, including endangered and undiscovered species in the area, and the replacement of the original environment by a new inland lake.
Over time, sand accumulates in layers behind the dam, which helps store water and, most importantly, prevent evaporation.
Tarbela Dam is a large dam on the Indus River in Pakistan.
Dams can also be created by natural geological forces.
Since 2007, the Dutch IJkdijk foundation is developing, with an open innovation model and early warning system for levee/dike failures.
Erosion rates are often monitored, and the risk is ordinarily minimized, by shaping the downstream face of the spillway into a curve that minimizes turbulent flow, such as an ogee curve.
This method of construction minimizes the amount of concrete necessary for construction but transmits large loads to the foundation and abutments.
Hydroelectric power is a major source of electricity in the world.
Repairs were carried out during various periods, most important around 750 BC, and 250 years later the dam height was increased to .
Rivers topography and dynamics depend on a wide range of flows, whilst rivers below dams often experience long periods of very stable flow conditions or sawtooth flow patterns caused by releases followed by no releases.
The structure was built around 2800 or 2600 BC as a diversion dam for flood control, but was destroyed by heavy rain during construction or shortly afterwards.
The elements of a fuse plug are independent free-standing blocks, set side by side which work without any remote control.
Many countries have rivers with adequate water flow, that can be dammed for power generation purposes.
William John Macquorn Rankine at the University of Glasgow pioneered the theoretical understanding of dam structures in his 1857 paper ''On the Stability of Loose Earth''.
This transformed dam design from an art based on empirical methodology to a profession based on a rigorously applied scientific theoretical framework.
In addition, the CFRD design is flexible for topography, faster to construct and less costly than earth-fill dams.
It is thought to be from the time of the Hittite empire between the 15th and 13th century BC.
When situated on a suitable site, a gravity dam can prove to be a better alternative to other types of dams.
Its construction required the loss of over a million people's homes and their mass relocation, the loss of many valuable archaeological and cultural sites, as well as significant ecological change.
It was the inadequate design of the spillway which led to the 1889 over-topping of the South Fork Dam in Johnstown, Pennsylvania, resulting in the infamous Johnstown Flood (the "great flood of 1889").
At  high, it is the tallest dam in the world, including both natural and man-made dams.
Material used to raise the dam can include the tailings (depending on their size) along with dirt.
In such cases the cofferdam is fabricated from sheet steel and welded into place under water.
Henry Russel of the Royal Engineers oversaw the construction of the Mir Alam dam in 1804 to supply water to the city of Hyderabad (it is still in use today).
They are most common in northeastern Africa and the arid areas of Brazil while also being used in the southwestern United States, Mexico, India, Germany, Italy, Greece, France and Japan.
The 75-miles dam near Warwick, Australia, was possibly the world's first concrete arch dam.
A sand-storage dam is a weir built in stages across a stream or wadi.
It had a height of  and consisted of 21 arches of variable span.
Parker Dam on the Colorado River is a constant-angle arch dam.
As a part of the development effort, full-scale dikes are destroyed in the IJkdijk fieldlab.
there is no tension in the upstream face of the dam holding the top of the dam down.
Intended as permanent structures, steel dams were an (arguably failed) experiment to determine if a construction technique could be devised that was cheaper than masonry, concrete or earthworks, but sturdier than timber crib dams.
Once completed, if it is well designed and maintained, a hydroelectric power source is usually comparatively cheap and reliable.
Note that the shape that prevents tension in the upstream face also eliminates a balancing compression stress in the downstream face, providing additional economy.
By 1997, there were an estimated 800,000 dams worldwide, some 40,000 of them over  high.
The tallest dam in the world is the  Nurek Dam in Tajikistan.
It was finished in 251 BC.
The specific design used is dependent upon topography, geology, climate, the type of tailings, and cost.
The dam's weight counteracts that force, tending to rotate the dam the other way about its toe.
Eflatun Pınar is a Hittite dam and spring temple near Konya, Turkey.
To facilitate the identification, a protective sign consisting of three bright orange circles placed on the same axis is defined by the rules of IHL.
While dams and the water behind them cover only a small portion of earth's surface, they harbour biological activity that can produce large amounts of greenhouse gases.
A gravity dam can be combined with an arch dam into an arch-gravity dam for areas with massive amounts of water flow but less material available for a purely gravity dam.
Two dams called Ha-Uar running east-west were built to retain water during the annual flood and then release it to surrounding lands.
* Environmental impacts on river fisheries, forests and wildlife (see also fish ladder)
The primary function of the dam's structure is to fill the gap in the natural reservoir line left by the stream channel.
the dam does not need to be so massive.
The multiple-arch dam does not require as many buttresses as the hollow gravity type, but requires good rock foundation because the buttress loads are heavy.
By the mid-late 3rd century BC, an intricate water-management system within Dholavira in modern-day India was built.
A second sluice was put in on the west side of the dam, about  above the base.
Other major sources include deep upland reservoirs contained by high dams across deep valleys, such as the Claerwen series of dams and reservoirs.
When built on a carefully studied foundation, the gravity dam probably represents the best developed example of dam building.
He cites Morarji Desai, Interior Minister of India, in 1960 speaking to villagers upset about the Pong Dam, who threatened to "release the waters" and drown the villagers if they did not cooperate.
A ''service spillway'' or ''primary spillway'' passes normal flow.
Beavers create dams primarily out of mud and sticks to flood a particular habitable area.
By flooding a parcel of land, beavers can navigate below or near the surface and remain relatively well hidden or protected from predators.
Many urban areas of the world are supplied with water abstracted from rivers pent up behind low dams or weirs.
Examples include London, with water from the River Thames, and Chester, with water taken from the River Dee.
A sub-surface dam is built across an aquifer or drainage route from an impervious layer (such as solid bedrock) up to just below the surface.
Nick Cullather argues in ''Hungry World: America's Cold War Battle Against Poverty in Asia'' that dam construction requires the state to displace individual people in the name of the common good, and that it often leads to abuses of the masses by planners.
Splash dams were timber crib dams used to help float logs downstream in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
Earth-fill dams, also called earthen dams, rolled-earth dams or simply earth dams, are constructed as a simple embankment of well compacted earth.
Construction of a hydroelectric plant requires a long lead time for site studies, hydrological studies, and environmental impact assessments, and are large-scale projects by comparison to traditional power generation based upon fossil fuels.
A tailings dam is typically an earth-fill embankment dam used to store tailings, which are produced during mining operations after separating the valuable fraction from the uneconomic fraction of an ore.
Dam failures are generally catastrophic if the structure is breached or significantly damaged.
Timber dams were widely used in the early part of the industrial revolution and in frontier areas due to ease and speed of construction.
For example, power generation and water supply would keep the reservoir high, whereas flood prevention would keep it low.
An example of this type of dam is the now-decommissioned Red Bluff Diversion Dam on the Sacramento River near Red Bluff, California.
This gravity dam featured an originally  and  stone wall, supported by a  earth rampart.
Common uses for cofferdams include construction and repair of offshore oil platforms.
A cofferdam is a barrier, usually temporary, constructed to exclude water from an area that is normally submerged.
The torrid summer weather and the lack of facilities near the site also presented difficulties.
The system included 16 reservoirs, dams and various channels for collecting water and storing it.
When suitable material is at hand, transportation is minimized leading to cost savings during construction.
The sites are usually those where the gap becomes a minimum for the required storage capacity.
Embankment dams rely on their weight to hold back the force of water, like gravity dams made from concrete.
Man-made dams are typically classified according to their size (height), intended purpose or structure.
The central square of Amsterdam, covering the original place of the 800-year-old dam, still carries the name ''Dam Square'' or simply ''the Dam''.
After the end of the Kingdom of Saba, the dam fell under the control of the Ḥimyarites (~115 BC) who undertook further improvements, creating a structure  high, with five spillway channels, two masonry-reinforced sluices, a settling pond, and a  canal to a distribution tank.
The impact on human society is also significant.
Conversely, a wing dam is a structure that only partly restricts a waterway, creating a faster channel that resists the accumulation of sediment.
For instance the Dutch capital Amsterdam (old name ''Amstelredam'') started with a dam through the river Amstel in the late 12th century, and Rotterdam started with a dam through the river Rotte, a minor tributary of the Nieuwe Maas.
The first was built at Shustar on the River Karun, Iran, and many of these were later built in other parts of the Islamic world.
The heavy crib structure supported the dam's face and the weight of the water.
Filters are specifically graded soil designed to prevent the migration of fine grain soil particles.
Milling dams were introduced which the Muslim engineers called the ''Pul-i-Bulaiti''.
He reported that one in Ahwaz was more than  long, and that it had many water-wheels raising the water into aqueducts through which it flowed into reservoirs of the city.
The timber was later replaced by concrete as the design was applied to irrigation and power schemes.
The purpose of the dam was to divert the waters of the Kaveri across the fertile delta region for irrigation via canals.
The Kallanai is constructed of unhewn stone, over  long,  high and  wide, across the main stream of the Kaveri river in Tamil Nadu, South India.
Conventional water retention dams can serve this purpose, but due to cost, a tailings dam is more viable.
One of the engineering wonders of the ancient world was the Great Dam of Marib in Yemen.
When the upstream face is sloped the distribution is more complicated.
The Ancient Egyptian Sadd-el-Kafara Dam at Wadi Al-Garawi, located about  south of Cairo, was  long at its base and  wide.
Historical examples include the Usoi Dam in Tajikistan, which blocks the Murghab River to create Sarez Lake.
A centerlined dam has sequential embankment dams constructed directly on top of another while fill is placed on the downstream side for support and slurry supports the upstream side.
It was the first French arch dam of the industrial era, and it was built by François Zola in the municipality of Aix-en-Provence to improve the supply of water after the 1832 cholera outbreak devastated the area.
Hydroelectric generation can be vulnerable to major changes in the climate, including variations in rainfall, ground and surface water levels, and glacial melt, causing additional expenditure for the extra capacity to ensure sufficient power is available in low-water years.
