The vast majority of Damascenes are Arabs.
Damascus is the centre of an over-crowded metropolitan area with an estimated population of 5 million.
There is no schedule for the lines, and due to the limited number of official bus stops, buses will usually stop wherever a passenger needs to get on or off.
Twelvers primarily live near the Shia holy sites of Sayyidah Ruqayya and Sayyidah Zaynab.
The Ghouta oasis has been decreasing in size with the rapid expansion of housing and industry in the city and it is almost dry.
Saladin also besieged Kerak in 1183, but was forced to withdraw.
Under Duqaq and Toghtekin, Damascus experienced stability, elevated status and a revived role in commerce.
Damascus' Ghouta (Oasis) is also a popular weekend-destination for recreation.
is an Arabic term for "Levant" and for "Syria"; the latter, and particularly the historical region of Syria, is called '''' ( / "land of the Levant").
A four-line metro network is expected be in operation by 2050.
The Aramaeans initially turned Damascus into an outpost of a loose federation of Aramaean tribes, known as Aram-Zobah, based in the Beqaa Valley.
Tishreen Park is one of the largest and popular parks in Damascus.
Summers are dry and hot with less humidity.
They maintained the independence of Damascus from the Arab Hamdanid dynasty of Aleppo and the Baghdad-based Abbasids until 967.
The English and Latin name of the city is "Damascus" which was imported from Greek ,  In Arabic, the city is called '''' (), although this is often shortened to either ''Dimashq'' or ''ash-Shām'' by the citizens of Damascus, of Syria and other Arab neighbours and Turkey (as ''Şam''). ''''
Lines are not numbered, rather they are given captions mostly indicating the two end points and possibly an important station along the line and Taxicab.
This church is independent of the Middle Eastern-based Syriac Orthodox Church in Damascus and has its own leadership and structure in India, although both practice the same or similar denomination of Christianity.
Coincidentally, the Seljuq prince of Mosul, Imad al-Din Zengi, took power in Aleppo and gained a mandate from the Abbasids to extend his authority to Damascus.
As a result, he granted Israel trading rights in Damascus.
Damascus is mentioned in Genesis 14:15 as existing at the time of the War of the Kings.
The control of Damascus reverted to Syria either upon the death of Herod the Great or was part of the lands given to Herod Philip which were given to Syria with his death in 33/34 AD.
Many recreation centres operate in the city including sport clubs, swimming pools and golf courses.
Nicolaus of Damascus, in the fourth book of his History, says thus: "Abraham reigned at Damascus, being a foreigner, who came with an army out of the land above Babylon, called the land of the Chaldeans: but, after a long time, he got him up, and removed from that country also, with his people, and went into the land then called the land of Canaan, but now the land of Judea, and this when his posterity were become a multitude; as to which posterity of his, we relate their history in another work.
* Arab International University
The institutes play an important rule in the education, including:
In 2008, the government announced a plan to construct a Damascus Metro with opening time for the green line scheduled for 2015.
With the ascension of Caliph Abd al-Malik in 685, an Islamic coinage system was introduced and all of the surplus revenue of the Caliphate's provinces were forwarded to the treasury of Damascus.
The tourism industry in Damascus has a lot of potential, however the current civil war has hampered these prospects.
The French agreed to withdraw in 1946, thus leading to the full independence of Syria.
All other remaining members of Imam Husain's family (left alive after Karbala) along with heads of all other companions, who were killed at Karbala, were also brought to Damascus.
* Syrian Private University
The crusade came to an end peacefully, with the Treaty of Jaffa in 1192.
At the end of the Bab Sharqi street, one reaches the House of Ananias, an underground chapel that was the cellar of Ananias's house.
After the death of Caliph Ali in 661, Mu'awiya was chosen as the caliph of the expanding Islamic empire.
The metropolitan area of Damascus includes the cities of Douma, Harasta, Darayya, Al-Tall and Jaramana.
Within the first six months of Abbasid rule, revolts began erupting in the city, albeit too isolated and unfocused to present a viable threat.
This victory gave the latter mastery over Syria, displeasing his Fatimid overlords, but gaining the admiration of Damascus' citizens.
* Yarmouk Private University
7, Josephus reports:
* Syrian Virtual University
The old city was surrounded with barbed wire to prevent rebels infiltrating from the Ghouta, and a new road was built outside the northern ramparts to facilitate the movement of armored cars.
In 727, a revolt took place in the city, but was put down by Assyrian forces.
By June 2012, bullets and shrapnel shells smashed into homes in Damascus overnight as troops battled the Free Syrian Army in the streets.
The Seljuqs established a court in Damascus and a systematic reversal of Shia inroads in the city.
'''Damascus''' ( '''' ) is the capital and the largest city of Syria after Aleppo prior to the civil war.
It is attested as '''' in Akkadian, '''' in Egyptian, '''' () in Old Aramaic and ''Dammeśeq'' () in Biblical Hebrew.
In the meantime Zengi was assassinated and his territory was divided among his sons, one of whom, Nur ad-Din, emir of Aleppo, made an alliance with Damascus.
In 1129, around 6,000 Isma'ili Muslims were killed in the city along with their leaders.
It is home to Damascus University, which is the oldest and largest university in Syria.
These are, clockwise from the north of the citadel:
Aram-Damascus came out victorious, temporarily preventing the Assyrians from encroaching into Syria.
The Romans occupied Damascus and subsequently incorporated it into the league of ten cities known as the Decapolis which themselves were incorporated  into the province of Syria and granted autonomy.
However, after Hadadzezer was killed by his successor, Hazael, the Levantine alliance collapsed.
He also began to assert his independence from Nur ad-Din, and with the death of both Amalric and Nur ad-Din in 1174, he was well-placed to begin exerting control over Damascus and Nur ad-Din's other Syrian possessions.
The city wall contained seven gates, but only the eastern gate (Bab Sharqi) remains from the Roman period.
The historical role that Damascus played as an important trade center has changed in recent years due to political development in the region as well as the development of modern trade.
The city would gain pre-eminence in southern Syria when Ezron, the claimant to Aram-Zobah's throne who was denied kingship of the federation, fled Beqaa and captured Damascus by force in 965 BC.
The Christian quarter of the old city (mostly inhabited by Catholics), including a number of churches, was burnt down.
Because of the vast amounts of assets his clan, the Umayyads, owned in the city and because of its traditional economic and social links with the Hijaz as well as the Christian Arab tribes of the region, Mu'awiya established Damascus as the capital of the entire Caliphate.
Damascus was the capital of independent Ayyubid rulers between 1193 and 1201, from 1218 to 1238, from 1239 to 1245, and from 1250 to 1260.
* International University for Science and Technology
They reside primarily in the neighborhoods of Wadi al-Mashari ("Zorava" or "Zore Afa" in Kurdish) and Rukn al-Din.
While the Muslims administered the city, the population of Damascus remained mostly Christian—Eastern Orthodox and Monophysite—with a growing community of Muslims from Mecca, Medina, and the Syrian Desert.
11:32" and in reality "neither from archaeological evidence, secular-historical sources, nor New Testament texts can Nabatean sovereignty over Damascus in the first century AD be proven."
Roman Catholic historians also consider Bab Tuma to be the birthplace of several Popes such as John V and Gregory III.
Damascus has a cool desert climate (''BWk'') in Köppen-Geiger system, due to the rain shadow effect of the Anti-Lebanon mountains and the prevailing ocean currents.
The city also saw an expansion of religious life through private endowments financing religious institutions (''madrasas'') and hospitals (''maristans'').
However, the Versailles Conference had granted France a mandate over Syria, and in 1920 a French army commanded by the General Mariano Goybet crossed the Anti-Lebanon Mountains, defeated a small Syrian defensive expedition at the Battle of Maysalun and entered Damascus.
It is critical to note that, at the time Damascus was conquered by the Muslims, the majority of Arabs were either pagans or Christians.
Other areas outside the walled city also bear the name "gate": Bab al-Faraj, Bab Mousalla and Bab Sreija, both to the south-west of the walled city.
In 1164, King Amalric of Jerusalem invaded Fatimid Egypt, which requested help from Nur ad-Din.
The mausoleum where Saladin was buried is located in the gardens just outside the mosque.
In addition the massacre of Christians in 1860 was also one of the most notorious incidents of these centuries, when fighting between Druze and Maronites in Mount Lebanon spilled over into the city.
Medhat Pasha Souq is also a main market in Damascus and was named after Midhat Pasha, the Ottoman governor of Syria who renovated the Souk.
The surviving crusaders, joined by new arrivals from Europe, put Acre to a lengthy siege which lasted until 1191.
When Shirkuh died in 1169, he was succeeded by his nephew Yusuf, better known as Saladin, who defeated a joint crusader-Byzantine siege of Damietta.
The Nur ad-Din sent his general Shirkuh, and in 1166 Amalric was defeated at the Battle of al-Babein.
However, on his return in October 1517, the sultan ordered the construction of a mosque, tekkiye and mausoleum at the shrine of Shaikh Muhi al-Din ibn Arabi in al-Salihiyah.
The old city of Damascus, enclosed by the city walls, lies on the south bank of the river Barada which is almost dry ( left).
Other parks include: al-Jahiz, al-Sibbki, al-Tijara, al-Wahda, etc.
The Ottomans remained for the next 400 years, except for a brief occupation by Ibrahim Pasha of Egypt from 1832 to 1840.
Following Tughtakin's death in 1128, his son, Taj al-Din Buri, became the nominal ruler of Damascus.
Saladin allowed pilgrimages to be made to Jerusalem, allowing the crusaders to fulfil their vows, after which they all returned home.
* Bab al-Saghir (The Small Gate)
Muhammad's first indirect interaction with the people of Damascus was when he sent Shiya bin Wahab to Haris bin Ghasanni, the king of Damascus.
The Christian inhabitants of the notoriously poor and refractory Midan district outside the walls (mostly Orthodox) were, however, protected by their Muslim neighbours.
The Aramaeans who entered the city without battle, adopted the name "Dimashqu" for their new home.
Damascus has also held an annual international trade exposition every fall, since 1955.
It was ruled by Abu Sa'id Taj ad-Dawla Tutush I starting in 1079 and he was succeeded by his son Abu Nasr Duqaq in 1095.
In 998, hundreds of Damascus' citizens were rounded up and executed by him for incitement.
They are the remnants of an ancient and much larger Jewish presence in Syria, dating back at least to Roman times, if not before to the time of King David.
As this new state expanded south, it prevented the Kingdom of Israel from spreading north and the two kingdoms soon clashed as they both sought to dominate trading hegemony in the east.
Coffeehouses, where —in addition to Arabic coffee and tea— nargileh (water pipes) are served, proliferate Damascus.
Today it is called Bahira Atayba, the hesitant lake, because in years of severe drought it does not even exist.
By 715, the mosque was complete.
* Higher Institute for Applied Science and Technology
Today, it consists of the street of Bab Sharqi and the Souk Medhat Pasha, a covered market.
In addition to being one of the oldest continuously inhabited cities in the world, Damascus is a major cultural and religious centre of the Levant.
Card games, tables (backgammon variants), and chess are activities frequented in cafés.
Seleucus I Nicator, one of Alexander's generals, made Antioch the capital of his vast empire, which led to the decline of Damascus' importance compared with new Seleucid cities such as Latakia in the north.
In August, the two sides met along the Yarmouk River where they a fought a major battle which ended in a decisive Muslim victory, solidifying Muslim rule in Syria and Palestine.
Several Eastern Christian rites
In 23 BC Herod the Great was gifted lands controlled by Zenodorus by Caesar Augustus and some scholars believe that Herod was also granted control of Damascus as well.
In 1144 Zengi conquered Edessa, a crusader stronghold, which led to a new crusade from Europe in 1148.
* Bab al-Salam ("the gate of peace"), all on the north boundary of the Old City
* Bab al-Jabiya at the entrance to Souk Midhat Pasha, in the south-west.
Damascus used to be surrounded by an oasis, the Ghouta region (الغوطة ''al-ġūṭä''), watered by the Barada river.
American Missionary E.C.
The city satisfied the Roman demands for eastern luxuries.
Saladin eventually overthrew the Fatimid caliphs and established himself as Sultan of Egypt.
Served by Chemins de Fer Syriens, the former main railway station of Damascus was al-Hejaz railway station, about  west of the old city.
Another possible reason for the treaty between Aram-Damascus and Israel was the common threat of the Neo-Assyrian Empire which was attempting to expand into the Mediterranean coast.
The arrival of the Sea Peoples, around 1200 BC, marked the end of the Bronze Age in the region and brought about new development of warfare.
Damascus is surrounded by the Ghouta, irrigated farmland where many vegetables, cereals and fruits have been farmed since ancient times.
According to the 1st-century Jewish historian Flavius Josephus in his twenty-one volume ''Antiquities of the Jews'', Damascus (along with Trachonitis), was founded by Uz, the son of Aram.
The majority of the population in Damascus came as a result of rural-urban migration.
It is now most likely the largest city of Syria, due to the decline in population of Aleppo because of the ongoing battle for the city.
Damascus was only the peripheral part of this picture which mostly affected the larger population centres of ancient Syria.
During the ''Pax Romana'', Damascus and the Roman province of Syria in general began to prosper.
According to the Acts of the Apostles, Saint Paul and Saint Thomas both lived in that neighbourhood.
Traditional handcrafts and artisan copper engravings are still produced in the old city.
These events shocked Europe, resulting in the Third Crusade in 1189, led by Richard I of England, Philip II of France and Frederick I, Holy Roman Emperor, though the last drowned en route.
Buri was assassinated by Isma'ili agents in 1132; he was succeeded by his son, Shams al-Mulk Isma'il who ruled tyrannically until he himself was murdered in 1135 on secret orders from his mother, Safwat al-Mulk Zumurrud; Isma'il's brother, Shihab al-Din Mahmud, replaced him.
However, in ancient times this was mitigated by the Barada River, which originates from mountain streams fed by melting snow.
Damascus saw a political decline throughout the Abbasid era, only to regain significant importance in the Ayyubid and Mamluk periods.
Damascus became a metropolis by the beginning of the 2nd century and in 222 it was upgraded to a ''colonia'' by the Emperor Septimius Severus.
A Turk, Alptakin drove out the Fatimids five years later, and through diplomacy, prevented the Byzantines from attempting to annex the city.
The Fijeh spring, west along the Barada valley, used to provide the city with drinking water.
Tulunid rule of Damascus was brief, lasting only until 906 before being replaced by the Qarmatians who were adherents of Shia Islam.
The Arab geographer, al-Muqaddasi, visited Damascus in 985, remarking that the architecture and infrastructure of the city was "magnificent", but living conditions were awful.
Thus they were known as ''al-Akrad'' ''(the Kurds)'' and ''al-Muhajirin'' ''(the migrants)''.
The site originally had been the Christian Cathedral of St. John and the Muslims maintained the building's dedication to John the Baptist.
Alawites live primarily in the Mezzeh districts of Mezzeh 86 and Sumariyah.
Intense exchanges of assault-rifle fire marked the clash, according to residents and amateur video posted online.
In his letter, Muhammad stated: "Peace be upon him who follows true guidance.
Damascus is not documented as an important city until the arrival of the Aramaeans, a Semitic people from Mesopotamia, in the 11th century BC.
The same network was later improved by the Romans and the Umayyads, and still forms the basis of the water system of the old part of the city today.
In 811, distant remnants of the Umayyad dynasty staged a strong uprising in Damascus that was eventually put down.
Al-Walid died that same year and he was succeeded at first by Suleiman ibn Abd al-Malik and then by Umar II, who each ruled for brief periods before the reign of Hisham in 724.
The Citadel of Damascus is located in the northwest corner of the Old City.
In 64 BC, the Roman general Pompey annexed the western part of Syria.
There was a small Jewish community namely in what is called ''Haret al-Yahud'' the Jewish quarter.
The estimated population of Damascus in 2011 was 1,711,000.
There are 170,000 Syriac Orthodox members in Syria.
In 2009 new office space was built and became available on the real estate market.
On 15 December, he left Damascus by Bab al-Jabiya, intent on the conquest of Egypt.
You should accept Islam, and whatever under your command shall remain yours"
Soon after the massacre, the Crusaders aimed to take advantage of the unstable situation and launch an assault against Damascus with nearly 60,000 troops.
After Assyria went on a wide-scale campaign of quelling revolts throughout Syria, Damascus became totally subjugated by their rule.
Meanwhile, Zengi, intent on putting Damascus under his control, married Safwat al-Mulk in 1138.
When the European crusaders arrived, they and the nobles of Jerusalem agreed to attack Damascus.
The native crusader barons set about rebuilding their kingdom from Acre and the other coastal cities.
Mawdud was assassinated in the Umayyad Mosque in 1109, depriving Damascus of northern Muslim backing and forcing Toghtekin to agree to a truce with the Crusaders in 1110.
The range has peaks of over 10,000&nbsp;ft. and blocks precipitation from the Mediterranean sea, so that the region of Damascus is sometimes subject to droughts.
The Syrian National Congress in March adopted a democratic constitution.
When in 1925 the Great Syrian Revolt in the Hauran spread to Damascus, the French suppressed with heavy weaponry, bombing and shelling the city on 9 May 1926.
in the north west and on the slopes of the mountains at Berze in the north-east.
A Europeanised residential quarter soon began to be built on the road leading between al-Marjeh and al-Salihiyah.
These factors resulted in the Old City being placed by the World Monuments Fund on its 2008 Watch List of the 100 Most Endangered Sites in the world.
It is commonly known in Syria as ''ash-Sham'' ( '''') and nicknamed as the ''City of Jasmine'' ( '''').
After the enactment of legislation allowing private higher institutions, several new universities were established in the city and in the surrounding area, including:
In 853 BC, King Hadadezer of Damascus led a Levantine coalition, that included forces from the northern Aram-Hamath kingdom and troops supplied by King Ahab of Israel, in the Battle of Qarqar against the Neo-Assyrian army.
Another heavily visited site is Sayyidah Zaynab Mosque, where the tomb of Zaynab bint Ali is located.
However, by 977, the Fatimids under Caliph al-Aziz, wrested back control of the city and tamed Sunni dissidents.
In 1560 the Tekkiye al-Sulaimaniyah, a mosque and khan for pilgrims on the road to Mecca, was completed to a design by the famous Ottoman architect Mimar Sinan, and soon afterwards a madrasa was built adjoining it.
Shias, Fatemids and Dawoodi Bohras believe that after the battle of Karbala (680 AD), in Iraq, the Umayyad caliph Yezid brought Imam Husain's head to Damascus, where it was first kept in the courtyard of Yezid Mahal, now part of Umayyad Mosque complex.
First settled in the second millennium BC, it was chosen as the capital of the Umayyad Caliphate from 661 to 750.
His army had previously attempted to capture the city in April 634, but without success.
In 1177 Saladin was defeated by the crusaders at the Battle of Montgisard, despite his numerical superiority.
Saladin died in 1193, and there were frequent conflicts between different Ayyubid sultans ruling in Damascus and Cairo.
Under Emperor Heraclius, the Byzantines fielded an army superior to that of the Rashidun in manpower.
Abd al-Malik's successor, al-Walid initiated construction of the Grand Mosque of Damascus (known as the Umayyad Mosque) in 706.
The Barada River flows through Damascus.
Afterwards, the Umayyad family cemetery was desecrated and the city walls were torn down, reducing Damascus into a provincial town of little importance.
Two days later, 3 October 1918, the forces of the Arab revolt led by Prince Faysal also entered Damascus.
Duqaq seemed to have been content with Crusader rule as a buffer between his dominion and the Fatimid Caliphate of Egypt.
Because of its importance as the point of departure for one of the two great Hajj caravans to Mecca, Damascus was treated with more attention by the Porte than its size might have warranted—for most of this period, Aleppo was more populous and commercially more important.
* Bab Sharqi ("eastern gate") in the east wall, the only one to retain its Roman plan
Several thousand Christians were killed, with many more being saved through the intervention of the Algerian exile Abd al-Qadir and his soldiers (three days after the massacre started), who brought them to safety in Abd al-Qadir's residence and the citadel.
The Kurds are the largest ethnic minority, with a population of approximately 300,000.
Under Ottoman rule, Christians and Jews were considered dhimmis and were allowed to practice their religious precepts.
There are about one hundred lines that operate inside the city and some of them extend from the city center to nearby suburbs.
Poorer areas, often built without official approval, have mostly developed south of the main city.
The patterned Byzantine and Chinese silks available through Damascus, one of the Western termini of the Silk Road, gave the English language "damask".
With the heralding of the Abbasid Caliphate, Damascus became eclipsed and subordinated by Baghdad, the new Islamic capital.
Acre fell to Saladin soon after, and Jerusalem itself was captured in October.
This conflict continued until the early 8th century BC when Ben-Hadad II was captured by Israel after unsuccessfully besieging Samaria.
By the start of the first millennium BC, several Aramaic kingdoms were formed, as Aramaeans abandoned their nomadic lifestyle and formed federated tribal states.
The governor assigned to the city which had been chosen as the capital of Islamic Syria was Mu'awiya I.
On 21 September, the Mamluk governor of Damascus fled the city, and on 2 October the khutba in the Umayyad mosque was pronounced in the name of Selim I.
Some of the earliest Egyptian records are from the 1350 BC Amarna letters, when Damascus (called ''Dimasqu'') was ruled by king Biryawaza.
The Bab Sharqi street is filled with small shops and leads to the old Christian quarter of Bab Tuma (St. Thomas's Gate).
When the city seemed to be on the verge of collapse, the crusader army suddenly moved against another section of the walls, and were driven back.
One of these kingdoms was Aram-Damascus, centred on its capital Damascus.
The French made Damascus capital of their League of Nations Mandate for Syria.
A huge number of the city's artisans were taken to Timur's capital at Samarkand.
There is a qibla (place of worship) marked at the place, where Imam Ali-Zain-ul-Abedin used to pray while in captivity.
have their headquarters in Damascus.
Popular sports include football, basketball, swimming, tennis, table tennis, equestrian and chess.
The modern city has an area of , out of which  is urban, while Jabal Qasioun occupies the rest.
