Daniel Boone was born there, the sixth of 11 children.
Boone remained critical of Braddock's blunders for the rest of his life.
He calmly cocked his rifle and shot the predator through the heart just as it leaped at him.
He escaped and alerted Boonesborough that the Shawnees were planning an attack.
In September 1786, Boone took part in a military expedition into the Ohio Country led by Benjamin Logan.
In 1798, a warrant was issued for Boone's arrest after he ignored a summons to testify in a court case, although the sheriff never found him.
Other settlements, notably Harrodsburg, were also established at this time.
In 1784, on his 50th birthday, historian John Filson published ''The Discovery, Settlement And present State of Kentucke'', a book which included a chronicle of Boone's adventures.
On April 24, Shawnee Indians led by Chief Blackfish attacked Boonesborough.
After Cooper, other writers developed the Western hero, an iconic figure which began as a variation of Daniel Boone.
Daniel Boone died of natural causes, other sources, from acute indigestion on September 26, 1820, at Nathan Boone's home on Femme Osage Creek, 2-1/2 months short of his 86th birthday.
Byron's poem celebrated Boone as someone who found happiness by turning his back on civilization.
On December 22, 1769, a fellow hunter and he were captured by a party of Shawnees, who confiscated all of their skins and told them to leave and never return.
A similar carving, preserved in the museum of the Filson Historical Society in Louisville, Kentucky, reads "D. Boon Kilt a Bar, 1803."
Blackfish wanted to continue to Boonesborough and capture it, since it was now poorly defended, but Boone convinced him that the women and children were not hardy enough to survive a winter trek.
He was initially prosperous, owning seven slaves by 1787, a relatively large number for Kentucky at the time.
Boone was adopted into a Shawnee family at Chillicothe, perhaps into the family of Chief Blackfish himself, and given the name Sheltowee (Big Turtle).
In 1852, critic Henry Tuckerman dubbed Boone "the Columbus of the woods", comparing Boone's passage through the Cumberland Gap to Christopher Columbus's voyage to the New World.
He was a famous frontiersman in the development of Virginia, Kentucky and the trans-Appalachian west.
First published in 1784, Filson's book was a pamphlet primarily intended to popularize Kentucky to immigrants.
Even though Boone had lost two sons in wars with Indians, he respected Indians and was respected by them.
Resentment in Missouri about the disinterment grew over the years, and a legend arose that Boone's remains never left Missouri.
Native Americans who were unhappy about the loss of Kentucky in treaties saw the war as a chance to drive out the colonists.
Instead, Boone promised that Boonesborough would surrender willingly to the Shawnees the following spring.
Daniel Boone was honored with a 6-cent stamp in the American Folklore Series on September 26, 1968, at Frankfort, Kentucky, where he was buried.
While he was sleeping in a tavern during the trip, the cash was stolen from his room.
American painter John James Audubon claimed to have gone hunting with Boone in the woods of Kentucky around 1810.
Squire Boone's parents, George Boone III and Mary Maugridge, followed their son to Pennsylvania in 1717, and in 1720 built a log cabin at Boonecroft.
Some of the settlers forgave Boone the loss; others insisted he repay the stolen money, which took him several years to do.
The incident became the most celebrated event of Boone's life.
The Revolutionary War had ended, but the border war with American Indians north of the Ohio River resumed with the Northwest Indian War.
Some 19th-century writers regarded Boone's sympathy for Indians as a character flaw and therefore altered his words to conform to contemporary attitudes.
Rather than remain in Boonesborough, Boone founded the nearby settlement of Boone's Station.
On July 14, 1776, Boone's daughter Jemima and two other teenaged girls were captured outside Boonesborough by an Indian war party, who carried the girls north towards the Shawnee towns in the Ohio country.
On May 11, 1769, Boone began a two-year hunting expedition in Kentucky.
Boone was not the simple frontiersman of legend, however: he engaged in land speculation on a large scale, buying and selling claims to tens of thousands of acres.
Boone and his men ambushed the Indians while they were stopped for a meal, rescuing the girls and driving off their captors.
It was soon translated into French and German, and made Boone famous in America and Europe.
He served under Captain Hugh Waddell on the North Carolina frontier.
In the popular theme song for the series, Boone was described as a "big man" in a "coonskin cap", and the "rippin'est, roarin'est, fightin'est man the frontier ever knew!"
Boone was elected to the first of his three terms in the Virginia General Assembly, during the Revolutionary War, and fought in the Battle of Blue Licks in 1782.
A wall of roughly-hewn boards displays the tools of Boone's trade—a Pennsylvania rifle, a powder horn, and a knife.
The Shawnees had not signed the Stanwix treaty, and since they regarded Kentucky as their hunting ground, they considered white hunters there to be poachers.
When the War of 1812 came to Missouri, Boone's sons Daniel Morgan Boone and Nathan Boone took part, but by that time Boone was much too old for militia duty.
Daniel Boone was of English and Welsh ancestry.
Isolated settlers and hunters became the frequent target of attacks, convincing many to abandon Kentucky.
In the court martial that followed, Boone was found "not guilty", and was even promoted after the court heard his testimony.
After the trial, Boone returned to North Carolina to bring his family back to Kentucky.
In American popular culture, he is remembered as one of the foremost early frontiersmen.
The Boones moved to a more remote area of the Yadkin River Valley, and Boone began to hunt westward into the Blue Ridge Mountains.
In 1777, Henry Hamilton, a British Lieutenant Governor of Canada, began to recruit American Indian war parties to raid the Kentucky settlements.
In 1750, Squire Boone sold his land and moved the family to North Carolina.
Boone returned to Kentucky and in August 1782 fought in the Battle of Blue Licks, in which his son Israel was killed.
Transylvania land claims had been invalidated after Virginia created Kentucky County, so settlers needed to file new land claims with Virginia.
Boone and his men were taken to Blackfish's town of Chillicothe, where they were made to run the gauntlet.
On June 16, 1778, when he learned  Blackfish was about to return to Boonesborough with a large force, Boone eluded his captors and raced home, covering the  to Boonesborough in five days on horseback and, after his horse gave out, on foot.
According to one story, in 1810 or later, Boone went with a group on a long hunt as far west as the Yellowstone River, a remarkable journey at his age, if true.
His son, Nathan Boone, was the first white man born in Kentucky.
In the autumn of 1779, a large party of emigrants came with him, including (according to tradition) the family of Abraham Lincoln's grandfather.
According to historian John Bakeless, there is no record that Boone ever scalped Indians, unlike other frontiersmen of the era.
An American edition made him equally famous across the United States.
In 1742, Boone's parents were compelled to publicly apologize after their eldest child, Sarah, married John Willcockson, a "worldling" (non-Quaker).
In 1816, a United States officer at Fort Osage, on the Missouri, wrote:
During Boone's term, Cornwallis surrendered at Yorktown in October 1781, but the fighting continued in Kentucky unabated.
The couple initially lived in a cabin on his father's farm.
In April 1781, he was elected as a representative to the Virginia General Assembly, which was held in Richmond.
The land market in frontier Kentucky was chaotic, and Boone's ventures ultimately failed because his investment strategy was faulty and because his sense of honor made him reluctant to profit at someone else's expense.
Back in Limestone, Boone housed and fed Shawnees who were captured during the raid, and helped to negotiate a truce and prisoner exchange.
There they built a log cabin, partially preserved today as the Daniel Boone Homestead.
Boone's relatives in Missouri, displeased with the Kentuckians who came to exhume Boone, kept quiet about the mistake, and they allowed the Kentuckians to dig up the wrong remains.
While on the Braddock expedition years earlier, Boone had heard about the fertile land and abundant game of Kentucky from fellow wagoner John Findley, who had visited Kentucky to trade with American Indians.
The inscriptions may also be among numerous forgeries of the famous trapper, part of a long tradition of phony Boone relics.
This was in the western backwoods area.
He sold his land to pay off creditors.
Through this occupational interest, Boone first learned the easy routes to the area.
In the 19th century, when Native Americans were being displaced from their lands and confined on reservations, Boone's image was often reshaped into the stereotype of the belligerent, Indian-hating frontiersman which was then popular.
The two men journeyed more than  in two months to warn those who had not already fled the region.
"Nothing embitters my old age," he said late in life, like "the circulation of absurd stories that I retire as civilization advances..."
This did not describe the real Daniel Boone, who was not a big man and did not wear a coonskin cap.
On February 7, 1778, when Boone was hunting meat for the expedition, he was surprised and captured by warriors led by Blackfish.
After the brief war, which ended soon after Virginia's victory in the Battle of Point Pleasant in October 1774, the Shawnees relinquished their claims to Kentucky.
Years later, Audubon painted a portrait of Boone, supposedly from memory, although skeptics have noted the similarity of this painting to the well-known portraits by Chester Harding.
The pacifist Pennsylvania Quakers had good relations with the Indians, but the steady growth of the white population compelled many Indians to move further west.
Meanwhile, lawsuits over conflicting land claims continued to make their way through the Kentucky courts.
In Flint's book, Boone fought hand-to-paw with a bear, escaped from Indians by swinging on vines (as Tarzan would later do), and so on.
In 1731, the Boones moved to the Oley Valley, near the modern city of Reading.
Because Boone's party was greatly outnumbered, Boone returned the next day with Blackfish and persuaded his men to surrender rather than put up a fight.
The U.S. Navy's  Polaris submarine , was named for Boone.
Boone rejected such an interpretation of his life, however.
By the mid-1760s, with peace made with the Cherokee, colonial immigration into the area increased.
After the Yadkin River Valley was raided by Cherokee, the Boones and many other families fled north to Culpeper County, Virginia.
They  eventually had 10 children.
As a young adult, Boone supplemented his farm income by hunting and trapping game, and selling their pelts in the fur market.
Upon his return to Boonesborough, some of the men expressed doubts about Boone's loyalty, since after surrendering the salt-making party, he had apparently lived quite happily among the Shawnees for months.
Upon his return to Virginia, Boone helped defend colonial settlements along the Clinch River, earning a promotion to captain in the militia, as well as acclaim from fellow citizens.
After his father's death in 1765, Boone traveled with his brother Squire and a group of men to Florida, which had become British territory after the end of the war, to look into the possibility of settling there.
Boone spent his final years in Missouri, often in the company of children and grandchildren, where he continued to hunt and trap as much as his health and energy levels permitted.
In popular mythology, Boone became the first to explore and settle Kentucky, opening the way for countless others to follow.
The pipe tomahawk represents that the Shawnees had adopted Boone.
While Boone recovered, Shawnees kept up their attacks outside Boonesborough, destroying the surrounding cattle and crops.
Boone's family insisted he never returned to Kentucky after 1799, although some historians believe Boone visited his brother Squire near Kentucky in 1810 and have therefore reported Audubon's story as factual.
Boone's adventures, real and mythical, formed the basis of the archetypal hero of the American West, popular in 19th-century novels and 20th-century films.
Boone responded by leading a preemptive raid against the Shawnees across the Ohio River, and then by helping to successfully defend Boonesborough against a 10-day siege led by Blackfish, which began on September 7, 1778.
When the long hunters returned in the spring, they sold their take to commercial fur traders.
Both the Frankfort Cemetery in Kentucky and the Old Bryan Farm graveyard in Missouri claim to have Boone's remains.
Subsequent editors cut some of these passages and replaced them with more plausible—but still spurious—ones.
Boone, however, continued hunting and exploring Kentucky until his return to North Carolina in 1771, and returned to hunt there again in the autumn of 1772.
The Spanish governor appointed Boone "syndic" (judge and jury) and commandant (military leader) of the Femme Osage district,  The many anecdotes of Boone's tenure as syndic suggest he sought to render fair judgments rather than to strictly observe the letter of the law.
Daniel Boone was the subject of a TV series that ran on NBC from 1964 to 1970.
The historian John Mack Faragher cautions that the folk image of Boone as semiliterate is misleading, and argues that he "acquired a level of literacy that was the equal of most men of his times."
Because the young couple had "kept company", they were considered "married without benefit of clergy".
In fact, other Americans had explored and settled Kentucky before Boone, as debunkers in the 20th century often pointed out, but Boone came to symbolize them all, making him what historian Michael Lofaro called "the founding father of westward expansion".
The main character of James Fenimore Cooper's Leatherstocking Tales, the first of which was published in 1823, bore striking similarities to Boone; even his name, Nathaniel Bumppo, echoed Daniel Boone's name.
Violence in Kentucky increased with the outbreak of the American Revolutionary War (1775–1783).
The real Boone disliked bloodshed, however.
Boone and a group of men from Boonesborough followed in pursuit, finally catching up with them two days later.
Kenton became Boone's close friend, as well as a legendary frontiersman in his own right.
The massacre was one of the first events in what became known as Dunmore's War, a struggle between Virginia and, primarily, Shawnees of the Ohio Country for control of what is now West Virginia and Kentucky.
Along with a party of about 30 workers, Boone marked a path to the Kentucky River, where he founded Boonesborough.
After the Revolution, Boone resettled in Limestone (renamed Maysville, Kentucky in 1786), then a booming Ohio River port.
There he operated a trading post and occasionally worked as a surveyor's assistant.
In 1720, Squire Boone, who worked primarily as a weaver and a blacksmith, married Sarah Morgan (1700–77).
Flint greatly embellished Boone's adventures, doing for Boone what Parson Weems did for George Washington.
After his death, he was frequently the subject of heroic tall tales and works of fiction.
Boone returned home and on August 14, 1756, he married Rebecca Bryan, a neighbor in the Yadkin River Valley whose brother married one of Boone's sisters.
The validity of this claim is contested, but the story was told so often that it became part of his popular image.
His last words were, "I'm going now.
She was a member of a class of 41 submarines, all of which were named for great Americans from history, including the , two other noteworthy frontiersmen of the Great West.
However, because the real Boone was a man of few words, Filson invented florid, philosophical dialogue for this "autobiography".
Finley took Boone on his first fateful hunting trip to Kentucky 12 years later.
On September 25, 1773, Boone packed up his family and, with a group of about 50 immigrants, began the first attempt by British colonists to establish a settlement in Kentucky.
Boone's remaining land claims were sold off to pay legal fees and taxes, but he no longer paid attention to the process.
He contracted to provide supplies for the Kanawha militia, but his debts prevented him from buying goods on credit, so he closed his store and returned to hunting and trapping.
The British released Boone on parole several days later.
He was a legend in his own lifetime, especially after an account of his adventures was published in 1784 by John Filson, making him famous across Europe as the typical all-American frontiersman.
Boone was still an obscure hunter and trapper at the time; the most prominent member of the expedition was William Russell, a well-known Virginian and future brother-in-law of Patrick Henry.
Existing simultaneously with the image of Boone as a refugee from society was, paradoxically, the popular portrayal of him as civilization's trailblazer.
Although heavily outnumbered, Americans repelled the Shawnee warriors in the Siege of Boonesborough.
When the Boones' oldest son Israel married a "worldling" in 1747, Squire Boone stood by him.
Several places in the United States are named for him, including the Daniel Boone National Forest, the Sheltowee Trace Trail, the town of Boone, North Carolina, various settlements carrying the name of "Boonville", and seven counties: Boone County, Illinois, Boone County, Indiana, Boone County, Nebraska, Boone County, West Virginia, Boone County, Missouri, Boone County, Arkansas, and Boone County, Kentucky.
While on the campaign, Boone met John Finley, a packer who worked for George Croghan in the trans-Appalachian fur trade.
Afterwards, Henderson hired Boone to blaze what became known as the Wilderness Road, which went through the Cumberland Gap and into central Kentucky.
As was their custom, the Shawnees adopted some of the prisoners into the tribe to replace fallen warriors; the remainder were taken to Hamilton in Detroit.
Boone became a celebrity while living in Maysville.
In the 20th century, Boone was featured in numerous comic strips, radio programs, and films, where the emphasis was usually on action and melodrama rather than historical accuracy.
In 1791, he was elected to the Virginia legislature for the third time.
Based on interviews with Boone, Filson's book contained a mostly factual account of Boone's adventures from the exploration of Kentucky through the American Revolution.
The Boone family belonged to the Religious Society of Friends, called "Quakers", and were persecuted in England for their dissenting beliefs.
The competition of new settlers decreased the amount of game available.
Boone sold most of this land to repay old Kentucky debts.
When Virginia created Kanawha County in 1789, Boone was appointed lieutenant colonel of the county militia.
Boone would sometimes entertain his hunting companions by reading to them around the evening campfire.
In 1809, he petitioned Congress to restore his Spanish land claims, which was finally done in 1814.
Boone supported his growing family in these years as a market hunter and trapper, collecting pelts for the fur trade.
Boone regularly took reading material with him on his hunting expeditions—the Bible and ''Gulliver's Travels'' were favorites.
He began earning money at this time by locating good land for other settlers.
Boone was transformed in the popular imagination into someone who regarded Indians with contempt and had killed scores of the "savages".
In Maysville, he kept a tavern and worked as a surveyor, horse trader, and land speculator.
Boone is most famous for his exploration and settlement of what is now Kentucky, which was then part of Virginia but on the other side of the mountains from the settled areas.
In the 1775 treaty, Henderson purchased the Cherokee claim to Kentucky to establish a colony called Transylvania.
Boone was captured by Shawnee warriors in 1778.
Following the war, Boone worked as a surveyor and merchant, but fell deeply into debt through failed Kentucky land speculation.
'''Daniel Boone''' (September 26, 1820) was an American pioneer, explorer,  woodsman, and  frontiersman, whose frontier exploits made him one of the first folk heroes of the United States.
Because he grew up on the frontier, Boone had little formal education, but deep knowledge of the woods.
Folk tales have often emphasized Boone's skills as a hunter.
Blue Licks, a Shawnee victory over the Patriots, was one of the last battles of the Revolutionary War, coming after the main fighting ended in October 1781.
In a typical anecdote, when asked why he was moving to Missouri, Boone supposedly replied, "I want more elbow room!"
According to Faragher, "Boone lacked the ruthless instincts that speculation demanded."
Boone was given his first rifle at the age of 12, as families depended on hunting for much of their food.
Daniel Boone spent his early years on what was then the edge of the Pennsylvania frontier.
He learned to hunt from both local settlers and the Lenape.
Boone emerged as a legend in large part because of land speculator John Filson's "The Adventures of Colonel Daniel Boon", part of his book ''The Discovery, Settlement And present State of Kentucke''.
Boone is commonly remembered as a hunter, pioneer, and "Indian-fighter", though most people are uncertain when he lived or exactly what he did.
Despite some resistance from American Indian tribes such as the Shawnee, in 1775, Boone blazed his Wilderness Road through the Cumberland Gap in the Appalachian Mountains from North Carolina and Tennessee into Kentucky.
In 1762, Boone, his wife and four children moved back to the Yadkin River Valley from Culpeper.
As mentioned above, ''The Last of the Mohicans'' (1826), Cooper's second Leatherstocking novel, featured a fictionalized version of Boone's rescue of his daughter.
Schools across the United States are named for Daniel Boone, including schools in Birdsboro, Pennsylvania, Douglassville, Pennsylvania, Richmond, Kentucky, Wentzville, Missouri, Warrenton, Missouri, Gray, Tennessee, and Chicago.
The epic Daniel Boone mythology often overshadows the historical details of his life.
Bar killed a bear on this tree in the year 1760".
In Boone's youth, his family became a source of controversy in the local Quaker community when two of the oldest children married outside the endogamous community, in present-day Lower Gwynedd Township, Pennsylvania.
Boone once told his son Nathan that he was certain of having killed only one Indian, during the battle at Blue Licks, although he believed others might have died from his bullets in other battles.
He was often the only literate person in groups of frontiersmen.
In reality, however, Boone was a leading citizen of Kentucky at this time.
These are little remembered today; probably the most noteworthy is the 1936 film ''Daniel Boone'', with George O'Brien playing the title role.
Frustrated with the legal problems resulting from his land claims, in 1799, Boone emigrated to eastern Missouri, where he spent most of the last two decades of his life (1800–20).
According to one family tradition, a schoolteacher once expressed concern over Boone's education, but Boone's father said, "Let the girls do the spelling and Dan will do the shooting."
Meanwhile, the American Revolutionary War continued.
At the same time, news had arrived about the Treaty of Fort Stanwix, in which the Iroquois had ceded their claim to Kentucky to the British.
Boone went alone or with a small group of men, accumulating hundreds of deer skins in the autumn, and trapping beaver and otter over the winter.
Before the end of the 18th century, more than 200,000 Americans migrated to Kentucky/Virginia by following the route marked by Boone.
Daniel's father, Squire (his first name, not a title) Boone (1696–1765) emigrated from the small town of Bradninch, Devon (near Exeter, England) to Pennsylvania in 1713, to join William Penn's colony of dissenters.
Boone pursued this strategy so convincingly that many of his men concluded that he had switched his loyalty to the British.
The graves, which were unmarked until the mid-1830s, were near Jemima (Boone) Callaway's home on Tuque Creek, about two miles (3&nbsp;km) from the present-day Marthasville, Missouri.
Such frontiersmen often carved messages on trees or wrote their names on cave walls, and Boone's name or initials have been found in many places.
In 1782, he was elected sheriff of Fayette County.
When Kentucky was divided into three Virginia counties in November 1780, Boone was promoted to lieutenant colonel in the Fayette County militia.
His adventures—real and legendary—were influential in creating the archetypal Western hero of American folklore.
Almost every autumn, Boone would go on "long hunts", extended expeditions into the wilderness lasting weeks or months.
This nuclear submarine was decommissioned in 1994, and has since been scrapped.
Several Lenape Indian villages were nearby.
