During this revolt, Scythian nomads took advantage of the disorder and chaos and invaded Persia.
Darius believed that because he lived righteously by Asha, Ahura Mazda supported him.
This gave Darius the initiative.
In Darius's words, he had killed a total of eight "lying kings" through the quelling of revolutions.
Darius's account, written at the Behistun Inscription states that Cambyses II killed his own brother Bardiya, but that this murder was not known among the Iranian people.
Herodotus, a Greek historian and author of ''The Histories'', provided an account of many Persian kings and the Greco-Persian Wars.
In an effort to further improve trade, Darius built canals, underground waterways and a powerful navy.
He also married Artystone, another daughter of Cyrus, with whom he had two sons, Arsames and Gobryas.
and reform the system of taxation he inherited from Cyrus and Cambyses.
Darius mentions several times that he is the rightful king by the grace of Ahura Mazda, the Zoroastrian god.
In Pasargadae Darius finished all incomplete construction projects from the reign of Cyrus the Great.
and  are the Latin forms of the Greek ''Dareîos'' (), itself from Old Persian ''Dārayava(h)uš'' (; in Aramaic ''dryhwš''), which is a shortened form of ''Dārayava(h)uš'' ().
The defeat at Marathon marked the end of the first Persian invasion of Greece.
Even though Darius was a Zoroastrian, he built temples dedicated to the Gods of the Ancient Egyptian religion.
On this visit to Egypt he erected monuments and executed Aryandes on the charge of treason.
Darius chose Aramaic as a common language, which soon spread throughout the empire.
He also married another woman of the nobility, Phaidyme, the daughter of Otanes.
Mardonius' 492 campaign made it a fully subordinate part of the Persian kingdom.
Darius felt that the Babylonian people had taken advantage of him and deceived him, which resulted in Darius gathering a large army and marching to Babylon.
He sent a messenger to each of the noblemen, asking them if they approved of Intaphernes's actions.
These deportees enhanced the empire's economy and improved inter-cultural relations.
According to the accounts of Greek historians, Cambyses II had left Patizeithes in charge of the kingdom when he headed for Egypt.
In addition, further texts and monuments from Persepolis have been found, as well as a clay tablet containing a Old Persian cuneiform of Darius from Gherla, Romania (Harmatta) and a letter from Darius to Gadates, preserved in a Greek text of the Roman period.
Before Cyrus and his army crossed the Aras River to battle with the Armenians, he installed his son Cambyses II as king in case he should not return from battle.
A complete list is preserved in the catalogue of Herodotus, beginning with Ionia and listing the other satrapies from west to east excluding Persis which was the land of the Persians and the only province which was not a conquered land.
Hystaspes was an officer in Cyrus's army and a noble of his court.
Darius first finished defeating the rebels in Elam, Assyria, and Babylon and then attacked the Scythian invaders.
However, the increasing concerns amongst the Greeks over the strength of Darius's kingdom along with the constant interference by the Greeks in Ionia and Lydia were stepping stones towards the conflict that was yet to come between Persia and certain of the leading Greek city states.
They denied and disavowed any connection with Intaphernes's actions, stating that they stood by their decision to appoint Darius as King of Kings.
The daric was also recognized beyond the borders of the empire, in places such as Celtic Central Europe and Eastern Europe.
To do this, Darius created twenty provinces called satrapies (or ''archi'') which were each assigned to a satrap (''archon'') and specified fixed tributes that the satrapies were required to pay.
Even though Darius did not seem to have the support of the populace, Darius had a loyal army, led by close confidants and nobles (including the six nobles who had helped him remove Gaumata).
For a year and a half, Darius and his armies were unable to retake the city, though he attempted many tricks and strategies—even copying that which Cyrus the Great had employed when he captured Babylon.
Darius began to fear for his own safety; he thought that all seven noblemen had banded together to rebel against him and that the attack against his officers was the first sign of revolt.
As can be seen at the Behistun Inscription, Darius believed that Ahura Mazda had appointed him to rule the Achaemenid Empire.
The increased government revenues helped maintain and improve existing infrastructure and helped fund irrigation projects in dry lands.
The daric also improved government revenues as the introduction of the daric made it easier to collect new taxes on land, livestock and marketplaces.
As presented by Herodotus, the tactics used by the Scythians resulted in the loss of their best lands and of damage to their loyal allies.
This revolt in Egypt worsened his failing health and prevented the possibility of his leading another army.
He had the cliff-face Behistun Inscription carved to record his conquests, an important testimony of the Old Persian language.
While leaving the palace, he took the bridle from his horse, and tied the two officers together.
After Bardiya was murdered, widespread revolts occurred throughout the empire, especially on the eastern side.
These satraps were personally picked by Darius to monitor these provinces.
Darius is mentioned in the near-contemporary biblical books of Haggai and Zechariah (two of the Twelve Minor Prophets), whose account is also reflected in the later books of Ezra–Nehemiah.
At first, the seven discussed the form of government; a democratic republic was strongly pushed by Otanes, an oligarchy was pushed by Megabyzus, while Darius pushed for a monarchy.
He then left Megabyzus to conquer Thrace, returning to Sardis to spend the winter.
Darius's inscription states that his father was satrap of Bactria in 522 BCE.
Darius had spent three years preparing men and ships for war when a revolt broke out in Egypt.
Following this, revolts broke out in Persis, the homeland of the Persians and Darius and then in Elam and Babylonia, followed by in Media, Parthia, Assyria, and Egypt.
At the same time, anti-Persian parties gained more power in Athens, and pro-Persian aristocrats were exiled from Athens and Sparta.
To open this canal, he travelled to Egypt in 497 BCE, where the inauguration was carried out with great fanfare and celebration.
The plan was successful and Darius's army eventually surrounded the city and overcame the rebels.
The majority of the satraps were of Persian origin and were members of the royal house or the six great noble families.
In frustration Darius sent a letter to the Scythian ruler Idanthyrsus to fight or surrender.
Darius conquered large portions of Eastern Europe, even crossing the Danube to wage war on the Scythians.
Each of these provinces were divided into sub-provinces with their own governors which were chosen either by the royal court or by the satrap.
Darius is mentioned in the Biblical books of Haggai, Zechariah, and Ezra–Nehemiah.
He organized a new uniform monetary system, along with making Aramaic the official language of the empire.
A palace was also built during the reign of Darius, with an inscription in the name of Cyrus the Great.
Following his coronation at Pasargadae, Darius moved to Ecbatana.
He had also observed Egyptian religious rites related to kingship and had built the temple for the Egyptian god, Amun.
A would-be usurper named Gaumata came and lied to the people, stating he was Bardiya.
Darius's European expedition was a major event in his reign, which began with the invasion of Thrace.
Through another series of campaigns, Darius I would eventually reign over the territorial apex of the empire, when it stretched from parts of the Balkans (Thrace-Macedonia, Bulgaria-Paeonia) in the west, to the Indus Valley in the east.
One of the most famous banking firms was Murashu Sons, based in the Babylonian city of Nippur.
Until then, they would continue their strategy as they had no cities or cultivated lands to lose.
The officers went to the king and showed him what Intaphernes had done to them.
However, Darius gathered a group of scholars to create a separate language system only used for Persis and the Persians, which was called Aryan script which was only used for official inscriptions.
Taking precautions against further resistance, Darius sent soldiers to seize Intaphernes, along with his son, family members, relatives and any friends who were capable of arming themselves.
Darius ended the Elamite revolt when the revolutionary leader Aschina was captured and executed in Susa.
Both men belonged to the Achaemenid tribe and were still alive when Darius ascended the throne.
This led Cyrus to order Hystaspes to go back to Persis and watch over his son strictly, until Cyrus himself returned.
He soon learned that support for Bardiya was strong, and revolts in Elam and Babylonia had broken out.
Persian military and naval operations to quell the revolt ended in the Persian reoccupation of Ionian and Greek islands, as well as the re-subjugation of Thrace and the conquering of Macedonia in 492 BC under Mardonius.
One of the significant events of Darius's early reign was the slaying of Intaphernes, one of the seven noblemen who had deposed the previous ruler and installed Darius as the new monarch.
Darius also built a canal to connect the Red Sea and Mediterranean.
On 1 July, the Iranian people chose to be under the leadership of Gaumata, as "Bardiya".
In many cuneiform inscriptions denoting his achievements, he presents himself as a devout believer, perhaps even convinced that he had a divine right to rule over the world.
Although Artobazanes was Darius's first-born, Xerxes became heir and the next king through the influence of Atossa; she had great authority in the kingdom as Darius loved her most of all his wives.
Furthermore, Darius married Phratagune, with whom he had two sons, Abrokomas and Hyperantes.
During Darius's Greek expedition, he had begun construction projects in Susa, Egypt and Persepolis.
It is unknown if he had any children with her.
Darius spent the winter of 516–515 BCE in Gandhara, preparing to conquer the Indus Valley.
To further improve trade, Darius built the Royal Road, a postal system and Phoenician-based commercial shipping.
Nonetheless, Darius killed Intaphernes's entire family, excluding his wife's brother and son.
Seeking to fight with the Scythians, Darius's army chased the Scythian army deep into Scythian lands, where there were no cities to conquer and no supplies to forage.
After three months the revolt in Babylonia had ended.
The Iranians had grown rebellious against Cambyses's rule and on 11 March 522 BCE a revolt against Cambyses broke out in his absence.
Several temples found were dedicated to Ptah and Nekhbet.
She chose her brother to live.
With this in mind, Darius married Atossa, daughter of Cyrus, with whom he had four sons: Xerxes, Achaemenes, Masistes and Hystaspes.
Darius then marched through the Bolan Pass and returned through Arachosia and Drangiana back to Persia.
Darius justifies his ascension to the throne with his lineage.
He had linked the Red Sea to the river Nile by building a canal which ran from modern Zaqāzīq to modern Suez.
Before the contest, Oebares rubbed his hand over the genitals of a mare that Darius's horse had a fondness for.
The daric was a major boost to international trade.
Immediately after, lightning and thunder occurred leading the other six noblemen to believe to be an act of God, causing them to dismount and kneel before Darius.
Darius responded by sending troops led by his son-in-law across the Hellespont.
These military actions, coming as a direct response to the revolt in Ionia, were the beginning of the First Persian invasion of (mainland) Greece.
This revolt occurred when Otanes withdrew much of the army from Babylon to aid Darius in suppressing other revolts.
In his ''Histories'', Herodotus states that the ruins of the forts were still standing in his day.
Only the king could mint gold darics.
These Greeks served as soldiers, artisans, statesmen and mariners for Darius.
The monuments that Darius built were often inscribed in the official languages of the Persian Empire, Old Persian, Elamite and Babylonian and Egyptian hieroglyphs.
When the six nobles gathered outside, Oebares placed his hands beside the nostrils of Darius's horse, who became excited at the smell and neighed.
To them, it seems likely that Gaumata (a pretender to the throne) was in fact Bardiya (the legitimate heir), and that under cover of revolts, Darius killed the heir to the throne and took it himself.
Based on historical demographic estimates, Darius I ruled over approximately 50 million people, or at least 44% of the world's population.
There were two types of darics, a gold daric and a silver daric.
At some time between his coronation and his death, Darius left a tri-lingual monumental relief on Mount Behistun, which was written in Elamite, Old Persian and Babylonian.
While there is no absolute consensus about the adherence of the kings before Darius, such as Cyrus and Cambyses, it is well established that Darius was an adherent of Zoroastrianism or at least a firm believer in Ahura Mazda.
To aid the presentation of his ancestry, Darius wrote down the sequence of events that occurred after the death of Cyrus the Great.
Soon after, Darius died.
The daric was called ''dārayaka'' within the empire and was most likely named after Darius.
Darius also worked on construction projects throughout the empire, focusing on Susa, Pasargadae, Persepolis, Babylon and Egypt.
Herodotus provides a dubious account of Darius's ascension: Several days after Gaumata had been assassinated, Darius and the other six nobles discussed the fate of the empire.
Darius conquered the lands surrounding the Indus River in 515 BCE.
Darius, who had served Cambyses as his lance-bearer until the deposed ruler's death, prayed for aid and in September 522 BCE, along with Otanes, Intraphrenes, Gobryas, Hydarnes, Megabyzus and Aspathines, killed Gaumata in the fortress of Sikayauvati.
To construct these monuments Darius employed a large number of workers and artisans of diverse nationalities.
He pursued the invaders, who led him to a marsh; there he found no known enemies but an enigmatic Scythian tribe.
Darius encountered mockery and taunting from the rebels, including the famous saying "Oh yes, you will capture our city, when mules shall have foals."
The inscription begins with a brief autobiography including his ancestry and lineage.
However, the situation changed in Darius's favour when, according to the story, a mule owned by Zopyrus, a high-ranking soldier, foaled.
To improve Greek-Persian relations, Darius opened his court and treasuries to those Greeks who wanted to serve him.
After chasing the Scythians for a month, Darius's army was suffering losses due to fatigue, privation and sickness.
It begins with the removal of the alleged usurper Gaumata and continues to the end of Darius's reign.
The rise of Darius to the throne contains two variations, an account from Darius and another from Greek historians.
He claimed he could trace his ancestors back to Achaemenes, even though he was only distantly related.
Darius used the coinage system as a transnational currency to regulate trade and commerce throughout his empire.
When Darius returned to Persis, he found that the codification of Egyptian law had been finished.
He wrote extensively on Darius, spanning half of Book 3 along with Books 4, 5 and 6.
No member of the Achaemenid family would rise against Gaumata for the safety of their own life.
In 1923 German archaeologist Ernst Herzfeld made casts of the cuneiform inscriptions on Darius's tomb.
He supported faiths and religions that were "alien" as long as the adherents were submissive and peaceable, sometimes giving them grants from his treasury for their purposes.
The total tribute from the satraps came to an amount less than 15,000 silver talents.
At Babylon, Darius was met with closed gates and a series of defences to keep him and his armies out.
Darius organized the empire by dividing it into provinces and placing satraps to govern it.
The longer form is also seen to have been reflected in the Elamite ''Da-ri-(y)a-ma-u-iš'', Babylonian ''Da-(a-)ri-ia-(a-)muš'', Aramaic ''drywhwš'', and possibly the longer Greek form ''Dareiaîos'' ().
The generous funding of the temple gave Darius and his successors the support of the Jewish priesthood.
Darius was the eldest of five sons  to Hystaspes and Rhodugune in 550 BCE.
When Aristagoras organized the Ionian Revolt, Eretria and Athens supported him by sending ships and troops to Ionia and by burning Sardis.
Darius believed that Intaphernes was planning a rebellion, but when he was brought to the court, there was no proof of any such plan.
Additionally, Darius sponsored large construction projects in Susa, Babylon, Egypt, and Persepolis.
Through these changes the empire was centralized and unified.
Additionally, royal inspectors who were the "eyes and ears" of Darius completed further checks on each satrap.
The Book of Ezra (chapter 6, verses 1 to 11) describes the decree to continue reconstruction of the Temple in Jerusalem, specifying financial support and supplies for the temple services.
While in Babylonia, Darius learned a revolution had broken out in Bactria, a satrapy which had always been in favour of Darius, and had initially volunteered an army of soldiers to quell revolts.
After stating that a republic would lead to corruption and internal fighting, while a monarchy would be led with a single-mindedness not possible in other governments, Darius was able to convince the other nobles that a monarchy was the correct form of government.
Nonetheless, there were certain Greeks who were pro-Persian, although these were largely based in Athens.
Between Cyrus and Darius, an exchange of letters with King Ahasuerus and Artaxerxes is described (chapter 4, verse 7), the grandson of Darius I, during whose reign Ezra and Nehemiah came to Jerusalem.
He further improved and expanded the network of roads and way stations throughout the empire, so that there was a system of travel authorization for the King, satraps and other high officials, which entitled the traveller to draw provisions at daily stopping places.
All six nobles would gather outside mounted on their horses at sunrise, and the nobles' horse which neighed first would become Great King.
Despite the evading tactics of the Scythians, Darius' campaign was so far relatively successful.
In the lands that were conquered by his empire, Darius followed the same Achaemenid tolerance that Cyrus had shown and later Achaemenid kings would show.
She was asked to choose between her brother and son.
Her reasoning for doing so was that she could have another husband and another son, but she would always have but one brother.
Xerxes completed these works and in some cases expanded his father's projects by erecting new buildings of his own.
Darius was the son of Hystaspes and the grandson of Arsames.
Before these royal marriages, Darius had married an unknown daughter of his good friend and lace carrier Gobryas from an early marriage, with whom he had three sons, Artobazanes, Ariabignes and Arsamenes.
Tributes were paid in both silver and gold talents.
After killing the impostor along with his brother Patizeithes and other Magians, Darius was crowned king the following morning.
Darius invaded European Scythia in 513 BC, where the Scythians evaded Darius's army, using feints and retreating eastwards while laying waste to the countryside, by blocking wells, intercepting convoys, destroying pastures and continuous skirmishes against Darius's army.
However, once Cyrus had crossed the Aras River, he had a vision in which Darius had wings atop his shoulders and stood upon the confines of Europe and Asia (the known world).
In 516 BCE, Darius embarked on a campaign to Central Asia, Aria and Bactria and then marched into Afghanistan to Taxila in modern-day Pakistan.
This led to the registration of land which was measured and then taxed.
To ensure that one person did not gain too much power, each satrap had a secretary who observed the affairs of the state and communicated with Darius, a treasurer who safeguarded provincial revenues and a garrison commander who was responsible for the troops.
Darius left a detailed account of these revolutions in the Behistun Inscription.
However, a violent storm and harassment by the Thracians forced the troops to return to Persia.
At the time of Darius's death construction projects were still under way.
Darius was impressed by her response and spared both her brother's and her son's life.
Concerned about losing more of his troops, Darius halted the march at the banks of the Volga River and headed towards Thrace.
Several of these workers were deportees who had been employed specifically for these projects.
Also according to Herodotus (III.139), Darius, prior to seizing power and "of no consequence at the time", had served as a spearman (''doryphoros'') in the Egyptian campaign (528–525 BCE) of Cambyses II, then the Persian Great King.
Those paid in gold were measured with the Euboic talent.
Becoming enraged and insulted, Intaphernes drew his sword and cut off the ears and noses of the two officers.
Some modern historians have inferred that Darius's rise to power might have been illegitimate.
One evening, Intaphernes went to the palace to meet Darius, but was stopped by two officers who stated that Darius had retired for the night.
The Greeks living in Asia Minor and some of the Greek islands had submitted to Persian rule already by 510 BCE.
Darius ascended the throne by overthrowing Gaumata, the alleged magus usurper of Bardiya with the assistance of six other Persian noble families; Darius was crowned the following morning.
In Susa, Darius built a new palace complex in the north of the city.
The most notable of all these revolts was the Babylonian revolt which was led by Nebuchadnezzar III.
The imperial administration was coordinated by the chancery with headquarters at Persepolis, Susa, and Babylon with Bactria, Ecbatana, Sardis, Dascylium and Memphis having branches.
To assess tributes, a commission evaluated the expenses and revenues of each satrap.
In 490 BCE, at the Battle of Marathon, the Persian army was defeated by a heavily armed Athenian army, with 9,000 men who were supported by 600 Plataeans, 1,000 soldiers from each of eleven Greek city-states (11,000 men in total) and 10,000 lightly armed soldiers led by Miltiades.
Darius also created several roads and routes in Egypt.
Today only glazed bricks of the palace remain, the majority of them in the Louvre.
Tributes in silver from each satrap were measured with the Babylonian talent.
Darius married Parmys, the daughter of Bardiya, with whom he had a son, Ariomardus.
To decide who would become the monarch, the six nobles (Otanes stated that he had no interest in becoming king) decided on a test.
After the killing, Patizeithes put his brother Gaumata, a Magian who resembled Bardiya, on the throne and declared him the Great King.
Darius asserted his position as king by force, taking his armies throughout the empire, suppressing each revolt individually.
Xerxes, the eldest son of Darius and Atossa, succeeded to the throne as Xerxes I; however, prior to Xerxes's accession, he contested the succession with his elder half-brother Artobarzanes, Darius's eldest son who was born to his commoner first wife before Darius rose to power.
He had conquered enough Scythian territory to force the Scythians to respect the Persian forces.
Darius did not seem to have any treasonous thoughts as Cambyses II ascended the throne peacefully; and, through promotion, Darius was eventually elevated to be Cambyses's personal lancer.
According to Herodotus, Darius had a slave, Oebares who helped Darius win this contest.
With their support, Darius was able to suppress and quell all revolts within a year.
By 522 BCE, there were revolts against Darius in most parts of the Achaemenid Empire leaving the empire in turmoil.
Darius began preparations for a second force which he would command, instead of his generals; however, before the preparations were complete, Darius died, thus leaving the task to his son Xerxes.
Although ultimately ending in failure at the Battle of Marathon, Darius succeeded in the re-subjugation of Thrace, expansion of the empire through the conquest of Macedon, the Cyclades, and the island of Naxos, and the sacking of the city of Eretria.
Darius had dualistic convictions and believed that each rebellion in his kingdom was the work of druj, the enemy of Asha.
Any daughters he had with her are not known.
