These categories also correspond to fluctuation spectrum effects and the interval following the Big Bang at which each type became non-relativistic.
The Galactic Center is a particularly good place to look because the density of dark matter may be higher there.
Based on these conclusions, Zwicky inferred that some unseen matter provided the mass and associated gravitation attraction to hold the cluster together.
The distribution of mass in galaxy clusters has been used to argue both for and against the significance of self-interaction.
Later, small anisotropies gradually grew and condensed the homogeneous universe into stars, galaxies and larger structures.
Although dark matter has not been directly observed, its existence and properties are inferred from its gravitational effects such as the motions of visible matter, gravitational lensing, its influence on the universe's large-scale structure, and its effects in the cosmic microwave background.
If WIMPs are Majorana particles (their own antiparticle) then two WIMPs could annihilate to produce gamma rays or Standard Model particle-antiparticle pairs.
The detection by LIGO in September 2015 of gravitational waves, opens the possibility of observing dark matter in a new way.
Other experiments include SIMPLE and PICASSO.
These processes could be detected indirectly through an excess of gamma rays, antiprotons or positrons emanating from high density regions.
Its basic properties are determined by six adjustable parameters: dark matter density, baryon (atom) density, the universe’s age (or equivalently, the Hubble constant), the initial fluctuation amplitude and their scale dependence.
Galactic rotation curves, which illustrate the velocity of rotation versus the distance from the galactic center, show the "excess" velocity.
Directional dark matter experiments include DMTPC, DRIFT, Newage and MIMAC.
On average, superclusters are expanding but more slowly than the cosmic mean due to their gravity, while voids are expanding faster than average.
The first to suggest the existence of dark matter (using stellar velocities) was Dutch astronomer Jacobus Kapteyn in 1922.
Possibilities include dense baryonic (interacts with electromagnetic force) matter and non-baryonic matter (interacts with its surroundings only through gravity).
Since the gas peaks contain more ordinary matter than the stars, modified-gravity theories should show the lensing peaks near the gas peaks, contrary to the observations.
Unlike galactic rotation curves, this evidence is independent of the details of Newtonian gravity, directly supporting dark matter.
The rotational/orbital speed of galaxies/stars does not decline with distance, unlike other orbital systems such as stars/planets and planets/moons that also have most of their mass at the centre.
He attributed it to either light absorption within the galaxy or modified dynamics in the outer portions of the spiral and not to missing matter.
The survey studies galaxies more than a billion light-years distant, across an area greater than a thousand square degrees (about one fortieth of the entire sky).
WIMP annihilation from the Milky Way galaxy as a whole may also be detected in the form of various annihilation products.
Rubin found that most galaxies must contain about six times as much dark as visible mass; thus, by around 1980 the apparent need for dark matter was widely recognized as a major unsolved problem in astronomy.
Some theories modify the laws of gravity.
Zwicky applied the virial theorem to the Coma galaxy cluster and obtained evidence of unseen mass that he called ''dunkle Materie'' 'dark matter'.
In the dozens of cases where this has been done, the mass-to-light ratios obtained correspond to the dynamical dark matter measurements of clusters.
These observations generally indicate that baryonic mass is approximately 12–15 percent, in reasonable agreement with the Planck spacecraft cosmic average of 15.5–16 percent.
Noble liquid experiments include ZEPLIN, XENON, DEAP, ArDM, WARP, DarkSide, PandaX, and LUX, the Large Underground Xenon experiment.
Some modified gravity theories, such as scalar-tensor-vector gravity, require "warm" dark matter to make their equations work.
MOND was not relativistic: it was an adjustment of the Newtonian account.
Their primary goal was to measure the angular scale of the first acoustic peak of the anisotropies’ power spectrum, for which COBE had insufficient resolution.
Separately, heavy sterile neutrinos exist in non-supersymmetric extensions to the standard model that explain the small neutrino mass through the seesaw mechanism.
As the dark matter and baryons clumped together after recombination, the effect is much weaker in the galaxy distribution in the nearby universe, but is detectable as a subtle (~ 1 percent) preference for pairs of galaxies to be separated by 147 Mpc, rather than 130 or 160 Mpc, called the BAO feature.
A universal rotation curve can be expressed as the sum of an exponential distribution of visible matter that tapers to zero with distance from the center, and a spherical dark matter halo with a flat core of radius r0 and density ρ0 = 4.5 × 10−2(r0/kpc)−2/3 pc−3.
It hypothesized that attractive gravitational effects are instead a side-effect of dark energy.
Large galaxy redshift surveys may be used to make a three-dimensional map of the galaxy distribution.
The detection of such a signal is not conclusive evidence, as the sources of gamma ray production are not fully understood.
Although WIMPs are popular search candidates, the Axion Dark Matter eXperiment (ADMX) searches for axions.
Weak gravitational lensing investigates minute distortions of galaxies, using statistical analyses from vast galaxy surveys.
Type Ia supernovae can be used as "standard candles" to measure extragalactic distances.
Many supersymmetric models offer dark matter candidates in the form of the WIMPy Lightest Supersymmetric Particle (LSP).
Applying relativity to fractal, non-differentiable spacetime, Nottale suggests that potential energy may arise due to the fractality of spacetime, which would account for the missing mass-energy observed at cosmological scales.
Fellow Dutchman and radio astronomy pioneer Jan Oort also hypothesized the existence of dark matter in 1932.
In particular, assuming the gravitational mass is due to only visible matter, stars far from the center of galaxies have much higher velocities than predicted by the virial theorem.
Observations have turned up 90-99% fewer small galaxies than permitted by dark matter-based predictions.
In that case, dark matter could exist in a "Hidden Valley" in other dimensions that only interact with the matter in our dimensions through gravity.
High-energy neutrino telescopes such as AMANDA, IceCube and ANTARES are searching for this signal.
Generally, these three methods are in reasonable agreement that dark matter outweighs visible matter by approximately 5 to 1.
If the WIMP is unstable, WIMPs could decay into standard model (or other) particles.
The most direct observational evidence comes from the Bullet Cluster.
The dark matter hypothesis accounts for the missing mass, explaining the anomaly.
Prior to structure formation, e.g., Friedmann cosmology solutions to general relativity describe a homogeneous universe.
A dark-matter compliant hypothesis proposes that some stars may have been torn by tidal forces from disk-galaxy mergers from their original galaxies during the first close passage and put on outgoing trajectories, explaining the low velocities of the remaining stars even in the presence of a halo.
According to A. Peter: "... the only ''really plausible'' dark-matter candidates are new particles."
According to consensus among cosmologists, dark matter is composed primarily of a not yet characterized type of subatomic particle.
In 2011, researchers using the CRESST detectors presented evidence of 67 collisions occurring in detector crystals from subatomic particles.
Lensing observations show two dark matter peaks near the galaxy peaks, as expected in dark matter theory.
As the structures collapse in the evolving universe, they begin to "light up" as baryonic matter heats up through gravitational contraction and approaches hydrostatic pressure balance.
By examining the apparent shear deformation of the adjacent background galaxies, astrophysicists can characterize the mean distribution of dark matter.
Models of the Big Bang and structure formation suggested that such dark galaxies should be very common, but VIRGOHI21 was the first to be detected.
Unusually, VIRGOHI21 does not appear to contain visible stars: it was discovered with radio frequency observations of hydrogen.
Combining the CMB observations with BAO measurements from galaxy redshift surveys provides a precise estimate of the Hubble constant and the average matter density in the Universe.
"Cold" dark matter offers the simplest explanation for most cosmological observations.
Another approximate dividing line is that "warm" dark matter became non-relativistic when the universe was approximately 1 year old and 1 millionth of its present size and in the radiation-dominated era (photons and neutrinos), with a photon temperature 2.7 million K. Standard physical cosmology gives the particle horizon size as 2''ct'' (speed of light multiplied by time) in the radiation-dominated era, thus 2 light-years.
Estimates of masses for galaxies and larger structures via dynamical and general relativistic means are much greater than those based on the mass of the visible "luminous" matter.
Thus, an object A affects an object B, and the object B then re-affects object A, and so on, creating a feedback loop that strengthens gravity.
Strong lensing is the observed distortion of background galaxies into arcs when their light passes through such a gravitational lens.
DASI first detected the CMB polarization, and CBI provided the first E-mode polarization spectrum with compelling evidence that it is out of phase with the T-mode spectrum.
If dark matter is made up of WIMPs, then millions, possibly billions, of WIMPs must pass through every square centimeter of the Earth each second.
The dark matter hypothesis plays a central role in current modeling of cosmic structure formation and galaxy formation and evolution and on explanations of the anisotropies observed in the cosmic microwave background (CMB).
A galaxy rotation curve is a plot of the orbital velocities (i.e., the speeds) of visible stars or gas in that galaxy versus their radial distance from that galaxy's center.
ESA's Planck spacecraft returned more detailed results in 2013-2015.
The actual FSL is roughly 5 times the above length, since it continues to grow slowly as particle velocities decrease inversely with the scale factor after they become non-relativistic.
Dark matter can be divided into ''cold'', ''warm'' and ''hot'' categories.
This was the first formal inference about the existence of dark matter.
The Milky Way is estimated to have roughly 10 times as much dark matter as ordinary matter.
In the Bullet Cluster, lensing observations show that much of the lensing mass is separated from the X-ray-emitting baryonic mass.
Multiple Hubble projects have used this method to measure cluster masses.
The constituents of "cold" dark matter are unknown.
Lyman-alpha forest observations can also constrain cosmological models.
Gravitational lensing observations of galaxy clusters allow direct estimates of the gravitational mass based on its effect on light coming from background galaxies, since large collections of matter (dark or otherwise) gravitationally deflect light.
The Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope is searching for similar gamma rays.
Dark matter could consist of primordial defects ("birth defects") in the topology of quantum fields, which would contain energy and therefore gravitate.
In most regions dark and visible matter are found together, due to their gravitational attraction.
The gravity from dark matter increases the compaction force, allowing the formation of these structures.
WIMPs coming from the direction in which the Sun is travelling (roughly towards Cygnus) may then be separated from background, which should be isotropic.
This set up a preferred length scale for baryons in the early universe which is determined as 147 megaparsec (comoving) by the Planck spacecraft.
Indirect detection experiments search for the products of WIMP annihilation/decay.
the same calculation today shows a smaller fraction, using greater values for luminous mass.
Experiments with the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) may be able to detect WIMPs produced in collisions of the LHC proton beams.
In such cases, it is usually attributed extraordinary physical or magical properties.
Star velocity profiles seemed to indicate a concentration of dark matter in the disk of the Milky Way.
In clusters such as Abell 1689, lensing observations confirm the presence of considerably more mass than is indicated by the clusters' light.
Zwicky estimated its mass based on the motions of galaxies near its edge and compared that to an estimate based on its brightness and number of galaxies.
A 2006 study explained the warp in the Milky Way's disk by the interaction of the Large and Small Magellanic Clouds and the 20-fold increase in predicted mass from dark matter.
Studies of Big Bang nucleosynthesis and gravitational lensing convinced most cosmologists that MACHOs cannot make up more than a small fraction of dark matter.
The effect was predicted quantitatively by Nick Kaiser in 1987, and first decisively measured in 2001 by the 2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey.
These categories refer to velocity rather than an actual temperature, indicating how far corresponding objects moved due to random motions in the early universe, before they slowed due to cosmic expansion&nbsp;– this is an important distance called the "free streaming length" (FSL).
Observationally, the total kinetic energy is much greater.
In April 2012, an analysis of previously available data from its Large Area Telescope instrument produced statistical evidence of a 130 GeV signal in the gamma radiation coming from the center of the Milky Way.
Thus, observed neutrinos cannot explain dark matter.
Because galaxy-size density fluctuations get washed out by free-streaming, "hot" dark matter implies that the first objects that can form are huge supercluster-size pancakes, which then fragment into galaxies.
COBE's successor, the Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP) provided the most detailed measurements of (large-scale) anisotropies in the CMB in 2003&ndash;2010.
Mention of dark matter is made in works of fiction.
Conversely, much lighter particles, such as neutrinos with masses of only a few eV, have FSLs much larger than a protogalaxy, thus qualifying them as "hot".
This avoids small-scale (stellar) dynamical effects.
These maps are slightly distorted because distances are estimated from observed redshifts; the redshift contains a contribution from the galaxy's so-called peculiar velocity in addition to the dominant Hubble expansion term.
Dark matter seems to be a small component or absent in some places.
They were discovered independently, long before the hunt for dark matter: they were postulated in 1930, and detected in 1956.
This model requires the presence of non-relativistic neutrinos or other cold dark matter, to work.
However, Zwicky did correctly infer that the bulk of the matter was dark.
Rotation curves for some elliptical galaxies do display low velocities for outlying stars (tracked for example by the motion of embedded&nbsp;planetary nebulae).
This effect causes superclusters to appear "squashed" in the radial direction, and likewise voids are "stretched"; angular positions are unaffected.
It is dark matter composed of constituents with an FSL much smaller than a protogalaxy.
In the following decade, CMB anisotropies were investigated by ground-based and balloon experiments.
This is the focus for dark matter research, as hot dark matter does not seem to be capable of supporting galaxy or galaxy cluster formation, and most particle candidates slowed early.
X-ray observations show that much of the luminous matter (in the form of 107–108&nbsp;Kelvin gas or plasma) is concentrated in the cluster's center.
Weak gravitational lensing observations show that much dark matter resides outside the central region.
Rubin worked with a new spectrograph to measure the velocity curve of edge-on spiral galaxies with greater accuracy.
The name refers to the fact that it does not emit or interact with electromagnetic radiation, such as light, and is thus invisible to the entire electromagnetic spectrum.
The results are roughly consistent with those derived from the WMAP observations and further constrain the Lambda CDM model and (indirectly) dark matter.
In the same way, the dark fluid might generally disperse, while collecting around galaxies.
Many experiments to detect proposed dark matter particles through non-gravitational means are under way.
* Gravitational lensing (usually of more distant galaxies) can measure cluster masses without relying on observations of dynamics (e.g., velocity).
Globular clusters show little evidence of dark matter.
The effect is not detectable for any one structure since the true shape is not known, but can be measured by averaging over many structures assuming we are not at a special location in the Universe.
Another candidate is heavy hidden sector particles that only interact with ordinary matter via gravity.
MOND, TeVeS, and conformal gravity that attempt to account for the observations without invoking additional matter.
In this example the FSL would correspond to 10 million light-years or 3 Mpc today, around the size containing an average large galaxy.
It has been observed around many distant clusters including Abell 1689.
This could produce a distinctive signal in the form of high-energy neutrinos.
Deep-field observations show instead that galaxies formed first, followed by clusters and superclusters as galaxies clump together.
Tensions separate observations and simulations.
Dark fluid combines dark matter and dark energy in a single energy field that produces different effects at different scales.
Many of these appear to be fairly uniform, so by the virial theorem, the total kinetic energy should be half the galaxies' total gravitational binding energy.
An influential paper presented Rubin's results in 1980.
In 2005, astronomers claimed to have discovered a galaxy made almost entirely of dark matter, 50 million light years away in the Virgo Cluster, which was named VIRGOHI21.
These experiments can be divided into two classes: direct detection experiments, which search for the scattering of dark matter particles off atomic nuclei within a detector; and indirect detection, which look for the products of WIMP annihilations.
In addition, if the particles of which it is composed are supersymmetric, they can undergo annihilation interactions with themselves, possibly resulting in observable by-products such as gamma rays and neutrinos ("indirect detection").
A challenge for this model is the lack of particle candidates with the required mass ~ 300 eV to 3000 eV.
In August 2016, astronomers reported that Dragonfly 44, an ultra diffuse galaxy (UDG) with the mass of the Milky Way galaxy, but with nearly no discernable stars or galactic structure, may be made almost entirely of dark matter.
They constrain the dark energy density ΩΛ = ~0.713 for a flat, Lambda CDM universe and the parameter  for a quintessence model.
These experiments could show that WIMPs can be formed, but a direct detection experiment must still show that they exist in sufficient numbers to account for dark matter.
Thus WIMPs may accumulate at the center of these bodies, increasing the chance of collision/annihilation.
Ground-based interferometers provided fluctuation measurements with higher accuracy, including the Very Small Array, the Degree Angular Scale Interferometer (DASI) and the Cosmic Background Imager (CBI).
These constraints agree with those obtained from WMAP data.
This claim is so far unconfirmed and unreconciled with negative results of other experiments.
They could be from dark matter annihilation or from pulsars.
Angular CMB fluctuations provide evidence for dark matter.
The mass observations for galaxies based on the light that they emit are far too low to explain the velocity observations.
It now appears, however, that the high concentration of baryonic matter in the disk (especially in the interstellar medium) can account for this motion.
Their masses are slightly different.
(As the Earth orbits the Sun, the velocity of the detector relative to the dark matter halo will vary by a small amount).
The first robust indications that the mass to light ratio was anything other than unity came from measurements of galaxy rotation curves.
Dark matter is transparent to electromagnetic radiation and/or is so dense and small that it fails to absorb or emit enough radiation to be detectable with current imaging technology.
Vera Rubin and Kent Ford in the 1960s–1970s provided further strong evidence, also using galaxy rotation curves.
The DAMA/NaI, DAMA/LIBRA experiments detected an annual modulation in the event rate that they claim is due to dark matter.
The galaxies, stars and dark matter continued through with negligible collisions.
Dark matter also closes gaps in models of large-scale structure.
This explains the relative weakness of gravity compared to the other forces of nature that cannot cross into extra dimensions.
All these lines of evidence suggest that galaxies, clusters of galaxies, and the universe as a whole contain far more matter than that which is observable via electromagnetic signals.
The Global Positioning System may be able to operate as such a network.
This property simplifies the disentanglement of the dark and visible matter contributions to the rotation curves.
At the center of this cluster is an enormous elliptical galaxy likely formed from many smaller galaxies.
Initially, baryonic matter's post-Big Bang temperature and pressure were too high to collapse and form smaller structures, such as stars, via the Jeans instability.
By measuring the distortion geometry, the mass of the intervening cluster can be obtained.
In 2007, John Moffat proposed a modified gravity hypothesis based on nonsymmetric gravitational theory (NGT) that claims to account for the behavior of colliding galaxies.
Such a signal would be strong indirect proof of WIMP dark matter.
Many experiments aim to test this hypothesis.
Gravity acts as a lens to bend the light from a more distant source (such as a quasar) around a massive object (such as a cluster of galaxies) lying between the source and the observer in accordance with general relativity.
In 1939, Horace W. Babcock reported the rotation curve for the Andromeda nebula, which suggested that the mass-to-luminosity ratio increases radially.
Extensive data sets of these supernovae can be used to constrain cosmological models.
'''Dark matter''' is an unidentified type of matter comprising approximately 27% of the mass and energy in the observable universe that is not accounted for by dark energy, baryonic matter (ordinary matter), and neutrinos.
Neutrinos' mass is less than 10−6 that of an electron.
Dark fluid can be compared to an atmospheric system.
"Warm" dark matter refers to particles with an FSL comparable to the size of a protogalaxy.
Attempts were made to bring MOND into conformity with general relativity; this spawned competing MOND-based hypotheses—including TeVeS, MOG or STV gravity, and the phenomenological covariant approach.
Predictions based on warm dark matter are similar to those for cold dark matter on large scales, but with less small-scale density perturbations.
The distribution of dark matter in galaxies required to explain the motion of the observed matter suggests the presence of a roughly spherically symmetric, centrally concentrated halo of dark matter with the visible matter concentrated in a central disc.
Low surface brightness dwarf galaxies are important sources of information for studying dark matter.
He estimated that the cluster had about 400 times more mass than was visually observable.
CMB anisotropy measurements fix models in which most matter is dark.
On 25 August 2016, astronomers reported that Dragonfly 44, an ultra diffuse galaxy (UDG) with the mass of the Milky Way galaxy, but with nearly no discernable stars or galactic structure, may be made almost entirely of dark matter.
A few of the WIMPs passing through the Sun or Earth may scatter off atoms and lose energy.
Observations suggest that structure formation  proceeds hierarchically, with the smallest structures collapsing first, followed by galaxies and then galaxy clusters.
It had some success explaining the rotational velocity curves of elliptical and dwarf elliptical galaxies that it was designed to match, but fails on galaxy cluster gravitational lensing.
The three known flavours of neutrinos are the ''electron'', ''muon'', and ''tau''.
This makes them 'weakly interacting light particles' (WILPs), as opposed to WIMPs.
These experiments mostly use either cryogenic or noble liquid detector technologies.
Neutrinos oscillate among the flavours as they move.
A stream of independent observations in the 1980s indicated its presence, including gravitational lensing of background objects by galaxy clusters, the temperature distribution of hot gas in galaxies and clusters, and the pattern of anisotropies in the cosmic microwave background.
WIMP annihilation was seen as the most probable explanation.
This treatment is a simplification of a previous fluid-like model called the generalized Chaplygin gas model in which the whole of spacetime is a compressible gas.
Another proposal uses a gravitational backreaction from a theory that explains gravitational force between objects as an action, a reaction and then a back-reaction.
Atmospheric pressure causes air to expand and air regions can collapse to form clouds.
The 2.7 million K photon temperature gives a typical photon energy of 250 electron-volts, thereby setting a typical mass scale for "warm" dark matter: particles much more massive than this, such as GeV&nbsp;– TeV mass WIMPs, would become non-relativistic much earlier than 1 year after the Big Bang and thus have FSLs much smaller than a protogalaxy, making them "cold".
Possibilities range from large objects like MACHOs (such as black holes) or RAMBOs (such as clusters of brown dwarfs), to new particles such as WIMPs and axions.
Because a WIMP has negligible interaction with matter, it may be detected indirectly as (large amounts of) missing energy and momentum that escape the detectors, provided other (non-negligible) collision products are detected.
This reduces the predicted abundance of dwarf galaxies and may lead to lower density of dark matter in the central parts of large galaxies; some researchers consider this to be a better fit to observations.
Zwicky's estimates were off by more than an order of magnitude, mainly due to an obsolete value of the Hubble constant;
