The Dartmouth Men's Rugby Team, founded in 1951, has been ranked among the best collegiate teams in that sport, winning for example the Ivy Rugby Conference every year between 2008 and 2015.
In seeking to expand the school into a college, Wheelock relocated it to Hanover, in the Province of New Hampshire.
Since then, Dartmouth has graduated over 1,000 Native American students from over 200 different tribes, more than the other seven Ivy League universities combined.
By 2008, Dartmouth had graduated 238 classes of students and has over 60,000 living alumni in a variety of fields.
Image:Nelson Rockefeller.jpg|Nelson Rockefeller, businessman and politician
This design does not survive.
Dartmouth, a liberal arts institution, offers a four-year Bachelor of Arts and ABET-accredited Bachelor of Engineering degree to undergraduate students.
The Collis Center is the center of student life and programming, serving as what would be generically termed the "student union" or "campus center."
Unlike Tubestock, Fieldstock is funded and supported by the College.
In 2004, Booz Allen Hamilton selected Dartmouth College as a model of institutional endurance "whose record of endurance has had implications and benefits for all American organizations, both academic and commercial," citing ''Trustees of Dartmouth College v. Woodward'' and Dartmouth's successful self-reinvention in the late 19th century.
Occom, disappointed with Wheelock's departure from the school's original goal of Indian Christianization, went on to form his own community of New England Indians called Brothertown Indians in New York.
Image:Connie Britton 2013.jpg|Connie Britton, actress, singer and producer
Dartmouth's more than 200 student organizations and clubs cover a wide range of interests.
In 2007, roughly 70% of eligible students belonged to a Greek organization; since 1987, students have not been permitted to join Greek organizations until their sophomore year.
The college has 39 academic departments offering 56 major programs, while students are free to design special majors or engage in dual majors.
In 2015, $88.8 million in need-based scholarships were awarded to Dartmouth students.
In ''Forbes''' 2016 rankings of colleges, Dartmouth ranked 17th overall in the combined liberal arts college and national universities ranking and 2nd in "grateful graduates", with a financial grade of A+.
In 2011, over 96% of freshmen elected to participate.
The admitted students’ academic profile showed average SAT scores of 737 in critical reading, 741 in math, and 741 in writing.
Image:Jb modern frost 2 e.jpg|Robert Frost, poet
Webster concluded his peroration with the famous words: "It is, Sir, as I have said, a small college.
More than 51% identified as being students of color,  14.7% are among the first generation in their families to matriculate to college, 8.2% are international students, and 8.1% are legacies.
However, Wheelock primarily intended the college to educate White youth, and the few Native students that attended Dartmouth experienced much difficulty in an institution ostensibly dedicated to their education.
It was modified in the 1980s in an attempt to reduce the problems of lack of social and academic continuity.
The college ranks 7th in ''The Wall Street Journal'''s ranking of top feeder schools.
Dartmouth alumni in academia include Stuart Kauffman and Jeffrey Weeks, both recipients of MacArthur Fellowships (commonly called "genius grants").
In 1970, longtime professor of mathematics and computer science John George Kemeny became president of Dartmouth.
Norman Maclean, a former professor at the University of Chicago and author of ''A River Runs Through It and Other Stories'', graduated from Dartmouth in 1924.
The College has actively sought to reduce carbon emissions and energy usage on campus, earning it the grade of A- from the Sustainable Endowments Institute on its College Sustainability Report Card 2008.
Other requirements for graduation include the completion of ten "distributive requirements" in a variety of academic fields, proficiency in a foreign language, and completion of a writing class and first-year seminar in writing.
In addition to its campus in Hanover, Dartmouth owns  of Mount Moosilauke in the White Mountains and a  tract of land in northern New Hampshire known as the Second College Grant.
In the 2015-2016 cycle, 20,675 applied and 2,176 were accepted for a 10.5% admissions rate.
Behind the Alumni Gymnasium is Memorial Field, a 15,600-seat stadium overlooking Dartmouth's football field and track.
Also visible from Memorial Field is the  Nathaniel Leverone Fieldhouse, home to the indoor track.
The Dartmouth Plan (or simply "D-Plan") is an academic scheduling system that permits the customization of each student's academic year.
Wheelock founded Moor's Indian Charity School in 1755.
On October 28, 1926, the trustees approved a "Dartmouth College Shield" for general use.
An institution called Dartmouth University occupied the college buildings and began operating in Hanover in 1817, though the college continued teaching classes in rented rooms nearby.
President James Wright announced his retirement in February 2008 and was replaced by Harvard University professor and physician Jim Yong Kim on July 1, 2009.
Among its other highly ranked graduate offerings, the school is ranked 40th in computer science, 29th in medicine for primary care, and 37th in medicine for research.
According to a 2008 article in ''The Wall Street Journal'' based on data from payscale.com, Dartmouth graduates also earn higher median salaries at least 10&nbsp;years after graduation than alumni of any other American university surveyed.
He was Patriarch of the LDS Church.
College designer John Scotford made a stylized version of the shield during the 1960s, but it did not see the success of MacDonald's design.
Dartmouth alumni serving as CEOs or company presidents and executives include Charles Alfred Pillsbury, founder of the Pillsbury Company and patriarch of the Pillsbury family, Sandy Alderson (San Diego Padres), John Donahoe (eBay), Louis V. Gerstner, Jr. (IBM), Charles E. Haldeman (Putnam Investments), Donald J.
Its 34 varsity sports teams compete intercollegiately in the Ivy League conference of the NCAA Division I.
In addition to the traditional American team sports (football, basketball, baseball, and ice hockey), Dartmouth competes at the varsity level in many other sports including track and field, softball, squash, sailing, tennis, rowing, soccer, skiing, and lacrosse.
which offered students a path to a navy commission.
Its  campus is centered on a  "Green", a former field of pine trees cleared in 1771.
Although the board elected its members from the two sources of nominees in equal proportions between 1891 and 2007, the board decided in 2007 to add several new members, all charter trustees.
''The Dartmouth'' describes itself as "America's Oldest College Newspaper, Founded 1799."
In literature and journalism, Dartmouth has produced thirteen Pulitzer Prize winners: Thomas M. Burton, Richard Eberhart, Dan Fagin, Paul Gigot, Frank Gilroy, Jake Hooker,  Nigel Jaquiss, Joseph Rago, Martin J. Sherwin, David K. Shipler, David Shribman, and Justin Harvey Smith.
During the 1990s, the college saw a major academic overhaul under President James O. Freedman and a controversial (and ultimately unsuccessful) 1999 initiative to encourage the school's single-sex Greek houses to go coed.
In 2005, sponsored project awards to Dartmouth faculty research amounted to $169 million.
Professional football players include former Miami Dolphins quarterback Jay Fiedler, linebacker Reggie Williams, three-time Pro Bowler Nick Lowery, quarterback Jeff Kemp, and Tennessee Titans tight end Casey Cramer.
Dartmouth employs a total of 607 tenured or tenure-track faculty members, including the highest proportion of female tenured professors among the Ivy League universities.
The college graduated only 19 Native Americans during its first two hundred years.
Dartmouth's nine libraries are all part of the collective Dartmouth College Library, which comprises 2.48 million volumes and 6 million total resources, including videos, maps, sound recordings, and photographs.
Hall, Sr. (Hallmark Cards), Jeffrey R. Immelt (General Electric), Gail Koziara Boudreaux (United Health Care), Grant Tinker (NBC), and Brian Goldner (Hasbro).
The mid- and late first decade of the 21st century have also seen extensive campus construction, with the erection of two new housing complexes, full renovation of two dormitories, and a forthcoming dining hall, life sciences center, and visual arts center.
The college's founder Eleazar Wheelock designed a seal for his college bearing a striking resemblance to the seal of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, a missionary society founded in London in 1701, in order to maintain the illusion that his college was more for mission work than for higher education.
Dartmouth's other athletic facilities in Hanover include the Friends of Dartmouth Rowing Boathouse and the old rowing house storage facility (both located along the Connecticut River), the Hanover Country Club, Dartmouth's oldest remaining athletic facility (established in 1899), and the Corey Ford Rugby Clubhouse.
The first decade of the 21st century saw the commencement of the $1.3 billion Campaign for the Dartmouth Experience, the largest capital fundraising campaign in the college's history, which surpassed $1 billion in 2008.
Winter term is celebrated by Winter Carnival, a tradition started in 1911 by the Dartmouth Outing Club to promote winter sports.
On October 28, 1926, the trustees affirmed the charter's reservation of the seal for official corporate documents alone.
Dartmouth is the largest private landowner of the town of Hanover, and its total landholdings and facilities are worth an estimated $434 million.
The 1957 design continues to be used under trademark number 2305032.
It is often pointed out that the charter of Dartmouth College, granted to Eleazar Wheelock in 1769, proclaims that the institution was created "for the education and instruction of Youth of the Indian Tribes in this Land in reading, writing and all parts of Learning... as well as in all liberal Arts and Sciences; and also of English Youth and any others."
Adam Nelson won the silver medal in the shotput in the 2000 Sydney Olympics and the gold medal at the 2004 Athens Olympics to go along with his gold medal in the 2005 World Championships in Athletics in Helsinki.
Educators include founder and first president of Bates College, Oren Burbank Cheney (1839), the current chancellor of the University of California, San Diego, Marye Anne Fox (PhD.
Robinson Hall, next door to both Collis and Thayer, contains the offices of a number of student organizations including the Dartmouth Outing Club and ''The Dartmouth'' daily newspaper.
For international students, financial need is taken into consideration as one of many factors at the time of admission.
Campus meals are served by Dartmouth Dining Services, which operates 11 dining establishments around campus.
Most prominent among them is the Sphinx society, housed in a prominent Egyptian tomb-like building near the center of campus.
Baker-Berry Library is the main library at Dartmouth, comprising a merger of the Baker Memorial Library (opened 1928) and the Berry Library (completed 2002).
Dartmouth was founded by Eleazar Wheelock, a Congregational minister from Columbia, Connecticut, who had previously sought to establish a school to train Native Americans as Christian missionaries.
Most of Dartmouth's buildings are designed in the Georgian American colonial style, a theme which has been preserved in recent architectural additions.
Notable student groups include the nation's largest and oldest collegiate outdoors club, the Dartmouth Outing Club, which includes the nationally recognized Big Green Bus; the campus's oldest a cappella group, The Dartmouth Aires; the controversial conservative newspaper ''The Dartmouth Review''; and ''The Dartmouth'', arguably the nation's oldest university newspaper.
Over 164 Dartmouth graduates have served in the United States Senate and United States House of Representatives, such as Massachusetts statesman Daniel Webster.
The D-Plan was instituted in the early 1970s at the same time that Dartmouth began accepting female undergraduates.
Attached to Alumni Gymnasium is the Berry Sports Center, which contains basketball and volleyball courts (Leede Arena), as well as the Kresge Fitness Center.
The summer term was formerly marked by Tubestock, an unofficial tradition in which the students used wooden rafts and inner tubes to float on the Connecticut River.
It was initially devised as a plan to increase the enrollment without enlarging campus accommodations, and has been described as "a way to put 4,000 students into 3,000 beds."
Image:SenatorGillibrandpic.jpg|Kirsten Gillibrand, American politician
In the early first decade of the 21st century, campus-wide debate focused on a Board of Trustees recommendation that Greek organizations become "substantially coeducational"; this attempt to change the Greek system eventually failed.
These applicants are admitted to the college without regard to their financial circumstances.
The building was designed by the famed architect Wallace Harrison, who would later design the similar-looking façade of Manhattan's Metropolitan Opera House at Lincoln Center.
Although new dormitories have been built since, the number of students has also increased and the D-Plan remains in effect.
Beginning in the fall term of 2016, Dartmouth will place all undergraduate students in one of six House communities, similar to residential colleges.
Through the Graduate Studies program, Dartmouth grants doctorate and master's degrees in 19 Arts & Sciences graduate programs.
Athletics and participation in the Greek system are the most popular campus activities.
Dartmouth has produced many prominent alumni, including 62 Rhodes Scholars, 13 Pulitzer Prize winners, over 164 members of the U.S. Senate and the U.S. House of Representatives, 22 U.S. Governors, 10 billionaire graduates, 8 U.S.
Dartmouth College is situated in the rural town of Hanover, New Hampshire, located in the Upper Valley along the Connecticut River in New England.
The 2006 Carnegie Foundation classification listed Dartmouth as the only "majority-undergraduate", "arts-and-sciences focused", "research university" in the country that also had "some graduate coexistence" and "very high research activity."
Dartmouth has also graduated three Nobel Prize winners: Owen Chamberlain (Physics, 1959), K. Barry Sharpless (Chemistry, 2001), and George Davis Snell (Physiology or Medicine, 1980).
Nine of Dartmouth's 17 presidents were alumni of the College.
The university functions on a quarter system, operating year-round on four ten-week academic terms.
Since the election of a number of petition-nominated trustees to the Board of Trustees starting in 2004, the role of alumni in Dartmouth governance has been the subject of ongoing conflict.
On June 9, 1944, the trustees approved another coat of arms based on the shield part of the seal, this one by Canadian artist and designer Thoreau MacDonald.
Under President William Jewett Tucker (1893–1909), Dartmouth underwent a major revitalization of facilities, faculty, and the student body, following large endowments such as the $10,000 given by Dartmouth alumnus and law professor John Ordronaux.
Faculty members have been at the forefront of such major academic developments as the Dartmouth Conferences, the Dartmouth Time Sharing System, Dartmouth BASIC, and Dartmouth ALGOL 30.
During all terms, students are permitted to choose between studying on-campus, studying at an off-campus program, or taking a term off for vacation, outside internships, or research projects.
Hyrum Smith, brother of Mormon Prophet Joseph Smith, attended the college in his teens.
Theodor Geisel, better known as children's author Dr. Seuss, was a member of the class of 1925.
in Chemistry, 1974), founding president of Vassar College Milo Parker Jewett, founder and first president of Kenyon College Philander Chase, first professor of Wabash College Caleb Mills, and former president of Union College Charles Augustus Aiken.
Named for William Legge, 2nd Earl of Dartmouth—an important supporter of Eleazar Wheelock's earlier efforts but who, in fact, opposed creation of the College and never donated to it—Dartmouth is the nation's ninth oldest college and the last institution of higher learning established under Colonial rule.
Image:Shonda Rhimes 2008.jpg|Shonda Rhimes, television producer and writer
The average composite ACT score was around 33.
More than 3,000 students elect to live in housing provided by College.
Partially because of Dartmouth's rural, isolated location, the Greek system dating from the 1840s is one of the most popular social outlets for students.
All undergraduates are required to be in residence for the fall, winter, and spring terms of their freshman and senior years, as well as the summer term of their sophomore year.
For its graduate programs, ''U.S.
The Hop is connected to the Hood Museum of Art, arguably North America's oldest museum in continuous operation, and the Loew Auditorium, where films are screened.
That design was used widely and, like Dwiggins' seal, had its date changed from "1770" to "1769" around 1958.
In 1970, the college established Native American academic and social programs as part of a "new dedication to increasing Native American enrollment."
Some alumni and students, as well as the conservative student newspaper, ''The Dartmouth Review'', have sought to return the Indian symbol to prominence, but never succeeded in doing so.
Daniel Webster, an alumnus of the class of 1801, presented the College's case to the Supreme Court, which found the amendment of Dartmouth's charter to be an illegal impairment of a contract by the state and reversed New Hampshire's takeover of the college.
The nearby Thompson Arena, designed by Italian engineer Pier Luigi Nervi and constructed in 1975, houses Dartmouth's ice rink.
The dormitories varied in design from modern to traditional Georgian styles, and room arrangements range from singles to quads and apartment suites.
Dartmouth's Winter Carnival tradition was the subject of the 1939 film ''Winter Carnival'' starring Ann Sheridan and written by Budd Schulberg '36 and F. Scott Fitzgerald.
Opened in 1962, the Hop houses the College's drama, music, film, and studio arts departments, as well as a woodshop, pottery studio, and jewelry studio which are open for use by students and faculty.
Dartmouth practices need-blind admissions for all applicants who are U.S. citizens, permanent residents, and undocumented students in the U.S.
That charter created a college "for the education and instruction of Youth of the Indian Tribes in this Land in reading, writing & all parts of Learning which shall appear necessary and expedient for civilizing & christianizing Children of Pagans as well as in all liberal Arts and Sciences and also of English Youth and any others."
A number of Dartmouth alumni have found success in professional sports.
Furthermore, Dartmouth is home to three professional schools: the Geisel School of Medicine (established 1797), Thayer School of Engineering (1867)&nbsp;— which also serves as the undergraduate department of engineering sciences&nbsp;— and Tuck School of Business (1900).
Today, two of Dartmouth's athletic facilities are located in the southeast corner of campus.
The institution was officially associated with Dartmouth and was directed by Dartmouth's president.
The Hop is also the location of all student mailboxes ("Hinman boxes") and the Courtyard Café dining facility.
As is mandatory for the members of the Ivy League, Dartmouth College does not offer athletic scholarships.
Cherie Piper, Gillian Apps, and Katie Weatherston were among Canada's ice hockey gold medalists in 2006.
At Dartmouth, free tuition is provided for students from families with total incomes of $100,000 or less and possessing typical assets.
Dartmouth also has a number of secret societies, which are student- and alumni-led organizations often focused on preserving the history of the college and initiating service projects.
Dartmouth's 269-acre campus is in the rural Upper Valley region of New Hampshire.
News'' ranks Dartmouth's MBA program 9th overall and 6th for management.
The College Publications Committee commissioned noted typographer W. A. Dwiggins to create a line drawing version of the seal in 1940 that saw widespread use.
The head of the trust was a Methodist named William Legge, 2nd Earl of Dartmouth.
Following a liberal arts curriculum, the university provides undergraduate instruction in 40 academic departments and interdisciplinary programs including 57 majors in the humanities, social sciences, natural sciences, and engineering, and enables students to design specialized majors and minors or engage in dual degree programs.
In addition to its 19 graduate programs in the arts and sciences, Dartmouth is home to three separate graduate schools.
Other notable alumni include numerous MacArthur Genius fellows, Fulbright and Marshall scholarship recipients, CEOs and founders of Fortune 500 companies, high-ranking U.S. diplomats, scholars in academia, literary and media figures, professional athletes, and Olympic medalists.
Four of them are located at the center of campus in the Class of 1953 Commons, formerly Thayer Dining Hall.
The Dartmouth–Hitchcock Medical Center, located several miles to the south in Lebanon, New Hampshire, contains a 396-bed teaching hospital for the Medical School.
Dartmouth serves as the host institution of the University Press of New England, a university press founded in 1970 that is supported by a consortium of schools that also includes Brandeis University, the University of New Hampshire, Northeastern University, Tufts University and the University of Vermont.
This new celebration includes a barbecue, live music, and the revival of the 1970s and 1980s tradition of racing homemade chariots around the Green.
Wheelock's ostensible inspiration for such an establishment resulted from his relationship with Mohegan Indian Samson Occom.
The Thayer School of Engineering and the Tuck School of Business are both located at the end of Tuck Mall, west of the center of campus and near the Connecticut River.
This unofficial mascot and team name was used until the early 1970s, when its use came under criticism.
The institution also ranked 5th in High School Counselor Rankings in 2017.
In 1988, Dartmouth's alma mater song's lyrics changed from "Men of Dartmouth" to "Dear old Dartmouth".
In May 2010 Dartmouth joined the Matariki Network of Universities (MNU) together with Durham University (UK), Queen's University (Canada), University of Otago (New Zealand), University of Tübingen (Germany), University of Western Australia (Australia) and Uppsala University (Sweden).
Dartmouth's athletic teams compete in the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) Division I eight-member Ivy League conference; some teams also participate in the Eastern College Athletic Conference (ECAC).
Eugene Norman Veasey (class of 1954) served as the Chief Justice of Delaware.
The nickname "The Big Green," originating in the 1860s, is based on students' adoption of a shade of forest green ("Dartmouth Green") as the school's official color in 1866.
News'' when in 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, and 2013 it ranked Dartmouth first in undergraduate teaching at national universities.
Dartmouth functions on a quarter system, operating year-round on four ten-week academic terms.
The Government Department, whose prominent professors include Stephen Brooks, Richard Ned Lebow, and William Wohlforth, was ranked the top solely undergraduate political science program in the world by researchers at the London School of Economics in 2003.
Despite student enthusiasm for Keggy, the mascot has received approval from only the student government.
The college's creative and performing arts facility is the Hopkins Center for the Arts ("the Hop").
At about the same time, the college adopted its "Dartmouth Plan" of academic scheduling, permitting the student body to increase in size within the existing facilities.
The move from Connecticut followed a lengthy and sometimes frustrating effort to find resources and secure a charter.
Other notable film and television figures include Sarah Wayne Callies (''Prison Break''), Emmy Award winner Michael Moriarty, Andrew Shue of ''Melrose Place'', Aisha Tyler of ''Friends'' and ''24'', Connie Britton of ''Spin City'', ''The West Wing'' and ''Friday Night Lights'', and Mindy Kaling of ''The Office'' and ''The Mindy Project''.
The fraternities have an extensive history of hazing and alcohol abuse, leading to police raids and accusations of sexual harassment.
The school is also home to a variety of longstanding traditions and celebrations and has a loyal alumni network; Dartmouth ranked #2 in "The Princeton Review" in 2006 for Best Alumni Network.
The Economics Department, whose prominent professors include David Blanchflower and Andrew Samwick, also holds the distinction as the top-ranked bachelor's-only economics program in the world.
Approximately 20% of students participate in a varsity sport, and nearly 80% participate in some form of club, varsity, intramural, or other athletics.
Kemeny oversaw several major changes at the college.
A notable feature of the Dartmouth campus is its many trees which (despite Dutch elm disease) include some 200 American elms.
Seuss, writer and illustrator
Dartmouth's strength in undergraduate education is highlighted by ''U.S.
It was ranked 7th in this area in the 2017 rankings.
Dartmouth's close association and involvement in the development of the downhill skiing industry is featured in the 2010 book ''Passion for Skiing'' as well as the 2013 documentary based on the book ''Passion for Snow''.
That version continues to be used under trademark registration number 3112676 and others.
Dartmouth comprises five constituent schools: the original undergraduate college, the Geisel School of Medicine, the Thayer School of Engineering, the Tuck School of Business, and the School of Graduate and Advanced Studies.
C. Everett Koop was the Surgeon General of the United States under President Ronald Reagan.
The Sphinx has been the subject of numerous rumors as to its facilities, practices, and membership.
'', and ''Despicable Me'', and the title character of ''Mister Rogers' Neighborhood'', Fred Rogers.
The Thayer School presently comprises two buildings; Tuck has seven academic and administrative buildings, as well as several common areas.
The Latin motto is literally translated as "A calling voice in the wilderness", but is more often rendered as "A voice crying out in the wilderness".
Arthur Shaw, Earl Thomson, Edwin Myers, Marc Wright, Adam Nelson, Gerry Ashworth, and Vilhjálmur Einarsson have all won medals in track and field events.
The Royal Governor of New Hampshire, John Wentworth, provided the land upon which Dartmouth would be built and on December 13, 1769, issued the charter in the name of King George III establishing the College.
Dartmouth College was among the first institutions of higher education to desegregate fraternity houses in the 1950s, and was involved in the movement to create coeducational Greek houses in the 1970s.
Dartmouth fraternities have an extensive history of hazing and alcohol abuse, leading to police raids and accusations of sexual harassment.
In order to graduate, a student must complete 35 total courses, eight to ten of which are typically part of a chosen major program.
In the spring, Green Key is a weekend mostly devoted to campus parties and celebration.
In a CNN interview, John Landis said the movie was "based on Chris Miller's real fraternity at Dartmouth", Alpha Delta Phi.
The 46th and current Governor of Pennsylvania Tom Wolf is also a Dartmouth alumnus.
Dartmouth's motto, chosen by Eleazar Wheelock, is ''Vox clamantis in deserto''.
Its global ranking places is at 242nd.
Nelson A. Rockefeller, 41st Vice President of the United States and 49th Governor of New York, graduated ''cum laude'' from Dartmouth with a degree in economics in 1930.
Tucker is often credited for having "refounded Dartmouth" and bringing it into national prestige.
The Charity School proved somewhat successful, but additional funding was necessary to continue school's operations, and Wheelock sought the help of friends to raise money.
The college also offers 26 club and intramural sports such as fencing, rugby, water polo, figure skating, boxing, volleyball, ultimate frisbee, and cricket, leading to a 75% participation rate in athletics among the undergraduate student body.
Dartmouth College has appeared in or been referenced by a number of popular media.
Other authors and media personalities include ABC Senior White House correspondent Jake Tapper, novelist and founding editor of ''The Believer'' Heidi Julavits, "Dean of rock critics" Robert Christgau, National Book Award winner Louise Erdrich, novelist/screenwriter Budd Schulberg, political analyst Dinesh D'Souza, radio talk show host Laura Ingraham, commentator Mort Kondracke, and journalist James Panero.
In the area of religion and theology, Dartmouth alumni include priests and ministers Ebenezer Porter, Jonathan Clarkson Gibbs, Caleb Sprague Henry, Arthur Whipple Jenks, Solomon Spalding, and Joseph Tracy; and rabbis Marshall Meyer, Arnold Resnicoff, and David E. Stern.
The trustees officially accepted the seal on August 25, 1773, describing it as:
Dwiggins' design was modified during 1957 to change the date from "1770" to "1769", to accord with the date of the college charter.
Dartmouth is well known for its fierce school spirit and many traditions.
The figure skating team won the national championship five straight times from 2004 through 2008.
The funds for the Charity School for Native Americans that preceded Dartmouth College were raised primarily by the efforts of a Native American named Samson Occom, and at least some of those funds were used to help found the college.
Dartmouth has also produced a number of Olympic competitors.
Most start by giving to the Senior Class Gift.
