The double-20 is often referred to as double-top, reflecting the 20's position on the dartboard.
Once everyone has a number, each player takes it in turn to get their number five times with their three darts (doubles count twice, and triples three times).
However, it wasn't until 2005 that viewers were able to see every dart thrown live at the World Championship.
Some of these tournaments can also be watched on the internet for free using a live stream, depending on contractual restrictions.
Although playing straight down from 501 is standard in darts, sometimes a double must be hit to begin scoring, known as "doubling in", with all darts thrown before hitting a double not being counted.
A killer can aim for anyone's numbers, even another killer's.
This has only 12 equal segments numbered 20, 5, 15, 10, 20, 5, 15, 10, 20, 5, 15, 10 with the doubles and triples being a quarter of an inch wide.
a triple-20 is worth 60 points).
Mathematically, removing the rotational symmetry by placing the "20" at the top, there are 19!, or 121,645,100,408,832,000 possible dartboards.
The American Darts Organization began operation January 1, 1976 with 30 charter member clubs and a membership of 7,500 players.
A throw that reduces a player's score below zero, to exactly one, or to zero but not ending with a double is known as "going bust", with the player's score being reset to the value prior to starting the turn, and the remainder of the turn being forfeited.
Their model of dartboard was not a great success until someone came up with the idea of using the century plant to make a dartboard.
The steel points come in 2 common lengths, 32mm and 41mm and are sometimes knurled or coated to improve grip.
The winner is 'the last man standing'.
The BDO held on to the contract with the BBC to continue with the BDO World Championship and this was the only tournament shown on free to air television in the UK between 1994 and 2001 apart from the showdown between PDC Champion Phil Taylor and BDO Champion Raymond van Barneveld in 1999 which was shown on ITV, BBC finally began to expand their darts coverage in 2001 when they added the World Masters to their portfolio.
For example; Thrower A shoots for the bullseye and hits the 17.
A dart that hits the board side on or at an angle but does not fall off because it is held in place by two other darts, for example, will score either equal to where its point touches or not at all.
The dartboard featured on the "Indoor League" television show of the 1970s did not feature a triple section, and according to host Fred Trueman during the first episode, this is the traditional Yorkshire board.
At σ = 16.4&nbsp;mm the best place to aim jumps to the T19.
Dart golf is a darts game based on the sport of golf and is regulated by the World Dolf Federation (WDFF).
In a team competition the winner is the first team to reach the last number or bullseye after the round is complete or each member of each team has thrown that specific round.
The board is made of plastic facings with small holes.
They also organise county darts for their 66 county members in the UK including individual and team events.
In the professional game, betting is prominent with many of the big bookmaking companies sponsoring events (particularly within the PDC).
ITV returned to darts coverage in November 2007, showing the inaugural Grand Slam of Darts — its first major darts tournament coverage in almost twenty years.
Both organisations hold other professional tournaments.
The primary purpose of the flight is to produce drag and thus prevent the rear of the dart overtaking the point.
Their best option is to deliberately bust it to get back onto double 10.
Two Dutch independently organised major tournaments, the International Darts League and the World Darts Trophy introduced a mix of BDO and PDC players in 2006 and 2007.
Circular wires within the outer wire subdivide each section into single, double and triple areas.
The bundles were then compressed into a disk and bound with a metal ring.
There are a number of regional variations on the standard rules and scoring systems.
Dartball is a darts game based on the sport of baseball.
It was an instant success, as the darts did little or no damage to the board—they just parted the fibres when they entered the board; this type of board was more durable and required little maintenance.
However, many sponsors were lost and British TV coverage became much reduced by the early nineties.
That is felt by some to be a purer version of the game, as under the normal rules, as explained above, a player left with a difficult finish, e.g.
Modern darts have four parts: The points, the barrels, the shafts and the flights.
Shafts are generally made from plastics, nylon polymers, or metals such as aluminium and titanium; and can be rigid or flexible.
It had a $1 million prize to showcase professional darts in the United States.
This is a regional variant still played in some parts of the East End of London.
In Europe, Eurosport broadcast the Lakeside World Championships, having signed a three-year contract in 2006.
The main supply for the illumination should be protected against accidental piercing, or placed away from the board.
The American Darts Organization promulgates rules and standards for amateur league darts and sanctions tournaments in the United States.
Typically a talking electronic dartboard is used to speak the numbers hit, keep score and announce who is throwing next.
Shanghai can also be played for 20 rounds to use all numbers.
A darts match is played over a fixed number of games, known as legs.
A longer shaft will however make the dart less responsive and increase the chance of "wobbling".
For competitive purposes a dart cannot weigh more than 50g including the shaft and flight and cannot exceed a total length of 300mm.
It is played on both special golf dartboards and traditional dartboards.
As the wood dried, cracks would develop, creating "sections".
Only hits on the wedge for that round are counted.
The winner is the person who has the most points at the end of seven rounds (1–7); or you can score a Shanghai and win instantly.
Longer shafts provide greater stability and allow a reduction in flight size which in turn can lead to closer grouping; but they also shift the weight towards the rear causing the dart to tilt backwards during flight,requiring a harder, faster throw.
Various games can be played (and still are played informally) using the standard dartboard.
Although this applies to most of the board, the left-hand side (near the 14 section) is preferred by beginners, for its concentration of larger numbers.
A Fairer Start for Shanghai: To prevent players from becoming too practised at shooting for the 1, the number sequence can begin at the number of the dart that lost the throw for the bullseye to determine the starting thrower.
A regulation board is  inches (451&nbsp;mm) in diameter and is divided into 20 radial sections.
One make of this board was the Harrows Quadro 240.
The numbers indicating the various scoring sections of the board are also normally made of wire, especially on tournament-quality boards.
A game of darts is generally contested between two players, who take turns.
The holes slant out, allowing the plastic-tipped darts to stick inside.
A match may be divided into sets, with each set being contested as over a fixed number of legs.
* Hitting the thin outer portions of these sections, again coloured red or green, scores double the points value of that section.
In Dutch it's called "Van 20 naar 1".
Today, the ADO has a membership that averages 250 clubs on a yearly basis representing roughly 50,000 members.
The PDC tournaments often have higher prize money and feature the leading player in the history of the game, 16-time World Champion Phil Taylor.
The BDO organise the World Masters and many Open tournaments.
* Hitting the thin inner portions of these sections, roughly halfway between the outer wire and the central circle coloured red or green, scores triple the points value of that section.
However, a great many other configurations have been used throughout the years and in different geographical locations.
The barrels come in a variety of weights and are usually constructed from brass, silver-nickel, or a tungsten alloy.
Metal barrels were patented in 1906 but wood continued to be used into the 1950s.
Darts has continued to grow again on television and there now several major tournaments broadcast in the UK, Europe and the rest of the world.
The WDF rankings are based on the preceding 12 months performances, the BDO resets all ranking points to zero after the seedings for their world championship have been determined, and the PDC Order of Merit is based on prize money earned over a two-year period.
Some manufactures have sought to solve this by making a flight long and thin but this in turn creates other problems such as changing the dart's centre of gravity.
The tournament was replaced with a US Open event in 2007 which was screened in the UK on digital television channel Challenge TV, with Nuts TV showing the 2008 tournament.
Where σ  may refer to the standard deviation for a specific population: List of darts players.
The most common nine dart finish consists of two 180 maximums followed by a 141 checkout (T20-T19-D12), but there are many other possible ways of achieving the feat.
Silver-nickel darts offer a compromise between density and cost.
In 1978, the World Championships started and were covered by the BBC, the BBC innovated with the split screen showing the throwing of the dart and where it hit the board.
1972 was a big year for darts when ITV started broadcasting the News of the World Championship.
Eurosport covered the BDO Finland Open, the BDO British Internationals, the BDO England Open and the BDO British Open in 2006–2007 but dropped coverage of these tournaments however they then returned to Darts in 2013 covering the Winmau World Masters, they have since expanded their coverage to cover the new BDO major the World Trophy from Blackpool and existing tournaments in the BDO such as the 6 Nations, England Open, Scottish Open and Northern Ireland Open.
The BDO and PDC both organise a World Professional Championship.
A "quad" ring appeared briefly between the triple ring and the bull in the 1990s, leading to a potential ''240'' maximum (three quad-20s), a ''210'' maximum checkout (Q20-Q20-Bull) and ''seven'' dart finishes from a 501 start (five quad-20s, triple-17, bullseye), but was swiftly dropped from professional tournament play after only two years.
RTL 5 broadcast the Dutch Grand Masters in 2005.
A reverse form of unscored Cricket, beginning with the bullseye.
Both organisations allocated rankings to the tournaments, but these two events are now discontinued.
*Any dart that does not remain in the board until it is collected by the player (for example, a dart that hits a wire and bounces out of the board or drops out with the impact of a later throw) also scores nothing; exception should be noted if play is on any electronic board: darts falling out are counted.
Quality dartboards are made of sisal fibres; less expensive boards are sometimes made of cork or coiled paper.
This keeps the weight as far forward as possible but like the ton, gives it a larger diameter than the cylinder.
The goal of 20 to 1 is to be the first player or team to throw all numbers in consecutive order from 20 to 1 and win the game with outer or inner bullseye.
Soon, regional standards emerged and many woodworkers supplemented bar tabs by fabricating dart boards for the local pubs.
More recently, in keeping with darts' strong association with pubs and drinking, matches between friends or pub teams are often played for pints of beer.
As well as being a professional competitive sport, darts is a traditional pub game, commonly played in the British Isles, across the Commonwealth, the Netherlands, Germany, Belgium, France, the Scandinavian countries, the United States, and elsewhere.
Torpedo shaped barrels are widest at the point end and taper towards the rear.
"Round the clock" is a variation that involves hitting the numbers in sequence, known as "around the world" in Australia and New Zealand.
These dartboards have electronic scoring computers that are preprogrammed with a wide variety of game types.
Though various boards and rules have been used in the past, the term "darts" usually now refers to a standardised game involving a specific board design and set of rules.
The BDO originally organised a number of the more prestigious British tournaments with a few notable exceptions such as the News of the World Championship and the national events run under the auspices of the National Darts Association of Great Britain.
American Darts is a regional USA variant of the game (most U.S. dart players play the traditional games described above).
The game can be tailored to the skill level of the players by selecting easy or difficult targets.
A variant of traditional darts played using a blindfold.
The dartboard may have its origins in the cross-section of a tree.
The PDC tournaments have a considerable following, although the PDC World Championship attracts lower TV viewing figures than that of the BDO due to the BDO World Championship being free to view on the BBC.
The shafts are manufactured in various lengths and some are designed to be cut to length.
The first purpose made darts were manufactured in one piece from wood; wrapped with a strip of lead for weight and fitted with flights made from split turkey feathers.
It is played on a diamond shaped board and has similar scoring to baseball.
The best dartboards have the thinnest wire, so that the darts have less chance of hitting a wire and bouncing out.
The BDO World Championship has been running since 1978; the PDC World Championship started in 1994.
These lists are commonly used to determine seedings for various tournaments.
'''Distance''' - The oche should be 7&nbsp;ft 9¼in (2.37&nbsp;m) from the face of the board.
This game is played with at least two players.
The WDF also organise the Europe Cup.The PDC has their own world cup competition, the PDC World Cup of Darts.
When two teams play, the starting score is sometimes increased to '701' or even '1001'; the rules remain the same.
The skilled player should aim for the centre of the T20 and as the player's skill reduces their aim moves slightly up and to the left of the T20.
The BBC also cut back on their coverage after 1988 to such an extent that only one major event was still broadcast on either channel by 1989, the World Championship and this contributed in the split in darts.
The highest score possible with three darts is 180, commonly known as a "ton 80" (100 points is called a ton), obtained when all three darts land in the triple 20.
Lawn darts (also called Jarts or yard darts) is a lawn game based on darts.
Each turn consists of throwing three darts.
The board has fewer, larger segments, all numbered either 5, 10, 15 or 20.
Recently, some companies have produced electronic dartboards.
Initially each player throws a dart at the board with their non-dominant hand to obtain their 'number'.
Ton shaped barrels are thin at either end but bulge in the middle.
Under the "northern bust" they would remain on 5.
"'''Jumpers'''" is a somewhat swifter and more exciting variation of Round the Clock believed to have originated amongst the British ex-pat community in Asia.
Before the First World War, pubs in the United Kingdom had dartboards made from solid blocks of wood, usually elm.
However, due to the BBC picking up the inaugural Champions League of Darts set to begin on 24 September 2016, they will no longer be broadcasting the BDO World Championship.
This type of dart continued to be used into the 1970s.
In the Netherlands, SBS6 has broadcast the Lakeside (since 1998) and the Dutch Open.
The term "bullseye" can mean either the whole central part of the board or just the inner red/black section.
The PDC's World Grand Prix uses this format.
An old name for a dartboard is "butt"; the word comes from the French word ''but'', meaning "target".
These darts were mainly imported from France and became known as French darts.
The minimum number of thrown darts required to complete a leg of 501 is nine.
Shanghai is a darts game of accuracy.
Gamlin's layout was devised to penalise inaccuracy.
20 to 1 is a Dutch variation of the around the world darts game that differs a lot because of all kinds of extra rules.
The outer bullseye counts as 25 points, and the inner as 50.
The standard dartboard is divided into 20 numbered sections, scoring from 1 to 20 points, by wires running from the small central circle to the outer circular wire.
It also has an effect on stability by reducing wobble.
20 to 1 is typically played between 2, 3, 4 or 5 players, or 2 teams of max 5 players.
The Indoor League was shown across Britain on the ITV network from 1973 onwards.
Thrower B shoots for the bullseye and hits it.
Illumination should be arranged to brightly illuminate the dartboard and minimize shadows of thrown darts.
Others are designed to retract slightly on impact to lessen the chance of bouncing out.
Cricket is a widely played darts game involving a race to control and score on numbers between 20 and 15 and the bullseye, by hitting each of these targets for three marks to ''open'' or ''own'' it for scoring.
5 and one dart remaining will often deliberately "bust" it in order to get back to the easier finish that they had at the start of their go.
Garside was discharged as the magistrates found darts, indeed, to be a game of skill.
When a dart strikes the board, the section makes contact with a metal plate, telling the computer where the player has thrown.
This changed when a company called Nodor, whose primary business was making modelling clay (which has no odour, hence the name Nodor), started producing clay dartboards in 1923.
You cannot get more than 5 points.
In the televised game, the referee frequently announces a score of 180 in exuberant style.
In 1992 a breakaway organisation was formed, initially known as the World Darts Council (WDC) but shortly after known as the Professional Darts Corporation (PDC).
It is generally said that the standard numbering plan with a 20 on top was created in 1896 by Lancashire carpenter Brian Gamlin, though this is disputed.
They continued covering this until 2010 when Sky Sports took over the rights, ITV also showed the European Championship in 2008 and Players Championship since its inception.
Barrels come in 3 basic shapes: Cylindrical, torpedo, or ton.
The highly successful BDO player Raymond van Barneveld switched to the PDC and won the PDC World Championship at his first attempt in 2007.
The remainder is usually nickel, iron, or copper.
Standard scoring is used, and doubles and triples are counted.
Three 167s (T20-T19-Bull) is considered a pure or perfect nine dart finish by some players.
This is played in exactly the same way as a regular game of darts, but using recurve or compound bows to shoot full length arrows from a distance to hit a 60&nbsp;cm or 90&nbsp;cm paper target face that looks like a dartboard.
Its tournaments were often shown on the BBC in the UK.
Dutch station, Sport One, DSF in Germany and several other TV stations across the globe also broadcast the PDC events.
Their slenderness makes them better for grouping but because they are long, the centre of gravity is further back.
The term "bull's ring" usually means just the green outer ring.
Small bundles of sisal fibres of the same length were bundled together.
They had to be soaked overnight to heal the holes made by the darts, and it was a messy business for the publican, although darts was a popular game.
If a person gets to zero they are out.
This game uses the standard 20 number dartboard with the triple and double rings.
There have been several mathematical papers published that consider the "optimal" dartboard.
Often played by people with visual disabilities.
This means they can aim for other peoples numbers, taking a point off for each time they hit (doubles x2, triples x3).
The WDF World Cup for national teams and a singles tournament has been played biennially since 1977.
The three most common shapes in order of size are the standard, the kite, and the smaller pear shape.
Hitting doubles and triples is paramount to victory.
In a one on one battle the winner is the person to reach the last number or bullseye.
The first metal barrels were made from brass which was relatively cheap and easy to work.
They are held annually over the Christmas/New Year period, with the PDC championship finishing slightly earlier than the BDO tournament.
This style of dart board is most often found in eastern Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Delaware, Maryland, and parts of New York state.
*Hitting outside the outer wire scores nothing.
Sky's coverage continued to increase throughout the 1990s, with more new events added.
Unfortunately the programme was not a ratings success and was taken from its peak time broadcast slot on ESPN after just a few weeks.
Scoring is similar to golf.
Boards of lesser quality often have the numbers printed directly on the board.
The game play and objective are similar to both horseshoes and darts.
Setanta Sports also televised some BDO events in 2008–2009 and the inaugural League of Legends.
The standard version is played in 7 rounds.
Cylindrical barrels are the same diameter along their entire length and so tend to be long and thin.
In some variants (called a "northern bust" in London) only the dart that causes the bust is not counted.
To score a Shanghai you have to hit a triple, a double and single (in any order) of the number that is in play.
The wire ring on which the numbers are welded can be turned to facilitate even wear of the board.
Both the WDF, BDO and PDC each maintain their own rankings lists.
In particular, the Yorkshire and Manchester Log End boards differ from the standard board in that they have no treble, only double and bullseye, the Manchester board being of a smaller diameter, with a playing area of only 25&nbsp;cm across with double and bull areas measuring just 4&nbsp;mm.
Sky Bet (2012 - NOW McCOYS) (Premier League), Bodog (World Grand Prix), Stan James (World Matchplay), Blue Square (2012 - NOW SPEEDY SERVICES - Equipment Hire) (UK Open) and Ladbrokes (World Championship) are all title sponsors of major PDC events.
As the player's skill decreases further, the best place to aim curls into the centre of the board, stopping a bit lower than and to the left of the bullseye at σ = 100.
"Around the world" is a game whereby each player must hit consecutive numbers on the board in order to proceed to the next round.
They also hold PDC Pro Tour events and smaller category events around the UK.
'''Darts''' is a form of throwing game in which small missiles are thrown at a circular dartboard fixed to a wall.
Despite widespread belief that some dartboards are constructed using pig bristles, camel hair, or horse hair, there is no evidence that boards have ever been produced commercially from these materials.
In round one players throw their darts aiming for the 1 section, round 2, the 2 section and so on until round 7.
Modern flights are generally made from plastic, nylon, or foil and are available in a range of shapes and sizes.
