* Real-time databases process transactions fast enough for the result to come back and be acted on right away.
For that reason, many NoSQL databases are using what is called eventual consistency to provide both availability and partition tolerance guarantees with a reduced level of data consistency.
For example, sales data might be aggregated to weekly totals and converted from internal product codes to use UPCs so that they can be compared with ACNielsen data.
It deals with storage layout of the data, using storage structures such as indexes to enhance performance.
PostgreSQL is often used for global mission critical applications (the .org and .info domain name registries use it as their primary data store, as do many large companies and financial institutions).
", or "if a plane flies from New York to Dubai via Frankfurt, is that one flight or two (or maybe even three)?".
* An unstructured data database is intended to store in a manageable and protected way diverse objects that do not fit naturally and conveniently in common databases.
Both the database and most of its DBMS reside remotely, "in the cloud", while its applications are both developed by programmers and later maintained and utilized by (application's) end-users through a web browser and Open APIs.
A third way is by some technical aspect, such as the database structure or interface type.
It ran on IBM mainframe computers using the Michigan Terminal System.
IMS was a development of software written for the Apollo program on the System/360.
The co founder of the company claimed that the system was big enough to run the 8 largest SAP customers.
Thus most database systems nowadays are software systems running on general-purpose hardware, using general-purpose computer data storage.
Various low-level database storage structures are used by the storage engine to serialize the data model so it can be written to the medium of choice.
One way to classify databases involves the type of their contents, for example: bibliographic, document-text, statistical, or multimedia objects.
Typically, an appropriate general-purpose DBMS can be selected to be utilized for this purpose.
A database transaction is a unit of work, typically encapsulating a number of operations over a database (e.g., reading a database object, writing, acquiring lock, etc.
Typically, a DBMS vendor provides tools to help importing databases from other popular DBMSs.
Application programmers may use a wire protocol directly, or more likely through an application programming interface.
XML database management systems include commercial software MarkLogic and Oracle Berkeley DB XML, and a free use software Clusterpoint Distributed XML/JSON Database.
A common example is storing ''materialized views'', which consist of frequently needed ''external views'' or query results.
The CODASYL approach relied on the "manual" navigation of a linked data set which was formed into a large network.
Occasionally it stores data of individual views (materialized views), computed from generic data, if performance justification exists for such redundancy.
The downsides of materialized views are the overhead incurred when updating them to keep them synchronized with their original updated database data, and the cost of storage redundancy.
It involves both defining access control to database objects as well as defining security levels and methods for the data itself.
General graph databases that can store any graph are distinct from specialized graph databases such as triplestores and network databases.
In 1970, he wrote a number of papers that outlined a new approach to database construction that eventually culminated in the groundbreaking ''A Relational Model of Data for Large Shared Data Banks''.
Database storage is the container of the physical materialization of a database.
Hardware database accelerators, connected to one or more servers via a high-speed channel, are also used in large volume transaction processing environments.
This in spite of the fact that tools may exist to help migration between specific DBMSs.
The dBASE product was lightweight and easy for any computer user to understand out of the box.
The new computers empowered their users with spreadsheets like Lotus 1-2-3 and database software like dBASE.
Many databases provide active database features in the form of database triggers.
::The major parallel DBMS architectures which are induced by the underlying hardware architecture are:
Codd's ideas were establishing themselves as both workable and superior to CODASYL, pushing IBM to develop a true production version of System R, known as ''SQL/DS'', and, later, ''Database 2'' (DB2).
However, the entire possible object collection does not fit into a predefined structured framework.
The transformation should maintain (if possible) the database related application (i.e., all related application programs) intact.
A competing "next generation" known as NewSQL databases attempted new implementations that retained the relational/SQL model while aiming to match the high performance of NoSQL compared to commercially available relational DBMSs.
This process is often called logical database design, and the output is a logical data model expressed in the form of a schema.
DBMSs are found at the heart of most database applications.
It also contains all the information needed (e.g., metadata, "data about the data", and internal data structures) to reconstruct the ''conceptual level'' and ''external level'' from the internal level when needed.
IMS remains in use .
as well as providing a simple system for finding and returning ''sets'' of data in a single operation.
This can help to establish what information is needed in the database, and what can be left out.
They started a project known as INGRES using funding that had already been allocated for a geographical database project and student programmers to produce code.
Examples of these are collections of documents, spreadsheets, presentations, multimedia, and other files.
The most popular NoSQL systems include MongoDB, Couchbase, Riak, Memcached, Redis, CouchDB, Hazelcast, Apache Cassandra, and HBase, which are all open-source software products.
Most other DBMS implementations usually called ''relational'' are actually SQL DBMSs.
IBM itself did one test implementation of the relational model, PRTV, and a production one, Business System 12, both now discontinued.
* A cloud database relies on cloud technology.
Another data model, the entity–relationship model, emerged in 1976 and gained popularity for database design as it emphasized a more familiar description than the earlier relational model.
A successful data model will accurately reflect the possible state of the external world being modeled: for example, if people can have more than one phone number, it will allow this information to be captured.
Thus, a relational model can express both hierarchical and navigational models, as well as its native tabular model, allowing for pure or combined modeling in terms of these three models, as the application requires.
XML databases are mostly used in enterprise database management, where XML is being used as the machine-to-machine data interoperability standard.
While there is typically only one conceptual (or logical) and physical (or internal) view of the data, there can be any number of different external views.
The warehouse becomes the central source of data for use by managers and other end-users who may not have access to operational data.
Beginning in 1973, INGRES delivered its first test products which were generally ready for widespread use in 1979.
", or "if a product is sold with two different forms of packaging, are those the same product or different products?
For instance, a common use of a database system is to track information about users, their name, login information, various addresses and phone numbers.
The 1990s, along with a rise in object-oriented programming, saw a growth in how data in various databases were handled.
* A terminology-oriented database builds upon an object-oriented database, often customized for a specific field.
A DBMS has evolved into a complex software system and its development typically requires thousands of human years of development effort.
The database research area has several dedicated academic journals (for example, ''ACM Transactions on Database Systems''-TODS, ''Data and Knowledge Engineering''-DKE) and annual conferences (e.g., ACM SIGMOD, ACM PODS, VLDB, IEEE ICDE).
* An embedded database system is a DBMS which is tightly integrated with an application software that requires access to stored data in such a way that the DBMS is hidden from the application’s end-users and requires little or no ongoing maintenance.
Instead of records being stored in some sort of linked list of free-form records as in CODASYL, Codd's idea was to use a "table" of fixed-length records, with each table used for a different type of entity.
Another aspect of physical database design is security.
Both a database and its DBMS conform to the principles of a particular database model.
It comprises the ''internal'' (physical) ''level'' in the database architecture.
The relational model solved this by splitting the data into a series of normalized tables (or ''relations''), with optional elements being moved out of the main table to where they would take up room only if needed.
NewSQL is a class of modern relational databases that aims to provide the same scalable performance of NoSQL systems for online transaction processing (read-write) workloads while still using SQL and maintaining the ACID guarantees of a traditional database system.
The retrieved data may be made available in a form basically the same as it is stored in the database or in a new form obtained by altering or combining existing data from the database.
* A spatial database can store the data with multidimensional features.
IBM also had their own DBMS in 1966, known as Information Management System (IMS).
Just as the navigational approach would require programs to loop in order to collect records, the relational approach would require loops to collect information about any ''one'' record.
Later systems added B-trees to provide alternate access paths.
Many CODASYL databases also added a very straightforward query language.
Sometimes a DBMS is loosely referred to as a 'database'.
* In a hypertext or hypermedia database, any word or a piece of text representing an object, e.g., another piece of text, an article, a picture, or a film, can be hyperlinked to that object.
The relational model employs sets of ledger-style tables, each used for a different type of entity.
Programmers and designers began to treat the data in their databases as objects.
INGRES was similar to System R in a number of ways, including the use of a "language" for data access, known as QUEL.
* A document-oriented database is designed for storing, retrieving, and managing document-oriented, or semi structured data, information.
* An active database includes an event-driven architecture which can respond to conditions both inside and outside the database.
Other user interfaces are used to select needed DBMS parameters (like security related, storage allocation parameters, etc.
* Data definition – Creation, modification and removal of definitions that define the organization of the data.
Because of the critical importance of database technology to the smooth running of an enterprise, database systems include complex mechanisms to deliver the required performance, security, and availability, and allow database administrators to control the use of these features.
* An array DBMS is a kind of NoSQL DBMS that allows to model, store, and retrieve (usually large) multi-dimensional arrays such as satellite images and climate simulation output.
Some DBMSs support specifying which character encoding was used to store data, so multiple encodings can be used in the same database.
Putting data into permanent storage is generally the responsibility of the database engine a.k.a.
Databases and DBMSs can be categorized according to the database model(s) that they support (such as relational or XML), the type(s) of computer they run on (from a server cluster to a mobile phone), the query language(s) used to access the database (such as SQL or XQuery), and their internal engineering, which affects performance, scalability, resilience, and security.
dBASE was one of the top selling software titles in the 1980s and early 1990s.
Monitoring can be set up to attempt to detect security breaches.
Producing the conceptual data model sometimes involves input from business processes, or the analysis of workflow in the organization.
The migration involves the database's transformation from one DBMS type to another.
Examples of database applications include computerized library systems, flight reservation systems, computerized parts inventory systems, and many content management systems that store websites as collections of webpages in a database.
*A knowledge base (abbreviated '''KB''', '''kb''' or Δ) is a special kind of database for knowledge management, providing the means for the computerized collection, organization, and retrieval of knowledge.
::* '''Shared disk architecture''', where each processing unit (typically consisting of multiple processors) has its own main memory, but all units share the other storage.
In 1970, the University of Michigan began development of the MICRO Information Management System based on D.L.
Document-oriented databases are one of the main categories of NoSQL databases.
Some general-purpose DBMSs such as Adabas, Oracle and DB2 have been undergoing upgrades since the 1970s.
DBMSs may be built around a custom multitasking kernel with built-in networking support, but modern DBMSs typically rely on a standard operating system to provide these functions from databases before the inception of Structured Query Language (SQL).
The database data and the additional needed information, possibly in very large amounts, are coded into bits.
Both concepts later became known as navigational databases due to the way data was accessed, and Bachman's 1973 Turing Award presentation was ''The Programmer as Navigator''.
The answers to these questions establish definitions of the terminology used for entities (customers, products, flights, flight segments) and their relationships and attributes.
Interest in a standard began to grow, and Charles Bachman, author of one such product, the Integrated Data Store (IDS), founded the "Database Task Group" within CODASYL, the group responsible for the creation and standardization of COBOL.
This allows for relations between data to be relations to objects and their attributes and not to individual fields.
Various database parameters may need changing and the database may need to be tuned (tuning) for better performance; application's data structures may be changed or added, new related application programs may be written to add to the application's functionality, etc.
On the programming side, libraries known as object-relational mappings (ORMs) attempt to solve the same problem.
For instance, if the login name of a user is unique, addresses and phone numbers for that user would be recorded with the login name as its key.
The World Wide Web is thus a large distributed hypertext database.
The underlying philosophy was that such integration would provide higher performance at lower cost.
RAID is used for recovery of data if any of the disks fail.
Data may be freely inserted, deleted and edited in these tables, with the DBMS doing whatever maintenance needed to present a table view to the application/user.
The data manipulation is done by dBASE instead of by the user, so the user can concentrate on what he is doing, rather than having to mess with the dirty details of opening, reading, and closing files, and managing space allocation."
It may include email messages, documents, journals, multimedia objects, etc.
*'''End-user databases''' consist of data developed by individual end-users.
Static analysis techniques for software verification can be applied also in the scenario of query languages.
* Data warehouses archive data from operational databases and often from external sources such as market research firms.
A DBMS provides the needed user interfaces to be utilized by database administrators to define the needed application's data structures within the DBMS's respective data model.
Possible uses include security monitoring, alerting, statistics gathering and authorization.
* A federated database system comprises several distinct databases, each with its own DBMS.
This may be managed directly on an individual basis, or by the assignment of individuals and privileges to groups, or (in the most elaborate models) through the assignment of individuals and groups to roles which are then granted entitlements.
As computers grew in speed and capability, a number of general-purpose database systems emerged; by the mid-1960s a number of such systems had come into commercial use.
Sometimes it is desired to bring a database back to a previous state (for many reasons, e.g., cases when the database is found corrupted due to a software error, or if it has been updated with erroneous data).
#Navigating relationships (called sets) from one record to another
Thus, the database's conceptual and external architectural levels should be maintained in the transformation.
Several products exist to support such databases.
Most established DBMSs now support unstructured data in various ways, and new dedicated DBMSs are emerging.
NoSQL databases are often very fast, do not require fixed table schemas, avoid join operations by storing denormalized data, and are designed to scale horizontally.
Occasionally a database employs storage redundancy by database objects replication (with one or more copies) to increase data availability (both to improve performance of simultaneous multiple end-user accesses to a same database object, and to provide resiliency in a case of partial failure of a distributed database).
A '''database management system''' ('''DBMS''') is a computer software application that interacts with the user, other applications, and the database itself to capture and analyze data.
Also a collection of data representing problems with their solutions and related experiences.
That is to say that if a person's data were in a database, that person's attributes, such as their address, phone number, and age, were now considered to belong to that person instead of being extraneous data.
The process of creating a logical database design using this model uses a methodical approach known as normalization.
The internal level, which is hidden inside the DBMS and depends on its implementation, requires a different level of detail and uses its own types of data structure types.
Data security prevents unauthorized users from viewing or updating the database.
By May 2012, HANA was able to run on servers with 100TB main memory powered by IBM.
IBM started working on a prototype system loosely based on Codd's concepts as ''System R'' in the early 1970s.
The relational part comes from entities referencing other entities in what is known as one-to-many relationship, like a traditional hierarchical model, and many-to-many relationship, like a navigational (network) model.
In particular,  the *Abstract interpretation framework has been extended to the field of query languages for relational databases as a way to support sound approximation techniques.
Whereas the conceptual data model is (in theory at least) independent of the choice of database technology, the logical data model will be expressed in terms of a particular database model supported by the chosen DBMS.
Another way is by their application area, for example: accounting, music compositions, movies, banking, manufacturing, or insurance.
In the long term, these efforts were generally unsuccessful because specialized database machines could not keep pace with the rapid development and progress of general-purpose computers.
The name may be misleading since some objects can be highly structured.
* Update – Insertion, modification, and deletion of the actual data.
In many cases, the entire database is replicated.
It balances all the external views' performance requirements, possibly conflicting, in an attempt to optimize overall performance across all activities.
Therefore, there are many examples of systems that use special-purpose databases.
Edgar Codd worked at IBM in San Jose, California, in one of their offshoot offices that was primarily involved in the development of hard disk systems.
For example, an employee database can contain all the data about an individual employee, but one group of users may be authorized to view only payroll data, while others are allowed access to only work history and medical data.
Codd's solution to the necessary looping was a set-oriented language, a suggestion that would later spawn the ubiquitous SQL.
In the early 1980s, Mimer introduced transaction handling for high robustness in applications, an idea that was subsequently implemented on most other DBMSs.
In the relational approach, the data would be ''normalized'' into a user table, an address table and a phone number table (for instance).
Existing DBMSs provide various functions that allow management of a database and its data which can be classified into four main functional groups:
Often storage redundancy is employed to increase performance.
He was unhappy with the navigational model of the CODASYL approach, notably the lack of a "search" facility.
Having produced a conceptual data model that users are happy with, the next stage is to translate this into a schema that implements the relevant data structures within the database.
Linking the information back together is the key to this system.
Designing a good conceptual data model requires a good understanding of the application domain; it typically involves asking deep questions about the things of interest to an organisation, like "can a customer also be a supplier?
* Retrieval – Providing information in a form directly usable or for  further processing by other applications.
* Sometimes the term ''multi-database'' is used as a synonym to federated database, though it may refer to a less integrated (e.g., without an FDBMS and a managed integrated schema) group of databases that cooperate in a single application.
It provides the synthesis of all the external views.
Using passwords, users are allowed access to the entire database or subsets of it called "subschemas".
The acronym ACID describes some ideal properties of a database transaction: Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, and Durability.
Research activity includes theory and development of prototypes.
A common example is an email system that performs many of the functions of a general-purpose DBMS such as the insertion and deletion of messages composed of various items of data or associating messages with a particular email address; but these functions are limited to what is required to handle email and don't provide the user with all of the functionality that would be available using a general-purpose DBMS.
#Scanning all the records in a sequential order
The most popular database model for general-purpose databases is the relational model, or more precisely, the relational model as represented by the SQL language.
* An in-memory database is a database that primarily resides in main memory, but is typically backed-up by non-volatile computer data storage.
The conceptual view provides a level of indirection between internal and external.
A database built with one DBMS is not portable to another DBMS (i.e., the other DBMS cannot run it).
Database technology has been an active research topic since the 1960s, both in academia and in the research and development groups of companies (for example IBM Research).
#Use of a primary key (known as a CALC key, typically implemented by hashing)
* A mobile database can be carried on or synchronized from a mobile computing device.
It is handled as a single database by a federated database management system (FDBMS), which transparently integrates multiple autonomous DBMSs, possibly of different types (in which case it would also be a heterogeneous database system), and provides them with an integrated conceptual view.
For example, a financial department of a company needs the payment details of all employees as part of the company's expenses, but does not need details about employees that are the interest of the human resources department.
IMS is classified as a hierarchical database.
Access to these data is usually provided by a "database management system" (DBMS) consisting of an integrated set of computer software that allows users to interact with one or more databases and provides access to all of the data contained in the database (although restrictions may exist that limit access to particular data).
All are enterprise software database platforms and support industry standard ACID-compliant transaction processing with strong database consistency characteristics and high level of database security.
Thus different departments need different ''views'' of the company's database.
It is concerned with cost, performance, scalability and other operational matters.
It is out of the scope of the various database end-users, and is rather of interest to database application developers and database administrators.
The idea is that changes made at a certain level do not affect the view at a higher level.
Using a branch of mathematics known as tuple calculus, he demonstrated that such a system could support all the operations of normal databases (inserting, updating etc.)
Database access controls are set by special authorized (by the database owner) personnel that uses dedicated protected security DBMS interfaces.
Since DBMSs comprise a significant economical market, computer and storage vendors often take into account DBMS requirements in their own development plans.
Database designers and database administrators interact with the DBMS through dedicated interfaces to build and maintain the applications' databases, and thus need some more knowledge and understanding about how DBMSs operate and the DBMSs' external interfaces and tuning parameters.
The queries on such data include location-based queries, like "Where is the closest hotel in my area?
The system remained in production until 1998.
Logging services allow for a forensic database audit later by keeping a record of access occurrences and changes.
However, the fact that their development cost can be spread over a large number of users means that they are often the most cost-effective approach.
Database management systems are often classified according to the database model that they support; the most popular database systems since the 1980s have all supported the relational model as represented by the SQL language.
A distributed system can satisfy any two of these guarantees at the same time, but not all three.
A database is not generally portable across different DBMSs, but different DBMS can interoperate by using standards such as SQL and ODBC or JDBC to allow a single application to work with more than one DBMS.
For example, it can help when deciding whether the database needs to hold historic data as well as current data.
"Database system" refers collectively to the database model, database management system, and database.
), an abstraction supported in database and also other systems.
The DBMS provides various functions that allow entry, storage and retrieval of large quantities of information and provides ways to manage how that information is organized.
Physically, database servers are dedicated computers that hold the actual databases and run only the DBMS and related software.
Later on, entity–relationship constructs were retrofitted as a data modeling construct for the relational model, and the difference between the two have become irrelevant.
