His family was not rich and, as a younger son, he had little patrimony to live on.
From 1746, Hume served for three years as secretary to General James St Clair, who was envoy to the courts of Turin and Vienna.
There are at least three interpretations of Hume's theory of causation represented in the literature: (1) the logical positivist; (2) the sceptical realist; and (3) the quasi-realist.
My views of ''things'' are more conformable to Whig principles; my representations of ''persons'' to Tory prejudices.
Beginning with his ''A Treatise of Human Nature'' (1739), Hume strove to create a total naturalistic science of man that examined the psychological basis of human nature.
For O'Connor, Hume's "position is deeply ironic.
Hume concludes the essay with the frank admission: " I cannot say there is no vanity in making this funeral oration of myself, but I hope it is not a misplaced one; and this is a matter of fact which is easily cleared and ascertained."
Hume was considered a Tory history, and emphasised religious differences more than constitutional issues.
However, while denying the possibility of knowing the powers between objects, Hume accepted the causal principle, writing, "I never asserted so absurd a proposition as that something could arise without a cause."
However, P. F. Strawson argued that the issue of whether we hold one another morally responsible does not ultimately depend on the truth or falsity of a metaphysical thesis such as determinism.
Hume, I felt, was perfectly right in pointing out that induction cannot be logically justified.
However, Kierkegaard took this as a reason for the necessity of religious faith, or fideism.
The criterion for assessing a belief system for Hume is based on the balance of probability whether something is more likely than not to have occurred.
Hume is thus widely regarded as a pivotal figure in the history of philosophical thought.
The ''Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy'' states that Hume "wrote forcefully and incisively on almost every central question in the philosophy of religion."
Hume's volume of ''Political Discourses'', written in 1749 and published by Kincaid & Donaldson in 1752, was the only work he considered successful on first publication.
He offers the example of an Indian Prince, who, having grown up in a hot country, refuses to believe that water has frozen.
There must be a stream before anything can be interrupted".
Finally, Hume discussed a version of the anthropic principle.
He developed new ways of seeing scientists in the context of their times by looking at how they interacted with society and each other.
After the publication of ''Essays Moral and Political'' in 1744, which was included in the later edition called ''Essays, Moral, Political, and Literary'', Hume applied for the Chair of Pneumatics and Moral Philosophy at the University of Edinburgh.
Although Hume leaves open the possibility for miracles to occur and be reported, he offers various arguments against this ever having happened in history: He points out that people often lie, and they have good reasons to lie about miracles occurring either because they believe they are doing so for the benefit of their religion or because of the fame that results.
Blackburn writes that "Someone talking of cause is voicing a distinct mental set: he is by no means in the same state as someone merely describing regular sequences.
He argued that the quest for liberty was the highest standard for judging the past, and concluded that after considerable fluctuation, England at the time of his writing had achieved "the most entire system of liberty that was ever known amongst mankind".
Philosopher Louise E. Loeb notes that Hume is saying that only experience and observation can be our guide to making inferences about the conjunction between events.
This engagement ended in disarray after about a year.
However, the position was given to William Cleghorn after Edinburgh ministers petitioned the town council not to appoint Hume because he was seen as an atheist.
Hume, to this end, was influenced greatly by the scientific revolution and by in particular Sir Isaac Newton.
The "fact that Christianity is contrary to reason ... is the necessary precondition for true faith."
Hume, on this view, was a proto-positivist, who, in his philosophical writings, attempted to demonstrate how ordinary propositions about objects, causal relations, the self, and so on, are semantically equivalent to propositions about one's experiences.
After eating well for a time, he went from being "tall, lean and raw-bon'd" to being "sturdy, robust and healthful-like".
Moreover, Hume goes on to argue that in order to be held morally responsible, it is required that our behaviour be caused or necessitated, for, as he wrote:
The best theologian he ever met, he used to say, was the old Edinburgh fishwife who, having recognized him as Hume the atheist, refused to pull him out of the bog into which he had fallen until he declared he was a Christian and repeated the Lord's prayer.
Philosopher Angela Coventry writes that, for Hume, "there is nothing in any particular instance of cause and effect involving external objects which suggests the idea of power or necessary connection" and that "we are ignorant of the powers that operate between objects".
The cornerstone of Hume's epistemology is the problem of induction.
This may be the area of Hume's thought where his scepticism about human powers of reason is most pronounced.
In ''Of the Standard of Taste'', Hume argues that no rules can be drawn up about what is a tasteful object.
He wrote that testimony might be doubted even from some great authority in case the facts themselves are not credible.
This still meant that he could be very critical of the Catholic Church, dismissing it with the standard Protestant accusations of superstition and idolatry, as well as dismissing as idolatry what his compatriots saw as uncivilised beliefs.
Referring to his essay "Of the Balance of Trade", economist Paul Krugman has remarked that "David Hume created what I consider the first true economic model."
His writings contain elements that are, in modern terms, both conservative and liberal, although these terms are anachronistic.
In ''An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding'' (Section 10), Hume defines a miracle as "a transgression of a law of nature by a particular volition of the Deity, or by the interposition of some invisible agent".
His views on ethics are that "moral decisions are grounded in moral sentiment."
Canadian philosopher Neil McArthur writes that Hume believed that we should try to balance our demands for liberty with the need for strong authority, without sacrificing either.
According to the logical positivists, unless a statement could be verified by experience, or else was true or false by definition (i.e.
His health improved somewhat, but, in 1731, he was afflicted with a ravenous appetite and palpitations of the heart.
Aged around 18, he made a philosophical discovery that opened up to him "a new Scene of Thought", which inspired him "to throw up every other Pleasure or Business to apply entirely to it".
He makes an ironic remark that anyone who "is moved by faith to assent" to revealed testimony "is conscious of a continued miracle in his own person, which subverts all principles of his understanding, and gives him a determination to believe what is most contrary to custom and experience."
Hume states that "I believe it will not be very necessary to employ many words in explaining this distinction" and commentators have generally taken Hume to mean the distinction between feeling and thinking.
Since practical reason is supposed to regulate our actions (in theory), Hume denied practical reason on the grounds that reason cannot directly oppose passions.
The self is nothing but a bundle of experiences linked by the relations of causation and resemblance; or, more accurately, that the empirically warranted idea of the self is just the idea of such a bundle.
Due to this inspiration, Hume set out to spend a minimum of ten years reading and writing.
In all cases, we must balance the opposite experiments ... and deduct the smaller number from the greater, in order to know the exact force of the superior evidence.
If he is anything, he is a Hobbist", a follower of Thomas Hobbes.
He did not recount what this scene was, and commentators have offered a variety of speculations.
Many commentators have since rejected this understanding of Humean empiricism, stressing an epistemological (rather than a semantic) reading of his project.
Hume believes that this choice is made spontaneously.
The ''Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy'' writes that Hume is "generally regarded as one of the most important philosophers to write in English."
Thus, perceptions must already come parcelled into distinct "bundles" before they can be associated according to the relations of similarity and causality.
Kant himself famously credited Hume as the spur to his philosophical thought who had awakened him from his "dogmatic slumbers;" contemporary philosophers have opined that "Hume, rivaled only by Darwin, who has done the most to undermine in principle our confidence in arguments from design;" that "No man has influenced the history of philosophy to a deeper or more disturbing degree, and that Hume's Treatise is  "the founding document of Cognitive Science" and the "most important philosophical work written in English"; no less a philosophical authority than Arthur Schopenhauer once declared that "there is more to be learned from each page of David Hume than from the collected philosophical works of Hegel, Herbart and Schleiermacher taken together."
Thomas Jefferson banned the ''History'' from University of Virginia, feeling that it had "spread universal toryism over the land".
As Hume puts it, “Reason is, and ought only to be the slave of the passions and can never pretend to any other office than to serve and obey them.” The reason Hume views reason as less significant than any passion is because he believed that reason had no original influence, while all passions have an original existence, or rather that they are a “modification of existence”.
There, in an attempt to make his larger work better known and more intelligible, he published the ''An Abstract of a Book lately Published'' as a summary of the main doctrines of the ''Treatise'', without revealing its authorship.
Hume had also written on religious subjects in the first ''Enquiry'', as well as later in the ''Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion''.
But if our actions are not thus connected to the will, then our actions can never be free: they would be matters of "chance; which is universally allowed to have no existence".
The logical positivist interpretation is that Hume analyses causal propositions, such as "A caused B", in terms of regularities in perception: "A causes B" is equivalent to "Whenever A-type events happen, B-type ones follow", where "whenever" refers to all possible perceptions.
Philosopher Corliss Swain notes that "Commentators agree that if Hume did find some new problem" when he reviewed the section on personal identity, "he wasn't forthcoming about its nature in the Appendix."
Critics have argued that Hume's position assumes the character of miracles and natural laws prior to any specific examination of miracle claims, thus it amounts to a subtle form of begging the question.
Hume offered his view on the best type of society in an essay titled "Idea of a Perfect Commonwealth", which lays out what he thought was the best form of government.
During this time he was also involved with the Canongate Theatre through his friend John Home, a preacher.
Hume told him he sincerely believed it a "most unreasonable fancy" that there might be life after death.
Political philosophers Leo Strauss and Joseph Cropsey, writing of Hume's thoughts about "the wise statesman", note that he "will bear a reverence to what carries the marks of age".
Philosopher Simon Blackburn calls this a quasi-realist reading.
Also, Hume notes that miracles seem to occur mostly in "ignorant and barbarous nations" and times, and the reason they do not occur in the civilised societies is such societies are not awed by what they know to be natural events.
By comparison, Samuel Johnson thought Hume "a Tory by chance&nbsp;... for he has no principle.
There he had frequent discourse with the Jesuits of the College of La Flèche.
In 1769 he returned to James' Court in Edinburgh, and then lived, from 1771 until his death in 1776, at the southwest corner of St. Andrew's Square in Edinburgh's New Town, at what is now 21 Saint David Street.
Hume's compatibilist theory of free will takes causal determinism as fully compatible with human freedom, and has proved extremely influential on subsequent moral philosophy.
Hume's moral theory maintained an early commitment to naturalistic explanations of moral phenomena, and is usually taken to have first clearly expounded the is–ought problem, or the idea that a statement of fact alone can never give rise to a normative conclusion of what ''ought'' to be done.Hume also influentially denied that humans have an actual conception of the self, positing that we experience only  a bundle of sensations, and that the self is nothing more than this bundle of causally-connected perceptions.
By 1894, there were at least 50 editions as well as abridgements for students, and illustrated pocket editions, probably produced specifically for women.
All of these aspects were discussed in Hume's 1757 dissertation, ''The Natural History of Religion''.
Danish theologian and philosopher Søren Kierkegaard adopted "Hume's suggestion that the role of reason is not to make us wise but to reveal our ignorance."
It is difficult to categorise Hume's political affiliations.
Empiricist philosophers, such as Hume and Berkeley, favoured the bundle theory of personal identity.
Letters between them illuminate both men's interest in the success of the ''History.''
This view is forwarded by, for example, positivist interpreters, who saw Hume as suggesting that terms such as "self", "person", or "mind" referred to collections of "sense-contents".
Hume calls this form of decision making the liberty of spontaneity.
Hume also put forward the is–ought problem, later called ''Hume's Law'', denying the possibility of logically deriving what ''ought'' to be from what ''is''.
On this aspect of Hume's thought, philosophical historian Frederick Copleston wrote that it was Hume's aim to apply to the science of man the method of experimental philosophy (the term that was current at the time to imply Natural philosophy), and that "Hume's plan is to extend to philosophy in general the methodological limitations of Newtonian physics".
Hume describes the link between causality and our capacity to rationally make a decision from this an inference of the mind.
His finances as a young man were very "slender".
Thus, no form of justification will rationally warrant our inductive inferences.
Hume here confesses his belief that the"love of literary fame" had served as his "ruling passion" in life, and claims that this desire "never soured my temper, notwithstanding my frequent disappointments."
Hume did not graduate.
At first, because of his family, he considered a career in law, but came to have, in his words, "an insurmountable aversion to everything but the pursuits of Philosophy and general Learning; and while my family fanceyed I was poring over Voet and Vinnius, Cicero and Virgil were the Authors which I was secretly devouring".
In his will he requests that it be inscribed only with his name and the year of his birth and death, "leaving it to Posterity to add the Rest".
This was what persuaded Hume's physician to make his diagnosis.
Indeed, many have argued that miracles not only do not contradict the laws of nature, but require the laws of nature to be intelligible as miraculous, and thus subverting the law of nature.
He asserts that "Nature, by an absolute and uncontroulable  necessity has determin'd us to judge as well as to breathe and feel."
Arguing that reason cannot be behind morality, he wrote:
However, he "would not have come and could not be forced to attend if he said he was not a member of the Established Church".
One such disappointment Hume discusses in the mini-autobiography was his disappointment that  with the initial literary reception of the ''Treatise'', which he claims to have overcome by means of the success of the ''Essays'': "the work was favourably received, and soon made me entirely forget my former disappointment".
He also wrote that the science of man is the "only solid foundation for the other sciences" and that the method for this science requires both experience and observation as the foundations of a logical argument.
There is no observed conjunction to ground an inference either to extended objects or to God, as unobserved causes."
He changed the spelling of his name in 1734, because of the fact that his surname ''Home,'' pronounced ''Hume,'' was not known in England.
He hoped that, "in some future age, an opportunity might be afforded of reducing the theory to practice, either by a dissolution of some old government, or by the combination of men to form a new one, in some distant part of the world".
Anyone hankering for startling revelations or amusing anecdotes had better look elsewhere."
Through his discussions on politics, Hume developed many ideas that are prevalent in the field of economics.
The fact that the universe as a whole is a coherent and efficiently functioning system likewise, in this view, indicates a divine intelligence behind it."
This because it "seems altogether inconceivable, how this new relation can be a deduction from others".
One popular interpretation, prominent in contemporary Hume scholarship, is that the new "scene of thought" was Hume's realization that Francis Hutcheson's "moral sense" theory of morality could be applied to the understanding as well.
Hume says that we believe an event that has frequently occurred is likely to occur again, but we also take into account those instances where the event did not occur.
A major concern of Hume's political philosophy is the importance of the rule of law.
This insight resulted in Popper's major work ''The Logic of Scientific Discovery''.
Often called the ''First Enquiry'', it proved little more successful than the ''Treatise'', perhaps because of the publishing of his short autobiography, ''My Own Life'', which "made friends difficult for the first Enquiry".
Hume was also a sentimentalist who held that ethics are based on emotion or sentiment rather than abstract moral principle, famously proclaiming that "Reason Is and Ought Only to Be the Slave of the Passions".
In the ''Treatise'' he wrote of the connection between beauty and deformity and vice and virtue, and his later writings on this subject continue to draw parallels of beauty and deformity in art, with conduct and character.
In his autobiography, ''Unended Quest'', he wrote: "Knowledge&nbsp;... is ''objective''; and it is hypothetical or conjectural.
In the following year "the Faculty of Advocates chose me their Librarian, an office from which I received little or no emolument, but which gave me the command of a large library".
He then argues that, according to these definitions, not only are the two compatible, but liberty ''requires'' necessity.
Once this has been abandoned, Hume argues that "liberty and necessity will be found not to be in conflict one with another".
He states "I flatter myself, that I have discovered an argument of a like nature, which, if just, will, with the wise and learned, be an everlasting check to all kinds of superstitious delusion, and consequently, will be useful as long as the world endures."
In this theory, "the mind itself, far from being an independent power, is simply 'a bundle of perceptions' without unity or cohesive quality."
They argue that distinct selves can have perceptions that stand in relations of similarity and causality with one another.
Little appreciated is the voluminous literature either foreshadowing Hume, in the likes of Thomas Sherlock or directly responding to and engaging with Hume- from William Paley, William Adams, John Douglas, John Leland  and George Campbell, among others.
In what is sometimes referred to as Hume's problem of induction, he argued that inductive reasoning, and belief in causality, cannot, ultimately, be justified rationally; our trust in causality and induction instead results from custom and mental habit, and are attributable to only the experience of "constant conjunction" rather than logic: for we can never, in experience, perceive that one event causes another, but only that the two are always conjoined, and to draw any inductive causal inferences from past experience first requires the presupposition that the future will be like the past, a presupposition which cannot be grounded in prior experience without already being presupposed.
The donkey is incapable of forming a rational decision as there is no motive to choose one bale of hay over the other.
Since the bundle-theory interpretation portrays Hume as answering an ontological question, philosophers, like Galen Strawson, who see Hume as not very concerned with such questions have queried whether the view is really Hume's.
As Hume wrote, induction concerns how things behave when they go "beyond the present testimony of the senses, or the records of our memory".
The system of the Swiss militia was proposed as the best form of protection.
Hume argued that the dispute about the compatibility of freedom and determinism has been continued over two thousand years by ambiguous terminology.
Although he wrote a great deal about religion, Hume's personal views are unclear, and there has been much discussion concerning his religious position.
Later, some scurvy spots broke out on his fingers.
The problem revolves around the plausibility of inductive reasoning, that is, reasoning from the observed behaviour of objects to their behaviour when unobserved.
For if our actions were not necessitated in the above sense, they would "have so little in connexion with motives, inclinations and circumstances, that one does not follow with a certain degree of uniformity from the other".
His tenure there, and the access to research materials it provided, ultimately resulted in Hume's writing the massive six-volume ''The History of England'', which became a bestseller and the standard history of England in its day.
This is the idea that theories of the universe are constrained by the need to allow for man's existence in it as an observer.
He wrote in the ''Treatise'' that in every system of morality he has read, the author begins with stating facts about the world, but then suddenly is always referring to what ought to be the case.
By no means&nbsp;... there is a ''necessary connexion'' to be taken into consideration.
Hume was sufficiently worried about the damage to his reputation from the quarrel with Rousseau (who is generally believed to have suffered from Paranoia) to have authored an account of the dispute, which he titled, appropriately enough ''"A concise and genuine account of the dispute between Mr. Hume and Mr.
Perfect equality would thus lead to impoverishment.
In 1749 he went to live with his brother in the countryside.
He also considered extreme Protestant sects, the members of which he called "enthusiasts", to be corrupters of religion.
In the Appendix to the ''Treatise'', Hume declares himself dissatisfied with his earlier account of personal identity in Book 1.
Here he wrote that he was given "all the secrets of the Kingdom".
He wrote of his Paris life, "I really wish often for the plain roughness of The Poker Club of Edinburgh&nbsp;... to correct and qualify so much lusciousness".
Also, if he wishes to improve a constitution, his innovations will take account of the "ancient fabric", in order not to disturb society.
According to philosopher Jerry Fodor, Hume's ''Treatise'' is "the founding document of cognitive science".
By contrast, in his ''The Natural History of Religion'', Hume presented arguments suggesting that polytheism had much to commend it over monotheism.
A popular story, consistent with some historical evidence, suggests the street may have been named after Hume.
Hume demands that a reason should be given for inferring what ought to be the case, from what is the case.
For Hume, this refusal to grant credence does not guarantee correctness.
According to this opposing view, Hume's empiricism consisted in the idea that it is our knowledge, and not our ability to conceive, that is restricted to what can be experienced.
A wise man ... considers which side is supported by the greater number of experiments ... A hundred instances or experiments on one side, and fifty on another, afford a doubtful expectation of any event; though a hundred uniform experiments, with only one that is contradictory, reasonably beget a pretty strong degree of assurance.
It is a common sense notion of veracity based upon epistemological evidence, and founded on a principle of rationality, proportionality and reasonability.
The volumes traced events from the Invasion of Julius Caesar to the Revolution of 1688, and was a bestseller in its day.
To assume that testimony is a homogeneous reference group seems unwise- to compare private miracles with public miracles, unintellectual observers with intellectual observers and those who have little to gain and much to lose with those with much to gain and little to lose is not convincing to many.
Political theorist Isaiah Berlin, for example, has pointed out the similarities between the arguments of Hume and Kierkegaard against rational theology.
Berlin also writes about Hume's influence on what Berlin calls the counter-enlightenment, and German anti-rationalism.
He argued that this was because the spectator is aware that he is witnessing a dramatic performance.
Of Campbell, it is rumoured that, having read Campbell's Dissertation, Hume remarked that "the Scotch theologue had beaten him".
In his ''Treatise of Human Nature'', Hume wrote:
As Hume explains in A Treatise of Human Nature: “Morals excite actions, and produce or prevent action.
Hume wrote that he "went under a Course of Bitters and Anti-Hysteric Pills", taken along with a pint of claret every day.
In his discussion of miracles, Hume argues that we should not believe that miracles have occurred and that they do not therefore provide us with any reason to think that God exists.
Shall we rest contented with these two relations of contiguity and succession, as affording a complete idea of causation?
Some contemporary scholars view Hume's moral theory as a unique attempt to synthesize the modern sentimentalist moral tradition to which Hume belonged, with the virtue ethics tradition of ancient philosophy, with which Hume concurred in regarding traits of character, rather than acts or their consequences, as ultimately the proper objects of moral evaluation.
He covers over forty scientists, with special attention paid to Francis Bacon, Robert Boyle, and Isaac Newton.
Reason itself is utterly impotent in this particular.
Hume writes that "All the testimony which ever was really given for any miracle, or ever will be given, is a subject of derision."
Hume's rationalism in religious subjects influenced, via German-Scottish theologian Johann Joachim Spalding, the German neology school and rational theology, and contributed to the transformation of German theology in the age of enlightenment.
During the 1745 Jacobite rising, Hume tutored the Marquis of Annandale (1720–92), who was "judged to be a lunatic".
Hume also decided to have a more active life to better continue his learning.
A century later, the idea of order without design was rendered more plausible by Charles Darwin's discovery that the adaptations of the forms of life are a result of the natural selection of inherited characteristics.
However, he resisted aligning himself with either of Britain's two political parties, the Whigs and the Tories.
Finally, the miracles of each religion argue against all other religions and their miracles, and so even if a proportion of all reported miracles across the world fit Hume's requirement for belief, the miracles of each religion make the other less likely.
Such a decision is not made on the basis of chance, but rather on necessity and spontaneity, given the prior predetermined events leading up to the predicament.
Elections were to take place on an annual basis and representatives were to be unpaid.
With regard to demonstrative reasoning, Hume argues that the uniformity principle cannot be demonstrated, as it is "consistent and conceivable" that nature might stop being regular.
Hume was concerned with the way spectators find pleasure in the sorrow and anxiety depicted in a tragedy.
Hume's argument is supported by modern day compatibilists such as R. E. Hobart, a pseudonym of philosopher Dickinson S. Miller.
This is because, while inclining towards a weak form of deism, he seriously doubts that we can ever find a sufficiently favourable balance of evidence to justify accepting any religious position."
On this interpretation, Hume is proposing a "no-self theory" and thus has much in common with Buddhist thought.
In ''An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding'', Hume wrote that the design argument seems to depend upon our experience, and its proponents "always suppose the universe, an effect quite singular and unparalleled, to be the proof of a Deity, a cause no less singular and unparalleled".
As Hume had spent most of his savings during those four years, he resolved "to make a very rigid frugality supply my deficiency of fortune, to maintain unimpaired my independency, and to regard every object as contemptible except the improvements of my talents in literature".
Indeed, Hume would become well known in his time for his "corpulence", and his fondness for good port and cheese.
either tautological or contradictory), then it was meaningless (this is a summary statement of their verification principle).
The ''History'' became a best-seller and made Hume a wealthy man who no longer had to take up salaried work for others.
As this is using the very sort of reasoning (induction) that is under question, it would be circular reasoning.
Hume argues it is justified, because resources are limited.
At that time Hume also wrote ''Philosophical Essays Concerning Human Understanding'', later published as ''An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding''.
One interpretation of Hume's view of the self has been argued for by philosopher and psychologist James Giles.
Hume was an early cultural historian of science.
These various differing accounts weaken the overall evidential power of miracles.
Hume denied the existence of practical reason as a principle because he claimed reason does not have any effect on morality, since morality is capable of producing effects in people that reason alone cannot create.
From 1763 to 1765, Hume was invited to attend Lord Hertford in Paris, where he became secretary to the British embassy.
Hume's solution to this problem is to argue that, rather than reason, natural instinct explains the human practice of making inductive inferences.
In the introduction to ''A Treatise of Human Nature'', Hume wrote, "'Tis evident, that all the sciences have a relation, more or less, to human nature&nbsp;...
In its own day, moreover, it was an innovation, soaring high above its very few predecessors."
Katherine (''née'' Falconer), daughter of Sir David Falconer, 5th Lord Falconer of Halkerton.
