After the Treaty of Fort Jackson in August 1814, Andrew Jackson, now with the U.S. Army, wanted the British forces ousted from Spanish Florida and asked for support from the Tennessee militia.
In 1955, Jesús Sánchez Garza self-published a book called ''La Rebelión de Texas—Manuscrito Inédito de 1836 por un Ofical de Santa Anna'' purporting to be memoirs of José Enrique de la Peña, a Mexican officer present at the Battle of the Alamo.
A chance meeting in 1826 gained him the encouragement of Memphis mayor Marcus Brutus Winchester to try again to win a seat in Congress.
These led in the 20th century to television and movie portrayals, and he became one of the best-known American folk heroes.
The Crocketts then moved to Franklin County in 1813.
He arrived in Memphis in the second week of November with a much-diminished company, and ferried over the Mississippi River the next day and continued his journey on horseback through Arkansas.
Secondly, there is some speculation that de la Peña's account may have been a deliberate fabrication, with the intention of presenting Santa Anna in a far more diabolical light than American (and especially Texan) historians have given him since the fall of the Alamo.
The next year he discussed with his friend Benjamin McCulloch raising a company of volunteers to take to Texas in the expectation that a revolution was imminent.
Historians disagree on whether any or all of the book has been falsified.
Therefore, it is believed that de la Peña either created the scenario of Travis' death, or he saw another of the defenders after breaching the walls, and took him to be Travis.
In 1792, the Crocketts moved to Mossy Creek in Jefferson County.
After an altercation with a fellow student, David played hookey from school.
Several historians, including Walter Lord, speculated that the Texians were creating a diversion to allow their last courier, John Smith, to evade Mexican pickets.
He arrived in Nacogdoches, Texas, in early January 1836.
All that is certain about the fate of David Crockett is that he died fighting at the Alamo on the morning of March 6, 1836, at age 49.
Crockett ran against Fitzgerald again in the 1833 election and was returned to Congress, serving until 1835.
According to many accounts of the battle, between five and seven Texans surrendered during the battle, possibly to General Castrillon.
He resigned from the office of justice of the peace and from his position with the regiment.
Selling that tract of land in 1794, John moved the family to Cove Creek and built a gristmill with partner Thomas Galbraith.
While John was away as a militia volunteer in 1777, David and Elizabeth were killed at their home near today's Rogersville by Creeks and Chickamauga Cherokees led by war chief Dragging Canoe.
The three men, who included Crockett, were sent to find Fannin.
In 1776, the family moved to northeast Tennessee, in the area now known as Hawkins County.
Their third child Margaret Finley (Polly) Crockett was born on November 25, 1812.
As the siege progressed, Travis sent many messages asking for reinforcements.
Crockett's legend was reborn in a 1950s TV show by Walt Disney, which also introduced his legendary coonskin cap.
His brother James was taken prisoner and held for seventeen years.
The daily bombardment by artillery had been suspended, perhaps a ploy to encourage the natural human reaction to a cessation of constant strain.
He met Polly Finley and her mother Jean at a harvest festival.
We're satisfied that it is what it is."
While serving as part of the wedding party, Crockett met Margaret Elder.
He married Elizabeth Boulay.
On August 16, he rode to Polly's house with family and friends, determined to ride off with Polly to be married elsewhere.
Crockett fell in love with John Canady's niece Amy Summer, who was unavailable to him due to her engagement to Canady's son Robert.
When David was 12 years old, his father indentured him to Jacob Siler to help with the Crockett family indebtedness.
Margaret had also become engaged to another young man at the same time and married him instead.
He spoke out against Congress giving a lump sum amount of $100,000 to the widow of Stephen Decatur, citing that Congress was not empowered to do that.
That same year, he married the widow Elizabeth Patton, who had a daughter, Margaret Ann, and a son, George.
David joined a cattle drive to Front Royal, Virginia for Jesse Cheek.
In addition to this, the Mexican Army had not breached the walls of the Alamo when Travis was killed, therefore they would have been seeing him from an area below the walls, while being fired down upon by the defenders.
Crockett and his men were encouraged to keep shooting, as they were unusually effective.
Furthermore, Catherine Williamson manuscript cataloguer at Butterfield & Butterfield said:  "De la Peña's memoir was written on a high rag content paper typical of the early 19th century.
Their second child, William Finley Crockett, was born November 25, 1808.
Most of the noncombatants gathered in the church sacristy for safety.
In 1823, he ran against Andrew Jackson's nephew-in-law William Edward Butler  and won a seat in the General Assembly representing the counties of Carroll, Humphreys, Perry, Henderson and Madison.
Historian Joseph Musso also questions the validity, likewise basing his suspicions on the timing of the diaries' release.
Groneman also points out that the journals are made up of several different types of paper from several different paper manufacturers, all cut down to fit.
The family moved to Tryon County, North Carolina c. 1768.
Butterfield officials believe the eyewitness journal could fetch between $200,000 and $300,000.
Crockett spent his entire legislative career fighting for the rights of impoverished settlers whom he felt dangled on the precipice of losing title to their land due to the state's complicated system of grants.
On February 26, Alamo commander William Barret Travis ordered the artillery to stop returning fire so as to conserve precious ammunition.
Their son Joseph Louis was born in Ireland and married Sarah Stewart.
On September 20, Crockett left his family and enlisted as a scout for an initial term of 90 days with Francis Jones's Company of Mounted Rifleman, part of the Second Regiment of Volunteer Mounted Riflemen.
At Morristown in the Southwest Territory, John built a tavern on a stage coach route.
That same night, outside the Alamo, there was a skirmish between Mexican and Texian troops.
Although Castrillon and several other officers refused to do so, staff officers who had not participated in the fighting drew their swords and killed the unarmed Texians.
In between trips with Myers, he worked for farmer John Gray.
Because the original book was self-published, no editor or publisher ever vetted its authenticity.
Cherokee chief John Ross sent him a letter on January 13, 1831, expressing his thanks for Crockett's vote.
On January 14, 1836, Crockett and 65 other men signed an oath before Judge John Forbes to the Provisional Government of Texas for six months: "''I have taken the oath of government and have enrolled my name as a volunteer and will set out for the Rio Grande in a few days with the volunteers from the United States''."
The watermarks tell us the paper was produced in Lisbon between 1825 and 1832.
He arrived in Washington D.C. and took up residence at Mrs. Ball's Boarding House, where a number of other legislators lived when Congress was in session.
Joseph and Sarah immigrated to New York, where their son William David was born in 1709.
The English publication caused a scandal within the United States, as it asserted that Crockett did not die in battle.
He states that "All of the enemy perished, there remaining alive only an elderly lady and a Negro slave, whom the soldiers spared out of mercy and because we had established that only force had kept them in danger."
These men would have reached Cibolo Creek,  from the Alamo, on the afternoon of March 3.
He won again in 1833, then narrowly lost in 1835, prompting his angry departure to Texas (then the Mexican state of Tejas) shortly thereafter.
The Crocketts were of Irish, English, Scottish and French-Huguenot ancestry.
According to Petite, "every account of the Crockett surrender-execution story comes from an avowed antagonist (either on political or military grounds) of Santa Anna's.
Crockett declared his intentions to marry Polly, regardless of whether the ceremony was allowed to take place in her parents home or had to be performed elsewhere.
He said, "I told the people of my district that I would serve them as faithfully as I had done; but if not, they might go to hell, and I would go to Texas."
On November 25, the state legislature appointed him county justice of the peace.
In 1948, Disney told columnist Hedda Hopper that it was "time to get acquainted, or renew acquaintance with, the robust, cheerful, energetic and representative folk heroes".
After leaving Myers, he journeyed to Christiansburg, where he apprenticed for the next four years with hatter Elijah Griffith.
It is believed that many stories, such as the surrender and execution of Crockett, were created and spread in order to discredit Santa Anna and add to his role as villain."
He was defeated for re-election in the August 1835 election by Adam Huntsman.
Postal Service issued a 5-cent stamp commemorating Davy Crockett.
In 1802 he journeyed by foot back to his father's tavern in Tennessee.
'''David''' "'''Davy'''" '''Crockett''' (August 17, 1786 – March 6, 1836) was a 19th-century American folk hero, frontiersman, soldier, and politician.
The guns were moved closer to the Alamo each day, increasing their effectiveness.
If something had indicated to us the paper was made after that period or was from the 20th century and clearly a fake, we would not be offering it for sale.
He supported 1821 gubernatorial candidate William Carroll, over Andrew Jackson's endorsed candidate Edward Ward.
Several messengers were sent to James Fannin, who commanded the only other official group of Texian soldiers.
By December 1834, Crockett was writing to friends about moving to Texas if Jackson's chosen successor Martin Van Buren was elected President.
Andrew Jackson was appointed major general of the Tennessee militia in 1802.
On February 25, 1830, Crockett introduced a resolution to abolish the United States Military Academy at West Point, New York, because he felt it was public money going to benefit the sons of wealthy men.
Upon completion of that trip, he joined teamster Adam Myers on a trip to Gerrardstown, West Virginia.
Although Fannin ultimately decided it was too risky to attempt to reinforce the Alamo, historian Thomas Ricks Lindley concludes that up to 50 of Fannin's men left his command to go to Bexar.
In early 1836, Crockett took part in the Texas Revolution and was killed at the Battle of the Alamo in March.
First, no other accounts of Crockett's surviving the Alamo have surfaced besides de la Peña's diary.
Militia veteran William Arnold also entered the race, and Crockett easily defeated both political opponents for the two-year term March 4, 1827 – March 3, 1829.
They were the parents of William, David Jr., Robert, Alexander, James, Joseph and John, the father of David Crockett who died at the Alamo.
The siege ended on March 6, when the Mexican army attacked just before dawn while the defenders were sleeping.
David helped tend Siler's cattle as a buckaroo on a 400-mile trip to near Natural Bridge in Virginia.
However, in 1876, Alamo survivor Susannah Dickinson said that Travis sent three men out shortly after dark on March 3, probably a response to the arrival of Mexican reinforcements.
"The Ballad of Davy Crockett" from the Disney TV show had four different versions of the song hit the ''Billboard'' Best Sellers pop chart in 1955.
27 amendment to a bill sponsored by James K. Polk.
A local carpenter created a simple coffin, and ashes from the funeral pyres were placed inside.
Finally, in 2001, archivist David Gracy published a detailed analysis of the manuscript, including lab results.
They were later greeted by James Bowie and Antonio Menchaca, and taken to the home of Don Erasmo Seguin.
On January 2, 1834, Crockett introduced the land title resolution H.R.
John married Rebecca Hawkins in 1780.
He is commonly referred to in popular culture by the epithet "King of the Wild Frontier".
The earliest known paternal ancestor was Gabriel Gustave de Crocketagne, whose son Antoine de Saussure Peronette de Crocketagne was given a commission in the Household Troops under French King Louis XIV.
The freed former slave to Travis, Joe, claimed Travis died early on in the battle, on the north wall.
His father was in debt to Abraham Wilson for $36, so David was hired out to Wilson to pay off the debt.
John forfeited his property in bankruptcy in 1795.
Although friendly towards him in the beginning, Jean Finley eventually felt Crockett was not the man for her daughter.
It is a popular belief by many historians that de la Peña may have witnessed or been told about executions of some Alamo survivors, but in fact neither he nor his comrades would have known who these men were.
After a volley and a charge with bayonets, Mexican soldiers pushed the few remaining defenders back toward the church.
He was appointed to the Committee of Propositions and Grievances on September 17, 1821, and served through the first session that ended November 17, as well as the special session called by the governor in the summer of 1822, ending on August 24.
Daughter Matilda was born August 2, 1821.
Crockett often hunted wild game for the soldiers, and felt better suited to that role than the killing of Creek warriors and families.
A seventh-season episode of the Discovery Channel series ''MythBusters'' explored a story of Crockett's backwoods exploits: that he could stick an axe into a tree trunk, fire his long rifle from 40 yards away, and hit the edge so precisely that the bullet would split in two.
In 1854 his widow received a payment certificate for $24.00 from Texas.)
William and Elizabeth's son David was born in Pennsylvania and married Elizabeth Hedge.
Later, Crockett worked off a $40 debt to John Canady.
The amendment was defeated May 3, 1830.
They served under Colonel John Coffee in the war, marching south into present-day Alabama and taking an active part in the fighting.
John continually struggled to make ends meet, and in 1792, the Crocketts moved to a tract of land on Lick Creek.
However, Ben, a former American slave who acted as cook for one of Santa Anna's officers, maintained that Crockett's body was found in the barracks surrounded by "no less than sixteen Mexican corpses", with Crockett's knife buried in one of them.
During Andrew Jackson's election to the United States Senate in 1823, Crockett backed his opponent John Williams.
On November 12, 1835, Crockett and his entourage arrived in Little Rock, Arkansas.
During his last term in Congress, Crockett collaborated with Kentucky Congressman Thomas Chilton to write his autobiography, which was published by E. L. Carey and A. Hart in 1834 as ''A Narrative of the Life of David Crockett, Written by Himself'' .
The ''Jackson Gazette'' published a letter from Crockett on September 15, 1826, announcing his intention of again challenging Rankin, stating his opposition to the policies of President John Quincy Adams, Secretary of State Henry Clay and Rankin's position on the cotton tariff.
Just before daylight on March 4, part of the Texian force managed to break through the Mexican lines and enter the Alamo.
He found, among other things, that the paper and ink were of a type used by the Mexican army in the 1830s, and the handwriting matched that on other documents in the Mexican military archives that were written or signed by de la Peña."
From his home he traveled to Jackson, arriving there with 30 well-armed men, where he gave a speech from the steps of the Madison County courthouse, and then rode southwest to Bolivar, where he spent the night at residence of Dr. Calvin Jones, once again drawing crowds who sent him off the next morning.
Antoine married Louise de Saix and immigrated to Ireland with her, changing the family name to Crockett.
He seemed very confident the morning he went away that he would soon have us all to join him in Texas."
He represented Tennessee in the U.S. House of Representatives and served in the Texas Revolution.
He arranged for a justice of the peace and took out a marriage license on August 12, 1806.
Crockett became famous in his own lifetime for larger-than-life exploits popularized by stage plays and almanacs.
The men defended the low wall in front of the church, using their rifles as clubs and relying on knives, as the action was too furious to allow reloading.
In 1836, newspapers published the now-famous quote attributed to Crockett upon his return to his home state.
The newlyweds settled on land near Polly's parents, and their first child, John Wesley Crockett, who became a United States Congressman, was born July 10, 1807.
In October 1811, the family relocated to Lincoln County.
In November, Elizabeth's father Robert Patton deeded 800 acres of his Carroll County property to Crockett.
Crockett grew up in East Tennessee, where he gained a reputation for hunting and storytelling.
After being made a colonel in the militia of Lawrence County, Tennessee, he was elected to the Tennessee state legislature in 1821.
185 amendment to the land bill on January 29, 1830.
His vote was not popular with his own district, and in 1831 he was defeated in the election by William Fitzgerald.
Some historians, including Bill Groneman, found it suspicious that Sánchez Garza's compilation was published in 1955, at the height of interest in Crockett and the Alamo caused by Walt Disney's television miniseries about Crockett's life, ''Davy Crockett''.
Upon learning of this, John attempted to whip David but was outrun by his son.
Crockett went east to promote the book.
A second group was driven across the prairie by Mexican cavalry.
But the garrison awakened and the final fight began.
Crockett returned home in December.
Crockett opposed Jackson's 1830 Indian Removal Act, and was the only member of the Tennessee delegation to vote against it.
Crockett arrived at the Alamo on February 8.
He persuaded her to marry him, and a marriage contract was drawn up on October 21, 1805.
Incensed that his orders to take no prisoners had been ignored, Santa Anna demanded the immediate execution of the survivors.
In 1825, Crockett was elected to the U.S. Congress, where he vehemently opposed many of the policies of President Andrew Jackson, most notably the Indian Removal Act.
In that account, he describes with detail how Travis was heroic in his final moments, turning straight into the Mexican soldiers and facing his death with honor.
The local newspapers reported that hundreds of people swarmed into town to get a look at Crockett, and a group of leading citizens put on a dinner in his honor that night at the Jeffries Hotel.
Crockett introduced H.R.
Crockett spoke "mainly to the subject of Texan independence," as well as Washington politics.
He served until December 24, 1813.
Polly's father pleaded with Crockett to have the wedding in the Finley home.
After his death, he continued to be credited with acts of mythical proportion.
David returned to Canady's employment, where he stayed for four years.
Lindley stated that just before midnight, Crockett and one of the other men found the force of Texians waiting along Cibolo Creek, who had advanced to within  of the Alamo.
The coffin is thought to have been buried in a peach tree grove, but the spot was not marked and can no longer be identified.
In 1975, the Texas A&M University Press published an English translation of the book, called ''With Santa Anna in Texas: A Personal Narrative of the Revolution''.
John was one of the Overmountain Men who fought in the Battle of Kings Mountain during the American Revolutionary War.
Within 90 minutes, the battle was over, and the Mexican soldiers retreated.
When the Mexican soldiers breached the north outer walls of the Alamo complex, most of the Texians fell back to the barracks and the chapel, as previously planned.
In 1821, he resigned as commissioner and successfully ran for a seat in the Tennessee General Assembly, representing Lawrence and Hickman counties.
Less than two weeks after Crockett's 1821 election to the General Assembly, a flood of the Tennessee River destroyed Crockett's businesses.
The War of 1812 was being waged concurrently with the Creek War.
Crockett agreed only after Jean apologized for her past treatment of him.
In de la Peña's narrative, he adds a footnote which may align both versions.
There they joined another group of men who also planned to join the garrison.
On October 25, 1824, Crockett notified his constituents of his intention to run in the 1825 election for a seat in the U.S. House of Representatives.
Crockett appears in at least two short alternate history works: "Chickasaw Slave" by Judith Moffett in ''Alternate Presidents'', where Crockett is the seventh President of the United States, and "Empire" by William Sanders in ''Alternate Generals'' volume 2, where Crockett fights for Emperor Napoleon I of Louisiana in a conflict analogous to the War of 1812.
"The document's most energetic defender has been historian James Crisp, who found an 1839 pamphlet by de la Peña in which the Mexican said he was preparing his diary for publication - proof that, if nothing else, the Sanchez Garza text had a historical basis.
De la Peña describes the disposal of the dead and wounded as an ongoing process that took some time.
Daughter Rebecca Elvira was born December 25, 1818.
That evening, a fire was lit and the bodies of the defenders were burned to ashes.
Historians disagree on which story is accurate.
He also sold two rifles to Colonel O'Neal for $60.
He was re-elected for the March 4, 1829 – March 3, 1831 session, once again defeating Adam Rankin Alexander.
After the election results became known in August, his departure to Texas was delayed by a court appearance in the last week of October as co-executor of his deceased father-in-law's estate, and he finally left his home near Rutherford in West Tennessee on Nov. 1, 1835, with three other men to explore Texas.His youngest child, Matilda, later wrote that she distinctly remembered the last time she saw her father: "He was dressed in his hunting suit, wearing a coonskin cap, and carried a fine rifle presented to him by friends in Philadelphia&nbsp;...
On February 6, Crockett and about five other men rode into San Antonio de Bexar and camped just outside the town.
Each man was promised about  of land as payment.
The next year, John enrolled his sons in school.
126, but it never made it as far as being open for debate on the House floor.
The Fort Mims massacre near Mobile, Mississippi Territory, on August 30, 1813, became a rallying cry for the Creek War.
The problem with this: how would de la Peña have been able to distinguish Travis from any of the other defenders of the Alamo?
In 1817, Crockett moved the family to new acreage in Lawrence County, where he first entered public office as a commissioner helping to configure the new county's boundaries.
Part of the reason that de la Peña's memoirs are questioned comes from his detailed account of Col. William Travis' death in ''With Santa Anna in Texas''.
On February 23, to the surprise of the men garrisoned in the Alamo, a Mexican army led by General Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna arrived.
The names of Travis, Crockett, and Bowie were inscribed on the lid.
Crockett's opposition to Jackson's policies led to his defeat in the 1831 elections.
(After his death there was a claim for his heirs for $57.50.
He was well treated and paid for his services, but after several weeks in Virginia decided to return home to Tennessee.
Crockett sold off most of the acreage to help settle his debts, and moved his family to the remaining acreage on the Obion River, which remained in Carroll County until 1825 when the boundaries were reconfigured and put it in Gibson County.
According to Dickinson, before running to his post, Crockett paused briefly in the chapel to say a prayer.
By 1819, Crockett was operating multiple businesses in the area and felt his public responsibilities were beginning to consume so much of his time and energy that he had little left for either family or business.
He favored legislation to ease the tax burden on the poor.
He lost that election to the incumbent Adam Rankin Alexander.
