These include antimalarial drugs to prevent or treat infection; improvements in public health infrastructure to diagnose, sequester and treat infected individuals;  bednets and other methods intended to keep mosquitoes from biting humans; and vector control strategies such as larvaciding with insecticides, ecological controls such as draining mosquito breeding grounds or introducing fish to eat larvae and indoor residual spraying (IRS) with insecticides, possibly including DDT.
The committee's report "added up to a fairly thorough-going vindication of Rachel Carson’s Silent Spring thesis," in the words of the journal ''Science'', and recommended a phaseout of "persistent toxic pesticides".
The Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants, which took effect in 2004, outlawed several persistent organic pollutants, and restricted DDT use to vector control.
Along with the passage of the Endangered Species Act, the United States ban on DDT is cited by scientists as a major factor in the comeback of the bald eagle (the national bird of the United States) and the peregrine falcon from near-extinction in the contiguous United States.
A 2005 Lancet review stated that occupational DDT exposure was associated with increased pancreatic cancer risk in 2 case control studies, but another study showed no DDE dose-effect association.
Resistance and the harm both to humans and the environment led many governments to curtail DDT use in vector control and agriculture.
After the appointment of Arata Kochi as head of its anti-malaria division, WHO's policy shifted from recommending IRS only in areas of seasonal or episodic transmission of malaria, to advocating it in areas of continuous, intense transmission.
For comparison, treating  of cotton during a typical U.S. growing season requires the same amount of chemical as roughly 1,700 homes.
Eggshell thinning lowers the reproductive success rate of certain bird species by causing egg breakage and embryo deaths.
DDT remains on WHO's list of insecticides recommended for IRS.
Insects with certain mutations in their sodium channel gene are resistant to DDT and similar insecticides.
It is similar to the earlier  study regarding estimated theoretical infant mortality caused by DDT and subject to the criticism also mentioned earlier.
This study, which suggests a connection between DDT exposure and breast cancer that would not be picked up by most studies, has received variable commentary in third party reviews.
funestus'' Giles, indicates an urgent need to develop a strategy of insecticide resistance management for the malaria control programmes of southern Africa."
DDT is classified as "moderately toxic" by the US National Toxicology Program (NTP) and "moderately hazardous" by WHO, based on the rat oral  of 113&nbsp;mg/kg.
Production peaked in 1963 at 82,000 tonnes per year.
In 1945, DDT was made available to farmers as an agricultural insecticide and played a role in the final elimination of malaria in Europe and North America.
The biological thinning mechanism is not entirely understood, but strong evidence indictates that p,p'-DDE inhibits calcium ATPase in the membrane of the shell gland and reduces the transport of calcium carbonate from blood into the eggshell gland.
DDE caused eggshell thinning and population declines in multiple North American and European bird of prey species.
May Berenbaum, University of Illinois entomologist, says, "to blame environmentalists who oppose DDT for more deaths than Hitler is worse than irresponsible."
''Silent Spring'' was a best seller, and public reaction to it launched the modern environmental movement in the United States.
Malaria cases increased in South America after countries in that continent stopped using DDT.
In the United States, it was manufactured by some 15 companies, including Monsanto, Ciba, Montrose Chemical Company, Pennwalt and Velsicol Chemical Corporation.
In India outdoor sleeping and night duties are common, implying that "the excito-repellent effect of DDT, often reported useful in other countries, actually promotes outdoor transmission."
Due to hydrophobic properties, in aquatic ecosystems DDT and its metabolites are absorbed by aquatic organisms and adsorbed on suspended particles, leaving little DDT dissolved in the water.
A prospective cohort study of Chinese textile workers found "a positive, monotonic, exposure-response association between preconception serum total DDT and the risk of subsequent early pregnancy losses."
Resistance has been detected in Sri Lanka, Pakistan, Turkey and Central America and it has largely been replaced by organophosphate or carbamate insecticides, ''e.g.''
Its publication was a seminal event for the environmental movement and resulted in a large public outcry that eventually led, in 1972, to a ban on DDT's agricultural use in the United States.
After an initial six-month review process, William Ruckelshaus, the Agency's first Administrator rejected an immediate suspension of DDT's registration, citing studies from the EPA's internal staff stating that DDT was not an imminent danger.
This intervention, called indoor residual spraying (IRS), greatly reduces environmental damage.
Resistance was noted early in spray campaigns.
DDT is similar in structure to the insecticide methoxychlor and the acaricide dicofol.
In 1996, the country switched to alternative insecticides and malaria incidence increased dramatically.
IRS involves the treatment of interior walls and ceilings with insecticides.
A 2009 review, whose co-authors included persons engaged in DDT-related litigation, reached broadly similar conclusions, with an equivocal association with testicular cancer.
Around this time, toxicologist David Peakall was measuring DDE levels in the eggs of peregrine falcons and California condors and finding that increased levels corresponded with thinner shells.
However, another study in South Africa found generally lower costs for DDT spraying than for impregnated nets.
Unlike other insecticides such as pyrethroids, DDT requires long exposure to accumulate a lethal dose; however its irritant property shortens contact periods.
For example, DDT use is widespread in Indian agriculture, particularly mango production and is reportedly used by librarians to protect books.
Breast milk from South African mothers contains high levels of DDT and DDE.
The insecticide properties of "multiple chlorinated aliphatic or fat-aromatic alcohols with at least one trichloromethane group" were described in a patent in 1934 by Wolfgang von Leuthold.
The median serum DDE level of study group was lower than that typically observed in women living in homes sprayed with DDT.
DDT was less effective in tropical regions due to the continuous life cycle of mosquitoes and poor infrastructure.
First synthesized in 1874, DDT's insecticidal action was discovered by the Swiss chemist Paul Hermann Müller in 1939.
Some evidence indicates that the daughters of highly exposed women may have more increased TTP.
A 2015 case control study identified a link (odds ratio 3.4) between ''in-utero'' exposure (as estimated from archived maternal blood samples) and breast cancer diagnosis in daughters.
Organophosphate and carbamate  insecticides, ''e.g.''
One study concluded that "DDT is still a viable insecticide in indoor residual spraying owing to its effectivity in well supervised spray operation and high excito-repellency factor."
The minor component o,p'-DDT has weak estrogenic activity.
It is difficult, if not impossible, to predict when and where the breeding sites will form, and to find and treat them before the adults emerge."
DDT and DDE, like other organochlorines, have been shown to have xenoestrogenic activity, meaning they are chemically similar enough to estrogens to trigger hormonal responses in animals.
From 1950 to 1980, DDT was extensively used in agriculture&nbsp;– more than 40,000 tonnes each year worldwide&nbsp;– and it has been estimated that a total of 1.8 million tonnes have been produced globally since the 1940s.
WHO guidelines require that absence of resistance must be confirmed before using the chemical.
After the war, DDT was also used as an agricultural insecticide and its production and use duly increased.
The Convention was ratified by more than 170 countries.
A review of fourteen studies in sub-Saharan Africa, covering insecticide-treated nets, residual spraying, chemoprophylaxis for children, chemoprophylaxis or intermittent treatment for pregnant women, a hypothetical vaccine and changing front–line drug treatment, found decision making limited by the lack of information on the costs and effects of many interventions, the small number of cost-effectiveness analyses, the lack of evidence on the costs and effects of packages of measures and the problems in generalizing or comparing studies that relate to specific settings and use different methodologies and outcome measures.
India is the only country still manufacturing DDT and is the largest consumer.
Vietnam has enjoyed declining malaria cases and a 97% mortality reduction after switching in 1991 from a poorly funded DDT-based campaign to a program based on prompt treatment, bednets and pyrethroid group insecticides.
WHO's anti-malaria campaign, which consisted mostly of spraying DDT and rapid treatment and diagnosis to break the transmission cycle, was initially successful as well.
Pyrethroids such as deltamethrin are also more expensive than DDT, but are applied more sparingly (0.02–0.3&nbsp;g/m2 vs 1–2&nbsp;g/m2), so the net cost per house is about the same.
The US Agency for International Development (USAID) has been the focus of much criticism.
DDT is a persistent organic pollutant that is readily adsorbed to soils and sediments, which can act both as sinks and as long-term sources of exposure affecting organisms.
In the United States, these chemicals were detected in almost all human blood samples tested by the Centers for Disease Control in 2005, though their levels have sharply declined since most uses were banned.
According to CDC, such methods are not practical in Africa because "''Anopheles gambiae'', one of the primary vectors of malaria in Africa, breeds in numerous small pools of water that form due to rainfall&nbsp;...
Reasoning that DDT use became widespread in 1945 and peaked around 1950, they concluded that the ages of 14–20 were a critical period in which DDT exposure leads to increased risk.
Malaria remains the primary public health challenge in many countries.
In their campaign against the chemical, EDF petitioned the government for a ban and filed lawsuits.
Paul Russell, former head of the Allied Anti-Malaria campaign, observed in 1956 that "resistance has appeared after six or seven years."
William Shawn, editor of ''The New Yorker'', urged her to write a piece on the subject, which developed into her 1962 book ''Silent Spring''.
Resistance is largely due to agricultural use, in much greater quantities than required for disease prevention.
The agency claimed that in many cases alternative malaria control measures were more cost-effective than DDT spraying.
Its breakdown products and metabolites, DDE and DDD, are also persistent and have similar chemical and physical properties.
Before DDT, malaria was successfully eliminated or curtailed in several tropical areas by removing or poisoning mosquito breeding grounds and larva habitats, for example by eliminating standing water.
Eradication was abandoned in 1969 and attention instead focused on controlling and treating the disease.
The program switched to malathion, but despite initial successes, malaria continued its resurgence into the 1980s.
It was further described in 1929 in a dissertation by W. Bausch and in two subsequent publications in 1930.
This results in a dose-dependent thickness reduction.
It has been alleged that donor governments and agencies refused to fund DDT spraying, or made aid contingent upon not using DDT.
In the South Pacific, it was sprayed aerially for malaria and dengue fever control with spectacular effects.
2008 WHO estimates were 243 million cases and 863,000 deaths.
Routes of loss and degradation include runoff, volatilization, photolysis and aerobic and anaerobic biodegradation.
In the summer of 1972, Ruckelshaus announced the cancellation of most uses of DDT – exempting public health uses under some conditions.
Studies of malaria-vector mosquitoes in KwaZulu-Natal Province, South Africa found susceptibility to 4% DDT (WHO's susceptibility standard), in 63% of the samples, compared to the average of 86.5% in the same species caught in the open.
However, a study in Thailand found the cost per malaria case prevented of DDT spraying (US$1.87) to be 21% greater than the cost per case prevented of lambda-cyhalothrin–treated nets (US$1.54), casting some doubt on the assumption that DDT was the most cost-effective measure.
A study in the Solomon Islands found that "although impregnated bed nets cannot entirely replace DDT spraying without substantial increase in incidence, their use permits reduced DDT spraying."
DDT is the best-known of several chlorine-containing pesticides used in the 1940s and 1950s.
Experts tie malarial resurgence to multiple factors, including poor leadership, management and funding of malaria control programs; poverty; civil unrest; and increased irrigation.
The real change in the past two years 2006/07 was a new interest and emphasis on IRS in general – with DDT or any other insecticide – as an effective malaria prevention strategy in tropical Africa."
The book argued that pesticides, including DDT, were poisoning both wildlife and the environment and were endangering human health.
A 1994 study found that South Africans living in sprayed homes have levels that are several orders of magnitude greater than others.
It was not applied at all in sub-Saharan Africa due to these perceived difficulties.
Other studies found that DDT or DDE interfere with proper thyroid function in pregnancy and childhood.
White men had an increased risk, but not white women or black men.
The question of whether DDT or DDE are risk factors in breast cancer has not been conclusively answered.
About 89% of these deaths occur in Africa, mostly to children under age 5.
Case–control studies did not support an association with leukemia or lymphoma.
bednets or prompt access to anti-malarial drugs) varies and is dependent on local conditions.
DDT is an endocrine disruptor.
Reference is often made to ''Silent Spring,'' even though Carson never pushed for a DDT ban.
IRS with DDT did not play an important role in mortality reduction in these countries.
Returning to DDT and introducing new drugs brought malaria back under control.
These arguments were rejected as "outrageous" by former WHO scientist Socrates Litsios.
It is considered likely to be a human carcinogen although the majority of studies suggest it is not directly genotoxic.
DDT has been marketed under trade names including Anofex, Cezarex, Chlorophenothane, Clofenotane, Dicophane, Dinocide, Gesarol, Guesapon, Guesarol, Gyron, Ixodex, Neocid, Neocidol and Zerdane.
Thus far, pyrethroid resistance in ''Anopheles'' has not been a major problem.
The relative effectiveness of IRS versus other malaria control techniques (e.g.
However, these findings were criticized, as they were performed mostly by economic entomologists inherited from the United States Department of Agriculture, who many environmentalists felt were biased towards agribusiness and understated concerns about human health and wildlife.
Victor Yannacone, Charles Wurster, Art Cooley and others in the group had all witnessed bird kills or declines in bird populations and suspected that DDT was the cause.
So, politically correct or not, I am very confident that what we are doing is the right strategy."
DDT is one of many tools to fight the disease.
In response to an EDF suit, the U.S. District Court of Appeals in 1971 ordered the EPA to begin the de-registration procedure for DDT.
The director of Mexico's malaria control program found similar results, declaring that it was 25% cheaper for Mexico to spray a house with synthetic pyrethroids than with DDT.
Illegal diversion to agriculture is also a concern as it is difficult to prevent and its subsequent use on crops is uncontrolled.
Malaria Foundation International states, "The outcome of the treaty is arguably better than the status quo going into the negotiations.
It cataloged the environmental impacts of widespread DDT spraying in the United States and questioned the logic of releasing large amounts of potentially dangerous chemicals into the environment without understanding their effects on the environment or human health.
DDT's insecticidal properties were not, however, discovered until 1939 by the Swiss scientist Paul Hermann Müller, who was awarded the 1948 Nobel Prize in Physiology and Medicine for his efforts.
It is produced by the reaction of chloral () with chlorobenzene () in the presence of a sulfuric acid catalyst.
A more comprehensive approach to measuring cost-effectiveness or efficacy of malarial control would not only measure the cost in dollars, as well as the number of people saved, but would also consider ecological damage and negative human health impacts.
When John Stossel accused USAID of not funding DDT because it wasn't "politically correct," Anne Peterson, the agency's assistant administrator for global health, replied that "I believe that the strategies we are using are as effective as spraying with DDT&nbsp;...
The National Toxicology Program notes that while the majority of studies have not found a relationship between DDT exposure and breast cancer that positive associations have been seen in a "few studies among women with higher levels of exposure and among certain subgroups of women"
Estimated dietary intake has declined, although FDA food tests commonly detect it.
Even in 2010, California condors that feed on sea lions at Big Sur that in turn feed in the Palos Verdes Shelf area of the Montrose Chemical Superfund site exhibited continued thin-shell problems.
Investigative journalist Adam Sarvana and others characterize this notion as a "myth" promoted principally by Roger Bate of the pro-DDT advocacy group Africa Fighting Malaria (AFM).
DDT has on rare occasions been administered orally as a treatment for barbiturate poisoning.
In insects it opens sodium ion channels in neurons, causing them to fire spontaneously, which leads to spasms and eventual death.
Efforts shifted from spraying to the use of bednets impregnated with insecticides and other interventions.
In many areas early successes partially or completely reversed, and in some cases rates of transmission increased.
In 1955, the World Health Organization commenced a program to eradicate malaria in countries with low to moderate transmission rates worldwide, relying largely on DDT for mosquito control and rapid diagnosis and treatment to reduce transmission.
DDT was first synthesized in 1874 by Othmar Zeidler under the supervision of Adolf von Baeyer.
Some studies show that although DDE levels have fallen dramatically, eggshell thickness remains 10–12 percent thinner than before DDT was first used.
The term "total DDT" is often used to refer to the sum of all DDT related compounds (''p,p'-''DDT, ''o,p'-''DDT, DDE, and DDD) in a sample.
Most studies of DDT's human health effects have been conducted in developed countries where DDT is not used and exposure is relatively low.
John Quiggin and Tim Lambert wrote, "the most striking feature of the claim against Carson is the ease with which it can be refuted."
In a research from 1993 to 1995, Ecuador increased its use of DDT and achieved a 61% reduction in malaria rates, while each of the other countries that gradually decreased its DDT use had large increases.
The major component (77%) is the ''p'',''p' '' isomer (pictured above).
DDT and its breakdown products are transported from warmer areas to the Arctic by the phenomenon of global distillation, where they then accumulate in the region's food web.
DDT can still be effective against resistant mosquitoes and the avoidance of DDT-sprayed walls by mosquitoes is an additional benefit of the chemical.
China ceased production in 2007.
The decision thus created controversy.
DDT is still manufactured and used.
It is highly hydrophobic and nearly insoluble in water but has good solubility in most organic solvents, fats and oils.
Thereafter the program was halted to save money and malaria rebounded to 600,000 cases in 1968 and the first quarter of 1969.
A variety of usually simultaneous interventions represents best practice.
WHO reaffirmed its commitment to phasing out DDT, aiming "to achieve a 30% cut in the application of DDT world-wide by 2014 and its total phase-out by the early 2020s if not sooner" while simultaneously combating malaria.
The two cost-effectiveness estimates of DDT residual spraying examined were not found to provide an accurate estimate of the cost-effectiveness of DDT spraying; the resulting estimates may not be good predictors of cost-effectiveness in current programs.
They are stored mainly in body fat.
Some uses of DDT continued under the public health exemption.
Once the mainstay of anti-malaria campaigns, as of 2008 only 12 countries used DDT, including India and some southern African states, though the number was expected to rise.
While DDT's chemical and insecticidal properties were important factors in these victories, advances in application equipment coupled with competent organization and sufficient manpower were also crucial to the success of these programs.
Research data showed a strong negative relationship between DDT residual house sprayings and malaria.
These effects may cause developmental and reproductive toxicity:
p,p'-DDT, DDT's main component, has little or no androgenic or estrogenic activity.
Marine macroalgae (seaweed) help reduce soil toxicity by up to 80% within six weeks.
WHO's anti-malaria campaign of the 1950s and 1960s relied heavily on DDT and the results were promising, though temporary in developing countries.
DDE-related eggshell thinning is considered a major reason for the decline of the bald eagle, brown pelican, peregrine falcon and osprey.
The findings "support classification of DDT as an endocrine disruptor, a predictor of breast cancer, and a marker of high risk".
Usage peaked in 1959 at about 36,000 tonnes.
* DDT is associated with early pregnancy loss, a type of miscarriage.
The program eliminated the disease in "Taiwan, much of the Caribbean, the Balkans, parts of northern Africa, the northern region of Australia, and a large swath of the South Pacific" and dramatically reduced mortality in Sri Lanka and India.
The book claimed that DDT and other pesticides had been shown to cause cancer and that their agricultural use was a threat to wildlife, particularly birds.
The country resumed DDT vector control but the mosquitoes had evolved resistance in the interim, presumably because of continued agricultural use.
A WHO study released in January 2008 found that mass distribution of insecticide-treated mosquito nets and artemisinin–based drugs cut malaria deaths in half in malaria-burdened Rwanda and Ethiopia.
USAID's Kent R. Hill stated that the agency had been misrepresented: "USAID strongly supports spraying as a preventative measure for malaria and will support the use of DDT when it is scientifically sound and warranted."
In 2002, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported, "Overall, in spite of some positive associations for some cancers within certain subgroups of people, there is no clear evidence that exposure to DDT/DDE causes cancer in humans."
Industry sought to overturn the ban, while EDF wanted a comprehensive ban.
The evolution of resistance to first-generation drugs (e.g.
This endocrine disrupting activity has been observed in mice and rat toxicological studies.
The year after it appeared, President John F. Kennedy ordered his Science Advisory Committee to investigate Carson's claims.
As early as the 1940s, US scientists began expressing concern over possible hazards associated with DDT, and in the 1950s the government began tightening regulations governing its use.
For example, in Sri Lanka, the program reduced cases from about one million per year before spraying to just 18 in 1963 and 29 in 1964.
In 1962, Rachel Carson's book ''Silent Spring'' was published.
In parts of the world with rising living standards, the elimination of malaria was often a collateral benefit of the introduction of window screens and improved sanitation.
A 2007 case control study using archived blood samples found that breast cancer risk was increased 5-fold among women who were born prior to 1931 and who had high serum DDT levels in 1963.
Pyrethroid insecticides (e.g.
Its use in this context has been called everything from a "miracle weapon that is like Kryptonite to the mosquitoes," to "toxic colonialism".
Commercial DDT is a mixture of several closely–related compounds.
While the agency now funds DDT use in some African countries, in the past it did not.
In 1957 the ''New York Times'' reported an unsuccessful struggle to restrict DDT use in Nassau County, New York, that the issue came to the attention of the popular naturalist-author, Rachel Carson.
IRS is effective if at least 80% of homes and barns in a residential area are sprayed.
The researchers argued that DDT was the best pesticide for use in IRS (even though it did not afford the most protection from mosquitoes out of the three test chemicals) because the others pesticides worked primarily by killing or irritating mosquitoes – encouraging the development of resistance.
Roger Bate asserted, "many countries have been coming under pressure from international health and environment agencies to give up DDT or face losing aid grants: Belize and Bolivia are on record admitting they gave in to pressure on this issue from USAID."
DDT and DDE are resistant to metabolism; in humans, their half-lives are 6 and up to 10 years, respectively.
The EPA held seven months of hearings in 1971–1972, with scientists giving evidence for and against DDT.
A worldwide ban on agricultural use was formalized under the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants, but its limited and still-controversial use in disease vector control continues, because of its effectiveness in reducing malarial infections, balanced by environmental and other health concerns.
* Exposure to DDT can cause shorter menstrual cycles.
These methods have seen little application in Africa for more than half a century.
One preliminary study found that it is likely that the detriment to human health approaches or exceeds the beneficial reductions in malarial cases, except perhaps in epidemics.
DDT became a prime target of the growing anti-chemical and anti-pesticide movements, and in 1967 a group of scientists and lawyers founded the Environmental Defense Fund (EDF) with the specific goal of enacting a ban on DDT.
DDT continued to be produced in the United States for foreign markets until 1985, when over 300 tons were exported.
With pyrethrum in short supply, DDT was used extensively during World War II by the Allies to control the insect vectors of typhus – nearly eliminating the disease in many parts of Europe.
DDT is applied to the inside walls of homes to kill or repel mosquitoes.
EPA states that DDT exposure damages the reproductive system and reduces reproductive success.
Results about an association with  multiple myeloma, prostate and testicular cancer, endometrial cancer and colorectal cancer have been inconclusive or generally do not support an association.
* Studies generally find that high blood DDT or DDE levels do not increase time to pregnancy (TTP.)
In 2006 WHO reversed a longstanding policy against DDT by recommending that it be used as an indoor pesticide in regions where malaria is a major problem.
It was used in the second half of World War II to control malaria and typhus among civilians and troops.
Several meta analyses of observational studies have concluded that there is no overall relationship between DDT exposure and breast cancer risk.
Despite the worldwide ban, agricultural use continued in India, North Korea, and possibly elsewhere as of 2008.
* A review article in ''The Lancet'' states, "research has shown that exposure to DDT at amounts that would be needed in malaria control might cause preterm birth and early weaning&nbsp;... toxicological evidence shows endocrine-disrupting properties; human data also indicate possible disruption in semen quality, menstruation, gestational length, and duration of lactation."
Immediately after the announcement, both EDF and the DDT manufacturers filed suit against EPA.
