only 300 corpses were identified and 600 in 2009.
In 1992, Nelson pleaded guilty to a total of 20 charges, including 5 sectarian murders.
Arrow Cross rule, despite lasting only three months, was brutal.
Among them were the People's Will, the Bolshevik Battle Squad, and the Combat Brigade of the Socialist Revolutionary Party.
The most famous victims of the Oprichniki remains Kyr Philip Kolychev, the Metropolitan bishop of Moscow.
Hundreds of people, teachers, politicians, and union bosses were assassinated by government-backed forces.
Enraged, Tsar Ivan convened a Church council which declared Metropolitan Philip defrocked and imprisoned in a monastery for delinquent clergy.
On 30 November 1922, Liam Lynch issues what were dubbed the "orders of frightfulness", in which he ordered IRA members to assassinate members of the Irish Parliament, or Dáil Éireann, and Senators whenever possible.
According to authorities, 220 of its members carried out 694 murders of left-wing and liberal activists and intellectuals.
Walter Janka, a veteran of the Republican forces who remembers him described Mielke's career as follows,  "While I was fighting at the front, shooting at the Fascists, Mielke served in the rear, shooting Trotskyites and Anarchists. "
Attacks on university students were commonplace.
The greater share of the political executions during the 21 years of Military Dictatorship (1964–1985) were done by the Brazilian Armed Forces itself.
In order to prevent East German citizens from defecting to the West, orders were issued to border guards to shoot suspected defectors on sight.
They also rode black horses in order to inspire greater terror.
The secret killings of Assam (1998–2001) was probably the darkest chapter in Assam's political history when relatives, friends, sympathizers of ULFA insurgents were systematically killed by Death Squads.These extrajudicial murders happened in Assam between 1998 and 2001.
With the fall of this government following elections in 2001, the secret killings stopped.
Iraq was formed by the British from three provinces of the Ottoman Empire following the empire's breakup after World War I.
During these years, kangaroo courts and cavalier use of the death penalty were routinely used against suspected enemies of the State.
They were active from 1983 until 1987, under the Spanish Socialist Workers' Party's cabinets.
A large force group of Bushwhackers led by William Clarke Quantrill and Bloody Bill Anderson attacked and burned down the pro-Union town of Lawrence, Kansas in retaliation for the Jayhawker's earlier destruction of Osceola, Missouri.
These tactics were continued by the anti-communist White Movement during the Russian Civil War (1917-1920).
Another use of death squad tactics in Nazi Germany took place after the failure of the July 20th Plot, which had aimed to assassinate Hitler and dismantle the Nazi Party.
Mexican Catholics were also routinely hanged from telegraph poles along the railroad lines.
News reports on the use of death squads in Korea originated around the middle of the 20th century such as the Jeju Massacre and Daejeon.
Collins was assisted in this by IRA moles within Royal Irish Constabulary (RIC) and the Dublin Metropolitan Police.
Furthermore, former White Army Generals Alexander Kutepov and Evgeny Miller were abducted in Paris by the NKVD.
Led by Malyuta Skuratov, the Oprichniki routinely tortured and executed whomever the Tsar suspected of treason, including boyars, merchants, clergymen, commoners, and even entire cities.
According to a victims brother, Mirtala Linares', testimony, "He wouldn't tell us anything; he claimed they hadn't captured Sergio, that he knew nothing of his whereabouts – and that maybe my brother had gone as an illegal alien to the United States!
The most infamous operation of Weimar-era Communist death squads remains the 1931 slayings of Berlin police Captains Paul Anlauf and Franz Lenck.
It was also used during the Battle of Algiers by Paul Aussaresses.
During the interwar period, the NKVD routinely targeted anti-Stalinists in the West for abduction or murder.
During this period, his airplanes were permitted to smuggle narcotics into the United States without the interference of the Mexican Air Force.
There are certain vigilante death squads that are active in the Philippines, especially in Davao City where local death squads roam around the city to hunt criminals.
These groups were responsible for the extrajudicial killings of civilians and wanted or alleged criminals, including street criminals, looters and drug users.
The most infamous example of this remains the 1992 Mykonos restaurant assassinations, in which a group of anti-Islamist Iranians were fatally machine-gunned in a Greek restaurant in Berlin.
The latter attack, which was carried out by RAF members Brigitte Mohnhaupt and Christian Klar, involved firing an RPG-7 anti-tank rocket into the General's armored Mercedes.
They may comprise a secret police force, paramilitary groups, government soldiers, policemen, or combinations thereof.
As a rule, these groups were financed by members of the business community.
During the course of the Iraq War the country has increasingly become divided into three zones: a Kurdish ethnic zone to the north, a Sunni center and the Shia ethnic zone to the south.
There were death squads used by both the Falangists and Republicans during this conflict.
Honduras also had death squads active through the 1980s, the most notorious of which was the army unit Battalion 316.
Kenyan President Uhuru Kenyatta and the National Security Council of Kenya members denied operating an extrajudicial assassination program.
Composed largely of peasant volunteers and commanded by retired General Enrique Gorostieta Velarde, the Cristeros were also responsible for atrocities.
Between 1850 and 1852 the state appropriated almost one million dollars for the activities of these militias, and between 1854 and 1859 the state appropriated another $500,000, almost half of which was reimbursed by the federal government.
Despite the best efforts of the Anti-Treaty forces, both the Irish Army and the CID proved highly effective in both combat and intelligence work.
Notable cases include the Provisional IRA Internal Security Unit, commonly known as "the nutting squad", which carried out the killing of suspected informers and "collaborators" with the British security forces and the case of Brian Nelson, who was simultaneously an Ulster Defence Association member and an informant for the British Army's Intelligence Corps.
According to historian Tom Mahon, the Irish Civil War, "effectively ended," on 10 April 1923, when the Irish Army tracked down and mortally wounded Liam Lynch during a skirmish in the Knockmealdown Mountains of County Tipperary.
It was involved in several death incidents.
When death squads are not controlled by the state, they may consist of insurgent forces or organized crime.
In the State of São Paulo, Death Squads and individual gunmen called "justiceiros" were pervasive and executions almost were exclusively the work of off-duty policemen.
Among them were "death squads" in the form of killings of civilians by government agents that were denied by the government.
Campbell alleges that the difference between it and modern death-squads is that the Ku Klux Klan was composed of members of a defeated regime rather than the ruling governmental.
Shortly before German Reunification, West Germany's Federal Constitutional Court indicted former Stasi chief Erich Mielke for collusion with two Red Army Faction terrorist attacks against U.S. military personnel.
It has even been alleged that, under PRI rule, no drug traffickers were ever successful without the permission of the Mexican State.
The last surviving conspirator, former East German secret police head Erich Mielke, was belatedly tried and convicted for the murders in 1993.
This partial Westernization of the country can be seen paralleling similar events in Lebanon, United Arab Emirates, and Northern Iraq beginning in the late 1990s.
By their destruction the very air is made sweeter.
As British authority in Ireland began to disintegrate, Prime Minister David Lloyd George declared a state of emergency.
These groups operated night or day.
One Kenyan officer within the Council's General Service Unit also indicated that Israeli instructors taught them how to kill.
During this foray, members of the squad ordered or personally carried out the execution of at least 75 individuals held in Army custody in these garrisons.
When he protested, Wiegand was told that Abu Daoud was, "a friend of our country, a high-raking political functionary," and that there was no proof that he was a terrorist.
They included the Namibian ''SWAPO'' and the Angolan ''MPLA'' during the South African Border War, the ''FRELIMO'' during the Mozambican War of Independence and civil war, and Robert Mugabe's ''ZANLA'' during the Rhodesian Bush War.
This was the first of the massacres that made up the Holocaust.
In 1983, a police officer nicknamed "Cabo Bruno" was convicted for murdering more than 50 victims.
In Southeast Asia, extrajudicial killings were conducted by both sides during the Vietnam War.
This information was almost certainly used.
Allegations have been made by both journalists and American law enforcement of collusion between senior PRI statesmen and the Mexican drug cartels.
Prior to World War II, Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union fought a war by proxy during the Spanish Civil War.
I have paid them back in their own coin."
They ultimately institutionalized the practices into the Gulag system.
Since 1994, the South African Government elections have been won by the ANC, though the Democratic Alliance has strength in the Afrikaans-majority Western Cape, and the new EFF party is growing in support amongst frustrated young black voters.
Col. Wiegand had been sickened by the 1972 Munich massacre and was horrified that the GDR would treat the man who ordered it as an honored guest.
Red Army troops reached the outskirts of the city in December 1944, and the Battle of Budapest began, although it has often been claimed that there is no proof that the Arrow Cross members and the Germans conspired to destroy the Budapest ghetto.
When newspaper publisher Vladimir Dmitrievich Nabokov attempted to shield the intended victim, he was fatally shot by assassin Piotr Shabelsky-Bork.
During the 12-year regime of Joaquín Balaguer, the ''Frente Democrático Anticomunista y Antiterrorista'', most known as ''la Banda Colorá'', continued the practices of ''la 42''.
The ''Esquadrão da Morte'' ("Death Squad" in Portuguese) was a paramilitary organization that emerged in the late 1960s in the context of the Brazilian Military Dictatorship.
This was particularly the case during the 1990s when more than 80 writers, translators, poets, political activists, and ordinary citizens who had been critical of the government in some way, disappeared or were found murdered.
General Miller was not so fortunate and died in Moscow's Lubianka Prison.
According to the NGO ''Memoria y Justicia'', the squad killed 26 in the South and 71 in the North, making a total of 97 victims.
*It is also alleged that, during the time they lost the presidency, some of the most powerful PRI members were supporting and protecting drug cartels that they used as death squads against their criminal rivals, mainly during the Mexican drug war that the PAN party started against the Cartels.
A report from the country's public prosecutors office at the end of 2009 reported the number of 28,000 disappeared by paramilitary and guerrilla groups.
They included the assassination of Abubaker Shariff Ahmed "Makaburi", an Al-Shabaab associate from Kenya, who was among 21 Muslim radicals allegedly murdered by the Kenyan police since 2012.
András Kun, a Roman Catholic priest who commanded an Arrow Cross death squad while dressed in his cassock, was also convicted and hanged after the war.
They rounded up their victims, questioned them and then took them out to killing fields.
Those captured in arms against the Tsar's forces were tried by military tribunals before being hanged or shot.
Both deaths were believed accidental until 1961, when their murderer, Bohdan Stashynsky, defected to the West with his wife and voluntarily surrendered to West German prosecution.
In December 2014, Kenyan Anti-Terrorism Police Unit officers confessed to Al-Jazeera that they were responsible for almost 500 of the extrajudicial killings.
Priests and laity who refused to convert to Orthodoxy were either assassinated or deported to the GULAGs at Karaganda.
*In 2000, however, during an internal power struggle between former president Salinas and president Zedillo, the PRI was peacefully voted out from power, until 2013  when they regained their influence and power.
Death squads were instrumental in killing hundreds of real and suspected Communists.
The Russian military has been accused of using death squads against Chechen insurgents.
Following the Bolshevik Revolution, the former Russian Empire spent 73 years as a one party state ruled by the Communist Party of the Soviet Union.
In the modern era, Grupos Antiterroristas de Liberación (GAL) terrorist group were death squads illegally set up by officials within the Spanish government to fight ETA.
For example, Alianza Anticomunista Argentina was a far-right death squad mainly active during the "Dirty War".
This marked a turning point in the history of the Guatemalan security apparatus, and brought about a new era in which mass murder of both real and suspected subversives by government "death squads" became a common occurrence in the country.
Veteran Human Rights Watch researcher Cynthia J. Arnson writes that "particularly during the years 1980–1983 when the killing was at its height (numbers of killings could reach as far as 35,000), assigning responsibility for the violence and human rights abuses was a product of the intense ideological polarization in the United States.
The Bushwhackers shot down nearly 150 unarmed men and boys.
The uprising largely ended after the Holy See and the Mexican State negotiated a compromise agreement.
Based in Dublin's Oriel House, the CID were despised by the Anti-Treaty IRA, which referred to them as, "The Murder Gang."
They dressed in black garb, similar to a Russian Orthodox monastic habit, and bore the insignia of a severed dog's head (to sniff out treason and the enemies of the Tsar) and a broom (to sweep them away).
Among those to receive the death penalty was Max Matern, who was later glorified as a martyr by the East German State.
The masterminds behind the attempt on Pope John Paul II's life in 1981 by Grey Wolves member Mehmet Ali Ağca were not identified and the organization's role remains unclear.
Furthermore, all officials of the new Irish State were required to take an oath of allegiance to King George V of the United Kingdom.
Although the term "death squad" did not rise to notoriety until the activities of such groups in Central and South America during the 1970s and 1980s became widely known, death squads have been employed under different guises throughout history.
Veterans who had held officers rank were formed into the Auxiliary Division, the members of which were higher paid and received better supplies.
He also successfully sued and won, in French courts, in cases against the French newspapers that made the accusations.
Those with upper class origins were routinely targeted in this way during the early years of the Soviet Union.
*The PRI also used death squad tactics against the Zapatista guerilla movement in the Yucatán.
As a result, Carillo Fuentes became known as "The Lord of the Skies."
One example was Alianza Anticomunista Argentina, a far-right death squad mainly active during the "Dirty War".
In 2003, roughly 2,000 extra-judicial murders occurred in São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro, with Amnesty International claiming the numbers are likely far higher.
This paralleled the development of ethnic militias by the Shia, Sunni, and the Kurdish Peshmerga.
Quickly formed battalions raided the Yellow Star Houses and combed the streets, hunting down Jews claimed to be partisans and saboteurs since Jews attacked Arrow Cross squads at least six to eight times with gunfire.
A photograph taken of the event by American reporter Eddie Adams horrified people throughout the Western World and contributed to the anti-Vietnam War movement.
As control of the city's institutions began to decay, the Arrow Cross trained their guns on the most helpless possible targets: patients in the beds of the city's two Jewish hospitals on Maros Street and Bethlen Square, and residents in the Jewish poorhouse on Alma Road.
Szálasi was declared "Leader of the Nation" and prime minister of a "Government of National Unity".
The first organized use of death squad violence in Russia dates from the 16th century reign of Ivan the Terrible, the first Russian monarch to claim the title of Tsar.
The hostilities ended in 1921 with the signing of the Anglo-Irish Treaty, which guaranteed the independence of the Irish Free State.
The Klan soon had ''klaverns'' not only in the South, but also in the Midwestern states of Michigan, Minnesota, Indiana, and Illinois.
Under the reign of Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi (1941–1979) the SAVAK (Security and Intelligence Service) was founded.
The Cheka were initially a party organization and later were given official powers and authority for extrajudicial secret arrest, internment, and execution.
After universal-suffrage elections were held in 1994, the National Party was somewhat peacefully voted out from power and its members were either absorbed by the ANC or went on to be part of the future Democratic Alliance.
In 1981, it was reported by Amnesty International that this same "safe house" was in use by Guatemalan security officials to coordinate counterinsurgency activities involving the use of the "death squads."
That was how he answered us."
Beginning in the 1960s, the African National Congress (ANC) and its ally, the South African Communist Party (SACP) and Pan-Africanist Congress (PAC), began a campaign to topple South Africa's NP-controlled Government.
After defecting to the United States in October, 2000, Sergei Tretyakov, an SVR agent, accused the Government of the Russian Federation of following Soviet-era practices by routinely assassinating its critics abroad.
During the Irish War of Independence, the Irish Republican Army under Michael Collins made use of death squads and targeted killings.
The dog's head was also symbolic of "nipping at the heels of the Tsar's enemies."
Their oath of allegiance was:
Szálasi knew that the documents used by these diplomats to save Jews were invalid according to international law, but ordered that they be respected.
Twenty days later, Lynch's successor, Frank Aiken, gave the order to, "Surrender and dump arms."
Another former Battalion 3–16 member, Napoleón Nassar Herrera, was high Commissioner of Police for the north-west region under Zelaya and under Micheletti, and also became a Secretary of Security spokesperson "for dialogue" under Micheletti.
(see also Saints of the Cristero War).
At the orders of IRA Chief of Staff Liam Lynch, Anti-Treaty IRA began raising money for their cause via armed robbery of banks and post offices.
Those whom Freisler sentenced to death were routinely hanged from piano wire nooses within hours of their trials.
Then, in October 1944, Horthy announced a cease-fire with the Allies and ordered the Hungarian Army to lay down their arms.
The group was particularly active in the Brazilian Southeastern States of Guanabara and Rio de Janeiro, and remains active in the state of Espírito Santo.
In the 2000s, police officers remain linked with death-squad-type executions.
(see also Saints of the Spanish Civil War).
On 20 March 1920, Tomás Mac Curtain, the nationalist Lord Mayor of Cork, was shot dead in front of his wife and son by a group of RIC officers with blackened faces.
Because the death squads involved were found to have been soldiers of the Salvadoran military security forces, which were receiving U.S. arms, funding, training and advice during the Carter, Reagan and George H. W. Bush administrations, these events prompted some outrage in the U.S. Human rights activists criticized U.S. administrations for denying Salvadoran government links to the death squads.
The French military used death squads during the Algerian War (1954–1962).
Many others suffocated in specially designed poison trucks called gas vans.
The Chilean military regime of 1973–1990 also committed such killings.
Between the end of World War II and 1989, Germany was divided into the capitalist Federal Republic of Germany and the Communist German Democratic Republic, a one-party state under the Socialist Unity Party and its secret police, the Stasi.
Argentina used extrajudicial killings as way of crushing the liberal and communist opposition to the military junta during the 'Dirty war' of the 1970s.
Some scholars contend that the state financing of these militias, as well as the US government's role in other massacres in California, such as the Bloody Island and Yontoket Massacres, in which up to 400 or more natives were killed in each massacre, constitutes acts of genocide against the native people of California.
Military advisors like Vladimir Antonov-Ovseenko, journalists like Koltsov were open to infection by the heresies, especially Trotsky's, prevalent among the Republic's supporters.
Kun's cassock remains on permanent display at the House of Terror in Budapest.
Among the victims of Marxist death squads were Tsar Alexander II of Russia, the Grand Duke Sergei Alexandrovich of Russia, and the Georgian language poet and publisher Ilia Chavchavadze.
Many were executed, including Ferenc Szálasi.
While all three groups have operated death squads,
These tactics ended only with the surrender of Nazi Germany in 1945.
Death squads killed as many as 38,000 Hungarians.
Unlike its counterpart, the re-constituted KKK opposed not only non-whites, but also "White Ethnic" Americans, Jews, and Roman Catholics.
Hundreds of people, teachers, politicians, and union bosses were assassinated by government-backed forces.
The murder and subsequent trial has been publicized in the nonfiction bestseller ''The Assassins of the Turquois Palace'' by Roya Hakakian.
The Iranian regime later used death squads occasionally throughout the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s however by the 2000s it has appeared to almost entirely if not all cease their operation.
Iron Guard of Egypt was a pro-palace political movement1 or a secret palace organization which struck at Farouk of Egypt's enemies2 or a secret unit with a licence to kill, believed to take orders from Farouk personally3.
According to the agents, they resorted to killing after the Kenyan police could not successfully prosecute terror suspects.
During the Battle of Dublin (1922), the CID is known to have shot 25 Anti-Treaty militants, officially while, "resisting arrest."
The ''Tonton Macoute'' was a paramilitary force created in 1959 by Haitian dictator François "Papa Doc" Duvalier that murdered 30,000 to 60,000 Haitians.
The events of the Cristero War are depicted in the 2012 film ''For Greater Glory''.
Similar treatment was meted out to Palestinian terrorists from the ''Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine'', ''Abu Nidal'', and ''Black September''.
Prominent victims of the Mexican State's campaign against Catholicism include the teenager Jose Sanchez del Rio, the Jesuit priest Father Miguel Pro, and the Christian Pacifist Anacleto González Flores.
That afternoon, British security forces opened fire into the crowd during a Gaelic football match at Croke Park, killing 14 and wounding 68 players and spectators.
Even in post-Stalin era, the Soviet secret police continued to assassinate anti-communists in the West.
They may also be organized as vigilantes.
They have destroyed without trial.
One example of this is the 1968 Tlatelolco massacre, in which an anti-regime protest rally was attacked by security forces in Mexico City.
The most famous victim of the era's death squad violence remains Amir-Abbas Hoveida, Prime Minister of Iran under the Shah.
This General Order sanctioned the assassination of certain judges and newspaper editors.
During the 1980s, the Stasi carried out a mission to hunt down and assassinate West Germans who were suspected of smuggling East Germans.
Among their victims were Matthias Erzberger and Walter Rathenau, both of whom were cabinet ministers in the Weimar regime.
An upsurge in rebel activity in Guatemala convinced the US to provide increased counterinsurgency assistance to Guatemala's security apparatus in the mid to late 1960s.
During this period, the organization became a "death squad" engaged in "street killings and gunbattles".
The head of the International Bar Association, Mark Ellis, cautioned that any such involvement by foreign nations would constitute a breach of international law.
After the American Civil War began, the fraternal bloodshed increased.
In later centuries, Russian Tsars would declare a state of emergency and use death squad tactics in order to suppress domestic uprisings like Pugachev's Rebellion and the Russian Revolution of 1905.
These tactics were drastically accelerated following the October Revolution.
The Reagan administration downplayed the scale of abuse as well as the involvement of state actors.
''"...Catholic Church in Mexico is a political movement, and must be eliminated in order to proceed with a Socialist government free of religious hypnotism which fools the people... within one year without the sacraments, the people will forget the faith..."''
Therefore, Irish men and women who supported the Free State were regarded as traitors.
During the government of Asom Gana Parishad (AGP) leader and Chief Minister Prafulla Kumar Mahanta, a number of family members of ULFA leaders were assassinated by unidentified gunmen.
Furthermore, several secretaries working for the British Army High Command in Dublin were also working as spies for Collins.
The most famous victims of the Freikorps were of Communist leaders Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg, who were captured after the Spartacist Uprising and shot without trial.
In December 1980, three American nuns and a lay worker were gangraped and murdered by a military unit later found to have been acting on specific orders.
Apparently, the term was first used by the fascist Iron Guard in Romania.
I swear also not to eat or drink with the zemshchina, and not to have anything in common with them.
The trouble with an all powerful secret police in the hands of fanatics, or of anybody, is that once it gets started there's no stopping it until it has corrupted the whole body politic."
with both Muslim and Buddhist sectarian death squads still operating in the South of the country.
In June 1999, judge Juan Guzmán Tapia ordered the arrest of five retired generals.
Among its most famous victims are Father James Coyle, Medgar Evars, James Chaney, Andrew Goodman, and Michael Schwerner.
Titled, the Rotfrontkämpferbund they carried out assassinations of carefully selected individuals from the Weimar regime as well as rival political parties.
in the national capital of Baghdad some members of the now Shia police department and army formed unofficial, unsanctioned, but long tolerated death squads.
Some Freikorps veterans drifted into the ultra-nationalist Organisation Consul, which regarded the 1918 Armistice and the Versailles Treaty as treasonous and assassinated politicians associated with them.
The most famous such organization is ''Scuderie Detetive Le Cocq'' (English: ''Shield of Detective Le Cocq''), named after deceased Detective Milton Le Cocq.
Documents released in 1999 details how United States military and police advisers had encouraged and assisted Guatemalan military officials in the use of repressive techniques, including helping establish a "safe house" from within the presidential palace as a location to coordinate counter insugency activities.
Calles explained his reasons in a private telegram to the Mexican Ambassador to the French Third Republic, Alberto José Pani Arteaga.
