The winning team will typically have excelled in most, if not all, of these areas.
Each of these speeches is six minutes in length, and is followed by two minutes of cross examination.
The winner will have to excel in providing a clear understanding of the topic.
Debating societies were a phenomenon associated with the simultaneous rise of the public sphere, a sphere of discussion separate from traditional authorities and accessible to all people that acted as a platform for criticism and the development of new ideas and philosophy.
One side is supposed to defend the motion while the other must defeat it.
However, after 6 minutes, no more POIs are permitted.
This motion of drawing back and clapping is done with the flow of a dancer’s movements.
In these summary speeches it is typical for the speaker to answer the questions posed by the floor, as well as any questions the opposition may have put forward, before summarising his or her own key points.
It is based on the British Parliamentary style, but the primary difference is that the proposition's members are not called "government", since not only the political government congressmen of that country can introduce new parliamentary topics.
Henley was also instrumental in constructing the space of the debating club: he added two platforms to his room in the Newport district of London to allow for the staging of debates, and structured the entrances to allow for the collection of admission.
Since then site-specific development has become increasingly common in facilitating different debate styles.
These cultures vary sufficiently that most styles can find a home.
In 1780, 35 differently named societies advertised and hosted debates for anywhere between 650 and 1200 people.
In particular, in parliamentary democracies a legislature debates and decides on new laws.
At the end of the fifth minute the debate will be opened to the house, in which members of the audience will put questions to the candidate which they will have to answer.
Furthermore, although the main goal of the debater is to persuade the judge, IPDA also awards the best speakers within each tournament.
However, unlike a cross-examination style debate  another dominant debate style in Canada  Parliamentary debate involves parliamentary rules and allows interruptions for points of order.
Members of the parliament, assembly or congress then discuss the proposal and cast their vote for or against such a law.
However, there is no unique model in Brazil because many clubs debates were created before the creation of "Parli Brazil"  and not all modified their rules.
John Henley, a clergyman, founded an Oratory in 1726 with the principal purpose of "reforming the manner in which such public presentations should be performed."
Although evidence-based arguments are used, the central focus of IPDA is to promote a debate format that emphasizes public speaking and real-world persuasion skills over the predominate use of evidence and speed.
Extemporaneous speaking is a style that involves no planning in advance, and two teams with a first and second speaker.
Impromptu debating is a relatively informal style of debating, when compared to other highly structured formats.
The Cambridge Society served as a model for the subsequent foundation of similar societies at several other prominent universities, including the Oxford Union and the Yale Political Union.
At Parli Brasil, every speaker speaks for 7 minutes, with 15 seconds of tolerance after that.
The sides, one affirming the resolution and one negating the resolution, then prepare an opening speech, a cross-examination of the other side, and closing remarks for the round.
The negative will generally try to prove that it would be better not to do the plan or that the opportunity costs to the plan are so great that it should not be implemented.
The issue, by convention, is presented in the form of an affirmative statement beginning with "That", for example, "That cats are better than dogs", or "This House", for example, "This House would establish a world government".
If any or some of the teams cannot participate than replacements would be called in from the top 60 teams or based on strong recommendations from senior members of the University Debating community.
The Canadian Parliamentary debating style involves one "government" team and one "opposition" team.
Though established as an alternative to policy debate, there has been a strong movement to embrace certain techniques that originated in policy debate (and, correspondingly, a strong backlash movement).
In dependence on the union of Method and Wisdom, one is able to attain Buddhahood.
Policy debate is a form of speech competition in which teams of two advocate for and against a resolution that typically calls for policy change by the United States federal government.
The context in which the Australasia style of debate is used varies, but in Australia and New Zealand is mostly used at the Primary and Secondary school level, ranging from small informal one-off intra-school debates to larger more formal inter-school competitions with several rounds and a finals series which occur over a year.
During the rest of the speech, the speaker may be interrupted by Points of Information (POIs) from the opposite countries (debaters from France and UK may ask POIs to debaters representing Germany and Russia and vice versa, respectively).
There are many different styles of competitive debating, organizations and rules.
One purpose is to train and educate young people who may in future be required to debate and resolve matters.
Examples of more established sites include the Online Debate Network, Debate.org, and CreateDebate.
Debating can be competitive or for fun.
Each of the speakers' positions is based around a specific role.
Though they are often expressed via flaming and other forms of argumentation, which consist primarily of assertions, formalized debating websites do exist.
Since the 1976 general election, debates between presidential candidates have been a part of U.S. presidential campaigns.
High school debate events such as Congressional Debate, Model United Nations, European Youth Parliament, Junior State of America and the American Legion's Boys/Girls State attempt to stimulate the debating environment of legislatures.
The resolution, which changes bimonthly, asks whether a certain policy or action conforms to a specific value.
In order for the affirmative side to win, all of the negative contentions must be defeated, and all of the affirmative contentions must be left standing.
"Public forum" debating combines aspects of both policy debate and Lincoln-Douglas debate, but makes them easily understood by the general public by having shorter speech lengths, and long questioning periods, called "cross-fires", where the debaters interact.
After all four debaters have spoken, the debate will be opened to the floor, in which members of the audience will put questions to the teams.
Also, Extemporaneous Speech is considered in more areas, especially the in United States, as a form of Speech, which is considered separate from debate, or itself a form of debate with several types of events.
In schools and colleges, competitive debating often takes the form of a contest with explicit rules.
It may be presided over by one or more judges or adjudicators.
In jurisdictions which elect holders of high political office such as president or prime minister, candidates sometimes debate in public, usually during a general election campaign.
Parliamentary debate (sometimes referred to as "parli" in the United States, or "BP" in the rest of the world) is conducted under rules derived from British parliamentary procedure, though parliamentary debate now has several variations including the British, Canadian and American.
At the opening of a session of debate, the standing Challenger claps his hands together and recites the seed syllable of Manjushri, "Dhih".
On the "government" side, there is the "Prime Minister" and the "Minister of the Crown".
WUPID was the brainchild of Daniel Hasni Mustaffa, Saiful Amin Jalun and Muhammad Yunus Zakariah.
A characteristic of the Tibetan Buddhist style of debating is the hand gestures used by debaters.
Four teams representing four major European nations (for instance France, the United Kingdom, Germany and Russia) confront each other on a policy debate including two broad coalitions (online examples for sustainable energy  and defence).
Debaters normally alternate sides from round to round as either the "affirmative", which upholds the resolution, or "negative", which attacks it.
IPDA offers both "team debating" where two teams, consisting of two people, debate and individual debate.
The more recently founded National Parliamentary Debate Association (NPDA) is now the largest collegiate sponsor.
Debating is also carried out for educational and recreational purposes, usually associated with educational establishments and debating societies.
Originally most debate sites were little more than online or bulletin boards.
Some sites promote a contentious atmosphere that can border on "flaming" (the personal insult of your opponent, also known as a type of ad hominem fallacy), while others strictly police such activities and strongly promote independent research and more structured arguments.
Lincoln-Douglas debating is primarily a form of United States high school debate (though it also has a college form called NFA LD) named after the Lincoln-Douglas Debates of 1858.
Certain other sites have tended to be based on various debating niches - for instance, Naqeshny arose in Egypt out of the Arab Spring movement, Meevsu is based on the emerging technology of live video debate, and edeb8 has a focus on emulating the real-world debating experience.
It is a solo contest, unlike other debating forms.
The public was now willing to pay to be entertained, and Henley exploited this increasing commercialization of British society.
The premier event in the world of parliamentary debate, the World Universities Debating Championship, is conducted in the British Parliamentary style.
The speaking order is as follows: First Affirmative, First Negative, Second Affirmative, Second Negative, Third Affirmative, and finally Third Negative.
This style of debate is particularly popular in Ireland at secondary school level.
The debate style varies from site to site, with local communities and cultures developing.
Formal debates between candidates for elected office, such as the leaders debates that are sometimes held in democracies.
The outcome of a contest may be decided by audience vote, by judges, or by some combination of the two.
The origins of these societies are not certain in many cases however, by the mid-18th century, London fostered an active debating society culture.
Debates are usually conducted by proposing a law, or changes to a law known as Amendments.
The winner is chosen by audience applause at the end of the debate.
Among universities, it is unlikely that IPDA is the fastest growing debate association within the United States.
The presidential debates were initially moderated in 1976, 1980, 1984 by the League of Women Voters, but the Commission on Presidential Debates (CPD) was established in 1987  by the Republican and Democratic parties.
Two teams of five debate on a given motion.
This is the style used by the World Universities Debating Championship (WUDC).
This style includes two individuals, one functioning as the Challenger (questioner) and the other as the Defender (answerer).
Two opposing teams, consisting of two people, debate an affirmative motion (e.g.
A winner is declared in an Oxford-Style debate either by the majority or by which team has swayed more audience members between the two votes.
In a formal debating contest, there are rules for participants to discuss and decide on differences, within a framework defining how they will interact.
Speeches last 4:30 minutes with 30 seconds protected from POIs at either end of the debate.
The presidential debate's primary purpose is to sponsor and produce debates for the United States presidential and vice presidential candidates and to undertake research and educational activities relating to the debates.
They then immediately draw back their right hand with the palm held upward and at the same time, hold forth their left hand with the palm turned downward.
Each team has three members, each of whom is named according to their team and speaking position within his/her team.
Unlike debates sponsored at the high school or collegiate level, the participants, format, and rules are not independently defined.
The year 1785 was pivotal: The ''Morning Chronicle'' announced on March 27:
In the Turncoat format, emphasis is on the strength of argument and balancing of opinions.
In 2013, UFRN Debate Society was created ("Sociedade de Debates da UFRN") also made some changes based on the old "Clube de Debates de Natal" (Debate Club in Natal, Rio Grande do Norte).
The Australasian style debate consists of two teams, consisting of three people, who debate over an issue that is commonly called a topic or proposition.
Speakers were not permitted to slander or insult other speakers, or diverge from the topic at hand, again illustrating the value placed on politeness by late 18th century debaters.
In Canada, debating tournaments may involve a mix of parliamentary and cross-examination-style debate, or be entirely one style or the other.
Debate is a method of formally presenting an argument in a disciplined manner.
Here, the speaker is required to speak for 2 minutes "For the motion" , 2 minutes "Against the motion" and finally draw up a 1-minute conclusion in which the speaker balances the debate.
Two teams of two compete through six rounds of argument, giving persuasive speeches on a particular topic.
Both sides seek to win against the other while following the rules.
If the speaker accepts they are permitted to ask a question.
The debating style was brought to and evolved within Tibet.
On the "opposition" side, there is the "Leader of the Opposition" and the "Shadow Minister".
These speeches are each four minutes long.
Speakers were given set amounts of time to argue their point of view, and, at the end of the debate, a vote was taken to determine a decision or adjourn the question for further debate.
Lincoln-Douglas speeches can range from a conversational pace to well over 300 words per minute (when trying to maximize the number of arguments and depth of each argument's development).
The debate format is relatively simple; each team member of each side speaks for five minutes, alternating sides.
Each speaker will make a seven-minute speech in the order; 1st Proposition, 1st Opposition, 2nd Proposition, 2nd Opposition.
The debate continues with the first speaker of the United Kingdom, followed by the first speaker of Russia and it goes on with the respective second speakers.
WUPID was first held in December 2007 with Sydney University being crowned champion.
Most of the information presented in the debate must be tied in to support one of these contentions, or "signposted".
Rule sets on various sites usually serve to enforce or create the culture envisioned by the site's owner, or in some more open communities, the community itself.
It borrows terms such as "government" and "opposition" from the British parliament (although the term "proposition" is sometimes used rather than "government" when debating in the United Kingdom).
The format forces each debater to develop a winning strategy while respecting the coalition.
The format of the presidential debates, though defined differently in every election, is typically more restrictive than many traditional formats, forbidding participants to ask each other questions and restricting discussion of particular topics to short time frames.
In the Mace format, emphasis is typically on analytical skills, entertainment, style and strength of argument.
The right hand represents "Method" — the altruistic intention to become enlightened, motivated by great love and compassion for all sentient beings.
Each panelist presents a seven-minute opening statement, after which the moderator takes questions from the audience with inter-panel challenges.
Competitive debating is carried out at the local, national, and international level.
The closing team of each side must either introduce a new substantive point (outward extension) or expand on a previous point made by their opening team (inward extension), all whilst agreeing with their opening team yet one-upping them, so to speak.
The major goal of the study of debate as a method or art is to develop the ability to debate rationally from either position with equal ease.
Policing post content, style, and structure combine with frequent use of "reward" systems (such as reputation, titles, and forum permissions) to promote activities seen as productive while discouraging unwelcomed actions.
Each debater speaks for 5 minutes.
Traditional L-D debate attempts to be free of policy debate "jargon".
This makes the debate similar to a prepared debate for the "government" team and an impromptu debate for the "opposition" team.
While most member programs of the International Public Debate Association are associated with colleges or universities, participation in IPDA tournaments is open to anyone whose education level is equivalent to high school graduate or higher.
This format was commonly developed by The Franco-British Comparative Project and Declan McCavanna, Chairman of the FDA  and was featuring France, the UK, Germany, Russia and Italy.
The British Parliamentary (BP) debating style involves four teams: "government" or "proposition" (one opening, one closing) teams support the motion, and two "opposition" teams (one opening, one closing) oppose it.
Plans, counterplans, critical theory, postmodern theory, debate about the theoretical basis and rules of the activity itself, and critics have all reached more than occasional, if not yet universal, usage.
This is a traditional Buddhist form of debating that was influenced by earlier Indian forms.
The outcome of a debate may depend upon consensus or some formal way of reaching a resolution, rather than the objective facts.
The "for" side must debate points that will support the proposition; the "against" side must refute these arguments sufficiently to warrant not adopting the proposition; the "against" side are not required to propose any alternative.
The debate starts with the first speaker from France, followed by the first speaker of Germany (the opposite side), followed by the second speaker of France and the second speaker of Germany.
One main difference with both of them, however, is that extemporaneous speech focuses less on the implementation of the resolution.
Affirmative teams generally present a plan as a proposal to implement the resolution.
This way, using "government" as a synonym to "proposition teams" could create confusion about how the speakers are going to position themselves on debate.
This means that the assigned motion is not intended to be debated, and may even be a quote from a film or a song.
Each team is composed of two speakers (the Prime Minister and the Foreign Secretary).
The Debaters is a Canadian radio comedy show in which two debaters (usually stand up comedians) debate topics, which are deliberately comedic (such as "backseat drivers are helpful", "gravity is our friend" and "cats are smarter than dogs".
A ten-minute discussion period, similar to other formats' "open cross-examination" time follows, and then a five-min butch ute break (comparable to other formats' preparation time).
When the Challenger first puts their question to the sitting Defender, their right hand is held above the shoulder at the level of their head and the left hand is stretched forward with the palm turned upward.
Following the break, each team gives a 4-minute rebuttal.
WUPID is an invitational tournament that employs the BP or Worlds format of debating.
'''Public debate''' may mean simply debating by the public, or in public.
Finally, each panelist delivers a two-minute closing argument, and the audience delivers their second (and final) vote for comparison against the first.
With the increasing popularity and availability of the Internet, differing opinions arise frequently.
It invites the top 30 debating institutions in accordance to the list provided by the World Debate Website administered by Colm Flynn.
At the end of their statement, the Challenger punctuates by loudly clapping together their hands and simultaneously stomping their left foot.
For instance the second speaker of the affirmative team to speak is called the "Second Affirmative Speaker" or "Second Proposition Speaker", depending on the terminology used.
The topic subject may vary from region to region.
However, even within the United Kingdom, British Parliamentary style is not used exclusively; the English-Speaking Union (ESU) runs national championships for both universities (John Smith Memorial '''Mace''') and schools (ESU Schools '''Mace'''), (including representation from Ireland) in a unique "Mace" format named after the competition, while there are numerous standalone BP competitions hosted by universities and schools across the UK and Ireland throughout the year.
However, in announcing its withdrawal from sponsoring the debates, the League of Women Voters stated that it was withdrawing "because the demands of the two campaign organizations would perpetrate a fraud on the American voter."
Every speaker speaks for 6 minutes.
The "government" team then "squirrels" the motion into something debatable by making a series of logical links between the proposed motion and the one they propose to debate.
Deliberative bodies such as parliaments, legislative assemblies, and meetings of all sorts engage in debates.
It was developed by the debate club Streitkultur Türingen and was used for the first time in a tournament in 2001.
This alternating speech will go on until the third opposition.
After the first minute of each speech, members of the opposing team may request a 'point of information' (POI).
He made extensive use of the print industry to advertise the events of his Oratory, making it an omnipresent part of the London public sphere.
To further this goal, IPDA predominantly uses lay judges in order to encourage an audience-centered debate style.
Much of extemporaneous speaking is similar to the forms known as policy debate and Student Congress Debate.
The ''offene parliamentarische Debatte'' (Open Parliamentary Debate, OPD) is a German competitive debating format.
This is the case, for example, of the UFC Debate Society in Fortaleza ("Sociedade de Debates da UFC") which was established in 2010.
The second installation in 2008 saw Monash taking the trophy home.
The debate is structured with each party speaking in a particular order and for a define length of time.
No new points can be brought into the debate during the rebuttals.
Since then, they were also created UFSC Debate Society ("Sociedade de Debates da UFSC") in 2014 and the UFRJ Debate Society ("Sociedade de Debates da UFRJ") on June 25, 2015, and others.
In debate, one must have a good motivation, the best of which is to establish all beings in liberation.
In competitive debates, teams compete against each other and are judged the winner by a list of criteria that is usually based around the concepts of "content, style and strategy".
In 2004, the Citizens' Debate Commission was formed in the hope of establishing an independent sponsor for presidential debates, with a more voter-centric role in the definition of the participants, format, and rules.
This is a format specifically used in France (though the debates are commonly held in English).
The debate is judged on the quality of the arguments, the strength of the rhetoric, the charisma of the speaker, the quality of the humor, the ability to think on one's feet, and teamwork.
These changes were further implemented when Henley moved his enterprise to Lincoln's Inn Fields.
For example, the third speaker has the opportunity to make a rebuttal towards the opposing team's argument by introducing new evidence to add to their position.
The Mace debating style is prominent in Britain at the school level.
The debate ends when the proposition ends the reply speech.
In other words, the government can support or oppose the topic in session on the Congress.
The French Debating Association organizes its National Debating Championship upon this style.
The third WUPID will be held in University Putra Malaysia (UPM) in December 2009.
Nevertheless, in a campaign season heavily dominated by television advertisements, talk radio, sound bites, and spin, they still offer a rare opportunity for citizens to see and hear the major candidates side by side.
Most topics however, are usually region specific to facilitate interest by both the participants and their audiences.
Therefore, the speakers at the debate are called "First Member of Proposition", "First Member of Opposition", "Second Member of Proposition", and so on.
The last speaker is called the "Team Advisor/Captain".
The organization, which is a nonprofit, nonpartisan corporation, sponsored all of the presidential debates in 1988, 1992, 1996, 2000 and 2004.
They were all former debaters for UPM who took part at all possible levels of debating from the Malaysian nationals to the World Championship.
This means that the 1st and 7th minute is considered the 'protected' period where no POIs can be offered to the speaker.
not scheduled) and granted by the Speaker.
These trends have created a serious rift within the activity between the debaters, judges, and coaches who advocate or accept these changes, and those who vehemently oppose them.
The term is also used for a particular formal style of debate in a competitive or educational context.
It is a one-on-one event focused mainly on applying philosophical theories to real world issues.
Adjudication will depend on BP marking, but with particular recognition of principled debating.
Each of the six speakers (three affirmative and three negative) speak in succession to each other beginning with the Affirmative Team.
One side is typically in ''favor of'' (also known as "for", "Affirmative", or "Pro") or ''opposed to'' (also known as "against", "Negative", "Con") a statement, proposition, moot or Resolution.
Through logical consistency, factual accuracy and some degree of emotional appeal to the audience are elements in debating, where one side often prevails over the other party by presenting a superior "context" and/or framework of the issue.
In both team and individual debate a list of topics are given to the two sides thirty minutes before the start of the round.
4 minutes is allocated for the reply speech and no POI's can be offered during this time.
The drawing back and upraising of the right hand symbolizes one’s will to raise all sentient beings up out of cyclic existence and to establish them in the omniscience of Buddhahood.
After the floor debate, one speaker from each team (traditionally the first speaker), will speak for 4 minutes.
Manjushri is the manifestation of the wisdom of all the Buddhas and, as such, is the special deity of debate.
It features the competition of individuals in a multi-person setting.
The question for debate was introduced by a president or moderator who proceeded to regulate the discussion.
