Some banks set minimum and maximum purchase sizes, mostly for online-only cards.
Most banks in Hong Kong provide ATM cards with EPS capability.
MasterCard debit is also used by a small minority of institutions and operates in a very similar manner.
Less than 10% of CB cards were credit cards.
Megalink launched Paylink EFTPOS system in 1993.
Tipping with a debit card is usually not proposed but a service fee of 15%, where applicable, is already included in the price.
The debit card was mostly used for ATM transactions.
However, the previous sentence applies to all kinds of transaction types, at least when using a card issued by a European bank.
The new name for the local debit card in Malaysia is MyDebit, which was previously known as either bankcard or e-debit.
The most common cards in Bulgaria are Maestro and Visa Electron, accepted everywhere together with VISA and MasterCard.
The system is organised through a special banking association Currence set up specifically to coordinate access to payment systems in the Netherlands.
Most Indian banks issue Visa debit cards, though some banks (like SBI and Citibank India) also issue Maestro cards.
Laser adopted EMV 'Chip and PIN' security in 2002 in common with other credit and debit cards right across Europe.
The debit card had limited popularity in India as the merchant is charged for each transaction.
These two debit card brands operate offline in Israel (meaning the transaction operates under the credit cards systems & debited officially from the cardholder account only few days later, after being processed - though reflected on the current account immediately).
Although the four largest bank card issuers (American Express, Discover Card, MasterCard, and  Visa) all offer debit cards, there are many other types of debit card, each accepted only within a particular country or region, for example Switch (now: Maestro) and Solo in the United Kingdom, Interac in Canada, Carte Bleue in France, EC electronic cash (formerly Eurocheque) in Germany, UnionPay in China, RuPay in India and EFTPOS cards in Australia and New Zealand.
It is offered by two credit companies in Israel: One is ICC, short for "Israeli Credit Cards" (referred to as "CAL", an acronym formed from its abbreviation in Hebrew), which issues it in the form of a Visa Electron card valid only in Israel.
The cards are also sometimes used for authenticating transactions together with a card reader for 2-factor authentication on online banking.
Depending on the user's bank, a fee may be charged for use of EFTPOS.
Goods may be purchased using this system at most supermarkets, retail stores, pubs and restaurants in major urban centers.
In the United States, an FSA debit card only allows medical expenses.
Otherwise, transactions may be conducted in either credit or debit mode (which is sometimes, but not always, indicated on the receipt), and this has nothing to do with whether the transaction was conducted in online or offline mode, since both credit and debit transactions may be conducted in both modes.
The most commonly accepted are Visa and MasterCard, or the unembossed Visa Electron or Maestro.
Most businesses have to resort to manual "zip-zap" swipe machines in such case.
Cards commonly in circulation include Maestro (previously Switch), Debit MasterCard, Visa Debit (previously Visa Delta) and Visa Electron.
The annual fee for a deferred debit card is around €10 more than for one with immediate debit.
The maximum amount per transaction is set to €20 and the maximum amount of all contactless payments per day is between 50 and €100 depending on the bank.
The EFTPOS system is used for credit cards as well, with a customer selecting Credit Card and entering their PIN, or for older credit cards without loaded PIN, pressing OK and signing their receipt with identification through matching signatures.
It is used by some banks for withdrawals from their FSAs, medical savings accounts (MSA), and health savings accounts (HSA) as well.
The Danish debit card Dankort is ubiquitous in Denmark.
Debit cards may also be used on the Internet either with or without using a PIN.
Colombian debit cards are Maestro (pin), Visa Electron (pin), Visa Debit (as Credit) and MasterCard-Debit (as Credit).
Traditionally, FSAs (the oldest of these accounts) were accessed only through claims for reimbursement after incurring, and often paying, an out-of-pocket expense; this often happens after the funds have already been deducted from the employee's paycheck.
* , more than 80,000 Danish shops had a Dankort terminal, and another 11,000 internet shops also accepted the Dankort.
The primary market for prepaid cards has traditionally been unbanked people, that is, people who do not use banks or credit unions for their financial transactions, possibly because of poor credit ratings.
This means that cards issued by one network will typically work anywhere they accept ATM/POS cards for payment.
Merchants in France do not differentiate between debit and credit cards, and so both have equal acceptance.
They currently operate 10,000 terminals for their cardholders.
Therefore, using the card exclusively for qualifying purchases may be convenient for the customer, but it has nothing to do with how the card can actually be used.
However, J-Debit has not been that popular since then.
Shops may add surcharges to the price of the goods or services in accordance with laws allowing them to do so.
This is especially true in the United States, where check fraud is a crime in every state, but exceeding your credit limit is not.
In some countries and with some banks and merchant service organizations, a "credit" or offline debit transaction is without cost to the purchaser beyond the face value of the transaction, while a fee may be charged for a "debit" or online debit transaction (although it is often absorbed by the retailer).
Fixed EFTPOS terminals in most businesses utilise the public switched telephone network to contact the EFTPOS network, either utilising dedicated phone lines or sharing the merchant's voice line (especially in smaller businesses).
Carte Bancaire (CB), the national payment scheme, in 2008, had 57.5&nbsp;million cards carrying its logo and 7,76&nbsp;billion transactions (POS and ATM) were processed through the e-rsb network (135 transactions per card mostly debit or deferred debit).
In Japan people usually use their , originally intended only for use with cash machines, as debit cards.
Credit/debit card transactions in Israel are not PIN based (other than at ATMs) and it is only in recent years that EMV chip smart cards have begun to be issued, with the Bank of Israel ordering the banks and credit card companies - in 2013 - to switch customers to credit cards with the EMV security standard within 3.5 years.
It can be used on Poste Italiane's ATMs (Postamat) and on Visa's Electron-compatible bank ATMs all over the world.
As in most countries, fees paid by merchants in the United Kingdom to accept credit cards are a percentage of the transaction amount, which funds card holders' interest-free credit periods as well as incentive schemes such as points, airmiles or cashback.
Regardless of which transaction type was used, the purchase may result in an overdraft because the money is considered to have left the account at the moment of the card swiping.
This card is branded as KNET, which is the central switch in Kuwait.
Of these, 4.5&nbsp;million were processed on just a single day, 21 December.
In an everyday use this payment method is always called Paypass.
In addition, an increasing number of mobile operator, such as taxis, stall holders and pizza deliverers have mobile EFTPOS systems.
The fees charged to merchants on offline debit purchases—and the lack of fees charged merchants for processing online debit purchases and paper checks—have prompted some major merchants in the U.S. to file lawsuits against debit-card transaction processors such as Visa and MasterCard.
RBI has announced that such fees are not justified so the transaction has no processing fee.
Banks in France usually charge annual fees for debit cards (despite card payments being very cost efficient for the banks), yet they do not charge personal customers for checkbooks or processing checks (despite checks being very costly for the banks).
Established in 2000 by 17 largest Armenian banks.
Some consumers prefer "credit" transactions because of the lack of a fee charged to the consumer/purchaser; also, a few debit cards in the U.S. offer rewards for using "credit" (for example, S&T Bank's "Preferred Debit Rewards Card" ).
It is legal in France to set a minimum amount to transactions, but the merchants must display it clearly.
BancNet introduced their point of sale system in 1994 as the first consortium-operated EFTPOS service in the country.
Processing fees are paid by the businesses, which leads to some business owners refusing debit card payments for sales totalling less than a certain amount, usually 5 or 10 euro.
In 2010, in line with the mandatory EMV system, Local Singapore Banks started to reissue their Debit Visa/MasterCard branded debit cards with EMV Chip compliant ones to replace the magnetic stripe system.
The most popular prepaid debit card is "Postepay".
Visa and MasterCard, for instance, prohibit minimum and maximum purchase sizes, surcharges, and arbitrary security procedures on the part of merchants.
What may be referred to as a credit card, is most likely to be a deferred debit card on an associated bank current account, the most common type of card in Israel, somewhat like the situation in France, though the term "debit card" is not in common usage.
a 10% reduction for public transport fares) when paying with "Geldkarte".
Today, Irish debit cards are exclusively Chip and PIN and almost entirely Visa Debit.
Terminal services are provided by Equitable Card Network on behalf of the consortium.
Equens, an association with all major banks as its members, runs the system, and until August 2005 also charged for it.
They are different in that stored-value cards are generally anonymous and are only usable at the issuer, while debit cards are generally associated with an individual's bank account and can be used anywhere on the Interac network.
Originally, all Visa and MasterCard based debit cards in the Philippines are non-embossed and are marked either for "Electronic Use Only" (Visa/MasterCard) or "Valid only where MasterCard Electronic is Accepted" (MasterCard Electronic).
The debit card transactions are routed through Visa or MasterCard networks in India and overseas rather than directly via the issuing bank.
The system was abolished at the end of 2014.
Responding to allegations of monopoly abuse, it has handed over contractual responsibilities to its member banks through who now offer competing contracts.
EFTPOS cards can also be used to deposit and withdraw cash over the counter at Australia Post outlets participating in GiroPost, just as if the transaction was conducted at a bank branch, even if the bank branch is closed.
This may lead them to "steer" customers to debit transactions.
In Malaysia, the local debit card network is operated by the Malaysian Electronic Clearing Corporation (MyClear), which had taken over the scheme from MEPS in 2008.
In the United Kingdom, banks started to issue debit cards in the mid-1980s in a bid to reduce the number of cheques being used at the point of sale, which are costly for the banks to process; the first bank to do so was Barclays with the ''Barclays Connect'' card.
Iraq's two biggest state-owned banks, Rafidain Bank and Rasheed Bank, together with the ''Iraqi Electronic Payment System (IEPS)'' have established a company called  International Smart Card, which has developed a national credit card called 'Qi Card', which they have issued since 2008.
Merchants are usually charged higher transaction fees for credit transactions, since debit network transactions are less likely to be fraudulent.
The card is in limited use due to the virtual monopoly of the EPS Corporation which is co-owned by 21 major banks.
However, the regulation of settlement fees also removed the ability of banks, who typically provide merchant services to retailers on behalf of Visa or MasterCard, from stopping those retailers charging extra fees to take payment by credit card instead of cash or EFTPOS.
If the user fails to enter the correct pin three times, the consequences range from the card being locked out for a minimum 24-hour period, a phone call or trip to the branch to reactivate with a new PIN, the card being cut up by the merchant, or in the case of an ATM, being kept inside the machine, both of which require a new card to be ordered.
Union Bank of the Philippines cards, EastWest Visa Debit Card, Equicom Savings Bank & Sterling Bank of Asia EMV cards which can also be used for internet purchases.
Although merchants won the right through  The Credit Cards (Price Discrimination) Order 1990 to charge customers different prices according to the payment method, few merchants in the UK charge less for payment by debit card than by credit card, the most notable exceptions being budget airlines, travel agents and IKEA.
In Kuwait, all banks provide a debit card to their account holders.
Merchants may also offer cashback facilities to customers, where a customer can withdraw cash along with their purchase.
Debit cards are quite popular in Italy.
Most early keycards were only usable for EFTPOS and at ATM or bank branches, whilst the new debit card system works in the same way as a credit card, except it will only use funds in the specified bank account.
In Mexico, many companies use a type of debit card called a payroll card (tarjeta de nómina), in which they deposit their employee's payrolls, instead of paying them in cash or through checks.
Singapore also uses the e-purse systems of NETS CASHCARD and the CEPAS wave system by EZ-Link and NETS.
These cards have been heavily criticized for their higher-than-average fees, including some (such as a flat fee added onto every purchase made with the card) that similar products offered by Green Dot and American Express do not have.
The main international debit circuit used by Italian banks is Maestro: for this reason almost every debit card issued in Italy has both PagoBancomat and Maestro logos, with Bancomat/PagoBancomat being used in Italy and the Maestro circuit when abroad.
Canada has a nationwide EFTPOS system, called Interac Direct Payment.
The introduction of Visa and MasterCard debit cards along with regulation in the settlement fees charged by the operators of both EFTPOS and credit cards by the Reserve Bank has seen a continuation in the increasing ubiquity of credit card use among Australians and a general decline in the profile of EFTPOS.
The cards are usually processed online, but some cards can also be processed offline depending on the rules applied by the card issuer.
* In 2007, PBS (now called Nets), the Danish operator of the Dankort system, processed a total of 737&nbsp;million Dankort transactions.
This measure was put in place to minimise issuers' exposure to fraudulent charges.
Facilities already existed before EFTPOS became popular with the Eurocheque card, an authorization system initially developed for paper checks where, in addition to signing the actual check, customers also needed to show the card alongside the check as a security measure.
The banks in Angola issue by official regulation only one brand of debit cards: Multicaixa, which is also the brand name of the one and only network of ATMs and POS terminals.
It is also possible to get a Visa Electron debit card and MasterCard.
Banks involved included NETS Members of POSB-DBS, UOB-OCBC-SCB along with the SharedATM alliance (NON-NETS) of HSBC, Citibank, State Bank of India, and Maybank.
The major debit card vendors in Brazil are Visa (with Visa Electron cards) and MasterCard (with Maestro cards).
This payment method is now universal and accepted almost everywhere.
In Canada, the bank cards can be used at POS and ABMs.
These can be used anywhere the Visa logo is seen and in much the same way as a credit card.
Bank of America, for example, ran advertisements as far back as 2009, promising customers using its debit card zero liability for fraud, and restoration of the amount taken in one day, subject to certain requirements.
For example, a NYCE card will work at a Pulse POS terminal or ATM, and vice versa.
Previously, debit cards have been in use for ABM usage since the late 1970s, with Credit Unions in Saskatchewan and Alberta, Canada introducing the first card-based, networked ATMs beginning in June, 1977.
Internet transactions may be conducted in either online or offline mode, although shops accepting online-only cards are rare in some countries (such as Sweden), while they are common in other countries (such as the Netherlands).
Express Payment System or EPS was the pioneer provider, having launched the service in 1987 on behalf of the Bank of the Philippine Islands.
It is similar to Singapore's NETS and Mainland China's UnionPay
The U.S. federal government uses prepaid debit cards to make benefits payments to people who do not have bank accounts.
Laser also offered 'cash back' facilities where customers could ask retailers (where offered) for an amount of cash along with their transaction.
Smart-card-based electronic purse systems (in which value is stored on the card chip, not in an externally recorded account, so that machines accepting the card need no network connectivity) are in use throughout Europe since the mid-1990s, most notably in Germany (Geldkarte), Austria (Quick Wertkarte), the Netherlands (Chipknip), Belgium (Proton), Switzerland (CASH) and France (Moneo, which is usually carried by a debit card).
Slowly in the later half of the 1990s, it was estimated that approximately 50% of retailers offered Interac as a source of payment.
The system involves the merchant swiping (or inserting) the customer's card and entering the purchase amount.
In January 2016, 57.2% of all the debits cards in France also had a contactless payment chip .
Since 2006, Irish banks have progressively replaced Laser with international schemes, primarily Visa Debit and by 28 February 2014 the Laser Card system had been withdrawn entirely and is no longer accepted by retailers.
Certain financial institutions also allow their clients to use their debit cards in the United States on the NYCE network.
Australia operates both electronic credit card transaction authorization and traditional EFTPOS debit card authorization systems, the difference between the two being that EFTPOS transactions are authorized by a personal identification number (PIN) while credit card transactions can additionally be authorized using a contactless payment mechanism.
For very small amounts, this means it is cheaper for a merchant to accept a credit card than a debit card.
Goods may be purchased using this system at most supermarkets, retail stores, pubs and restaurants in major urban centers.
This chip can be charged with up to 200 euro, and is advertised as a means of making medium to very small payments, even down to several euros or cent payments.
In Canada, the debit card is sometimes referred to as a "bank card".
The first technology to be used was MasterCard PayPass, later joined by Visa's payWave.
However, since "credit" costs more for merchants, many terminals at PIN-accepting merchant locations now make the "credit" function more difficult to access.
Sterling Bank of Asia has released its first line of prepaid and debit Visa cards with EMV chip.
Prior to European standardization, Finland had a national standard (''pankkikortti'').
Previously, only cash withdrawal from ATMs was available to minors (''automaattikortti'' or Visa).
Laser was launched by the Irish banks in 1996 as an extension of the existing ATM and Cheque guarantee card systems that had existed for many years.
Many smaller merchants in France refuse to accept debit cards for transactions under a certain amount because of the minimum fee charged by merchants' banks per transaction (this minimum amount varies from €5 to €15.25, or in some rare cases even more).
At the same time, there were 125,000 Eftpos terminals in operation (one for every 30 people), and 5.1&nbsp;million Eftpos cards in circulation (1.27 per capita).
The UK has converted all debit cards in circulation to Chip and PIN (except for Chip and Signature cards issued to people with certain disabilities), based on the EMV standard, to increase transaction security; however, PINs are not required for internet transactions (though some banks employ additional security measures for online transactions such as Verified by Visa and MasterCard Secure Code).
In Bahrain debit cards are under Benefit, the interbanking network for Bahrain.
Cash can only be withdrawn from ATMs or, less and less, from banks.
Point of sale systems with integrated EFTPOS often sent the purchase total to the terminal and the customer swipes their own card.
Some debit cards are dual branded with the logo of the (former) national card as well as Maestro (for example, EC cards in Germany, Switch and Solo in the UK, Pinpas cards in the Netherlands, Bancontact cards in Belgium, etc.).
Parallel to this will be the expansion into retail stores through a network of points of sales of about 30,000 units by 2015'
A Carte Bleue without a Visa or a MasterCard logo is often known as a "Carte Bleue Nationale" and a Carte Bleue with a Visa or a MasterCard logo is known as a "Carte Bleue Internationale", or more frequently, simply called a "Visa" or "MasterCard".
Electronic Purse Cards (called Chipknip) were introduced in 1996, but have never become very popular.
In the late 2000s contactless cards started to being introduced.
The advantages of prepaid debit cards include being safer than carrying cash, worldwide functionality due to Visa and MasterCard merchant acceptance, not having to worry about paying a credit card bill or going into debt, the opportunity for anyone over the age of 18 to apply and be accepted without regard to credit quality and the option to directly deposit paychecks and government benefits onto the card for free.
Checks are no longer used.
In 2011 spending money using debit cards rose to 83&nbsp;billion euro whilst cash spending dropped to 51&nbsp;billion euro and creditcard spending grew to 5&nbsp;billion.
This popularity may be partially attributable to two main factors: the convenience of not having to carry cash, and the availability of automated bank machines (ABMs) and Direct Payment merchants on the network.
Those cards could also be used at ATMs and for card-based electronic funds transfer (called Girocard) with PIN entry.
However, since 1999, there have been several new providers, such as TransCash, 247card, iKobo.
The debit functionality of these cards is usually referred to as , and only cash cards from certain banks can be used.
The card usually enables immediate ATM cash withdrawals & balance inquiries (as debit cards do), instalment & deferred charge interest free transactions offered by merchants (also applicable in Brazil), interest bearing instalment plans/deferred charge/revolving credit which is transaction specific at the point of sale (though granted by the issuer, hence the interest), and a variety of automated/upon request types of credit schemes including loans, some of which revolve or resemble the extended payment options sometimes offered by charge cards.
KNET card transactions are free for both customer and the merchant and therefore KNET debit cards are used for low valued transactions as well.
This service allowed retailers to reduce volumes of cash in tills and allowed consumers to avoid having to use ATMs.
This means that, among other advantages, the new system is suitable for electronic purchases without a delay of two to four days for bank-to-bank money transfers.
In the U.S., EFTPOS is universally referred to simply as ''debit''.
The key factor here is that no processing fees are deducted by banks.
This is in contrast to a typical credit card transaction; though it can also have a lag time of a few days before the transaction is posted to the account, it can be many days to a month or more before the consumer makes repayment with actual money.
Most banks will, however, set this limit to $0 for debit cards issued to their customers which are linked to their checking or savings account.
As of 2013, several city governments (including Oakland, California and Chicago, Illinois) are now offering prepaid debit cards, either as part of a municipal ID card (for persons such as undocumented immigrants, who are unable to obtain a state driver's license or DMV ID card) in the case of Oakland, or in conjunction with a prepaid transit pass (Chicago).
Visa debit cards are issued by Union Bank of the Philippines (e-Wallet & eon), Chinatrust, Equicom Savings Bank (Key Card & Cash Card), Banco De Oro, HSBC, HSBC Savings Bank, Sterling Bank of Asia (Visa ShopNPay prepaid and debit cards)& EastWest Bank.
The need for cross-border compatibility and the advent of the euro recently led to many of these card networks (such as Switzerland's "EC direkt", Austria's "Bankomatkasse" and Switch in the United Kingdom) being re-branded with the internationally recognised Maestro logo, which is part of the MasterCard brand.
In some cases debit card-issuing banks will promptly refund any disputed charges until the matter can be settled, and in some jurisdictions the consumer liability for unauthorized charges is the same for both debit and credit cards.
Most of these debit cards are for medical expenses, though a few are also issued for dependent care and transportation expenses.
Debit cards may also be used by expatriated workers to send money home to their families holding an affiliated debit card.
It is offered mainly through the Israel Post (post office) bank (which is not allowed, by regulation, to offer any type of credit) or through Israel Discount Bank, its main owner (where it is branded as "Discount Money Key" card).
Today the Dankort is primarily issued as a multicard combining the national Dankort with the more internationally recognized VISA (denoted simply as a "VISA/Dankort" card).
Debit cards in Malaysia are now issued on a combo basis where the card has both the local debit card payment application as well as having that of an International scheme (Visa or MasterCard).
In 2014 the Isracard Direct card (a.k.a.
EPS can be utilised overseas only in limited circumstances, such as for POS transactions.
Around 2000, an Electronic Purse Card was introduced, dubbed Geldkarte ("money card").
In the mid 2010s Polish banks started to replace unembossed cards with embossed electronic cards such as Debit MasterCard and Visa Debit, allowing the customers to own a card that has all qualities of a credit card (given that fact that credit cards are not popular in Poland).
Some business mitigate the risk by consulting a proprietary blacklist or by switching to Girocard for higher transaction amounts.
Other cards are issued by other companies, such as Vodafone CashCard, Banca Popolare di Milano's Carta Jeans and Carta Moneta Online.
Generally credit card transaction costs are borne by the merchant with no fee applied to the end user (although a direct consumer surcharge of 0.5 - 3% is not uncommon) while EFTPOS transactions cost the consumer an applicable withdrawal fee charged by their bank.
Transactions conducted with offline debit cards require 2–3 days to be reflected on users’ account balances.
All banks offer a debit card suitable for EFTPOS with current accounts.
Interpay, a legal predecessor of Equens, was fined €47&nbsp;million in 2004, but the fine was later dropped, and a related fine for banks was lowered from €17&nbsp;million to €14&nbsp;million.
It is a client card issued by a bank that provides access to funds and other bank account transactions, such as transferring funds, checking balances, paying bills, etc., as well as point of purchase transactions connected on the Interac network.
Most CB cards are debit cards, either debit or deferred debit.
Banks who issue mainly Visa cards will rather offer electronic use, mandate authorized transaction only, unembossed version of Visa Electron deferred debit cards (branded as "Visa Basic" or "Visa Classic") to its customers - sometimes even in the form of revolving credit card.
There are both classic and prepaid cards.
In 2005, some banks issued customers with Lasers cards that were cobranded with Maestro.
In the United States, not all medical service or supply stores are capable of providing the correct information so an FSA debit card issuer can honor every transaction-if rejected or documentation is not deemed enough to satisfy regulations, cardholders may have to send in forms manually.
However, this has nothing to do with the card networks, but rather with the bank's judgement of the person's age and credit records.
The report also advises that governments should consider replacing any remaining cheque-based payments with prepaid card programs in order to realize substantial savings for taxpayers, as well as benefits for payees.
Any fees that the customers have to pay to the bank are the same regardless of whether the transaction is conducted as a credit or as a debit transaction, so there is no advantage for the customers to choose one transaction mode over another.
But more and more merchants accept debit cards for small amounts, due to the massive daily use of debit card nowadays.
In Hungary debit cards are far more common and popular than credit cards.
The system was launched in 1987, and in 2010 there were 258,585 terminals throughout the country, including mobile terminals used by delivery services and on markets.
All Bulgarian banks can provide debit cards when you open a bank account, for maintenance costs.
In this last case, only the credit-card mode is allowed for abroad/Internet transactions, while the debit card mode is used only in Italy.
Typically merchants don't pay fees for transactions, most only having to pay for the equipment rental.
It makes use of the smart card chip on the front of the standard issue debit card.
It did not gain the popularity its inventors had hoped for.
This method is preferred in many places because it is a much safer and secure alternative compared to the more traditional forms of payment.
The Israel bank card system is somewhat confusing to newcomers, comprising a blend of features taken from different types of cards.
In Austria and Germany, almost all current bank cards now include electronic purses, whereas the electronic purse has been recently phased out in the Netherlands.
Almost all business and stores in Poland accept debit and credit cards.
If the bank rejects a transaction, for instance, because it is not at a recognized drug store, then it would be causing harm and confusion to the cardholder.
Merchant codes and product codes are used at the point of sale (required by law by certain merchants by certain dates in the USA) to restrict sales if they do not qualify.
