or art, or with the violation of a duty inherent to that profession or art, lead to the additional penalty of a temporary ban in the
The truth was therefore a sufficient defense, for no man had a right to demand legal protection for a false reputation.
Once a claim has been made, the defendant may avail themselves of a defense of justification (the truth), fair comment, responsible communication, or privilege.
The case gained worldwide attention and is often said, inaccurately, to be the first of its kind.
A person who has made defamatory remarks will not necessarily be civilly liable for them.
German defamation lawsuits are increasing.
In addition, the crime of defamation (Article 595, Penal Code) refers to any other situation involving offending one's reputation before many persons, and has a penalty of up to a year in prison or up to 1032 Euros in fine, doubled to up to two years in prison or a fine of 2065 Euros if the offense consists of the attribution of a determined fact.
The origins of US defamation law pre-date the American Revolution; one famous 1734 case involving John Peter Zenger sowed the seed for the later establishment of truth as an absolute defense against libel charges.
Zenger was hired to publish ''New York Weekly Journal''.
When the offense happens by the means of the press or by any other means of publicity, or in a public demonstration, the penalty is of imprisonment from six months to three years, or a fine of at least 516 Euros.
The 1964 case ''New York Times Co. v. Sullivan'', however, dramatically altered the nature of libel law in the United States by elevating the fault element for public officials to actual malice—that is, public figures could win a libel suit only if they could demonstrate the publisher's "knowledge that the information was false" or that the information was published "with reckless disregard of whether it was false or not".
A notable characteristic of these crimes under Philippine law is the specification that they apply to imputations both real and imaginary.
The statement must be about that particular person for it to be categorised as defamatory.
In Canada, the so-called "blasphemous libel" is a crime punished with a maximum term of two years in prison, according to Article 296-1 of the Canadian Criminal Code, as well as the crime of "defamatory libel" (Article 298), which receives the same penalty (see Article 301).
In Bulgaria, defamation is formally a criminal offense, but the penalty of imprisonment has been abolished in 1999.
The laws made a number of changes to the Common Law, including:
In Brazil, defamation is a crime, which is prosecuted either as "defamation" (three months to a year in prison, plus fine; Article 139 of the Penal Code), "calumny" (six months to two years in prison, plus fine; Article 138 of the PC) and/or "injury" (one to six months in prison, or fine; Article 140), with aggravating penalties when the crime is practiced in public (Article 141, item III) or against a state employee because of his regular duties.
Penalty is a fine from 3,000 to 30,000 pesos.
Accordingly, for the purpose of criminal defamation, ''"reasonable restrictions"'' are defined in ''Section 499'' of Indian Penal Code, 1860.
If the offense refers to the attribution of a determined fact and is committed before many persons, penalties are doubled to up to a year in prison or up to 1032 Euros in fine.
Article 4 makes it a crime to defame a deceased person according to Article 1 or 2.
Uniform Defamation Laws was passed in Australia in January 2006 severely restricting the right of corporations to sue for defamation (see, e.g., ''Defamation Act 2005'' (Vic), s 9).
Rather, any person who believes he or she has been subject to defamation will have to press civil lawsuits.
Individuals are protected under the Defamation Act 2009 which came into force on the first of January 2010.
Human rights organizations, and other organizations such as the Council of Europe and Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe, have campaigned against strict defamation laws that criminalize defamation.
Other sections relevant to prosecution of these offences are §190 (Criminal conviction as proof of truth), §193 (No defamation in the pursuit of rightful interests), §194 (The Application for a criminal prosecution under these paragraphs), §199 (Mutual insult allowed to be left unpunished), and §200 (Method of proclamation).
Criminal libel was abolished on 12 January 2010 by section 73 of the Coroners and Justice Act 2009.
According to the Constitution of India, the fundamental right to free speech (Article 19) is subject to '''reasonable restrictions'''.
Related criminal offenses include "slander and assault" (Article 115), that happens "if a person insults, mocks, mistreats or threatens will ill-treatment another one in public", and yet "malicious falsehood" (Article 297), defined as a false accusation that exposes someone to the risk of prosecution.
''Hotzaat shem ra'' is worse, and consequently a graver sin, than ''lashon hara''.
* Providing new defences including that of triviality, where it is a defence to the publication of a defamatory matter if the defendant proves that the circumstances of publication were such that the plaintiff was unlikely to sustain any harm.
Truth is always a defense.
Here again, the plaintiff need only prove that someone had made the statement to any third party.
#Any person who has defamed any other person by alleging openly facts through information and communications networks anyone stating true comments by internet and email with the purpose of slandering him shall be subject to imprisonment with or without prison labor for not more than 3 years or by a fine not exceeding 20 million won.
Even though some of what ''The Times'' printed was false, the Court ruled in its favor, saying that libel of a public official requires proof of actual malice, which was defined as a "knowing or reckless disregard for the truth".
''Noonan v. Staples'' is sometimes cited as precedent that truth is not always a defense to libel in the U.S., but the case is actually not valid precedent on that issue because Staples did not argue First Amendment protection, which is one theory for truth as complete defense, for its statements.
"Defamation" is the general term used internationally, and is used in this article where it is not necessary to distinguish between "slander" and "libel".
183; up to two years in prison or at least 120 days of fine) and when the victim is an authority (art.184; all other penalties aggravated by an extra half).
For example, in the United States, the person must prove that the statement was false, caused harm, and was made without adequate research into the truthfulness of the statement.
International "comity" procedure or "intent" appear not key in Korea.
In any of the crimes covered by Chapter V of the Penal Code, the minimum penalty may be doubled (Article 453-bis) « when one of the motivations of the crime is hatred, contempt or hostility of a person due to his or her intended race, color of the skin, ancestry, national origin or ethnicity, nationality, gender, sexual orientation, marital status, place of birth, age, patrimony, philosophical or religious belief, present or future health condition, disability, native language, political belief, physical or genetical characteristic, or social origin."
The Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) has also published a detailed database on criminal and civil defamation provisions in 55 countries, including all European countries, all member countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States, the United States and Canada.
English law allows actions for libel to be brought in the High Court for any published statements alleged to defame a named or identifiable individual or individuals (under English law companies are legal persons, and allowed to bring suit for defamation) in a manner that causes them loss in their trade or profession, or causes a reasonable person to think worse of them.
Some jurisdictions also have the tort of "false light", in which a statement may be technically true, but so misleading as to be defamatory.
In addition to this criminal law, in Korea you can also sue for damages with civil actions.
Article 416 defines ''injuria'' as "all expression said or action performed that dishonors, discredits or causes contempt".
Everyone has the right to the protection of the law against such interference or attacks.
Title thirteen of the Revised Penal Code of the Philippines addresses ''Crimes Against Honor''.
Article 1 regulates defamation (''förtal'') and consists of pointing out someone as a criminal or as "having a reprehensible way of living", or of providing information about him "intended to cause exposure to the disrespect of others".
A person who defames another may be called a "defamer", "famacide", "libeler" or "slanderer".
There are two types of privilege in the common law tradition:
It is considered to be closed to detraction, the sin of revealing previously unknown faults or sins of another person to a third person.
When the defamation occurs in public, the crime is "aggravated defamation" (Chapter 24, Section 10), with a maximum punishment of two years in prison or a fine.
Chapter one of that title addresses libel and slander.
No proof of special damages is required.
There is a broader consensus against laws that ''criminalize'' defamation.
This means that even if the statement would be considered defamatory per se if false, if the defendant establishes that it's in fact true, an action for defamation per se cannot survive.
However, expressions referring to subjects of public interest or that are not assertive don't constitute calumny.
According to Article 216, an additional penalty to calumny or injury may be imposed by the judge, determining the publication of the judicial decision (in a newspaper) at the expenses of the defamer.
Essentially, this Act provides that libel is criminally punishable and describes it as: "Libel – the unlawful or prohibited act as defined in Article 355 of the Revised Penal Code, as amended, committed through a computer system or any other similar means which may be devised in the future."
To establish civil liability for defamation, the plaintiff must establish, on a balance of probabilities, the existence of an injury (fault), a wrongful act (damage), and of a causal connection (link of causality) between the two.
The 2006 reforms also established across all Australian states the availability of truth as an unqualified defense; previously a number of states only allowed a defense of truth with the condition that a public benefit existed.
In Austria, the crime of defamation is foreseen by Article 111 of the Criminal Code.
The Penal Code has not taken effect as of 2010, and there are no set date for this.
In 2005, uniform defamation laws were introduced across Australia.
361-A, § 1) is punished with at least three months in prison.
The record verdict rendered in favour of an individual was the award of $35.5 million against the Russian newspaper ''Izvestia'' in favor of entrepreneur Alex Konanykhin, who also won a $3 million judgment against ''Kommersant'', another Russian newspaper.
Criminal laws prohibiting protests at funerals, sedition, false statements in connection with elections, and the use of profanity in public, are also often used in contexts similar to criminal libel actions.
Article 246 of the Criminal Law of the People's Republic of China (中华人民共和国刑法) criminalizes defamation.
Finally, according to Article 425, in the case of calumnies and slander published in foreign newspapers, are considered liable all those who from Chilean territory sent articles or gave orders for publication abroad, or contributed to the introduction of such newspapers in Chile with the intention of propagating the calumny and slander.
In Korea true and false statements are punishable criminally and civilly with defamation; any words harming another can be considered illegal and may be punishable with fines and imprisonment up to seven years.
According to § 251, defamation lawsuits must be initiated by the offended person, unless the defamatory act was directed to an indefinite group or a large number of persons, when it may also be prosecuted by public authorities.
Most states recognize that some categories of statements are considered to be defamatory ''per se'', such that people making a defamation claim for these statements do not need to prove that the statement was defamatory.
Article 3 regulates other insulting behavior (''förolämpning''), not characterized under Article 1 or 2 and is punishable with a fine or, if it's gross, with up to six months of prison or a fine.
exercise of that profession or art.
Allowable defences are justification (the truth of the statement), fair comment (whether the statement was a view that a reasonable person could have held), absolute privilege (whether the statements were made in Parliament or in court, or whether they were fair reports of allegations in the public interest) and qualified privilege (where it is thought that the freedom of expression outweighs the protection of reputation, but not to the degree of granting absolute immunity).
In addition, Article 266-b prescribes a maximum prison term of two years in the case of public defamation aimed at a group of persons because of their race, color, national or ethnic origin, religion or "sexual inclination".
Publishers of defamatory comments may also use the defense of innocent dissemination where they had no knowledge of the nature of the statement, it was not brought to their attention, and they were not negligent.
Calumny is defined as "the false imputation to a determined person of a concrete crime that leads to a lawsuit" (Article 109).
With the growth of publication came the growth of libel and development of the tort of libel.
These steps are for an ordinary citizen.
Modern libel and slander laws (as implemented in many but not all Commonwealth nations) in the United Kingdom, and in the Republic of Ireland are originally descended from English defamation law.
Generally, criminal actions proceed civil ones with Korean police as judicial investigators..
The less severe cases can be solved by an action for apology, damages or injunctions.
Incitation to hatred and violence is also foreseen in the Penal Code (incitation to a crime, Article 286).
While an act of defamation involves a third person, it is not a requirement for insulting behavior.
The equivalent of the defence of justification is "veritas".
In ''Hill v. Church of Scientology of Toronto'' (1995), the Supreme Court of Canada rejected the ''actual malice'' test adopted in the US case ''New York Times Co. v. Sullivan''.
In addition, defamation may result in up to two months in prison and/or a fine, while aggravated defamation can lead to at least 3 months of prison, plus a possible fine (Article 363) and deprivation of the offender's civil rights.
Civil actions for damages seem to have been relatively frequent so far back as the reign of Edward I (1272–1307), though it is unknown whether any generally applicable criminal process was in use.
Penalties are aggravated in cases with publicity (art.
It should be noted that truth is an absolute defense to defamation per se.
According to Article 30, the penalty of "lower imprisonment" in its medium or minimum degrees carries with it also the suspension of the exercise of a public position during the prison term.
This judgment was significant as it demonstrated that tweets, consisting of even as little as three words, can be defamatory, as was held in this case.
In Poland, defamation is a crime that consists of accusing someone of a conduct that may degrade him in public opinion or expose him "to the loss of confidence necessary for a given position, occupation or type of activity".
Intent is always presumed, and it is not necessary to prove that the defendant intended to defame.
Moreover, in situations like bullying or moral constraint, defamation acts are also covered by the crimes of "illegal constraint" (Article 146 of the Penal Code) and "arbitrary exercise of discretion" (Article 345 of PC), defined as breaking the law as a vigilante.
In Spain, the crime of calumny (Article 205 of the Penal Code) consists of offending one's reputation knowing the falsity of the offense, or with a reckless contempt for truth.
In the United States, a comprehensive discussion of what is and is not libel or slander is difficult, because the definition differs between different states, and under federal law.
The first fully reported case in which libel is affirmed generally to be punishable at common law was tried during the reign of James I.
According to the OSCE report on defamation laws, "Azerbaijan intends to remove articles on defamation and insult from criminal legislation and preserve them in the Civil Code".
When there is harm to somebody, penalties are aggravated by an extra half (Article 117 bis, §§ 2nd and 3rd).
Calumny is defined as "the false imputation of a determined crime and that can lead to a public prosecution" (Article 412).
In Croatia, the crime of insult prescribes a penalty of up to three months in prison, or a fine of "up to 100 daily incomes" (Criminal Code, Article 199).
*"Qualified privilege" may be available to the journalist as a defense in circumstances where it is considered important that the facts be known in the public interest; an example would be public meetings, local government documents, and information relating to public bodies such as the police and fire departments.
However, there are nine states (Idaho, Georgia, Kansas, Louisiana, Nevada, North Dakota, Oklahoma, Utah and Washington) that have criminal statutes regarding defamation of the dead.
When the offender acts "against his better judgment", he is liable to a maximum prison term of three years (§ 248).
, five petitions claiming the law to be unconstitutional had been filed with the Philippine Supreme Court, one by Senator Teofisto Guingona III.
"Grave slander" in written form or with publicity are punished with "lower imprisonment" in its minimum to medium degrees plus a fine of 11 to 20 "vital wages".
In Belgium, crimes against honour are foreseen in Chapter V of the Belgian Penal Code, Articles 443 to 453-bis.
However, personalities involved in the fields of politics, business, public office or public position, "or in a comparable position", are specifically not protected by this article.
The outcome of the case is one of jury nullification, and not a case where the defense acquitted itself as a matter of law.
In Anglo-Saxon England, slander was punished by cutting out the tongue.
Drawing on the argument of Labeo, he asserted that the offense consisted in shouting contrary to the morals of the city ("adversus bonos mores huius civitatis") something apt to bring in disrepute or contempt ("quae... ad infamiam vel invidiam alicuius spectaret") the person exposed thereto.
The crime of injury (Article 594 of the Penal Code) refers to offending one's honor and is punished with up to six months in prison or up to 516 Euros in fine.
Slander by deed is defined as "any act not included and punished in this title, which shall cast dishonor, discredit or contempt upon another person."
Media liability insurance is available to newspapers to cover potential damage awards from libel lawsuits.
However, only the most severe cases will be subjets to criminal liability.
Among the various common law jurisdictions, some Americans have presented a visceral and vocal reaction to the ''Gutnick'' decision.
He who intentionally dishonor or discredit a determined person is punished with a penalty from 1,500 to 20,000 pesos (Article 110).
Such "closet defamation" may be used to conceal other criminal or negligent acts.
Public interest is generally not "what the public is interested in", but rather "what is in the interest of the public".
Even if a statement is defamatory, there are circumstances in which such statements are permissible in law.
185; up to 6 months in prison or a fine of up 240 days).
If the crime is committed in public, the prison term can reach one year (Article 200-2).
Libel is defined as "public and malicious imputation of a crime, or of a vice or defect, real or imaginary, or any act, omission, condition, status, or circumstance tending to cause the dishonor, discredit, or contempt of a natural or juridical person, or to blacken the memory of one who is dead."
Such newly created or circumstantially recognized privileges are referred to as residual justification privileges.
The use of the defense of justification has dangers, however; if the defendant libels the plaintiff and then runs the defense of truth and fails, he may be said to have aggravated the harm.
With the rise of the internet, and also intranets (closed computer networks), defamatory statements may be communicated on webpages or internal memos, without reaching the attention of the courts.
If the crime is committed in public, penalties are aggravated to up to six months of imprisonment, or a fine of "up to 150 daily incomes" (Article 199-2).
Some jurisdictions have a separate tort or delict of "verbal injury", "intentional infliction of emotional distress", "outrageousness", or "convicium", involving the making of a statement, even if truthful, intended to harm the claimant out of malice; some have a separate tort or delict of "invasion of privacy" in which the making of a true statement may give rise to liability: but neither of these comes under the general heading of "defamation".
A more recent case in defamation law was ''Hockey v Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited'' 2015, heard in the Federal Court of Australia.
* The defences against defamation may be negated if there is proof the publication was actuated by malice.
In the absence of charged facts, it is an insult.
The criminal portion of the law has been rarely applied.
The Hebrew term lashon hara is the halakhic term for derogatory speech about another person.
Calumny or slander of a deceased person (Article 424) can be prosecuted by the spouse, children, grandchildren, parents, grandparents, siblings and heirs of the offended person.
Professor Harry Roque of the University of the Philippines has written that under this law, electronic libel is punished with imprisonment from 6 years and one day to up to 12 years.
The only corporations excluded from the general ban are those not for profit or those with less than 10 employees and not affiliated with another company.
#Any person who has defamed any other person by alleging openly false facts via information and communications networks anyone stating false comments on the internet and email with the purpose of slandering him/her shall be subject to imprisonment with prison labor for not more than 7 years or the suspension of disqualification for not more than 10 years, or by a fine not exceeding 50 million won approximately US$50,000.
In addition, the crime of "calumnious denunciation" (Article 445) is punished with 15 days to six months in prison, plus a fine.
The remedy for verbal defamation was long confined to a civil action for a monetary penalty, which was estimated according to the significance of the case, and which, although vindictive in its character, doubtless included practically the element of compensation.
The boundaries of a court's power to hold individuals in "contempt of court" for what amounts to alleged defamatory statements about judges or the court process by attorneys or other people involved in court cases is also not well established in many common law countries.
Insulting (Article 119) can lead to a fine or up to six months of imprisonment (if in public, up to a year), while libel (Article 120) may result in a fine or up to a year of prison (up to 2 years when in public).
The average period in prison was 270 days, and the maximum sentence was 1460 days of imprisonment.
The punishment for Defamation is a simple imprisonment for up to two years or with fine or with both.
Proving adverse public character statements to be true is often the best defense against a prosecution for libel or defamation.
On the other hand, according to Article 203, there is an exemption for the application of the aforementioned articles (insult and defamation) when the specific context is that of a scientific work, literary work, work of art, public information conducted by a politician or a government official, journalistic work, or the defense of a right or the protection of justifiable interests, in all cases ''provided that'' the conduct was not aimed at damaging someone's reputation.
Penalties are aggravated to up to three years of prison if the victim is falsely accused of having committed a crime "of grave or very grave nature" (Article 147.2).
Privilege can be argued whenever a defendant can show that he acted from a justifiable motive.
If the calumny is written and with publicity, penalty is "lower imprisonment" in its medium degree plus a fine of 11 to 20 "vital wages" when it refers to a crime, or "lower imprisonment" in its minimum degree plus a fine of 6 to 10 "vital wages" when it refers to a misdemeanor (Article 413).
The penalty is 8 days to one year of imprisonment, plus a fine (Article 444).
It is based on the New York State 2008 Libel Terrorism Protection Act (also known as "Rachel’s Law," after Rachel Ehrenfeld who initiated the state and federal laws).
This 2009 Act repeals the Defamation Act 1961, which had, together with the underlying principles of the common law of tort, governed Irish defamation law for almost half a century.
Corporations may, however, still sue for the tort of injurious falsehood, where the burden of proof is greater than for mere defamation, because the plaintiff must show that the defamation was made with malice and resulted in economic loss.
Any act apt to bring another person into disrepute gave rise to an ''actio injurarum''.
The defendant needs to prove that the defamatory imputations are substantially true.
On the other hand, the decision mirrors similar decisions in many other jurisdictions such as England, Scotland, France, Canada and Italy.
When the insult is public and aims at offending a group of people or an individual because of his or their nationality, ethnicity, race, religion or lack of religion, the maximum prison term is 3 years.
The U.S. Supreme Court overruled a State court in Alabama that had found ''The New York Times'' guilty of libel for printing an advertisement that criticized Alabama officials for mistreating student civil rights activists.
Some jurisdictions decline to recognize any legal distinction between fact and opinion.
Section 6 of the Libel Act 1843 allowed the proven truth of the allegation to be used as a valid defense in criminal libel cases, but only if the defendant also demonstrated that publication was for the "Public Benefit".
Statements of opinion that cannot be proven true or false will likely need to apply some other kind of defense.
The Court, when given judgment as to the liability for wrongful act and the amount of compensation, shall not be bound by the provisions of the criminal law concerning liability to punishment or by the conviction or non-conviction of the wrongdoer for a criminal offence."
In many legal systems, adverse public statements about legal citizens presented as fact must be proven false to be defamatory or slanderous/libellous.
A defamatory statement is presumed to be false unless the defendant can prove its truth.
The Act has a one-year limitation period which can be extended to two years in exceptional circumstances.
Under exemptions in the Freedom of the Press Act, Chapter 7, both criminal and civil lawsuits may be brought to court under the laws on denigration.
The relevant offences of Germany's Criminal Code are §90 (Denigration of the President of State), §90a (Denigration of the State and its Symbols), §90b (Unconstitutional denigration of the Organs of the Constitution), §185 ("insult"), §186 (Defamation of character), §187 (Defamation with deliberate untruths), §188 (Political defamation with increased penalties for offending against paras 186 and 187), §189 (Denigration of a deceased person), §192 ("insult" with true statements).
If the court grants an injunction, the defendant is usually ordered to delete the publication or to publish a rectification statement.
In addition, there's also a crime called "dissemination of information violating personal privacy" (Chapter 24, Section 8), that deals with the public dissemination of information that can harm one's private life.
The crime of insult (Article 148) can lead to a fine of up to 1000 times the minimum wage, or to the same penalties of defamation for public work, correctional work or imprisonment.
Defamation law in the United States is much less plaintiff-friendly than its counterparts in European and the Commonwealth countries.
Korean defamation varies significantly from Western laws and in general by country and by case.
As is the case for most Commonwealth jurisdictions, Canada follows English law on defamation issues (except in Quebec where the private law is derived from French civil law).
There are several ways a person must go about proving that libel has taken place.
Libel and slander both require publication.
''Lashon hara'' differs from defamation in that its focus is on the use of true speech for a wrongful purpose, rather than falsehood and harm arising.
Regarding defamation on the internet, in 2011 the Supreme Court of Canada held that a person who posts hyperlinks on a website which lead to another site with defamatory content is not publishing that defamatory material for the purposes of libel and defamation law.
Both the New York state law and the federal law were passed unanimously.
But even in public matters, the accused had the opportunity to justify his actions by openly stating what he considered necessary for public safety to be denounced by the libel, and proving his assertions to be true.
Slander is defined as oral defamation.
However, American writers and publishers are protected from foreign libel judgments not compliant with the US First Amendment, or libel tourism, by the SPEECH Act, which was passed by the 111th United States Congress and signed into law by President Barack Obama in 2010.
Statements of opinion or pure opinion are not actionable.
Some U.S. statutes preserve historical common law exceptions to the defense of truth to libel actions.
Qualified privilege has the same effect as absolute privilege, but does not protect statements that can be proven to have been made with malicious intent.
In India, a defamation case can be filed under either criminal law or civil law or Cyber Crime Law, together or in sequence.
In Finland, defamation is a crime, according to the Criminal Code (Chapter 24, Section 9), with a penalty of imprisonment of up to six months or a fine.
The four (4) categories of slander that are actionable ''per se'' are (i) accusing someone of a crime; (ii) alleging that someone has a foul or loathsome disease; (iii) adversely reflecting on a person's fitness to conduct their business or trade; and (iv) imputing serious sexual misconduct.
It is also necessary in these cases to show that there is a well-founded public interest in the specific information being widely known, and this may be the case even for public figures.
Article 417 defines broadly "''injurias graves''" (grave slander), including the imputation of a crime or misdemeanor that cannot lead to public prosecution, and the imputation of a vice or lack of morality, which are capable of harming considerably the reputation, credit or interests of the offended person.
Libel is defined as defamation by written or printed words, pictures, or in any form other than by spoken words or gestures.
In a 2012 ruling on a complaint filed by a broadcaster who had been imprisoned for violating Philippine libel law, the United Nations Commission on Human Rights held that the criminalization of libel violates freedom of expression and is inconsistent with Article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
Someone is guilty of calumny « when law admits proof of the alleged fact » and of defamation "when law does not admit this evidence" (Article 443).
For example, in the United States, defamation is generally limited to the living.
If it's not written or with publicity, penalty is "lower imprisonment" in its minimum degree plus a fine of 6 to 15 "vital wages" when it's about a crime, or plus a fine of 6 to 10 "vital wages" when it's about a misdemeanor (Article 414).
Paragraph 188 has been criticized for allowing certain public figures additional protection against criticism.
Privilege is any circumstance that justifies or excuses a prima facie tort.
(Previous English defamation law had not provided the defense of truth.)
There is yet the extra penalty of "public knowledge of the court decision" (costs paid by the defamer) (art.
