Studies of the Great Depression by Ben Bernanke have indicated that, in response to decreased demand, the Federal Reserve of the time decreased the money supply, hence contributing to deflation.
This view has received a setback in light of the failure of accommodative policies in both Japan and the US to spur demand after stock market shocks in the early 1990s and in 2000–02, respectively.
An answer to falling aggregate demand is stimulus, either from the central bank, by expanding the money supply, or by the fiscal authority to increase demand, and to borrow at interest rates which are below those available to private entities.
Goods produced by craftsmen did not decrease in price, nor did many services, and the cost of labor actually increased.
This was the largest one-month fall in prices in the US since at least 1947.
In modern credit-based economies, deflation may be caused by the central bank ''initiating'' higher interest rates (i.e., to 'control' inflation), thereby possibly popping an asset bubble.
The Bank of the United States also contracted its lending.
* Fear of insolvent banks:&nbsp;&nbsp;Japanese people are afraid that banks will collapse so they prefer to buy (United States or Japanese) Treasury bonds instead of saving their money in a bank account.
Persistent deflation was clearly understood as being the result of the enormous gains in productivity of the period.
When structural deflation appeared in the years following 1870, a common explanation given by  various government inquiry committees was a scarcity of gold and silver, although they usually mentioned the changes in industry and trade we now call productivity.
Banks get assets which have fallen dramatically in value since their mortgage loan was made, and if they sell those assets, they further glut supply, which only exacerbates the situation.
Since reductions in general price level are called deflation, a deflationary spiral occurs when reductions in price lead to a vicious circle, where a problem exacerbates its own cause .
Some economists believe the United States may have experienced deflation as part of the financial crisis of 2007–10; compare the theory of debt-deflation.
Foreign coins, such as Mexican silver, were commonly used.
Episodes of deflation have been rare and brief since the Federal Reserve was created (a notable exception being the Great Depression) while U.S. economic progress has been unprecedented.
Although the values of capital assets are often casually said to deflate when they decline, this usage is not consistent with the usual definition of deflation; a more accurate description for a decrease in the value of a capital asset is economic depreciation.
In effect, barter acts as a protective tariff in such economies, encouraging local consumption of local production.
In the 21st century negative interest rate has been tried, but it can't be too negative, since people might withdraw cash from bank accounts if they have negative interest rate.
This is the famous liquidity trap.
In the past 60 years, the United States has only experienced deflation two times.
Following the 1848 finding of gold in the Sierra Nevada, enough gold came to market to devalue gold relative to silver.
In November 2009, Japan returned to deflation, according to the Wall Street Journal.
Since in such economies the central government is often unable, even if it were willing, to adequately control the internal economy, there is no pressing need for individuals to acquire official currency except to pay for imported goods.
They are therefore rewarded by holding money.
In modern economies, deflation is usually caused by a drop in aggregate demand, and is associated with economic depression, as occurred in the Great Depression and the Long Depression.
It also acts as a spur to mining and exploration, because one easy way to make money in such an economy is to dig it out of the ground.
A central bank cannot, normally, charge negative interest for money, and even charging zero interest often produces less stimulative effect than slightly higher rates of interest.
:Productivity and deflation are discussed in a 1940 study by the Brookings Institution that gives productivity by major US industries from 1919 to 1939, along with real and nominal wages.
Businesses, unable to make enough profit no matter how low they set prices, are then liquidated.
The banks could try to collect on the collateral (land), but this wouldn't pay off the loan.
So were it not for redemption of currency for gold (in accordance with the gold standard), the central bank could have effectively increased money supply by simply reducing the reserve requirements and through open market operations (e.g., buying treasury bonds for cash) to offset the reduction of money supply in the private sectors due to the collapse of credit (credit is a form of money).
There was a rather large price bubble in stocks and especially real estate in Japan in the 1980s (peaking in late 1989).
During World War I the British pound sterling was removed from the gold standard.
:Historically not all episodes of deflation correspond with periods of poor economic growth.
More recently Alan Greenspan cited the time lag as taking between 12 and 13 quarters.
Japan has an aging population (22.6% over age 65) that is not growing and will soon start a long decline.
The deflation was caused by the decrease in the production and distribution costs of goods.
* Bank credit deflation: a decrease in the bank credit supply due to bank failures or increased perceived risk of defaults by private entities or a contraction of the money supply by the central bank.
There is less reason to expect deflation, aside from the collapse of speculative asset classes, under a fiat monetary system with low productivity growth.
This "hoarding" behavior is seen as undesirable by most economists, as Hayek points out:
In a closed economy, this is because charging zero interest also means having zero return on government securities, or even negative return on short maturities.
Without the "hidden risk of inflation", it may become more prudent for institutions to hold on to money, and not to spend or invest it (burying money).
Deflation can discourage private investment, because there is reduced expectations on future profits when future prices are lower.
Economists generally believe that deflation is a problem in a modern economy because it increases the real value of debt, and may aggravate recessions and lead to a deflationary spiral.
To equalize the value of the two metals in coinage, the U.S. mint slightly reduced the silver content of new coinage in 1853.
These deflationary periods preceded the establishment of the U.S. Federal Reserve System and its active management of monetary matters.
Inflation reduces the real value of money over time; conversely, deflation increases the real value of money the currency of a national or regional economy.
Because the price of goods is falling, consumers have an incentive to delay purchases and consumption until prices fall further, which in turn reduces overall economic activity.
The United States then began experiencing measurable deflation, steadily decreasing from the first measured deflation of -0.38% in March, to July's deflation rate of -2.10%.
In a credit-based economy, a slow-down or fall in lending leads to less money in circulation, with a further sharp fall in money supply as confidence reduces and velocity weakens, with a consequent sharp fall-off in demand for employment or goods.
According to these economic schools, that 'stimulus' money actually perpetuated the problem it was intended to cure.
When deflation takes hold, it requires "special arrangements" to lend money at a zero nominal rate of interest (which could still be a very high ''real'' rate of interest, due to the ''negative'' inflation rate) in order to artificially increase the money supply.
Deflation occurs when improvements in production efficiency lower the overall price of goods.
Since this idles the productive capacity, investment also falls, leading to further reductions in aggregate demand.
Therefore, lowering rates may prove to be only a temporary palliative, aggravating an eventual debt deflation crisis.
The deflation of the Great Depression occurred partly because there was an enormous contraction of credit (money), bankruptcies creating an environment where cash was in frantic demand, and when the Federal Reserve was supposed to accommodate that demand, it instead contracted the money supply by 30% in enforcement of its new real bills doctrine, so banks toppled one-by-one (because they were unable to meet the sudden demand for cash see fractional-reserve banking).
Most nations abandoned the gold standard in the 1930s.
Many East Asian currencies devalued following the crisis.
There was inflation during World War I, but deflation returned again after that war and during the 1930s depression.
It is the opposite of stagflation, which was the main fear during the spring and summer of 2008.
* Growth deflation: an enduring decrease in the real cost of goods and services as the result of technological progress, accompanied by competitive price cuts, resulting in an increase in aggregate demand.
Year-on-year, consumer prices dropped for six months in a row to end-August 2009, largely due to a steep decline in energy prices.
The United States had no national paper money until 1862 (greenbacks used to fund the Civil War), but these notes were discounted to gold until 1877.
That is, there is a fall in how much the whole economy is willing to buy, and the going price for goods.
In a procyclical manner, prices of commodities rose when capital was flowing in, that is, when banks were willing to lend, and fell in the depression years of 1818 and 1839 when banks called in loans.
According to RTÉ's account, "Minister for Finance Brian Lenihan has said that deflation must be taken into account when Budget cuts in child benefit, public sector pay and professional fees are being considered.
This is the deflationary spiral.
This was quite common in the 19th century, and in the 20th century until the permanent abandonment of the gold standard for the Bretton Woods system in 1948.
* Stimulus spending: According to both Austrian and monetarist economic theory, Keynesian 'stimulus' spending actually has a depressing effect.
The Great Depression was regarded by some as a deflationary spiral.
With interest rates near zero, debt relief becomes an increasingly important tool in managing deflation.
In the early economic history of the United States, cycles of inflation and deflation correlated with capital flows between regions, with money being loaned from the financial center in the Northeast to the commodity producing regions of the mid-West and South.
The Bank of Japan kept monetary policy loose only when inflation was below zero, tightening whenever deflation ends.
While an increase in the purchasing power of one's money benefits some, it amplifies the sting of debt for others: after a period of deflation, the payments to service a debt represent a larger amount of purchasing power than they did when the debt was first incurred.
This view was challenged in the 1930s during the Great Depression.
In recent years changes in the money supply have historically taken a long time to show up in the price level, with a rule of thumb lag of at least 18 months.
This deflation was at times caused by technological progress that created significant economic growth, but at other times it was triggered by financial crises — notably the Panic of 1837 which caused deflation through 1844, and the Panic of 1873 which triggered the Long Depression that lasted until 1879.
Demand-side causes are:
Overall consumer prices decreased by 1.7% in the month.
* Tight monetary conditions.
Prices for cotton and tobacco fell.
Some banks made even more loans to these companies that are used to service the debt they already had.
The Jackson administration opened branch mints, which over time increased the supply of coins.
In the early history of the United States there was no national currency and an insufficient supply of coinage.
The alleged economic harm caused by deflation is not alluded to or mentioned by this member of government.
In recent times, as loan terms have grown in length and loan financing (or leveraging) is common among many types of investments, the costs of deflation to borrowers has grown larger.
During the Great Depression, people who owed money to a bank whose deposits had been frozen would sometimes buy bank books (deposits of other people at the bank) at a discount and use them to pay off their debt at par value.
Some believe that, in the absence of large amounts of debt, deflation would be a welcome effect because the lowering of prices increases purchasing power.
Austrian economists worry about the inflationary impact of monetary policies on asset prices.
Domestic producers must match these prices in order to remain competitive.
Whether deflationary spirals can actually occur is controversial, with its possibility being disputed by freshwater economists (including the Chicago school of economics) and Austrian School economists.
When the central bank has lowered nominal interest rates to zero, it can no longer further stimulate demand by lowering interest rates.
The Hong Kong dollar however, was pegged to the US dollar, leading to an adjustment instead by a deflation of consumer prices.
Thus inflation encourages short term consumption and can similarly over-stimulate investment in projects that may not be worthwhile in real terms (for example the housing or Dot-com bubbles), while deflation retards investment even when there is a real-world demand not being met.
A similar situation in Japan, beginning with the stock and real estate market collapse in the early 1990s, was arrested by the Japanese government preventing the collapse of most banks and taking over direct control of several in the worst condition.
On the wage front, in October 2009 the state of Colorado announced that its state minimum wage, which is indexed to inflation, is set to be cut, which would be the first time a state has cut its minimum wage since 1938.
At times banknotes were as much as 80% of currency in circulation before the Civil War.
In mainstream economics, deflation may be caused by a combination of the supply and demand for goods and the supply and demand for money, specifically the supply of money going down and the supply of goods going up.
The situation was worsened by the increasingly cheap exports from Mainland China, and "weak consumer confidence" in Hong Kong.
Also, banknotes were discounted relative to gold and silver, the discount depending on the financial strength of the bank.
In economies with an unstable currency, barter and other alternate currency arrangements such as dollarization are common, and therefore when the 'official' money becomes scarce (or unusually unreliable), commerce can still continue (e.g., most recently in Zimbabwe).
In response, the Federal Reserve decided to continue cutting interest rates, down to a near-zero range as of December 16, 2008.
This is the first time deflation has hit the Irish economy since 1960.
Thus, prices of imported products are decreasing.
The Japanese death rate recently exceeded its birth rate.
The fourth was between 1930–33 when the rate of deflation was approximately 10 percent/year, part of the United States' slide into the Great Depression, where banks failed and unemployment peaked at 25%.
A ''deflationary spiral'' is a situation where decreases in price lead to lower production, which in turn leads to lower wages and demand, which leads to further decreases in price.
Bonds, equities and commodities have been suggested as reservoirs for buffering changes in money supply.
This means that the savings rate depresses consumption, but does not appear in the economy in an efficient form to spur new investment.
The Bank of Japan and the government tried to eliminate it by reducing interest rates and 'quantitative easing', but did not create a sustained increase in broad money and deflation persisted.
Banks delayed that decision, hoping asset prices would improve.
Once in 2009 with the financial crisis.
* Unfavorable demographics.
Most damaging was the price of cotton, the U.S.'s main export.
In July 2006, the zero-rate policy was ended.
Competition in the marketplace often prompts those producers to apply at least some portion of these cost savings into reducing the asking price for their goods.
Supply-side causes are:
This is often no more than a stop-gap measure, because they must then restrict credit, since they do not have money to lend, which further reduces demand, and so on.
Banknotes were the majority of the money in circulation.
* Insolvent companies:&nbsp;&nbsp;Banks lent to companies and individuals that invested in real estate.
Throughout the history of the United States, inflation has approached zero and dipped below for short periods of time (negative inflation is deflation).
With interest rates near zero, debt relief becomes an increasingly important tool in managing deflation.
The magnitude of this contraction is only matched by the Great Depression.
Sometimes the notes became worthless, and the notes of weak surviving banks were heavily discounted.
There were several causes of the deflation of the severe depression of 1839-43, which included an oversupply of agricultural commodities (importantly cotton) as new cropland came into production following large federal land sales a few years earlier, banks requiring payment in gold or silver, the failure of several banks, default by several states on their bonds and British banks cutting back on specie flow to the U.S.
Brian Lenihan, Ireland's Minister for Finance, mentioned deflation in an interview with RTÉ Radio.
Partly because of overcapacity and market saturation and partly as a result of the Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act, international trade contracted sharply, severely reducing demand for goods, thereby idling a great deal of capacity, and setting off a string of bank failures.
Before he was Chairman of the United States Federal Reserve, Ben Bernanke claimed in 2002, "...sufficient injections of money will ultimately always reverse a deflation", although Japan's deflationary spiral was not broken by this very sort of quantitative easing.
:A structural deflation existed from the 1870s until the cycle upswing that started in 1895.
A financial crisis in England in 1818 caused banks to call in loans and curtail new lending, draining specie out of the U.S.
During financial crises many banks failed and their notes became worthless.
A credit contraction caused by a financial crisis in England drained specie out of the U.S.
The motivation for this policy change was to finance World War I; one of the results was inflation, and a rise in the gold price, along with the corresponding drop in international exchange rates for the pound.
Most money circulated as banknotes, which typically sold at a discount according to distance from the issuing bank and the bank's perceived financial strength.
When banks failed their notes were redeemed for bank reserves, which often did not result in payment at par value, and sometimes the notes became worthless.
This becomes a deflationary spiral when prices fall below the costs of financing production, or repaying debt levels incurred at the prior price level.
However, deflation is the natural condition of hard currency economies when the supply of money does not grow as quickly as population and the economy.
purchasing financial assets of a type not usually used by the central bank as reserves (such as mortgage-backed securities).
A historical analysis of money velocity and monetary base shows an inverse correlation: for a given percentage decrease in the monetary base the result is nearly equal percentage increase in money velocity.
Despite the deflation and depression, GDP rose 16% from 1839-43.
This is because the government is competing against private industry, and usurping private investment dollars.
This can produce a liquidity trap or it may lead to shortages that entice investments yielding more jobs and commodity production.
It may be attributed to a dramatic contraction of the money supply, or to adherence to a gold standard or other external monetary base requirement.
It was proposed as a theory by Irving Fisher (1933) to explain the deflation of the Great Depression.
Additionally, the velocity of the monetary base is interest rate sensitive, the highest velocity being at the highest interest rates.
Deflation occurs when the inflation rate falls below 0% (a negative inflation rate).
When real estate values dropped, these loans could not be paid.
The Bank of the United States also reduced its lending.
Consumer prices dropped 1 percent in October, 2008.
A deflationary spiral is the modern macroeconomic version of the general glut controversy of the 19th century.
* Imported deflation: Japan imports Chinese and other countries' inexpensive consumable goods (due to lower wages and fast growth in those countries) and inexpensive raw materials, many of which reached all time real price minimums in the early 2000s.
Also, deflation did not occur in countries that did not have modern manufacturing, transportation and communications.
Overall, Japan's 'stimulus' packages added up to over ''one hundred trillion'' yen, and yet they failed.
Deflation occurred periodically in the U.S. during the 19th century (the most important exception was during the Civil War).
The mild inflation after 1895 was attributed to the increase in gold supply that had been occurring for decades.
Notes of weak surviving banks traded at steep discounts.
The price of agricultural commodities also were pressured by a return of normal harvests following 1816, the ''year without a summer'', that caused large scale famine and high agricultural prices.
In the financial crises of 1818–19 and 1837–41, many banks failed, leaving their money to be redeemed below par value from reserves.
Also, there was no national paper currency at the time and there was a scarcity of coins.
In this sense it is the opposite of the more usual scenario of inflation, whose effect is to tax currency holders and lenders (savers) and use the proceeds to subsidize borrowers, including governments, and to cause malinvestment as overinvestment.
Deflation is distinct from disinflation, a slow-down in the inflation rate, i.e.
When this happens, the available amount of hard currency per person falls, in effect making money more scarce, and consequently, the purchasing power of each unit of currency increases.
Until the 1930s, it was commonly believed by economists that deflation
The second was the depression of the late 1830s to 1843, following the Panic of 1837, when the currency in the United States contracted by about 34% with prices falling by 33%.
By contrast, under a fiat monetary system, there was high productivity growth from the end of World War II until the 1960s, but no deflation.
Reserve requirements from the central bank were high compared to recent times.
In monetarist theory, deflation must be associated with either a reduction in the money supply, a reduction in the velocity of money or an increase in the number of transactions.
* Cash building (hoarding) deflation: attempts to save more cash by a reduction in consumption leading to a decrease in velocity of money.
For example, in the late 19th century, populists in the US wanted debt relief or to move off the new gold standard and onto a silver standard (the supply of silver was increasing relatively faster than the supply of gold, making silver less deflationary than gold), bimetal standard, or paper money like the recently ended Greenbacks.
Under normal conditions, the Fed and most other central banks implement policy by setting a target for a short-term interest rate the overnight federal funds rate in the U.S. and enforcing that target by buying and selling securities in open capital markets.
With the rise of monetarist ideas, the focus in fighting deflation was put on expanding demand by lowering interest rates (i.e., reducing the "cost" of money).
Sustained low real rates can cause higher asset prices and excessive debt accumulation.
Consequently, with reduced private investments, spiraling deflation can cause a collapse in aggregate demand.
This continuing process is known as maintaining an "unrealized loss", and until the assets are completely revalued and/or sold off (and the loss realized), it will continue to be a deflationary force in the economy.
Irving Fisher blamed the worldwide inflation of the pre WW I years on rising gold supply.
However, it is important to note that the monetary base is a much narrower definition of money than M2 money supply.
It was possibly spurred by return to a gold standard, retiring paper money printed during the Civil War.
Consequently, deflation can be thought of as an effective increase in a loan's interest rate.
Another related idea is Irving Fisher's theory that excess debt can cause a continuing deflation.
Improved transportation, mainly from turnpikes, and to a minor extent the introduction of steamboats, significantly lowered transportation costs.
* Fallen asset prices.
Keynesian economists argued that the economic system was not self-correcting with respect to deflation and that governments and central banks had to take active measures to boost demand through tax cuts or increases in government spending.
Since deflationary periods disfavor debtors (including most farmers), they are often periods of rising populist backlash.
The third was after the Civil War, sometimes called The Great Deflation.
In an open economy it creates a carry trade, and devalues the currency.
Rising productivity and reduced transportation cost created structural deflation during the acceleration productivity era of from 1870–1900, but there was mild inflation for about a decade before the establishment of the Federal Reserve in 1913.
In economics, '''deflation''' is a decrease in the general price level of goods and services.
To slow or halt the deflationary spiral, banks will often withhold collecting on non-performing loans (as in Japan, and most recently America and Spain).
The UK experienced deflation of approx 10% in 1921, 14% in 1922, and 3 to 5% in the early 1930s.
when inflation declines to a lower rate but is still positive.
This cycle has been traced out on the broad scale during the Great Depression.
As prices decreased, demand would naturally increase and the economic system would correct itself without outside intervention.
Another term, the accounting conventions of depreciation are standards to determine a decrease in values of capital assets when market values are not readily available or practical.
This is to be expected because monetary base (MB), velocity of base money (VB), price level (P) and real output (Y) are related by definition: MBVB&nbsp;=&nbsp;PY.
When the short-term interest rate hits zero, the central bank can no longer ease policy by lowering its usual interest-rate target.
Economist Nouriel Roubini predicted that the United States would enter a deflationary recession, and coined the term "stag-deflation" to describe it.
Bloomberg L.P. reports that consumer prices fell in October 2009 by a near-record 2.2%.
If, as during the Great Depression in the United States, deflation averages 10% per year, even an interest-free loan is unattractive as it must be repaid with money worth 10% more each year.
That record was again broken in November, 2008 with a 1.7% decline.
But any of these may occur separately without deflation.
