Shrinking forest cover lessens the landscape's capacity to intercept, retain and transpire precipitation.
Deforestation may also cause carbon stores held in soil to be released.
In Central America, two-thirds of lowland tropical forests have been turned into pasture since 1950 and 40% of all the rainforests have been lost in the last 40 years.
Whereas deforestation was primarily driven by subsistence activities and government-sponsored development projects like transmigration in countries like Indonesia and colonization in Latin America, India, Java, and so on, during late 19th century and the earlier half of the 20th century.
The government claims that at least 1 billion trees have been planted in China every year since 1982.
In Bolivia, deforestation in upper river basins has caused environmental problems, including soil erosion and declining water quality.
Rising populations created a food demand and with deforestation opening up new areas of the forest the hunters harvested a great deal of primate bushmeat, which is believed to be the origin of HIV.
Experts do not agree on whether industrial logging is an important contributor to global deforestation.
New methods are being developed to farm more intensively, such as high-yield hybrid crops, greenhouse, autonomous building gardens, and hydroponics.
It has been estimated that about half of the Earth's mature tropical forests—between 7.5 million and 8 million km2 (2.9 million to 3 million sq mi) of the original 15 million to 16 million km2 (5.8 million to 6.2 million sq mi) that until 1947 covered the planet—have now been destroyed.
About 90% of the deforestation has occurred within 100 km of roads in most parts of the Amazon.
*their litter and other organic residue change soil properties that affect the capacity of soil to store water.
Certification, as provided by global certification systems such as Programme for the Endorsement of Forest Certification and Forest Stewardship Council, contributes to tackling deforestation by creating market demand for timber from sustainably managed forests.
*they contribute to terrestrial evaporation and reduce soil moisture via transpiration;
Estimates vary widely as to the extent of tropical deforestation.
They claim that that rainforests  years ago covered 14% of the world's land surface, now only cover 5–7%, and that all tropical forests will be gone by the middle of the 21st century.
The World Wildlife Fund's ecoregion project catalogues habitat types throughout the world, including habitat loss such as deforestation, showing for example that even in the rich forests of parts of Canada such as the Mid-Continental Canadian forests of the prairie provinces half of the forest cover has been lost or altered.
It has been calculated that plantations yielding 10 cubic meters per hectare annually could supply all the timber required for international trade on 5% of the world's existing forestland.
Deforestation can also create a path for non-native species to flourish such as certain types of snails, which have been correlated with an increase in schistosomiasis cases.
A 2002 analysis of satellite imagery suggested that the rate of deforestation in the humid tropics (approximately 5.8 million hectares per year) was roughly 23% lower than the most commonly quoted rates.
Forester Chad Oliver has suggested a forest mosaic with high-yield forest lands interspersed with conservation land.
Rainforests were fragmented forming shrinking 'islands' further and further apart.
Between 2000 and 2012,  of forests around the earth were cut down.
He attributed the collapse to deforestation and over-exploitation of all resources.
Asia as a whole gained 1 million hectares of forest between 2000 and 2005.
Methodological guidance for forest monitoring was also emphasized at COP-15.
The forest products industry is a large part of the economy in both developed and developing countries.
For example, in the 1945 Battle of Okinawa, bombardment and other combat operations reduced the lush tropical landscape into "a vast field of mud, lead, decay and maggots".
Significant work is underway on tools for use in monitoring developing country adherence to their agreed REDD targets.
'''Deforestation''', '''clearance''' or '''clearing''' is the removal of a forest or stand of trees where the land is thereafter converted to a non-forest use.
In Kenya, deforestation has led to an increase in malaria cases which is now the leading cause of morbidity and mortality the country.
The model predicted 2, which contributes to global warming.
In the areas where "slash-and-burn" is practiced, switching to "slash-and-char" would prevent the rapid deforestation and subsequent degradation of soils.
Clarus, and the examples of Ephesus, Priene and Miletus, where harbors had to be abandoned because of the silt deposited by the Meander) and in coastal Syria during the last centuries BC.
*their roots create macropores – large conduits – in the soil that increase infiltration of water;
Much of what remains of the world's rainforests is in the Amazon basin, where the Amazon Rainforest covers approximately 4 million square kilometres.
In cyclic agriculture, cattle are grazed on farm land that is resting and rejuvenating.
About 30% of Earth's land surface is covered by forests.
Conversely, a newer analysis of satellite images reveals that deforestation of the Amazon rainforest is twice as fast as scientists previously estimated.
A catastrophic example of range expansion is the 1998 outbreak of Nipah Virus in Malaysia.
These methods are often dependent on chemical inputs to maintain necessary yields.
The famous silting up of the harbor for Bruges, which moved port commerce to Antwerp, also followed a period of increased settlement growth (and apparently of deforestation) in the upper river basins.
Mature forests alternate between being net sinks and net sources of carbon dioxide (see carbon dioxide sink and carbon cycle).
Rainforest Rescue argues that the standards of organizations like FSC are too closely connected to timber industry interests and therefore do not guarantee environmentally and socially responsible forest management.
The Arbor Day Foundation then protects the land from deforestation.
Rainforests once covered 14% of the earth's land surface; now they cover a mere 6% and experts estimate that the last remaining rainforests could be consumed in less than 40 years.
Some nations have taken steps to help increase the amount of trees on Earth.
Forestry operations themselves also increase erosion through the development of (forest) roads and the use of mechanized equipment.
They also receive US$30, which purchases a beehive, to compensate for conservation for two hectares of water-sustaining forest for five years.
Historically, utilization of forest products, including timber and fuel wood, has played a key role in human societies, comparable to the roles of water and cultivable land.
An ambitious proposal for China is the Aerially Delivered Re-forestation and Erosion Control System and the proposed Sahara Forest Project coupled with the Seawater Greenhouse.
The thousand years following the mid-first millennium BC saw serious, intermittent pulses of soil erosion in numerous places.
For a number of years, deforestation, drought, and subsequent fires led to a dramatic geographic shift and density of fruit bats, a reservoir for Nipah virus.
The elite's (nobility and higher clergy) protection of their own hunting privileges and game often protected significant woodlands.
That quicker transport of surface water can translate into flash flooding and more localized floods than would occur with the forest cover.
Tropical rainforests produce about 30% of our planet's fresh water.
Many important forest functions have no markets, and hence, no economic value that is readily apparent to the forests' owners or the communities that rely on forests for their well-being.
The land was reclaimed by nature, but the secondary forests usually lacked the original biodiversity.
One method is the “visual interpretation of aerial photos or satellite imagery that is labor-intensive but does not require high-level training in computer image processing or extensive computational resources”.
In Malaysia, thousands of acres of forest have been cleared for pig farms.
80% will have been lost, and with them hundreds of thousands of irreplaceable species.
Deforestation is a contributor to global warming, and is often cited as one of the major causes of the enhanced greenhouse effect.
The known extinction rates from deforestation rates are very low, approximately 1 species per year from mammals and birds which extrapolates to approximately 23,000 species per year for all species.
Disregard of ascribed value, lax forest management and deficient environmental laws are some of the factors that allow deforestation to occur on a large scale.
When populations were quickly decreased by causes such as the Black Death or devastating warfare (for example, Genghis Khan's Mongol hordes in eastern and central Europe, Thirty Years' War in Germany), this could lead to settlements being abandoned.
Deforestation generally increases rates of soil loss, by increasing the amount of runoff and reducing the protection of the soil from tree litter.
Funding has been an issue, but at the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) Conference of the Parties-15 (COP-15) in Copenhagen in December 2009, an accord was reached with a collective commitment by developed countries for new and additional resources, including forestry and investments through international institutions, that will approach USD 30 billion for the period 2010–2012.
The disappearance of the island's trees seems to coincide with a decline of its civilization around the 17th and 18th century.
Tropical forest in El Salvador expanded more than 20% between 1992 and 2001.
This also locks in the way of life of the primitive tribes living on the forest land.
Forests support biodiversity, providing habitat for wildlife; moreover, forests foster medicinal conservation.
In the country of Senegal, on the western coast of Africa, a movement headed by youths has helped to plant over 6 million mangrove trees.
By contrast, natural forests produce about 1–2 cubic meters per hectare; therefore, 5–10 times more forestland would be required to meet demand.
While the virus infected the pigs, mortality was much lower than among humans, making the pigs a virulent host leading to the transmission of the virus to humans.
One way is for the wood to be harvested and turned into long-lived products, with new young trees replacing them.
In France, Colbert planted oak forests to supply the French navy in the future.
In developing countries almost three billion people rely on wood for heating and cooking.
Most predictions of forestry related biodiversity loss are based on species-area models, with an underlying assumption that as the forest declines species diversity will decline similarly.
Short-term economic gains made by conversion of forest to agriculture, or over-exploitation of wood products, typically leads to loss of long-term income and long-term biological productivity.
Some scientists have predicted that unless significant measures (such as seeking out and protecting old growth forests that have not been disturbed) are taken on a worldwide basis, by 2030 there will only be 10% remaining, with another 10% in a degraded condition.
Mesolithic foragers used fire to create openings for red deer and wild boar.
Piracy also contributed to the over harvesting of forests, as in Spain.
A recent study of the Brazilian Amazon predicts that despite a lack of extinctions thus far,  up to 90 percent of predicted extinctions will finally occur in the next 40 years.
An innovative project to try and remedy this situation involves landholders in upstream areas being paid by downstream water users to conserve forests.
A 2005 report by the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) estimates that although the Earth's total forest area continues to decrease at about 13 million hectares per year, the global rate of deforestation has recently been slowing.
Remote sensing image processing tools are included, as well as tools for international reporting for Reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (REDD) and MRV and FAO's  Global Forest Resource Assessments.
Accompanying the reservoir species are pathogens that have the ability to find new hosts in previously unexposed regions.
Other causes of contemporary deforestation may include corruption of government institutions, the inequitable distribution of wealth and power, population growth and overpopulation, and urbanization.
Jared Diamond gives an extensive look into the collapse of the ancient Easter Islanders in his book ''Collapse''.
However, due to the large percentage of trees dying off after planting (up to 75%), the project is not very successful.
In 1995, economic growth in developing countries reached nearly 6%, compared with the 2% growth rate for developed countries.” As our human population grows, new homes, communities, and expansions of cities will occur.
The new procedures to get amounts of wood are causing more harm to the economy and overpower the amount of money spent by people employed in logging.
Several French colonial towns of the Illinois Country, such as Kaskaskia, Cahokia and St. Philippe, Illinois were flooded and abandoned in the late 19th century, with a loss to the cultural record of their archeology.
Up to 90% of West Africa's coastal rainforests have disappeared since 1900.
It has been estimated that we are losing 137 plant, animal and insect species every single day due to rainforest deforestation, which equates to 50,000 species a year.
They include the noted Langdale axe industry in the English Lake District, quarries developed at Penmaenmawr in North Wales and numerous other locations.
In Western countries, increasing consumer demand for wood products that have been produced and harvested in a sustainable manner is causing forest landowners and forest industries to become increasingly accountable for their forest management and timber harvesting practices.
Flint was still used from sources such as Grimes Graves but from many other mines across Europe.
In many parts of the world, especially in East Asian countries, reforestation and afforestation are increasing the area of forested lands.
Rough-outs were made locally near the quarries, and some were polished locally to give a fine finish.
As these pathogens and species come into closer contact with humans, they are infected both directly and indirectly.
More than half of all plant and land animal species in the world live in tropical forests.
In temperate mesic climates, natural regeneration of forest stands often will not occur in the absence of disturbance, whether natural or anthropogenic.
Trees extract groundwater through their roots and release it into the atmosphere.
Then deforestation rates accelerate (HFHD, high forest cover – high deforestation rate), and forest cover is reduced (LFHD, low forest cover – high deforestation rate), before the deforestation rate slows (LFLD, low forest cover – low deforestation rate), after which forest cover stabilizes and eventually starts recovering.
Scientists estimate that one fifth of the world's tropical rainforest was destroyed between 1960 and 1990.
Also, it has introduced the Green Wall of China project, which aims to halt the expansion of the Gobi desert through the planting of trees.
A typical progress trap was that cities were often built in a forested area, which would provide wood for some industry (for example, construction, shipbuilding, pottery).
The transferring of such rights in China, perhaps the largest land reform in modern times, has been argued to have increased forest cover.
Brazil has lost 90–95% of its Mata Atlântica forest.
Rural roads promote economic development but also facilitate deforestation.
This in turn changes erosion rates and the availability of water for either ecosystem functions or human services.
This can be an advantage in excessively leached tropical rain forest soils.
The Arbor Day Foundation's Rain Forest Rescue program is a charity that helps to prevent deforestation.
Additionally, erosion can produce pools of stagnant water that are perfect breeding grounds for mosquitos, well known vectors of malaria, yellow fever, nipah virus, and more.
Some argue that poor people are more likely to clear forest because they have no alternatives, others that the poor lack the ability to pay for the materials and labour needed to clear forest.
The historic silting of ports along the southern coasts of Asia Minor (''e.g.''
Easter Island has suffered from heavy soil erosion in recent centuries, aggravated by agriculture and deforestation.
Through deforestation, hosts and reservoir species are forced into neighboring habitats.
Deforestation eliminates a great number of species of plants and animals which also often results in an increase in disease.
Deforestation can also be an intentional tactic of military forces.
Deforestation on a human scale results in decline in biodiversity, and on a natural global scale is known to cause the extinction of many species.
This resulted in 265 reported cases of encephalitis, of which 105 resulted in death.
In Tonga, paramount rulers developed policies designed to prevent conflicts between short-term gains from converting forest to farmland and long-term problems forest loss would cause, while during the 17th and 18th centuries in Tokugawa, Japan, the shoguns developed a highly sophisticated system of long-term planning to stop and even reverse deforestation of the preceding centuries through substituting timber by other products and more efficient use of land that had been farmed for many centuries.
With most of the population remaining active in (or indirectly dependent on) the agricultural sector, the main pressure in most areas remained land clearing for crop and cattle farming.
Deforestation occurs for multiple  reasons: trees are cut down to be used or sold as fuel (sometimes in the form of charcoal) or timber, while cleared land is used as pasture for livestock and plantation.
Mixed with biomass it brings the creation of terra preta, one of the richest soils on the planet and the only one known to regenerate itself.
Species-area models are known to overpredict the number of species known to be threatened in areas where actual deforestation is ongoing, and greatly overpredict the number of threatened species that are widespread.
The landholders receive US$20 to conserve the trees, avoid polluting livestock practices, and enhance the biodiversity and forest carbon on their land.
Brazil, Cambodia, Democratic Peoples Republic of Korea, Equatorial Guinea, Malaysia, Solomon Islands, Timor-Leste, Venezuela, Zambia are listed as High Forest Cover with High Rates of Deforestation (HFHD).
Paraguay was losing its natural semi humid forests in the country’s western regions at a rate of 15.000 hectares at a randomly studied 2-month period in 2010, Paraguay’s parliament refused in 2009 to pass a law that would have stopped cutting of natural forests altogether.
According to a study, "in most areas studied, the various ventures that prompted deforestation rarely generated more than US$5 for every ton of carbon they released and frequently returned far less than US$1".
The tools support the inventory lifecycle, from needs assessment, design, planning, field data collection and management, estimation analysis, and dissemination.
Certification represents a shift from regulatory approaches to market incentives to promote sustainable forest management.
Forests return most of the water that falls as precipitation to the atmosphere by transpiration.
A now well-developed theory is that the spread of HIV it is at least partially due deforestation.
The US Forest Service, in Bandelier National Monument for example, is studying how to restore the former ecosystem, and reduce erosion, by removing the trees.
The bare intercanopy areas become highly erodible.
Plants remove carbon in the form of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere during the process of photosynthesis, but release some carbon dioxide back into the atmosphere during normal respiration.
The degradation of forest ecosystems has also been traced to economic incentives that make forest conversion appear more profitable than forest conservation.
Even when speculators sought to encourage towns, settlers needed an agricultural belt around or sometimes within defensive walls.
When the oak plantations matured in the mid-19th century, the masts were no longer required because shipping had changed.
Since the tropical rainforests are the most diverse ecosystems on Earth and about 80% of the world's known biodiversity could be found in tropical rainforests, removal or destruction of significant areas of forest cover has resulted in a degraded environment with reduced biodiversity.
Efforts to stop or slow deforestation have been attempted for many centuries because it has long been known that deforestation can cause environmental damage sufficient in some cases to cause societies to collapse.
However, according to the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, the models used to investigate remote responses to tropical deforestation showed a broad but mild temperature increase all through the tropical atmosphere.
This has resulted in an increase in the zoonosis the Nipah virus.
The environmental organization Avoided Deforestation Partners leads the campaign for development of REDD through funding from the U.S. government.
*their litter, stems and trunks slow down surface runoff;
When part of a forest is removed, the trees no longer transpire this water, resulting in a much drier climate.
The amount of woodland has increased in 22 of the world's 50 most forested nations.
This rodent is the host of a number of zoonotic diseases and, while there has not yet been a human-borne outbreak due to the movement of this rodent into new regions, it offers an example of how habitat destruction through deforestation and subsequent movements of species is occurring regularly.
(i) a forest scarcity path, where forest scarcity triggers forces (for example, higher prices of forest products) that lead to forest cover stabilization; and
In contrast, when an area is deforested, almost all precipitation is lost as run-off.
The choice of forest cover and GDP per capita also fits well with the two key scenarios in the FT:
The price on the European market for an offset tied to a one-ton reduction in carbon is 23 euro (about US$35).
In certain regions of southwest US, shrubs and trees have been encroaching on grassland.
Deforestation rate and total area deforested, have been widely used for monitoring deforestation in many regions, including the Brazilian Amazon deforestation monitoring by INPE.
Others state that tropical rainforest deforestation is contributing to the ongoing Holocene mass extinction.
Sources in the U.S. government admitted that the purpose of this was that the "ultimate destruction of the war potential of German forests."
Damage to forests and other aspects of nature could halve living standards for the world's poor and reduce global GDP by about 7% by 2050, a report concluded at the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) meeting in Bonn in 2008.
Deforested regions typically incur significant adverse soil erosion and frequently degrade into wasteland.
According to the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), "A major condition for the adoption of sustainable forest management is a demand for products that are produced sustainably and consumer willingness to pay for the higher costs entailed.
The forest coverage was 12% two decades ago and now is 16.55%.
Another pathway through which deforestation affects disease is the relocation and dispersion of disease-carrying hosts.
Often the destruction of predatory species can result in an increase in rodent populations.
To meet the world's demand for wood, it has been suggested by forestry writers Botkins and Sedjo that high-yielding forest plantations are suitable.
This is because on older and less fertile soils trees grow too slowly for silviculture to be economic, whilst in areas with a strong dry season there is always a risk of forest fires destroying a tree crop before it matures.
In 2014, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and partners launched Open Foris - a set of open-source software tools that assist countries in gathering, producing and disseminating information on the state of forest resources.
According to one study, in deforested north and northwest China, the average annual precipitation decreased by one third between the 1950s and the 1980s.
The wholescale clearance of woodland to create agricultural land can be seen in many parts of the world, such as the Central forest-grasslands transition and other areas of the Great Plains of the United States.
It has adverse impacts on biosequestration of atmospheric carbon dioxide.
Instead of trapping precipitation, which then percolates to groundwater systems, deforested areas become sources of surface water runoff, which moves much faster than subsurface flows.
This includes the protection of such rights entitled in existing laws, such as India’s Forest Rights Act.
The trees themselves enhance the loss of grass between tree canopies.
FT depicts a broad trend, and an extrapolation of historical rates therefore tends to underestimate future BAU deforestation for counties at the early stages in the transition (HFLD), while it tends to overestimate BAU deforestation for countries at the later stages (LFHD and LFLD).
As carbon dioxide accrues, it produces a layer in the atmosphere that traps radiation from the sun.
Climate change devastated tropical rainforests causing the extinction of many plant and animal species.
Enough wild green was usually left standing (and partially used, for example, to collect firewood, timber and fruits, or to graze pigs) for wildlife to remain viable.
Intensive farming can also decrease soil nutrients by consuming at an accelerated rate the trace minerals needed for crop growth.The most promising approach, however, is the concept of food forests in permaculture, which consists of agroforestal systems carefully designed to mimic natural forests, with an emphasis on plant and animal species of interest for food, timber and other uses.
Because of fuel needs, mining and metallurgy often led to deforestation and city abandonment.
In the 19th century, introduction of steamboats in the United States was the cause of deforestation of banks of major rivers, such as the Mississippi River, with increased and more severe flooding one of the environmental results.
In order for forests to take up carbon, there must be a net accumulation of wood.
This led to a weakening of the domestic economy after Columbus' discovery of America, as the economy became dependent on colonial activities (plundering, mining, cattle, plantations, trade, etc.)
Mexico, India, the Philippines, Indonesia, Thailand, Burma, Malaysia, Bangladesh, China, Sri Lanka, Laos, Nigeria, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Liberia, Guinea, Ghana and the Ivory Coast, have lost large areas of their rainforest.
Deforestation reduced the available fruiting trees in the bats’ habitat, and they encroached on surrounding orchards which also happened to be the location of a large number of pigsties.
In the People's Republic of China, where large scale destruction of forests has occurred, the government has in the past required that every able-bodied citizen between the ages of 11 and 60 plant three to five trees per year or do the equivalent amount of work in other forest services.
The charity uses donated money to buy up and preserve rainforest land before the lumber companies can buy it.
The project is being conducted by Fundación Natura Bolivia and Rare Conservation, with support from the Climate & Development Knowledge Network.
In 16th-century Germany, landowners also developed silviculture to deal with the problem of deforestation.
Using fuel from bamboo rather than wood results in cleaner burning, and since bamboo matures much faster than wood, deforestation is reduced as supply can be replenished faster.
In 2000 the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) found that "the role of population dynamics in a local setting may vary from decisive to negligible," and that deforestation can result from "a combination of population pressure and stagnating economic, social and technological conditions."
Rapidly growing economies also have an effect on deforestation.
99% of the water absorbed by the roots moves up to the leaves and is transpired.
In Europe there is little solid evidence before 7000 BC.
Small scale deforestation was practiced by some societies for tens of thousands of years before the beginnings of civilization.
Organizations such as Community Forestry International, Cool Earth, The Nature Conservancy, World Wide Fund for Nature, Conservation International, African Conservation Foundation and Greenpeace also focus on preserving forest habitats.
Main international organizations including the United Nations and the World Bank, have begun to develop programs aimed at curbing deforestation.
Stuart England was so widely deforested that it depended on the Baltic trade for ship timbers, and looked to the untapped forests of New England to supply the need.
The forest may have little impact on flooding in the case of large rainfall events, which overwhelm the storage capacity of forest soil if the soils are at or close to saturation.
The removal or destruction of areas of forest cover has resulted in a degraded environment with reduced biodiversity.
