Often, one cannot do serious injury to another without first dehumanizing him or her in one's mind (as a form of rationalization.)
When the simulator presented an armed Black man, participants shot faster and more accurately compared to an armed White man.
Neuroimaging studies have discovered that the medial prefrontal cortex—a brain region distinctively involved in attributing mental states to others—shows diminished activation to extremely dehumanized targets (i.e., those rated, according to the stereotype content model, as low-warmth and low-competence, such as drug addicts or homeless people).
Humans seen as having certain lower social standings such as people suffering from addictions and homeless persons are often perceived as being low in cognitive warmth and low in social competency reliability.
Biologically, dehumanization can be describe as an introduced species marginalizing the human species or an introduced person/process that debases other persons inhumanely.
Dehumanization often ignores the target's individuality (i.e., the creative and interesting aspects of their personality) and can hinder one from feeling empathy or properly understanding a stigmatized group of people.
In the United States of America, Americans of African ancestry were dehumanised via the classification of being deemed as a primate, not a human.
Compton's cafeteria riot predates the stonewall riots of 1969 and marks one of the first times in American history that non-hetero-normative peoples denied their oppressors taking agency by demanding human rights.
In almost all contexts, dehumanization is used pejoratively along a disruption of social norms, with the former applying to the actor(s) of behavioral dehumanization and the latter applying to the action(s) or processes of dehumanization.
Figuratively in law, the dehumanizer is the judge, attorney, and jury and the person dehumanized is an alien, a non-citizen without rights, purpose, or acknowledgment in the dehumanizer’s court.
Accounts of frequent sexual assault, police brutality, abuse of power, and constant arrests by local law enforcement towards those seeking refuge in the ghettos of the tenderloin have been told in the documentary ''Screaming Queens: The Riot at Compton’s Cafeteria.''
While social distance from the outgroup target is a necessary condition for dehumanization, some research suggests that it is not sufficient.
This dehumanized perception can occur when the target has elicited disgust or further negative responses when in contact with the dehumanizing subject.
The propaganda model of Edward S. Herman and Noam Chomsky argues that corporate media are able to carry out large-scale, successful dehumanization campaigns when they promote the goals (profit-making) that the corporations are contractually obliged to maximise.
Alternatively, states sometimes present an enemy government or way of life as barbaric and its citizens as childlike and incapable of managing their own affairs.
In the 1900s, the Australian Constitution and British Government partook in an Act to federate the Australian states.
Language, higher order cognition, refined emotions, civility, and morality are uniquely human characteristics (i.e., traits humans have that non-human animals do not).
The work of Herbert Kelman, "Violence without moral restraint: Reflections on the dehumanization of victims and victimizes", illustrates how the above dehumanization of Americans with African ancestry is occurring.
It is theorized to take on two forms: ''animalistic dehumanization'', which is employed on a largely intergroup basis, and ''mechanistic dehumanization'', which is employed on a largely interpersonal basis.
State-organized dehumanization has historically been directed against perceived political, racial, ethnic, national, or religious minority groups.
Targets of mechanistic dehumanization are seen as cold, rigid, interchangeable, lacking agency, and likened to machines or objects.
Dehumanization often occurs as a result of conflict in an intergroup context.
Dehumanization occurred in the form of barbaric genocidal processes of murder, rape, starvation, enslavement, allocation, and germ warfare.
Psychological research has identified high status, power, and social connection as additional factors that influence whether dehumanization will occur.
Furthermore, in light democracy, criminal law might be reduced to the simple formula: violating a person means an act of dehumanization by taking "freedom, unfairly and inhumanely".
The results found that the malignant language, when compared to the unspecific insult and categorized labels, subjects would not connect the human connotative words with homosexuals.
Characteristics of human nature are perceived to be widely shared among groups (i.e., every human has these traits), while uniquely human characteristics (e.g., civility, morality) are thought to vary between groups.
Dehumanization differs from inhumane behaviors or processes in its breadth to include the emergence of new competing social norms.
The Holocaust during World War II and the Rwandan Genocide have both been cited as atrocities predicated upon government-organized campaigns of dehumanization, while crimes like lynching (especially in the United States) are often thought of as the result of popular bigotry and government apathy.
In laboratory studies, people who are portrayed as lacking human qualities have been found to be treated in a particularly harsh and violent manner.
In Nick Haslam's review of dehumanization, he differentiates between uniquely human (UH) characteristics, which distinguish humans from other animals, and human nature (HN), characteristics that are typical of or central to human beings.
Tens of millions First Nations died at the hands of European invaders in an attempt to appropriate the entirety of the land.
There is evidence that this representation persists in the American context with African Americans implicitly associated with apes.
People that suffer animalistic dehumanization are seen as amoral, unintelligent, and lacking self-control, and they are likened to animals.
Radiologists evaluating X-rays reported more details to patients and expressed more empathy when a photo of the patient's face accompanied the X-rays.
Researchers have identified six potential causes of dehumanization in medicine: deindivudating practices, impaired patient agency, dissimilarity (causes which do not facilitate the delivery of medical treatment), mechanization, empathy reduction, and moral disengagement (which could be argued, do facilitate the delivery of medical treatment).
Annually, 250,000 children are processed through to adult correctional facilities; this is at the impairment of their physical and mental health.
"Besides manipulations of target persons, manipulations of social goals validate this prediction: Inferring preference, a mental-state inference, significantly increases MPFC and STS activity to these otherwise dehumanized targets."
Primary emotions (those that are experienced by all sentient beings, both humans and other animals) and are found to be more associated with the outgroup.
Implied dehumanization estimated the inclination of excessive force used by law enforcement against American suspect of African ancestry compared to other races.
It is conceptually related to infrahumanization, delegitimization, moral exclusion, and objectification.
Someone who acts inhumanely towards humans.
A study conducted with predominately White female undergraduates as well as predominately White male law enforcement found that participants overestimated the age of American children of African ancestry by 4.59 years, translating to boys of thirteen and a half years of age would be misperceived as legal adults.
Researchers have found that engaging in violent video game play diminishes perceptions of both one's own humanity and the humanity of the players who are targets of the violence in the games.
In a medical context, the passage of time has served to make some dehumanizing practices more acceptable, not less.
Lt. Col. Dave Grossman has shown that without such desensitization it would be difficult, if not impossible for someone to kill another human, even in combat or under threat to their own lives.
Through a study by Fiske, Cuddy, & Glick in 2007, a stereotype content model showed that social targets such as the elderly and wealthy were trustworthy, friendly, and of capable ability due to perceived competence and warmth.
Governments sometimes represent "enemy" civilians or soldiers as less than human so that voters will be more likely to support a war they may otherwise consider mass murder.
However, these benefits were provided to other non-Indigenous Australians by the Commonwealth Government.
Of the myriad of ways the English performed ethnic cleansing, one of the most frequent was the practice of bounty hunting and scalping—where colonial conquerors would raid communities and remove the scalps of children and adults.
Additionally, sex selection hinders the development of females thru discrimination and sexist stereotypes.
His work states European colonialism in Canada and America was a subjugation of the indigenous peoples and is an unequivocal violent series of crimes against humanity which has been unparalleled historically.
As social norms define what is humane is, reflexively these same social norms define what isn’t or inhumane.
Non-state actors—terrorists in particular—have also resorted to dehumanization to further their cause and assuage pangs of guilt.
Studies by Heberlein, Adolphs, Tranel & Damasio, Heberlein AS, Adolphs R, Tranel D, Damasio H. Cortical regions for judgments of emotions and personality traits from point-light walkers explore the constants of biological motion perception within areas of the human brain, where participants would infer intent among objects which do not have any emotion or cognitions.
That is, a low status, socially disconnected person without power should be more likely to attribute human qualities to pets or electronics than a high-status, high-power, socially connected person.
Fredrickson and Roberts argued that the sexual objectification of women extends beyond pornography (which emphasizes women's bodies over their uniquely human mental and emotional characteristics) to society generally.
Behaviorally, dehumanization describes a disposition towards others that debases the others' individuality as either an "individual" species or an "individual" object.
In both democracies and dictatorships, state media are also capable of carrying out dehumanization campaigns, to the extent with which the population is unable to counteract the dehumanizing memes.
Such efforts often depend on preexisting racist, sectarian, or otherwise biased beliefs, which governments play upon through various types of media, presenting "enemies" as barbaric, as undeserving of rights, and as threats to the nation.
It is also possible for subjects to anthropomorphize a spectrum of inanimate objects and non-human life forms.
A California police officer who was also involved in the Rodney King beating described a dispute between an American couple with African ancestry as “something right out of gorillas in the mist.” Franz Boas and Charles Darwin hypothesized that there may be an evolution process among primates.
The Center of Disease Control statistics on law enforcement killings between 1999 and 2011 showed that American youth of African ancestry between the ages of 15 and 19 are 2.8 times more likely to be killed by law enforcement than the national average of all races and age groups.
While usually employed on an intergroup basis, animalistic dehumanization can occur on an interpersonal basis as well.
Such "good-versus-evil" claims help end substantive debate (see also thought-terminating cliché).
If being an outgroup member was all that was required to be dehumanized, dehumanization would be far more prevalent.
To the extent that an individual has this dehumanizing implicit association, they are more likely to support violence against African Americans (e.g., jury decisions to execute defendants).
In comparison to children at juvenile facilities, children sentenced as adults are, five times as likely to be sexually assaulted, twice as likely to be assaulted by a correctional officer, and eight times as likely to commit suicide.
These epithets (e.g., ''faggot'') were thought to function as dehumanizing labels because of their tendency to act as labels of deviance.
The demand of male gender dominant households may lead to the unjust treatment of female offspring, female infanticide, and non-medical abortions.
In the romantic period of painting martyrdom art was most often a means of deifying the oppressed and tormented, and it was common for Goya to depict evil personalities performing these unjust horrible acts.
Cognitive flexibility, emotionality, vital agency, and warmth are central to human nature.
The involvement of the bureaucratic apparatus is one of dehumanization.
Moral exclusion occurs when outgroups are subject to a different set of moral values, rules, and fairness than are used in social relations with ingroup members.
Tasks involving social cognition typically activate the neural network responsible for subjective projections of disgust-inducing perceptions and patterns of dehumanization.
Scalping was common practice in many United States areas all the way until the 1860s in attempt to completely wipe out the remaining First Nations.
In Herbert Kelman's work on dehumanization, humanness has two features: "identity" (i.e., a perception of the person "as an individual, independent and distinguishable from others, capable of making choices") and "community" (i.e., a perception of the person as "part of an interconnected network of individuals who care for each other").
"…one would not know whom the painting depicts, so determinedly has Goya reduced his subjects from martyrs to meat."
The misuse and perpetual misuse of these words used to describe the other in the English language can alter the perception of a group in a derogatory way.
A series of examinations of language sought to find if there was a direct relation between homophobic epithets and social cognitive distancing towards a group of homosexuals, a form of dehumanization.
In reckoning the numbers of the people of the Commonwealth, or of a state or other part of the Commonwealth, Aboriginal natives shall not be counted.
Likewise, rhetoric statements such as "terrorists are just scum", is an act of dehumanization.
Dehumanization has been associated with modern medicine generally, and specifically, has been suggested as a coping mechanism for doctors who work with patients at the end of life.
When individuals dehumanize others, they no longer experience distress when they treat them poorly.
Technology revolutions cause the dehumanization of labor markets to the point of antiquation.
Historically, dehumanization is frequently connected to genocidal conflicts in that ideologies before and during the conflict link victims to rodents/vermin.
However, dehumanization’s definition remains in a reflexive state of a type-token ambiguity relative to the fundamental attribution errors on both scales individual and societal.
Section 51 (xxvi) and 127 were two provisions that dehumanised Aboriginals.
Similarly, a recent study showed that subtle humanization of medical patients appears to improve care for these patients.
Meanwhile, the word immigrant is used to describe people coming to a new area to reside and infers a much less desirable meaning.
In Psychology higher-order cognitive processes like social cognition may occur between a human and human, or human and non-human, human and object.
In both studies, subjects were shown a homophobic epithet, its labelled category, or unspecific insult.
Francisco Goya, famed Spanish painter and printmaker of the romantic period often depicted subjectivity involving the atrocities of war and brutal violence conveying the process of dehumanization.
There is no other classification that I’m aware of where the individual is being rendered as illegal as opposed to the actions of that individuals."
This incident was a result of the rampant discrimination, abuse, and ultimately, dehumanizing acts of violence against the LGBT community in the tenderloin district of San Francisco.
Dehumanization occurs across several domains; is facilitated by status, power, and social connection; and results in behaviors like exclusion, violence, and support for violence against others.
With the ease of anthropomorphic projection, children's lack of social cognition unto human counterparts is surprising.
Other minoritized and marginalized individuals and groups (based on sexual orientation, gender, disability, class, or some other organizing principle) are also susceptible to various forms of dehumanization.
(xxvi) The people of any race, other than the Aboriginal people in any state, for whom it is deemed necessary to make special laws.
Dehumanization or an act thereof can describe a behavior or process that undermines individuality of and in others.
Mental states projected onto objects and non-human forms of life can occur without intention.
When a target's agency and community embeddedness are denied, they no longer elicit compassion or other moral responses, and may suffer violence as a result.
During the St. Louis World's fair in 1904 human zoos exhibited several natives from independent tribes around the globe, most notably a young Congolese man, Ota Benga.
In response to the "don't shoot", command of an unarmed Black man participant's reaction time was slower and less accurate compared to an unarmed White man.
When referring to identity, the death is individualized; when referring to community, the death is experienced personally.
Expatriate has been found to be a word to describe the privileged, often caucasian people newly residing in an area and has connotations which suggest ability, wealth, and trust.
Members of low status groups exhibit no differences in associations with humanity.
Finally, social connection, thinking about a close other or being in the actual presence of a close other, enables dehumanization by reducing attribution of human mental states, increasing support for treating targets like animals, and increasing willingness to endorse harsh interrogation tactics.
Those hundreds of diverse civilizations and communities who thrived across North America millions of years before the exploits of Christopher Columbus were ultimately destroyed.
A 2007 study by Harris, McClure, van den Bos, Cohen & Fiske suggest a subject's mental reliability towards dehumanizing social cognition due to the decrease of neural activity towards the projected target, replicating across stimuli and contexts.
David Livingstone Smith, director and founder of The Human Nature Project at the University of New England, argues that historically, human beings have been dehumanizing one another for thousands of years.
Similarly, Nazi scientists conducted horrific experiments on Jewish people during the Holocaust.
His model suggests that different types of dehumanization arise from the denial of one sense of humanness or the other.
The 1960s terrorist group Weather Underground had advocated violence against any authority figure, and used the "police are pigs" idea to convince members that they were not harming human beings, but simply killing wild animals.
This war crime of scalping was most prevalent when maritime colonialists repeatedly attempted to eradicate Daniel N. Paul's ancestors, the Mi'kmaq.
In the 1990s reportedly California State Police classified incidents involving young men of African ancestry as no humans involved.
Having high status makes one more likely to dehumanize others.
If the new norms lose acceptance then the action remains one of dehumanization and its severity is determine by its comparison to past examples throughout history.
Sex selection and discrimination are when, communities, where the male gender is more valued than the female gender from the cultural, social, and economic ground, dehumanise the female.
The concept of dehumanization has received empirical attention in the psychological literature.
After allocating to New York in 1906, public outcry led to the permanent ban and closure of human zoos in the United States.
Men who dehumanize women as either animals or objects are more liable to rape and sexually harass women and display more negative attitudes toward female rape victims.
Dehumanization and dehumanized perception can occur as a result of language used to describe groups of people.
Humans can  suddenly consider the mental cognitions of those persons who experience emotions of a social variety, linking in-groups of positive social figures to pride, connecting in-groups of wealthy and the upper class feelings of envy, and experiencing pity towards in-groups of the disabled and the elderly.
Dehumanized perception has been indicated to occur when a subject experiences low frequencies of activation within their social cognition neural network.
Delegitimization is the "categorization of groups into extreme negative social categories which are excluded from human groups that are considered as acting within the limits of acceptable norms and/or values."
Low status groups are more associated with human nature traits (warmth, emotionality) than uniquely human traits, implying that they are closer to animals than humans because these traits are typical of humans but can be seen in other species.
This includes areas of neural networking such as the superior temporal sulcus and the medial prefrontal cortex.
Dehumanization can be seen outside of overtly violent conflicts, as in political debates where opponents are presented as collectively stupid or inherently evil.
Each of them are grounded in the "dignity of man" aspect.
Up until the Compton cafeteria riot, the act of dressing in non-gender binary clothing was considered a criminal offence, and police would respond to "cross-dressers" with frequent violence and misconduct.
It appears that inclusion of the photos counteracts the dehumanization of the medical process.
Subjects were later prompted to associate words of animal and human connotations to both heterosexuals and homosexuals.
A study investigating racialized law enforcement violence is using virtual simulators to investigate "shoot or don't shoot" responses.
When this research came to light, efforts were made to protect participants of future research, and currently institutional review boards exist to safeguard individuals from being taken advantage of by scientists.
In 1902 the Commonwealth Franchise Act was passed, this categorically denied Aboriginals from the right to vote.
This has happened to Conservatives in the United States, Jewish people during The Holocaust, and the Tutsi ethnic group during the Rwandan Genocide.
The apprehension towards murdering human beings is so overwhelming that the victim must be removed from their human status if systematic murdering is to occur.
Aged pensions and maternity allowances.
The act of dehumanization is then the alienation of human rights.
An example of gender imbalance resulted from sex selection is in Haryana State, India there are 861 females to 1000 males.
Dehumanization is intrinsically connected with violence.
Ethnic and racial others are often represented as animals in popular culture and scholarship.
Military training is, among other things, a systematic desensitization and dehumanization of the enemy, and servicemen and women may find it psychologically necessary to refer to the enemy as animal or other non-human beings.
Further, "immigrant" is a word that can be paired with "illegal", which harbours a deeply negative connotation to those projecting social cognition towards the other.
The assigning that occurs in social cognition suggests a non-human target can have projected internal life, or conscious emotional and cognitive experiences.
The studies conducted that participants' responses were affected by racial bias.
In children there is a common pattern of projecting the imaginary other, both humanlike and not, and a child is able to interact with the imaginary other without much effort as if the projected other exists.
Dehumanization has occurred historically under the pre-tense of "progress in the name of science".
Mechanistic dehumanization is usually employed on an interpersonal basis (e.g., when a person is seen as a means to another's end).
Further, the same assessment was done to measure effects the language may have on the physical distancing between the subject and homosexuals.Similarly to the prior associative language study, it was found that subjects became more physically distant to the homosexual, indicating the malignant language could encourage dehumanization, cognitive and physical distancing in ways that other forms of malignant language does not.
Anthropologists Ashley Montagu and Floyd Matson famously wrote that dehumanization might well be considered "the fifth horseman of the apocalypse" because of the inestimable damage it has dealt to society.
Dehumanization may be carried out by a social institution (such as a state, school, or family), interpersonally, or even within the self.
"Most of the time when we hear illegal immigrant used, most of the time the shorter version 'illegals' is being used as a noun, which implies that a human being is perpetually illegal.
While dissections of human cadavers was seen as dehumanizing in the Dark Ages (see History of anatomy), the value of dissections as a training aid is such that they are now more widely accepted.
To establish others as entirely human, signify the sorrow from their death, despite racial background, as well as our individual relationship with the person.
Several lines of psychological research relate to the concept of dehumanization.
Relatively recent history has seen the relationship between dehumanization and science result in unethical scientific research.
The mechanistic form occurs when features of human nature (e.g., cognitive flexibility, warmth, agency) are denied to targets.
The reaction of a civilized Western society ought to be "taking freedom as well, but fair and humane".
But it was revolutionary the way the painter broke this convention by dehumanizing these martyr figures.
From the patient point of view, in some states in America, controversial legislation requires that a woman view the ultrasound image of her fetus before being able to have an abortion.
Immigrants are also dehumanized in this manner.
This often elicits more frequent disgust compared to certain higher social standings when projected cognitions by the dehumanizing subject.
As a process, it may be understood as the opposite of personification, a figure of speech in which inanimate objects or abstractions are endowed with human qualities; dehumanization then is the disendowment of these same qualities or a reduction to abstraction.
Such arguments have been used as a pretext for colonialism.
Sociologists and historians often view dehumanization as central to war.
The psychological distance women may feel from their bodies might cause them to dehumanize themselves.
Words such as migrant, immigrant, and expatriate are assigned to foreigners based on their social status and wealth, rather than ability, achievements, and political alignment.
Monkeys and apes were least evolved, then savage and/ or deformed anthropoids which referred to people of African ancestry, to Caucasians as most evolved.
According to Haslam, the animalistic form of dehumanization occurs when uniquely human characteristics (e.g., refinement, moral sensibility) are denied to an outgroup.
Dehumanization can be unintentional, especially on the part of individuals, as with some types of ''de facto'' racism.
During this period religion was still the driving force behind much political and scientific action, and because of this, eugenics were widely supported among the most notable US scientific communities, political figures, and industrial elites.
Therefore, its "negation" might be seen as dehumanization in our common Western sense.
A study by Frith & Frith in 2001 suggests the criticality of social interaction within a neural network has tendencies for subjects to dehumanize those seen as disgust-inducing leading to social disengagement.
Dehumanization can occur discursively (e.g., idiomatic language that likens certain human beings to non-human animals, verbal abuse, erasing one's voice from discourse), symbolically (e.g., imagery), or physically (e.g., chattel slavery, physical abuse, refusing eye contact).
Martha Nussbaum (1999) identified seven components of objectification: "instrumentality", "ownership", "denial of autonomy", "inertness", "fungibility", "violability", and "denial of subjectivity".
This emergence then is the action of dehumanization until the old norms lose out to the competing new norms, which will then redefine the action of dehumanization.
Dehumanization has applications outside traditional social contexts.
Dehumanized perception often means a cognitive bias experienced through lack of consideration for thoughts, feelings, and general mental contents of a social target's cognition.
Moral exclusion is used to explain extreme behaviors like genocide, harsh immigration policies, and eugenics, but can also happen on a more regular, everyday discriminatory level.
Some research has indicated that women and men exhibit a "sexual body part recognition bias", in which women's sexual body parts are better recognized when presented in isolation than in the context of their entire bodies, whereas men's sexual body parts are better recognized in the context of their entire bodies than in isolation.
Specifically, individuals associate secondary emotions (which are seen as uniquely human) more with the ingroup than with the outgroup.
Indigenous Australians were not allowed social security benefits e.g.
Benga's imprisonment was put on display as a public service showcasing “a degraded and degenerate race”.
Anthropomorphism (i.e., perceiving in nonhuman entities mental and physical capacities that reflect humans) is the inverse of dehumanization, which occurs when characteristics that apply to humans are denied to other humans.
While the players are dehumanized, the video game characters that play them are likely anthropomorphized.
Waytz, Epley, and Cacioppo suggest that the inverse of the factors that facilitate dehumanization (e.g., high status, power, and social connection) should facilitate anthropomorphism.
This is surprising because social connection has documented benefits for personal health and well-being but appears to impair intergroup relations.
However, in-groups of the disabled, poor, persons with addictions, and immigrants were recorded as disgust-inducing due to projected low warmth and incompetence.
The victims are then dehumanized by placing them "outside the boundary in which moral values, rules, and considerations of fairness apply", the principle of mortality is no longer applicable.
Aboriginals in rural areas were discriminated and controlled as to where and how they could marry, work, live, and their movements were restricted.
There is a normative emphasis on female appearance that causes women to take a third-person perspective on their bodies.
Critics of the law argue that simply seeing an image of the fetus humanizes it, and biases women against abortion.
The Tuskegee syphilis experiment and the Nazi human experimentation on Jewish people are two such examples.
Dictatorships use the same process to prevent opposition by citizens.
In addition, another line of work found that individuals in a position of power were more likely to objectify their subordinates, treating them as a means to one's own end rather than focusing on their essentially human qualities.
The Parliament shall, subject to this Constitution, have power to make laws for the peace, order, and good government of the Commonwealth with respect to:
“Dehumanisation is viewed as a central component to intergroup violence because it is frequently the most important precursor to moral exclusion, the process by which stigmatized groups are placed outside the boundary in which moral values, rules, and considerations of fairness apply.”
Mi'kmaq elder and human rights activist Daniel N. Paul has researched written extensively of historic accounts of atrocious acts of violence against First Nations peoples in North America.
