The city's road network is maintained by MCD, NDMC, Delhi Cantonment Board, Public Works Department (PWD) and Delhi Development Authority.
According to the 2011 census, MCD is among the largest municipal bodies in the world, providing civic services to about 11&nbsp;million people.
* National Highway 24 (India) (NH 24) is a National Highway in India that connects the National capital Delhi to Uttar Pradesh state capital Lucknow running  in length.
* Inner Ring Road is one of the most important "state highways" in Delhi.
210000, the second highest in India.
Delhi has the highest level of the airborne particulate matter, PM2.5 considered most harmful to health, with 153 micrograms.
The name "New Delhi" was given in 1927, and the new capital was inaugurated on 13 February 1931.
Delhi (civic administration) was ranked 5th out of 21 Cities for best governance & administrative practices in India in 2014.
In 2008, there were 85 cars in Delhi for every 1,000 of its residents.
According to CSE and System of Air Quality Weather Forecasting and Research (SAFAR), burning of agricultural waste in nearby Punjab, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh regions results in severe intensification of smog over Delhi.
The National Capital Territory of Delhi has its own Legislative Assembly, Lieutenant Governor, council of ministers and Chief Minister.
Some regal ''havelis'' (palatial residences) are in the Old City.
The state government of Uttar Pradesh is considering imposing a ban on crop burning to reduce pollution in Delhi NCR and an environmental panel has appealed to India's Supreme Court to impose a 30% cess on diesel cars.
Cellular coverage is available in GSM, CDMA, 3G and 4G.
By 1200, native Hindu resistance had begun to crumble, the dominance of foreign Turkic Muslim dynasties in north India was to last for the next five centuries.
The Lotus Temple has won numerous architectural awards and been featured in hundreds of newspaper and magazine articles.
The Republic Day Parade is a large cultural and military parade showcasing India's cultural diversity and military strength.
The monsoon arrives at the end of June, along with an increase in humidity.
However, according to several authors, most of these gains have been lost, especially due to stubble burning, a rise in the market share of diesel cars and a considerable decline in bus ridership.
From April to October the weather is hot.
Some historians believe that the name is derived from ''Dilli'', a corruption of the Hindustani words ''dehleez'' or ''dehali''—both terms meaning 'threshold' or 'gateway'—and symbolic of the city as a gateway to the Gangetic Plain.
Other Indian cuisines are also available in this area even though the street specialises in north Indian food .
Delhi features an atypical version of the humid subtropical climate (Köppen ''Cwa'').
The people of Delhi are referred to as ''Delhiites'' or ''Dilliwalas''.
UNESCO was scheduled to visit Delhi in September 2014 to validate its claims.
Lotus Temple, is a Bahá'í House of Worship completed in 1986. Notable for its flowerlike shape, it serves as the Mother Temple of the Indian subcontinent and has become a prominent attraction in the city.
The opening ceremony of the 2010 Commonwealth Games was held at the Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium, the main stadium of the event, in New Delhi at 7:00&nbsp;pm Indian Standard Time on 3 October 2010.
In 2001, the population of Delhi increased by 285,000 as a result of migration and by 215,000 as a result of natural population growth, which made Delhi one of the fastest growing cities in the world.
For the next three hundred years, Delhi was ruled by a succession of Turkic and an Afghan, Lodhi dynasty.
In 1757, the Afghan ruler, Ahmad Shah Durrani, sacked Delhi.
They built several forts and townships that are part of the seven cities of Delhi.
However, the recovery was short-lived and the sultanate was destroyed in 1526 by Babur, founder of the Mughal dynasty.
The Parliament of India, the Rashtrapati Bhavan (Presidential Palace), Cabinet Secretariat and the Supreme Court of India are located in the municipal district of New Delhi.
Personal vehicles especially cars also form a major chunk of vehicles plying on Delhi roads.
The Mamluk Sultanate (Delhi) was overthrown in 1290 by Jalal ud din Firuz Khilji (1290–1320).
20 training venues were used in the Games, including seven venues within Delhi University.
Delhi's culture has been influenced by its lengthy history and historic association as the capital of India.
The city is administratively divided into eleven police-zones which are subdivided into 95 local police stations.
Delhi Metro completed 10&nbsp;years of operation on 25 December 2012.
Under the second Khilji ruler, Ala-ud-din Khilji, the Delhi sultanate extended its control south of the Narmada River in the Deccan.
A large portion of the sewage flows untreated into the Yamuna river.
According to the Bhavishya Purana, King Prithiviraja of Indraprastha built a new fort in the modern-day Purana Qila area for the convenience of all four castes in his kingdom.
In 1996, the Centre for Science and Environment (CSE) started a public interest litigation in the Supreme Court of India that ordered the conversion of Delhi's fleet of buses and taxis to run on compressed natural gas (CNG) and banned the use of leaded petrol in 1998.
In 1998, the Supreme Court of India ordered that all public transport vehicles in Delhi must be fuelled by compressed natural gas (CNG).
Delhi has the highest number of registered cars compared to any other metropolitan city in India.
, about 16% of all Delhi residents possessed at least a college graduate degree.
The warm season lasts from 9 April to 8 July with an average daily high temperature above .
Radio is a less popular mass medium in Delhi, although FM radio has gained popularity since the inauguration of several new stations in 2006.
Buses are operated by the state-owned Delhi Transport Corporation (DTC), which owns the largest fleet of compressed natural gas (CNG)-fueled buses in the world.
The slave general of Ghori, Qutb-ud-din Aibak was given the responsibility of governing the conquered territories of India and then Ghori returned to his capital, Ghor.
The state-owned Delhi Transport Corporation (DTC) is a major bus service provider which operates the world's largest fleet of CNG-fuelled buses.
The Archaeological Survey of India recognises 1200 heritage buildings and 175 monuments as national heritage sites.
The Delhi Fire Service runs 43 fire stations that attend about 15,000 fire and rescue calls per year.
Remains of eight major cities have been discovered in Delhi.
It has a length of  and a width of .
Delhi has one of India's largest and fastest growing retail industries.
The southern provinces then broke away.
The Municipal co-operation  handles civic.
Shah Jahan built the seventh city of Delhi that bears his name ''Shahjahanabad'', which served as the capital of the Mughal Empire from 1638 and is today known as the ''Old City'' or ''Old Delhi''.
administration for the city as part of the Panchayati Raj Act.
In 1553, the Hindu king, Hemu acceded to the throne of Delhi by defeating forces of Mughal Emperor Humayun at Agra and Delhi.
Temperatures in Delhi usually range from , with the lowest and highest temperatures ever recorded being  respectively.
The highest temperature recorded in July was  in 1931.
The city is also home to the Indian Premier League team Delhi Daredevils, who play their home matches at the Kotla, and was the home to the Delhi Giants team (previously Delhi Jets) of the now defunct Indian Cricket League.
The airport functioned until 2001, however in January 2002 the government closed the airport for flying activities because of security concerns following the New York attacks in September 2001.
Safdarjung's Tomb is an example of the Mughal gardens style.
The mess left behind after the Commonwealth Games prompted Prime Minister Manmohan Singh to replace Sports and Youth Affairs minister Manohar Singh Gill with Ajay Maken in 19 January 2011 Cabinet reshuffle.
'''Delhi''' (,  '''''Dilli'''''; Devanāgarī: दिल्ली), officially the '''National Capital Territory of Delhi''', is a city and a union territory of India.
Jat community, which mostly live in the rural areas of outer Delhi, constitute around 5% of Delhi's population while the Other Backward Classes (OBCs) & the Dalits constitute 18% and 17% respectively.
Another legend holds that the name of the city is based on the Hindi/Prakrit word ''dhili'' (''loose'') and that it was used by the Tomaras to refer to the city because the Iron Pillar of Delhi had a weak foundation and had to be moved.
According to WHO Delhi was the most polluted city in the world in 2014.
At 240&nbsp;MGD, the Bhakra storage is DJB's largest water source, followed by the Yamuna and Ganges rivers.
Delhi Metro was India's second modern public transportation system, which has revolutionised travel by providing a fast, reliable, safe, and comfortable means of transport.
Owing to more than 2 dozen grade-separators/flyovers, the road is almost signal-free.
The coldest day of the year is 4 January, with an average low of  and high of .
Delhi Metro is being built and operated by the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Limited (DMRC), a state-owned company with equal equity participation from Government of India and Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi.
The Delhi ridge originates from the Aravalli Range in the south and encircles the west, north-east and north-west parts of the city.
He returned to Afghanistan leaving a Mughal puppet ruler in nominal control.
Delhi has 1922.32&nbsp;km of road length per 100&nbsp;km2, one of the highest road densities in India.
Delhi is a member of the Asian Network of Major Cities 21.
A treaty signed in 1752 made Marathas the protectors of the Mughal throne in Delhi.
* National Highway 2 (India) (NH 2) commonly referred as Delhi-Kolkata Road is a busy Indian National Highway that runs through the states of Delhi, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand and West Bengal.
One of them is derived from ''Dhillu'' or ''Dilu'', a king who built a city at this location in 50&nbsp;BC and named it after himself.
The annual mean temperature is ; monthly mean temperatures range from .
Television programming includes two free terrestrial television channels offered by Doordarshan, and several Hindi, English, and regional-language cable channels offered by multi system operators.
A number of state-owned and private radio stations broadcast from Delhi.
In 2012-13, the airport was used by more than 35 million passengers, making it one of the busiest airports in South Asia.
The cold season lasts from 11 December to 11 February with an average daily high temperature below .
Under the Afghan Lodhi dynasty (1451–1526), the Delhi sultanate recovered control of the Punjab and the Gangetic plain to once again achieve domination over Northern India.
INTACH acted as the nodal agency for the bid.
Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium is the home stadium for Delhi Dynamos FC.
But in 2013, the Congress was ousted from power by the newly formed Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) led by Arvind Kejriwal forming the government with outside support from the Congress.
The legislative assembly was abolished in 1956, after which direct federal control was implemented until it was re-established in 1993.
The Indira Gandhi Arena is also in Delhi.
, it supplied 650&nbsp;million gallons per day (MGD), whereas the estimated consumption requirement is 963&nbsp;MGD.
Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi is ranked 2 in the QS National (India) and under top 200 (World) university rankings and is one of the best engineering universities in Asia.
Many national media agencies, including the state-owned Press Trust of India, Media Trust of India and Doordarshan, is based in the city.
The Bahá'í laws also stipulate that only the holy scriptures of the Bahá'í Faith and other religions can be read or chanted inside in any language; while readings and prayers can be set to music by choirs, no musical instruments can be played inside.
After Mumbai, Delhi has the second-highest number of billionaires and millionaires among all cities in India.
It scored 3.6 on 10 compared to the national average of 3.3.
Other monuments include the India Gate, the Jantar Mantaran 18th-century astronomical observatoryand the Purana Qilaa 16th-century fortress.
National Law University, Delhi is a prominent law school and is affiliated to the Bar Council of India.
The Delhi-Gurgaon Expressway connects Delhi with Gurgaon and the international airport.
Along with Indian cuisine, a variety of international cuisines are popular among the residents.
In early March, the wind direction changes from north-westerly to south-westerly.
'''National Highways Passing Through Delhi'''
During 2013-14, peak levels of fine particulate matter (PM) in Delhi increased by about 44%, primarily due to high vehicular and industrial emissions, construction work and crop burning in adjoining states.
There are a number of myths and legends associated with the origin of the name ''Delhi''.
All stations have escalators, lifts, and tactile tiles to guide the visually impaired from station entrances to trains.
Nader eventually agreed to leave the city and India after forcing the Mughal emperor Muhammad Shah I to beg him for mercy and granting him the keys of the city and the royal treasury.
In February 2014, the Government of India approved Delhi's bid for World Heritage City status.
The Mughal dynasty ruled Delhi for more than three centuries, with a sixteen-year hiatus during the reigns of Sher Shah Suri and Hemu from 1540 to 1556.
* The Delhi Faridabad Skyway is controlled tolled expressway which connects Delhi to Faridabad, an important satellite city of Haryana.
According to Indian meteorologists, the average maximum temperature in Delhi during winters has declined notably since 1998 due to rising air pollution.
There were further terrorist attacks in Delhi in October 2005 and September 2008, resulting in a total of 103 deaths.
As the capital of India, Delhi is the focus of political reportage, including regular television broadcasts of Parliament sessions.
The rugby stadium in Delhi University North Campus hosted rugby games for Commonwealth Games.
In December 2004, 636,000 people were registered with various employment exchange programmes in Delhi.
he began construction of the Qutb Minar and Quwwat-al-Islam (Might of Islam) mosque, the earliest extant mosque in India.
As per the Economic survey of Delhi (2005–2006), the tertiary sector contributes 70.95% of Delhi's gross SDP followed by secondary and primary sectors with 25.20% and 3.85% contributions respectively.
A second airport open for commercial flights has been suggested either by expansion of Meerut Airport or construction of a new airport in Greater Noida.
The city's classic dishes include butter chicken, ''aloo chaat'', ''chaat'', ''dahi vada'', ''kachori'',''gol gappe'',''samosa'', ''chole bhature'', ''chole kulche'', ''jalebi'' and ''lassi''.
Like all other Bahá'í Houses of Worship, is open to all regardless of religion, or any other distinction, as emphasised in Bahá'í texts.
* Outer Ring Road is another major artery in Delhi that links far-flung areas of Delhi.
The Delhi Metro has also been credited for significantly reducing air pollutants in the city.
The network consists of six lines with a total length of  with 142 stations, of which 35 are underground, five are at-grade, and the remainder are elevated.
Key service industries are information technology, telecommunications, hotels, banking, media and tourism.
, the per capita income of Delhi was Rs.
A union territory, the political administration of the NCT of Delhi today more closely resembles that of a state of India, with its own legislature, high court and an executive council of ministers headed by a Chief Minister.
However, sports minister Manohar Singh Gill later stated that funding infrastructure would come before a 2020 bid.
Migration to Delhi from the rest of India continues (), contributing more to the rise of Delhi's population than the birth rate, which is declining.
The Government of India and the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi jointly administer New Delhi, where both bodies are located.
Buddh International Circuit in Greater Noida, a suburb of Delhi, hosts the annual Formula 1 Indian Grand Prix.
The brief, mild winter starts in late November, peaks in January and heavy fog often occurs.
Delhi hosted the first and ninth Asian Games in 1951 and 1982 respectively and the 2010 Commonwealth Games.
It was made a district province of the Punjab.
Regional language newspapers include the Malayalam daily ''Malayala Manorama'' and the Tamil dailies ''Dinamalar'' and ''Dinakaran''.
Satellite television has yet to gain a large quantity of subscribers in the city.
In 2004–05, approximately 15.29&nbsp;lakh (1.529&nbsp;million) students were enrolled in primary schools, 8.22&nbsp;lakh (0.822&nbsp;million) in middle schools and 6.69&nbsp;lakh (0.669&nbsp;million) in secondary schools across Delhi.
In 1739, the Mughal Empire lost the huge Battle of Karnal in less than three hours against the numerically outnumbered but militarily superior Persian army led by Nader Shah of Persia.
Delhi is often regarded as the "Book Capital" of India because of high readership.
A trend of dining at local ''dhabas'' is popular among the residents.
Delhi Metro completed 10&nbsp;years of operation on 25 December 2012.
Two prominent features of the geography of Delhi are the Yamuna flood plains and the Delhi ridge.
According to the 2011 census of India, the population of Delhi is 16,753,235.
The corresponding population density was 11,297 persons per km2 with a sex ratio of 866 women per 1000 men, and a literacy rate of 86.34%.
The Bahá'í laws emphasise that the spirit of the House of Worship be that it is a gathering place where people of all religions may worship God without denominational restrictions.
Delhi is a major junction in the Indian railway network and is the headquarters of the Northern Railway.
Members of the legislative assembly are directly elected from territorial constituencies in the NCT.
Construction, power, health and community services and real estate are also important to the city's economy.
The first five cities were in the southern part of present-day Delhi.
In addition to the Delhi Metro, a suburban railway, the Delhi Suburban Railway exists.
Delhi's association and geographic proximity to the capital, New Delhi, has amplified the importance of national events and holidays like Republic Day, Independence Day (15 August) and ''Gandhi Jayanti''.
The ceremony featured over 8,000 performers and lasted for two and a half hours.
However, the Government of India withdrew its nomination on 21 May 2015.
Besides construction and operation of Delhi Metro, DMRC is also involved in the planning and implementation of metro rail, monorail, and high-speed rail projects in India and providing consultancy services to other metro projects in the country as well as abroad.
Other major English newspapers include ''Times of India'', ''The Hindu'', ''Indian Express'', ''Business Standard'', ''The Pioneer'', ''The Statesman'',  and ''The Asian Age''.
The dearth of food habits among the city's residents created a unique style of cooking which became popular throughout the world, with dishes such as ''Kebab'', ''biryani'', ''tandoori''.
There are several cricket grounds, or ''maidans'', located across the city.
Delhi hosted the Nehru Cup in 2007 and 2009, in both of which India defeated Syria 1–0.
In the Old City, the Mughals and the Turkic rulers constructed several architecturally significant buildings, such as the Jama MasjidIndia's largest mosque built in 1656    and the Red Fort.
The Delhi cricket team has produced several world-class international cricketers such as Virender Sehwag, Gautam Gambhir, Madan Lal, Chetan Chauhan and Bishan Singh Bedi to name a few.
Almost the entire street is occupied by fast food stalls or street vendors.
Delhi has hosted many major international sporting events, including the first and also the ninth Asian Games, the 2010 Hockey World Cup, the 2010 Commonwealth Games and the 2011 Cricket World Cup.
The Yamuna, a sacred river in Hinduism, is the only major river flowing through Delhi.
Amongst the English language newspapers, ''The Hindustan Times'', with a daily circulation of over a million copies, is the single largest daily.
The Delhi Metro is a rapid transit system serving Delhi, Faridabad, Gurgaon, Noida and Ghaziabad in the National Capital Region of India.
The announcement of accepted cities was to be made in June 2015.
The former MCD was divided into three smaller Municipal CorporationsNorth Delhi, South Delhi and East Delhi.
In 2001, the manufacturing sector employed 1,440,000 workers and the city had 129,000 industrial units.
The Delhi metropolitan area lies within the National Capital Territory of Delhi (NCT), which has five local municipal corporations;  North Delhi Municipal Corporation,  South Delhi Municipal Corporation,  East Delhi Municipal Corporation, NDMC and DCB.
In the Elite Football League of India, Delhi's first professional American football franchise, the Delhi Defenders played its first season in Pune.
The city came under the direct control of the British Government in 1858.
The ''Gali Paranthe Wali'' (the street of fried bread) is a street in Chandni Chowk particularly for food eateries since the 1870s.
The Delhi Metro project was spearheaded by Padma Vibhushan E. Sreedharan, the Managing Director of DMRC and popularly known as the "Metro Man" of India.
Buses are the most popular means of road transport catering to about 60% of Delhi's total demand.
Delhi is included in India's seismic zone-IV, indicating its vulnerability to major earthquakes.
Phase-II has a total length of 128&nbsp;km and was completed by 2010.
During the Indian Rebellion of 1857, Delhi fell to the forces of East India Company after a bloody fight known as the Siege of Delhi.
It has nearly become a tradition that almost every prime minister of India has visited the street to eat ''paratha'' at least once.
Research on Delhi suggests that up to half of the city's water use is unofficial groundwater.In Delhi, daily domestic solid waste production is 8000&nbsp;tonnes which is dumped at three landfill locations by MCD.
The city is believed to be the site of Indraprastha, the legendary capital of the Pandavas in the Indian epic Mahabharata.
In 2006, Delhi had 165 colleges, five medical colleges and eight engineering colleges, seven major universities and nine deemed universities.
New Delhi houses several government buildings and official residences reminiscent of British colonial architecture, including the Rashtrapati Bhavan, the Secretariat, Rajpath, the Parliament of India and Vijay Chowk.
In 2016 WHO downgraded Delhi to eleventh in the urban air quality database.
Delhi Technological University (formerly Delhi College of Engineering), Indraprastha Institute of Information Technology, Netaji Subhas Institute of Technology, Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University and National Law University, Delhi are the only state universities.
, the number of vehicles in the metropolitan region, Delhi NCR, is 11.2&nbsp;million (11.2&nbsp;million).
Delhi Bus Rapid Transit System runs between Ambedkar Nagar and Delhi Gate.
The area around Delhi was probably inhabited before the second millennium BC and there is evidence of continuous inhabitation since at least the 6th century BC.
Prithviraj Chauhan conquered Lal Kot in 1178 and renamed it Qila Rai Pithora.
The average date of the advent of monsoon winds in Delhi is 29 June.
Babur, was a descendant of Genghis Khan and Timur, from the Fergana Valley in modern-day Uzbekistan.
The king Prithviraj Chauhan was defeated in 1192 by Muhammad Ghori, a Tajik invader from Afghanistan, who made a concerted effort to conquer northern India.
On 10 February 2015, the Aam Aadmi Party returned to power after a landslide victory, winning 67 out of the 70 seats in the Delhi Legislative Assembly.
As of August 2011, the metro consists of six operational lines with a total length of  and 146 stations, and several other lines are under construction.
Part of the reason that the city remains assessed at basic sustainability is because of the low resource-use and carbon emissions of its poorer neighbourhoods.
To meet the transport demand, the State and Union government constructed a mass rapid transit system, including the Delhi Metro.
Furthermore, no sermons can be delivered, and there can be no ritualistic ceremonies practised.
Dwarka Sub City, Asia's largest planned residential area, is located within the National Capital Territory of Delhi.
Through most of its history, Delhi has served as a capital of various kingdoms and empires.
