Antipsychotics, particularly haloperidol, are the most commonly used drugs for delirium and the most studied.
In addition, there is a more general bias selecting younger and fitter participants amenable to scanning, especially if using intensive protocols such as MRI.
However, a few studies have exploited the opportunity to sample CSF from persons undergoing spinal anaesthesia for elective or emergency surgery.
Each case was admitted with a range of primary pathologies, but all had acute respiratory distress syndrome and/or septic shock contributing to the delirium.
Generally, structural imaging suggested that diffuse brain abnormalities such as atrophy and leukoaraiosis might be associated with delirium, though few studies could account for differences in key variables such as age, sex, education or underlying cognitive function and education.
About 5% to 10% of older adults who are admitted to hospital develop a new episode of delirium while in hospital.
A systematic review of delirium in general medical inpatients showed that estimates of delirium prevalence on admission ranged from 10 to 31%.
Occasionally sleeplessness and severe agitation and irritability are part of "delirium."
* Disturbance of consciousness (that is, reduced clarity of awareness of the environment, with reduced ability to focus, sustain, or shift attention)
Other symptoms can include disorientation, thought disorder, memory problems, language disorder, sleep disturbance, delusions, mood lability, psychomotor changes (changes in rate of activity/movement), and hallucinations.
Only a handful of studies exist where there has been an attempt to correlate delirium with pathological findings at autopsy.
Thus, without careful assessment and history, delirium can easily be confused with a number of psychiatric disorders or long term organic brain syndromes, because many of the signs and symptoms of delirium are conditions also present in dementia, depression, and psychosis.
*Delirium is distinguished by time-course from the confusion and lack of attention which result from long term learning disorders and varieties of congenital brain dysfunction.
Misperceptions include depersonalisation, delusional misidentifications, illusions and hallucinations.
After an episode of delirium in the general population, functional dependence increased threefold.
Delirium may be difficult to diagnose without the proper establishment of the baseline mental function of a patient.
Without using one of these tools, 75% of ICU delirium is missed by the practicing team, which leaves the patient without any likely active interventions to help reduce the duration of his/her delirium.
Higher rates of detection of delirium in general settings (for the ICU see below) can be assisted by the use of validated delirium screening tools.
A case series has been reported on 7 patients who died during ICU admission.
being poisoned by nurses).
the dementia was present before the delirium, rather than caused by it).
One functional MRI study reported a reversible reduction in activity in brain areas localising with cognition and attention function.
Delirium requires both a sudden change in mentation, and an organic cause for this.
Treatment of delirium involves two main strategies: first, treatment of the underlying presumed acute cause or causes; secondly, optimising conditions for the brain.
The association between delirium and dementia is complex.
Delusions are typically poorly formed and less stereotyped than in schizophrenia or Alzheimer’s disease.
Outside the ICU, on hospital wards and in nursing homes, the problem of delirium is also a very important medical problem, especially for older patients.
Studies were generally small, studying heterogeneous populations with different times of CSF sampling in relation to delirium, and no clear conclusions could be drawn.
Persons with delirum had higher scores for HLA-DR and CD68 (markers of microglial activation), IL-6 (cytokines pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory activities) and GFAP (marker of astrocyte activity).
A precipitating factor is any biological, psychological or social factor that can trigger delirium.
It is not as important which tool is used as that the patient gets monitored.
In order to avoid the use of restraints some patients may require constant supervision.
Minor disturbances with insomnia or excessive daytime somnolence may be hard to distinguish from other medically ill patients without delirium, but delirium typically involves more substantial alterations with sleep fragmentation or even complete sleep-wake cycle reversal that reflect disturbed circadian rhythm regulation.
Detection and management of mental stress is also important.
There are also opportunities to summarise temporal fluctuations as continuous recordings, compressed into power spectra (quantitative EEG, qEEG).
Another way of looking at dementia, however, is not strictly based on the decline component but on the degree of memory and executive function problems.
There is an urgent need to understand more about the mechanisms of dysfunction underpinning delirium and data arising from these and other animal models must form part of the discussion on delirium pathophysiology.
They have been used to define clinical subtypes (hypoactive, hyperactive, mixed) though studies are inconsistent as to the prevalence of these subtypes.
British professional guidelines by the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence advise haloperidol or olanzapine.
During the 20th century, delirium was described as a ‘clouding of consciousness’ but this rather nebulous concept has been replaced by a better understanding of the components of phenomenology that culminate in severely impaired higher order brain functions.
Earliest rodent models of delirium used an antagonist of the muscarinic acetylcholine receptors, atropine, to induce cognitive and EEG changes similar to delirium.
Since publication of the systematic review, five further studies have been published.
Profound systemic inflammation occurring during bacteraemia/sepsis is also known to cause delirium (often termed septic encephalopathy).
Melatonin and other pharmacological agents have been studied for prevention of postoperative delirium, but evidence is not clear.
However, when it occurs in the course of a critical illness, delirium has been found to occur in young and old patients at relatively even rates.
If this is insufficient, verbal and non-verbal de-escalation techniques may be required to offer reassurances and calm the person experiencing delirium.
Since older memories are retained without need of concentration, previously formed long-term memories (i.e., those formed before the period of delirium) are usually preserved in all but the most severe cases of delirium.
Reduction in formation of new long-term memory (which by definition survives withdrawal of attention), is common in delirium, because initial formation of (new) long-term memories generally requires an even higher degree of attention than do short-term memory tasks.
More formal testing can include the months of the year backwards, serial sevens or digit span tests.
The two main explanations for these findings are either: (1) the study was underpowered to detect mediating pathways between premorbid cognitive impairment, Alzheimer’s pathology biomarkers and subsequent delirium; or (2) postoperative delirium arises through pathophysiological pathways that are distinct from Alzheimer's disease.
Disorientation (another symptom of confusion, and usually a more severe one) describes the loss of awareness of the surroundings, environment and context in which the person exists.
All unnecessary attachments are removed (IVs, catheters, NG tubes) which allows for greater mobility.
This involves ensuring that the person with delirium has adequate oxygenation, hydration, nutrition, and normal levels of metabolites, that drug effects are minimised, constipation treated, pain treated, and so on.
Evidence is weaker for the atypical antipsychotics, such as risperidone, olanzapine and quetiapine.
Hallucination, drowsiness, and disorientation are not required, but may be contribute to the diagnosis.
One additional study has since been published.
In other words, a mentally disabled or demented person who is operating at their own baseline level of mental ability might appear to be delirious without a baseline functional status against which to compare.
Broadly, delirium may be associated with: increased serotoninergic and dopamine signalling; reversible fall in somatostatin; increased cortisol; and increase in some inflammatory cytokines (IL-8, IL-1β), but possibly not others (TNF-α).
Inattention is the cardinal and required symptom to diagnose delirium and is noticeable on interview by distractibility and inability to shift and / or sustain attention.
This aspect of delirium is common but often difficult for non-experts to assess reliably.
Two studies examined delirium risk as a post-operative complication after elective cardiac surgery.
Psychotic symptoms occur in both although the prevailing stereotype suggests that they only occur in hyperactive cases.
Language disturbances in delirium include anomic aphasia, paraphasias, impaired comprehension, agraphia, and word-finding difficulties.
Similar anticholinergic drugs such as biperiden and scopolamine have also produced delirium-like effects.
There are translations of these tools in over 20 languages and they are used globally in many thousands of ICUs, and instructional videos and myriad implementation tips are available.
In the UK, the cost is estimated as £13k per admission.
Dementia is supposed to be an entity that continues to decline, such as Alzheimer’s disease.
They usually relate to persecutory themes of impending danger or threat in the immediate environment (e.g.
* Onset of hours to days, and tendency to fluctuate.
It is a corollary of these differential criteria that a diagnosis of delirium ''cannot'' be made without a previous assessment, or knowledge, of the affected person's ''baseline'' level of cognitive function.
The same association is also evident in persons already diagnosed with Alzheimer’s dementia.
Similar findings were reported for alpha frequencies.
Overall, the study found that longer duration of delirium was associated with smaller brain volume and more white matter disruption, and both these correlated with worse cognitive scores 12 months later.
Hallucinations and illusions are frequently visual though can be tactile and auditory.
The relative power of the theta frequency was consistently different between delirium and non-delirium patients.
This found 12 articles for inclusion, most with small sample sizes (total number of cases 127).
Cognitive impairments and EEG slowing are comparable in hyperactive and hypoactive patients though other symptoms may vary.
They differ in duration, complexity, need for training, and so on.
'''Delirium''', or '''acute confusional state''', is an organically caused decline from a previously attained baseline level of cognitive function.
Incoherent or illogical / rambling conversation is reported commonly.
Among those requiring critical care, delirium is a risk for death within the next year.
The relationship of circadian disturbances to the characteristic fluctuating severity of delirium symptoms over a 24-hour period or to motor disturbance is unknown.
The most recent area of the hospital in which delirium is just beginning to be monitored routinely in many centers is the Emergency Department, where the prevalence of delirium among older adults is about 10%.
* Change in cognition (e.g., problem-solving impairment or memory impairment) or a perceptual disturbance (hallucination)
In a frail individual, a single or mild precipitating factor could be sufficient to trigger an episode of delirium.
Disruption of sleep-wake cycle is almost invariably present in delirium and often predates the appearance of a full-blown episode.
*Delirium is distinguished from depression.
Avoiding unnecessary movement, involving family members, having recognizable faces at the bedside, having means of orientation available (such as a clock and a calendar) may be sufficient in stabilizing the situation.
Delirium as a syndrome is one which occurs more frequently in people in their later years.
These both showed that white matter damage predicted post-operative delirium.
In the only population-based prospective study of delirium, older persons had an eight-fold increase in dementia and faster cognitive decline.
It is now known, for example, that between 50% and 70% of ICU patients have tremendous problems with ongoing brain dysfunction that looks a lot like the degree of problems experienced by Alzheimer’s or TBI (traumatic brain injury) patients and which leaves too many ICU survivors disabled and unable to go back to work and unable to serve effectively as the matriarchs and patriarchs of their families.
The most salient component of the definition of delirium that nurses and other healthcare professionals use at the bedside is whether or not the patient can pay attention and follow simple commands (see videos and literature).
Non medication treatments are the first measure in delirium, unless there is severe agitation that places the person at risk of harming oneself or others.
Overall, 17 different biomarkers were considered and each article identified in the review focused on a narrow range of biomarkers with no overlap between studies.
Since the advent of validated and easy-to-implement delirium instruments for ICU patients such as the Confusion Assessment Method for the ICU (CAM-ICU) and the Intensive Care Delirium Screening Checkllist (IC-DSC).,  of the hundreds of thousands of ICU patients who develop delirium in ICUs every year, it has been recognized that most of them belong to the hypoactive variety, which is easily missed and invisible to the managing teams unless actively monitored using such instruments.
Treatment of delirium requires treating the underlying cause.
Delirium may occur in a mixed type where someone may fluctuate between both hyper- and hypoactive periods.
Only if this fails, or if de-escalation techniques are inappropriate, is pharmacological treatment indicated.
Recent long-term studies bear this out, showing that many patients end up meeting criteria for delirium for an alarmingly long time.
There was substantial heterogeneity in populations, study design, and imaging modalities such that no firm conclusions were made.
A systematic review identified 14 studies for inclusion, representing a range of different populations: 6 in older populations, 3 in ICU, sample sizes between 10 and 50).
A systematic review identified 8 studies involving 235 patients (142 with delirium).
Delirium represents an organically caused decline from a previously attained level of cognitive functioning.
Delirium has also been referred to as 'acute confusional state' or 'acute brain syndrome'.
Disorientation may occur in time (not knowing what time of day, day of week, month, season or year it is), place (not knowing where one is) or person (not knowing who one is).
* Thinking is slow and muddled but the content is often complex.
Conversely, delirium may only result in a fit individual if they suffer serious or multiple precipitating factors.
The key word in both of these descriptions is "acute" (meaning: of ''recent onset''), since delirium may share many of the clinical (i.e., symptomatic) features of dementia or developmental disabilities including attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, with the important ''exception'' of symptom duration.
This is a distressing personal and public health problem that is getting an increasing amount of scrutiny in ongoing investigations.
Abnormalities of affect which may attend the state of delirium may include many distortions to perceived or communicated emotional states.
This prospectively examined the neuroimaging correlates of delirium in 47 participants after critical illness.
Delirium is a syndrome encompassing an array of neuropsychiatric symptoms, including a disturbance in consciousness/attention and cognition that develops acutely and tends to fluctuate.
Emotional states may also fluctuate, so that a delirious person may rapidly change between, for example, terror, sadness and jocularity.
* Behaviour may be either overactive or underactive, and sleep is often disturbed, with loss of the normal Circadian rhythm.
Hypoactive cases are prone to non detection or misdiagnosis as depression.
A range of studies suggest that motor subtypes differ regarding  underlying pathophysiology, treatment needs, and prognosis for function and mortality though inconsistent subtype definitions and poorer detection of hypoactives impacts interpretation of these findings.
Thus, ''physical'' disorders can be said to produce delirium as a mental side-effect or symptom, although primary ''mental'' disorders which produce the symptom cannot be put into this category once identified.
In its hyperactive form, it is manifested as severe confusion and disorientation, developing with relatively rapid onset and fluctuating in intensity.
required more assistance with their care needs) than those not experiencing infection.
Memory impairment occurs and is linked to inattention.
Motor activity alterations are very common in delirium.
Patients are treated to reduce agitation.
In its hypoactive form, it is manifested by an equally sudden withdrawal from interaction with the outside world.
This technique requires that patients are isolated in a specific area designated for patients of old age dealing with symptoms of  delirium.
However, when delirium is caused by alcohol or sedative hypnotic withdrawal, benzodiazepines are typically used.
Examples of tools in use in clinical practice are:  Delirium Observation Screening Scale, the  Nursing Delirium Screening Scale (Nu-DESC), the  Confusion Assessment Method, the  Recognizing Acute Delirium As part of your Routine (RADAR) tool  and the 4 "A"s Test or  4AT.
The advent of daily monitoring for delirium, made easy by the CAM-ICU and other assessment tools, as well as proper documentation, had led to important changes in the culture of ICUs and rounds in that the entire team can now discuss the brain and how it is doing in terms of being “on” (not delirious) or “off” (delirious) and then focus on the several most likely causes of delirium in any specific patient.
*Delirium is distinguished from dementia (chronic organic brain syndrome) which describes an "acquired" (non-congenital) and usually irreversible cognitive and psychosocial decline in function.
Other clinical features include disorganized thinking, poor memory, delusions, and mood lability.
Delirium occurs as a stage of consciousness in the continuum between normal awakeness/alertness and coma.
Whether the deficit is one of attention or short-term memory is difficult to dissect, but it is undeniably distinct from long-term memory, consistent with observations in patients with delirium.
Similarly, people with dementia with Lewy bodies may have significant side-effects to antipsychotics, and should either be treated with a small dose or not at all.
It affects 10-20% of all hospitalized adults, and 30-40% of elderly who are hospitalized and up to 80% of those in ICU.
Animal models that interrogate interactions between prior degenerative pathology and superimposed systemic inflammation have been developed more recently and these demonstrate that even mild systemic inflammation, a frequent trigger for clinical delirium, induces acute and transient attentional/working memory deficits, but only in animals with prior pathology.
The highest rates of delirium (often 50% to 75% of people) is seen among those who are critically ill in the intensive care unit (ICU) As a result this was referred to as "ICU psychosis" or "ICU syndrome", terms largely abandoned for the more widely accepted term ICU delirium.
It typically involves other cognitive deficits, changes in arousal (hyperactive, hypoactive, or mixed), perceptual deficits, altered sleep-wake cycle, and psychotic features such as hallucinations and delusions.
Health can be described as a balance between fitness and frailty, in which fitness results from physical and socioeconomic assets, and frailty results from physical and socioeconomic deficits.
Postoperative delirium was strongly associated with pre-operative cognitive decline.
In the ICU, international guidelines recommend that every patient gets checked for delirium every day (usually twice or more a day) using a validated clinical tool.
Many such tools have been published.
In common usage, delirium is often used to refer to drowsiness, disorientation, and hallucination.
The antidepressant trazodone is occasionally used in the treatment of delirium, but it carries a risk of oversedation, and its use has not been well studied.
Sims (1995, p.&nbsp;31) points out a "superb detailed and lengthy description" of delirium in ''The Stroller's Tale'' from Charles Dickens' The Pickwick Papers.
It may result from an underlying disease, over-consumption of alcohol, from drugs administered during treatment of a disease, withdrawal from drugs or from any number of health factors.
Psychotic symptoms occur in up to 50% of patients with delirium.
Although hallucinations and delusions are sometimes present in delirium, these are not required for the diagnosis, and the symptoms of delirium are clinically distinct from those induced by psychosis or hallucinogens (with the exception of deliriants.)
The change in cognition (memory deficit, disorientation, language disturbance) or the development of a disturbance, must be one that is not better accounted for by a pre-existing, established, or evolving dementia.
The core features are:
those with significant predisposing factors) demonstrate an inability to compensate for additional physical or social stressors (‘precipitating factors’).
Reducing agitation may mean that patients are not reoriented if reorientation causes agitation.
In a community-based population examining individuals after an episode of severe infection (though not specifically delirium), these persons acquired more functional limitations (i.e.
Most of the literature has been summarised by a systematic review.
Delirium may present in hyperactive, hypoactive, or mixed forms.
It may also appear with delirium, but it is not required, as noted.
Physical restraints are occasionally used as a last resort with patients in a severe delirium.
These models, along with clinical studies of drugs with ‘anticholinergic activity’ have contributed to a hypocholinergic theory of delirium.
Delirium itself is not a disease, but rather a clinical syndrome (a set of symptoms).
In addition, brain volumes were also assessed and related to cognitive outcomes in the same manner.
For most studies, the outcome of interest was the relative power measures, in order: alpha, theta, delta frequencies.
According to DSM-IV, demonstration of acute onset impairments in attention and some other cognitive domain, that cannot be better explained by existing dementia and that are triggered by physiological disturbances resulting from some general medical condition should be present in order to reach a ‘diagnosis’ of delirium.
Delirium duration was related to measures of white matter tract integrity and this in turn was related to poorer cognitive outcomes at 3 and 12 months.
Estimates of the prevalence of delirium in nursing homes are between 10%  to 45%.
In prospective studies, people hospitalised from any cause appear to be at greater risk of dementia  and faster trajectories of cognitive decline,  but these studies did not specifically look at delirium.
Delirium is probably the single most common acute disorder affecting adults in general hospitals.
Indeed, spinal anaesthesia may in fact be the anaesthetic modality of choice for frail older patients, so these studies are often undertaken in highly relevant populations.
However, CSF Aβ1-42, tau, and phosphorylated-tau levels were not associated with delirium status, nor did they correlate significantly with cognitive function before the onset of delirium.
Frail individuals (i.e.
Phenomenology studies suggest that “core” symptoms occur with greater frequency while other less consistent “associated” symptoms may reflect the biochemical influence of particular aetiologies or genetic, neuronal or physiological vulnerabilities.
For example, in ICU cohorts, it is common to find that 10% of patients still have delirium at the time of hospital discharge.
6/7 had evidence of hypoperfusion and diffuse vascular injury, with consistent involvement of the hippocampus in 5/7.
Multiple guidelines recommend that delirium should be diagnosed when it presents to healthcare services.
Delirium most commonly affects the frail and infirm.
Antipsychotics are not supported for the treatment or prevention of delirium among those who are in hospital.
Many attempts to image people with concurrent delirium will be unsuccessful.
Some mental illnesses, such as a manic episode of bipolar disorder, or some types of acute psychosis, may cause a rapidly fluctuating impairment of cognitive function and ability to focus.
Prior dementia or age-associated cognitive impairment is the primary predisposing factor for clinical delirium and ‘prior pathology’ as defined by these new animal models may consist of synaptic loss, network disconnectivity, and primed microglia (brain macrophages that are ‘primed’ by the primary pathology to produce exaggerated responses to subsequent inflammatory insults).
The implications of such an “acquired dementia-like illness” (note: the term here is being used in a circumstance in which not all patients continue to decline as some have persistent yet stable brain dysfunction and others with newly acquired brain problems can recover fully) are profound at the private level, dismantling the person’s life in very practical ways such as inability to find a car in a parking lot or even complete shopping lists or job-related tasks done previously for years.
Electroencephalography (EEG) is an attractive mode of study in delirium as it is able to capture measures of global brain function.
Thus, it is not the monitoring itself that changes the patient’s clinical course, but rather it is this combination of monitoring and then relaying the information on rounds in the ICU that makes such a huge difference in awareness of this form of organ dysfunction and then enables a difference to be made in clinical outcomes.
The causes of delirium in such patients depend on the underlying illnesses, new problems like sepsis and low oxygen levels, and the sedative and pain medicines that are nearly universally given to all ICU patients.
The two most widely used are the Confusion Assessment Method for the ICU (CAM-ICU) and the Intensive Care Delirium Screening Checklist (ICDSC).
The division of causes into ‘predisposing’ and ‘precipitating’ is useful in order to assess an individual’s risk of suffering from delirium, and in guiding the management of delirium – however there may be a significant degree of overlap between the two categories.
Delirium must by definition be caused by an organic process, i.e., a physically identifiable structural, functional, or chemical problem in the brain (see organic brain syndrome), and thus, fluctuations of mentation due to changes in purely psychiatric processes or diseases, such as sudden psychosis from schizophrenia or bipolar disorder, are (by definition) not termed delirium.
However, it is difficult to be certain that this is accurate because the population admitted to hospital includes persons with undiagnosed dementia (i.e.
A predisposing factor might be any biological, psychological or social factor that increases an individual’s susceptibility to delirium.
In some cases, temporary or palliative or symptomatic treatments are used to comfort the person or to allow other care (for example, a person who, without understanding, is trying to pull out a ventilation tube that is required for survival).
Institutionalisation was also twice as likely after an admission with delirium (meta-analysis of 7 studies).
Outwardly this appears similar to a confused state caused by inadequate brain metabolism but it actually comes from problems in functioning.
Benzodiazepines themselves can cause delirium or worsen it, and lack a reliable evidence base.
A case-control study examined 9 delirium cases with 6 age-matched controls, investigating inflammatory cytokines and their role in delirium.
Disorganised thinking includes tangentiality, circumstantiality and a proneness to loose associations between elements of thought which results in speech that often makes limited sense with multiple apparent irrelevancies.
Dementia usually results from an identifiable degenerative brain disease (for example Alzheimer disease or Huntington's disease).
The pathophysiology of delirium is not well understood and a lack of animal models that are relevant to the syndrome has left many key questions in delirium pathophysiology unanswered.
Antipsychotics however not supported for the treatment or prevention of delirium among those who are in hospital.
It is thought that 30–40% of all cases of delirium could be prevented, and that high rates of delirium reflect negatively on the quality of care.
However, such symptoms may be impossible to distinguish clinically from delirium resulting from physical disorders, if a diagnosis of an underlying mental disorder is yet to be made.
Much evidence suggest, however, that delirium is greatly underdiagnosed.
In two studies, the relative power of all these bands was different within patients before and after delirium.
Interestingly, Barrough noted in 1583 that if delirium resolves, it may be followed by a "loss of memory and reasoning power."
