They may be able to do simple chores around the house but not much else, and begin to require assistance for personal care and hygiene other than simple reminders.
Tube-feeding is associated with agitation, increased use of physical and chemical restraints, and worsening pressure ulcers.
Psychiatric nurses can make a distinctive contribution to people's mental health.
It becomes more common with age.
A dementia diagnosis requires a change from a person's usual mental functioning and a greater decline than one would expect due to aging.
However, the symptoms are very similar and it is usually difficult to diagnose the type of dementia by symptoms alone.
A helpful finding was that although the incidence of Alzheimer's disease increased with age (from 5–10% of 75-year-olds to as many as 40–50% of 90-year-olds), there was no age at which all persons developed it, so it was not an inevitable consequence of aging, no matter how great an age a person attained.
hippocampus, thalamus) can lead to sudden cognitive decline.
Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) is a form of dementia that is characterized by problems with eye movements.
In young adults (up to 40 years of age) who were previously of normal intelligence, it is very rare to develop dementia without other features of neurological disease, or without features of disease elsewhere in the body.
Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors, such as donepezil, may be useful for Alzheimer disease and dementia in Parkinson's, DLB, or vascular dementia.
* Spinocerebellar ataxia type 2
A person with moderate dementia scores between 6-17 on the MMSE.
For example, a person may not feel pain on one side, or may only draw half of a picture when asked.
Testing for alcohol and other known dementia-inducing drugs may be indicated.
There is no solid evidence that folate or vitamin B12 improves outcomes in those with cognitive problems.
Memory problems are not a main feature of this disorder.
The last type of FTD is called progressive non-fluent aphasia (PNFA).
Several countries have national plans or strategies.
Social stigma against those affected is common.
The Alzheimer's Disease Caregiver Questionnaire is another tool.
The most common type of dementia is Alzheimer's disease, which makes up 50% to 70% of cases.
Actively searching for a potential cause, such as pain, physical illness, or overstimulation can be helpful in reducing agitation.
Other parts of the brain that show shrinking (atrophy) include the temporal and parietal lobes.
Cognitive and behavioral interventions may be appropriate.
The ensuing debate led for a time to the proposed disease diagnosis of "senile dementia of the Alzheimer's type" (SDAT) in persons over the age of 65, with "Alzheimer's disease" diagnosed in persons younger than 65 who had the same pathology.
In addition, the person's affected limbs may be rigid or have muscle contractions causing strange repetitive movements (dystonia).
Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) is characterized by drastic personality changes and language difficulties.
Educating and providing emotional support to the caregiver is of importance as well.
* Neuroacanthocytosis
Health professionals often lack the skills and usually lack the time needed to recognize, accurately assess, and adequately monitor pain in people with dementia.
As dementia progresses, the symptoms first experienced in the early stages of the dementia generally worsen.
Frontotemporal lobar degeneration and Huntington's disease account for most of the remaining cases.
Aristotle and Plato from Ancient  Greece spoke of the mental decay of advanced age, but apparently simply viewed it as an inevitable process that affected all old men, and which nothing could prevent.
Cognitive dysfunction of shorter duration is called ''delirium''.
The former British Prime Minister David Cameron has described dementia as being a "national crisis", affecting 800,000 people in the United Kingdom.
There is some evidence that dementia is most likely to develop between the ages of 80-84 and individuals who pass that point without being affected have a lower chance of developing it.
Since difficulty moving the eyes upward can sometimes happen in normal aging, problems with downward eye movements are the key in PSP.
Several charitable organisations aim to raise awareness and campaign for the rights of people living with dementia.
Other examples include the abbreviated mental test score (AMTS), the, ''Modified Mini-Mental State Examination'' (3MS), the ''Cognitive Abilities Screening Instrument'' (CASI), the Trail-making test, and the clock drawing test.
70% of those diagnosed with MCI progress to dementia at some point.
For comparison, the Roman statesman Cicero held a view much more in line with modern-day medical wisdom that loss of mental function was not inevitable in the elderly and "affected only those old men who were weak-willed".
It was specifically designed for the use in the primary care setting.
Because people with dementia can be aggressive, resistant to their treatment, and otherwise disruptive, sometimes antipsychotic drugs are considered as a therapy in response.
The number of cases of dementia worldwide in 2010 was estimated at 35.6 million.
He or she should score between 25-30 on the MMSE.
Vitamin deficiencies and chronic infections may also occur at any age; they usually cause other symptoms before dementia occurs, but occasionally mimic degenerative dementia.
The area of the brain most often affected in corticobasal degeneration is the posterior frontal lobe and parietal lobe.
* Trouble eating or swallowing
In the 21st century, a number of other types of dementia have been differentiated from Alzheimer's disease and vascular dementias (these two being the most common types).
However, in recent years researchers have realized that many older people with memory complaints in fact have MCI, the earliest stage of dementia.
Normal pressure hydrocephalus, though relatively rare, is important to recognize since treatment may prevent progression and improve other symptoms of the condition.
The mini mental state examination is one commonly used cognitive test.
They may have some memory trouble and trouble finding words, but they solve everyday problems and handle their own life affairs well.
The MATCH-D criteria can help identify ways that a diagnosis of dementia changes medication management for other health conditions.
In addition, home care can provide one-on-one support and care in the home allowing for more individualized attention that is needed as the disorder progresses.
Exercise programs are beneficial with respect to activities of daily living and potentially improve outcomes.
A secondary option for people who cannot swallow effectively is to consider gastrostomy feeding tube placement as a way to give nutrition.
Most cases of progressive cognitive disturbance in this age group are caused by psychiatric illness, alcohol or other drugs, or metabolic disturbance.
Globally, dementia affects 36 million people.
* Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
MCI is generally divided into two categories.
Generally, stopping antipsychotics for people with dementia does not cause problems, even in those who have been on them a long time.
A temporary reduction in the brain's supply of blood or oxygen may lead to hypoxic-ischemic injury.
At the same time, in 1907, a specific organic dementing process of early onset, called Alzheimer's disease, had been described.
The first is one that is primarily memory loss (amnestic MCI).
People with dementia are often physically or chemically restrained to a greater degree than necessary, raising issues of human rights.
In another study, carried out using 66 patients seen at the University of Michigan, PET studies using either PIB or another radiotracer, carbon-11 dihydrotetrabenazine (DTBZ), led to more accurate diagnosis for more than one-fourth of patients with mild cognitive impairment or mild dementia.
A person with DLB often shows occipital hypoperfusion on SPECT scan or occipital hypometabolism on a PET scan.
Additional psychological and behavioral problems that often affect people who have dementia include:
This differentiation is on the basis of pathological examination of brain tissues, symptomatology, and by different patterns of brain metabolic activity in nuclear medical imaging tests such as SPECT and PETscans of the brain.
It is one of the most common causes of disability among the old.
Public awareness of Alzheimer's Disease was greatly increased in 1994 when former US president Ronald Reagan announced that he had been diagnoses with the condition.
In addition, the symptoms begin to interfere with daily activities.
:*Changes in sleep or appetite.
The first has major symptoms in the area of personality and behavior.
However, Cicero's views on aging, although progressive, were largely ignored in a world that would be dominated by Aristotle's medical writings for centuries.
By the 1970s, the medical community maintained that vascular dementia was rarer than previously thought and Alzheimer's disease caused the vast majority of mental impairments in old age.
In the United Kingdom, as with all mental disorders, where a person with dementia could potentially be a danger to themselves or others, they can be detained under the Mental Health Act 1983 for the purposes of assessment, care and treatment.
As people age, they experience more health problems, and most health problems associated with aging carry a substantial burden of pain; therefore, between 25% and 50% of older adults experience persistent pain.
He noted that the fact that "senile dementia" was not considered a disease, but rather part of aging, was keeping millions of aged patients experiencing what otherwise was identical with Alzheimer's disease from being diagnosed as having a disease process, rather than simply considered as aging normally.
Mild cognitive impairment means that the person exhibits memory or thinking difficulties, but not severe enough for a dementia diagnoses.
Diagnosis of MCI is often difficult, as cognitive testing may be normal.
Persistent pain can lead to decreased ambulation, depressed mood, sleep disturbances, impaired appetite, and exacerbation of cognitive impairment, and pain-related interference with activity is a factor contributing to falls in the elderly.
The symptoms of early dementia usually include memory difficulty, but can also include some word-finding problems (anomia) and problems with planning and organizational skills (executive function).
The symptoms of dementia vary across types and stages of the diagnosis.
There are three main types of FTD.
* Perception and visual problems
In 2015, Atlantic Philanthropies announced a $177 million gift aimed at understanding and reducing dementia.
The person usually scores between a 20 and 25 on the MMSE.
* Memory or other cognitive (thought-processing) complaint by the person or a person who knows the patient well.
Other common symptoms include emotional problems, problems with language, and a decrease in motivation.
On the other hand, the ''General Practitioner Assessment Of Cognition'' combines both, a patient assessment and an informant interview.
In those who are getting older, general screening for cognitive impairment using cognitive testing or early diagnosis of dementia has not been shown to improve outcomes.
No difference has been shown between the agents in this family.
Shakespeare notably mentions it in some of his plays including ''Hamlet'' and ''King Lear''.
Eventually the two terms fused, so that until 1952 physicians used the terms ''dementia praecox'' (precocious dementia) and ''schizophrenia'' interchangeably.
Other common symptoms include jerky movements of one or more limbs (myoclonus), symptoms that are different in different limbs (asymmetric), difficulty with speech that is due to not being able to move the mouth muscles in a coordinated way, numbness and tingling of the limbs and neglecting one side of the person's vision or senses.
People with PSP often have progressive difficulty eating and swallowing, and eventually with talking as well.
It involves looking at the antecedents (A), behavior (B), and consequences (C) associated with an event to help define the problem and prevent further incidents that may arise if the person's needs are misunderstood.
While elderly persons constituted an average of 3-5% of the population prior to 1945, by 2010 it was common in many countries to have 10-14% of people over 65 and in Germany and Japan, this figure exceeded 20%.
All people with memory difficulty should be checked for hypothyroidism and B12 deficiency.
Benefits of this procedure in those with advanced dementia has not been shown.
The latter stated that the elderly were unsuited for any position of responsibility because, "There is not much acumen of the mind that once carried them in their youth, those characteristics one would call judgement, imagination, power of reasoning, and memory.
For people with dementia and those who care for them many measures can improve their lives.
Screening the general population for the disorder is not recommended.
Delirium can be easily confused with dementia due to similar symptoms.
One very good way of assessing a person's impairment is by asking if he or she is still able to handle his/her finances independently.
Depression affects 20–30% of people who have dementia, and about 20% have anxiety.
* Dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy
People with the other type of MCI may go on to develop other types of dementia.
Diagnosis is usually based on history of the illness and cognitive testing with medical imaging and blood work used to rule out other possible causes.
The person is asked to say which one goes best with the pyramid.
These include deficiencies of vitamin B12, folate, or niacin, and infective causes including cryptococcal meningitis, HIV, Lyme disease, progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, subacute sclerosing panencephalitis, syphilis, and Whipple's disease.
In many cases, the diagnosis cannot be absolutely sure except with a brain biopsy, but this is very rarely recommended (though it can be performed at autopsy).
When evaluating a person for dementia, it is important to consider how the person was able to function five or ten years earlier.
It is caused by disease or injury to blood vessels that damage the brain, including strokes.
In other types of dementia, like dementia with Lewy bodies and fronto-temporal dementia, personality changes and difficulty with organization and planning may be the first signs.
As more people are living longer, dementia is becoming more common in the population as a whole.
They see them gradually blunted by deterioration and can hardly fulfill their function."
In comparison, dementia has typically a long, slow onset (except in the cases of a stroke or trauma), slow decline of mental functioning, as well as a longer duration (from months to years).
When dementia occurs in Parkinson's disease, the underlying cause may be dementia with Lewy bodies or Alzheimer's disease, or both.
If they do, it is considered dementia.
Medications for other health conditions may need to be managed differently for a person who also has a diagnosis of dementia.
The term ''precocious dementia'' for a mental illness suggested that a type of mental illness like schizophrenia (including paranoia and decreased cognitive capacity) could be expected to arrive normally in all persons with greater age (see paraphrenia).
Many countries consider the care of people living with dementia a national priority and invest in resources and education to better inform health and social service workers, unpaid caregivers, relatives, and members of the wider community.
For example, a drawing of a bird, dog, and an airplane in someone with FTD may all appear just about the same.
Additionally, using an "ABC analysis of behaviour" can be a useful tool for understanding behavior in people with dementia.
Commonly, the person no longer recognizes familiar people.
Tube feedings may also cause fluid overload, diarrhea, abdominal pain, local complications, less human interaction, and may increase the risk of aspiration.
* Urea cycle disorders
Changes in thinking, hearing, and vision are associated with normal ageing and can cause problems when diagnosing dementia due to the similarities.
People who receive frequent head trauma, such as boxers or football players, are at risk of chronic traumatic encephalopathy (also called dementia pugilistica in boxers).
While depression is frequently associated with dementia, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) do not appear to affect outcomes.
Doctors should advise appropriate testing on when to quit driving.
This suggestion opened the view that dementia is never normal, and must always be the result of a particular disease process, and is not part of the normal healthy aging process, ''per se''.
Recent research has established the value of PET imaging using carbon-11 Pittsburgh Compound B as a radiotracer (PIB-PET) in predictive diagnosis of various kinds of dementia, in particular Alzheimer's disease.
Dementia in the elderly was called ''senile dementia'' or ''senility'', and viewed as a normal and somewhat inevitable aspect of growing old, rather than as being caused by any specific diseases.
Clinical neuropsychologists provide diagnostic consultation following administration of a full battery of cognitive testing, often lasting several hours, to determine functional patterns of decline associated with varying types of dementia.
Chronic inflammatory conditions of the brain may affect cognition in the long term, including Behçet's disease, multiple sclerosis, sarcoidosis, Sjögren's syndrome, and systemic lupus erythematosus.
Although he repeated existing Aristotelian beliefs that dementia was inevitable after a long enough lifespan, he did make the extremely progressive assertion that the brain was the center of memory and thought rather than the heart.
A person's consciousness is usually not affected.
For example, an accountant who can no longer balance a checkbook would be more concerning than a person who had not finished high school or had never taken care of his/her own finances.
Physicians used to think that anyone who came in with memory complaints had depression and not dementia (because they thought that those with dementia are generally unaware of their memory problems).
Katzmann thus suggested that Alzheimer's disease, if taken to occur over age 65, is actually common, not rare, and was the 4th or 5th leading cause of death, even though rarely reported on death certificates in 1976.
Normally, symptoms must be present for at least six months to support a diagnosis.
* Maple syrup urine disease
the most commonly used criteria are called the Peterson criteria and include:
The alien limb is a limb of the person that seems to have a mind of its own, it moves without control of the person's brain.
On scans of the brain, the midbrain of people with PSP is generally shrunken (atrophied), but there are no other common brain abnormalities visible on images of the person's brain.
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor blockers such as memantine may be of benefit but the evidence is less conclusive than for AChEIs.
* The person must not have dementia.
In TV-FTD the person would not be able to answer that question.
:*Delusions (often believing people are stealing from them) or hallucinations
Around two thirds of individuals with dementia live in low and middle income countries, where the sharpest increases in numbers are predicted.
Therefore, any dementia evaluation should include a depression screening such as the Neuropsychiatric Inventory or the Geriatric Depression Scale.
Some mental illnesses, including depression and psychosis, may produce symptoms that must be differentiated from both delirium and dementia.
About 10% of people develop the disorder at some point in their lives.
Possible causes include brain infection (viral encephalitis, subacute sclerosing panencephalitis, Whipple's disease) or inflammation (limbic encephalitis, Hashimoto's encephalopathy, cerebral vasculitis); tumors such as lymphoma or glioma; drug toxicity (e.g., anticonvulsant drugs); metabolic causes such as liver failure or kidney failure; and chronic subdural hematoma.
The problem is complicated by the fact that these cause confusion more often in persons who have early dementia, so that "reversal" of such problems may ultimately only be temporary.
However it is not known if it prevents dementia.
The last two he described as the "senium", a period of mental and physical decay, and of the final phase being where "the scene of mortal existence closes after a great length of time that very fortunately, few of the human species arrive at, where the mind is reduced to the imbecility of the first epoch of infancy".
Wilson's disease is particularly important since cognition can improve with treatment.
Again, imaging studies cannot necessarily make the diagnosis of DLB, but some signs are particularly common.
It included mental illness and any type of psychosocial incapacity, including conditions that could be reversed.
He or she may not want to get out of bed, or may need complete assistance doing so.
It may begin with difficulty naming things.
Less common causes include normal pressure hydrocephalus, Parkinson's disease, syphilis, and Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease among others.
In 550 BC, the Greek Athenian statesman and poet Solon argued that the terms of a man's will might be invalidated if he exhibited loss of judgement due to advanced age.
* Niemann–Pick disease type C
Among otherwise healthy older people,  computerized cognitive training may improve memory.
They do, however, acknowledge low-severity cases and those with an early diagnosis, and those drivers may be permitted to drive pending medical reports.
In 2013 dementia resulted in about 1.7 million deaths up from 0.8 million in 1990.
Often, the early signs of dementia only become apparent when looking back in time.
The most common symptoms of Alzheimer's disease are short-term memory loss and word-finding difficulties.
Alzheimer's disease is still the most frequent cause, but inherited forms of the disorder account for a higher proportion of cases in this age group.
Since dementia impairs normal communication due to changes in receptive and expressive language, as well as the ability to plan and problem solve, agitated behaviour is often a form of communication for the person with dementia.
Byzantine physicians sometimes wrote of dementia, and it is recorded that at least seven emperors whose lifespans exceeded the age of 70 displayed signs of cognitive decline.
Caregivers of people with late-stage dementia often provide pureed diets, thickened liquids, and assistance in eating, to prolong their lives, to cause them to gain weight, to reduce the risk of choking, and to make feeding the person easier.
The other two types of FTD feature language problems as the main symptom.
Also, after 1952, mental illnesses like schizophrenia were removed from the category of ''organic brain syndromes'', and thus (by definition) removed from possible causes of "dementing illnesses" (dementias).
The person can usually still take care of him or herself but may forget things like taking pills or doing laundry and may need prompting or reminders.
By the time the person shows signs of the disorder, the process in the brain has been happening for a long time.
During the 19th century, doctors generally came to believe that dementia in the elderly was the result of cerebral atherosclerosis, although opinions fluctuated between the idea that it was due to blockage of the major arteries supplying the brain or small strokes within the vessels of the cerebral cortex.
Insight refers to whether or not the person realizes he/she has memory problems.
Overall benefit, however, may be minor.
Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is a dementia that has the primary symptoms of visual hallucinations and "Parkinsonism."
The person may also have certain "frontal lobe signs" such as perseveration, a grasp reflex and utilization behavior (the need to use an object once you see it).
This is often one of the first things to become problematic.
The MOCA (Montreal Cognitive Assessment) is a very reliable screening test and is available online for free in 35 different languages.
Evidence of this is shown by numerous documented supercentenarians (people living to 110+) that experienced no serious cognitive impairment.
One of the most common signs is apathy, or not caring about anything.
This was associated with particular microscopic changes in the brain, but was seen as a rare disease of middle age because the first patient diagnosed with it was a 50-year-old woman.
Driving with dementia could lead to severe injury or even death to self and others.
Aggressive behavior changes are sometimes the result of other solvable problems, that could make treatment with antipsychotics unnecessary.
* Wandering or restlessness
About 10% of people with dementia have what is known as ''mixed dementia'', which is usually a combination of Alzheimer's disease and another type of dementia such as frontotemporal dementia or vascular dementia.
It is believed to result in economic costs of 604 billion USD a year.
Alzheimer's disease accounts for up to 50% to 70% of cases of dementia.
Causes of dementia depend on the age when symptoms begin.
