Other African nations produce music genres that are derived from Congolese soukous.
Ertürk added that "Armed groups attack local communities, loot, rape, kidnap women and children, and make them work as sexual slaves".
Opening up the Congo and its natural and mineral riches for the Belgian economy remained the main motive for colonial expansion&nbsp;– however, other priorities, such as healthcare and basic education, slowly gained in importance.
The lava poisoned the water of Lake Kivu, killing fish.
To enforce the rubber quotas, the army, the ''Force Publique'', was called in and made the practice of cutting off the limbs of the natives a matter of policy.
Later in 2013 the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative suspended the country's candidacy for membership due to insufficient reporting, monitoring and independent audits, but in July 2013 the country improved its accounting and transparency practices to the point where the EITI gave the country full membership.
In 2012, it was estimated that about 1.1% of adults aged 15–49 were living with HIV/AIDS.
The executive branch was vested in a 60-member cabinet, headed by a President and four vice presidents.
* The Northeastern Congolian lowland forests, with one of the richest concentrations of primates in the world
Serge Ibaka, Bismack Biyombo, Christian Eyenga and Emmanuel Mudiay are others who gained significant international attention.
The ''Force Publique'' gained a notable victory when it marched into Tabora in September 1916, under the command of General Charles Tombeur after heavy fighting.
In July 2007, the International Committee of the Red Cross expressed concern about the situation in eastern DRC.
In 1971 Mobutu changed the name again, this time to "Republic of Zaire".
As a result of the 6-year civil war in the late 1990s-early 2000s, over 5.2 million children in the country did not receive any education.
His son Joseph Kabila succeeded him and called for multilateral peace-talks.
According to UNICEF, 43.5% of children under five are stunted.
On and off fighting in the Ituri conflict occurred between the Nationalist and Integrationist Front (FNI) and the Union of Congolese Patriots (UPC) who claimed to represent the Lendu and Hema ethnic groups, respectively.
New destination countries include South Africa and various points en route to Europe.
According to Yakin Ertürk, the UN Special Rapporteur on Violence against Women who toured eastern Congo in July 2007, violence against women in North and South Kivu included "unimaginable brutality".
* Southern Congolian forest-savanna mosaic
Besides the capital, Kinshasa, the other major cities, Lubumbashi and Mbuji-Mayi, are both mining communities.
During World War II, the Belgian Congo was a crucial source of income for the Belgian government in exile in London, and the ''Force Publique'' again participated in Allied campaigns in Africa.
In April 2013, anti-corruption NGOs revealed that Congolese tax authorities had failed to account for $88 million from the mining sector, despite booming production and positive industrial performance.
The river also has the second-largest flow and the second-largest watershed of any river in the world (trailing the Amazon in both respects).
Traditional art includes masks and wooden statues.
It is the only country in the world in which bonobos are found in the wild.
62 Protestant denominations are federated under the umbrella of the Church of Christ in Congo.
Shortly after independence, the provinces of Katanga (led by Moise Tshombe) and South Kasai engaged in secessionist struggles against the new leadership.
As of June 2016, DR Congo had one major national airline (Congo Airways) that offered flights inside DR Congo.
He named it the Congo Free State.
In the resulting M23 rebellion, M23 briefly captured the provincial capital of Goma in November 2012.
Since 1975, the four national languages have been reintroduced in the first two years of primary education, with French becoming the sole language of education from the 3rd year onwards, but in practice many primary schools in urban areas solely use French from the first year of school onward.
DRC has the world's second-highest rate of infant mortality (after Chad).
Executive power rested with the Belgian Minister of Colonial Affairs, assisted by a Colonial Council (Conseil Colonial) (both located in Brussels) and the Belgian parliament exercised legislative authority over the Belgian Congo.
* Beira-Lobito Highway: this east-west highway crosses Katanga and requires re-construction over most of its length, being an earth track between the Angolan border and Kolwezi, a paved road in very poor condition between Kolwezi and Lubumbashi, and a paved road in fair condition over the short distance to the Zambian border.
Cobalt, copper, cadmium, industrial and gem-quality diamonds, gold, silver, zinc, manganese, tin, germanium, uranium, radium, bauxite, iron ore, and coal are all found in plentiful supply, especially in the Congo's southeastern Katanga region.
Primary education in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is not free or compulsory, even though the Congolese constitution says it should be (Article 43 of the 2005 Congolese Constitution).
This trend was reversed after independence, when French became the sole language of education at all levels.
Schatzberg has called it the country's "only truly national institution apart from the state."
Although relative peace and stability were achieved, Mobutu's government was guilty of severe human rights violations, political repression, a cult of personality and corruption.
The last Governor-general of the Congo Free State, Baron Wahis, remained in office in the Belgian Congo and the majority of Leopold II’s administration with him.
With a population of over 80 million, the Democratic Republic of the Congo is the most populated officially Francophone country, the fourth most populated nation in Africa and the eighteenth most populated country in the world.
Kinshasa is currently negotiating membership in the Organization for the Harmonization of Business Law in Africa (OHADA).
Corruption became so prevalent the term "le mal Zairois" or "Zairean Sickness", meaning gross corruption, theft and mismanagement, was coined, reportedly by Mobutu himself.
A third of the DRC's diamonds are believed to be smuggled out of the country, making it difficult to quantify diamond production levels.
President Joseph Kabila established the Commission of Repression of Economic Crimes upon his ascension to power in 2001.
The DRC has blended its ethnic musical sources with Cuban rumba, and merengue to give birth to soukous.
Four years later the first local administrative council was elected.
By 2005, 90% of the DRC's revenues derived from its minerals (Exenberger and Hartmann 2007:10).
The coalition allied with some opposition figures, led by Laurent-Désiré Kabila, becoming the Alliance of Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Congo (AFDL).
The civil war and resulting poor economic conditions have endangered much of this biodiversity.
The Democratic Republic of Congo is widely considered to be one of the world's richest countries in natural resources; its untapped deposits of raw minerals are estimated to be worth in excess of US$24 trillion.
There are already about 836 solar power systems in the DRC, with a total power of 83&nbsp;kW, located in Équateur (167), Katanga (159), Nord-Kivu (170), the two Kasaï provinces (170), and Bas-Congo (170).
The 10th century marked the final expansion of the Bantu in West-Central Africa.
Taking advantage of the leadership crisis between Kasavubu and Lumumba, Mobutu garnered enough support within the army to create mutiny.
In a succession of negotiations, Leopold, professing humanitarian objectives in his capacity as chairman of the front organization ''Association Internationale Africaine'', actually played one European rival against another.
''Sécession au Katanga''&nbsp;– J.Gerald-Libois -Brussels- CRISP)
In the capital city Kinshasa, 67% of the population can read and write French, and 68.5% can speak and understand it.
Mobutu continued in power until armed forces forced him to flee Zaire, in 1997.
In April 2006 Gertler's DGI took a major stake in DEM Mining, a cobalt-copper mining and services company based in Katanga.
According to a 2014 OIF report, 33 million Congolese people (47% of the population) can read and write in French.
The usual term for these children is ''enfants sorciers'' (child witches) or ''enfants dits sorciers'' (children accused of witchcraft).
A census is supposed to take place, but it is no longer tied to when the elections take place.
Mobutu allegedly stole as much as US$4-5 billion while in office; in July 2009, a Swiss court determined that the statute of limitations had run out on an international asset recovery case of about $6.7 million of deposits of Mobutu's in a Swiss bank, and therefore the assets should be returned to Mobutu's family.
He would go to the bank with Mobutu's authority, and take out ten.
Its schools have educated over 60% of the nation's primary school students and more than 40% of its secondary students.
A number of International Monetary Fund and World Bank missions met with the government to help it develop a coherent economic plan, and President Joseph Kabila began to implementing reforms.
Dikembe Mutombo is one of the best African basketball players to ever play the game.
The culture of the Democratic Republic of the Congo reflects the diversity of its hundreds of ethnic groups and their differing ways of life throughout the country&nbsp;&nbsp;— from the mouth of the River Congo on the coast, upriver through the rainforest and savanna in its centre, to the more densely populated mountains in the far east.
Okapi Wildlife Reserve (1996).
Congo Airways was based at Kinshasa's international airport.
Congolose Muslims are divided into Sunnis (50%), Shias (10%), Ahmadis (6%), and non-denominational Muslims (14%).
An election-result dispute between Kabila and Jean-Pierre Bemba turned into an all-out battle between their supporters in the streets of Kinshasa.
In September 2004, state-owned Gécamines signed an agreement with Global Enterprises Corporate (GEC), a company formed by the merger of Dan Gertler International (DGI) with Beny Steinmetz Global, to rehabilitate and operate the Kananga and Tilwezembe copper mines.
Figures for Congolese nationals abroad vary greatly depending on the source, from 3 to 6 million.
Leopold's rėgime began various infrastructure projects, such as construction of the railway that ran from the coast to the capital of Leopoldville (now Kinshasa), which took eight years to complete.
Transit migration towards South Africa and Europe also plays a role.
The DRC is also one of the twenty lowest-ranked countries on the Corruption Perception Index.
Newspapers of the DRC include ''L'Avenir'', ''La Cité africaine de Matadi'', ''La Conscience'', ''L'Observateur'', ''Le Phare'', ''Le Potentiel'', ''Le Soft'' and ''LeCongolais.CD'', a web-based daily.
In 2009 people in the Congo continued to die at a rate of an estimated 45,000 per month&nbsp;– estimates of the number who have died from the long conflict range from 900,000 to 5,400,000.
Mobutu got one, and we took the other nine."
Non-denominational church organizations have been formed to capitalize on this belief by charging exorbitant fees for exorcisms.
Most of the 100,000 Europeans who had remained behind after independence fled the country, opening the way for Congolese to replace the European military and administrative elite.
The people living in the south and southwest were mostly San Bushmen and hunter-gatherer groups, whose technology involved only minimal use of metal technologies.
Through 2011 the Democratic Republic of the Congo had the lowest Human Development Index of the 187 ranked countries.
There have been frequent reports of weapon bearers killing civilians, of the destruction of property, of widespread sexual violence, causing hundreds of thousands of people to flee their homes, and of other breaches of humanitarian and human rights law.
Katanga Mining Limited, a Swiss-owned company, owns the Luilu Metallurgical Plant, which has a capacity of 175,000 tonnes of copper and 8,000 tonnes of cobalt per year, making it the largest cobalt refinery in the world.
The size of Congo, , is slightly greater than the combined areas of Spain, France, Germany, Sweden, and Norway.
In 2002 and 2003 Bemba intervened in the Central African Republic on behalf of its former president, Ange-Félix Patassé.
Belgian Congolese forces under the command of Belgian officers notably fought against the Italian colonial army in Ethiopia in Asosa, Bortaï and Saïo under Major-General Auguste-Eduard Gilliaert during the second East African Campaign.
Patrice Lumumba thus became the first Prime Minister of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In June 2006 Gertler bought Tremalt from the Zimbabwean businessman John Bredenkamp for about $60 million.
Conservationists have particularly worried about primates.
Belgian exploration and administration took place from the 1870s until the 1920s.
The new constitution also saw the disappearance of the Supreme Court, which was divided into three new institutions.
The two rebel movements, along with Rwandan and Ugandan troops, started the Second Congo War by attacking the DRC army in 1998.
It is culturally accepted as the ''lingua franca'' facilitating communication among the many different ethnic groups of the Congo.
The Senate had, among other things, the charge of drafting the new constitution of the country.
Also, the 148 Caritas network system has a total power of 6.31 kW.
This led to the displacement of the hunter-gatherer groups in the east and southeast.
The economy of DR Congo, the second largest country in Africa, relies heavily on mining.
Registered in the Isle of Man, reached a market capitalization of $1.5 billion by 2007.
World Heritage Sites located in Democratic Republic of Congo are:
Malaria is also a problem.
* Lagos-Mombasa Highway: the DR Congo is the main missing link in this east-west highway and requires a new road to be constructed before it can function.
In 1971, Mobutu renamed the country the ''Republic of Zaire'', its fourth name change in 11 years and its sixth overall.
Chronic economic mismanagement and internal conflicts have led to long-term under-investment.
During World War I, an initial stand-off between the ''Force Publique'' and the German colonial army in German East Africa (Tanganyika) turned into open warfare with a joint Anglo-Belgian invasion of German colonial territory in 1916 and 1917 during the East African Campaign.
The first members of the Baha'i Faith to live in the country came from Uganda in 1953.
The sources of the Congo are in the Albertine Rift Mountains that flank the western branch of the East African Rift, as well as Lake Tanganyika and Lake Mweru.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) is located in central sub-Saharan Africa, bounded by (clockwise from the southwest) Angola, the South Atlantic Ocean, the Republic of Congo, the Central African Republic, South Sudan, Uganda, Rwanda, Burundi, Tanzania across Lake Tanganyika, and Zambia.
Logging allows hunters much easier access to previously-unreachable jungle terrain, while simultaneously eroding away the habitats of animals.
They came to be known as the fourth generation of Congolese music and mostly come from the former well-known band Wenge Musica.
File:Hippo pod edit.jpg|Hippopotamus
Amidst widespread confusion and chaos, a temporary government was led by technicians (Collège des Commissaires) with Evariste Kimba.
The name for the Congo state is derived in part from the river.
Malnutrition affects approximately two thirds of the country's population.
Because of hunting and habitat destruction, the chimpanzee, the bonobo and the gorilla, each of whose populations once numbered in the millions, have now dwindled down to only about 200,000 gorillas, 100,000 chimpanzees and possibly only about 10,000 bonobos.
The Albertine Rift plays a key role in shaping the Congo's geography.
Comparative figures for Zambia and Botswana are 721&nbsp;km and 3427&nbsp;km respectively.
The Rift valley has exposed an enormous amount of mineral wealth throughout the south and east of the Congo, making it accessible to mining.
The impact of the Roman Catholic Church in the Democratic Republic of Congo is difficult to overestimate.
The transitional constitution also established a relatively independent judiciary, headed by a Supreme Court with constitutional interpretation powers.
Displaced refugees cause or are otherwise responsible for significant deforestation, soil erosion and wildlife poaching.
Lumumba declared Kasavubu's action unconstitutional and a crisis between the two leaders developed.
Mutombo is well known for humanitarian projects in his home country.
The Democratic Republic of Congo is extremely rich in natural resources, but political instability, a lack of infrastructure, deep rooted corruption, and centuries of both commercial and colonial extraction and exploitation have limited holistic development.
We'd go to an intermediary and tell him to get five million.
As a result of its equatorial location, the DRC experiences high precipitation and has the highest frequency of thunderstorms in the world.
The 2006 constitution, also known as the Constitution of the Third Republic, came into effect in February 2006.
The hospitals in the Democratic Republic of the Congo include the General Hospital of Kinshasa.
Female genital mutilation (FGM) is also practiced in DRC, although not on a large scale.
The Congolese Civil Wars, which began in 1996, brought about the end of Mobutu Sese Seko's 32-year reign and devastated the country.
The 30% who live in urban areas have been the most open to Western influences.
Lake Edward and Lake Albert are connected by the Semliki River.
Their propagation was accelerated by the transition from Stone Age to Iron Age techniques.
The river and a 37&nbsp;km wide strip of coastline on its north bank provide the country's only outlet to the Atlantic.
File:Bas-congo.JPG|Bas-Congo landscape
Conditions improved in late 2002, when a large portion of the invading foreign troops withdrew.
A coalition of Rwandan and Ugandan armies invaded Zaire to overthrow the government of Mobutu, and ultimately to control the mineral resources of Zaire, launching the First Congo War.
Gertler and Steinmetz put GEC's 75% share in Komoto Oliveira Virgule (KOV), the project made of up of Tilwezembe and Kananga, along with the Kolwesi concentrator, into Nikanor Plc.
The Congo is also known for its art.
Approximately 242 languages are spoken in the country, but only four have the status of national languages: Kituba ("Kikongo ya leta"), Lingala, Tshiluba, and Swahili.
A new election took place in October 2006, which Kabila won, and on December 2006 he was sworn in as President.
The country was known officially as the "Democratic Republic of the Congo" from 1965 to 27 October 1971, when it was changed to the "Republic of Zaire".
In 2007 Tremalt was owned by Prairie International Ltd, of which Dan Gertler's family trust was a major shareholder.
Not only is the northeastern section of the country much more mountainous, but due to the rift's tectonic activity, this area also experiences volcanic activity, occasionally with loss of life.
Since 1968 the Democratic Republic of the Congo has participated in the Olympic Games.
The DRC borders the Republic of the Congo, the Central African Republic, and South Sudan to the north; Uganda, Rwanda, Burundi and Tanzania to the east; Zambia and Angola to the south; and the Atlantic Ocean to the west and southwest.
Several international airlines service Kinshasa's international airport and a few also offer international flights to Lubumbashi International Airport.
On 5 September 1960, Kasavubu dismissed Lumumba from office.
This combination has caused widespread endangerment of local fauna, and has forced humans to trudge deeper into the wilderness in search of the desired animal meat.
In 2002, tin was discovered in the east of the country, but to date has only been mined on a small scale.
Virunga National Park (1979),
The river basin (meaning the Congo River and all of its myriad tributaries) occupies nearly the entire country and an area of nearly .
Kimbanguism, officially "the church of Christ on Earth by the prophet Simon Kimbangu", now has about three million members, primarily among the Bakongo of Bas-Congo and Kinshasa.
There is also considerable migration for commercial activities from other African countries and the rest of the world, but these movements are not well studied.
Boss Mining had rented and operated Bredenkamp's half of Mukondo.
The parliament elected as President Joseph Kasavubu, of the Alliance des Bakongo (ABAKO) party.
Though recently outlawed, children have been subjected in these exorcisms to often-violent abuse at the hands of self-proclaimed prophets and priests.
The tropical climate also produced the Congo River system which dominates the region topographically along with the rainforest it flows through, though they are not mutually exclusive.
* A large section of the Central Zambezian Miombo woodlands
World Wide Fund for Nature ecoregions located in the Congo include:
Smuggling of conflict minerals such as coltan and cassiterite, ores of tantalum and tin, respectively, helped to fuel the war in the Eastern Congo.
In 2007, The World Bank decided to grant the Democratic Republic of Congo up to $1.3 billion in assistance funds over the following three years.
The women included in the report were abused in several locations across the country including the capital Kinshasa and other areas away from the conflict zones.
RTNC currently broadcasts in Lingala, French, and English.
Leopold formally acquired rights to the Congo territory at the Conference of Berlin in 1885 and made the land his private property.
One of the three streams of extremely fluid lava flowed through the nearby city of Goma, killing 45 and leaving 120,000 homeless.
The river and its tributaries  form the backbone of Congolese economics and transportation.
The same Congolese soukous, under the guidance of "le sapeur", Papa Wemba, has set the tone for a generation of young men always dressed up in expensive designer clothes.
With more than 25 million members, it constitutes one of the largest Protestant bodies in the world.
During the period of 1885–1908, millions of Congolese died as a consequence of exploitation and disease.
The President was also the Commander-in Chief of the armed forces.
However, Laurent Nkunda, a member of an RCD branch integrated to the army, RCD-Goma, defected along with troops loyal to him and formed the National Congress for the Defence of the People (CNDP), which began an armed rebellion against the government, starting the Kivu conflict.
Rising populations soon made possible intricate local, regional and foreign commercial networks that traded mostly in salt, iron and copper.
The Belgian Congo achieved independence on 30 June 1960 under the name "République du Congo" ("Republic of Congo" or "Republic of the Congo" in English).
Kabila later requested that foreign military forces return to their own countries—he had concerns that the Rwandan officers running his army were plotting a coup to give the presidency to a Tutsi who would report directly to the Rwandan president, Paul Kagame.
Six months after the 2002 eruption, nearby Mount Nyamulagira also erupted.
Angolan, Zimbabwean and Namibian militaries entered the hostilities on the side of the government.
A relative explained how the government illicitly collected revenue: "Mobutu would ask one of us to go to the bank and take out a million.
The protests began after the passage of a law by the Congolese lower house that, if also passed by the Congolese upper house, would keep Kabila in power at least until a national census was conducted (a process which would likely take several years and therefore keep him in power past the planned 2016 elections, which he is constitutionally barred from participating in).
Actual school attendance has also improved greatly in recent years, with primary school net attendance estimated to be 82.4% in 2014 (82.4% of children ages 6–11 attended school; 83.4% for boys, 80.6% for girls).
Much economic activity still lies outside the GDP data.
In 2009, the United Nations estimated the country's population to be 66 million people, a rapid increase from 39.1 million in 1992 despite the ongoing war.
The '''Democratic Republic of the Congo''' (; ; ), also known as '''DR Congo''', '''DRC''', '''DROC''', '''Congo-Kinshasa''', or simply the '''Congo''' is a country located in Central Africa.
On 14 September, Lumumba was arrested by forces loyal to Joseph Mobutu.
The hunting has also been facilitated by the extensive logging prevalent throughout the Congo's rainforests from both corporate logging, and farmers clearing forest landfor agriculture.
This area is surrounded by plateaus merging into savannas in the south and southwest, by mountainous terraces in the west, and dense grasslands extending beyond the Congo River in the north.
Although several hundred local languages and dialects are spoken, the linguistic variety is bridged both by widespread use of French and the national intermediary languages Kituba, Tshiluba, Swahili, and Lingala.
The death toll is due to widespread disease and famine; reports indicate that almost half of the individuals who have died are children under five years of age.
Gertler terminated this arrangement.
In June 2014, Freedom from Torture published reported rape and sexual violence being used routinely by state officials in Congolese prisons as punishment for politically active women.
This bill passed; however, it was gutted of the provision that would keep Joseph Kabila in power until a census took place.
The Democratic Republic of Congo has infrastructure for hydro-electricity from the Congo River at the Inga dams.
Traditionally water transport has been the dominant means of moving around in approximately two-thirds of the country.
Data are also lacking on irregular immigrants, however given neighbouring countries' ethnic links to DRC nationals, irregular migration is assumed to be a significant phenomenon.
The Katanga secession was ended in January 1963 with the assistance of UN forces.
Immigration is very diverse in nature; refugees and asylum-seekers&nbsp;– products of the numerous and violent conflicts in the Great Lakes Region&nbsp;– constitute an important subset of the population.
Neighboring countries, particularly Rwanda, have been accused of using rebels groups as proxies to gain control of the resource-rich country and of arming rebels, a claim they deny.
