The slander that Demosthenes' wife also slept with the boy suggests that the relationship was contemporary with his marriage.
According to the classical scholar Harry Thurston Peck, Demosthenes "affects no learning; he aims at no elegance; he seeks no glaring ornaments; he rarely touches the heart with a soft or melting appeal, and when he does, it is only with an effect in which a third-rate speaker would have surpassed him.
According to Plutarch, when Demosthenes first addressed himself to the people, he was derided for his strange and uncouth style, "which was cumbered with long sentences and tortured with formal arguments to a most harsh and disagreeable excess".
In 324&nbsp;BC Harpalus, to whom Alexander had entrusted huge treasures, absconded and sought refuge in Athens.
The theme of the ''First Philippic'' (351–350&nbsp;BC) was preparedness and the reform of the theoric fund, a mainstay of Eubulus's policy.
Aeschines agreed with this proposition and maintained that the Athenians should participate in the Congress.
He is criticised for having overrated Athens's capacity to revive and challenge Macedon.
An Athenian logographer could remain anonymous, which enabled him to serve personal interests, even if it prejudiced the client.
His city had lost most of its Aegean allies, whereas Philip had consolidated his hold over Macedonia and was master of enormous mineral wealth.
His language is simple and natural, never far-fetched or artificial.
After Chaeronea, Philip inflicted a harsh punishment upon Thebes, but made peace with Athens on very lenient terms.
Philip decided to act at once; in the winter of 339–338&nbsp;BC, he passed through Thermopylae, entered Amfissa and defeated the Locrians.
Between his coming of age in 366&nbsp;BC and the trials that took place in 364&nbsp;BC, Demosthenes and his guardians negotiated acrimoniously but were unable to reach an agreement, for neither side was willing to make concessions.
* ''Dicanic'' or ''judicial'', assessing the justice of past actions—only about ten of these are cases in which Demosthenes was personally involved, the rest were written for other speakers;
* G. Cawkwell, ''Philip II of Macedon'', 102–103.
Chris Carey, a professor of Greek in UCL, concludes that Demosthenes was a better orator and political operator than strategist.
an obscene soldier of the Greek army during the Trojan War" Stung by these words, Philip immediately altered his demeanour.
Demosthenes (''First Olynthiac'', 20)—The orator took great pains to convince his countrymen that the reform of the theoric fund was necessary to finance the city's military preparations.
His father—also named Demosthenes—who belonged to the local tribe, Pandionis, and lived in the deme of Paeania in the Athenian countryside, was a wealthy sword-maker.
Although his father left an estate of nearly fourteen talents, (equivalent to about 220 years of a labourer's income at standard wages, or 11 million dollars in terms of median US annual incomes)* D. M. MacDowell, ''Demosthenes the Orator'', ch.
* H. Yunis, ''Demosthenes: On the Crown'', 167.
He then turned south-east down the Cephissus valley, seized Elateia, and restored the fortifications of the city.
* ''Epideictic'' or ''sophistic display'', attributing praise or blame, often delivered at public ceremonies—only two speeches have been included in the Demosthenic corpus, one a funeral speech that has been dismissed as a "rather poor" example of his work, and the other  probably spurious.
* E. M. Burke, "The Early Political Speeches of Demosthenes", 185.
Since 357&nbsp;BC, when Philip seized Amphipolis and Pydna, Athens had been formally at war with the Macedonians.
He also accused Demosthenes of having been such a bad ''erastes'' to Aristarchus so as not even to deserve the name.
* C. Wooten, "Cicero's Reactions to Demosthenes", 39.
It is unknown whether such vignettes are factual accounts of events in Demosthenes' life or merely anecdotes used to illustrate his perseverance and determination.
He finally defeated Aeschines, although his enemy's objections to the crowning were arguably valid from a legal point of view.
In each one of the three types he was better than its special masters.
Using all the power of his eloquence, he demanded resolute action against Philip and called for a burst of energy from the Athenian people.
Thus for example Aeschines accused Demosthenes of unethically disclosing his clients' arguments to their opponents; in particular, that he wrote a speech for Phormion (350 BC), a wealthy banker, and then communicated it to Apollodorus, who was bringing a capital charge against Phormion.
Curtius, a German archaeologist and historian, likened the relation between Isaeus and Demosthenes to "an intellectual armed alliance".
Irrespective of their status, the speeches attributed to Demosthenes are often grouped in three genres first defined by Aristotle:
In 352&nbsp;BC, he delivered ''For the Megalopolitans'' and, in 351&nbsp;BC, ''On the Liberty of the Rhodians.''
Nonetheless, Alexander moved swiftly to Thebes, which submitted shortly after his appearance at its gates.
Demosthenes escaped to a sanctuary on the island of Kalaureia (modern-day Poros), where he was later discovered by Archias, a confidant of Antipater.
For Thomas Wilson, who first published translation of his speeches into English, Demosthenes was not only an eloquent orator, but, mainly, an authoritative statesman, "a source of wisdom".
French Prime Minister Georges Clemenceau was among those who idealised Demosthenes and wrote a book about him.
* D. M. MacDowell, ''Demosthenes the Orator'', ch.
Demosthenes (''Second Olynthiac'', 10)—The orator faced serious accusations more than once, but he never admitted to any improper actions and insisted that it is impossible "to gain permanent power by injustice, perjury, and falsehood".
However, Antipater, Alexander's successor, quelled all opposition and demanded that the Athenians turn over Demosthenes and Hypereides, among others.
Such was Philip's hatred for Demosthenes that, according to Diodorus Siculus, the king after his victory sneered at the misfortunes of the Athenian statesman.
The secret of his power is simple, for it lies essentially in the fact that his political principles were interwoven with his very spirit."
Aeschines is speechless.
The main criticism of Demosthenes's art, however, seems to have rested chiefly on his known reluctance to speak extempore; he often declined to comment on subjects he had not studied beforehand.
According to a story repeated by Plutarch, when Demosthenes was an adolescent, his curiosity was noticed by the orator Callistratus, who was then at the height of his reputation, having just won a case of considerable importance.
He was also famous for his caustic wit.
MacDowell, ''Demosthenes the Orator'', ch.
"We need money, for sure, Athenians, and without money nothing can be done that ought to be done."
To prevent a similar revolt against his own rule, Alexander's successor in this region, Antipater, sent his men to track Demosthenes down.
Judicial oratory had become a significant literary genre by the second half of the fifth century, as represented in the speeches of Demosthenes' predecessors, Antiphon and Andocides.
He was among the first ever volunteer trierarchs in 357&nbsp;BC, sharing the expenses of a ship called ''Dawn'', for which the public inscription still survives.
Another time, after the ecclesia had refused to hear him and he was going home dejected, an actor named Satyrus followed him and entered into a friendly conversation with him.
Both Dionysius and Cicero assert that Demosthenes brought together the best features of the basic types of style; he used the middle or normal type style ordinarily and applied the archaic type and the type of plain elegance where they were fitting.
He idealized his city and strove throughout his life to restore Athens' supremacy and motivate his compatriots against Philip II of Macedon.
Demosthenes asserted his guardians had left nothing "except the house, and fourteen slaves and thirty silver minae" (30 minae = ½ talent).
In his first encounter with Philip, Demosthenes is said to have collapsed from fright.
"You stand revealed in your life and conduct, in your public performances and also in your public abstinences.
Some of the speeches that comprise the "Demosthenic corpus" are known to have been written by other authors, though scholars differ over which speeches these are.
Authors and scholars who flourished at Rome, such as Longinus and Caecilius, regarded his oratory as sublime.
The Thebans and the Athenians rebelled once again, financed by Darius III of Persia, and Demosthenes is said to have received about 300&nbsp;talents on behalf of Athens and to have faced accusations of embezzlement.
He pleaded with his audience to predict the potential of being defeated, and to prepare.
During this period, he wrote ''Against Androtion'' and ''Against Leptines'', two fierce attacks on individuals who attempted to repeal certain tax exemptions.
In 335&nbsp;BC Alexander felt free to engage the Thracians and the Illyrians, but, while he was campaigning in the north, Demosthenes spread a rumour—even producing a bloodstained messenger—that Alexander and all of his expeditionary force had been slaughtered by the Triballians.
* E. M. Burke, "The Early Political Speeches of Demosthenes", 187.
According to Aeschines, "it was but the seventh day after the death of his daughter, and though the ceremonies of mourning were not yet completed, he put a garland on his head and white raiment on his body, and there he stood making thank-offerings, violating all decency."
Demosthenes accused the other envoys of venality and of facilitating Philip's plans with their stance.
In any case, the Athenians soon repealed the sentence.
In 336&nbsp;BC, the orator Ctesiphon proposed that Athens honour Demosthenes for his services to the city by presenting him, according to custom, with a golden crown.
The ''Alexandrian Canon'' compiled by Aristophanes of Byzantium and Aristarchus of Samothrace recognised Demosthenes as one of the ten greatest Attic orators and logographers.
The ecclesia officially accepted Philip's harsh terms, including the renouncement of their claim to Amphipolis.
In 347&nbsp;BC, an Athenian delegation, comprising Demosthenes, Aeschines and Philocrates, was officially sent to Pella to negotiate a peace treaty.
Apparently, while still under Demosthenes' tutelage, Aristarchus killed and mutilated a certain Nicodemus of Aphidna.
He expected that he would hold safely any Athenian possessions which he might seize before the ratification.
Also in 342&nbsp;BC, he delivered the ''Third Philippic'', which is considered to be the best of his political orations.
Demosthenes (''Third Philippic'', 69)—The orator warned his countrymen of the disasters Athens would suffer, if they continued to remain idle and indifferent to the challenges of their times.
Demosthenes (''On the Crown'', 198)—In ''On the Crown'' Demosthenes fiercely assaulted and finally neutralised Aeschines, his formidable political opponent.
Greek cities like Athens and Thebes saw in this change of leadership an opportunity to regain their full independence.
At the age of 20 Demosthenes sued his trustees in order to recover his patrimony and delivered five orations: three ''Against Aphobus'' during 363 and 362&nbsp;BC and two ''Against Onetor'' during 362 and 361&nbsp;BC.
French author and lawyer Guillaume du Vair praised his speeches for their artful arrangement and elegant style; John Jewel, Bishop of Salisbury, and Jacques Amyot, a French Renaissance writer and translator, regarded Demosthenes as a great or even the "supreme" orator.
According to Jacqueline de Romilly, a French philologist and member of the Académie française, the threat of Philip would give Demosthenes' stances a focus and a raison d'être (reason for existence).
Demosthenes was born in 384 BC, during the last year of the 98th&nbsp;Olympiad or the first year of the 99th&nbsp;Olympiad.
It is not unlikely that he became a teacher of rhetoric and that he brought pupils into court with him.
It has also been said that Demosthenes paid Isaeus 10,000&nbsp;drachmae (somewhat over 1.5&nbsp;talents) on the condition that Isaeus should withdraw from a school of rhetoric which he had opened, and should devote himself wholly to Demosthenes, his new pupil.
For this depends upon his own nature; while his power and his influence are determined by external causes.
Supported by Thebes and Thessaly, Macedon took control of Phocis's votes in the Amphictyonic League, a Greek religious organisation formed to support the greater temples of Apollo and Demeter.
* I. Apostolidis, notes 1219, 1226 & 1229 ''in'' J. G. Droysen, ''History of Alexander the Great'', 717–726; K. Tsatsos, ''Demosthenes'', 303–309; D. Whitehead, ''Hypereides'', 359–360; I. Worthington, ''Harpalus Affair'', ''passim''.
According to Plutarch, Demosthenes employed Isaeus as his master in rhetoric, even though Isocrates was then teaching this subject, either because he could not pay Isocrates the prescribed fee or because Demosthenes believed Isaeus's style better suited a vigorous and astute orator such as himself .
In 348&nbsp;BC a peculiar event occurred: Meidias, a wealthy Athenian, publicly slapped Demosthenes, who was at the time a choregos at the Greater Dionysia, a large religious festival in honour of the god Dionysus.
* C. Carey, ''Aeschines'', 7–8.
In response, Demosthenes delivered the ''Second Philippic'', a vehement attack against Philip.
To secure their allegiance, Demosthenes was sent, by Athens, to the Boeotian city; Philip also sent a deputation, but Demosthenes succeeded in securing Thebes's allegiance.
"While the vessel is safe, whether it be a large or a small one, then is the time for sailor and helmsman and everyone in his turn to show his zeal and to take care that it is not capsized by anyone's malice or inadvertence; but when the sea has overwhelmed it, zeal is useless."
He also insulted Philip by calling him a "barbarian".
Because of this turbulence, the Athenian Assembly convened.
To make his living, Demosthenes became a professional litigant, both as a "logographer", writing speeches for use in private legal suits, and advocate ("synegoros") speaking on another's behalf.
The rancorous and often hilariously exaggerated accusations, satirised by Old Comedy, were sustained by innuendo, inferences about motives, and a complete absence of proof; as J. H. Vince states "there was no room for chivalry in Athenian political life".
He is, therefore, regarded as a consummate orator, adept in the techniques of oratory, which are brought together in his work.
After saying these words, he passed by the altar, fell down and died.
The Assembly, however, laid aside Philip's grievances against Demosthenes' conduct and denounced the peace treaty; so doing, in effect, amounted to an official declaration of war.
From his part, George A. Kennedy believes that his political speeches in the ecclesia were to become "the artistic exposition of reasoned views".
Almost no politician, with the exception of Phocion, was at the same time an apt orator and a competent general.
Plutarch much later supported this accusation, stating that Demosthenes "was thought to have acted dishonorably" and he also accused Demosthenes of writing speeches for both sides.
According to this critique, Demosthenes should have understood that the ancient Greek states could only survive unified under the leadership of Macedon.
* D. M. MacDowell, ''Demosthenes the Orator'', ch.
Among other things, the plan called for the creation of a rapid-response force, to be created cheaply with each hoplite to be paid only ten drachmas (two obols per day), which was less than the average pay for unskilled labourers in Athensimplying that the hoplite was expected to make up the deficiency in pay by looting.
The historian maintains that Demosthenes measured everything by the interests of his own city, imagining that all the Greeks ought to have their eyes fixed upon Athens.
Demosthenes is also said to have admired the historian Thucydides.
He thus laid the foundations for his future political successes and for becoming the leader of his own "party" (the issue of whether the modern concept of political parties can be applied in the Athenian democracy is hotly disputed among modern scholars).
He delivered his first judicial speeches at the age of 20, in which he argued effectively to gain from his guardians what was left of his inheritance.
Therefore, Demosthenes is accused of misjudging events, opponents and opportunities and of being unable to foresee Philip's inevitable triumph.
but the Macedonian victory over the Phocians at the Battle of Crocus Field shook Demosthenes.
* D. M. MacDowell, ''Demosthenes the Orator'', ch.
In 349&nbsp;BC, Philip attacked Olynthus, an ally of Athens.
In a now lost letter, Cicero, though an admirer of the Athenian orator, claimed that occasionally Demosthenes "nods", and elsewhere Cicero also argued that, although he is pre-eminent, Demosthenes sometimes fails to satisfy his ears.
"Two characteristics, men of Athens, a citizen of a respectable character...must be able to show: when he enjoys authority, he must maintain to the end the policy whose aims are noble action and the pre-eminence of his country: and at all times and in every phase of fortune he must remain loyal.
Finally, peace was sworn at Pherae, where Philip accompanied the Athenian delegation, after he had completed his military preparations to move south.
On the other hand, Polybius, a Greek historian of the Mediterranean world, was highly critical of Demosthenes's policies.
The only information about his wife, whose name is unknown, is that she was the daughter of Heliodorus, a prominent citizen.
Although his father provided well for him, his legal guardians, Aphobus, Demophon and Therippides, mishandled his inheritance.
Despite Demosthenes' strong advocacy, the Athenians would not manage to prevent the falling of the city to the Macedonians.
"If you feel bound to act in the spirit of that dignity, whenever you come into court to give judgement on public causes, you must bethink yourselves that with his staff and his badge every one of you receives in trust the ancient pride of Athens."
He sought to preserve his city's freedom and to establish an alliance against Macedon, in an unsuccessful attempt to impede Philip's plans to expand his influence southward by conquering all the other Greek states.
Had you for Greece been strong, as wise you were,
According to Professor of Classics Cecil Wooten, Cicero ended his career by trying to imitate Demosthenes's political role.
However the most desirable ally for Athens was Thebes.
Demosthenes encouraged the fortification of Athens and was chosen by the ecclesia to deliver the Funeral Oration.
In this judgement, Peck agrees with Jaeger, who said that the imminent political decision imbued Demosthenes's speech with a fascinating artistic power.
Demosthenes undertook a disciplined programme to overcome his weaknesses and improve his delivery, including diction, voice and gestures.
In 348&nbsp;BC, he became a choregos, paying the expenses of a theatrical production.
While the Athenians and the Thebans were preparing themselves for war, Philip made a final attempt to appease his enemies, proposing in vain a new peace treaty.
Demosthenes delivered ''On the Chersonese'' and convinced the Athenians not to recall Diopeithes.
After his death, texts of his speeches survived in Athens (possibly forming part of the library of Cicero's friend, Atticus, though their fate is otherwise unknown), and in the Library of Alexandria.
"For a house, I take it, or a ship or anything of that sort must have its chief strength in its substructure; and so too in affairs of state the principles and the foundations must be truth and justice."
He took pride in not relying on attractive words but rather simple, effective prose.
Demosthenes was fined and imprisoned, but he soon escaped.
The Macedonian army swiftly proclaimed Alexander III of Macedon, then twenty years old, as the new king of Macedon.
His ideas and principles survived, influencing prominent politicians and movements of our times.
* H. Yunis, ''Demosthenes: On The Crown'', 263 (note 275).
In his most brilliant speech, ''On the Crown,'' Demosthenes effectively defended Ctesiphon and vehemently attacked those who would have preferred peace with Macedon.
At the same time, Demosthenes prepared himself for the trials and improved his oratory skill.
Demosthenes' oration before the Theban people is not extant and, therefore, the arguments he used to convince the Thebans remain unknown.
He did not attack Athens, but demanded the exile of all anti-Macedonian politicians, Demosthenes first of all.
When the Macedonian army approached Chersonese (now known as the Gallipoli Peninsula), an Athenian general named Diopeithes ravaged the maritime district of Thrace, thereby inciting Philip's rage.
According to Dionysius of Halicarnassus, a Greek historian and teacher of rhetoric, Demosthenes represented the final stage in the development of Attic prose.
He reminds one of an old sprain or fracture: the moment you are out of health it begins to be active."
Being very anxious about the delay, Demosthenes insisted that the embassy should travel to the place where they would find Philip and swear him in without delay.
The "publication" and distribution of prose texts was common practice in Athens by the latter half of the fourth century&nbsp;BC and Demosthenes was among the Athenian politicians who set the trend, publishing many or even all of his orations.
Demosthenes now dominated Athenian politics and was able to considerably weaken the pro-Macedonian faction of Aeschines.
However, the Athenian orator and statesman Demades is said to have remarked: "O King, when Fortune has cast you in the role of Agamemnon, are you not ashamed to act the part of Thersites?
When Demosthenes felt that the poison was working on his body, he said to Archias: "Now, as soon as you please you may commence the part of Creon in the tragedy, and cast out this body of mine unburied.
* D. C. Innes, 'Longinus and Caecilius", 277–279.
In the ''Illiterate Book-Fancier,'' Lucian mentions eight beautiful copies of Thucydides made by Demosthenes, all in Demosthenes' own handwriting.
the diversion of Theoric Funds to military purposes).
In 351&nbsp;BC, Demosthenes felt strong enough to express his view concerning the most important foreign policy issue facing Athens at that time: the stance his city should take towards Philip.
He went on to devote his most productive years to opposing Macedon's expansion.
Rebutting historian Theopompus, the biographer insists that for "the same party and post in politics which he held from the beginning, to these he kept constant to the end; and was so far from leaving them while he lived, that he chose rather to forsake his life than his purpose".
Demosthenes was to become fully engaged in this kind of litigation and he was also to be instrumental in developing the power of the Areopagus to indict individuals for treason, invoked in the ecclesia by a process called "ἀπόφασις".
This proposal became a political issue and, in 330&nbsp;BC, Aeschines prosecuted Ctesiphon on charges of legal irregularities.
Aeschines, Demosthenes' greatest political rival, maintained that his mother Kleoboule was a Scythian by blood—an allegation disputed by some modern scholars.
There is no consensus among scholars either on whether Demosthenes finally delivered ''Against Meidias'' or on the veracity of Aeschines' accusation that Demosthenes was bribed to drop the charges.
He was a master at “self-fashioning” by referring to his previous accomplishments, and renewing his credibility.
Demosthenes however reversed Aeschines' initiatives and Athens finally abstained.
Modern scholars are divided: some reject them, while others, such as Blass, believe they are authentic.
The divine power seems originally to have designed Demosthenes and Cicero upon the same plan, giving them many similarities in their natural characters, as their passion for distinction and their love of liberty in civil life, and their want of courage in dangers and war, and at the same time also to have added many accidental resemblances.
In the case of Aristion, a youth from Plataea who lived for a long time in Demosthenes' house, Aeschines mocks the "scandalous" and "improper" relation.
Aeschines is in evidence.
Demosthenes was apt at combining abruptness with the extended period, brevity with breadth.
Aeschines taunted him and referred to him in his speeches by the nickname "Batalus", apparently invented by Demosthenes' pedagogues or by the little boys with whom he was playing.
Dionysius stated that Demosthenes's only shortcoming is the lack of humour, although Quintilian regards this deficiency as a virtue.
Instead of electioneering, Athenian politicians used litigation and defamation to remove rivals from government processes.
Another version credits Isaeus with having taught Demosthenes without charge.
There are problems in Plutarch's account, however, and it is probable that Demosthenes actually suffered rhotacism, mispronouncing ρ (r) as λ (l).
Almost simultaneously, probably on Eubulus's recommendation, they engaged in a war in Euboea against Philip, which ended in stalemate.
According to Professor of Greek Arthur Wallace Pickarde, success may be a poor criterion for judging the actions of people like Demosthenes, who were motivated by the ideal of political liberty.
All these speeches, which offer early glimpses of his general principles on foreign policy, such as the importance of the navy, of alliances and of national honour, are prosecutions (''graphē paranómōn'') against individuals accused of illegally proposing legislative texts.
They were collected for the Library of Alexandria by Callimachus, who believed them genuine.
According to Jebb, Demosthenes was a true artist who could make his art obey him.
* D. M. MacDowell, ''Demosthenes the Orator'', ch.
According to one story, when he was asked to name the three most important elements in oratory, he replied "Delivery, delivery and delivery!
At the same time, Athens orchestrated the creation of an alliance with Euboea, Megara, Achaea, Corinth, Acarnania and other states in the Peloponnese.
Moreover, his delivery was not accepted by everybody in antiquity: Demetrius Phalereus and the comedians ridiculed Demosthenes's "theatricality", whilst Aeschines regarded Leodamas of Acharnae as superior to him.
Alexander admonished them but imposed no punishment.
According to Demosthenes, the account revealed the misappropriation of his property.
Most of Demosthenes' major orations were directed against the growing power of King Philip II of Macedon.
He was imprisoned after a proposal of Demosthenes and Phocion, despite the dissent of Hypereides, an anti-Macedonian statesman and former ally of Demosthenes.
Although his early orations were unsuccessful and reveal a lack of real conviction and of coherent strategic and political prioritisation, Demosthenes established himself as an important political personality and broke with Eubulus's faction, a prominent member of which was Aeschines.
In his rousing call for resistance, Demosthenes asked his countrymen to take the necessary action and asserted that "for a free people there can be no greater compulsion than shame for their position".
After Alexander's death in 323&nbsp;BC, Demosthenes again urged the Athenians to seek independence from Macedon in what became known as the Lamian War.
Although he lacked Aeschines's charming voice and Demades's skill at improvisation, he made efficient use of his body to accentuate his words.
One tactic that Demosthenes used during his philippics was foresight.
He stated that a democratic state perishes if the rule of law is undermined by wealthy and unscrupulous men, and that the citizens acquire power and authority in all state affairs due "to the strength of the laws".
In 354&nbsp;BC, Demosthenes delivered his first political oration, ''On the Navy'', in which he espoused moderation and proposed the reform of the ''symmoriai'' (boards) as a source of funding for the Athenian fleet.
And in me, you will find, this loyalty has persisted unalloyed...For from the very first, I chose the straight and honest path in public life: I chose to foster the honour, the supremacy, the good name of my country, to seek to enhance them, and to stand or fall with them."
According to Plutarch, a special Athenian embassy led by Phocion, an opponent of the anti-Macedonian faction, was able to persuade Alexander to relent.
* G. Kennedy, ''Greek Literature'', 514.
In 352&nbsp;BC, Athenian troops successfully opposed Philip at Thermopylae,* E. M. Burke, "The Early Political Speeches of Demosthenes", 184 (note 92).
In 344&nbsp;BC Demosthenes travelled to the Peloponnese, in order to detach as many cities as possible from Macedon's influence, but his efforts were generally unsuccessful.
Hence, he constituted a source of inspiration for the authors of ''The Federalist'' Papers (a series of 85 essays arguing for the ratification of the United States Constitution) and for the major orators of the French Revolution.
