Some economists have criticized the efficiency of democracy.
The American Revolution led to the adoption of the United States Constitution in 1787, the oldest surviving, still active, governmental codified constitution.
Presidential Democracy is a system where the public elects the president through free and fair elections.
Dewey argues that democracy is a way of life in his work of ""Creative Democracy: The Task Before Us"  and an experience built on faith in human nature, faith in human beings, and faith in working with others.
Democracy is further defined as (a:) "government by the people; especially :  rule of the majority (b:) "a government in which the supreme power is vested in the people and exercised by them directly or indirectly through a system of representation ...."
notes=1This map was compiled according to the Wikipedia ''list of countries by system of government''.
Elections typically have a fixed date and aren't easily changed.
Anthony Downs suggests that ideological political parties are necessary to act as a mediating broker between individual and governments.
Although in the past 120 years less than 250 initiatives have been put to referendum.
A consensus democracy, in contrast, would not be dichotomous.
The Puritans (Pilgrim Fathers), Baptists, and Quakers who founded these colonies applied the democratic organisation of their congregations also to the administration of their communities in worldly matters.
These principles are reflected in all eligible citizens being equal before the law and having equal access to legislative processes.
A council court of randomly chosen citizens serves as a check on the tyranny of the majority, and rules on which body gets to vote on which issue.
Election misconduct is more likely in countries with low per capita incomes, small populations, rich in natural resources, and a lack of institutional checks and balances.
Authority can be delegated to a segment of the citizen body to carry out specific duties, for example to serve as members of popular courts, or of regional and confederal councils.
Passage of the Petition of Right in 1628 and Habeas Corpus Act in 1679 established certain liberties and remain in effect.
Other commentators have mentioned the influence of ''wealth'' (e.g.
''Authentic deliberation'' is deliberation among decision-makers that is free from distortions of unequal political power, such as power a decision-maker obtained through economic wealth or the support of interest groups.
This is done through a Vote of No Confidence where the legislature decides whether or not to remove the Prime Minister from office by a majority support for his or her dismissal.
A direct democracy gives the voting population the power to:
Such reasons have driven criticism upon representative democracy, pointing out the contradictions of representation mechanisms' with democracy
Anarcho-capitalists, voluntaryists and other right-anarchists oppose institutional democracy as they consider it in conflict with widely held moral values and ethical principles and their conception of individual rights.
For Aristotle the underlying principle of democracy is freedom, since only in a democracy the citizens can have a share in freedom.
The citizen body is advised by experts but it is the citizen body which functions as the ultimate decision-taker .
However, more recently, theorists have also advanced the concept epistemic democracy to assert that democracy actually does a good job tracking the truth.
More recently, democracy is criticised for not offering enough political stability.
In some countries, freedom of political expression, freedom of speech, and freedom of the press are considered important to ensure that voters are well informed enabling them to vote according to their own interests.
The most common mechanisms involve election of the candidate with a majority or a plurality of the votes.
Full enfranchisement of citizens was not secured until after the African-American Civil Rights Movement (1955–1968) gained passage by the United States Congress of the Voting Rights Act of 1965.
As such, what "democracy" is or what is "democratic" progresses throughout history as a continual and potentially never ending process of social construction.
The use of a lot system, a characteristic of Athenian democracy, is unique to direct democracies.
Athenian democracy was not only ''direct'' in the sense that decisions were made by the assembled people, but also the ''most direct'' in the sense that the people through the assembly, boule and courts of law controlled the entire political process and a large proportion of citizens were involved constantly in the public business.
Nevertheless, these oppositions, inherited from Greek philosophy, are now ambiguous because contemporary governments have mixed democratic, oligarchic, and monarchic elements.
The liberal trend spread to some nations in Africa in the 1990s, most prominently in South Africa.
However, if any democracy is not structured so as to prohibit the government from excluding the people from the legislative process, or any branch of government from altering the separation of powers in its own favour, then a branch of the system can accumulate too much power and destroy the democracy.
The Bill of Rights in 1791 set limits on government power to protect personal freedoms but had little impact on judgements by the courts for the first 130 years after ratification.
self-management in places of work and education, and ecological democracy which aims to reintegrate society and nature.
Many non-governmental organisations decide policy and leadership by voting.
This may be the reason why presidential democracy is not very common outside the Americas, Africa, and Central and Southeast Asia.
Most importantly, citizens do not really rule themselves unless they directly decide laws and policies.
A little closer to modern democracy were the Cossack republics of Ukraine in the 16th and 17th centuries: Cossack Hetmanate and Zaporizhian Sich.
The highest post – the Hetman – was elected by the representatives from the country's districts.
By contrast, in a cosmopolitan democracy, the people who are affected by decisions also have a say in them.
In India, parliamentary sovereignty is subject to the Constitution of India which includes judicial review.
In modern times it has become equated to elections or  "a system of government in which all the people of a state or polity....elect representatives to a parliament or similar assembly", as defined by the Oxford English Dictionary.
In representative democracies, it may not benefit incumbents to conduct fair elections.
Within Marxist orthodoxy there is a hostility to what is commonly called "liberal democracy", which they simply refer to as parliamentary democracy because of its often centralised nature.
The main idea about Creative Democracy is that democracy encourages individual capacity building and the interaction among the society.
the United Nations, as well as the creation of new institutions such as a World Parliament, which ideally would enhance public control over, and accountability in, international politics.
In 2007 the United Nations declared September 15 the International Day of Democracy.
Delegates are recallable at any time.
The lack of evidence for these conventional theories of democratisation have led researchers to search for the "deep" determinants of contemporary political institutions, be they geographical or demographic.
According to its supporters, any attempt to solve global problems is undemocratic without some form of cosmopolitan democracy.
Carroll Quigley concludes that the characteristics of weapons are the main predictor of democracy: Democracy tends to emerge only when the best weapons available are easy for individuals to buy and use.
This opportunist alliance not only has the handicap of having to cater to too many ideologically opposing factions, but it is usually short lived since any perceived or actual imbalance in the treatment of coalition partners, or changes to leadership in the coalition partners themselves, can very easily result in the coalition partner withdrawing its support from the government.
The study raises fears for the survival of democracy itself.
In some countries, the Prime Minister can also call an election whenever he or she so chooses, and typically the Prime Minister will hold an election when he or she knows that they are in good favour with the public as to get re-elected.
The only form of democracy considered acceptable to many anarchists is direct democracy.
The political system of Classical Athens, for example, granted democratic citizenship to free men and excluded slaves and women from political participation.
The taxed peasantry was represented in parliament, although with little influence, but commoners without taxed property had no suffrage.
Cleisthenes is referred to as "the father of Athenian democracy."
Plato's ''The Republic'' presents a critical view of democracy through the narration of Socrates: "Democracy, which is a charming form of government, full of variety and disorder, and dispensing a sort of equality to equals and unequaled alike."
In the 1860 United States Census, the slave population in the United States had grown to four million, and in Reconstruction after the Civil War (late 1860s), the newly freed slaves became citizens with a nominal right to vote for men.
The argument suggests that applying a populist or market-driven approach to art and literature (for example), means that innovative creative work goes unpublished or unproduced.
As Louis Brandeis once professed, "We may have democracy, or we may have wealth concentrated in the hands of a few, but we can't have both."
No consensus exists on how to define democracy, but legal equality, political freedom and rule of law have been identified as important characteristics.
World War II brought a definitive reversal of this trend in western Europe.
''Radical democracy'' is based on the idea that there are hierarchical and oppressive power relations that exist in society.
Creative Democracy is advocated by American philosopher John Dewey.
the assembly of demos, the citizen body in a given geographical area which may encompass a town and the surrounding villages, or even neighbourhoods of large cities.
2Several states constitutionally deemed to be multiparty republics are broadly described by outsiders as authoritarian states.
A subsequent wave of democratisation brought substantial gains toward true liberal democracy for many nations.
Cosmopolitan Democracy has been promoted, among others, by physicist Albert Einstein, writer Kurt Vonnegut, columnist George Monbiot, and professors David Held and Daniele Archibugi.
Economic malaise in the 1980s, along with resentment of Soviet oppression, contributed to the collapse of the Soviet Union, the associated end of the Cold War, and the democratisation and liberalisation of the former Eastern bloc countries.
Aristotle called this "childish", as compared with the stone voting ballots used by the Athenians.
Hence, democracy allows for political minorities to be oppressed by the "tyranny of the majority" in the absence of legal protections of individual or group rights.
Referendums are possible at any time via votes of most lower-level councils, however, not everything is a referendum as this is most likely a waste of time.
However, the power to call parliament remained at the pleasure of the monarch.
However, this trend does not apply to governments where fraudulent elections are common.
Some right-anarchists also criticise democracy on ''a posteriori'' consequentialist grounds, in terms of inefficiency or disability in bringing about maximisation of individual liberty.
In 1833, the United Kingdom passed the Slavery Abolition Act which took effect across the British Empire.
The United Kingdom's Slave Trade Act 1807 banned the trade across the British Empire, which was enforced internationally by the Royal Navy under treaties Britain negotiated with other nations.
As governments are frequently elected on and off there tends to be frequent changes in the policies of democratic countries both domestically and internationally.
There are two main aspects of freedom: being ruled and ruling in turn, since everyone is equal according to number, not merit, and to be able to live as one pleases.
In a related theory, Ronald Inglehart suggests that improved living-standards can convince people that they can take their basic survival for granted, leading to increased emphasis on self-expression values, which is highly correlated to democracy.
But their indefatigable labor improves the soil and secures for them a comparative well-being.
Representatives may be elected or become diplomatic representatives by a particular district (or constituency), or represent the entire electorate through proportional systems, with some using a combination of the two.
The president cannot be easily removed from office by the legislature, but he or she cannot remove members of the legislative branch any more easily.
The term "democracy" is sometimes used as shorthand for liberal democracy, which is a variant of representative democracy that may include elements such as political pluralism; equality before the law; the right to petition elected officials for redress of grievances; due process; civil liberties; human rights; and elements of civil society outside the government.
Pierre-Joseph Proudhon argued that the only acceptable form of direct democracy is one in which it is recognised that majority decisions are not binding on the minority, even when unanimous.
The guiding philosophy is that people should have decision making power in proportion to how much they are affected by the decision.
Sub-Saharan countries, as well as Afghanistan, all tend to fall into that category.
Democracy, in Dewey's view, is a moral ideal requiring actual effort and work by people; it is not an institutional concept that exists outside of ourselves.
Robert A. Dahl argues that the fundamental democratic principle is that, when it comes to binding collective decisions, each person in a political community is entitled to have his/her interests be given equal consideration (not necessarily that all people are equally satisfied by the collective decision).
It suggests that parts of the population could perceive the upheaval triggered by peak oil as a general systemic crisis.
countries Freedom House regards as free and respectful of basic human rights and the rule of law are 85 in number and represent 38 percent of the global population.
India emerged as the world's largest democracy and continues to be so.
According to the theory of direct democracy, on the other hand, citizens should vote directly, not through their representatives, on legislative proposals.
Unlike aggregative democracy, deliberative democracy holds that, for a democratic decision to be legitimate, it must be preceded by authentic deliberation, not merely the aggregation of preferences that occurs in voting.
However, these polyarchic procedures may not create a full democracy if, for example, poverty prevents political participation.
Furthermore, any voting would be ethno-colour blind.
Robert Michels asserts that although democracy can never be fully realised, democracy may be developed automatically in the act of striving for democracy: "The peasant in the fable, when on his death-bed, tells his sons that a treasure is buried in the field.
The populace has been conservative, approving only about 10% of the initiatives put before them; in addition, they have often opted for a version of the initiative rewritten by government.
The Parliament of England had its roots in the restrictions on the power of kings written into Magna Carta (1215), which explicitly protected certain rights of the King's subjects and implicitly supported what became the English writ of habeas corpus, safeguarding individual freedom against unlawful imprisonment with right to appeal.
An important justification for this kind of system is that the decisions made in national or regional democracies often affect people outside the constituency who, by definition, cannot vote.
# Put forth initiatives, referendums and suggestions for laws,
Evidence that is consistent with conventional theories of why democracy emerges and is sustained has been hard to come by.
By 1960, the vast majority of country-states were nominally democracies, although most of the world's populations lived in nations that experienced sham elections, and other forms of subterfuge (particularly in Communist nations and the former colonies.)
In addition, the Roman Republic was the first government in the western world to have a Republic as a nation-state, although it didn't have much of a democracy.
sovereignty residing at the lowest levels of authority, (2) political equality, and (3) social norms by which individuals and institutions only consider acceptable acts that reflect the first two principles of upward control and political equality.
Élite upper houses of legislatures, which often had lifetime or hereditary tenure, were common in many nations.
The exclusion of large parts of the population from the citizen body is closely related to the ancient understanding of citizenship.
Thus, their role is purely administrative and practical, not one of policy-making like that of representatives in representative democracy.
Governments couldn't do any better: it became the age of mass armies of citizen soldiers with guns Similarly, Periclean Greece was an age of the citizen soldier and democracy.
He uses the term polyarchy to refer to societies in which there exists a certain set of institutions and procedures which are perceived as leading to such democracy.
Different variants of aggregative democracy exist.
The seat of power is there, but remains open to constant change.
Roger Scruton argues that democracy alone cannot provide personal and political freedom unless the institutions of civil society are also present.
Parliamentary republics2
As the voting franchise in the U.K. was increased, it also was made more uniform in a series of reforms beginning with the Reform Act of 1832.
In the 5th century BC, to denote the political systems then existing in Greek city-states, notably Athens, the term is an antonym to ἀριστοκρατία (''aristokratía'') "rule of an elite".
According to this minimalist conception, citizens cannot and should not "rule" because, for example, on most issues, most of the time, they have no clear views or their views are not well-founded.
10: "the same advantage which a republic has over a democracy, in controlling the effects of faction, is enjoyed by a large over a small republic".
According to political scientist Larry Diamond, democracy consists of four key elements: (a) A political system for choosing and replacing the government through free and fair elections; (b) The active participation of the people, as citizens, in politics and civic life; (c) Protection of the human rights of all citizens, and (d) A rule of law, in which the laws and procedures apply equally to all citizens.
Indeed, they argued that elite oligarchy is the unbendable law of human nature, due largely to the apathy and division of the masses (as opposed to the drive, initiative and unity of the elites), and that democratic institutions would do no more than shift the exercise of power from oppression to manipulation.
This might be seen as a form of representative democracy, but representatives to the Council might be appointed rather than directly elected.
Parliamentary constitutional monarchies
In the Apella, Spartans elected leaders and cast votes by range voting and shouting.
Governments that have frequent elections tend to have significantly more stable economic policies than those governments who have infrequent elections.
The Constitution provided for an elected government and protected civil rights and liberties for some, but did not end slavery nor extend voting rights in the United States beyond white male property owners (about 6% of the population).
Over time, these either had their powers limited (as with the British House of Lords) or else became elective and remained powerful (as with the Australian Senate).
(See Democracy in Marxism.)
Many democratic socialists and social democrats believe in a form of participatory, industrial, economic and/or workplace democracy combined with a representative democracy.
Even though the rights of the individual were not secured by the Athenian constitution in the modern sense (the ancient Greeks had no word for "rights"), the Athenians enjoyed their liberties not in opposition to the government but by living in a city that was not subject to another power and by not being subjects themselves to the rule of another person.
Similarly, Ronald Dworkin argues that "democracy is a substantive, not a merely procedural, ideal."
Political activity can be valuable in itself, it socialises and educates citizens, and popular participation can check powerful elites.
Democracy's role is to make visible and challenge those relations by allowing for difference, dissent and antagonisms in decision making processes.
Under ''minimalism'', democracy is a system of government in which citizens have given teams of political leaders the right to rule in periodic elections.
He replied "A republic—if you can keep it."
Instead, decisions would be based on a multi-option approach, and policies would be enacted if they gained sufficient support, either in a purely verbal agreement, or via a consensus vote - a multi-option preference vote.
The president serves as both the head of state and head of government controlling most of the executive powers.
Any claim to substance such as the collective good, the public interest or the will of the nation is subject to the competitive struggle and times of for gaining the authority of office and government.
While representative democracy is sometimes equated with the republican form of government, the term "republic" classically has encompassed both democracies and aristocracies.
Post-Enlightenment ideologies such as fascism, nazism, and neo-fundamentalism oppose democracy on different grounds, generally citing that the concept of democracy as a constant process is flawed and detrimental to a preferable course of development.
Other uses of "democracy" include that of direct democracy.
Constitutional monarchies in which the monarch personally exercises power
This would create "room for ideological and extremist alternatives to existing forms of government".
The Bill set out the requirement for regular elections, rules for freedom of speech in Parliament and limited the power of the monarch, ensuring that, unlike much of Europe at the time, royal absolutism would not prevail.
The votes of the powerful were given more weight through a system of gerrymandering, so most high officials, including members of the Senate, came from a few wealthy and noble families.
Parliamentary systems have the right to dismiss a Prime Minister at any point in time that they feel he or she is not doing their job to the expectations of the legislature.
James Madison critiqued direct democracy (which he referred to simply as "democracy") in Federalist No.
The term "democracy" first appeared in ancient Greek political and philosophical thought in the city-state of Athens during classical antiquity.
Democratic political figures are not supreme rulers but rather temporary guardians of an empty place.
Such delegation is made, in principle, by lot, on a rotation basis, and is always recallable by the citizen body.
Countries which do not fit any of the above systems
Cosmopolitan democracy, also known as ''Global democracy'' or ''World Federalism'', is a political system in which democracy is implemented on a global scale, either directly or through representatives.
This provides some measure of separation of powers.
A variety of organisations were established advocating the movement of black people from the United States to locations where they would enjoy greater freedom and equality.
See there for sources.
The emergence of petitioning is some of the earliest evidence of parliament being used as a forum to address the general grievances of ordinary people.
The Kouroukan Fouga divided the Mali Empire into ruling clans (lineages) that were represented at a great assembly called the ''Gbara''.
Presidential republics2
According to ''World Forum on Democracy'', electoral democracies now represent 120 of the 192 existing countries and constitute 58.2 percent of the world's population.
English Puritans who migrated from 1620 established colonies in New England whose local governance was democratic and which contributed to the democratic development of the United States; although these local assemblies had some small amounts of devolved power, the ultimate authority was held by the Crown and the English Parliament.
Drawing on Claude Lefort's idea of the empty place of power, that "power emanates from the people ... but is the power of nobody", he remarks that democracy is reverence to a symbolic mythical authority as in reality, there is no such thing as the people or ''demos''.
Two effects of education and cognitive ability are distinguished: a cognitive effect (competence to make rational choices, better information-processing) and an ethical effect (support of democratic values, freedom, human rights etc.
Though the term "democracy" is typically used in the context of a political state, the principles also are applicable to private organisations.
However, the charter made Mali more similar to a constitutional monarchy than a democratic republic.
Within modern-day representative governments, certain electoral tools like referendums, citizens' initiatives and recall elections are referred to as forms of direct democracy.
The creation of the International Criminal Court in 2003 was seen as a major step forward by many supporters of this type of cosmopolitan democracy.
Governments will tend to produce laws and policies that are close to the views of the median voter – with half to their left and the other half to their right.
All eligible citizens were allowed to speak and vote in the assembly, which set the laws of the city state.
This Corsican Constitution was the first based on Enlightenment principles and included female suffrage, something that was not granted in most other democracies until the 20th century.
The English word dates to the 16th century, from the older Middle French and Middle Latin equivalents.
The intention is that those chosen will be representative of the opinions and interests of the people at large, and be more fair and impartial than an elected official.
As Benjamin Franklin was exiting after writing the U.S. constitution, a woman asked him "Well, Doctor, what have we got—a republic or a monarchy?".
Even if a political party maintains power, vociferous, headline grabbing protests and harsh criticism from the mass media are often enough to force sudden, unexpected political change.
Democracies in countries with high per capita income have been found to be less prone to violence, but in countries with low incomes the tendency is the reverse.
In the 21st century, democracy has become such a popular method of reaching decisions that its application beyond politics to other areas such as entertainment, food and fashion, consumerism, urban planning, education, art, literature, science and theology has been criticised as "the reigning dogma of our time".
"The task of democracy", Dewey concludes, "is forever that of creation of a freer and more humane experience in which all share and to which all contribute".
For example, in a representative democracy, every vote has equal weight, no unreasonable restrictions can apply to anyone seeking to become a representative, and the freedom of its eligible citizens is secured by legitimised rights and liberties which are typically protected by a constitution.
At the same time liberal democracies i.e.
Some representative democracies also incorporate elements of direct democracy, such as referendums.
What was critical to American values, John Adams insisted, was that the government be "bound by fixed laws, which the people have a voice in making, and a right to defend."
The first representative national assembly in England was Simon de Montfort's Parliament in 1265.
This system allocates votes to member states in part according to their population, but heavily weighted in favour of the smaller states.
Range voting appeared in Sparta as early as 700 BC.
Recent statistical analyses have challenged modernisation theory by demonstrating that there is no reliable evidence for the claim that democracy is more likely to emerge when countries become wealthier, more educated, or less unequal.
They maintain the people who participate in democratic institutions are foremost driven by economic self-interest.
Sparta adopted it because of its simplicity, and to prevent any bias voting, buying, or cheating that was predominant in the early democratic elections.
By the 1800s, guns were the best personal weapons available, and in America, almost everyone could afford to buy a gun, and could learn how to use it fairly easily.
Between January 1995 and June 2005, Swiss citizens voted 31 times, to answer 103 questions (during the same period, French citizens participated in only two referendums).
This was particularly the case in the eleven states of the American South.
Universal male suffrage was established in France in March 1848 in the wake of the French Revolution of 1848.
Some varieties of democracy provide better representation and more freedom for their citizens than others.
Other cultures, such as the Iroquoi Nation in the Americas between around 1450 and 1600 AD also developed a form of democratic society before they came in contact with the Europeans.
In his work, Plato lists 5 forms of government from best to worst.
In other parliamentary democracies extra elections are virtually never held, a minority government being preferred until the next ordinary elections.
Examples include Switzerland and some U.S. states, where frequent use is made of referendums and initiatives.
only a small minority actually had a voice; Parliament was elected by only a few percent of the population (less than 3% as late as 1780).
