During the visit, Deng visited the Johnson Space Center in Houston, as well as the headquarters of Coca-Cola and Boeing in Atlanta and Seattle, respectively.
The return of these two territories was based on political principle formulated by Deng himself called "one country, two systems", which refers to the coexistence under one political authority areas with different economic systems, communism and capitalism.
In December 1978, during the Third Plenum of the 11th Central Committee Congress of the Communist Party of China, Deng took over the reins of power.
Deng focused on reconstructing the country's economy and stressed unity as the first step by raising production.
At that time, he began using the nickname "Xiaoping" and occupied prominent positions in the party apparatus.
In 1982 the Central Committee of the Communist Party released a document entitled ''On the Various Historical Issues since the Founding of the People's Republic of China''.
Deng's father strongly supported his son's participation in the work-study abroad program.
In October 1987, at the Plenary Session of the National People's Congress, Deng was re-elected as Chairman of Central Military Commission, but he resigned as Chairman of the Central Advisory Commission and he was succeeded by Chen Yun.
File:Deng Xiaoping billboard 06.jpg|Deng Xiaoping billboard in Qingdao, Shandong
Observers suggest that Jiang's submission to Deng's policies had solidified his position as Deng's heir apparent.
Deng's ancestors can be traced back to Mei County, Guangdong, a prominent ancestral area for the Hakka people, and had been settled in Sichuan for several generations.
Deng's first wife, one of his schoolmates from Moscow, died aged 24 a few days after giving birth to Deng's first child, a baby girl who also died.
Deng had once again become a leading figure in the party, when the north ended up winning the civil war against the Kuomintang.
He was the paramount leader of China from 1978 until his retirement in 1989.
In Wuhan, Deng first established contact with Mao Zedong, who was then little valued by militant pro-Soviet leaders of the party.
In addition, in coastal areas and on the island province of Hainan, Deng is seen on roadside billboards with messages emphasizing economic reform or his policy of One country, two systems.
In 1929 Deng led the Baise Uprising in Guangxi province against the Kuomintang (KMT) government.
This is in sharp contrast to the pattern in the ''perestroika'' undertaken by Mikhail Gorbachev in which most of the major reforms were originated by Gorbachev himself.
Unlike more conservative leaders such as Chen Yun, Deng did not object to policies on the grounds that they were similar to ones which were found in capitalist nations.
The original calligraphy was written by Jiang, then Chairman of the Central Military Commission.
Although he at first made concessions to the socialist hardliners, he soon resumed his reforms after his 1992 southern tour.
This political flexibility towards the foundations of socialism is strongly supported by quotes such as:
The successes of the Soviet in Jiangxi made the party leaders decide to move to Jiangxi from Shanghai.
With peasants able to sell surplus agricultural yields on the open market, domestic consumption stimulated industrialization as well and also created political support for more difficult economic reforms.
To purge sympathizers of Tiananmen demonstrators, the Communist Party initiated a one-and-a-half-year-long program similar to Anti-Rightist Movement.
He stressed the importance of economic reform in China, and criticized those who were against further reform and opening up.
Lee, on the other hand, advised Deng to stop exporting Communist ideologies to Southeast Asia, an advice which Deng later followed.
In a mountainous area of Jiangxi province, where Mao went to establish a communist system, there developed the embryo of a future state of China under communism which adopted the official name of the Chinese Soviet Republic, but was better known as the "Jiangxi Soviet".
Mao, sensing his loss of prestige, took action to regain control of the state.
The Kuomintang government was being forced to leave Guangzhou, and established Chongqing as a new provisional capital.
Deng was instrumental in the development of Shanghai's Pudong New Area, revitalizing the city as China's economic hub.
Coincidentally, when Deng Xiaoping's later political fortunes were down and he was sent to work in a tractor factory in 1924 he found himself a fitter again, and proved to still be a master of the skill.
In October 1969 Deng Xiaoping was sent to the Xinjian County Tractor Factory in rural Jiangxi province to work as a regular worker.
At that time Deng became mayor of Chongqing, while he simultaneously was the leader of the Communist Party in the southwest, where the Communist army, now proclaiming itself the People's Liberation Army, suppressed resistance loyal to the old Kuomintang regime.
Many CPC high level leaders visit the statue.
At that time, the Communist Party controlled the entire north, but there were still parts of the south held by the Kuomintang regime.
After delivering Zhou's official eulogy at the state funeral, the Gang of Four, with Mao's permission, began the so-called ''Criticize Deng and Oppose the Rehabilitation of Right-leaning Elements'' campaign.
True to his famous 1961 pronouncement "it doesn't matter whether a cat is black or white, if it catches mice it is a good cat", which had caused so much criticism, Deng, along with his closest collaborators, such as Zhao Ziyang, who in 1980 relieved Hua Guofeng as premier, and Hu Yaobang, who in 1981 did the same with the post of party chairman, took the reins of power and the purpose of advancing the "four modernizations" (economy, agriculture, scientific and technological development and national defense), and announced an ambitious plan of opening and liberalizing the economy.
French President Jacques Chirac said "In the course of this century, few men have, as much as Deng, led a vast human community through such profound and determining changes"; British Prime Minister John Major commented about Deng's key role in the return of Hong Kong to Chinese control; Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chrétien called Deng a "pivotal figure" in Chinese history.
Improving relations with the outside world was the second of two important philosophical shifts outlined in Deng's program of reform termed ''Gaige Kaifang'' (''lit.''
Deng was very impressed with Singapore's economic development, greenery and housing, and later sent tens of thousands of Chinese to Singapore and countries around the world to learn from their experiences and bring back their knowledge.
This experiment proved very successful.
In the move toward market allocation,  local municipalities and provinces were allowed to invest in industries that they considered most profitable, which encouraged investment in light manufacturing.
The result of these negotiations was the Sino-British Joint Declaration, signed on 19 December 1984, which formally outlined the United Kingdom's return of Hong Kong to China by 1997.
The statue shows Deng striding forward confidently.
The uprising failed and Deng went to the Central Soviet Area in Jiangxi province.
File:Deng Xiaoping billboard 10.JPG|Deng Xiaoping billboard in Lijiang, Yunnan
The epigraph in memory of Deng is written in Chinese, Russian and Kirghiz.
His second wife, Jin Weiying, left him after Deng came under political attack in 1933.
In addition, many reforms would be introduced by local leaders, often not sanctioned by central government directives.
At the same time, China's economy opened to foreign trade.
Soon after, he took the posts of Minister of Finance and Director of the Office of Communications.
This prompted Mao to remove Deng from all leadership positions, although he retained his party membership.
The last position of power retained by Hua Guofeng, chairman of the Central Military Commission, was taken by Deng in 1981.
The sixteen-year-old Deng briefly attended middle schools in Bayeux and Châtillon, but he spent most of his time in France working.
However, in sharp contrast to the similar, but much less successful reforms in the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the People's Republic of Hungary, these investments were not government mandated.
His antagonism with the Gang of Four became increasingly clear, and Mao seemed to sway in the Gang's favour.
He participated in the historic emergency session on 7 August 1927 in which, by Soviet instruction, the Party dismissed its founder Chen Duxiu, and Qu Qiubai became the secretary general.
Another bronze statue of Deng was dedicated 13 August 2004 in the city of Guang'an, Deng's hometown, in southwest China's Sichuan Province.
Appealing to his revolutionary spirit, Mao launched the Cultural Revolution, which encouraged the masses to root out the right-wing capitalists who have "infiltrated the party".
Mao retained his status as a "great Marxist, proletarian revolutionary, militarist, and general", and the undisputed founder and pioneer of the country and the People's Liberation Army.
The evacuation was difficult, because the Army of the Republic had taken positions in all areas occupied by the Communists.
Public mourning began on the streets of Beijing and universities in the surrounding areas.
There are a few public displays of Deng in the country.
Rural markets selling peasants' homegrown products and the surplus products of communes were revived.
In the year that followed, songs like "Story of Spring" by Dong Wenhua, which were created in Deng's honour shortly after Deng's southern tour in 1992, once again were widely played.
In late 1980s, dissatisfaction with the authoritarian regime and the growing inequalities caused the biggest crisis to Deng's leadership.
In one of his trips to Yan'an in 1939, he married, for the third and last time in his life, Zhuo Lin, a young native of Kunming, who, like other young idealists of the time, had traveled to Yan'an to join the Communists.
The statue is  high, with an additional 3.68-meter base.
Deng repudiated the Cultural Revolution and, in 1977, launched the "Beijing Spring", which allowed open criticism of the excesses and suffering that had occurred during the period.
While the protests lacked a unified cause or leadership, participants raised the issue of corruption within the government and some voiced calls for economic liberalization and democratic reform within the structure of the government while others called for a less authoritarian and less centralized form of socialism.
His third wife Zhuo Lin was the daughter of an industrialist in Yunnan Province.
While Deng never held office as the head of state, head of government or General Secretary (that is, the leader of the Communist Party), he nonetheless was considered the "paramount leader" of the People's Republic of China from December 1978 to November 1989.
From September 1937 until January 1938, he lived in Buddhist monasteries and temples in the Wutai Mountains.
Certain segments of the Chinese population, notably the modern Maoists and radical reformers (the far left and the far right), had negative views on Deng.
To the Communist Party, he was believed to have set a good example for communist cadres who refused to retire at old age.
After Lin Biao was killed in an air crash (according to official reports he was trying to flee from China after unsuccessfully trying to stage a coup against Mao), Deng Xiaoping (who had been political commissar of the 2nd Field Army during the civil war) became the most influential of the remaining army leaders.
Sino-Japanese relations also improved significantly.
The death of many Communist militants in those years led to a decrease in the number of members of the Communist Party, which enabled Deng to quickly move up the ranks.
Deng Pufang was tortured and jumped out, or was thrown out, of the window of a four-story building in 1968, becoming a paraplegic.
However, unlike the Soviet model, management was indirect through market mechanisms.
Mao agreed to cede the presidency of the People's Republic of China (China's ''de jure'' head of state position) to Liu Shaoqi, while retaining his positions as leader of the party and the army.
Deng's reputation as a reformer suffered a severe blow when the Qingming Festival, after the mass public mourning of Zhou on a traditional Chinese holiday, culminated in the Tiananmen Incident of 1976, an event the Gang of Four branded as counter-revolutionary and threatening to their power.
On his tour, Deng made various speeches and generated large local support for his reformist platform.
Deng remained the most influential of the CPC cadre, although after 1987 his only official posts were as chairman of the state and Communist Party Central Military Commissions.
Furthermore, the Gang deemed Deng the mastermind behind the incident, and Mao himself wrote that "the nature of things has changed".
Under this system, the CPC removed employment barriers to Chinese deemed to be associated with the former landlord class; its removal allowed a faction favoring the restoration of the private market to enter the Communist Party.
Deng, however, did little to improve relations with the Soviet Union; he continued to adhere the Maoist line of the Sino–Soviet split era that the Soviet Union was a superpower as "hegemonic" as the United States, but even more threatening to China because of its geographic proximity.
He soon declared that "the entire imperialist Western world plans to make all socialist countries discard the socialist road and then bring them under the monopoly of international capital and onto the capitalist road".
He is considered by some "the architect" of a new brand of socialist thinking, combining the Communist Party's socialist ideology with a pragmatic adoption of market economy practices.
Because Deng wished to pursue deep reforms, it was not possible for him to continue Mao's hard-line "class struggle" policies and mass public campaigns.
In the summer of 1919 Deng Xiaoping graduated from the Chongqing School.
Deng's father, Deng Wenming, was a middle-level landowner and had studied at the University of Law and Political Science in Chengdu.
He and 80 schoolmates travelled by ship to France (traveling steerage) to participate in the Diligent Work-Frugal Study Movement, a work-study program in which 4,001 Chinese would participate by 1927.
Downgrading communitarian values, but not necessarily the criticising the ideology of Marxism-Leninism, Deng emphasized that "socialism does not mean shared poverty".
In the final phase of the war, Deng again exercised a key role as political leader and propaganda master as Political Commissar of the 2nd Field Army commanded by Liu Bocheng.
Hua Guofeng, not Deng, was selected to become Zhou's successor.
Planning and market forces are both ways of controlling economic activity."
In 1952 he moved to Beijing, where he occupied different positions in the central government.
Jiang Zemin, General Secretary of the Communist Party of China since 1989, showed little support.
This split resulted in part from Chiang Kai-shek's forcing them to flee areas controlled by the KMT.
In La Garenne-Colombes Deng met Zhou Enlai, Nie Rongzhen, Cai Hesen, Zhao Shiyan and Li Wenhai.
With the short gestation period, low capital requirements, and high foreign-exchange export earnings, revenues generated by light manufacturing were able to be reinvested in technologically more advanced production and further capital expenditures and investments.
Upon his return to China he worked as a political commissar for the military in rural regions and was considered a "revolutionary veteran" of the Long March.
In contrast to previous leadership changes, Deng allowed Hua to retain membership in the Central Committee and quietly retire, helping to set the precedent that losing a high-level leadership struggle would not result in physical harm.
The protests were sparked by the death of Hu Yaobang, a reformist official backed by Deng but ousted by the Eight Elders and the conservative wing of the politburo.
Deng attracted foreign companies to a series of Special Economic Zones, where foreign investment and market liberalization were encouraged.
In one of the most important cities in the Soviet zone, Ruijin, Deng took over as secretary of the Party Committee in the summer of 1931.
In Beijing this was centered on the Monument to the People's Heroes in Tiananmen Square.
As the party's Secretary General, Deng became instrumental in China's economic reconstruction following the Great Leap Forward in the early 1960s.
Deng stayed at home for several months, awaiting his fate.
In December 1920 a French packet ship, the ''André Lyon'', sailed into Marseille with 210 Chinese students aboard including Deng.
Old-timers like Deng Fei aimed to deal "strictly with those inside the party with serious tendencies toward bourgeois liberalization" and more than 30,000 communist officers were deployed to the task.
Deng was recognized officially as "the chief architect of China's economic reforms and China's socialist modernization".
In 2014, a TV series commemorating Deng entitled ''Deng Xiaoping at History's Crossroads'' was released by CCTV in anticipation of the 110th anniversary of his birth.
Even though Hua Guofeng formally monopolized the top positions in the People's Republic, his position, with little support, was becoming increasingly difficult.
In 1963, Deng traveled to Moscow to lead a meeting of the Chinese delegation with Stalin's successor, Nikita Khrushchev.
They were primarily nationalists and they participated in the Communist revolution because that was the only viable route they could find to Chinese nationalism."
The Kuomintang chair in Taiwan also sent its condolences, saying it longed for peace, cooperation, and prosperity.
The statue was erected to commemorate Deng's 100th birthday.
He arrived in Xi'an, the stronghold of Feng Yuxiang, in March 1927.
By encouraging public criticism of the Cultural Revolution, he weakened the position of those who owed their political positions to that event, while strengthening the position of those like himself who had been purged during that time.
He has been credited with developing China into one of the fastest-growing economies in the world for over 35 years and raising the standard of living of hundreds of millions of Chinese citizens.
Although he was not punished in Shanghai, this episode in his biography remains unclear and would be used against him to question his devotion to the Communist Party during the Cultural Revolution era.
Deng gradually outmaneuvered his political opponents.
Wu Yuzhang, local leader of the Movement in Chongqing, enrolled Deng and his paternal uncle, Deng Shaosheng, in the program.
The response to this defeat catalyzed one of the most confusing episodes in the biography of Deng: in March 1931, he left the Communist Army seventh battalion to appear some time later in Shanghai.
The mourning became a public conduit for anger against perceived nepotism in the government, the unfair dismissal and early death of Hu, and the behind-the-scenes role of the "old men".
In November 1978, after the country had stabilized following political turmoil, Deng visited Bangkok, Kuala Lumpur and Singapore and met with Singapore's Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew.
Although there was a debate on whether or not Deng actually said it, his perceived catchphrase, "To get rich is glorious" (致富光荣), unleashed a wave of personal entrepreneurship that continues to drive China's economy today.
Meanwhile, he was the impetus for the abolition of the class background system.
The statue shows Deng, dressed casually, sitting on a chair and smiling.
Deng was born into an ethnically Hakka Han family in the village of Paifang (), in the township of Xiexing (), Guang'an County in Sichuan province, approximately  from Chongqing (formerly spelled ''Chungking'').
Zhou Enlai died in January 1976, to an outpouring of national grief.
Deng pressed the industrialist and former investor in Lenin's Soviet Union for as much information on the NEP as possible.
Jiang's tearful eulogy to the late reformist leader declared, "The Chinese people love, thank, mourn and cherish the memory of Comrade Deng Xiaoping because he devoted his life-long energies to the Chinese people, performed immortal feats for the independence and liberation of the Chinese nation."
On 22 July 1977, Deng was restored to the posts of Vice-Chairman of the Central Committee, Vice-Chairman of the Military Commission and Chief of the General Staff of the People's Liberation Army.
Deng's elevation to China's new number-one figure meant that the historical and ideological questions around Mao Zedong had to be addressed properly.
Deng and Liu's policies emphasized economics over ideological dogma, an implicit departure from the mass hysteria of the Great Leap Forward.
Deng was aware that China was suffering greatly, and that the Chinese people must have a modern education to save their country.
After the breakup of the alliance between communists and nationalists, Feng Yuxiang stood on the side of Chiang Kai-shek, and the Communists who participated in their army, such as Deng Xiaoping, were forced to flee.
Premier Zhou Enlai, for example, pioneered the Four Modernizations years before Deng.
His political and ideological work, along with his status as a veteran of the Long March, placed him in a privileged position within the party to occupy positions of power after the Communist Party managed to defeat Chiang Kai-shek and founded the People's Republic of China.
As a result, he was purged twice during the Cultural Revolution, but regained prominence in 1978 by outmaneuvering Mao's chosen successor, Hua Guofeng.
Deng reiterated that "some areas must get rich before others", and asserted that the wealth from coastal regions will eventually be transferred to aid economic construction inland.
Although this theory was applied to the cases of Hong Kong and Macau, it seems that Deng intended to also present it as an attractive option to the people of Taiwan for eventual incorporation of that island, claimed as Chinese territory.
In short, Deng's reforms sparked an industrial revolution in China.
Advancing through remote and mountainous terrain, some 100,000 men (and some women) managed to escape Jiangxi starting a long strategic retreat through the interior of China which ended one year later when between 8,000 and 9,000 survivors reached the northern province of Shaanxi.
In late 1978, the aerospace company Boeing announced the sale of 747 aircraft to various airlines in the PRC, and the beverage company Coca-Cola made public their intention to open a production plant in Shanghai.
China's domestic social, political, and most notably, economic systems would undergo significant changes during Deng's time as leader.
The movement lasted seven weeks.
New material incentives and bonus systems were introduced.
Liu and Deng's economic reforms of the early 1960s were generally popular and restored many of the economic institutions previously dismantled during the Great Leap Forward.
The commune system was gradually dismantled and the peasants began to have more freedom to manage the land they cultivated and sell their products on the market.
Although Deng provided the theoretical background and the political support to allow economic reform to occur, it is in general consensus amongst historians that few of the economic reforms that Deng introduced were originated by Deng himself.
Officially, Deng decided to retire from top positions when he stepped down as Chairman of the Central Military Commission in 1989, and retired from the political scene in 1992.
In Bishkek, capital of the Republic of Kyrgyzstan, there is a six-lane boulevard,  wide and  long, the ''Deng Xiaoping Prospekt'', which was dedicated on 18 June 1997.
By the eve of Hu's funeral, the demonstration had reached 100,000 people on Tiananmen Square.
However, Deng's daughter defends the actions that occurred as a collective decision by the party leadership.
Many ordinary people in Beijing believed that Deng had ordered the intervention, but political analysts do not know who was actually behind the order.
In 1933 he became director of the propaganda department of the Provincial Party Committee in Jiangxi.
After his tour, he was able to stop the attacks of the socialist hardliners on the reforms through their "named capitalist or socialist?"
With these visits so significant, Deng made it clear that the new Chinese regime's priorities were economic and technological development.
He repeated the words he had learned from his teachers: "To learn knowledge and truth from the West in order to save China."
The goals of Deng's reforms were summed up by the Four Modernizations, those of agriculture, industry, science and technology, and the military.
The document also steered the prime responsibility of the Cultural Revolution away from Mao (although it did state that "Mao mistakenly began the Cultural Revolution") to the "counter-revolutionary cliques" of the Gang of Four and Lin Biao.
Deng opened China to foreign investment and the global market, and encouraged private competition.
After leaving the army of Feng Yuxiang in the northwest, Deng ended up in the city of Wuhan, where the Communists at that time had their headquarters.
Beginning in 1929, he participated in the struggle against the Kuomintang in Guangxi.
Relations between the People's Republic of China and the Soviet Union had worsened since the death of Stalin.
It even issued stamps and paper money under the letterhead of the Soviet Republic of China, and the army of Chiang Kai-shek finally decided to attack the communist area.
This was followed by a Central Committee directive issued to all local party organs to study Mao's directive and criticize Deng.
Despite the strife within the party, the Jiangxi Soviet became the first successful experiment of communist rule in rural China.
However, in contrast, Deng's death in the media was announced without any titles attached (Mao was called the Great Leader and teacher, Deng was simply "Comrade"), or any emotional overtones from the news anchors that delivered the message.
Deng also received a great deal of popular support.
Deng personally commented that Mao was "seven parts good, three parts bad."
Zhu Rongji had refused to declare martial law in Shanghai during the demonstrations even though socialist hardliners had pressured him.
An often cited example is the household-responsibility system, which was first secretly implemented by a poor rural village at the risk of being convicted as "counter-revolutionary."
Both Liu and Deng supported Mao in the mass campaigns of the 1950s, in which they attacked the bourgeois and capitalists, and promoted Mao's ideology.
After officially supporting Mao Zedong in his Anti-Rightist Movement of 1957, Deng acted as Secretary General of the Secretariat and ran the country's daily affairs with President Liu Shaoqi and Premier Zhou Enlai.
It was then that he married a young woman he had met in Shanghai named Jin Weiying.
One of the first items of the Deng reforms was to prevent reallocation of profits except through taxation or through the banking system; hence, the reallocation in state-owned industries was somewhat indirect, thus making them more or less independent from government interference.
Zhou was a very important figure in Deng's political life, and his death eroded his remaining support within the Party's Central Committee.
On 1 January of that year, the United States recognized the People's Republic of China, leaving the Republic of China's Nationalist government to one side, and business contacts between China and the West began to grow.
For the next two weeks, Chinese state media ran news stories and documentaries related to Deng's life and death, with the regular 19:00 ''National News'' program in the evening lasting almost two hours over the regular broadcast time.
Deng continued the plans initiated by Hua Guofeng to restrict birth to only one child, limiting women to one child under pain of administrative penalty.
On 2 February 1976, the Central Committee issued a Top-Priority Directive, officially transferring Deng to work on "external affairs" and thus removing Deng from the party's power apparatus.
Deng argued that China was in the primary stage of socialism and that the duty of the party was to perfect so-called "socialism with Chinese characteristics", and "seek truth from facts".
There, Chiang Kai-shek and his son Chiang Ching-kuo, former classmate of Deng in Moscow, wanted to stop the advance of the Communist Party forces.
These reforms were a reversal of the Maoist policy of economic self-reliance.
The confrontational strategy of the party leadership was a failure that killed many militants.
The confrontation between the two parties was temporarily interrupted, however, by the Japanese invasion, forcing the Kuomintang to form an alliance for the second time with the Communists to defend the nation against external aggression.
Although the public was largely prepared for Deng's death, as rumors had been circulating for a long time, the death of Deng was followed by the greatest publicly sanctioned display of grief for any Chinese leader since Mao Zedong.
On 3–4 June, over two hundred thousand soldiers in tanks and helicopters were sent into the city to quell the protests by force, resulting in thousands of casualties.
Thus began the epic movement that would mark a turning point in the development of Chinese communism.
A documentary on Deng entitled ''Deng Xiaoping'' was released by CCTV in January 1997 that chronicles his life from his days as a student in France to his "Southern Tour" of 1993.
As Deng gradually consolidated control over the CPC, Hua was replaced by Zhao Ziyang as premier in 1980, and by Hu Yaobang as party chief in 1981, despite the fact that Hua was Mao Zedong's designated successor as the "paramount leader" of the Communist Party of China and the People's Republic of China.
From 1980, Deng led the expansion of the economy and in political terms, took over negotiations with the United Kingdom to return the territory of Hong Kong, meeting personally with British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher.
He broke earlier conventions of holding offices for life.
"Planning and market forces are not the essential difference between socialism and capitalism.
