The exact mechanism behind ADE is unclear.
Examples include the genes coding for the proteins known as TNFα, mannan-binding lectin, CTLA4, TGFβ, DC-SIGN, PLCE1, and particular forms of human leukocyte antigen from gene variations of HLA-B.
The most widely accepted hypothesis is that of antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE).
The virus seems to have no detrimental effect on the mosquito, which remains infected for life.
As of December 2015, there is no commercially available vaccine for dengue fever.
One of the concerns is that a vaccine could increase the risk of severe disease through antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE).
Prevention is by reducing mosquito habitat and limiting exposure to bites.
One that is partially effective is predicted to become available in Mexico, the Philippines, and Brazil in early 2016.
''Aedes aegypti'' is particularly involved, as it prefers to lay its eggs in artificial water containers, to live in close proximity to humans, and to feed on people rather than other vertebrates.
This can be done by virus isolation in cell cultures, nucleic acid detection by PCR, viral antigen detection (such as for NS1) or specific antibodies (serology).
Research efforts to prevent and treat dengue include various means of vector control, vaccine development, and antiviral drugs.
The distinctions between the serotypes are based on their antigenicity.
A rash occurs in 50–80% of those with symptoms in the first or second day of symptoms as flushed skin, or later in the course of illness (days 4–7), as a measles-like rash.
They are then able to enter other white blood cells, such as monocytes and macrophages.
This may include a high fever, headache, vomiting, muscle and joint pains, and a characteristic skin rash.
Severe dengue is defined as that associated with severe bleeding, severe organ dysfunction, or severe plasma leakage while all other cases are uncomplicated.
In testing for IgG and IgM antibodies there may be cross-reactivity with other flaviviruses which may result in a false positive after recent infections or vaccinations with yellow fever virus or Japanese encephalitis.
aegypti'', spread out of Africa in the 15th to 19th centuries due in part to increased globalization secondary to the slave trade.
A rash described as "islands of white in a sea of red" has also been observed.
An infection with dengue is second only to malaria as a diagnosed cause of fever among travelers returning from the developing world.
Terms for severe disease include "infectious thrombocytopenic purpura" and "Philippine", "Thai", or "Singapore hemorrhagic fever".
The highest levels (titres) of IgM are detected following a primary infection, but IgM is also produced in reinfection.
Both IgG and IgM provide protective immunity to the infecting serotype of the virus.
It is the most common viral disease transmitted by arthropods, and has a disease burden estimated at 1,600 disability-adjusted life years per million population.
In subsequent re-infections, levels peak earlier and the titres are usually higher.
Other members of the same genus include yellow fever virus, West Nile virus, St. Louis encephalitis virus, Japanese encephalitis virus, tick-borne encephalitis virus, Kyasanur forest disease virus, and Omsk hemorrhagic fever virus.
There is not enough evidence to determine if corticosteroids have a positive or negative effect in dengue fever.
The alternative name for dengue, "breakbone fever", comes from the associated muscle and joint pains.
Once inside the skin, dengue virus binds to Langerhans cells (a population of dendritic cells in the skin that identifies pathogens).
In the report title he uses the more formal term "bilious remitting fever".
The 1997 classification divided dengue into undifferentiated fever, dengue fever, and dengue hemorrhagic fever.
In severe disease, plasma leakage results in hemoconcentration (as indicated by a rising hematocrit) and hypoalbuminemia.
This makes it one of the most common vector-borne diseases worldwide.
The idea was first agreed upon in 2010 with the first event held in Jakarta, Indonesia in 2011.
Most are transmitted by arthropods (mosquitoes or ticks), and are therefore also referred to as arboviruses (''ar''thropod-''bo''rne viruses).
Humans are the primary host of the virus, but it also circulates in nonhuman primates.
Now that there is a fifth serotype this will need to be factored in.
In 1906, transmission by the ''Aedes'' mosquitoes was confirmed, and in 1907 dengue was the second disease (after yellow fever) that was shown to be caused by a virus.
Secondly, it may be possible to develop specific inhibitors of the viral protease (coded by NS3), which splices viral proteins.
A moderately elevated level of aminotransferase (AST and ALT) from the liver is commonly associated with low platelets and white blood cells.
For more severe cases blood transfusion may be required.
There are ongoing programs working on a dengue vaccine to cover all four serotypes.
Zika fever also has similar symptoms as dengue.
Each year between 50 and 528&nbsp;million people are infected and approximately 10,000 to 20,000 die.
Children often experience symptoms similar to those of the common cold and gastroenteritis (vomiting and diarrhea) and have a greater risk of severe complications, though initial symptoms are generally mild but include high fever.
Severe disease is more common in babies and young children, and in contrast to many other infections, it is more common in children who are relatively well nourished.
From that time until 1940, epidemics were infrequent.
Intravenous hydration, if required, is typically only needed for one or two days.
Reducing open collections of water through environmental modification is the preferred method of control, given the concerns of negative health effects from insecticides and greater logistical difficulties with control agents.
It is based on a weakened combination of the yellow fever virus and each of the four dengue serotypes.
The characteristic symptoms of dengue are sudden-onset fever, headache (typically located behind the eyes), muscle and joint pains, and a rash.
Therefore, travelers returning from endemic areas are unlikely to have dengue if fever or other symptoms start more than 14&nbsp;days after arriving home.
Vertical transmission (from mother to child) during pregnancy or at birth has been reported.
Of the 2.5&nbsp;billion people living in areas where it is common 70% are from Asia and the Pacific.
While each serotype can cause the full spectrum of disease, virus strain is a risk factor.
It is not entirely clear why secondary infection with a different strain of dengue virus places people at risk of dengue hemorrhagic fever and dengue shock syndrome.
It binds to and enters white blood cells, and reproduces inside the cells while they move throughout the body.
In countries such as Singapore, where dengue is endemic, the risk is estimated to be between 1.6 and 6 per 10,000 transfusions.
The fever itself is classically biphasic or saddleback in nature, breaking and then returning for one or two days.
Apart from attempts to control the spread of the ''Aedes'' mosquito there are ongoing efforts to develop antiviral drugs that would be used to treat attacks of dengue fever and prevent severe complications.
In a small proportion of cases, the disease develops into the life-threatening '''dengue hemorrhagic fever''', resulting in bleeding, low levels of blood platelets and blood plasma leakage, or into '''dengue shock syndrome''', where dangerously low blood pressure occurs.
Infections are most commonly acquired in the urban environment.
The dengue virus genome (genetic material) contains about 11,000 nucleotide bases, which code for the three different types of protein molecules (C, prM and E) that form the virus particle  and seven other types of protein molecules (NS1, NS2a, NS2b, NS3, NS4a, NS4b, NS5) that are found in infected host cells only and are required for replication of the virus.
Polymorphisms in the genes for the vitamin D receptor and FcγR seem to offer protection against severe disease in secondary dengue infection.
Another rash may occur with either a maculopapular or a vasculitic appearance, which is followed by peeling of the skin.
'''Dengue fever''' is a mosquito-borne tropical disease caused by the dengue virus.
During this stage, a fluid overload state may occur; if it affects the brain, it may cause a reduced level of consciousness or seizures.
Most people with dengue recover without any ongoing problems.
The term "break-bone fever" was applied by physician and United States Founding Father Benjamin Rush, in a 1789 report of the 1780 epidemic in Philadelphia.
In children with shock due to dengue a rapid dose of 20mL/kg is reasonable.
Those who have other health problems, have "warning signs", or who cannot manage regular follow-up should be cared for in hospital.
It received approval in December 2015.
The first approach is inhibition of the viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (coded by NS5), which copies the viral genetic material, with nucleoside analogs.
Both these species had expanding ranges in the second half of the 20th century.
About 8–10 days later, the virus spreads to other tissues including the mosquito's salivary glands and is subsequently released into its saliva.
Peripheral vascular collapse is determined in children via delayed capillary refill, rapid heart rate, or cold extremities.
All tests may be negative in the early stages of the disease.
This is done by getting rid of open sources of water, or if this is not possible, by adding insecticides or biological control agents to these areas.
The risk of severe disease from secondary infection increases if someone previously exposed to serotype DENV-1 contracts serotype DENV-2 or DENV-3, or if someone previously exposed to DENV-3 acquires DENV-2.
In some people, the disease proceeds to a critical phase as fever resolves.
Other ''Aedes'' species that transmit the disease include ''A.
polynesiensis'' and ''A.
If a person is outside of the critical phase, a loop diuretic such as furosemide may be used to eliminate excess fluid from the circulation.
With regards to vector control, a number of novel methods have been used to reduce mosquito numbers with some success including the placement of the guppy (''Poecilia reticulata'') or copepods in standing water to eat the mosquito larvae.
This may result in fluid accumulation in the chest and abdominal cavity as well as depletion of fluid from the circulation and decreased blood supply to vital organs.
aegypti'' is by eliminating its habitats.
Both IgG and IgM are produced after 5–7 days.
For the decade of the 2000s, 12 countries in Southeast Asia were estimated to have about 3&nbsp;million infections and 6,000 deaths annually.
Dengue has become a global problem since the Second World War and is common in more than 110&nbsp;countries.
The white blood cells respond by producing a number of signaling proteins, such as cytokines and interferons, which are responsible for many of the symptoms, such as the fever, the flu-like symptoms, and the severe pains.
These mosquitoes usually live between the latitudes of 35°&nbsp;North and 35°&nbsp;South below an elevation of .
Dengue shock syndrome is present if pulse pressure drops to ≤&nbsp;20&nbsp;mm&nbsp;Hg along with peripheral vascular collapse.
The primary vector, ''A.
IgG, by contrast, remains detectable for over 60 years and, in the absence of symptoms, is a useful indicator of past infection.
Two studies of a vaccine found it was 60% effective and prevented more than 80 to 90% of severe cases.
Attempts are ongoing to infect the mosquito population with bacteria of the ''Wolbachia'' genus, which makes the mosquitoes partially resistant to dengue virus.
Goals are to increase public awareness about dengue, mobilize resources for its prevention and control and, to demonstrate the Asian region's commitment in tackling the disease.
This increase is believed to be due to a combination of urbanization, population growth, increased international travel, and global warming.
Polymorphisms (normal variations) in particular genes have been linked with an increased risk of severe dengue complications.
Its viral cause and spread were understood by the early 20th century.
The same trends also led to the spread of different serotypes of the disease to new areas, and to the emergence of dengue hemorrhagic fever.
The virus enters the cells through binding between viral proteins and membrane proteins on the Langerhans cell, specifically the C-type lectins called DC-SIGN, mannose receptor and CLEC5A.
Working is still ongoing as of 2015 to determine the best type of ''Wolbachia'' to use.
Some serotypes of dengue virus appear to have mechanisms to slow down this process.
Other person-to-person modes of transmission have also been reported, but are very unusual.
Subsequent infection with a different type increases the risk of severe complications.
Other historical terms include "breakheart fever" and "la dengue".
The viruses are maintained in the forests of Southeast Asia and Africa by transmission from female ''Aedes'' mosquitoes—of species other than ''A.
Various antibodies are generated; some bind closely to the viral proteins and target them for phagocytosis (ingestion by specialized cells and destruction), but some bind the virus less well and appear instead to deliver the virus into a part of the phagocytes where it is not destroyed but is able to replicate further.
The marked spread of dengue during and after the Second World War has been attributed to ecologic disruption.
Nausea and vomiting may also occur.
aegypti'' and other species of ''Aedes'' such as ''A.
The fatality rate is 1–5%, and less than 1% with adequate treatment; however those who develop significantly low blood pressure may have a fatality rate of up to 26%.
The genetic variation in dengue viruses is region specific, suggestive that establishment into new territories is relatively infrequent, despite dengue emerging in new regions in recent decades.
It may be caused by poor binding of non-neutralizing antibodies and delivery into the wrong compartment of white blood cells that have ingested the virus for destruction.
While artificially induced infections with ''Wolbachia'' is effective, it is unclear if naturally acquired infections are protective.
When a mosquito carrying dengue virus bites a person, the virus enters the skin together with the mosquito's saliva.
In 2012 a PCR test was introduced that can run on equipment used to diagnose influenza; this is likely to improve access to PCR-based diagnosis.
It can be difficult to distinguish dengue fever and chikungunya, a similar viral infection that shares many symptoms and occurs in similar parts of the world to dengue.
The first record of a case of probable dengue fever is in a Chinese medical encyclopedia from the Jin Dynasty (265–420&nbsp;AD) which referred to a "water poison" associated with flying insects.
Generalized spraying with organophosphate or pyrethroid insecticides, while sometimes done, is not thought to be effective.
Leaky capillaries (and the critical phase) are thought to be caused by an immune system response.
Grade I is the presence only of easy bruising or a positive tourniquet test in someone with fever, grade II is the presence of spontaneous bleeding into the skin and elsewhere, grade III is the clinical evidence of shock, and grade IV is shock so severe that blood pressure and pulse cannot be detected.
The geographical distribution is around the equator.
The virus has five different types; infection with one type usually gives lifelong immunity to that type, but only short-term immunity to the others.
The tourniquet test, which is particularly useful in settings where no laboratory investigations are readily available, involves the application of a blood pressure cuff at between the diastolic and systolic pressure for five minutes, followed by the counting of any petechial hemorrhages; a higher number makes a diagnosis of dengue more likely with the cut off being more than 10 to 20 per 1&nbsp;inch2 (6.25&nbsp;cm2).
The smallest amount of fluid required to achieve this is recommended.
This critical phase, while rare, occurs relatively more commonly in children and young adults.
About half a million people require admission to hospital a year.
The term dengue fever came into general use only after 1828.
Meanwhile, the virus genome is translated in membrane-bound vesicles on the cell's endoplasmic reticulum, where the cell's protein synthesis apparatus produces new viral proteins that replicate the viral RNA and begin to form viral particles.
Packed red blood cells or whole blood are recommended, while platelets and fresh frozen plasma are usually not.
Rates of dengue increased 30&nbsp;fold between 1960 and 2010.
In severe infection, the virus production inside the body is greatly increased, and many more organs (such as the liver and the bone marrow) can be affected.
Discovery of the structure of the viral proteins may aid the development of effective drugs.
Dengue is common in more than 110 countries.
Dengue virus is primarily transmitted by ''Aedes'' mosquitoes, particularly ''A.
The fifth type was announced in 2013.
Dengue hemorrhagic fever and dengue shock syndrome were first noted in Central and South America in 1981, as DENV-2 was contracted by people who had previously been infected with DENV-1 several years earlier.
The improvement is often striking, and can be accompanied with severe itching and a slow heart rate.
The vaccine is produced by Sanofi and goes by the brand name Dengvaxia.
Typically, people infected with dengue virus are asymptomatic (80%) or have only mild symptoms such as an uncomplicated fever.
As a result, less blood circulates in the blood vessels, and the blood pressure becomes so low that it cannot supply sufficient blood to vital organs.
PCR and viral antigen detection are more accurate in the first seven days.
The World Health Organization counts dengue as one of seventeen neglected tropical diseases.
This is less than wished for by some.
The recovery phase occurs next, with resorption of the leaked fluid into the bloodstream.
A probable diagnosis is based on the findings of fever plus two of the following: nausea and vomiting, rash, generalized pains, low white blood cell count, positive tourniquet test, or any warning sign (see table) in someone who lives in an endemic area.
Some petechiae (small red spots that do not disappear when the skin is pressed, which are caused by broken capillaries) can appear at this point, as may some mild bleeding from the mucous membranes of the mouth and nose.
This may be done by getting rid of or covering standing water and wearing clothing that covers much of the body.
The diagnosis should be considered in anyone who develops a fever within two weeks of being in the tropics or subtropics.
There are five strains of the virus, called serotypes, of which the first four are referred to as DENV-1, DENV-2, DENV-3 and DENV-4.
It infects 50 to 528&nbsp;million people worldwide a year, leading to half a million hospitalizations, and approximately 20,000 deaths.
Paracetamol (acetaminophen) is used for fever and discomfort while NSAIDs such as ibuprofen and aspirin are avoided as they might aggravate the risk of bleeding.
Grades III and IV are referred to as "dengue shock syndrome".
Pleural effusions or ascites can be detected by physical examination when large, but the demonstration of fluid on ultrasound may assist in the early identification of dengue shock syndrome.
Immature virus particles are transported to the Golgi apparatus, the part of the cell where some of the proteins receive necessary sugar chains (glycoproteins).
Other risk factors for severe disease include female sex, high body mass index, and viral load.
Dengue is spread by several species of mosquito of the ''Aedes'' type, principally ''A.
Often, investigations are performed to exclude other conditions that cause similar symptoms, such as malaria, leptospirosis, viral hemorrhagic fever, typhoid fever, meningococcal disease, measles, and influenza.
These changes appear associated with a disordered state of the endothelial glycocalyx, which acts as a molecular filter of blood components.
Blood transfusion is initiated early in people presenting with unstable vital signs in the face of a ''decreasing hematocrit'', rather than waiting for the hemoglobin concentration to decrease to some predetermined "transfusion trigger" level.
A number of tests are available to confirm the diagnosis including detecting antibodies to the virus or its RNA.
DC-SIGN, a non-specific receptor for foreign material on dendritic cells, seems to be the main point of entry.
Warning signs typically occur before the onset of severe dengue.
A feeling of fatigue may last for weeks in adults.
However, early disease can be difficult to differentiate from other viral infections.
They typically bite during the early morning and in the evening, but they may bite and thus spread infection at any time of day.
Further investigations by John Burton Cleland and Joseph Franklin Siler completed the basic understanding of dengue transmission.
There is a suspicion that ADE is not the only mechanism underlying severe dengue-related complications, and various lines of research have implied a role for T cells and soluble factors such as cytokines and the complement system.
The detection of IgG alone is not considered diagnostic unless blood samples are collected 14 days apart and a greater than fourfold increase in levels of specific IgG is detected.
Other processes of interest include infected cells that become necrotic—which affect both coagulation and fibrinolysis (the opposing systems of blood clotting and clot degradation)—and low platelets in the blood, also a factor in normal clotting.
Dengue hemorrhagic fever was subdivided further into grades I–IV.
Fluid from the bloodstream leaks through the wall of small blood vessels into body cavities due to capillary permeability.
There are no specific antiviral drugs for dengue, however maintaining proper fluid balance is important.
Treatment of acute dengue is supportive and includes giving fluid either by mouth or intravenously for mild or moderate disease.
The initial reaction of infected cells is to produce interferon, a cytokine that raises a number of defenses against viral infection through the innate immune system by augmenting the production of a large group of proteins mediated by the JAK-STAT pathway.
Dengue can be life-threatening in people with chronic diseases such as diabetes and asthma.
The primary method of controlling ''A.
Like most arboviruses, dengue virus is maintained in nature in cycles that involve preferred blood-sucking vectors and vertebrate hosts.
A common genetic abnormality, especially in Africans, known as glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency, appears to increase the risk.
Apart from eliminating the mosquitoes, work is ongoing for medication targeted directly at the virus.
Others have more severe illness (5%), and in a small proportion it is life-threatening.
However, these methods appear not to be sufficiently effective, as the frequency of outbreaks appears to be increasing in some areas, probably due to urbanization increasing the habitat of ''A.
The febrile phase involves high fever, potentially over , and is associated with generalized pain and a headache; this usually lasts two to seven days.
In a person with symptoms, the detection of IgM is considered diagnostic.
In recent decades, the expansion of villages, towns and cities in the areas in which it is common, and the increased mobility of people has increased the number of epidemics and circulating viruses.
In all settings the infected lower primates or humans greatly increase the number of circulating dengue viruses, in a process called amplification.
The incubation period (time between exposure and onset of symptoms) ranges from 3 to 14 days, but most often it is 4 to 7 days.
Severe disease is marked by the problems of capillary permeability (an allowance of fluid and protein normally contained within blood to pass) and disordered blood clotting.
The now mature new viruses are released by exocytosis.
After a primary infection, IgG reaches peak levels in the blood after 14–21 days.
Dengue can also be transmitted via infected blood products and through organ donation.
The earliest change detectable on laboratory investigations is a low white blood cell count, which may then be followed by low platelets and metabolic acidosis.
An infection can be acquired via a single bite.
Detection of NS1 during the febrile phase of a primary infection may be greater than 90% sensitive however is only 60–80% in subsequent infections.
There have been descriptions of epidemics in the 17th century, but the most plausible early reports of dengue epidemics are from 1779 and 1780, when an epidemic swept across Asia, Africa and North America.
Dengue fever virus (DENV) is an RNA virus of the family ''Flaviviridae''; genus ''Flavivirus''.
Recovery generally takes less than two to seven days.
Shock (dengue shock syndrome) and hemorrhage (dengue hemorrhagic fever) occur in less than 5% of all cases of dengue, however those who have previously been infected with other serotypes of dengue virus ("secondary infection") are at an increased risk.
