In 1818 white authorities briefly ordered the church closed, for violating slave code rules that prohibited black congregations from holding worship services after sunset.
On July 1, an editorial in the ''Courier'' defended the work of the Court.
In 1964, historian Richard Wade examined the report in comparison to manuscript transcripts of the court proceedings, of which two versions exist.
His son was also judged guilty of conspiracy and was deported from the United States, along with many others.
The court took testimony under "pledges of inviolable secrecy" and "convicted the accused and "sentenced them to death without their seeing the persons, or hearing the voices of those, who testified to their guilt."
In later proceedings, some 30 additional followers were executed.
The other white conspirators' punishments were far more lenient than that of William Allen.
In 1818 he was among founders of a congregation on what was known as the "Bethel circuit" of the African Methodist Episcopal Church (AME Church).
Whites blamed the AME Church, they blamed rising slave literacy, and the African slaves brought from Haiti during its Revolution.
As leading suspects were rounded up by the militia ordered by Intendant/Mayor James Hamilton, the Charleston City Council voted to authorize a Court of Magistrates and Freeholders to evaluate suspects and determine crimes.
Its congregation represented more than 10% of the blacks in the city.
In total, the courts convicted 67 men of conspiracy and hanged 35, including Vesey, in July 1822.
The legislature also passed the Seaman's Act of 1822, requiring free black sailors on ships that docked in Charleston to be imprisoned in the city jail for the period that their ships were in port.
Even after gaining his freedom, Vesey continued to identify and socialize with many slaves.
Economic conditions in the Charleston area became difficult since an economic decline affected the city.
'''Denmark Vesey''' (also '''Telemaque''') (ca.
Due to the vast number of slaves who knew about the planned uprising, Vesey feared that word of the plot would get out.
According to records of the French Consulate in Charleston, his group was reported to have numerous members who were "French Negroes," slaves brought from Saint-Domingue by refugee masters.
This had been organized in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania in 1816 as the first independent black denomination in the United States.
Wilson had to decide whether to join the conspiracy described by Bennett or tell his master that there was a plot in the making.
The Court published its report in 1822 as ''An Official Report of the Trials of Sundry Negroes ...'' This was the first full account, as newspaper coverage had been very restricted during the secret proceedings.
The Court took secret testimony about suspects in custody and accepted evidence against men not yet charged.
Spady concluded that a group had in fact been about to launch the "rising" (as they called it) when their plans were revealed.
Morgan thinks that historians have too often ignored that warning and supports Johnson's close examination of the variations among the Vesey Court records.
Biographer David Robertson suggested that Telemaque may have been of Mande origin, but his evidence has not been generally accepted by historians.
Mayor Hamilton supported a militant approach to controlling slaves and believed that the paternalistic approach of improving treatment of slaves, as promoted by moderate slaveholders such as Bennett, was a mistake.
In addition, it required each free black to have documented white "guardians" to vouch for their character.
He also was pushing state lawmakers to strengthen laws against both mariners and free blacks in South Carolina in general, and anyone supporting slave rebellions in particular.
He was called Telemaque; historian Douglas Egerton suggested that Vesey could have been of Coromantee (an Akan-speaking people) origin.
John Igneshias was given a one hundred dollar fine and three months in prison, as was Jacob Danders.
Judge Bay sentenced the four white men as a warning to any other whites who might think of supporting slave rebels.
He managed to organize thousands of slaves who pledged to participate in his conspiracy.
By 1708, the population of the colony of South Carolina was majority slave, reflecting the numerous African slaves imported to the state as laborers on the rice and indigo plantations.
In his 50s, Vesey was a well-established carpenter with his own business.
Once they secured their weapons, the conspirators planned to commandeer ships from the harbor and sail to Haiti, possibly with Haitian help.
Extremely dependent on slavery, many Charleston residents had been alarmed about the Missouri Compromise of 1820 that restricted slavery from expansion to the western territories, feeling it threatened the future of slavery.
He became increasingly set on helping his new friends break from the bonds of slavery.
Egerton noted that free black carpenter Thomas Brown and other blacks familiar with Vesey or the Reverend Morris Brown, the leader of the AME Church, continued to speak or write about Vesey's plot in later years, supporting conclusions that it did exist.
He took the surname Vesey and the given name of 'Denmark,' after the nation ruling his birthplace of St. Thomas.
By using intimate family ties between those in the countryside and the city, Vesey created an extensive network of supporters
Hamilton ruthlessly pursued the prosecution, Tinkler concluded, because he "believed there was indeed a Vesey plot."
This act was ruled unconstitutional in Federal court, as it violated international treaties between the US and Britain.
He concluded that the report was an attempt by the Court to suggest that formal trials had been held, when the proceedings did not follow accepted procedures for trials and due process.
Planters in Upland areas were developing new plantations of short-staple cotton and needed workers, so the state approved the trade.
It rapidly attracted 1,848 members, making this the second-largest AME congregation in the nation after Mother Bethel in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
He had a good business and a family, but was unable to buy his first wife Beck and their children out of slavery.
Vesey and his followers also planned to kill white slaveholders throughout the city, as had been done in Haiti, and liberate the slaves.
The South Carolina State Arsenal, which became known as the Citadel, was completed in 1829; by then white fears of insurrection had subsided for a time.
In August both Governor Bennett and Mayor Hamilton published accounts of the insurrection and Court proceedings; Bennett downplayed the danger posed by the alleged crisis and argued that the Court's executions and lack of due process damaged the state's reputation.
This made it almost impossible for slaves to gain freedom, even in cases where an individual or family member could pay a purchase price.
Hamilton knew that four of Bennett's household slaves had been arrested as suspects; three were executed on July 2 together with Vesey.
The Mayor James Hamilton was told, and he organized a citizens' militia, putting the city on alert.
He suggests this factor was omitted because that political battle was over; instead, Hamilton identified reasons for the rising that could be prevented or controlled by legislation which he proposed.
In October the Court issued its Report, shaped by Hamilton.
the most important fact about the Report was (and remains) that it tells the story that Hamilton and the Court wanted told.
They were generally considered more tractable than newly enslaved Africans.
Vesey inspired slaves by connecting their potential freedom to the biblical story of the delivery of the children of Israel from Egyptian slavery.
After the Vesey Plot, the legislature further restricted the movement of free blacks and free people of color; if one left the state for any reason, that person could not return.
The church attracted 1848 members, making it the second largest AME church in the nation.
Wilson convinced LaRoche that they must tell his master to prevent the conspiracy from being acted out.
White militias and groups of armed men patrolled the streets daily for weeks until many suspects were arrested by the end of June, including 55-year-old Denmark Vesey.
Soon after the Court began its sessions, in secret and promising secrecy to all witnesses, Supreme Court Justice William Johnson published an article in the local paper recounting an incident of a feared insurrection of 1811.
Charleston officials said there was a large, complex and sophisticated conspiracy led by the "brilliant" Vesey; but Virginia officials downplayed Turner's revolt, stressing that he and his few followers acted alone.
In 1822, beleaguered whites in Charleston uniformly believed that blacks had planned a large insurrection; such a scenario represented their worst fears.
For instance, historians have described Vesey's physical appearance, which was not documented at all in the court record, although free black carpenter Thomas Brown, who on occasion worked with Vesey, described him as a "large, stout man."
Since the mid-20th century, most historians have evaluated the conspiracy in terms of black resistance to slavery, with some focusing on the plot, others on the character of Vesey and his senior leaders, and others on the black unity displayed.
Because Denmark Vesey was a preacher, when he had recruited enough followers, he would review the plans of the revolts with the others at his home during the religious classes.
Wade noted the lack of material evidence: no arms caches or documents related to the rebellion.
Joe LaRoche had originally planned to support the rising and brought the slave Rolla Bennett to discuss plans with George Wilson, his close friend.
Telemaque was purchased at about age 14 by Joseph Vesey, a Bermudian sea captain and slave merchant.
Their accounts of the revolts and its success spread rapidly among Charleston's slaves.
In July the pace of arrests and charges more than doubled, as if to prove there had been a large insurrection that needed controlling.
Colonists from Bermuda had settled here since 1669, and there were many ties.
In a response to Johnson's work, Philip D. Morgan notes that in the 19th century, Vesey was once described as a mulatto or free person of color by William Gilmore Simms.
Following the American Revolution, the captain retired from the sea and slave trade, settling in Charleston, South Carolina.
News of the plan was said to be spread among thousands of blacks throughout Charleston and for tens of miles through plantations along the Carolina coast.
After Vesey and the first five conspirators were executed, the Court had another 82 suspects arrested in July, more than twice as many as had been arrested in June.
In 2001, Michael P. Johnson criticized three histories of Vesey and the conspiracy published in 1999, based on his study of the primary documents.
George Wilson was a mixed-race slave who was deeply loyal to his master.
Charleston officials had a crisis in which not one white person had been killed or injured.
By some accounts, it would have involved thousands of slaves in the city and others on plantations miles away.
The congregations of Emanuel AME Church and the Morris Brown AME Church carry on the legacy of the first AME Church in Charleston.
Ford noted that Hamilton presented those aspects of and reasons for the insurrection that enabled him to gain controls on slavery which he had wanted before the crisis.
William Allen received twelve months in prison and a $1,000 fine, which was the harshest punishment of the four.
These four white men were William Allen, John Igneshias, Andrew S. Rhodes, and Jacob Danders; they were sentenced to varied fines and reasonably short jail time.
In 2004, historian Robert Tinkler, a biographer of Mayor Hamilton, reported that he found no evidence to support Johnson's theory that Hamilton conjured the plot for political gain.
Wade's conclusion that the conspiracy was not well formed, was criticized later by William Freehling and other historians, particularly as Wade was found to have overlooked some material.
Beginning in May, two slaves opposed to Vesey's scheme, George Wilson and Joe LaRoche, gave the first specific testimony about a coming uprising to Charleston officials, saying a "rising" was planned for July 14.
Morgan notes that by keeping silent, these slaves resisted the whites and were the true heroes of the crisis.
From 1804 to 1808, Charleston merchants imported some 75,000 slaves, more than were brought to South Carolina in the 75 years before the Revolution.
Vesey held numerous secret meetings and eventually gained the support of both slaves and free blacks throughout the city and countryside who were willing to fight for his cause.
Perhaps it was of a smaller scale than in some accounts, but he believed men were ready to take action.
Danders had said this publicly after the plot had been revealed; city officials thought his comment suspicious.
Neither slave was coerced nor imprisoned when he testified.
Though officials didn't believe the less specific testimony of Prioleau, they did believe Wilson and LaRoche due to their unimpeachable reputations with their masters.
It shaped the public perception of events, and it was certainly intended to do just that.
He suggested that historians had over-interpreted the available evidence, which was gathered at the end of Vesey's life from the testimony of witnesses under great pressure in court.
After a time, Vesey sold the youth to a planter in French Saint-Domingue (present-day Haiti).
After that, in July the cycle of arrests and judgments sped up, and the suspect pool was greatly expanded.
Morris Brown of the church was forced out of the state; he later became a bishop of the national AME Church.
The church was destroyed and its minister expelled from the city.
In 1820 the state legislature had already restricted manumissions by requiring that any act of manumission (for an individual only) had to be approved by both houses of the legislature.
He is notable as the accused and convicted ringleader of "the rising," a major potential slave revolt planned for the city in June 1822; he was executed.
His enslaved son Sandy Vesey was arrested, judged to have been part of the conspiracy, and included among those deported from the country, probably to Cuba.
1767 &ndash; July 2, 1822) was a literate, skilled carpenter and leader among African Americans in Charleston, South Carolina.
Bennett consulted in writing with Robert Y. Hayne, Attorney General for the state, expressing his concerns about the conduct of the Court and the inability of defendants to confront accusers, yet be subject to execution.
They resented the harassment of city officials.
Despite the threats of whites, few blacks confessed and few provided testimony against the leaders or each other.
He noted that a slave was mistakenly executed in the case, hoping to suggest caution in the Vesey affair.
Learning that the proceedings were conducted in secret, with defendants unable to confront their accusers or hear testimony against them, Governor Thomas Bennett, Jr. had concerns about the legality of the Court, as did his brother-in-law Justice Johnson.
He suggests that Vesey may have faked the seizures in order to escape the particularly brutal conditions on Saint-Domingue.
At the age of 32, he bought his freedom for $600 from Vesey.
Hamilton attributed the insurrection to the influence of black Christianity and the AME African Church, an increase in slave literacy, and misguided paternalism by masters toward slaves.
Connections of kinship and personal relations extended between slaves in the city of Charleston and those on plantations in the Lowcountry, just as those connections existed among the planter class, many of whom had residences (and domestic slaves) in both places.
The remainder of Vesey's family was also affected by the crisis and Court proceedings.
But, the court "found it difficult to get conclusive evidence."
Charleston was a continental hub connected to Bermuda's thriving merchant shipping trade.
He noted how little evidence was found for such a plot: no arms caches were discovered, no firm date appeared to have been set, and no well-organized underground apparatus was found, but both blacks and whites widely believed there was a well-developed insurrection in the works.
He was well respected, having been appointed as Justice by President Thomas Jefferson in 1804.
Vesey's wife Susan later emigrated to Liberia, which the American Colonization Society had established as a colony for freed American slaves.
Their Report has been the basis of historians' interpretations of Vesey's life and the rebellion.
Vesey reportedly advanced the date of the insurrection to June 16.
Danders was found guilty for showing sympathy to the slaves who had been caught trying to support the conspiracy.
No independent black church was established in the city again until after the Civil War, but many black worshippers met secretly.
As suspects were arrested, they were held in the Charleston Workhouse until the newly appointed Court of Magistrates and Freeholders heard evidence against them.
Their proceedings had been held in secret and defendants could not confront their accusers.
But his article appeared to produce a defensive reaction, with white residents defending the Court and the militancy of city forces.
Denmark Vesey began working as an independent carpenter and built up his own business.
Telemaque worked for Joseph Vesey as a personal assistant and interpreter in slave trading, including periods spent in Bermuda, and was known to be fluent in French and Spanish in addition to English.
Vesey told the minister that he would die for a "glorious cause".
City officials always worried about slaves in groups; they closed the church again for a time in 1821, as the City Council warned that its classes were becoming a "school for slaves" (under the slave code, slaves were prohibited from being taught to read).
Vesey was reported as a leader in the congregation, drawing from the Bible to project hope for freedom.
Vesey was about age 55.
Ford contrasted their actions to the approach of Virginia officials after the 1831 Nat Turner's Slave Rebellion, in which slaves killed tens of whites.
It noted in its report covering the second round of court proceedings, that three men sentenced to death implicated "scores of others" when they were promised leniency in punishment.
Johnson's article provoked considerable controversy among historians.
In 1819, Vesey became inspired by the congressional debates over the status of Missouri since slavery appeared to be under attack.
Reports from the judge show that the court believed that Allen was motivated by greed rather than any sympathy for the slaves.
By the late 18th century, slaves were increasingly "country born," that is, native to the United States.
The six men were executed by hanging on July 2; none of the six had confessed and each proclaimed his innocence to the end.
Rather than establish the municipal guard authorized in the act, the State and city entered into an agreement with the US War Department to garrison the Citadel, from those soldiers stationed at Fort Moultrie.
The suspects were allowed visits by ministers; Dr. Benjamin Palmer had visited Vesey when he was sentenced to death.
Open sessions could have allowed the potential for the court to distinguish among varying accounts.
White residents of Charleston feared there could be more whites who wanted to help blacks fight against slavery.
Some historians from 1849 to the 1990s described him as a mulatto, but lacking documentation, since the later 20th century, historians have described him as black.
Historians acknowledge that some witnesses testified under threat of death or torture, but Robertson believes that their affirming accounts appeared to provide details of a plan for rebellion.
In order for the revolt to be successful, Vesey had to recruit others and strengthen his army.
As part of this, in late 1822 the City petitioned the General Assembly "to establish a competent force to act as a municipal guard for the protection of the City of Charleston and its vicinity."
Tensions in the city were at a height, and some residents had doubts about actions taken during the widespread fears and quick rush to judgment.
This meant their future children would also be born into slavery.
Based on numerous discrepancies he found and the lack of material evidence at the time of the "trials," he suggested that the Vesey Conspiracy was mostly "angry talk," and that the plot was not well founded for action.
Vesey worked to gain freedom for his family; he tried to buy his wife but her master would not sell her.
Vesey "hired out" Telemaque as a skilled carpenter, and he joined other artisans, many of them free people of color who had their own community in the city.
Each volunteered his testimony early in the investigation, and LaRoche risked making statements that the court could have construed as self-incriminating.
Within the black population was a growing upper class of free people of color or mulattos, some of whom were slaveholders.
In 2012 Lacy K. Ford gave the keynote address to the South Carolina Historical Association; his subject was interpretation of the Vesey Plot.
By this time he had married an enslaved woman.
Vesey and five slaves were among the first group of men rapidly judged guilty by the secret proceedings of a city-appointed Court and condemned to death; they were executed by hanging on July 2, 1822.
While bickering with Johnson, the Court first published its judgment of guilt of Denmark Vesey and five black slaves, and announced sentencing them to death.
Wilson refused to join the conspiracy and urged both Laroche and Bennett to end their involvement in the plans.
This was to prevent them from interaction with and influencing slaves in the city.
Trial records, however, identified him as a free black man.
He said historians too wholeheartedly accepted such witness testimony as fact, and notes specific "interpretive improvisations."
Other men who seemed simply to "yield their acquiescence" to participating were deported.
Officials made no arrests in the next three days, as if wrapping up their business.
Some of these slaves were sold to the Uplands and other areas, but many of the new Africans were held in Charleston and on nearby Lowcountry plantations.
In 1822 Vesey was alleged to be the ringleader of a planned slave revolt.
When tried in court, Allen admitted to trying to help the slave conspiracy, but said that he did so because he was promised a large sum of money for his services.
The testimonies of these two men confirmed an earlier report coming from another slave named Peter Prioleau.
Vesey became active in the Second Presbyterian Church; in 1818 he was among the founders of an independent AME Church in the city, which had the support of white clergy.
Enlarging the threat posed by Vesey allowed the Lowcountry elite to disband the thriving
Vesey won a lottery and purchased his freedom at age 32.
Their deaths quieted some of the city residents' fears, and the tumult in Charleston about the planned revolt began to die down.
Johnson suggested that, after public criticism, the Court was motivated to prove there was a conspiracy.
Along with many other slaves, Vesey had belonged to the Second Presbyterian church, and chafed against its restrictions on black members.
Following passage of the Seaman's Act, the white minority of Charleston organized the South Carolina Association, essentially to take over enforcement of control of slaves and free blacks in the city.
Historians have found no evidence that any of these men was a known abolitionist; they do not seem to have had contact with each other or any of the plotters of the rebellion.
Lacy K. Ford notes that:
Vesey and his followers were said to be planning to kill slaveholders in Charleston, liberate the slaves, and sail to the black republic of Haiti for refuge.
In the city, the new slaves were referred to as "French Negroes".
Governor Bennett's criticism continued, and he made a separate report to the legislature in the fall of 1822 (he was in his last year in office).
In the year of 1820, Vesey and a few other slaves began to conspire and plan a revolt.
AME church in Charleston and launch a full-fledged, if ultimately unsuccessful, counter-attack against the paternalist insurgency.
The final white defendant, Andrew S. Rhodes, received a sentence of six months and a five hundred dollar fine although there was less evidence against him than any of the other whites.
The state's right to imprison free black sailors became one of the issues in the confrontation between South Carolina and the Federal government over states' rights.
This date was notable in association with the French Revolution, which had first abolished slavery in Saint-Domingue.
His plan was to form first a coordinated attack from multiple sides on the Charleston Meeting Street Arsenal.
Many whites and free people of color had fled to Charleston as refugees during the uprisings, and brought their slaves with them.
Hayne responded that slaves were not protected by the rights available to freemen of ''habeas corpus'' and the Magna Carta, under the state's constitution.
The state, the Lowcountry and city of Charleston had a majority of the population who were slaves of African descent.
The General Assembly agreed and appropriated funds to erect "suitable buildings for an Arsenal, for the deposit of the arms of the State, and a Guard House, and for the use of the municipal guard" or militia.
The court reported that he was born into slavery about 1767 in St. Thomas, at the time a colony of Denmark.
He did not take any action at first, because four of his household slaves were among those accused in the first group with Vesey, and three of these were executed with the leader on July 2.
(Both the city and county populations were majority black; Charleston in 1820 had a population of 14,127 blacks and 10,653 whites.)
''The William and Mary Quarterly'' invited contributions to a "Forum" on the issue, which was published in January 2002.
Biographer Egerton found no evidence of Vesey having epilepsy later in life.
From 1791 to 1803 the Haitian Revolution of slaves and free people of color on Saint-Domingue had embroiled the French colony in violence; blacks gained independence and created the republic of Haiti in 1804.
This elite class controlled the legislature for decades after the American Revolution.
A total of 31 men were transported, 27 reviewed and acquitted, and 38 questioned and released.
Likely born into slavery in St. Thomas, he served a master in Bermuda for some time before being brought to Charleston, where he gained his freedom.
