Although a September 2000 referendum rejected adopting the euro, the country follows the policies set forth in the Economic and Monetary Union of the European Union and meets the economic convergence criteria needed to adopt the euro.
The  '''Kingdom of Denmark''' is a sovereign state that comprises Denmark proper  and two autonomous constituent countries in the North Atlantic Ocean: the Faroe Islands and Greenland.
The country is flat with little elevation; having an average height above sea level of .
, Denmark's largest export partners are Germany, Sweden, the United Kingdom and Norway.
Today Danish photographers such as Astrid Kruse Jensen and Jacob Aue Sobol are active both at home and abroad, participating in key exhibitions around the world.
Faroese and Greenlandic are the official languages of the Faroe Islands and Greenland respectively.
Parliamentary elections are held at least every four years, but it is within the powers of the Prime Minister to ask the Monarch to call for an election before the term has elapsed.
The country ranks as having the world's highest social mobility, a high  level of income equality, is the country with the lowest perceived level of corruption in the world, has one of the world's highest per capita incomes, and one of the world's highest personal income tax rates.
To mitigate environmental degradation and global warming the Danish Government has signed the Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol.
The Faroese home government is defined to be an equal partner with the Danish national government, while the Greenlandic people are defined as a separate people with the right to self-determination.
Denmark qualified six times  consecutively for the European Championships between 1984 and 2004, and won the Championship in 1992; other significant achievements include winning the Confederations Cup in 1995 and reaching the quarter-final of the 1998 World Cup.
Following the Great Northern War (1700–21), Denmark managed to restore control of the parts of Schleswig and Holstein ruled by the house of Holstein-Gottorp in 1721 and 1773, respectively.
Greenlandic or "Kalaallisut" belongs to the Eskimo–Aleut languages; it is closely related to the Inuit languages in Canada, such as Inuktitut, and entirely unrelated to Danish.
Danish design is a term often used to describe a style of functionalistic design and architecture that was developed in the mid-20th century, originating in Denmark.
Much of its law is customary.
German is a recognised minority language in the area of the former South Jutland County (now part of the Region of Southern Denmark), which was part of the German Empire prior to the Treaty of Versailles.
Denmark exercises hegemonic influence in the Danish Realm, devolving powers to handle internal affairs.
Fearing German irredentism, Denmark refused to consider the return of the area without a plebiscite; the two Schleswig Plebiscites took place on 10 February and 14 March 1920, respectively.
Unlike the counties they replaced, the regions are not allowed to levy taxes and the health service is primarily financed by a national health care contribution until 2018('''') combined with funds from both government and municipalities.
This places Denmark above the OECD average and above the other Nordic countries.
Denmark's Muslims make up approximately 3.7% of the population and form the country's second largest religious community and largest minority religion.
The Kingdom of Denmark is a unitary state that comprises, in addition to Denmark proper, two autonomous constituent countries in the North Atlantic Ocean: Greenland and the Faroe Islands.
As the executive branch, the Cabinet is responsible for proposing bills and a budget, executing the laws, and guiding the foreign and internal policies of Denmark.
It establishes a constitutional monarchy—the current monarch is Queen Margrethe II—organised as a parliamentary democracy.
The country consists of a peninsula, Jutland, and an archipelago of 443 named islands, including Zealand and Funen.
During the Pre-Roman Iron Age (500 BC&nbsp;– AD 1), native groups began migrating south, and the first tribal Danes came to the country between the Pre-Roman and the Germanic Iron Age, in the Roman Iron Age (AD 1–400).
Denmark is known for its Carlsberg and Tuborg beers and for its akvavit and bitters.
It is the 13th most competitive economy in the world, and 8th in Europe, according to the World Economic Forum in its ''Global Competitiveness Report 2014–2015''.
Denmark prospered greatly in the last decades of the eighteenth century due to its neutral status allowing it to trade with both sides in the many contemporary wars.
In a 2012 study, Denmark had the highest cancer rate of all countries listed by the World Cancer Research Fund International; researchers suggest the reasons are better reporting, but also lifestyle factors like heavy alcohol consumption, smoking and physical inactivity.
The deforestation has created large swaths of heathland and devastating sand drifts.
Support for free trade is high among the Danish public; in a 2007 poll 76% responded that globalisation is a good thing.
GDP per hour worked was the 13th highest in 2009.
Following World War II, Denmark ended its two-hundred-year-long policy of neutrality.
British control over the waterways between Denmark and Norway proved disastrous to the union's economy and in 1813 Denmark–Norway went bankrupt.
The area and populations of the regions vary widely; for example, the Capital Region, which encompasses the Copenhagen metropolitan area with the exception of the subtracted province East Zeeland but includes the Baltic Sea island of Bornholm, has a population three times larger than that of North Denmark Region, which covers the more sparsely populated area of northern Jutland.
No restrictions apply regarding overtime work, which allows companies to operate 24 hours a day, 365 days a year.
The national sport is football (soccer), with over 320,000 players in more than 1600 clubs.
The position between a continent and an ocean means that weather often changes.
Denmark has an average of 179 days per year with precipitation, on average receiving a total of  per year; autumn is the wettest season and spring the driest.
Other notable airports are Billund Airport, Aalborg Airport, and Aarhus Airport.
Historians believe that before their arrival, most of Jutland and the nearest islands were settled by tribal Jutes.
The judicial system of Denmark is divided between courts with regular civil and criminal jurisdiction and administrative courts with jurisdiction over litigation between individuals and the public administration.
There are no final examinations, but pupils can choose to go to a test when finishing ninth grade (14–15 years old).
Until the 1970s, the state formally recognised "religious societies" by royal decree.
The two territories have their own home governments and parliaments and are effectively self-governing in regards to domestic affairs.
The areas of responsibility for the regional councils are the national health service, social services and regional development.
Land and water pollution are two of Denmark's most significant environmental issues, although much of the country's household and industrial waste is now increasingly filtered and sometimes recycled.
The Government of Denmark operates as a cabinet government, where executive authority is exercised—formally on behalf of the Monarch—by Prime Minister and other cabinet ministers, who head ministries.
In 1643, Swedish armies invaded Jutland and claimed Scania in 1644.
Inspired by the Dutch East India Company, he founded a similar Danish company and planned to claim Ceylon as a colony, but the company only managed to acquire Tranquebar on India's Coromandel Coast.
The World Happiness Report frequently ranks Denmark's population as the happiest in the world.
The astronomical discoveries of Tycho Brahe (1546–1601), Ludwig A. Colding's (1815–88) neglected articulation of the principle of conservation of energy, and the contributions to atomic physics of Niels Bohr (1885–1962) indicate the range of Danish scientific achievement.
Denmark also strongly supported American operations in Afghanistan and has contributed both monetarily and materially to the ISAF.
With the same definition, the most common countries of origin were Poland, Turkey, Germany, Iraq, Romania, Syria, Somalia, Iran, Afghanistan, and Yugoslavia and its successor states.
The number of unemployed people is forecast to be 65,000 in 2015.
In December 2014, the Climate Change Performance Index for 2015 placed Denmark at the top of the table, explaining that although emissions are still quite high, the country was able to implement effective climate protection policies.
The Royal Danish Orchestra is among the world's oldest orchestras.
In the early 11th century, Canute the Great won and united Denmark, England, and Norway for almost 30 years with a Scandinavian army.
This characteristic is called '''' or Law of Jante by Danes.
The level of unemployment benefits is dependent on former employment (the maximum benefit is at 90% of the wage) and at times also on membership of an unemployment fund, which is almost always—but need not be—administered by a trade union, and the previous payment of contributions.
However, the largest share of the financing is still carried by the central government and is financed by general taxation, and only to a minor degree from earmarked contributions.
The Royal Porcelain Factory is famous for the quality of its ceramics and export products worldwide.
Large marine mammals include healthy populations of Harbour porpoise, growing numbers of pinnipeds and occasional visits of large whales, including blue whales and orcas.
On the south-west coast of Jutland, the tide is between , and the tideline moves outward and inward on a  stretch.
Denmark was defeated and obliged to cede Schleswig and Holstein to Prussia.
In radio, DR has a near monopoly, currently broadcasting on all four nationally available FM channels, competing only with local stations.
In 1871, Holger Drachmann and Karl Madsen visited Skagen in the far north of Jutland where they quickly built up one of Scandinavia's most successful artists' colonies specialising in Naturalism and Realism rather than in the traditional approach favoured by the Academy.
It is now possible to drive from Frederikshavn in northern Jutland to Copenhagen on eastern Zealand without leaving the motorway.
Physicist Lene Vestergaard Hau is the first person to stop light, leading to advances in quantum computing, nanoscale engineering and linear optics.
The Danish resistance performed a rescue operation that managed to evacuate several thousand Jews and their families to safety in Sweden before the Germans could send them to death camps.
in the postal services and as bus drivers, and academics.
King Christian used this money to found several towns and fortresses, most notably Glückstadt (founded as a rival to Hamburg) and Christiania.
Danish and Faroese belong to the North Germanic (Nordic) branch of the Indo-European languages, along with Icelandic, Norwegian and Swedish.
The regions are further subdivided into 98 municipalities ('''').
Iceland severed ties to Denmark and became an independent republic in 1944; Germany surrendered in May 1945; in 1948, the Faroe Islands gained home rule; in 1949, Denmark became a founding member of NATO.
Denmark's armed forces are known as the Danish Defence ().
In 1969, Denmark was the first country to legalise pornography, and in 2012, Denmark replaced its "registered partnership" laws, which it had been the first country to introduce in 1989, with gender-neutral marriage.
'''Source:'''  Regional and municipal key figures
Denmark has been inhabited since around 12,500 BC and agriculture has been evident since 3900 BC.
Denmark's numerous beaches and resorts are popular locations for fishing, canoeing, kayaking, and many other water-themed sports.
Students aged 18 or above may apply for state educational support grants, known as ''Statens Uddannelsesstøtte (SU)'' which provides fixed financial support, disbursed monthly.
Cycling in Denmark is a common form of transport, particularly for the young and for city dwellers.
It is drained by a dozen or so rivers, and the most significant include the Gudenå, Odense, Skjern, Suså and Vidå—a river that flows along its southern border with Germany.
However, decisions by the highest courts in Greenland and the Faroe Islands may be appealed to the Danish High Courts.
The purpose of the tax is to discourage car ownership.
Denmark is a net exporter of food and energy and has for a number of years had a balance of payments surplus while battling an equivalent of approximately 39% of GNP foreign debt or more than DKK 300&nbsp;billion.
Roskilde Festival near Copenhagen is the largest music festival in Northern Europe since 1971 and Denmark has many recurring music festivals of all genres throughout, including Aarhus International Jazz Festival, Skanderborg Festival, The Blue Festival in Aalborg, Esbjerg International Chamber Music Festival and Skagen Festival among many others.
Employers can hire and fire whenever they want (flexibility), and between jobs, unemployment compensation is very high (security).
Thus, much of the next 125 years of Scandinavian history revolves around this union, with Sweden breaking off and being re-conquered repeatedly.
In the Napoleonic Wars, Denmark traded with both France and the United Kingdom and joined the League of Armed Neutrality with Russia, Sweden, and Prussia.
Establishing a business can be done in a matter of hours and at very low costs.
Like other Nordic countries, Denmark has adopted the Nordic Model which combines free market capitalism with a comprehensive welfare state and strong worker protection.
It shares a border of  with Germany to the south and is otherwise surrounded by  of tidal shoreline (including small bays and inlets).
In 1397, Denmark entered into a personal union with Norway and Sweden, united under Queen Margaret I.
Karen Blixen is famous for her novels and short stories.
These initiatives are often described by the authorities as part of a new "active foreign policy" of Denmark.
The Faroe Islands gained home rule in 1948 and Greenland in 1979, having previously had the status of counties.
The highest natural point is Møllehøj, at .
As a result of its acclaimed "flexicurity" model, Denmark has the most free labour market in Europe, according to the World Bank.
Denmark is also home to smaller mammals, such as polecats, hares and hedgehogs.
Denmark has a total area of , and a population of 5.7&nbsp;million.
In addition, Denmark annually receives a number of citizens from Western countries, notably Nordic countries, the EU, and North America, who seek residency to work or study for a definite period of time.
Denmark's economy stands out as one of the most free in the Index of Economic Freedom and the Economic Freedom of the World.
Denmark has a competitive corporate tax rate of 24.5% and a special time-limited tax regime for expatriates.
Among Kierkegaard's other followers include Jean-Paul Sartre who was impressed with Kierkegaard's views on the individual, and Rollo May, who helped create humanistic psychology.
After Sweden permanently broke away from the personal union, Denmark tried on several occasions to reassert control over its neighbour.
Life science is a key sector with extensive research and development activities.
Charles X Gustav quickly regretted not having wrecked Denmark and in August 1658, he began a two-year-long siege of Copenhagen but failed to take the capital.
The inhabitants of Denmark are there called "tani" (), or "Danes", in the accusative.
Neither the Faroe Islands nor Greenland are members of the Union, the Faroese having declined membership of the EEC in 1973 and Greenland in 1986, in both cases because of fisheries policies.
1955, neo-surrealism) and Simone Aaberg Kærn (b.
The Liberal Party and the Conservative People's Party have also led centre-right governments.
The Danish Vikings were most active in the eastern and southern British Isles and Western Europe.
The Danish Defence has around 1,400 staff in international missions, not including standing contributions to NATO SNMCMG1.
The first known Danish literature is myths and folklore from the 10th and 11th century.
With a network of bicycle routes extending more than 12,000&nbsp;km and an estimated 7,000&nbsp;km of segregated dedicated bicycle paths and lanes, Denmark has a solid bicycle infrastructure.
Private vehicles are increasingly used as a means of transport.
The deterioration of the Kingdom of Norway, caused by the Black Death, made it possible for Denmark to inherit an expansive colonial empire from this union—of which the Faroe Islands and Greenland are remnants.
A sizeable portion of Denmark's terrain consists of rolling plains whilst the coastline is sandy, with large dunes in northern Jutland.
In 1834, the first liberal, factual newspaper appeared, and the 1849 Constitution established lasting freedom of the press in Denmark.
Denmark is a representative democracy with universal suffrage.
Because of the high registration tax (150%), VAT (25%), and one of the world's highest income tax rates, new cars are very expensive.
The Jutes migrated to Great Britain eventually, some as mercenaries by Brythonic King Vortigern, and were granted the south-eastern territories of Kent, the Isle of Wight and other areas, where they settled.
For specific professions, there is vocational education, training young people for work in specific trades by a combination of teaching and apprenticeship.
The total circulation was 500,000 daily in 1901, more than doubling to 1.2 million in 1925.
Painting has continued to be a prominent form of artistic expression in Danish culture, inspired by and also influencing major international trends in this area.
The regions were created on 1 January 2007 to replace the sixteen former counties.
These ''sui generis'' municipalities were incorporated into the new regions under the 2007 reforms.
As Denmark has no minimum wage legislation, the high wage floor has been attributed to the power of trade unions.
This loss came as the latest in the long series of defeats and territorial loss that had begun in the 17th century.
Denmark's currency, the ''krone'' (DKK), is pegged at approximately 7.46 kroner per euro through the ERM.
This led to the so-called Danish-British Gunboat War.
Most Danish painters of modern times has also been very active with other forms of artistic expressions, such as sculpting, ceramics, art installations, activism, film and experimental architecture.
Today, Denmark is part of the European Union's internal market, which represents more than 508 million consumers.
Danish mass media and news programming are dominated by a few large corporations.
Copenhagen has a rapid transit system, the Copenhagen Metro, and an extensive electrified suburban railway network, the S-train.
Danish is more distantly related to German, which is a West Germanic language.
After the dissolution of the union with Norway, Denmark kept the possessions of Iceland (which retained the Danish monarchy until 1944), the Faroe Islands and Greenland, all of which had been governed by Norway for centuries.
An industrialised exporter of agricultural produce in the second half of the 19th century, Denmark introduced social and labour-market reforms in the early 20th century that created the basis for the present welfare state model with a highly developed mixed economy.
In the Thirty Years' War, Christian tried to become the leader of the Lutheran states in Germany but suffered a crushing defeat at the Battle of Lutter.
Especially DR is famous for its high quality TV-series often sold to foreign broadcast and often with strong leading female characters like internationally known actresses Sidse Babett Knudsen and Sofie Gråbøl.
All bills passed must be presented before the Council of State to receive Royal Assent within thirty days in order to become law.
Additionally, roughly two in five have complementary private insurance to cover services not fully covered by the state, such as physiotherapy.
Another renowned Danish actor Nikolaj Coster-Waldau is internationally known for playing the role of Jaime Lannister in the critically acclaimed HBO series ''Game of Thrones''.
This relatively new situation has stirred some internal critique, but the Danish population has generally been very supportive, in particular of the War in Afghanistan.
Pupils can alternatively attend an independent school (), or a private school (), such as Christian schools or Waldorf schools.
At the same time, smaller municipalities were merged into larger units, reducing the number from 270.
Denmark is an historically homogeneous nation.
The first recorded use of the word ''Danmark'' within Denmark itself is found on the two Jelling stones, which are runestones believed to have been erected by Gorm the Old () and Harald Bluetooth ().
Denmark's electricity sector has integrated energy sources such as wind power into the national grid.
In 1682 the state granted limited recognition to three religious groups dissenting from the Established Church: Roman Catholicism, the Reformed Church and Judaism, although conversion to these groups from the Church of Denmark remained illegal initially.
They were later absorbed or ethnically cleansed by the invading Angles and Saxons, who formed the Anglo-Saxons.
In printed media JP/Politikens Hus and Berlingske Media, between them, control the largest newspapers ''Politiken'', ''Berlingske Tidende'' and ''Jyllands-Posten'' and major tabloids ''B.T.''
Denmark has a universal health care system, characterised by being publicly financed through taxes and, for most of the services, run directly by the regional authorities.
A productive period of Historicism ultimately merged into the 19th-century National Romantic style.
There are five Danish heritage sites inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage list in Northern Europe: Christiansfeld, a Moravian Church Settlement, the Jelling Mounds (Runic Stones and Church), Kronborg Castle,  Roskilde Cathedral, and The par force hunting landscape in North Zealand.
, Denmark has a life expectancy of 79.5 years at birth (77 for men, 82 for women), up from 75 years in 1990.
The position of prime minister belongs to the person most likely to command the confidence of a majority in the Folketing; this is usually the current leader of the largest political party or, more effectively, through a coalition of parties.
The Danes rejected the euro as the national currency in a referendum in 2000.
In 2015, Denmark contributed 0.85% of its gross national income (GNI) to foreign aid and was one of only six countries meeting the longstanding UN target of 0.7% of GNI.
Notable Danish footballers include Allan Simonsen, named the best player in Europe in 1977, Peter Schmeichel, named the "World's Best Goalkeeper" in 1992 and 1993, and Michael Laudrup, named the best Danish player of all time by the Danish Football Association.
Following graduation from compulsory education, there are several continuing educational opportunities; the Gymnasium (STX) attaches importance in teaching a mix of humanities and science, Higher Technical Examination Programme (HTX) focuses on scientific subjects and the Higher Commercial Examination Programme emphasises on subjects in economics.
In the 20th century, Danes have also been innovative in several fields of the technology sector.
The island of Bornholm is located east of the rest of the country, in the Baltic Sea.
Evidence of strong Celtic cultural influence dates from this period in Denmark and much of North-West Europe and is among other things reflected in the finding of the Gundestrup cauldron.
The result was that the Catholic army under Albrecht von Wallenstein was able to invade, occupy, and pillage Jutland, forcing Denmark to withdraw from the war.
The Danish Parliament is called the Folketing ().
1969, superrealism).
The administrative divisions are led by directly elected councils, elected proportionally every four years; the most recent Danish local elections were held on 19 November 2013.
Denmark has the fourth highest ratio of tertiary degree holders in the world.
During peacetime, the Ministry of Defence employs around 33,000 in total.
The main military branches employ almost 27,000: 15,460 in the Royal Danish Army, 5,300 in the Royal Danish Navy and 6,050 in the Royal Danish Air Force (all including conscripts).
There is no taxation, however, on proceeds gained from selling one's home (provided there ''was'' any home equity ()), as the marginal tax rate on capital income from housing savings is around 0%.
Neoclassicism from France was slowly adopted by native Danish architects who increasingly participated in defining architectural style.
The languages are so closely related that it is possible for Danish, Norwegian and Swedish speakers to understand each other with relatively little effort.
Aksel V. Johannesen
In 1666, Anders Bording, the father of Danish journalism, began a state paper.
Region of Southern Denmark
Denmark, with a total area of , is divided into five administrative regions ().
Greenland gained home rule in 1979 and was awarded self-determination in 2009.
Danish films have been noted for their realism, religious and moral themes, sexual frankness and technical innovation.
26%); agricultural products and others for consumption 18.7% (in 2009 meat and meat products were 5.5% of total export; fish and fish products 2.9%).
Newspapers flourished in the second half of the 19th century, usually tied to one or another political party or trade union.
The modern pop and rock scene has produced a few names of note internationally, including MØ, Aqua, Lukas Graham, D-A-D, Oh Land, The Raveonettes, Michael Learns to Rock, Alphabeat, Kashmir, Mew and Volbeat, among others.
It is believed that Denmark became Christian for political reasons so as not to get invaded by the rising Christian power in Europe, the Holy Roman Empire, which was an important trading area for the Danes.
For example, as the result of a collective bargaining agreement between the 3F trade union and the employers group Horesta, workers at McDonald's and other fast food chains make the equivalent of US$20 an hour, which is more than double what their counterparts earn in the United States, and have access to five weeks' paid vacation, parental leave and a pension plan.
Danish companies have been influential in the shipping industry with the design of the largest and most energy efficient container ships in the world, the Maersk Triple E class, and Danish engineers have contributed to the design of MAN Diesel engines.
A circle enclosing the same area as Denmark would be  in diameter with a circumference of .
The islands are characterised by flat, arable land and sandy coasts, low elevation and a temperate climate.
70% of trade flows are inside the European Union.
This includes impressionism and the modernist styles of expressionism, abstract painting and surrealism.
All university and college (tertiary) education in Denmark is free of charges; there are no tuition fees to enrol in courses.
Although once extensively forested, today Denmark largely consists of arable land.
Danish philosophy has a long tradition as part of Western philosophy.
Capital Region of Denmark
This includes Geranium and Noma in Copenhagen.
Approximately 400 bird species inhabit Denmark and about 160 of those breed in the country.
Denmark shares strong cultural and historic ties with its Scandinavian neighbours Sweden and Norway.
In the late 19th century, literature was seen as a way to influence society.
