Thus, a crown may be needed.
Destroyed tooth structure does not fully regenerate, although remineralization of very small carious lesions may occur if dental hygiene is kept at optimal level.
Caries occur more often in people from the lower end of the socioeconomic scale than people from the upper end of the socioeconomic scale.
In the case of reparative dentin, other cells are needed to assume the role of the destroyed odontoblasts.
However, the risk factors and stages of development are similar.
It is the primary pathological cause of tooth loss in children.
As the enamel and dentin are destroyed, the cavity becomes more noticeable.
Topical fluoride is more highly recommended than systemic intake such as by tablets or drops to protect the surface of the teeth.
Fluoride treatment can help recalcification of tooth enamel as well as use of amorphous calcium phosphate.
Complications such as cavernous sinus thrombosis and Ludwig angina can be life-threatening.
Local anesthetics, nitrous oxide ("laughing gas"), or other prescription medications may be required in some cases to relieve pain during or following treatment or to relieve anxiety during treatment.
Over a million years ago, hominins such as Australopithecus suffered from cavities.
This communication can be improved by calling the child by their name, using eye contact and including them in any conversation about their treatment.
This can be likened to placing a glass container over a candle, which burns itself out once the oxygen is used up.
Most importantly, whether the carious lesion is cavitated or noncavitated dictates the management.
After tooth formation, the ameloblasts, which produce enamel, are destroyed once enamel formation is complete and thus cannot later regenerate enamel after its destruction.
Prevention includes: regular cleaning of the teeth, a diet low in sugar, and small amounts of fluoride.
Medications, such as antihistamines and antidepressants, can also impair salivary flow.
A Sumerian text from 5000 BC describes a "tooth worm" as the cause of caries.
The mouth contains a wide variety of oral bacteria, but only a few specific species of bacteria are believed to cause dental caries: ''Streptococcus mutans'' and ''Lactobacillus'' species among them.
In the presence of sugar and other carbohydrates, bacteria in the mouth produce acids that can demineralize enamel, dentin, and cementum.
Vaccines are also under development.
The classic DMF (decay/missing/filled) index is one of the most common methods for assessing caries prevalence as well as dental treatment needs among populations.
Bacteria can penetrate the enamel to reach dentin, but then the outer surface may remineralize, especially if fluoride is present.
Australia, Nepal, and Sweden (where children receive dental care paid for by the government) have a low incidence of cases of dental caries among children, whereas cases are more numerous in Costa Rica and Slovakia.
In general, early treatment is quicker and less expensive than treatment of extensive decay.
Four things are required for caries formation: a tooth surface (enamel or dentin), caries-causing bacteria, fermentable carbohydrates (such as sucrose), and time.
Besides lead, all atoms with electrical charge and ionic radius similar to bivalent calcium,
The name for this type of caries comes from the fact that the decay usually is a result of allowing children to fall asleep with sweetened liquids in their bottles or feeding children sweetened liquids multiple times during the day.
The differential diagnosis for dental caries includes dental fluorosis and developmental defects of the tooth including hypomineralization of the tooth and hypoplasia of the tooth.
There is no known method to grow back large amounts of tooth.
In dentin from the deepest layer to the enamel, the distinct areas affected by caries are the advancing front, the zone of bacterial penetration, and the zone of destruction.
Extractions may also be preferred by people unable or unwilling to undergo the expense or difficulties in restoring the tooth.
Often enamel which overlies decayed dentin must also be removed as it is unsupported and susceptible to fracture.
Professional hygiene care consists of regular dental examinations and professional prophylaxis (cleaning).
Tertiary dentin is produced to protect the pulp for as long as possible from the advancing bacteria.
Later, in the 1950s in the USA, Keyes and Fitzgerald working with hamsters showed that caries was transmissible and caused by an acid-producing ''Streptococcus''.
The zones of bacterial penetration and destruction are the locations of invading bacteria and ultimately the decomposition of dentin.
In most people, disorders or diseases affecting teeth are not the primary cause of dental caries.
Bacteria in a person's mouth convert glucose, fructose, and most commonly sucrose (table sugar) into acids such as lactic acid through a glycolytic process called fermentation.
After these protective responses, the dentin is considered sclerotic.
Since sclerotic dentin prevents the passage of such fluids, pain that would otherwise serve as a warning of the invading bacteria may not develop at first.
Along with oral hygiene, radiographs may be taken at dental visits to detect possible dental caries development in high risk areas of the mouth (e.g.
These defense mechanisms include the formation of sclerotic and tertiary dentin.
As a result, medical conditions that reduce the amount of saliva produced by salivary glands, in particular the submandibular gland and parotid gland, are likely to lead to dry mouth and thus to widespread tooth decay.
However oral hygiene is probably more effective at preventing gum disease (periodontal disease) than tooth decay.
The early carious lesion is characterized by demineralization of the tooth surface, altering the tooth's optical properties.
Unlike enamel, the dentin reacts to the progression of dental caries.
This results in a constriction of the tubules, which is an attempt to slow the bacterial progression.
The teeth at highest risk for carious lesions are the permanent first and second molars due to length of time in oral cavity and presence of complex surface anatomy.
In highly progressed cases, infection can spread from the tooth to the surrounding soft tissues.
After brushing with fluoride toothpaste, rinsing should be avoided and the excess spat out.
In Pakistan, teeth dating from around 5500 BC to 7000 BC show nearly perfect holes from primitive dental drills.
For dental health, frequency of sugar intake is more important than the amount of sugar consumed.
Early in its development, caries may affect only enamel.
Once a lesion has cavitated, especially if dentin is involved, remineralization is much more difficult and a dental restoration is usually indicated ("operative treatment").
The outer more superficial zone is highly infected with proteolytic degradation of the collagen matrix and as a result the dentin is irreversibly demineralised.
The caries disease process does not have an inevitable outcome, and different individuals will be susceptible to different degrees depending on the shape of their teeth, oral hygiene habits, and the buffering capacity of their saliva.
The use of dental sealants is a means of prevention.
This deprives resident plaque bacteria of carbohydrate, preventing the formation of pit and fissure caries.
Forms are available for risk assessment for caries when treating dental cases; this system using the evidence-based Caries Management by Risk Assessment (CAMBRA).
Thus, when root surfaces of teeth are exposed from gingival recession or periodontal disease, caries can develop more readily.
For the small lesions, topical fluoride is sometimes used to encourage remineralization.
Thus ''caries'' was not traditionally a plural word synonymous with ''holes'' or ''cavities''; that is, it was not the plural form of any singular form ''cary'' meaning hole or cavity.
The impact such sugars have on the progress of dental caries is called cariogenicity.
Grooves on the occlusal surfaces of molar and premolar teeth provide microscopic retention sites for plaque bacteria, as do the interproximal sites.
Enamel is a highly mineralized acellular tissue, and caries act upon it through a chemical process brought on by the acidic environment produced by bacteria.
Also, chewy and sticky foods (such as candy, cookies, potato chips, and crackers) tend to adhere to teeth longer.
Exposure of children to secondhand tobacco smoke is associated with tooth decay.
On the other hand, dentin is produced continuously throughout life by odontoblasts, which reside at the border between the pulp and dentin.
Because the cementum enveloping the root surface is not nearly as durable as the enamel encasing the crown, root caries tends to progress much more rapidly than decay on other surfaces.
* Class III - interproximal surfaces of anterior teeth without incisal edge involvement
These forms of classification can be used to characterize a particular case of tooth decay in order to more accurately represent the condition to others and also indicate the severity of tooth destruction.
The disease is most common in the developed world due to greater simple sugar consumption and less common in the developing world.
Traditionally teeth are shaved down to make room for the crown but, more recently, stainless steel crowns have been used to seal decay into the tooth and stop it progressing.
A person experiencing caries may not be aware of the disease.
In certain cases, endodontic therapy may be necessary for the restoration of a tooth.
The advancing front represents a zone of demineralised dentin due to acid and has no bacteria present.
At the same time, there is an increase of mineralization of the surrounding tubules.
Tobacco use is a significant risk factor for periodontal disease, which can cause the gingiva to recede.
Techniques such as stepwise caries removal are designed to avoid exposure of the dental pulp and overall reduction of the amount of tooth substance which requires removal before the final filling is placed.
Death of the pulp tissue and infection are common consequences.
Dental caries can occur on any surface of a tooth that is exposed to the oral cavity, but not the structures that are retained within the bone.
Where the deep developmental grooves of teeth are more numerous and exaggerated, pit and fissure caries is more likely to develop (see next section).
Bacteria collect around the teeth and gums in a sticky, creamy-coloured mass called plaque, which serves as a biofilm.
Before a restoration can be placed, all of the decay must be removed otherwise it will continue to progress underneath the filling.
During every exposure to the acidic environment, portions of the inorganic mineral content at the surface of teeth dissolve and can remain dissolved for two hours.
The translucent zone is the first visible sign of caries and coincides with a one to two percent loss of minerals.
The canals are instrumented with endodontic files to clean and shape them, and they are then usually filled with a rubber-like material called gutta percha.
Visual and tactile inspection along with radiographs are employed frequently among dentists, in particular to diagnose pit and fissure caries.
Since the carious process is reversible before a cavity is present, it may be possible to arrest the caries with fluoride and remineralize the tooth surface.
Experiments on rats have shown that a high-sucrose, cariogenic diet "significantly suppresses the rate of fluid motion" in dentin.
'', ''Nocardia spp.
A toothbrush can be used to remove plaque on accessible surfaces, but not between teeth or inside pits and fissures on chewing surfaces.
He found that bacteria inhabited the mouth and that they produced acids that dissolved tooth structures when in the presence of fermentable carbohydrates.
In 1924 in London, Killian Clarke described a spherical bacterium in chains isolated from carious lesions which he called ''Streptococcus'' ''mutans''.
From the deepest layer of the enamel to the enamel surface, the identified areas are the: translucent zone, dark zones, body of the lesion, and surface zone.
Miller conducted a series of studies that led him to propose an explanation for dental caries that was influential for current theories.
Another pattern of decay is "rampant caries", which signifies advanced or severe decay on multiple surfaces of many teeth.
Mothers are also recommended to avoid sharing utensils and cups with their infants to prevent transferring bacteria from the mother's mouth.
Dental caries is uncommon among companion animals.
It was not until the late 1960s that it became generally accepted that the ''Streptococcus'' isolated from hamster caries was the same as ''S''.
It is still unknown if the identification of high-risk individuals can lead to more effective long-term patient management that prevents caries initiation and arrests or reverses the progression of lesions.
Learning their training from apprenticeships, these health providers were quite successful in ending tooth pain and likely prevented systemic spread of infections in many cases.
This occurs due to acid made from food debris or sugar on the tooth surface.
In response to dental caries, there may be production of more dentin toward the direction of the pulp.
Food is forced inside pits and fissures under chewing pressure, leading to carbohydrate-fueled acid demineralisation where the brush, fluoride toothpaste, and saliva have no access to remove trapped food, neutralise acid, or remineralise demineralised tooth like on other more accessible tooth surfaces.
This leaves a greater concentration of fluoride residue on the teeth.
Other adjunct oral hygiene aids include interdental brushes, water picks, and mouthwashes.
Reparative dentin is produced at an average of 1.5&nbsp;μm/day, but can be increased to 3.5&nbsp;μm/day.
Screening can result in earlier detection.
The goal of treatment is to preserve tooth structures and prevent further destruction of the tooth.
These are usually made of metal (usually stainless steel but increasingly there are aesthetic materials).
For children, preformed crowns are available to place over the tooth.
Miller's contribution, along with the research on plaque by G.V.
Complications may include inflammation of the tissue around the tooth, tooth loss, and infection or abscess formation.
Proximal caries take an average of four years to pass through enamel in permanent teeth.
Chewing fibre like celery after eating forces saliva inside trapped food to dilute any carbohydrate like sugar, neutralise acid and remineralise demineralised tooth.
A sealant is a thin plastic-like coating applied to the chewing surfaces of the molars to prevent food from being trapped inside pits and fissures.
The affected areas of the tooth change color and become soft to the touch.
The diameter of the dentinal tubules is largest near the pulp (about 2.5&nbsp;μm) and smallest (about 900&nbsp;nm) at the junction of dentin and enamel.
In the Roman Empire, wider consumption of cooked foods led to a small increase in caries prevalence.
* Class II - proximal surfaces of posterior teeth
Fluoride may be from water, salt or toothpaste among other sources.
For other kids aged 12-18 months, dental caries develop on primary teeth and approximately twice yearly for permanent teeth.
This explanation is known as the chemoparasitic caries theory.
If left in contact with the tooth, these acids may cause demineralization, which is the dissolution of its mineral content.
Once the extent of decay reaches the deeper layer of dentin, the term "dentinal caries" is used.
The carious process can begin within days of a tooth's erupting into the mouth if the diet is sufficiently rich in suitable carbohydrates.
Risk factors include conditions that result in less saliva such as: diabetes mellitus, Sjogren's syndrome and some medications.
This may include a fluoride toothpaste or mouthwash or varnish.
Although the term "cementum caries" may be used to describe the decay on roots of teeth, very rarely does caries affect the cementum alone.
Enamel begins to demineralize at a pH of 5.5.
However, cariogenic bacteria (the ones that can cause the disease) are present in dental plaque, but they are usually in too low concentrations to cause problems unless there is a shift in the balance.
A slight remineralization of enamel occurs in the dark zone, which serves as an example of how the development of dental caries is an active process with alternating changes.
Children at 6-12 months are at increased risk of developing dental caries.
An extraction can also serve as treatment for dental caries.
The oral health assessment should include checking the child’s history, a clinical examination, checking the risk of caries in the child including the state of their occlusion and assessing how well equipped the child’s parent or carer is to help the child prevent caries.
The tooth is filled and a crown can be placed.
Such management of a carious lesion is termed "non-operative" since no drilling is carried out on the tooth.
Skulls dating from a million years ago through the neolithic period show signs of caries, including those from the Paleolithic and Mesolithic ages.
During the Sargonid dynasty of Assyria during 668 to 626 BC, writings from the king's physician specify the need to extract a tooth due to spreading inflammation.
The primary focus of brushing and flossing is to remove and prevent the formation of plaque or dental biofilm.
The surface zone remains relatively mineralized and is present until the loss of tooth structure results in a cavitation.
Brushing the teeth twice per day and flossing between the teeth once a day is recommended by many.
For larger lesions, the progression of dental caries can be stopped by treatment.
Caries can be classified by location, etiology, rate of progression, and affected hard tissues.
Archaeological evidence shows that tooth decay is an ancient disease dating far into prehistory.
Sealants are usually applied on the teeth of children, as soon as the teeth erupt but adults are receiving them if not previously performed.
Water fluoridation also lowers the risk of tooth decay.
This diminishes the ability for dental caries to progress within the dentinal tubules.
Before colonization, North American Indians subsisted on hunter-gatherer diets, but afterwards there was a greater reliance on maize agriculture, which made these groups more susceptible to caries.
These caries, sometimes referred to as "hidden caries", will still be visible on X-ray radiographs, but visual examination of the tooth would show the enamel intact or minimally perforated.
Treatment consisted mainly of herbal remedies and charms, but sometimes also included bloodletting.
Plaque consists mostly of bacteria.
Fluoride helps prevent decay of a tooth by binding to the hydroxyapatite crystals in enamel.
Since teeth are vulnerable during these acidic periods, the development of dental caries relies heavily on the frequency of acid exposure.
Sometimes caries may be directly visible.
In some instances, caries is described in other ways that might indicate the cause.
A tooth weakened by extensive internal decay can sometimes suddenly fracture under normal chewing forces.
The process is dynamic, however, as remineralization can also occur if the acid is neutralized by saliva or mouthwash.
Worldwide, approximately 2.43&nbsp;billion people (36% of the population) have dental caries in their permanent teeth.
In the United States, dental caries is the most common chronic childhood disease, being at least five times more common than asthma.
Since demineralization of enamel by caries, in general, follows the direction of the enamel rods, the different triangular patterns between pit and fissure and smooth-surface caries develop in the enamel because the orientation of enamel rods are different in the two areas of the tooth.
The more frequently teeth are exposed to this environment, the more likely dental caries is to occur.
Consequently, dental caries may progress for a long period of time without any sensitivity of the tooth, allowing for greater loss of tooth structure.
Technology utilizing laser speckle image (LSI) techniques may provide a diagnostic aid to detect early carious lesions.
The number of cases has decreased in some developed countries, and this decline is usually attributed to increasingly better oral hygiene practices and preventive measures such as fluoride treatment.
The diet of the “newly industrialized English working class” then became centered on bread, jam, and sweetened tea, greatly increasing both sugar consumption and caries.
As time progresses, the pH returns to normal due to the buffering capacity of saliva and the dissolved mineral content of tooth surfaces.
Primary diagnosis involves inspection of all visible tooth surfaces using a good light source, dental mirror and explorer.
This can occur, for example, when children continuously drink sugary drinks from baby bottles (see later discussion).
Also, chewing gum containing xylitol (a sugar alcohol) is widely used to protect teeth in many countries now.
As the cementum of root surfaces is more easily demineralized than enamel surfaces, a wider variety of bacteria can cause root caries, including ''Lactobacillus acidophilus'', ''Actinomyces spp.
Early, uncavitated caries is often diagnosed by blowing air across the suspect surface, which removes moisture and changes the optical properties of the unmineralized enamel.
These bacterial strains, most notably ''S.
Many dental professionals include application of topical fluoride solutions as part of routine visits and recommend the use of xylitol and amorphous calcium phosphate products.
The availability of treatment is often poor in the developing world.
Disclosing solutions are also used during tooth restoration to minimize the chance of recurrence.
Chewing and stimulation of flavor receptors on the tongue are also known to increase the production and release of saliva, which contains natural buffers to prevent the lowering of pH in the mouth to the point where enamel may become demineralized.
Crowns are often made of gold, porcelain, or porcelain fused to metal.
"bitewing" X-rays which visualize the crowns of the back teeth).
* Class IV - interproximal surfaces of anterior teeth with incisal edge involvement
Nonetheless, countries that have experienced an overall decrease in cases of tooth decay continue to have a disparity in the distribution of the disease.
(Occlusal caries accounts for between 80 and 90% of caries in children (Weintraub, 2001).)
In cases where a small area of tooth has begun demineralizing but has not yet cavitated, the pressure from the dental explorer could cause a cavity.
Unearthed ancient skulls show evidence of primitive dental work.
Poverty is also a significant social determinant for oral health.
Dental caries can also cause bad breath and foul tastes.
During the European Age of Enlightenment, the belief that a "tooth worm" caused caries was also no longer accepted in the European medical community.
The beginning of rice cultivation in South Asia is also believed to have caused an increase in caries, although there is also some evidence from sites in Thailand, such as Khok Phanom Di, that shows a decrease in overall percentage of dental caries with the increase in dependence on rice agriculture.
In response, the fluid inside the tubules brings immunoglobulins from the immune system to fight the bacterial infection.
Aggressive treatment, by filling, of incipient carious lesions, places where there is superficial damage to the enamel, is controversial as they may heal themselves, while once a filling is performed it will eventually have to be redone and the site serves as a vulnerable site for further decay.
In order to further increase a child’s cooperation in caries management, good communication by the dentist and the rest of the staff of a dental practice should be used.
Examples include Sjögren's syndrome, diabetes mellitus, diabetes insipidus, and sarcoidosis.
Some brands of smokeless tobacco contain high sugar content, increasing susceptibility to caries.
Between 29% and 59% of adults over the age of 50 experience caries.
Some sites collect plaque more commonly than others, for example sites with a low rate of salivary flow (molar fissures).
After meals or snacks, the bacteria in the mouth metabolize sugar, resulting in an acidic by-product that decreases pH.
The presentation of caries is highly variable.
