Boulevards are higher capacity streets and travel any direction (more commonly north and south).
* Two or more races: 4.1%
The Greenway project is recognized as one of the best urban reclamation projects in the U.S., winning, for example, the Silver Medal Rudy Bruner Award for Urban Excellence in 2001.
Denver is a consolidated city-county with a mayor elected on a nonpartisan ballot, a 13-member city council and an auditor.
The Colorado Rockies were created as an expansion franchise in 1993 and Coors Field opened in 1995.
According to the United States Census Bureau the city has a total area of , of which  is land and  (1.1%) is water.
Denver City served as the Arapahoe County Seat from 1861 until consolidation in 1902.
Although by the close of the 1860s, Denver residents could look with pride at their success establishing a vibrant supply and service center, the decision to route the nation's first transcontinental railroad through Cheyenne, rather than Denver, threatened the prosperity of the young town.
The NW–SE streets are numbered, while the NE–SW streets are named.
In 1867, Denver City became the Territorial Capital.
Frontier was reincarnated at DIA in 1994.
Denver's topography consists of plains in the city center with hilly areas to the north, west and south.
Walk score has rated Denver as the third most bicycle-friendly large city in the United States.
The Denver Museum of Nature and Science currently holds an aquamarine specimen valued at over one million dollars, as well as specimens of the state mineral, rhodochrosite.
The Downtown region has seen increased real estate investment with the construction of several new skyscrapers set to be completed in 2010–2013.
Chipotle Mexican Grill, Quizno's, and Smashburger were founded and headquartered in Denver.
Many Denver streets have bicycle lanes, and there are over 850 miles of paved, off-road, bike paths in Denver parks and along bodies of water, like Cherry Creek and the South Platte.
The mayor can approve or veto any ordinances or resolutions approved by the council, makes sure all contracts with the city are kept and performed, signs all bonds and contracts, is responsible for the city budget, and can appoint people to various city departments, organizations, and commissions.
According to the 2010 census, the City and County of Denver contains 600,158 people and 285,797 households.
Most neighborhoods contain parks or other features that are the focal point for the neighborhood.
The per capita income for the city is $24,101.
Larimer hoped that the town's name would help make it the county seat of Arapaho County, but unknown to him Governor Denver had already resigned from office.
Because Denver is the largest city within , it has become a natural location for storage and distribution of goods and services to the Mountain States, Southwest states, as well as all western states.
Denver is home to multiple regional magazines such as ''5280'', which takes its name from the city's mile-high () elevation.
In 1900, whites represented 96.8% of Denver's population.
Denver's location on the 105th meridian at over one mile (1.6&nbsp;km) in elevation also enables it to be the largest city in the U.S. to offer a "one-bounce" real-time satellite uplink to six continents in the same business day.
During the 1960s and 1970s, Denver was one of the epicenters of the Chicano Movement.
Big O Tires, LLC, of Centennial opened its first franchise in 1962 in Denver.
It was later renamed Stapleton International Airport in his honor.
On August 1, 1876, Colorado was admitted to the Union.
Blocks are usually identified in hundreds from the median streets, identified as "00", which are Broadway (the east–west median, running north–south) and Ellsworth Avenue (the north–south median, running east–west).
Denver also owns the mountain on which the Winter Park Resort ski area is operated in Grand County,  west of Denver.
It currently educates about 73,000 students in 73 elementary schools, 15 K-8 schools, 17 middle schools, 14 high schools, and 19 charter schools.
The Colburn Automobile Company made cars copied from the contemporary Renault.
It features hands-on and interactive exhibits, artifacts and programs about Colorado history.
The first school of what is now DPS was a log cabin that opened in 1859 on the corner of 12th Street between Market and Larimer Streets.
These "neighborhoods" should not be confused with cities or suburbs, which may be separate entities within the metro area.
19 market in the United States, according to the Spring 2011  Arbitron ranking (up from No.
The current mayor is Michael Hancock.
Over the years, Denver has acquired, built and maintained approximately  of mountain parks, including Red Rocks Park, which is known for its scenery and musical history revolving around the unique Red Rocks Amphitheatre.
19.1% of the population and 14.6% of families are below the poverty line.
In 1887, the precursor to the international charity United Way was formed in Denver by local religious leaders who raised funds and coordinated various charities to help Denver's poor.
The movement against hosting the games was based largely on environmental issues and was led by State Representative Richard Lamm, who was subsequently elected to three terms (1975–87) as Colorado governor.
Denver has several additional professional teams.
Snowfall is common throughout the late fall, winter and early spring, averaging  for 1981–2010.
On the other hand, the suburbs east of Denver and the city's east-northeastern extension (Denver International Airport) can see a few tornadoes, often weak landspout tornadoes,  each spring and summer—especially during June with the enhancement of the Denver Convergence Vorticity Zone (DCVZ).
In May 1859, Denver City residents donated 53 lots to the Leavenworth & Pike's Peak Express in order to secure the region's first overland wagon route.
RTD currently operates more than 1,000 buses serving over 10,000 bus stops in 38 municipal jurisdictions in eight counties around the Denver and Boulder metropolitan areas.
The Denver Department of Safety oversees three branches: the Denver Police Department, Denver Fire Department, and Denver Sheriff Department.
Soon, in addition to the elite and a large middle class, Denver had a growing population of German, Italian, and Chinese laborers, soon followed by African-Americans and Spanish-surname workers.
Denver-Boulder radio is the No.
In 1988, voters in the Denver Metropolitan Area approved the Scientific and Cultural Facilities Tax (commonly known as SCFD), a 1 cent sales tax that contributes money to various cultural and scientific facilities and organizations throughout the Metro area.
Denver submitted the winning bid to host the 1976 Winter Olympics, but subsequently withdrew, giving it the dubious distinction of being the only city to back out after winning a bid to host the Olympics.
Age distribution is 22.0% under the age of 18, 10.7% from 18 to 24, 36.1% from 25 to 44, 20.0% from 45 to 64, and 11.3% who are 65 years of age or older.
There are 285,797 housing units at an average density of 1,751 per square mile (676/km²).
They play in Sports Authority Field at Mile High.
The Major League Soccer team Colorado Rapids play in Dick's Sporting Goods Park, an 18,000 seat soccer-specific stadium opened for the 2007 MLS season, located in the Denver suburb of Commerce City.
The Broncos have sold out every home game (except for strike-replacement games) since 1970.
Winters consist of periods of snow and very low temperatures alternating with periods of milder weather due to the warming effect of Chinook winds.
The Denver area is home to the former nuclear weapons plant Rocky Flats, the Denver Federal Center, Byron G. Rogers Federal Building and United States Courthouse, the Denver Mint, and the National Renewable Energy Laboratory.
Larimer Street, named after William Larimer, Jr., the founder of Denver, which is located in the heart of LoDo, is the oldest street in Denver.
Despite challenges, on June 24, 1870, citizens cheered as the Denver Pacific completed the link to the transcontinental railroad, ushering in a new age of prosperity for Denver.
As a result, construction was delayed until 1980 after state and local legislation was passed.
The League of American Bicyclists has rated Colorado as the sixth most bicycle-friendly state in the nation for the year 2014.
Denver is also home to a large network of public community gardens, most of which are managed by Denver Urban Gardens, a non-profit organization.
Russell Stover Candies Inc. made its first chocolate candy in Denver in 1923, but moved to Kansas City in 1969.
Denver's economy is based partially on its geographic position and its connection to some of the major transportation systems of the country.
Its subsidiary and regional wholesale distributor, Coors Distributing Company, is in NW Denver.
In a study looking at hail events in areas with a population of at least 50,000, Denver was found to be ranked 10th most prone to hail storms in the continental United States.
The Denver County Court is an integrated Colorado County Court and Municipal Court and is managed by Denver instead of the state.
Without the 80249 zip code (47.3 sq&nbsp;mi, 8,407 residents) near the airport, the average density increases to around 5,470 per square mile.
It is currently being used for residential purposes.
+ Major League sports teams
Denver has also enjoyed success as a pioneer in the fast casual restaurant industry, with many popular national chain restaurants founded and based in Denver.
'''Denver''' (), officially the '''City and County of Denver''', is the capital and most populous municipality of the U.S. state of Colorado.
In the past, Denver has been home to several other airports that are no longer operational.
More recent Denver-based artists include The Lumineers, Air Dubai, The Fray, Flobots, Cephalic Carnage, Axe Murder Boyz, Deuce Mob, and Five Iron Frenzy.
Denver is nicknamed the ''Mile-High City'' because its official elevation is exactly one mile () above sea level, making it one of the highest major cities in the United States.
It was named in 2013 by ''True West Magazine'' as one of the top-ten "must see" history museums in the country.
In 2015, Denver ranked No.
Fundraising stalled before enough was raised, forcing these visionary leaders to take control of the debt-ridden railroad.
Spearheaded by visionary leaders including Territorial Governor John Evans, David Moffat, and Walter Cheesman, fundraising began.
For every 100 females there are 102.1 males.
Due to the city's high elevation and aridity, diurnal temperature variation is large throughout the year.
), while avenues south of Ellsworth are named.
The city acquired the estate of abstract expressionist painter Clyfford Still in 2004 and built a museum to exhibit his works near the Denver Art Museum.
Unprepared for this influx, the Silver Crash of 1893 unsettled political, social, and economic balances, laying the foundation for ethnic bigotry, such as the Red Scare and the rise of the Ku Klux Klan, as well as corruption and crime.
The Wright & McGill Company has been making its Eagle Claw brand of fishing gear in NE Denver since 1925.
MediaNews Group purchased the ''Denver Post'' in 1987; the company is based in Denver.
It also hosted the G7 (now G8) summit between June 20 and 22 in 1997 and the 2000 National Convention of the Green Party.
According to Geographic Names Information System (GNIS) and the National Elevation Dataset, the city's elevation is , which is reflected on various websites such as that of the National Weather Service.
Some of the neighborhoods even farther from the city center, or recently redeveloped parcels anywhere in the city have either very suburban characteristics or are new urbanist developments that attempt to recreate the feel of older neighborhoods.
Scott's Liquid Gold, Inc., has been making furniture polish in Denver since 1954.
Denver is home to a variety of sports teams and is one of the U.S. cities with teams from four major sports (the Denver metro area is the smallest metropolitan area to have a team in all four major sports).
There is now a plaque across the street from the Brown Palace Hotel which honors this idea.
Geography also allows Denver to have a considerable government presence, with many federal agencies based or having offices in the Denver area.
The Denver MSA has a gross metropolitan product of $157.6 billion in 2010, making it the 18th largest metro economy in the United States.
Out of the total population, 25.3% of those under the age of 18 and 13.7% of those 65 and older are living below the poverty line.
Denver is home to many nationally recognized museums, including a new wing for the Denver Art Museum by world-renowned architect Daniel Libeskind, the second largest Performing Arts Center in the nation after Lincoln Center in New York City and bustling neighborhoods such as LoDo, filled with art galleries, restaurants, bars and clubs.
The Gates Corporation, the world's largest producer of automotive belts and hoses, was established in S. Denver in 1919.
The site faded quickly, however, and by the summer of 1859 it was abandoned in favor of Auraria (named after the gold mining town of Auraria, Georgia), and St. Charles City.
Denver is the most populous city within a radius centered in the city and of  magnitude.
Heavy weather from the DCVZ can disrupt airport operations.
The auditor checks all expenditures and may refuse to allow specific ones, usually based on financial reasons.
Of particular note is Denver's importance in the folk scene of the 1960s and 1970s.
The average household size is 2.27 and the average family size is 3.14.
Denver City was a frontier town, with an economy based on servicing local miners with gambling, saloons, livestock and goods trading.
In 2005, Denver became the first major city in the U.S. to vote to make the private possession of less than an ounce of marijuana legal for adults 21 and older.
Denver Public Schools (DPS) is the public school system in Denver.
Ball has several operations in greater Denver.
Between the 1880s and 1930s, Denver's floriculture industry developed and thrived.
Denver is the most populous city of the 18-county Front Range Urban Corridor, an oblong urban region stretching across two states with an estimated 2015 population of 4,757,713.
The show is held every January at the National Western Complex northeast of downtown.
This allows for a significant portion of Denver's population to be bicycle commuters and has led to Denver being known as a bicycle friendly city.
When the price of oil dropped from $34 a barrel in 1981 to $9 a barrel in 1986, the Denver economy dropped with it, leaving almost 15,000 oil industry workers in the area unemployed (including former mayor and current governor John Hickenlooper, a former geologist), and the highest office vacancy rate in the nation (30%).
His signature project was the construction of Denver Municipal Airport, which began in 1929 amidst heavy criticism.
There are 250,906 households, of which 23.2% have children under the age of 18 living with them, 34.7% are married couples living together, 10.8% have a female householder with no husband present, and 50.1% are non-families.
In the 1880s Horace Tabor built Denver's first Opera House.
* Some other race: 9.2%
However, the average density throughout most Denver neighborhoods tends to be higher.
Amtrak, the national passenger rail system, provides service to Denver, operating its ''California Zephyr'' daily in both directions between Chicago and Emeryville, California, across the bay from San Francisco.
In total, 27.72% (148,335) of Denver's population age five and older spoke a language other than English.
The district boundaries are coextensive with the city limits.
The Denver Nuggets of the National Basketball Association also play at the Pepsi Center.
Denver is also well known for other types of food such as Rocky Mountain oysters, rainbow trout, and the Denver sandwich.
* Native American: 1.4%
According to data from the 2011 American Community Survey, Denver ranks 6th among US cities with populations over 400,000 in terms of the percentage of workers who commute by bicycle at 2.2% of commuters.
Denver also has a number of neighborhoods not reflected in the administrative boundaries.
A daunting 100 miles away, citizens mobilized to build a railroad to connect Denver to the transcontinental railroad.
Within three days, $300,000 had been raised, and citizens were optimistic.
Roads outside that system that travel east/west are given the suffix "avenue" and those that head north and south are given the "street" suffix (e.g.
While Denver elections are non-partisan, Democrats have long held the majority sway on Denver politics with most officials elected citywide having Democratic Party affiliation.
The Rapids won the MLS Cup in 2010.
The office of Denver's Mayor has been occupied by a Democrat since the municipal general election of 1963.
Denver has one of the country's largest populations of Mexican Americans and hosts four large Mexican American celebrations: Cinco de Mayo (with over 500,000 attendees), in May, El Grito de la Independencia, in September, the annual Lowrider show, and the Dia De Los Muertos art shows/events in North Denver's Highland neighborhood, and the Lincoln Park neighborhood in the original section of West Denver.
It was also the setting for the prime time drama ''Dynasty'' from 1981 to 1989 (although the show was mostly filmed in Los Angeles).
Three major public schools constitute the Auraria Campus, University of Colorado Denver, Metropolitan State University of Denver, and Community College of Denver.
The Denver area has 2 Chinese newspapers, the  Chinese American Post and the  Colorado Chinese News.
Denver's early years as a major train hub of the west are still very visible today.
In the early days of the city, gold and silver booms and busts played a large role in the economic success of the city.
History Colorado's Byers-Evans House Museum and the Molly Brown House are nearby.
* Asian: 3.4% (0.8% Vietnamese, 0.6% Chinese, 0.5% Indian, 0.3% Korean, 0.3% Japanese, 0.3% Filipino, 0.2% Burmese, 0.1% Cambodian)
With a 2015 estimated population of 682,545, Denver ranks as the 19th-most populous U.S. city, and with a 2.8% increase in 2015, the city is also the fastest growing major city in the United States.
All of these parks are important gathering places for residents and allow what was once a dry plain to be lush, active, and green.
The Denver City Council is elected from 11 districts with two at-large council-members and is responsible for passing and changing all laws, resolutions, and ordinances, usually after a public hearing, and can also call for misconduct investigations of Denver's departmental officials.
The Denver Boot, a car-disabling device was first used in Denver.
Denver is located in the center of the Front Range Urban Corridor, between the Rocky Mountains to the west and the High Plains to the east.
In federal elections, Denverites also tend to vote for Democratic candidates, voting for the Democratic Presidential nominee in every election since 1960 (excluding 1980 and 1972).
Based on 30-year averages obtained from NOAA's National Climatic Data Center for the months of December, January and February, Weather Channel ranked Denver the 18th coldest major U.S. city .
The numbered streets start underneath the Colfax and I-25 viaducts.
There is also an older downtown grid system that was designed to be parallel to the confluence of the South Platte River and Cherry Creek.
Several well-known companies originated in or have relocated to Denver.
Every September the Denver Mart, located at 451 E. 58th Avenue hosts a gem and mineral show.
The Mountain States Telephone & Telegraph Company, founded in Denver in 1911, is now a part of telecommunications giant CenturyLink.
All lines are light rail except the A, a commuter rail line.
Denver is ranked as a Beta- world city by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network.
The young city grew during these years, attracting millionaires with their mansions, as well as the poverty and crime of a rapidly growing city.
Village Inn restaurants began as a single pancake house in Denver in 1958.
Denver's neighborhoods also continue their influx of diverse people and businesses while the city's cultural institutions grow and prosper.
Rocky Mountain Metropolitan Airport (KBJC) is  north-northwest, Centennial Airport (KAPA) is  south-southeast, and Front Range Airport (KFTG) is located  east of the state capitol.
Other prominent Denver higher education institutions include Johnson & Wales University, Catholic (Jesuit) Regis University and the city has Roman Catholic and Jewish institutions, as well as a health sciences school.
Well-known folk artists such as Bob Dylan, Judy Collins and John Denver lived in Denver at various points during this time, and performed at local clubs.
The hope was that the center's expansion would elevate the city to one of the top 10 cities in the nation for holding a convention.
Lowry Air Force Base was a military flight training facility that ceased flight operations in 1966, with the base finally being closed in 1994.
The B-Cycle network was the largest in the United States at the time of its launch, boasting 400 bicycles.
It continues west through Utah and Nevada to Bishop, California.
The Broncos have advanced to eight Super Bowls and won back-to-back titles in 1997 and 1998, and won again in 2015.
The Denver Broncos of the National Football League have drawn crowds of over 70,000 since their origins in the early 1960s, and continue to draw fans today to their current home Sports Authority Field at Mile High.
A ruling by the Colorado Supreme Court, subsequent legislation, and a referendum delayed the creation of the City and County of Denver until November 15, 1902.
* White: 68.9% (Non-Hispanic Whites: 52.2%)
The 105th meridian west of Greenwich, the longitudinal reference for the Mountain Time Zone, passes directly through Denver Union Station.
In 1863, Western Union furthered Denver's dominance of the region by choosing the city for its regional terminus.
Smaller roads are sometimes referred to as places, drives (though not all drives are smaller capacity roads, some are major thoroughfares) or courts.
The Newmont Mining Corporation, the 2nd largest gold producer in North America and one of the largest in the world, is headquartered in Denver.
This period became known locally as the Carnation Gold Rush.
Denver and Colorado Springs hosted the 1962 World Ice Hockey Championships.
In the 1970s and early 1980s, the energy crisis in America and resulting high oil prices created an energy boom in Denver captured in the soap opera ''Dynasty''.
Most of Denver has a straightforward street grid oriented to the four cardinal directions.
With the grid oriented to the diagonal directions, the NW–SE streets receive sunlight to melt snow in the morning and the NE–SW streets receive it in the afternoon.
Metro Denver highway conditions can be accessed on the Colorado Department of Transportation website Traffic Conditions.
Extremes in temperature range from  on January 9, 1875 up to  as recently as June 25 and 26, 2012.
Many Denver streets have bicycle lanes, and there are over 850 miles of paved, off-road, bike paths in Denver parks and along bodies of water, like Cherry Creek and the South Platte.
That is part of the reason why Denver was recently recognized for the third year in a row as the best city for singles.
As of April 2015, the unemployment rate for the Denver-Aurora-Broomfield MSA is 4.2%.
* , after crossing four other states.
Additionally, the Ski Train operated on the former Denver & Rio Grande Western Railroad, which took passengers between Denver and the Winter Park Ski Resort, but it is no longer in service.
Advances in hydraulic fracturing have made the DJ Basin of Colorado into an accessible and lucrative oil play.
Denver's west-central geographic location in the Mountain Time Zone (UTC−7) also benefits the telecommunications industry by allowing communication with both North American coasts, South America, Europe, and Asia in the same business day.
The project spanned almost  along the highway with an additional line traveling parallel to part of I-225, stopping just short of Parker Road.
Colfax Avenue, Lincoln Street).
Denver is also served by over 40&nbsp;AM and FM radio stations, covering a wide variety of formats and styles.
Amtrak Thruway service operated by private bus companies links the Denver station with Rocky Mountain points.
The Denver-Aurora-Lakewood, CO Metropolitan Statistical Area had an estimated 2013 population of 2,697,476 and ranked as the 21st most populous U.S. metropolitan statistical area, and the larger Denver-Aurora-Boulder Combined Statistical Area had an estimated 2013 population of 3,277,309 and ranked as the 16th most populous U.S. metropolitan area.
Contrary to the popular belief that Denver receives 300 days of sunshine a year, the city can actually expect to receive an average of 115 clear days, 130 partly cloudy days, and 120 cloudy days each year.
The 10-county Denver-Aurora-Lakewood, CO Metropolitan Statistical Area had an estimated 2015 population of 2,814,330 and ranked as the 19th most populous U.S. metropolitan statistical area.
Early in the 20th century, Denver, like many other cities, was home to a pioneering Brass Era car company.
Three general aviation airports serve the Denver area.
The Cherry Creek School District serves some areas with Denver postal addresses that are outside the city limits.
For a list of radio stations, see Radio Stations in Colorado
Denver explored a potential bid for the 2022 Winter Olympics, but no bid will be submitted.
