The route of the ring road went through the St. Alkmund's Church and its Georgian churchyard, the only Georgian square in Derby.
This attachment was used on the Rev.
Training for companies is undertaken through its Corporate College.
It includes strong input from the local History Network  which was awarded a Heritage Lottery grant to pursue its work on marking the 100th anniversary of World War 1.
Bold Lane Car Park in Derby has been cited as one of the ten most secure places in the world.
The Belper and Milford mills were ''not'' built in partnership with Arkwright.
The Wyvern Way Retail Park is located just off the A52, by the pride park business park.
The Carriage and Wagon Works continues to build trains under Bombardier Transportation.
The beginning of the next century saw Derby emerging as an engineering centre with manufacturers such as James Fox, who exported machine tools to Russia.
The Midlands Co-operative Society, a predecessor of Central England Co-operative, traced its origins to Derby Co-operative Provident Society which, in 1854, was one of the first co-operatives in the region.
They were formed in 2002 following the demise of British Basketball League side Derby Storm.
Pupils attend infant and junior school (often in a combined primary school) before moving onto a secondary school.
Initially a market town, Derby grew rapidly in the industrial era.
Mickleover Sports play at Station Road, Mickleover and are members of the EvoStik Northern Premier League (the seventh level of the English football league system).
On 7 July 2014, Derby's first ever youth mayor (Belal Butt) was elected.
Derby Jazz caters for the jazz interest in the city.
Moreover, it remained a design and development centre and in the 'thirties, on the direction of Lord Stamp, the LMS Scientific Research Laboratory was opened on London Road.
In December 2014, the government announced that the park would gain enterprise zone status by being added to Nottingham Enterprise Zone.
These are the Cathedral Quarter, the St Peters Quarter and the Intu Derby shopping centre.
Rehousing, council house building and private housing developments continued on a large scale for some 30 years after the end of World War II in 1945.
Derby's emblem is the Derby Ram, about which there is a folk song entitled "The Derby Ram".
Meanwhile, the Carriage and Wagon Works were building the first of the Diesel Multiple Units which were to take over many of the services.
Derby has also become a significant cultural centre for the deaf community in Britain.
Darley Abbey, Five Lamps, Little Chester (also known as Chester Green), Strutt's Park, Six Streets and West End
Messrs Wright, the bankers of Nottingham, recommended that Richard Arkwright apply to Strutt and Need for finance for his cotton spinning mill.
Derby Airfield, located approximately  southwest of the city centre has grass runways targeted at general aviation.
In 1771 Richard Arkwright, Samuel Need and Jedediah Strutt built the world's first commercially successful water-powered cotton spinning mill at Cromford, Derbyshire, developing a form of power that was to be a catalyst for the Industrial Revolution.
Derby was a single United Kingdom Parliamentary constituency represented by two members of parliament until 1950, when it was divided into the single-member constituencies of Derby North and Derby South.
In the 1990s the firm was bought by Rolls-Royce plc and then sold on again to ABB Group.
The quarter boasts a diverse range of retail shops many of them, in Green Lane, Babington Lane, Osmaston Road and elsewhere, independent traders.
It is available on 104.5 FM and 1116 AM, on 95.3 FM in North and Mid Derbyshire and on 96.0 FM in the Buxton area, as well as being streamed on the internet.
Sunny Hill and Littleover (part of)
Allestree and Markeaton Park
After the closure of the old bus station, services used temporary stops on streets around the Morledge area until a new bus station, built on the old site as part of the Riverlights development, was opened on Sunday 28 March 2010.
It includes the Market place, the Guildhall and Assembly rooms along with the City Museum and the Silk Mill industrial museum.
In 1840, the North Midland Railway set up its works in Derby and, when it merged with the Midland Counties Railway and the Birmingham and Derby Junction Railway, to form the Midland Railway, Derby became its headquarters.
Derby holds an important position in the history of the Labour movement, because it was one of two seats (the other being Keir Hardie's in Merthyr Tydfil) gained by the recently formed Labour Representation Committee at the 1900 general election.
Currently closed due to council cuts.
In Rome in 1960 he broke the English Olympic record, recording a time of 2 hours 27 mins.
Derby Grammar School was founded in 1994 and was for boys only, until 2007, when they accepted girls into the sixth form for the first time.
In rugby union, Derby RFC play in Midlands Division One East (the sixth level of English rugby union) at their Haslams Lane ground.
Four webcams monitor the falcons here.
There is another campus in north Derbyshire at Buxton.
Intu Derby is the city's main indoor shopping centre.
Its boundary with the Cathedral Quarter follows Victoria Street, beneath which flows the underground course of the Markeaton Brook.
The Royal School for the Deaf on Ashbourne Road provides education in British Sign Language and English.
The city is bordered by four national character areas which include the Trent Valley Washlands to the south, the Nottinghamshire, Derbyshire and Yorkshire Coalfields in the east, the South Derbyshire Claylands in the west, and the Derbyshire Peak Fringe in the north.
The Rail Accident Investigation Branch has its headquarters in The Wharf, a facility in Derby.
The theatre company Oddsocks is based in Derby and stages productions in the city and the surrounding area, as well as travelling the country.
Derby station is operated by East Midlands Trains and the city is served by expresses to London, the North East and South West, provided by East Midlands Trains and CrossCountry.
They have played at Pride Park Stadium since 1997, having been previously based at the Baseball Ground, a stadium originally built in 1890 to house Derby's short-lived baseball team (one notable baseball player and famous footballer was the Derby legend Steve Bloomer).
When Derby's inner ring road was completed in 2010, a section of it was named 'Lara Croft Way' after the game's heroine Lara Croft.
Déda now hosts a BA degree in Dance in partnership with the University of Derby.
Derbyshire County Cricket Club are based at the County Ground in Derby and play almost all home matches there, although matches at Chesterfield were re-introduced in 2006.
Derby was one of the boroughs reformed by the Municipal Corporations Act 1835, and it became a county borough with the Local Government Act 1888.
As a traffic scheme this road is said to be a triumph; as townscape it is a disaster.'
John Osborne wrote his play Look Back in Anger in 1956 while living in Derby and working at Derby Playhouse
Chellaston and Shelton Lock
These are; Allestree Woodlands School, Bemrose School, Chellaston Academy, City of Derby Academy, da Vinci Community College, Derby Manufacturing UTC, Derby Moor Community Sports College, Derby Pride Academy, Landau Forte College, Lees Brook Community School, Littleover Community School, Merrill Academy, Murray Park School, Noel-Baker School, Saint Benedict Catholic Voluntary Academy and West Park School.
Erasmus Darwin, doctor, scientist, philosopher and grandfather of Charles Darwin, whose practice was based in Lichfield, Staffordshire was a frequent visitor to Derby, having founded the Derby Philosophical Society.
The quarter includes the historic St Peters church and, on St Peters Churchyard, the Ancient Derby School building.
A series of organ recitals is presented every summer at Derby Cathedral.
John Dexter the theatre director and the actor Alan Bates were from Derby.
After three years, Bloodworth and Stafford were paid off, and Samuel Need – a hosier of Nottingham – joined the partnership.
Even though it had pioneered the introduction of diesel locomotives, new production finished in 1966.
The pop band White Town is from Derby, and their video "Your Woman" features scenes from the city centre.
One of the designated first class county sides, they have won the County Championship once, in 1936.
A replica of the room is on display at Derby Museum in the city centre.
Most of the flat plains surrounding Derby lie in the Trent Valley Washlands and South Derbyshire Claylands while the hillier northern parts of the city lie within the Derbyshire Peak Fringe and the Coalfields.
Derby was for many years a railway centre, being the former headquarters of the Midland Railway, with both British Rail workshops and research facilities in the town.
Derby gained a high profile in sport following the appointment of Brian Clough as manager of Derby County F.C.
In 1923, the Midland Railway became part of the London, Midland and Scottish Railway with headquarters in London.
Boulton and Allenton (part of)
The ska punk band Lightyear also hail from the city, naming their second album Chris Gentlemens Hairdresser and Railway Book Shop after a shop in Macklin Street.
No other city in Germany participates in this exchange of envoys, and in Britain, only one other town, Wigan, receives and sends an envoy.
The university also has its School of Nursing and Midwifery located there, having moved from its former home at London Road Community Hospital in mid-2012.
The St Peters Quarter is Derby's second Business Improvement district brought into effect in the summer of 2011.
Nearby also is the Old Courthouse and several other notable buildings.
Graham Street Prims and Borrowash Victoria are both members of the East Midlands Counties League (level ten) and play on adjacent grounds at the Asterdale complex in Spondon.
Infinity Park Derby is a planned business park for aerospace, rail and automotive technology adjacent to the Rolls-Royce site in Sinfin.
Derby is also well provided with pubs and is renowned for its large amount of real ale outlets.
Derby Book Festival, first held in 2015, takes place in June, with events throughout the city.
The first Six Streets Arts trail was in June 2012, took place again in 2013 and will now be a biennial event.
Derby County moved there in 1895 after the baseball team folded.
The Kingsway Retail Park is located just outside the main city, off the A38.
Capital East Midlands, is the biggest commercial radio station in the city, broadcasting to Derby on 102.8 FM from the transmitter at Drum Hill, just outside the city.
In 1844, these three companies merged to form the Midland Railway who subsequently opened a direct route to London St Pancras station.
Under the Köppen climatic classification, Derby, in spite of its distance to large bodies of water, has an oceanic climate along with the rest of the British Isles.
The envoy gives talks to local societies and schools, finds pen friends and short term host families during work placements, works to assist groups who want to get involved in twinning by identifying and approaching possible counterparts and plans the annual mayweek trip.
Although much less important than in years gone by, limited train manufacture still continues in Derby and Derby railway station retains an important position in the railway network.
On 16 March 2011, Mercian Way, the final section of the city's inner ring road, was opened to traffic.
out in fields near Foremark (ref.
The last trolleybus ran on 9 September 1967.
After closure, part of the route west of Derby was used by British Rail as a test track.
They aim to continue the work and traditions of the former Derby School, which closed in 1989, one of the oldest schools in England.
Déda houses a 124 capacity studio theatre, three dance studios, meeting room facilities and the CUBE café bar.
Several Derby vehicles have been preserved at Sandtoft and the East Anglia Transport Museum.
The city is on National Express' London to Manchester and Yorkshire to the South West routes.
The ornate cast iron bridge by Andrew Handyside across Friargate is still in place, as is his bridge over the river.
Following the Clough's resignation in 1973, his successor Dave Mackay guided Derby County to another league title in 1975, but this remains to date the club's last major trophy; relegation followed in 1980 and top flight status was not regained until 1987, since then Derby have spent a total of 11 seasons (1987–1991, 1996–2002, 2007–2008) in the top flight.
Areas within the ward
From 2008 they are ground sharing with Derby RFC at Haslams Lane.
Derby Arboretum, donated to the town by local philanthropist Joseph Strutt in 1840, was the first planned urban public park in the country.
Professional golfer Melissa Reid was born in Derby in 1987.
The skyline of the inner city changed in 1968 when the inner ring road with its two new crossings of the River Derwent was built.
Team Derby, based at Derby Arena, won the inaugural National Badminton League title in 2014–15.
It is focused around the Cathedral and the area around Irongate and Sadler Gate.
An industrial boom began in Derby when Rolls-Royce opened a car and aircraft factory in the town in 1907.
Toyota Manufacturing UK's automobile headquarters is south west of the city at Burnaston.
After a lengthy period of financial uncertainty, Derby Playhouse closed in February 2008.
The oldest pub is the Grade II listed Ye Olde Dolphin Inne, dating from the late 16th century.
Derby Chamber Music presents an annual series of chamber music concerts at Derby University's Multifaith Centre.
Former Derby County managers include Brian Clough, Arthur Cox, Jim Smith, John Gregory and George Burley.
The exchange of envoys between two cities is very unusual.
With the arrival of the railways in the 19th century, the city became a centre of the British rail industry.
The patent expired in 1773, though the partnership continued until 1781 when Need died.
The remainder of the building has been developed as a Holiday Inn and a Hilton Hotel as well as a convenience store which opened in late 2010.
Abbey Street is the only road between the two ends from which Mercian Way can be accessed.
Although he wished to continue with his quest, he was over-ruled by his fellow officers.
Normanton (most of) and Austin Estate
The city is favoured as a site for a national railway centre.
At the same time, a route to Nottingham and Leicester was opened by the Midland Counties Railway.
The logo of the City Council's services is a stylised ram.
There also remain local stations at Peartree and Spondon, although services are limited, especially at the former.
Sinfin, Osmaston and Stenson Fields (part of)
It opened in 2007 as Westfield Derby after extension work costing £340&nbsp;million, subsequently being sold to Intu in March 2014.
BBC Radio Derby, the BBC's local station for Derbyshire and East Staffordshire, is based on St. Helen's Street in the city and offers local, national and international news, features, music and sports commentaries.
Many deaf people move to Derby because of its strong sign language-using community.
On 1 April 1997 Derby City Council became again a unitary authority (a status it had held, as a county borough, up until 1974), with the rest of Derbyshire administered from Matlock.
The BBC in Derby have their own local website for the area which provides news, travel and weather information, as well as other features.
The connection with the railway encouraged others, notably Andrew Handyside, Charles Fox and his son Francis Fox.
There is an annual exchange between the wind bands of John Port School, Etwall and its twin school Gymnasium Melle in Melle, Germany, District of Osnabrücker Land.
In December 1947 the Locomotive Works unveiled Britain's first mainline passenger diesel-electric locomotive – "Number 10000".
In 2006, Nottingham East Midlands Airport reverted to its previous name.
The building has two cinema screens showing independent and mainstream cinema, two gallery spaces housing contemporary visual arts, a digital studio, participation spaces, digital editing suites, artists studio and the BFI Mediatheque.
It is the venue for the city council's annual Guy Fawkes Night firework display and contains its own light railway.
As a testament to his belief in his cause, the prince – who on the march from Scotland had walked at the front of the column – made the return journey on horseback at the rear of the bedraggled and tired army.
Singer Jamie East later went on to create entertainment website Holy Moly and present Big Brother's Bit on the Side
Derby Museum and Art Gallery shows paintings by Joseph Wright, as well as fine Royal Crown Derby porcelain, natural history, local regiments and archaeology.
The unique cafe building is planned to be rebuilt at Crich Tramway Museum.
Other music venues in the city include The Venue on Abbey Street, The Hairy Dog on Becket Street, Ryans Bar in the St Peters Quarter, The Flowerpot on King's Street, and The Victoria Inn.
It was demolished in 2003, six years after County's move to Pride Park.
Bell was succeeded in 1910 by Jimmy Thomas and he in turn by the distinguished polymath and Nobel Laureate Philip Noel-Baker in 1936.
The Silk Mill stands at the southern end of the 24&nbsp;km (15&nbsp;mi) stretch of the River Derwent designated a World Heritage Site in 2001.
Although it suffered from neglect in the 1990s, it has been renovated.
Thus the editor (Elizabeth Williamson) of the 2nd edition of Pevsner for Derbyshire wrote:-  '...the character and cohesion of the centre has been completely altered by the replacement of a large number of C18 houses in the centre by a multi-lane road.
It is estimated that the deaf population in Derby is at least three times higher than the national average, and that only London has a larger deaf population.
The ''Anglo-Saxon Chronicle'' (c. 900) says that "Derby is divided by water".
It broadcasts a Contemporary Hit Radio (CHR) format, with Top 40 chart hits aimed at the city's under 35s.
She plays on the Ladies European Tour, and was a member of the victorious European Team in the 2011 Solheim Cup.
This new section connects Burton Road with Uttoxeter New Road, and crosses Abbey Street.
These areas of land were known as ''Norþworþig'' ("Northworthy", = "north enclosure") and Deoraby, and were at the "Irongate" (north) side of Derby.
Outside the state sector, there are three fee-paying independent schools.
Littleover (most of) and Heatherton Village
QUAD organises the annual Derby Film Festival, and the FORMAT international photography festival, held every two years at various venues throughout the city.
East Midlands Airport is situated about fifteen miles (24&nbsp;km) from Derby city centre.
In 1964 the British Rail Research Division opened to study all aspects of railway engineering from first principles.
It was his home and business headquarters.
One of Derby's longest-established businesses is Royal Crown Derby, which has been producing porcelain since the 1750s.
The Arena, opened in 2015, also contains a velodrome that has hosted the Revolution cycling series.
City Centre, Pear Tree and Rose Hill
Despite being one of the areas of Britain furthest from the sea, Derby holds a special place in the history of marine safety – it was as MP for Derby that Samuel Plimsoll introduced his bills for a 'Plimsoll line' (and other marine safety measures).
The present day station, Derby Midland is on the same site as 1840 and the original platform visibly forms the sub-structure of the modern Platform 1.
By traditional definitions, Derby is the county town of Derbyshire, although Derbyshire's administrative centre has in recent years been Matlock.
The annual open-air concert at Darley Park is one of the biggest free concerts of its kind.
The patent was obtained in January 1759.
The development was controversial and local opponents accuse it of drawing trade away from the older parts of the city centre where independent shops are located.
RAIB has one of its two operational centres in Derby.
The only buildings remaining are those visible from Platform 6 of the station.
It offers a weekly class programme and a year-round professional performance programme for children, young people and adults, and a community development programme.
The borough expanded in 1877 to include Little Chester and Litchurch, and then in 1890 to include New Normanton and Rowditch.
The first mill opened in Nottingham in 1770 and was driven by horses.
Both were demolished to make way for the road, a move still criticised today.
This exchange was originally based on a drama-project of both schools in June 2009, which contained performances in both cities with over 1600 visitors.
Markeaton Park is Derby's most used leisure facility.
Breadsall Hilltop and Chaddesden (newer part of)
In 2003 the University of Nottingham opened a graduate entry medical school based at Royal Derby Hospital.
Derby's former bus station was an art deco design by borough architect C.H.
Other major parks in the city include Allestree Park, Darley Park, Chaddesden Park, Alvaston Park, Normanton Park and Osmaston Park.
Derby is an internationally renowned centre for advanced transport manufacturing, home to the world’s second largest aero-engine manufacturer, Rolls-Royce, and Derby Litchurch Lane Works, for many years the UK's only train manufacturer.
And the historical Derby Roundhouse which is the college's vocational training hub, providing a centre for apprenticeships such as engineering, catering and hair & beauty.
Pickford also designed St Helen's House in King Street.
Most services in Derby now terminate at the bus station.
Derby was settled by Romans – who established the town of Derventio – Saxons and Vikings, who made Derby one of the Five Boroughs of the Danelaw.
These mills were all Strutt owned and financed.
The band reformed in 2012 and again with altered line up in 2014.
The club moved from its century-old Baseball Ground in 1997 to the new Pride Park Stadium.
The Cathedral Quarter was Derby's first BID (Business Improvement District), and includes a large range of shops, boutiques, coffee shops and restaurants.
Derby has been served by railways since 1840 with the opening of the North Midland Railway to Leeds, with a route to London via Rugby provided by the Birmingham and Derby Junction Railway.
This vastly increased Derby's population from 132,408 in the 1961 census to 219,578 in the 1971 census.
Derby High School is for girls-only at secondary level and for boys at primary level.
The ''Derby Trader'' was a free weekly newspaper which is no longer in print.
Between 1932 and 1967, Derby Corporation operated the Derby trolleybus system.
They are members of the Football League Championship.
Derby Gaol is a visitor attraction based in the dungeons of the Derbyshire County Gaol which dates back to 1756.
Repair work gradually diminished until, finally the locomotive works closed, the land being redeveloped as Pride Park.
He stayed at Exeter House, Full Street where he held his ''"council of war"''.
The folk-music scene includes the annual Derby Folk Festival.
In rock music, the blues singer-songwriter Kevin Coyne came from Derby, as does the three piece rock band LostAlone, and indie/glam rock band The Struts.
An exchange was established in 2009 between Allestree Woodlands School, and the Gymnasium Angelaschule in Osnabrück.
