The process of finding a derivative is called '''differentiation'''.
Such manipulations can make the limit value of  for small  clear even though  is still not defined at .
In particular, they exist, so polynomials are smooth functions.
(The above expression is read as "the derivative of ''y'' with respect to ''x''", "d y by d x", or "d y over d x".
Leibniz's notation allows one to specify the variable for differentiation (in the denominator).
If the limit  exists, meaning that there is a way of choosing a value for  that makes  a continuous function, then the function  is differentiable at , and its derivative at  equals .
Here '''h''' is a vector in '''R'''''n'', so the norm in the denominator is the standard length on '''R'''''n''.
The operator , however, is not defined on individual numbers.
For a real-valued function of several variables, the Jacobian matrix reduces to the gradient vector.
This limit is defined to be the derivative of the function  at :
Informally, this means that hardly any continuous functions have a derivative at even one point.
Here the derivative is said to exist if the shadow is independent of the infinitesimal chosen.
However, in 1872 Weierstrass found the first example of a function that is continuous everywhere but differentiable nowhere.
Substitute  into the difference quotient.
Substituting 0 for  in the difference quotient causes division by zero, so the slope of the tangent line cannot be found directly using this method.
In classical geometry, the tangent line to the graph of the function  at  was the unique line through the point  that did ''not'' meet the graph of  transversally, meaning that the line did not pass straight through the graph.
The definition of the '''total derivative''' of ''f'' at '''a''', therefore, is that it is the unique linear transformation  such that
If all the partial derivatives of ''f'' exist and are continuous at '''x''', then they determine the directional derivative of ''f'' in the direction '''v''' by the formula:
In this generalization, the derivative is reinterpreted as a linear transformation whose graph is (after an appropriate translation) the best linear approximation to the graph of the original function.
This formula is true because
The '''directional derivative''' of ''f'' in the direction of '''v''' at the point '''x''' is the limit
The slope of the tangent line is very close to the slope of the line through  and a nearby point on the graph, for example .
Furthermore, the derivative is a linear transformation, a different type of object from both the numerator and denominator.
If  is a continuous function, meaning that its graph is an unbroken curve with no gaps, then  is a continuous function away from .
Similarly, even if  does have a derivative, it may not have a second derivative.
It follows that the directional derivative is linear in '''v''', meaning that .
These are measured using directional derivatives.
This suggests that  is a linear transformation from the vector space '''R'''''n'' to the vector space '''R'''''m''.
This is equivalent to
Often this is done to turn the problem into the computation of a directional derivative in the direction of a unit vector.
For example, if  is twice differentiable, then
This can be seen graphically as a "kink" or a "cusp" in the graph at .
Sometimes  has a derivative at most, but not all, points of its domain.
In 1931, Stefan Banach proved that the set of functions that have a derivative at some point is a meager set in the space of all continuous functions.
If ''n'' and ''m'' are both one, then the derivative  is a number and the expression  is the product of two numbers.
Calculation shows that  is a differentiable function whose derivative is
The derivative of  with respect to  at  is, geometrically, the slope of the tangent line to the graph of  at .
Because of this rescaling property, directional derivatives are frequently considered only for unit vectors.
if the limit exists.
Up to changing variables, this is the statement that the function  is the best linear approximation to ''f'' at ''a''.
(This is a stronger condition than having  derivatives.
The space determined by these additional coordinates is called the jet bundle.
This gives an exact value for the slope of a line.
It cannot be a function on the tangent bundle because the tangent bundle only has room for the base space and the directional derivatives.
In practice, once the derivatives of a few simple functions are known, the derivatives of other functions are more easily computed using ''rules'' for obtaining derivatives of more complicated functions from simpler ones.
Then, after adding an appropriate error term, all of the above approximate equalities can be rephrased as inequalities.
The known derivatives of the elementary functions ''x''2, ''x''4, sin(''x''), ln(''x'') and , as well as the constant 7, were also used.
It is called the ''derivative'' of  with respect to .
For instance, when  is applied to the squaring function, ,  outputs the doubling function , which we named .
and was once thought of as an infinitesimal quotient.
Instead, the total derivative gives a function from the tangent bundle of the source to the tangent bundle of the target.
It also makes the chain rule easy to remember:
A function  need not have a derivative, for example, if it is not continuous.
For example, the derivative of the position of a moving object with respect to time is the object's velocity: this measures how quickly the position of the object changes when time is advanced.
The latter notation generalizes to yield the notation ''f'' (''n'') for the ''n''th derivative of ''f'' – this notation is most useful when we wish to talk about the derivative as being a function itself, as in this case the Leibniz notation can become cumbersome.
If '''e'''1, …, '''e'''''n'' is the standard basis for '''R'''''n'', then '''y'''(''t'') can also be written as .
An important example of a function of several variables is the case of a scalar-valued function  on a domain in Euclidean space '''R'''''n'' (e.g., on '''R'''2 or '''R'''3).
In this case, , for real numbers  and , and the slope  is given by
By subtracting these two new equations, we get
Similarly, the derivative of a second derivative, if it exists, is written  and is called the ''third derivative of ''.
Here the natural extension of  to the hyperreals is still denoted .
For this reason, the derivative is often described as the "instantaneous rate of change", the ratio of the instantaneous change in the dependent variable to that of the independent variable.
The subtraction in the numerator is subtraction of vectors, not scalars.
This example is now known as the Weierstrass function.
In particular,  is a linear transformation up to a small error term.
If we assume that '''v''' is small and that the derivative varies continuously in '''a''', then  is approximately equal to , and therefore the right-hand side is approximately zero.
If in addition the th derivative is continuous, then the function is said to be of differentiability class .
For the linear approximation formula to make sense,  must be a function that sends vectors in '''R'''''n'' to vectors in '''R'''''m'', and  must denote this function evaluated at '''v'''.
The fundamental theorem of calculus states that antidifferentiation is the same as integration.
The Jacobian matrix is the matrix that represents this linear transformation with respect to the basis given by the choice of independent and dependent variables.
If we write ''f'' using coordinate functions, so that , then the total derivative can be expressed using the partial derivatives as a matrix.
Furthermore, taking the limit as ''h'' tends to zero is the same as taking the limit as ''k'' tends to zero because ''h'' and ''k'' are multiples of each other.
Geometrically, the limit of the secant lines is the tangent line.
In particular, the numerator and denominator of the difference quotient are not even in the same vector space: The numerator lies in the codomain '''R'''''m'' while the denominator lies in the domain '''R'''''n''.
This is λ times the difference quotient for the directional derivative of ''f'' with respect to '''u'''.
It can be calculated in terms of the partial derivatives with respect to the independent variables.
which has the intuitive interpretation (see Figure 1) that the tangent line to  at  gives the ''best linear approximation''
The linear approximation formula implies:
Derivatives may be generalized to functions of several real variables.
The natural analog of second, third, and higher-order total derivatives is not a linear transformation, is not a function on the tangent bundle, and is not built by repeatedly taking the total derivative.
While the notation becomes unmanageable for high-order derivatives, in practice only few derivatives are needed.
The tangent line is the best linear approximation of the function near that input value.
The function whose value at  equals  whenever  is defined and elsewhere is undefined is also called the derivative of .
The derivative of a function of a single variable at a chosen input value, when it exists, is the slope of the tangent line to the graph of the function at that point.
This 1×1 matrix satisfies the property that  is approximately zero, in other words that
In the above difference quotient, all the variables except ''xi'' are held fixed.
Because the output of  is a function, the output of  can be evaluated at a point.
The total derivative of a function does not give another function in the same way as the one-variable case.
Consequently, the secant lines do not approach any single slope, so the limit of the difference quotient does not exist.
To make precise the idea that  is the best linear approximation, it is necessary to adapt a different formula for the one-variable derivative in which these problems disappear.
By standard differentiation rules, if a polynomial of degree  is differentiated  times, then it becomes a constant function.
for the ''n''th derivative of  (with respect to ''x'').
Here  is one of several common notations for the derivative (see below).
The '''derivative''' of a function of a real variable measures the sensitivity to change of a quantity (a function value or dependent variable) which is determined by another quantity (the independent variable).
The limit is the result of letting  go to zero, meaning it is the value that  tends to as  becomes very small:
That is, if ''f'' is a real-valued function of a real variable, then the total derivative exists if and only if the usual derivative exists.
is twice the absolute value function, and it does not have a derivative at zero.
The difference quotient becomes:
to  near  (i.e., for small ).
In the limit as '''v''' and '''w''' tend to zero, it must therefore be a linear transformation.
More generally, a similar computation shows that the derivative of the squaring function at  is :
If the derivative of '''y''' exists for every value of ''t'', then '''y'''′ is another vector valued function.
If  is positive, then the slope of the secant line from 0 to  is one, whereas if  is negative, then the slope of the secant line from 0 to  is negative one.
In this case, the directional derivative is a vector in '''R'''m.
A vector-valued function can be split up into its coordinate functions ''y''1(''t''), ''y''2(''t''), …, ''y''''n''(''t''), meaning that .
Notice that if we choose another vector '''w''', then this approximate equation determines another approximate equation by substituting '''w''' for '''v'''.
In Lagrange's notation, the derivative with respect to  of a function  is denoted  (read as "f prime of x") or  (read as "f prime x of x"), in case of ambiguity of the variable implied by the derivation.
Lagrange's notation is sometimes incorrectly attributed to Newton.
If ''v'' is a vector starting at ''a'', then  is called the pushforward of '''v''' by ''f'' and is sometimes written .
Similar examples show that a function can have  derivatives for any non-negative integer  but no th-order derivative.
By precomposing it with the diagonal map Δ, , a generalized Taylor series may be begun as
and, by definition,
The simplest case, apart from the trivial case of a constant function, is when  is a linear function of , meaning that the graph of  divided by  is a line.
cannot have a derivative at .
A value of  close to zero gives a good approximation to the slope of the tangent line, and smaller values (in absolute value) of  will, in general, give better approximations.
In practice, the existence of a continuous extension of the difference quotient  to  is shown by modifying the numerator to cancel  in the denominator.
At the point ''a'', these partial derivatives define the vector
Passing from an approximation to an exact answer is done using a limit.
Consequently, the gradient determines a vector field.
The analog of a higher-order derivative, called a jet, cannot be a linear transformation because higher-order derivatives reflect subtle geometric information, such as concavity, which cannot be described in terms of linear data such as vectors.
These are abbreviations for multiple applications of the derivative operator.
Because jets capture higher-order information, they take as arguments additional coordinates representing higher-order changes in direction.
Derivatives are a fundamental tool of calculus.
The derivative of '''y'''(''t'') is defined to be the vector, called the tangent vector, whose coordinates are the derivatives of the coordinate functions.
Continuing this process, one can define, if it exists, the th derivative as the derivative of the th derivative.
This vector is called the '''gradient''' of ''f'' at ''a''.
The derivative of a function  of a variable  is a measure of the rate at which the value  of the function changes with respect to the change of the variable .
By the definition of the derivative function, .
Just like the single-variable derivative,  is chosen so that the error in this approximation is as small as possible.
This output function can then be evaluated to get , , and so on.
If  represents the position of an object at time , then the higher-order derivatives of  have physical interpretations.
However, the usual difference quotient does not make sense in higher dimensions because it is not usually possible to divide vectors.
At an inflection point, a function switches from being a convex function to being a concave function or vice versa.
When the limit exists,  is said to be ''differentiable'' at .
On the real line, every polynomial function is infinitely differentiable.
Most functions that occur in practice have derivatives at all points or at almost every point.
The th derivative is also called the '''derivative of order '''.
They do not, however, directly measure the variation of ''f'' in any other direction, such as along the diagonal line .
In general, the '''partial derivative''' of a function  in the direction ''xi'' at the point (''a''1 …, ''a''''n'') is defined to be:
Let  be a real valued function defined in an open neighborhood of a real number .
The above definition is applied to each component of the vectors.
Even a function with a smooth graph is not differentiable at a point where its tangent is vertical: For instance, the function  is not differentiable at .
In one variable, the fact that the derivative is the best linear approximation is expressed by the fact that it is the limit of difference quotients.
is the slope of the secant line between  and .
If  is infinitely differentiable, then this is the beginning of the Taylor series for  evaluated at  around .
The coordinate functions are real valued functions, so the above definition of derivative applies to them.
Equivalently, the derivative satisfies the property that
This generalization is useful, for example, if '''y'''(''t'') is the position vector of a particle at time ''t''; then the derivative '''y'''&prime;(''t'') is the velocity vector of the particle at time ''t''.
But in higher dimensions, it is impossible for  to be a number.
Here the second term was computed using the chain rule and third using the product rule.
To distinguish it from the letter ''d'', ∂ is sometimes pronounced "der", "del", or "partial" instead of "dee".
However, the definition of the limit says the difference quotient does not need to be defined when .
As an example, choose a point  and let  be the step function that returns a value, say 1, for all  less than , and returns a different value, say 10, for all  greater than or equal to .
Euler's notation is useful for stating and solving linear differential equations.
When ''f'' is a function from an open subset of '''R'''''n'' to '''R'''''m'', then the directional derivative of ''f'' in a chosen direction is the best linear approximation to ''f'' at that point and in that direction.
A point where the second derivative of a function changes sign is called an ''inflection point''.
The left-hand side can be rewritten in a different way using the linear approximation formula with  substituted for '''v'''.
This interpretation is the easiest to generalize to other settings (see below).
The last expression shows that the difference quotient equals  when  and is undefined when , because of the definition of the difference quotient.
This process can be long and tedious for complicated functions, and many shortcuts are commonly used to simplify the process.
If , then the usual definition of the derivative may be manipulated to show that the derivative of ''f'' at ''a'' is the unique number  such that
The definition of the total derivative subsumes the definition of the derivative in one variable.
In fact, it is possible to make this a precise derivation by measuring the error in the approximations.
At an inflection point, the second derivative may be zero, as in the case of the inflection point  of the function , or it may fail to exist, as in the case of the inflection point  of the function .
This is especially relevant for partial differentiation.
The Jacobian matrix reduces to a 1×1 matrix whose only entry is the derivative ''f''&prime;(''x'').
For an example, see differentiability class.)
Since  is a function, it can be evaluated at a point .
If  and  are real numbers, and if the graph of  is plotted against , the derivative is the slope of this graph at each point.
suggesting the ratio of two infinitesimal quantities.
Hence the slope of the graph of the squaring function at the point  is 6, and so its derivative at  is .
But when , no single directional derivative can give a complete picture of the behavior of ''f''.
This last formula can be adapted to the many-variable situation by replacing the absolute values with norms.
Early in the history of calculus, many mathematicians assumed that a continuous function was differentiable at most points.
This is the partial derivative of ''f'' with respect to ''y''.
If it were a number, then  would be a vector in '''R'''''n'' while the other terms would be vectors in '''R'''''m'', and therefore the formula would not make sense.
If  is positive, then  is on the high part of the step, so the secant line from  to  has slope zero.
This notation is used exclusively for derivatives with respect to time or arc length.
It is still a function, but its domain is strictly smaller than the domain of .
If we assume that the derivative of a vector-valued function retains the linearity property, then the derivative of '''y'''(''t'') must be
If  is negative, then  is on the low part of the step, so the secant line from  to  is very steep, and as  tends to zero the slope tends to infinity.
A vector-valued function '''y'''(''t'') of a real variable sends real numbers to vectors in some vector space '''R'''''n''.
A function that has  successive derivatives is called '' times differentiable''.
, where the constant is independent of '''v''' but depends continuously on '''a'''.
With Leibniz's notation, we can write the derivative of ''y'' at the point  in two different ways:
The derivative of  collects all the derivatives of  at all the points in the domain of .
The relation between the total derivative and the partial derivatives of a function is paralleled in the relation between the ''k''th order jet of a function and its partial derivatives of order less than or equal to ''k''.
This function is written  and is called the ''derivative function'' or the ''derivative'' of .
Assume that the error in these linear approximation formula is bounded by a constant times
The oral form "d y d x" is often used conversationally, although it may lead to confusion.)
The idea, illustrated by Figures 1 to 3, is to compute the rate of change as the limit value of the ratio of the differences  as  becomes infinitely small.
If the total derivative exists at '''a''', then all the partial derivatives and directional derivatives of ''f'' exist at '''a''', and for all '''v''',  is the directional derivative of ''f'' in the direction '''v'''.
Here ∂ is a rounded ''d'' called the '''partial derivative symbol'''.
The second derivative of  is the derivative of , the velocity, and by definition this is the object's acceleration.
The slope  of the secant line is the difference between the  values of these points divided by the difference between the  values, that is,
It is still commonly used when the equation  is viewed as a functional relationship between dependent and independent variables.
The notation for derivatives introduced by Gottfried Leibniz is one of the earliest.
This is because the total derivative of a multivariable function has to record much more information than the derivative of a single-variable function.
It is only defined on functions:
Higher derivatives are expressed using the notation
