Many centuries later, both world wars saw fighting in the desert.
Plants face severe challenges in arid environments.
In the Thornthwaite climate classification system, deserts would be classified as arid megathermal climates.
Not only do they require food and water but they also need to keep their body temperature at a tolerable level.
Amphibians might seem unlikely desert-dwellers, because of their need to keep their skins moist and their dependence on water for reproductive purposes.
When it has passed through the gut of a pronghorn it germinates readily, and the little pile of moist dung provides an excellent start to life well away from the parent tree.
Rounded mounds of sand without a slip face are the rare dome dunes, found on the upwind edges of sand seas.
The giant saguaro cacti of the Sonoran Desert form "forests", providing shade for other plants and nesting places for desert birds.
Sand and dust storms are natural events that occur in arid regions where the land is not protected by a covering of vegetation.
The water holding frog in Australia has a similar life cycle and may aestivate for as long as five years if no rain falls.
It is virtually devoid of life because it is blocked from receiving precipitation by the Andes mountains to the east and the Chilean Coast Range to the west.
When they land, they strike other particles which may be jerked into the air in their turn, starting a chain reaction.
Vegetation plays a major role in determining the composition of the soil.
Deserts present a very challenging environment for animals.
Exfoliation also occurs when the outer surfaces of rocks split off in flat flakes.
Some annual plants germinate, bloom and die in the course of a few weeks after rainfall while other long-lived plants survive for years and have deep root systems able to tap underground moisture.
These grains of sand, up to about  in diameter are jerked into the air but soon fall back to earth, ejecting other particles in the process.
These areas are known as desert pavements and little further erosion takes place.
Plants and animals living in the desert need special adaptations to survive in the harsh environment.
Other water from the river is piped to urban communities but all this has been at the expense of the river, which below the extraction sites no longer has any above-ground flow during most of the year.
Berbers with knowledge of the region were employed to guide the caravans between the various oases and wells.
Even small fungi and microscopic plant organisms found on the soil surface (so-called ''cryptobiotic soil'') can be a vital link in preventing erosion and providing support for other living organisms.
Sandstorms occur with much less frequency than dust storms.
The relief of the internal pressure that has built up in rocks that have been underground for aeons can cause them to shatter.
Deserts can also be described as areas where more water is lost by evapotranspiration than falls as precipitation.
Many locations within this category have elevations exceeding  and the thermal regime can be hemiboreal.
Transverse dunes run at a right angle to the prevailing wind direction.
Small ripples form on the sand sheet when the wind exceeds 24&nbsp;km/h (15&nbsp;mph).
These include the Great Salt Lake, Utah Lake, Sevier Lake and many dry lake beds.
The Negev Desert, Israel, and the surrounding area, including the Arava Valley, receive plenty of sunshine and are generally not arable.
Large swaths of this desert are covered in mirrors, including nine fields of solar collectors.
These also occur parallel to a strong wind that blows in one general direction.
They reduce visibility and can remain in the atmosphere for days on end, conveyed by the trade winds for distances of up to .
A desert especially rich in mineral salts is the Atacama Desert, Chile, where sodium nitrate has been mined for explosives and fertilizer since around 1850.
Another woman explorer was Freya Stark who travelled alone in the Middle East, visiting Turkey, Arabia, Yemen, Syria, Persia and Afghanistan, writing over twenty books on her experiences.
The Tuareg were traders and the goods transported traditionally included slaves, ivory and gold going northwards and salt going southwards.
The juveniles stay on the surface for a while, feeding and growing, but soon dig themselves burrows.
The seed of the mesquite tree, which grows in deserts in the Americas, is hard and fails to sprout even when planted carefully.
Oxidising a gram of carbohydrate produces 0.60 grams of water; a gram of protein produces 0.41 grams of water; and a gram of fat produces 1.07 grams of water, making it possible for xerocoles to live with little or no access to drinking water.
At greater wind speeds, some particles are lifted into the air stream.
A field trial in the Sonoran Desert which exposed the roots of different species of tree to rhizobacteria and the nitrogen fixing bacterium ''Azospirillum brasilense'' with the aim of restoring degraded lands was only partially successful.
Some desert plants produce seed which lies dormant in the soil until sparked into growth by rainfall.
Jerboas, desert rats, kangaroo rats and other small rodents emerge from their burrows at night and so do the foxes, coyotes, jackals and snakes that prey on them.
Desertec Industrial Initiative is a consortium seeking $560 billion to invest in North African solar and wind installations over the next forty years to supply electricity to Europe via cable lines running under the Mediterranean Sea.
Many successful solar power plants have been built in the Mojave Desert.
These places owe their profound aridity (the average annual precipitation is often less than 40&nbsp;mm or 1.5&nbsp;in) to being very far from the nearest available sources of moisture and are often in the lee of mountain ranges.
Eggs are laid and the tadpoles grow rapidly as they must reach metamorphosis before the water evaporates.
During the day the sky is usually clear and most of the sun's radiation reaches the ground, but as soon as the sun sets, the desert cools quickly by radiating heat into space.
Grasses and low shrubs are the dominant vegetation here and the ground may be covered with lichens.
Very little further erosion takes place after the formation of a pavement, and the ground becomes stable.
They travelled over large areas with their herds, moving to new pastures as seasonal and erratic rainfall encouraged new plant growth.
Once ejected, these particles move in one of three possible ways, depending on their size, shape and density; suspension, saltation or creep.
As the desert dries out, the adult toads rebury themselves.
However the size and harshness of the terrain meant that all supplies needed to be brought in from great distances.
Arid deserts receive between  in a year and semiarid deserts between .
The soil is deep and fertile, being part of the river's flood plains, and what would otherwise have been desert has been transformed into one of the most productive farming regions in California.
Other desert minerals are copper from Chile, Peru, and Iran, and iron and uranium in Australia.
Carnivores can obtain much of their water needs from the body fluids of their prey.
Other xerophytic plants have developed similar strategies by a process known as convergent evolution.
Suspension is only possible for particles less than 0.1&nbsp;mm (0.004&nbsp;in) in diameter.
In English before the 20th century, ''desert'' was often used in the sense of "unpopulated area", without specific reference to aridity; but today the word is most often used in its climate-science sense (an area of low precipitation).
Deserts are also classified, according to their geographical location and dominant weather pattern, as trade wind, mid-latitude, rain shadow, coastal, monsoon, or polar deserts.
Trade wind deserts occur either side of the horse latitudes at 30° to 35° North and South.
This is believed to be caused by the stresses put on the rock by repeated expansions and contractions which induces fracturing parallel to the original surface.
In the first part of the night, as the ground radiates the heat absorbed during the day, they emerge and search for prey.
About one third of the land surface of the world is arid or semi-arid.
Deserts play a significant role in human culture with an extensive literature.
Mars is the only planet in the Solar System on which deserts have been identified.
Being ectotherms, reptiles are unable to live in cold deserts but are well-suited to hot ones.
Other areas are arid by virtue of being a very long way from the nearest available sources of moisture.
Saguaro grow slowly but may live for up to two hundred years.
Other desert features include rock outcrops, exposed bedrock and clays once deposited by flowing water.
Humans have long made use of deserts as places to live, and more recently have started to exploit them for minerals and energy capture.
Lizards and snakes are the most numerous in arid regions and certain snakes have developed a novel method of locomotion that enables them to move sidewards and navigate high sand-dunes.
The potential for generating solar energy from the Sahara Desert is huge, the highest found on the globe.
Most shrubs have spiny leaves and shed them in the coldest part of the year.
Many trade routes have been forged across deserts, especially across the Sahara Desert, and traditionally were used by caravans of camels carrying salt, gold, ivory and other goods.
The surface of Titan, a moon of Saturn, also has a desert-like surface with dune seas.
There is no evidence that body temperature of mammals and birds is adaptive to the different climates, either of great heat or cold.
It can only take place during the day as energy from the sun is required, but during the day, many deserts become very hot.
For these reasons, the front line moved back and forth through hundreds of kilometers as each side lost and regained momentum.
Although rain seldom occurs in deserts, there are occasional downpours that can result in flash floods.
As the wind blows, saltation and creep take place on the windward side of the dune and individual grains of sand move uphill.
As a steady wind begins to blow, fine particles lying on the exposed ground begin to vibrate.
In 1961, Peveril Meigs divided desert regions on Earth into three categories according to the amount of precipitation they received.
Many other metals, salts and commercially valuable types of rock such as pumice are extracted from deserts around the world.
In order to conserve energy, other desert birds run rather than fly.
At depths of more than  , these remain at between  regardless of the external temperature.
Daily variations in temperature can be as great as  or more, with heat loss by radiation at night being increased by the clear skies.
The saltbush in Australia has succulent leaves and secretes salt crystals, enabling it to live in saline areas.
Although overgrazing has historically been considered to be a cause of desertification, there is some evidence that wild and domesticated animals actually improve fertility and vegetation cover, and that their removal encourages erosive processes.
This picks up particles of sand and dust and wafts them aloft in sand or dust storms.
Like other desert birds it is well-camouflaged by its coloring and can merge into the landscape when stationary.
It is so arid that mountains that reach as high as  are completely free of glaciers and, in the southern part from 25°S to 27°S, may have been glacier-free throughout the Quaternary, though permafrost extends down to an altitude of  and is continuous above .
The grains end up as level sheets of sand or are piled high in billowing sand dunes.
The smaller dune fields occupy the bottom of many of the craters situated in the Martian polar regions.
While there they shed their skins a number of times and retain the remnants around them as a waterproof cocoon to retain moisture.
Deserts are formed by weathering processes as large variations in temperature between day and night put strains on the rocks which consequently break in pieces.
Warfare in the desert offered great scope for tacticians to use the large open spaces without the distractions of casualties among civilian populations.
Different theories exist as to how exactly the pavement is formed.
One well-studied example is the specializations of mammalian kidneys shown by desert-inhabiting species.
They occur in regions where large temperature differences occur between sea and land.
Half a million Americans were forced to leave their land in this catastrophe.
Many desert animals (and plants) show especially clear evolutionary adaptations for water conservation or heat tolerance and so are often studied in comparative physiology, ecophysiology, and evolutionary physiology.
Barchan dunes are produced by strong winds blowing across a level surface, and are crescent-shaped with the concave side away from the wind.
The stems and leaves of some plants lower the surface velocity of sand-carrying winds and protect the ground from erosion.
European interest in the Sahara Desert stems from its two aspects: the almost continual daytime sunshine and plenty of unused land.
There may be underground sources of water in the form of springs and seepages from aquifers.
Where these lie close to the surface, wells can be dug and oases may form where plant and animal life can flourish.
Cacti are desert specialists and in most species the leaves have been dispensed with and the chlorophyll displaced into the trunks, the cellular structure of which has been modified to allow them to store water.
Animals adapted to live in deserts are called xerocoles.
The sand eventually ends up deposited in level areas known as sand-fields or sand-seas, or piled up in dunes.
The Martian deserts principally consist of dunes in the form of half-moons in flat areas near the permanent polar ice caps in the north of the planet.
Other non-sandy deserts consist of exposed outcrops of bedrock, dry soils or aridisols, and a variety of landforms affected by flowing water, such as alluvial fans, sinks or playas, temporary or permanent lakes, and oases.
Some mineral extraction also takes place in deserts and the uninterrupted sunlight gives potential for the capture of large quantities of solar energy.
They can move to areas of greater food availability as the desert blooms after local rainfall and can fly to faraway waterholes.
Kangaroos keep cool by increasing their respiration rate, panting, sweating and moistening the skin of their forelegs with saliva.
In many ways birds are the most able to do this of the higher animals.
The shape of the dune depends on the characteristics of the prevailing wind.
The Great Man-Made River is a scheme launched by Libya's Colonel Gadaffi to tap this aquifer and supply water to coastal cities.
In the Sonoran Desert, Couch's spadefoot toad spends most of the year dormant in its burrow.
Winter temperatures vary considerably between different deserts and are often related to the location of the desert on the continental landmass and the latitude.
Deserts usually have a large diurnal and seasonal temperature range, with high daytime temperatures falling sharply at night.
Kharga Oasis in Egypt is  long and is the largest oasis in the Libyan Desert.
The Thar Desert near the India/Pakistan border is of this type.
The cultivation of semi-arid regions encourages erosion of soil and is one of the causes of increased desertification.
These include the horned viper of Africa and the sidewinder of North America, evolutionarily distinct but with similar behavioural patterns because of convergent evolution.
Evidence suggests that the Atacama may not have had any significant rainfall from 1570 to 1971.
It minimizes its water loss by producing concentrated urine and dry dung, and is able to lose 40% of its body weight through water loss without dying of dehydration.
Water and carbon dioxide are metabolic end products of oxidation of fats, proteins, and carbohydrates.
Geological processes in a desert climate can concentrate minerals into valuable deposits.
Oil and gas form on the bottom of shallow seas when micro-organisms decompose under anoxic conditions and later become covered with sediment.
Ground water may be drawn to the surface by evaporation and the formation of salt crystals may dislodge rock particles as sand or disintegrate rocks by exfoliation.
Other deserts are flat, stony plains where all the fine material has been blown away and the surface consists of a mosaic of smooth stones.
The Sahara is a very large expanse of land stretching from the Atlantic rim to Egypt.
Plants tend to be tough and wiry with small or no leaves, water-resistant cuticles and often spines to deter herbivory.
Nevertheless, there is some plant life in the Atacama, in the form of specialist plants that obtain moisture from dew and the fogs that blow in from the Pacific.
Its most easterly point was at El Alamein in Egypt, where the Allies decisively defeated the Axis forces in 1942.
They used terracing techniques and grew gardens beside seeps, in moist areas at the foot of dunes, near streams providing flood irrigation and in areas irrigated by extensive specially built canals.
Few make it to adulthood.
These are called "reg" in the western Sahara, "serir" in the eastern Sahara, "gibber plains" in Australia and "saï" in central Asia.
These larger particles anchor the other particles in place and may also be packed together on the surface so as to form a miniature desert pavement.
It has been found that plant growth-promoting bacteria play a role in increasing the resistance of plants to stress conditions and these rhizobacterial suspensions could be inoculated into the soil in the vicinity of the plants.
A desert is a region of land that is very dry because it receives low amounts of precipitation (usually in the form of rain but may be snow, mist or fog), often has little coverage by plants, and in which streams dry up unless they are supplied by water from outside the area.
Deserts can be classified by the amount of precipitation that falls, by the temperature that prevails, by the causes of desertification or by their geographical location.
Heavy rain is the trigger for emergence and the first male to find a suitable pool calls to attract others.
The cool winds crossing this water pick up little moisture and the coastal regions have low temperatures and very low rainfall, the main precipitation being in the form of fog and dew.
Orographic lift occurs as air masses rise to pass over high ground.
There may also be underground sources of water in deserts in the form of springs, aquifers, underground rivers or lakes.
Most of them are fossorial, spending the hot dry months aestivating in deep burrows.
Many other hot desert animals are nocturnal, seeking out shade during the day or dwelling underground in burrows.
This includes much of the polar regions where little precipitation occurs and which are sometimes called polar deserts or "cold deserts".
The range of temperatures on a daily and annual scale is relatively low, being  and  respectively in the Atacama Desert.
In common with cacti, many have developed spines to ward off browsing animals.
The necessary moisture may be present in the form of dew or mist.
These belts are associated with the subtropical anticyclone and the large-scale descent of dry air moving from high-altitudes toward the poles.
Others store water in succulent leaves or stems or in fleshy tubers.
Montane deserts are normally cold, or may be scorchingly hot by day and very cold by night as is true of the northeastern slopes of Mount Kilimanjaro.
Some cold deserts are far from the ocean and others are separated by mountain ranges from the sea and in both cases there is insufficient moisture in the air to cause much precipitation.
Fragmented strata slide down into the valleys where they continue to break into pieces due to the relentless sun by day and chill by night.
Some are deciduous, shedding their leaves in the driest season, and others curl their leaves up to reduce transpiration.
Evaporites are found in the USA's Great Basin Desert, historically exploited by the "20-mule teams" pulling carts of borax from Death Valley to the nearest railway.
At high wind speeds, sand grains are picked up off the surface and blown along, a process known as saltation.
This exposes coarser-grained material, mainly pebbles with some larger stones or cobbles, leaving a desert pavement, an area of land overlaid by closely packed smooth stones forming a tessellated mosaic.
Across the world, around 20% of desert is sand, varying from only 2% in North America to 30% in Australia and over 45% in Central Asia.
When there are two directions from which winds regularly blow, a series of long, linear dunes known as seif dunes may form.
The American poet Robert Frost expressed his bleak thoughts in his poem, ''Desert Places'', which ends with the stanza "They cannot scare me with their empty spaces / Between stars - on stars where no human race is.
The camel is a superb example of a mammal adapted to desert life.
Others occur on the eastern side of the Rocky Mountains, the eastern side of the southern Andes and in southern Australia.
Traditional means of overland transport declined with the advent of motor vehicles, shipping and air freight, but caravans still travel along routes between Agadez and Bilma and between Timbuktu and Taoudenni carrying salt from the interior to desert-edge communities.
The desert lark takes frequent dust baths which ensures that it matches its environment.
The Turks were defeated by the British, who had the backing of irregular Arab forces that were seeking to revolt against the Turks in the Hejaz, made famous in T. E. Lawrence's book ''Seven Pillars of Wisdom''.
With few inputs, they were at the mercy of the weather and may have lived at bare subsistence level.
The economy is heavily based on agriculture and the land is irrigated through a network of canals and pipelines sourced entirely from the Colorado River via the All-American Canal.
Seepages may occur in the walls of canyons and pools may survive in deep shade near the dried up watercourse below.
These plants have a combined capacity of 354 megawatts (MW) making them the largest solar power installation in the world.
Some weather stations in the Atacama have never received rain.
The whirling airborne grains act as a sand blasting mechanism which grinds away solid objects in its path as the kinetic energy of the wind is transferred to the ground.
When they reach the crest, they cascade down the far side.
The surface of the trunk is folded like a concertina, allowing it to expand, and a large specimen can hold eight tons of water after a good downpour.
They developed skills in the manufacture and use of weapons, animal tracking, finding water, foraging for edible plants and using the things they found in their natural environment to supply their everyday needs.
Moist warm air rises over the land, deposits its water content and circulates back to sea.
In many environments, the rate of erosion and run off increases dramatically with reduced vegetation cover.
In the heat of the day in the Sahara, the temperature can rise to .
Sand dunes are accumulations of windblown sand piled up in mounds or ridges.
Based on precipitation alone, hyperarid deserts receive less than  of rainfall a year; they have no annual seasonal cycle of precipitation and experience twelve-month periods with no rainfall at all.
The correlation between aridity and sparse population is complex and dynamic, varying by culture, era, and technologies; thus the use of the word ''desert'' can cause confusion.
They limit water loss by reducing the size and number of stomata, by having waxy coatings and hairy or tiny leaves.
/ I have it in me so much nearer home / To scare myself with my own desert places."
Potential evapotranspiration, then, is the amount of water that ''could'' evaporate in any given region.
The structure of the sheet consists of thin horizontal layers of coarse silt and very fine to medium grain sand, separated by layers of coarse sand and pea-gravel which are a single grain thick.
They include the Tengger and Sonoran Deserts.
Where sand does occur, it is usually in large quantities in the form of sand sheets or extensive areas of dunes.
The air is very cold and carries little moisture so little precipitation occurs and what does fall, usually as snow, is carried along in the often strong wind and may form blizzards, drifts and dunes similar to those caused by dust and sand in other desert regions.
Antoine de Saint-Exupéry described both his flying and the desert in ''Wind, Sand and Stars'' and Gertrude Bell travelled extensively in the Arabian desert in the early part of the 20th century, becoming an expert on the subject, writing books and advising the British government on dealing with the Arabs.
Reptiles cannot survive at this temperature and lizards will be prostrated by heat at .
The sunlight can be obliterated and it may become as dark as night at ground level.
They have few adaptations to desert life and are unable to cool themselves by sweating so they shelter during the heat of the day.
In "eolian deflation", the wind continually removes fine-grained material, which becomes wind-blown sand.
Rain falling in the cold season may be more effective at promoting plant growth, and defining the boundaries of deserts and the semiarid regions that surround them on the grounds of precipitation alone is problematic.
