He accuses Hutten of having misinterpreted his utterances about reform and reiterates his determination never to break with the Church.
Most of the manuscripts were, however, late Greek manuscripts of the Byzantine textual family and Erasmus used the oldest manuscript the least because "he was afraid of its supposedly erratic text."
The ''Ciceronianus'' came out in 1528, attacking the style of Latin that was based exclusively and fanatically on Cicero's writings.
The world had laughed at his satire, but few had interfered with his activities.
Most importantly, he extolled the reading of scripture as vital because of its power to transform and motivate toward love.
(A more literal translation of ''enchiridion'' - 'dagger' - has been likened to "the spiritual equivalent of the modern Swiss Army knife.")
In 1530, Erasmus published a new edition of the orthodox treatise of Algerus against the heretic Berengar of Tours in the eleventh century.
Here Erasmus complains of the doctrines and morals of the Reformers:
He also held to the Catholic doctrine of free will, which some Reformers rejected in favor of the doctrine of predestination.
Erasmus’s ''Sileni Alcibiadis'' is one of his most direct assessments of the need for Church reform.
Machiavelli stated that, to maintain control by political force, it is safer for a prince to be feared than loved.
Then he polished the Latin.
I will show you a great many who have become worse through following it....The solemn prayers of the Church are abolished, but now there are very many who never pray at all....I have never entered their conventicles, but I have sometimes seen them returning from their sermons, the countenances of all of them displaying rage, and wonderful ferocity, as though they were animated by the evil spirit....Who ever beheld in their meetings any one of them shedding tears, smiting his breast, or grieving for his sins ?...
The ''Enchiridion'' is more like a sermon than a satire.
For instance, Erasmus became an intimate friend of an Italian Humanist Publio Fausto Andrelini, poet and "professor of humanity" in Paris.
Luther hoped for his cooperation in a work which seemed only the natural outcome of his own.
The Catholic Counter-Reformation movement often condemned Erasmus as having "laid the egg that hatched the Reformation."
Today Queens' College has an Erasmus Building and an Erasmus Room.
No personal denunciation was made of Erasmus during his lifetime, however, and he took pains in later life to distance these earlier episodes by condemning sodomy in his works, and praising sexual desire in marriage between men and women.
To allow him to accept that post, he was given a temporary dispensation from his religious vows on the grounds of poor health and love of Humanistic studies, though he remained a priest.
The first New Testament ''printed'' in Greek was not by Erasmus but by Cardinal Francisco Jiménez de Cisneros, as part of the Complutensian Polyglot.
Erasmus dedicated his work to Pope Leo X as a patron of learning and regarded this work as his chief service to the cause of Christianity.
According to Franz Anton Knittel, Erasmus in his ''Novum Instrumentum omne'' did not incorporate the ''Comma'' from the ''Codex Montfortianus'', because of grammar differences, but used ''Complutensian Polyglotta''.
At the age of nine, he and his older brother Peter were sent to one of the best Latin schools in the Netherlands, located at Deventer and owned by the chapter clergy of the Lebuïnuskerk (St. Lebuin's Church), though some earlier biographies assert it was a school run by the Brethren of the Common Life.
However, any hesitancy on the part of Erasmus stemmed, not from lack of courage or conviction, but rather from a concern over the mounting disorder and violence of the reform movement.
A 17th-century legend has it that Erasmus was first named Geert Geerts (also Gerhard Gerhards or Gerrit Gerritsz), but this is unfounded.
Discovery in 1506 of Lorenzo Valla's ''New Testament Notes'' encouraged Erasmus to continue the study of the New Testament.
By the coming of the Age of Enlightenment, however, Erasmus increasingly again became a more widely respected cultural symbol and was hailed as an important figure by increasingly broad groups.
He is credited with coining the adage, "In the land of the blind, the one-eyed man is king."
Apart from these perceived moral failings of the Reformers, Erasmus also dreaded any change in doctrine, citing the long history of the Church as a bulwark against innovation.
According to an article by historian Renier Snooy (1478-1537), Erasmus was born in Gouda.
This is consistent with his view that outward signs were not important; what mattered was the believer's direct relationship with God, which he noted "as the Catholic church believes".
Noting Luther's criticism of the Catholic Church, Erasmus described him as "a mighty trumpet of gospel truth" while agreeing, "It is clear that many of the reforms for which Luther calls are urgently needed.” He had great respect for Luther, and Luther spoke with admiration of Erasmus's superior learning.
If these were the outcomes of reform, he was thankful that he had kept out of it.
In a letter to a friend, Erasmus once had written: "That you are patriotic will be praised by many and easily forgiven by everyone; but in my opinion it is wiser to treat men and things as though we held this world the common fatherland of all."
On 1 April, the city celebrates the publication of his best-known book ''The Praise of Folly''.
Etienne Dolet wrote a riposte titled ''Erasmianus'' in 1535.
He wrote, "There remains the New Testament translated by me, with the Greek facing, and notes on it by me."
The conclusions Erasmus reached drew upon a large array of notable authorities, including, from the Patristic period, Origen, John Chrysostom, Ambrose, Jerome, and Augustine, in addition to many leading Scholastic authors, such as Thomas Aquinas and Duns Scotus.
Until the theft of the artifact in a 19th-century student prank, Queens' College used to have a corkscrew that was purported to be "Erasmus' corkscrew" which was a third of a metre long, though today the college still has what it calls "Erasmus' chair".
This essay has been likened to John Colet’s ''Convocation Sermon'', though the styles differ.
It was not for lack of fidelity with either side but a desire for fidelity with them both:
His birthday is celebrated on 28 October.
Erasmus' friend, Chancellor John Fisher, was president of Queens' College from 1505 to 1508.
Erasmus preferred for the prince to be loved, and strongly suggested a well-rounded education in order to govern justly and benevolently and avoid becoming a source of oppression.
For the first time ever Greek was taught at a lower level than a university in Europe, and this is where he began learning it.
Certain works of Erasmus laid a foundation for religious toleration and Ecumenism.
A satirical attack on superstitions and other traditions of European society in general and the western Church in particular, it was written in 1509, published in 1511, and dedicated to Sir Thomas More, whose name the title puns.
For example, in ''De libero arbitrio'', opposing certain views of Martin Luther, Erasmus noted that religious disputants should be temperate in their language, "because in this way the truth, which is often lost amidst too much wrangling may be more surely perceived."
Only when he had mastered Latin did he begin to express himself on major contemporary themes in literature and religion.
By the 1530s, the writings of Erasmus accounted for 10 to 20 percent of all book sales in Europe.
After comparing what writings he could find, Erasmus wrote corrections between the lines of the manuscripts he was using (among which was Minuscule 2) and sent them as proofs to Froben.
His father, Gerard, was a Catholic priest and curate in Gouda.
Erasmus, "ever susceptible to the charms of attractive, well-connected, and rich young men", agreed.
The popularity of his books is reflected in the number of editions and translations that have appeared since the sixteenth century.
In 1495, with Bishop Henry's consent and a stipend, he went on to study at the University of Paris, in the Collège de Montaigu, a centre of reforming zeal, under the direction of the ascetic Jan Standonck, of whose rigors Erasmus complained.
You declaim bitterly against the luxury of priests, the ambition of bishops, the tyranny of the Roman Pontiff, and the babbling of the sophists; against our prayers, fasts, and Masses; and you are not content to retrench the abuses that may be in these things, but must needs abolish them entirely...Look around on this ‘Evangelical’ generation, and observe whether amongst them less indulgence is given to luxury, lust, or avarice, than amongst those whom you so detest.
Confession to the priest is abolished, but very few now confess to God....
He was buried with great ceremony in the Basel Minster (the former cathedral) there.
Erasmus used several Greek manuscript sources because he did not have access to a single complete manuscript.
Erasmus is also generally credited with originating the phrase "Pandora's box", arising through an error in his translation of Hesiod's ''Pandora'' in which he confused ''pithos'' (storage jar) with ''pyxis'' (box).
Erasmus wrote both on ecclesiastic subjects and those of general human interest.
I have already almost finished emending him by collating a large number of ancient manuscripts, and this I am doing at enormous personal expense."
The ''Institutio principis Christiani'' (''Education of a Christian Prince'') (Basel, 1516) was written as advice to the young king Charles of Spain (later Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor).
How I dislike everything that keeps me back, or retards me".
He declared, "It is only fair that Paul should address the Romans in somewhat better Latin."
Erasmus preferred to live the life of an independent scholar and made a conscious effort to avoid any actions or formal ties that might inhibit his freedom of intellect and literary expression.
By the 1560s, however, there was a marked change in reception.
One of the topics he dealt with was free will, a crucial question.
I know nothing of your church; at the very least it contains people who will, I fear, overturn the whole system and drive the princes into using force to restrain good men and bad alike.
''Sileni'' is the plural (Latin) form of ''Silenus'', a creature often related to the Roman wine god Bacchus and represented in pictorial art as inebriated, merry revellers, variously mounted on donkeys, singing, dancing, playing flutes etc.
The third edition of 1522 was probably used by Tyndale for the first English New Testament (Worms, 1526) and was the basis for the 1550 Robert Stephanus edition used by the translators of the Geneva Bible and King James Version of the English Bible.
In all his criticism of clerical follies and abuses, he had always protested that he was not attacking the Church itself or its doctrines, and had no enmity toward churchmen.
Priests are supposed to be pure, yet when they stray away, no one condemns them.
He collected all the Vulgate manuscripts he could find to create a critical edition.
Erasmus declined to commit himself, arguing that to do so would endanger his position as a leader in the movement for pure scholarship which he regarded as his purpose in life.
Thus, the universalist ideals of Erasmus are sometimes claimed to be important for fixing global governance.
His education there ended when plague struck the city about 1483, and his mother, who had moved there to provide a home for her sons, died of the infection.
In modern terminology, he made the two traditions "compatible".
Despite a chronic shortage of money, he succeeded in learning Greek by an intensive, day-and-night study of three years, continuously begging his friends to send him books and money for teachers in his letters.
But by first calling the final product ''Novum Instrumentum omne'' ("All of the New Teaching") and later ''Novum Testamentum omne'' ("All of the New Testament") he also indicated clearly that he considered a text in which the Greek and the Latin versions were consistently comparable to be the essential core of the church's New Testament tradition.
Erasmus had been working for years on two projects: a collation of Greek texts and a fresh Latin New Testament.
On one occasion he wrote Colet:
In his native Rotterdam, the University and Gymnasium Erasmianum have been named in his honor.
Erasmus saw him as a dim, brutal man who preferred physical strength to wisdom.
In support of this, Erasmus states, "Anyone who looks closely at the inward nature and essence will find that nobody is further from true wisdom than those people with their grand titles, learned bonnets, splendid sashes and bejeweled rings, who profess to be wisdom’s peak".
Together, the first and second editions sold 3,300 copies.
With it Erasmus challenged common assumptions, painting the clergy as educators who should share the treasury of their knowledge with the laity.
Erasmus had been unable to find those verses in any Greek manuscript, but one was supplied to him during production of the third edition.
In 1499, while in England, Erasmus was particularly impressed by the Bible teaching of John Colet who pursued a style more akin to the church fathers than the Scholastics.
Erasmus published a fourth edition in 1527 containing parallel columns of Greek, Latin Vulgate and Erasmus's Latin texts.
Johann Froben published it first within a revised edition of the ''Adagia'' in 1515, then as a stand-alone work in 1517.
As Queens' was an unusually humanist-leaning institution in the 16th century, Queens' College Old Library still houses many first editions of Erasmus' publications, many of which were acquired during that period by bequest or purchase, including Erasmus' New Testament translation which is signed by friend and Polish religious reformer Jan Laski.
Erasmus, they said, had laid the egg, and Luther had hatched it.
Continuing his chastisement of Luther—and undoubtedly put off by the notion of there being "no pure interpretation of Scripture anywhere but in Wittenberg" – Erasmus touches upon another important point of the controversy:
While at Stein, Erasmus fell in love with a fellow canon, Servatius Rogerus, and wrote a series of passionate letters in which he called Rogerus "half my soul".
Little is known of his mother other than that her name was Margaretha Rogerius (Latinized form of Dutch surname 'Rutgers') and she was the daughter of a physician from Zevenbergen; she may have been Gerard's housekeeper.
He stayed at Queens' College, Cambridge from 1510 to 1515.
Thus the victory will be yours if we allow you to be not the steward but the lord of Holy Scripture.
He was christened "Erasmus" after the saint of that name.
Forms can teach the soul how to worship God, or they may hide or quench the spirit.
Yet he was ever more bitterly accused of having started the whole "tragedy" (as the Catholics dubbed Protestantism).
At the University of Cambridge, he was the Lady Margaret's Professor of Divinity and had the option of spending the rest of his life as an English professor.
His hurried effort was published by his friend Johann Froben of Basel in 1516 and thence became the first published Greek New Testament, the ''Novum Instrumentum omne, diligenter ab Erasmo Rot.
Using humanist techniques for working on texts, he prepared important new Latin and Greek editions of the New Testament, which raised questions that would be influential in the Protestant Reformation and Catholic Counter-Reformation.
You stipulate that we should not ask for or accept anything but Holy Scripture, but you do it in such a way as to require that we permit you to be its sole interpreter, renouncing all others.
With the collaboration of Publio Fausto Andrelini, he formed a Paremiography (collection) of Latin proverbs and adages, commonly titled ''Adagia''.
Erasmus also wrote of the legendary Frisian freedom fighter and rebel Pier Gerlofs Donia (Greate Pier), though more often in criticism than in praise of his exploits.
Aloof from entangling obligations, Erasmus was the centre of the literary movement of his time, corresponding with more than five hundred men in the worlds of politics and of thought.
In his catechism (entitled ''Explanation of the Apostles' Creed'') (1533), Erasmus took a stand against Luther's teaching by asserting the unwritten Sacred Tradition as just as valid a source of revelation as the Bible, by enumerating the Deuterocanonical books in the canon of the Bible and by acknowledging seven sacraments.
However, feeling that the lack of sympathy which prevailed at Leuven at that time was actually a form of mental persecution, he sought refuge in Basel, where under the shelter of Swiss hospitality he could express himself freely.
He had remained loyal to the papal authorities in Rome, but he did not receive the last rites of the Catholic Church; and whether he asked for a priest or not is nowhere mentioned in the reports of his death.
He felt called upon to use his learning in a purification of the doctrine by returning to the historic documents and original languages of sacred Scripture.
During his stay there the curriculum was renewed by the principal of the school, Alexander Hegius.
Erasmus said it was "rushed into print rather than edited", resulting in a number of transcription errors.
He believed that his work so far had commended itself to the best minds and also to the dominant powers in the religious world.
He believes that the things which are the least ostentatious can be the most significant, and that the Church constitutes all Christian people —that despite contemporary references to clergy as the whole of the Church, they are merely its servants.
Gary Remer writes, "Like Cicero, Erasmus concludes that truth is furthered by a more harmonious relationship between interlocutors."
Erasmus was given the highest education available to a young man of his day, in a series of monastic or semi-monastic schools.
So he included the Greek text to permit qualified readers to verify the quality of his Latin version.
His rooms were in the "I" staircase of Old Court, and he famously hated English ale and English weather.
Erasmus's last major work, published the year of his death, is the ''Ecclesiastes'' or "Gospel Preacher" (Basel, 1536), in which he comments on the function of preaching.
Though he remained firmly neutral, each side accused him of siding with the other, perhaps because of his neutrality.
However, during preparations for the move in 1536, he suddenly died from an attack of dysentery during a visit to Basel.
I doubt that either side in the dispute can be suppressed without grave loss."
When Erasmus hesitated to support him, the straightforward Luther became angered that Erasmus was avoiding the responsibility due either to cowardice or a lack of purpose.
The exact year of his birth is debated, with most biographers citing the year as 1466.
These, like all of his writings, were published in Latin but were quickly translated into other languages, with his encouragement.
The European Union's Erasmus Programme scholarships enable students to spend up to a year of their university courses in a university in another European country.
However, following his death and in the late sixteenth century, many Reformation supporters saw Erasmus's critiques of Luther and lifelong support for the universal Catholic Church as damning, and second-generation Protestants were less vocal in their debts to the great humanist.
By comparison, only 600 copies of the Complutensian Polyglot were ever printed.
remaining committed to reforming the Church and its clerics' abuses from within.
Notable among these was Ulrich von Hutten, a brilliant but erratic genius, who had thrown himself into the Lutheran cause and declared that Erasmus, if he had a spark of honesty, would do the same.
He criticizes those that spend the Church’s riches at the people’s expense.
Erasmus responded with a lengthy, two-part ''Hyperaspistes'' (1526–27).
Erasmus was a classical scholar and wrote in a pure Latin style.
Recognitum et Emendatum''.
''Education'' was published in 1516, three years after Niccolò Machiavelli’s ''The Prince''; a comparison between the two is worth noting.
Erasmus also translated the Latin text into Greek wherever he found that the Greek text and the accompanying commentaries were mixed up, or where he simply preferred the Vulgate’s reading to the Greek text.
This portion was printed in 1514, but publication was delayed until 1522 by waiting for the Old Testament portion, and the sanction of Pope Leo X.
:"But one thing the facts cry out, and it can be clear, as they say, even to a blind man, that often through the translator’s clumsiness or inattention the Greek has been wrongly rendered; often the true and genuine reading has been corrupted by ignorant scribes, which we see happen every day, or altered by scribes who are half-taught and half-asleep."
Information on his family and early life comes mainly from vague references in his writings.
He wrote, "I have wooed you both unhappily and relentlessly".
That manuscript is now thought to be a 1520 creation from the Latin Vulgate, which likely got the verses from a fifth-century marginal gloss in a Latin copy of I John.
His last words, as recorded by his friend Beatus Rhenanus, were apparently "''lieve God''" ().
His parents were not legally married.
A bronze statue of him was erected in his city of birth in 1622, replacing an earlier work in stone.
Erasmus, at the height of his literary fame, was inevitably called upon to take sides, but partisanship was foreign to his nature and his habits.
Both being part of canonical tradition, he clearly found it necessary to ensure that both were actually presenting the same content.
Erasmus wittily dismissed the charge, claiming that Luther had hatched a different bird entirely.
He was born in Rotterdam, although there are insufficient records to confirm this.
He tried to free the methods of scholarship from the rigidity and formalism of medieval traditions, but he was not satisfied with this.
On a well-known wooden picture is indicated: ''Goudæ conceptus, Roterodami natus'' (Latin: conceived in Gouda; born in Rotterdam).
In the earlier phases of the project, he never mentioned a Greek text:
As a result of his reformatory activities, Erasmus found himself at odds with both the great parties.
In his reply in 1523, ''Spongia adversus aspergines Hutteni'', Erasmus displays his skill in semantics.
In a letter to Nikolaus von Amsdorf, Luther objected to Erasmus’ Catechism and called Erasmus a "viper," "liar,"
Some have taken this as evidence of an illicit affair.
Erasmus did not build a large body of supporters with his letters.
In his ''De libero arbitrio diatribe sive collatio'' (1524), he lampoons the Lutheran view on free will.
Much like the Brethren of the Common Life, he wrote that the New Testament is the law of Christ people are called to obey and that Christ is the example they are called to imitate.
In a way it is legitimate to say that Erasmus "synchronized" or "unified" the Greek and the Latin traditions of the New Testament by producing an updated version of either simultaneously.
In response, Luther wrote his ''De servo arbitrio'' (On the Bondage of the Will) (1525), which attacks the "Diatribe" and Erasmus himself, going so far as to claim that Erasmus was not a Christian.
In 1512, he began his work on this Latin New Testament.
In 2003, a poll showing that most Rotterdammers believed Erasmus to be the designer of the local "Erasmus Bridge" instigated the founding of the Erasmus House (Rotterdam), and the Erasmus House (Jakarta)  dedicated to celebrating Erasmus's legacy.
In book I of his ''Hyperaspistes'' he puts the matter bluntly to Luther:
This correspondence contrasts sharply with the generally detached and much more restrained attitude he showed in his later life.
The term ''Sileni''—especially when juxtaposed with the character of Alcibiades—can therefore be understood as an evocation of the notion that something on the inside is more expressive of a person's character than what one sees on the outside.
Erasmus lived against the backdrop of the growing European religious Reformation, but while he was critical of the abuses within the Catholic Church and called for reform, he kept his distance from Luther and Melanchthon and continued to recognise the authority of the pope, emphasizing a middle way with a deep respect for traditional faith, piety and grace, rejecting Luther's emphasis on faith alone.
Admirers from all quarters of Europe visited him there and he was surrounded by devoted friends, notably developing a lasting association with the great publisher Johann Froben.
Throughout his life, he was offered many positions of honor and profit throughout the academic world but declined them all, preferring the uncertain but sufficient rewards of independent literary activity.
This prompted him, upon his return from England, to master the Greek language, which would enable him to study theology on a more profound level and to prepare a new edition of Jerome's Bible translation.
The sacramentarians, headed by Œcolampadius of Basel, were, as Erasmus says, quoting him as holding views similar to their own in order to try to claim him for their schismatic and "erroneous" movement.
The University was then the chief seat of Scholastic learning, but already coming under the influence of Renaissance humanism.
He further demonstrated the reason for the inclusion of the Greek text when defending his work:
Protestant views of Erasmus fluctuated depending on region and period, with continual support in his native Netherlands and in cities of the Upper Rhine area.
For instance, something or someone ugly on the outside can be beautiful on the inside, which is one of the main points of Plato's dialogues featuring ''Alcibiades'' and the ''Symposion'', in which Alcibiades also appears.
He also wrote ''On Free Will,'' ''The Praise of Folly'', ''Handbook of a Christian Knight'', ''On Civility in Children'', ''Copia: Foundations of the Abundant Style'', ''Julius Exclusus'', and many other works.
Though some speculate that he intended to produce a critical Greek text or that he wanted to beat the Complutensian Polyglot into print, there is no evidence to support this.
We are dealing with this: Would a stable mind depart from the opinion handed down by so many men famous for holiness and miracles, depart from the decisions of the Church, and commit our souls to the faith of someone like you who has sprung up just now with a few followers, although the leading men of your flock do not agree either with you or among themselves – indeed though you do not even agree with yourself, since in this same ''Assertion'' you say one thing in the beginning and something else later on, recanting what you said before.
He criticizes the riches of the popes, believing that it would be better for the Gospel to be most important.
When his strength began to fail, he decided to accept an invitation by Queen Mary of Hungary, Regent of the Netherlands, to move from Freiburg to Brabant.
According to him the ''Comma'' was known to Tertullian.
His revolt against certain forms of Christian monasticism and scholasticism was not based on doubts about the truth of doctrine, nor from hostility to the organization of the Church itself, nor from rejection of celibacy or monastical lifestyles.
He added a dedication, affirming his belief in the reality of the Body of Christ after consecration in the Eucharist, commonly referred to as transubstantiation.
Alcibiades was a Greek politician in the 5th century BCE and a general in the Peloponnesian War; he figures here more as a character written into some of Plato's dialogues—a young, debauched playboy whom Socrates tries to convince to seek truth instead of pleasure, wisdom instead of pomp and splendor.
The true point of the Church is to help people lead Christian lives.
Twice in the course of the great discussion, he allowed himself to enter the field of doctrinal controversy, a field foreign to both his nature and his previous practice.
Later, while tutoring in Paris, he was suddenly dismissed by the guardian of Thomas Grey.
The Apostles were Sileni since they were ridiculed by others.
Erasmus was accused by the monks against the Reformation, that he had: "prepared the way and was responsible for Martin Luther.
In their early correspondence, Luther expressed boundless admiration for all Erasmus had done in the cause of a sound and reasonable Christianity and urged him to join the Lutheran party.
A bronze statue of him was erected in the city of his birth in 1622, replacing an earlier work in stone.
His more serious writings begin early with the ''Enchiridion militis Christiani,'' the "Handbook of the Christian Soldier" (1503) (translated into English a few years later by the young William Tyndale).
His residence at Leuven, where he lectured at the University, exposed Erasmus to much criticism from those ascetics, academics and clerics hostile to the principles of literary and religious reform and the loose norms of the Renaissance adherents to which he was devoting his life.
All of his works were placed on the Index of Prohibited Books by Pope Paul IV, and some of his works continued to be banned or viewed with caution in the later Index of Pope Pius IV.
For Erasmus the essential point is that humans have the freedom of choice.
As the popular response to Luther gathered momentum, the social disorders, which Erasmus dreaded and Luther disassociated himself from, began to appear, including the German Peasants' War, the Anabaptist disturbances in Germany and in the Low Countries, iconoclasm and the radicalization of peasants across Europe.
According to his letters, he was associated with the Venetian natural philosopher, Giulio Camillo, but, apart from this, he had a less active association with Italian scholars than might have been expected.
The chief evil of the day, he says, is formalism - going through the motions of tradition without understanding their basis in the teachings of Christ.
