In September 2006, Tutu repeated his opposition to Zuma's candidacy as ANC leader due to Zuma's "moral failings."
Tutu has been a staunch opponent since the start of the Iraq War, saying that it has "destabilised and polarised the world to a greater extent than any other conflict in history".
Tutu stated that he feared that riots would break out in Zimbabwe if the election results were ignored.
Through his writings and lectures at home and abroad, Tutu consistently advocated reconciliation between all parties involved in apartheid.
We pray for those who made it happen, help us to forgive them and help us so that we in our turn will not make others suffer."
In February 2006, Tutu repeated these statements after a UN report was published which called for the closure of the camp.
On 10 May 2013, Tutu said he would no longer be able to vote for the African National Congress, citing inequality, violence, and corruption.
In 2008, Governor Rod Blagojevich of Illinois proclaimed 13 May 'Desmond Tutu Day'.
So let us stand for them."
He said in a public lecture that he would not be able to hold his "head high" if Zuma became leader after being accused both of rape and corruption.
Tutu planned to travel to the Palestinian territory to "assess the situation of victims, address the needs of survivors and make recommendations on ways and means to protect Palestinian civilians against further Israeli assaults," according to the president of the UN Human Rights Council, Luis Alfonso De Alba.
According to Paul Larudee, founding member of GM2J, the aim was to "march from many starting points and converge on Jerusalem, either reaching that destination or getting as close to it as possible" on 30 March 2012 as an act of nonviolent resistance to what he describes as Israel's Judaization of Jerusalem.
The apartheid government was very powerful, but today it no longer exists."
This was seen as a gesture of support for him and The South African Council of Churches which he led at that time.
Tutu cancelled the trip in mid-December, saying that Israel had refused to grant him the necessary travel clearance after more than a week of discussions.
Professor Toffolo and others said 'We stand for him.'
From then on Tutu supported an economic boycott of his country.
Tutu used the occasion to praise the people of the city for their traditional support of freedom and for standing with the people of South Africa in their fight against apartheid.
As of March 2012, Tutu was a member of the Advisory Board for Global March to Jerusalem (GM2J).
Tutu was inducted into the Golden Key International Honour Society as an Honorary Member in 2001, by the University of Stellenbosch.
In August 2006 Tutu publicly urged Jacob Zuma, the South African politician (now President) who had been accused of sexual crimes and corruption, to drop out of the ANC's presidential succession race.
In October 2004, Tutu appeared in a play at Off Broadway, New York, called ''Guantanamo – Honor-bound to Defend Freedom''.
Tutu has often stated that all leaders in Africa should condemn Zimbabwe: "What an awful blot on our copy book.
He was due to begin serving his sentence in 1993, but failed to hand himself over to prison authorities.
He stated at the launching of the book ''Sex, Love and Homophobia'' that homophobia is a "crime against humanity" and "every bit as unjust" as apartheid.
In this role he presents the annual South African Reconciliation Award.
Tutu has been vocal in condemnation of corruption, the ineffectiveness of the ANC-led government to deal with poverty, and the recent outbreaks of xenophobic violence in some townships in South Africa.
Tutu preached a message of forgiveness during a 1989 trip to Israel's Yad Vashem museum, saying "Our Lord would say that in the end the positive thing that can come is the spirit of forgiving, not forgetting, but the spirit of saying: God, this happened to us.
Tutu was at the 2009 United Nations Climate Change Conference in Copenhagen.
Do we really care about human rights, do we care that people of flesh and blood, fellow Africans, are being treated like rubbish, almost worse than they were ever treated by rabid racists?"
Initiation rituals amongst the Xhosa people have led to the death of over 825 boys since 1995, many others suffered complications including penile amputation.
After the fall of apartheid, Tutu headed the Truth and Reconciliation Commission.
Tutu has been vocal in his criticism of human rights abuses in Zimbabwe as well as the South African government's policy of quiet diplomacy towards Zimbabwe.
Tutu is generally credited with coining the term Rainbow Nation as a metaphor for post-apartheid South Africa after 1994 under African National Congress rule.
Tutu has been particularly involved in The Elders' initiative on child marriage, attending the Clinton Global Initiative in New York in September 2011 to launch ''Girls Not Brides: The Global Partnership to End Child Marriage''.
He criticised China for not doing more against the Darfur genocide.
Tutu has lent his name to the fight against homophobia in Africa and around the world.
It is by standing up for the rights of girls and women that we truly measure up as men."
The Faculty of Protestant Theology and Senate based the decision on Tutu's outstanding achievement in developing and establishing what can be called "ubuntu-theology", his manifestation of what became known as "public theology".
Tutu made a stinging attack on South Africa's political elite, saying the country was "sitting on a powder keg" because of its failure to alleviate poverty a decade after apartheid's end.
Tutu is also a member of the PeaceJam Foundation.
When a new constitution was proposed for South Africa in 1983 to defend against the anti-apartheid movement, Tutu helped form the National Forum Committee to fight the constitutional changes.
The Nobel Committee cited his "role as a unifying leader figure in the campaign to resolve the problem of apartheid in South Africa".
"Our hope is that we can keep Darfur in the spotlight and spur on governments to help keep peace in the region," said Tutu.
The other members of the group are Martti Ahtisaari, Ela Bhatt, Lakhdar Brahimi, Fernando Henrique Cardoso, Jimmy Carter, Hina Jilani, Graça Machel, Mary Robinson and Ernesto Zedillo.
In 1990, Tutu and the ex-Vice-Chancellor of the University of the Western Cape Professor Jakes Gerwel founded the Desmond Tutu Educational Trust.
In 1972, Tutu returned to the UK, where he was appointed vice-director of the Theological Education Fund of the World Council of Churches, at Bromley in Kent.
However, Tutu and British academic Christine Chinkin are now due to visit the Gaza Strip via Egypt and will file a report at the September 2008 session of the Human Rights Council.
We live in a moral universe.
Building Tomorrow engages young people in their mission to build schools for underserved children and communities in Uganda.
In line with the requirement that members of The Elders should not hold public office, Suu Kyi stepped down as an honorary Elder following her election to parliament on 1 April 2012.
He later spoke to a rally calling on heads of states worldwide not to attend the 2008 Summer Olympics opening ceremony "for the sake of the beautiful people of Tibet".
He applied for amnesty from the Truth and Reconciliation Commission which was granted in 1997; a move that was harshly criticised by some as preferential treatment by a commission that was co-founded and chaired by his father.
The Trust – established to fund developmental programmes in tertiary education – provides capacity building at 17 historically disadvantaged institutions.
In December 2015, Tutu's daughter, Mpho.
Tutu came out in support of assisted dying on July 2014, stating that life shouldn't be preserved "at any cost".
Have they turned their backs on their profound and noble religious traditions?
On 8 May 2009, Tutu was the featured speaker during Michigan State University's spring undergraduate convocation.
Tutu married a woman, Marceline Furth.
He argued that Israel could never live in security by oppressing another people, and stated, "People are scared in this country the US, to say wrong is wrong because the Jewish lobby is powerful – very powerful.
His 2010 book, ''Made for Goodness'' was awarded a Nautilus Book Award.
While the AJC was critical of some of Tutu's views, it dismissed "insidious rumours" that he had made antisemitic statements.
It is the same with sexual orientation.
In 2006, Tutu launched a global campaign, organised by Plan, to ensure that all children are registered at birth, as an unregistered child did not officially exist and was vulnerable to traffickers and during disasters.
He often compared apartheid to Nazism; as a result the government twice revoked his passport, and he was jailed briefly in 1980 after a protest march.
It is said to be one of the few streets in the world where two Nobel Prize winners have lived.
On 8 March 2009, Tutu joined the "Africa for women's rights" campaign launched by the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), the African Centre for Democracy and Human Rights Studies (ACDHRS), Femmes Africa Solidarité (FAS), Women's Aid Collective (WACOL), Women in Law and Development in Africa (WILDAF), Women and Law in South Africa (WLSA) and a hundred other African human rights and women's rights organisations.
The Elders are independently funded by a group of donors: Sir Richard Branson and Jean Oelwang (Virgin Unite), Peter Gabriel (The Peter Gabriel Foundation), Kathy Bushkin Calvin (The United Nations Foundation), Jeremy Coller and Lulit Solomon (J Coller Foundation), Niclas Kjellström-Matseke (Swedish Postcode Lottery), Randy Newcomb and Pam Omidyar (Humanity United), Jeff Skoll and Sally Osberg (Skoll Foundation), Jovanka Porsche (HP Capital Partners), Julie Quadrio Curzio (Quadrio Curzio Family Trust), Amy Towers (The Nduna Foundation), Shannon Sedgwick Davis (The Bridgeway Foundation) and Marieke van Schaik (Dutch Postcode Lottery).
Tutu was awarded an honorary degree from Bangor University, Bangor, Wales, on 10 June 2009.
And I still want to say we must honour him for the things that he did do, and just say what a shame."
In 2007, the president of the University of St. Thomas in Minnesota cancelled a planned speech by Tutu, on the grounds that his presence might offend some members of the local Jewish community.
He proposed that a peace-keeping force should be sent to the region to ensure stability.
There are many things that you shouldn't accept."
In February 2006 Tutu took part in the 9th Assembly of the World Council of Churches, held in Porto Alegre, Brazil.
I say why are our memories so short.
For goodness sake, this is God's world!
Some found this statement offensive, with Rabbi Marvin Hier of the Simon Wiesenthal Center calling it "a gratuitous insult to Jews and victims of Nazism everywhere."
In 1992, he was awarded the Bishop John T. Walker Distinguished Humanitarian Service Award.
To celebrate the event, the Southwark Cathedral Merbecke Choir gave a concert in the presence of Archbishop Emeritus Desmond Tutu and his wife Leah at Southwark Cathedral on 11 July 2009.
In 2003, Tutu accepted the role as patron of Sabeel International, a Christian liberation theology organisation which supports the concerns of the Palestinian Christian community and has actively lobbied the international Christian community for divestment from Israel.
On January 22, 2000 Tutu received an honorary doctorate from the Faculty of Theology
St Paul said women should not speak in church at all and there are people who have used that to say women should not be ordained.
Tutu's family moved to Johannesburg when he was twelve.
He specifically welcomed the aims of the International Conference on Population and Development in Cairo.
He made similar comments in 2002, speaking of "the humiliation of the Palestinians at checkpoints and roadblocks, suffering like us when young white police officers prevented us from moving about".
One such people is the people of West Papua."
", "Black and white together!"
However, Tutu described these statistics as "cold comfort" as it was unacceptable that 600 people died of AIDS in South Africa every day.
He also helped to lead a rally in 2011 in Durban, South Africa (We Have Faith:Act Now for Climate Justice Rally) in the run up to the COP17 negotiations; where he advocated for all governments to sign a binding document to ensure that climate justice is realised for all people.
Former Elder Muhammad Yunus stepped down as a member of the group in September 2009, stating that he was unable to do justice to his membership due to the demands of his work.
In 1995, he was appointed a Chaplain and Sub-Prelate of the Venerable Order of Saint John by Queen Elizabeth II, and he became a patron of the American Harmony Child Foundation and the Hospice Palliative Care Association (HPCA) of South Africa.
In 2003 the Desmond Tutu HIV Centre was founded in Cape Town, while the Desmond Tutu TB Centre was founded in 2003 at Stellenbosch University.
In 1994, Tutu said that he approved of artificial contraception and that abortion was acceptable in a number of situations, such as incest and rape.
Tutu co-chairs 1GOAL Education for All ''campaign'' which was launched by Queen Rania of Jordan in August 2009 which aims to secure schooling for some 72 million children world-wide who cannot afford it, in accordance with the Millennium Goal Promise of Education For All by 2015 giving them an opportunity to get education through the FIFA 1Goal campaign.
In 2003, he taught a course entitled Truth and Reconciliation at the University of North Florida in Jacksonville, Florida, after being asked by adjunct professor Oupa Seane, a friend and activist from South Africa.
Tutu has also supported the inclusion of same-sex marriages within the Anglican Church of Southern Africa.
The military prosecution has not presented evidence that Private Manning injured anyone by releasing secret documents...
In May 2009 Tutu was awarded an honorary Doctor of Divinity degree from the University of Edinburgh.
Tutu has often spoken in support of the Basic Income Grant (BIG) which has so far been defeated in parliament.
Kellogg Foundation, launched the Desmond Tutu Footprints of the Legends Awards to recognise leadership in combating prejudice, human rights, research and poverty eradication.
Naomi Tutu founded the Tutu Foundation for Development and Relief in Southern Africa, based in Hartford, Connecticut.
After the first round of volleys were fired, South African Press Association journalist, Ben Maclennan reported Tutu's response as: "Thank you Mr President for telling me what you think of me, that I am—a liar with scant regard for the truth, and a charlatan posing with his concern for the poor, the hungry, the oppressed and the voiceless."
During the ceremony, Tutu thanked the people of Wales for their role in helping end apartheid.
In June 1999, Tutu was invited to give the annual Wilberforce Lecture in Kingston upon Hull, commemorating the life and achievements of the anti-slavery campaigner William Wilberforce.
Aung San Suu Kyi is a former honorary Elder.
Through his experience in Iraq, he became disturbed by top-level policy that undervalued human life and caused the suffering of innocent civilians and soldiers.
Before the 32nd G8 summit in Heiligendamm, Germany, in 2007, Tutu called on the G8 to focus on poverty in the Third World.
"People came and stood and had demonstrations to say 'Let Tutu speak.'
He said his application for a visa had not come through on time despite having been made to Pretoria several weeks earlier.
The spokesman for Tutu said the cleric changed his plans and would attend the funeral of Mandela, after not originally being officially invited.
Tutu asked why Iraq was being singled out when Europe, India and Pakistan also had many weapons of mass destruction.
In the same year, Tutu received an International Advocate for Peace Award from the Cardozo School of Law, an affiliate of Yeshiva University, sparking scattered student protests and condemnations from representatives of the Simon Wiesenthal Center and Anti-Defamation League.
Tutu wrote to the Chinese government demanding the release of dissident Yang Jianli in 2007.
From 1970 to 1972, Tutu lectured at the National University of Lesotho.
Tutu was named to head a United Nations fact-finding mission to the Gaza Strip town of Beit Hanoun, where, in a November 2006 incident the Israel Defense Forces killed 19 civilians after troops wound up a week-long incursion aimed at curbing Palestinian rocket attacks on Israel from the town.
Tutu had announced he would retire from public life when he turned 79 in October 2010.
Tutu has said, "I believe that education is the key to unlocking the door that will eradicate poverty and that young people have the power to make it happen."
Like other whistleblowers, he was driven foremost by a desire to reveal the truth
In the ongoing effort to research the diversity of the human genome, Tutu donated some of his own cells to the project.
"There were those who tried to say 'Tutu shouldn’t come to St.Thomas to speak.'
His father was a teacher and his mother was a cleaner and cook at a school for the blind.
Israeli officials expressed concern that the report would be biased against Israel.
Tutu's admirers see him as a great man who, since the demise of apartheid, has been active in the defence of human rights and uses his high profile to campaign for the oppressed.
Tutu has been more supportive in recent years of non-celibate gay Christian clergy, praising Gene Robinson and even writing the foreword for his autobiography, ''In the Eye of the Storm'' (2008).
At the Opening Ceremony of the XIX Olympic Winter Games in Salt Lake City, Tutu was offered, and accepted, the honour of being one of the eight flagbearers to carry the Olympic flag, representing Africa.
Gene Robinson is a wonderful human being, and I am proud to belong to the same church as he."
Tutu compared these detentions to those under Apartheid.
He has also compiled several books of his speeches and sayings.
In 2002, when delivering a public lecture in support of divestment, Tutu said "My heart aches.
He later returned to South Africa and became chaplain at the University of Fort Hare in 1967.
Tutu has focused on drawing awareness to issues such as poverty, AIDS and non-democratic governments in the Third World.
In 2009, Tutu assisted in the establishing of the Solomon Islands' Truth and Reconciliation Commission, modelled after the South African body of the same name.
Following the United Nations Millennium Summit in 2000, it appeared that world leaders were determined as never before to set and meet specific goals regarding extreme poverty.
Tutu is also a "Climate Ally" in the "tck tck tck Time for Climate Justice" campaign of the Global Humanitarian Forum and a 350.org messenger.
Tutu has increased his criticism of conservative attitudes to homosexuality within his own church, equating homophobia with racism, saying at a conference in Nairobi that he is "deeply disturbed that in the face of some of the most horrendous problems facing Africa, we concentrate on 'what do I do in bed with whom'".
Tutu also spoke against Tony Blair's failed attempt to hold terrorist suspects in Britain for up to 90 days without charge.
Tutu has acknowledged the significant role Jews played in the anti-apartheid struggle in South Africa and has voiced support for Israel's security concerns, speaking against suicide bombing.
The Zionist Organization of America has led a campaign to protest Tutu's appearances at North American campuses.
He added that "we struggled against apartheid in South Africa, supported by people the world over, because black people were being blamed and made to suffer for something we could do nothing about; our very skins...
If he had stepped down ten or so years ago he would be held in very, very high regard.
The Elders' priority issue areas include the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the Korean Peninsula, Sudan and South Sudan, sustainable development, and equality for girls and women.
In 2007, 2010 and 2013, he joined 600 college students and sailed around the world with the Semester at Sea program.
Tutu is the Patron of the educational improvement charity Link Community Development.
Have they forgotten the collective punishment, the home demolitions, in their own history so soon?
Tutu addressed Gonzaga University's Class of 2012 on 13 May 2012 in Spokane, Washington.
He was then released from Goodwood Prison in Cape Town where he had begun serving his three-and-a-half-year prison sentence after a court in East London refused to grant him bail.
After six wonderful years as Chair, I am sad to say that it was time for me to step down."
He returned to South Africa in 1975 and was appointed Dean of St Mary's Cathedral in Johannesburg.
This lecture, critical of the ANC-controlled government, stirred a pot of controversy between Tutu and Thabo Mbeki, calling into question "the right to criticise".
Blair defended himself at the conference, while Juan Cole observed that "Blair was paid thousands of dollars to attend the conference; if Tutu had gone, he would have spoken gratis."
In commemoration of this event the University established the Desmond Tutu Masters' Scholarship for students from Africa to do postgraduate Master's study within the School of Divinity.
The following year he launched the Desmond Tutu Peace Foundation USA, which is designed to work with universities nationwide to create leadership academies emphasising peace, social justice and reconciliation.
Tutu expressed support for the West Papuan independence movement, criticising the UN's role in the takeover of West Papua by Indonesia.
In 2007, statistics were released that indicated HIV and AIDS numbers were lower than previously thought in South Africa.
In 2007 he said the "quiet diplomacy" pursued by the Southern Africa Development Community (SADC) had "not worked at all" and he called on Britain and the West to pressure SADC, including South Africa, which was chairing talks between President Mugabe's Zanu-PF party and the opposition Movement for Democratic Change, to set firm deadlines for action, with consequences if they were not met.
The expression has since entered mainstream consciousness to describe South Africa's ethnic diversity.
The Archbishop joined the choir on stage for its encore – an arrangement of George Gershwin's 'Summertime'.
The Bible accepted slavery.
The bomb threat delayed the Johannesburg-bound flight for more than three hours, costing South African Airways some R28000.
Tutu is widely regarded as "South Africa's moral conscience" and was described by former President of South Africa Nelson Mandela as "sometimes strident, often tender, never afraid and seldom without humour, Desmond Tutu's voice will always be the voice of the voiceless".
A 2006 opinion piece in the ''Jerusalem Post'' newspaper described him as "a friend, albeit a misguided one, of Israel and the Jewish people".
Tutu claimed that arguments being made in Britain and the United States were similar to those the South African apartheid regime had used.
He has campaigned to fight HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, poverty, racism, sexism, homophobia, and transphobia.
Archbishop Tutu was joined on stage by Mary Blewitt who lost 50 members of her family in the Rwandan genocide; Jo Berry whose father was killed in the 1984 Brighton hotel bombing; and Patrick Magee, the former IRA activist who planted the bomb.
Tutu supported the creation of the Harvey Milk Foundation after being a co-recipient of 2009 Presidential Medal of Freedom with Milk and meeting his nephew, Stuart Milk, who accepted the medal on behalf of his uncle.
Here he met Trevor Huddleston, who was a parish priest in the black slum of Sophiatown.
In 2001, the Desmond Tutu Educational Trust, with funding from the W.K.
He has received numerous doctorates and fellowships at distinguished universities.
In 2013, Archbishop Tutu was a mentor for Unreasonable at Sea, a technology business accelerator for social entrepreneurs seeking to scale their ventures in international markets.
"Ninety days for a South African is an awful déjà-vu because we had in South Africa in the bad old days a 90-day detention law," he said.
During the 2008 Tibetan unrest, Tutu praised the 14th Dalai Lama and said that the government of China should "listen to his pleas for... no further violence".
Tutu was Bishop of Lesotho from 1976 until 1978, when he became Secretary-General of the South African Council of Churches.
He subsequently became patron of the South African Prostate Cancer Foundation, which was established in 2007.
He made a speech in front of many at the event.
at Uppsala University, Sweden
We just say that at the moment, we believe that they should remain celibate and we don't see what the fuss is about."
This play was highly critical of the US handling of detainees at Guantanamo Bay.
From this position, he was able to continue his work against apartheid with agreement from nearly all churches.
In October 2008, Tutu received the Wallenberg Medal from the University of Michigan in recognition of his lifelong work in defence of human rights and dignity.
He also wrote to the Revd Grayde Parsons praising the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.)'s decision to allow non-celibate male and female clergy.
He is also an active and prominent proponent of the campaign for divestment from Israel, likening Israel's treatment of Palestinians to the treatment of Black South Africans under apartheid.
Tutu called Mugabe "someone we were very proud of", as he "did a fantastic job, and it’s such a great shame, because he had a wonderful legacy.
At the time, Trevor Tutu announced his intention to appeal against his sentence, but failed to arrive for the appeal hearings.
Under apartheid, as at Guantanamo, people were held for "unconscionably long periods" and then released, he said.
At a thanksgiving for Tutu upon his retirement as Archbishop in 1996, Nelson Mandela said that Tutu made an "immeasurable contribution to our nation".
Tutu also emphasised that when South Africa had used those methods the country had been condemned; however when powerful countries such as Britain and the United States of America had invoked such power, the world was silent and in that silence accepted their methods even though the left charged that they violated essential human rights.
Many people continue to suffer brutal oppression, where their fundamental dignity as human beings is denied.
In 1993, Tutu was a patron of the Cape Town Olympic Bid Committee.
The latter statement was criticised by some Jewish groups, including the Anti-Defamation League.
The Students' Union nightclub, Tutu's, is named in his honour.
I was 10,000 miles away and I thought to myself, 'Ah, no,’ because there were many here who said 'No, come and speak,’" Tutu said.
Many faculty members opposed this decision, and with some describing Tutu as the victim of a smear campaign.
He is also the recipient of the Gandhi Peace Prize, the King Hussein Prize and the Marion Doenhoff Prize for International Reconciliation and Understanding.
He retired as Archbishop of Cape Town in 1996 and was made emeritus Archbishop of Cape Town, an honorary title that is unusual in the Anglican church.
Freedom of the city awards have been conferred on Tutu in cities in Italy, Wales, England and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
He sharply criticised the decision of the South African government to delay the issuance of a visa to the Dalai Lama, accusing the government of "kowtowing to China".
On 23 May 2011 in Shrewsbury, Massachusetts, Tutu gave what was said to be his last major public speech outside of South Africa.
Tutu studied at the Pretoria Bantu Normal College from 1951 to 1953, and went on to teach at Johannesburg Bantu High School and at Munsienville High School in Mogale City.
:"Instead of growing old gracefully, at home with my family – reading and writing and praying and thinking – too much of my time has been spent at airports and in hotels," the Nobel laureate said in a statement.
Tutu's opposition to apartheid was vigorous and unequivocal, and he was outspoken both in South Africa and abroad.
