As the expense of heavier surface combatants has generally removed them from the fleet, destroyer tonnage has grown (a modern ''Arleigh Burke''-class destroyer has the same tonnage as a World War II light cruiser).
* Operate the , a class of large multi-purpose missile destroyers.
They needed significant seaworthiness and endurance to operate with the battle fleet, and as they necessarily became larger, they became officially designated "torpedo boat destroyers", and by the First World War were largely known as "destroyers" in English.
At that time, and even into World War I, the only function of destroyers was to protect their own battle fleet from enemy torpedo attacks and to make such attacks on the battleships of the enemy.
The ''Kolkata'' class will be augmented by the new P15B class of destroyers (''Visakhapatnam''-class destroyer) the construction of which was started in 2014.
Examples include the Soviet , the British , and the US .
The Italian navy also operates two s. Italy classifies the FREMM with the NATO designation of "F" for frigate.
The trend during World War I had been towards larger destroyers with heavier armaments.
In common with subsequent early Thornycroft boats, they had sloping sterns and double rudders.
These ships are to be a subclass of South Korea's  destroyers.
rendering them unbearably hot in tropical regions."
These destroyers also carry anti-submarine rockets and torpedoes.
Four torpedo reloads were carried.
In most cases torpedo and/or dual-purpose gun armament was reduced to accommodate new anti-air and anti-submarine weapons.
Their anti-aircraft missiles have a surface attack mode, and both the 130&nbsp;mm guns and the torpedoes are useful against ships at close range.
They were fitted with new light anti-aircraft guns, radar, and forward-launched ASW weapons, in addition to their existing dual-purpose guns, depth charges, and torpedoes.
However, only two Russian battleships were seriously damaged due to the proper deployment of torpedo nets.
China also operates three ''Luyang'' III-class destroyers, six ''Luda''-class destroyers, two ''Luhu''-class destroyers, and one ''Luhai''-class destroyer.
But her commander, LT. John C. Fremont, described her as "...a compact mass of machinery not meant to keep the sea nor to live in... as five sevenths of the ship are taken up by machinery and fuel, whilst the remaining two sevenths, fore and aft, are the crew's quarters; officers forward and the men placed aft.
In naval terminology, a '''destroyer''' is a fast maneuverable long-endurance warship intended to escort larger vessels in a fleet, convoy or battle group and defend them against smaller powerful short-range attackers.
Other navies also adopted oil, for instance the USN with the  of 1909.
The task of escorting merchant convoys was still in the future.
The second development was the replacement of the torpedo-boat-style turtleback foredeck by a raised forecastle for the new s built in 1903, which provided better sea-keeping as well as more space below deck.
Germany started to build destroyers again during the 1930s as part of Hitler's rearmament program.
Once German and Japanese rearmament became clear, the British and American navies consciously focused on building destroyers that were smaller but more numerous than those used by other nations.
Germany nevertheless continued to build such boats until the end of World War I, although these were effectively small coastal destroyers.
The submarine threat meant that many destroyers spent their time on anti-submarine patrol; once Germany adopted unrestricted submarine warfare in January 1917, destroyers were called on to escort merchant convoys.
Early-war destroyers had the speed and armament to intercept submarines before they submerged, either by gunfire or by ramming.
Realizing the need for heavier gun armament, the British built the  of 1936 (sometimes called ''Afridi'' after one of two lead ships).
They produced 4,200&nbsp;hp from a pair of Thornycroft water-tube boilers, giving them a top speed of 27 knots, giving the range and speed to travel effectively with a battle fleet.
Torpedo Boat Destroyer designs continued to evolve around the turn of the 20th century in several key ways.
* Operates a single FREMM multipurpose frigate.
US Navy destroyers were among the first American units to be dispatched upon the American entry to the war, and a squadron of Japanese destroyers even joined Allied patrols in the Mediterranean.
:The People's Liberation Army Navy of the operate the , a class of large multi-purpose missile destroyers.
By 1910 the turbine had been widely adopted by all navies for their faster ships.
The Royal Navy also operates a Type 82 destroyer for training use.
After the war, the advent of the guided missile allowed destroyers to take on the surface combatant roles previously filled by battleships and cruisers.
has begun development into its .
Ultimately the term ''torpedo boat'' came to be attached to a quite different vessel – the very fast hydroplaning motor driven MTB.
In 1892, the Third Sea Lord, Rear Admiral John "Jacky" Fisher ordered the development of a new type of ships equipped with the then novel water-tube boilers and quick-firing small calibre guns.
The submarine had the potential to hide from gunfire and close underwater to fire torpedoes.
Examples include the US FRAM I programme and the British Type 15 frigates converted from fleet destroyers.
They will also use the AEGIS Combat System.
Destroyers also had a shallow enough draft that torpedoes would find it difficult to hit them.
* Operates five s. These ships are classified by Norway as frigates, but they are more capable than a ship the US Navy would classify as a frigate.
Essentially very small cruisers, torpedo gunboats were equipped with torpedo tubes and an adequate gun armament, intended for hunting down smaller enemy boats.
The ship carried three torpedoes per tube.
The Japanese destroyer-commander finished with, "Yesterday I looked at myself in a mirror for a long time; I was disagreeably surprised to see my face thin, full of wrinkles, and as old as though I were fifty.
* Operates three s. These ships are classified by Germany as frigates, but are destroyers in terms of size and strength, and are usually labeled as such by other navies.
At the end of the war the state-of-the-art was represented by the British W-class.
My clothes (uniform) cover nothing but a skeleton, and my bones are full of rheumatism."
The first seagoing vessel designed to fire the self-propelled Whitehead torpedo was the 33-ton  in 1876.
The US  adopted twin five-inch (127&nbsp;mm) guns, and the subsequent  and  (the latter of 1934) increased the number of torpedo tubes to 12 and 16 respectively.
The destroyers have the capability to carry two Sea King helicopters.
Three destroyer divisions attacked the Russian fleet in port, firing a total of 18 torpedoes.
Once destroyers became more than just catchers guarding an anchorage, it was realized that they were also ideal to take over the role of torpedo boats themselves, so they were fitted with torpedo tubes as well as guns.
They were armed with one 12-pounder gun and three 6-pounder guns, with one fixed 18-in torpedo tube in the bow plus two more torpedo tubes on a revolving mount abaft the two funnels.
The United States commissioned its first torpedo boat destroyer, , Destroyer No.
An important development came with the construction of HMS ''Swift'' in 1884, later redesignated TB 81.
The emergence and development of the destroyer was related to the invention of the self-propelled torpedo in the 1860s.
The threat evolved by World War I with the development of the submarine, or U-boat.
The first vessel designed for the explicit purpose of hunting and destroying torpedo boats was the torpedo gunboat.
In fact Germany never distinguished between the two types, giving them pennant numbers in the same series and never giving names to destroyers.
While ''U-19'' was only damaged, the next month  successfully sank .
is currently building three s. These ships are to replace the aging s. Their design is similar to that of the ''Arleigh Burke''-class destroyer and the ''Alvaro de Bazan''-class destroyer.
The destroyers currently in use by the US Navy are the .
These ships are a subclass of Spain's ''Alvaro de Bazan''-class frigates and carry the AEGIS Combat System.
Their armament consists of eight SS-N-22 Sunburn anti-ship missiles, launchers for SA-N-7 Gadfly anti-air missiles and two AK-130 twin-barreled 130&nbsp;mm automatic naval guns which can fire laser-guided shells.
is currently developing plans for its 25DD destroyers and its DDR Destroyer Revolution Project.
They are powered by pressure-fired boilers, making them capable of speeds in excess of .
Egypt also operates a single  for training use.
She was armed with two drop collars to launch these weapons; these were replaced in 1879 by a single torpedo tube in the bow.
Finally, 64 3K95 Kinzhal (SA-N-9) medium-range point defense SAMs can be fired from vertical launching system.
The first unit is expected to enter service in 2019.
is planning construction of an additional five  frigates.
Additionally, one more  is being constructed.
The first unit, , will be commissioned in June 2017.
In 1885 the Spanish Navy chose the design submitted by the shipyard of James and George Thomson of Clydebank, near the Yarrow shipyards.
is adding six more FREMM multipurpose frigates to their fleet, while also negotiating plans to export a number of units to the Hellenic Navy and attempting to sell units to the Royal Canadian Navy.
Six ships to the specifications circulated by the Admiralty were ordered initially, comprising three different designs each produced by a different shipbuilder:  and  from John I. Thornycroft & Company,  and  from Yarrows, and  and  from Laird, Son & Company.
Patrol duty was far from safe; of the 67 British destroyers lost in the war, collisions accounted for 18, while 12 were wrecked.
A ''destroyer'' is always more uncomfortable than the others, and rain, snow, and ''sea-water'' combine to make them damp; in fact, in bad weather there is not a dry spot where one can rest for a moment."
The ship, with 80 missiles and a crew of 150, will include two Advanced Gun Systems (AGS) that can fire rocket-powered, computer-guided shells to destroy targets  away.
The first example of this was , designed by Nathaniel Barnaby in 1885, and commissioned in response to the Russian War scare.
This was a large (137 ton) torpedo boat with four 47&nbsp;mm quick-firing guns and three torpedo tubes.
Most other nations replied with similar larger ships.
* Operates four s. These ships are classified by the Netherlands as frigates, but are destroyers in "all but name."
Fast boats armed with torpedoes were built and called torpedo boats.
A navy now had the potential to destroy a superior enemy battle fleet using steam launches to launch torpedoes.
She was armed with one  Spanish-designed Hontoria breech-loading gun, four  (6-pounder) Nordenfelt guns, two  (3-pdr) Hotchkiss cannons and two  Schwartzkopff torpedo tubes.
This changed from the Type 1936 onwards, which mounted heavy  guns.
Early torpedo gunboat designs lacked the range and speed to keep up with the fleet they were supposed to protect.
By the end of the 1890s torpedo gunboats were made obsolete by their more successful contemporaries, the torpedo boat destroyers, which were much faster.
The  of 1935 carried five  guns and nine torpedo tubes, but could achieve speeds of 45 knots (83&nbsp;km/h; 52&nbsp;mph), which remains the record speed for a steamship and for any destroyer.
German destroyers also used innovative high-pressure steam machinery: while this should have helped their efficiency, it more often resulted in mechanical problems.
Above deck, one or more quick-firing guns were mounted in the bows, in front of the bridge; several more were mounted amidships and astern.
As a result, casualties on destroyers were among the highest.
While capital ship engagements were scarce in World War I, destroyer units engaged almost continually in raiding and patrol actions.
:The modern  destroyers of the Russian Navy can displace about 7,900 tonnes, can travel at , and have a maximum range of 10,500&nbsp;nm (19,450&nbsp;km) at .
The original class (''Udaloy I'') was designed for anti-submarine warfare, which can be seen in their two quadruple launchers of the Metel Anti-Ship Complex (SS-N-14), two quadruple  launchers equipped with either the Type 53 torpedo on the ''Udaloy I'' class or RPK-2 Viyuga (SS-N-15) on the ''Udaloy II'' class, and the two RBU-6000 anti-submarine launchers.
DD(X), also called ''Zumwalt'' class, is much larger than traditional destroyers, nearly three thousand tons heavier than a  (15,610&nbsp;long tons, larger than most heavy cruisers from the World War II era).
Designed to Japanese specifications and ordered from the London Yarrow shipyards in 1885, she was transported in parts to Japan, where she was assembled and launched in 1887.
rounded) forecastle that was characteristic of early British TBDs.
The first depth-charge sinking was on 4 December 1916, when  was sunk by HMS ''Llewellyn''.
The Yarrow shipyards, builder of the parts for the ''Kotaka'', "considered Japan to have effectively invented the destroyer".
(Barak-8) system is installed to counter airborne threats.
Development has also begun for the Type 055 destroyer.
Many modern destroyer designs delegate their anti-submarine role to embarked helicopters, which in addition to anti-submarine warfare can also be used for maritime rescue and vertical replenishment.
Guided missile destroyers (DDG in the US Navy) were developed to carry these weapons and protect the fleet from air, submarine and surface threats.
Japan also operates a , two  destroyers, four  destroyers, five  destroyers, nine  destroyers, eight  destroyers, three  destroyers, six  destroyers, and three  destroyers for training use.
* Operates two s and operate new FREMM multipurpose frigates.
is currently adding ten more ships of the Type 052D destroyer class.
* operates a single  purchased from the United States for training use.
Aft of the crew spaces was as much engine space as the technology of the time would allow: several boilers and engines or turbines.
They are powered by pressure-fired boilers, making them capable of speeds in excess of .
However, construction remained focused on putting the biggest possible engines into a small hull, resulting in a somewhat flimsy construction.
* Operates the  and  destroyers which both employ the Aegis combat system.
Early destroyers were extremely cramped places to live, being "without a doubt magnificent fighting vessels... but unable to stand bad weather".
Additionally, Russia is also developing it's s. These ships are expected to be multi purpose destroyers tasked with reinforcing a modern Russian surface combat fleet.
The 'V' and 'W's set the standard of destroyer building well into the 1920s.
Later the bow torpedo tube was removed and two more 6-pounder guns added instead.
Two tube mountings (later on, multiple mountings) were generally found amidships.
Over 80 British destroyers and 60 German torpedo-boats took part in the Battle of Jutland, which involved pitched small-boat actions between the main fleets, and several foolhardy attacks by unsupported destroyers on capital ships.
Destroyers (with a DD hull classification symbol) primarily perform anti-submarine warfare duty while guided missile destroyers (DDGs) are multi-mission (anti-submarine, anti-aircraft and anti-surface warfare) surface combatants, with an emphasis on anti-surface warfare.
Although the term "destroyer" had been used interchangeably with "TBD" and "torpedo boat destroyer" by navies since 1892, the term "torpedo boat destroyer" had been generally shortened to simply "destroyer" by nearly all navies by the First World War.
The advent of surface-to-air missiles and surface-to-surface missiles, such as the Exocet, in the early 1960s changed naval warfare.
is currently negotiating plans to receive a number of s from the United States.
She was armed with a single 4-inch/25-pounder breech-loading gun, six 3-pounder QF guns and four  torpedo tubes, arranged with two fixed tubes at the bow and a set of torpedo dropping carriages on either side.
The first unit is expected to enter service in 2023, with 11 more units to follow in the coming years.
Their anti-aircraft missiles have a surface attack mode, and both the 130&nbsp;mm guns and the torpedoes are useful against ships at close range.
* Operates single , purchased from the United States.
She displaced 348 tons, and was equipped with triple-expansion engines generating , for a maximum speed of , which made her one of the faster ships in the world in 1888.
Jutland also concluded with a messy night action between the German High Seas Fleet and part of the British destroyer screen.
The Italians' own destroyers were almost as swift, most Italian designs of the 1930s being rated at over , while carrying torpedoes and either four or six 120&nbsp;mm guns.
By 1910 the steam-driven displacement (that is, not hydroplaning) torpedo boat had become redundant as a separate type.
In terms of gunnery, speed and dimensions, the specialised design to chase torpedo boats and her high seas capabilities, ''Destructor'' was an important precursor to the torpedo boat destroyer.
is currently adding four more  frigates to its fleet.
The  long vessel was armed with four 1-pounder (37&nbsp;mm) quick-firing guns and six torpedo tubes, reached , and at 203&nbsp;tons, was the largest torpedo boat built to date.
The Germans were also fond of large destroyers, but while the initial Type 1934 displaced over 3,000&nbsp;tons, their armament was equal to smaller vessels.
* Fleet destroyers operate in support of carrier battle groups, surface action groups, amphibious groups and replenishment groups.
Fernando Villaamil, second officer of the Ministry of the Navy of Spain, designed his own torpedo gunboat to combat the threat from the torpedo boat.
Submarines were more effective, and aircraft had become important weapons of naval warfare; once again the early-war fleet destroyers were ill-equipped for combating these new targets.
In response to this new threat, more heavily gunned picket boats called "catchers" were built which were used to escort the battle fleet at sea.
, 34 of these vessels are in service, with more under construction.
is currently building four s. Although classified by Germany as frigates, they are destroyers in terms of size and strength.
The need for large numbers of anti-submarine ships led to the introduction of smaller and cheaper specialized anti-submarine warships called corvettes and frigates by the Royal Navy and destroyer escorts by the USN.
The KDX-III is equipped with the Aegis combat system, Goalkeeper CIWS, Hyunmoo cruise missile and the Hae Sung anti-ship missile.
The gunboat was armed with torpedoes and designed for hunting and destroying smaller torpedo boats.
Often hulls were built of steel only 1/8&nbsp;in thick.
By this time the destroyers had become large, multi-purpose vessels, expensive targets in their own right.
Formerly known as DD 21, the program was renamed DD(X) (and later renamed to DDG-1000) to more accurately reflect the program purpose, which is to produce a family of advanced technology surface combatants, not a single ship class.
:In October 2013 the first of three U.S.  of destroyers left dry dock, the destroyer built with specific structural angles and a superstructure wrapped in a carbon fiber composite canopy to reduce its radar detectability by a factor of 50.
* The HS ''Velos'' (D-16), a , remains ceremonially in commission due to her historical significance.
Anti-submarine sensors included sonar (or ASDIC), although training in their use was indifferent.
* Operates the Type 45, or ''Daring'' class, stealth destroyer which displaces roughly 7,200 tonnes.
Additionally, plans have been laid out for Japan's new 30FF anti-submarine destroyer.
The French had long been keen on large destroyers, with their  of 1922 displacing over 2,000&nbsp;tons and carrying 130&nbsp;mm guns; a further three similar classes were produced around 1930.
The British V and W classes of the late war had sought to address this by mounting six torpedo tubes in two triple mounts, instead of the four or two on earlier models.
These torpedo boat destroyers all featured a turtleback (i.e.
Along with the ''Kolkata'' class, Indian Navy operates, the  and  destroyers.
Russia also operates a single .
* Operates a single , purchased from the United States.
With the retirement of the ''Spruance'' class, the US Navy began commissioning an advanced variant of the ''Arleigh Burke'' class with expanded ASW capabilities, the ''Arleigh Burke'' Flight IIA, beginning with .
By the 1880s, the type had evolved into small ships of 50–100 tons, fast enough to evade enemy picket boats.
While they also carry 533&nbsp;mm torpedo tubes and RBU-6000 rocket launchers for use against submarines, their primary mission is to attack surface ships.
The latter two are armed with long range air defense missiles, the indigenous HQ-9 and the Russian S-300 respectively.
The Metal Anti-Ship Complex is replaced with eight P-270 Moskit (SS-N-22 Sunburn) supersonic sea-skimming anti-ship missile.
The French navy also operates six s and two s. The French Navy applies the term "first-class frigate" to ''Georges Leygues'', ''Cassard'', ''Horizon'', and FREMM class ships and uses the NATO hull classification symbol "D 6xx" to place them in the destroyer type.
The  is planned to replace them; on November 1, 2001, the US Navy announced the issuance of a revised Request for Proposal (RFP) for the Future Surface Combatant Program.
The later  of 1931 further improved the torpedo armament by storing its reload torpedoes close at hand in the superstructure, allowing reloading within 15 minutes.
While they also carry 533&nbsp;mm torpedo tubes and RBU-6000 rocket launchers for use against submarines, their primary mission is to attack surface ships.
* Operates two s and operate new FREMM multipurpose frigates.
Anti-submarine weapons changed little, and ahead-throwing weapons, a need recognized in World War I, had made no progress.
Before World War II, destroyers were light vessels with little endurance for unattended ocean operations; typically a number of destroyers and a single destroyer tender operated together.
Iran is also building six s, these ships are to become the largest vessels in the Islamic Republic of Iran Navy and are expected to enter service in the coming years.
has begun development of its KDX-IIA destroyers.
She was manned by a crew of 60.
At first, the danger to a battle fleet was considered to exist only when at anchor, but as faster and longer-range torpedoes were developed, the threat extended to cruising at sea.
A number of opportunities to fire at capital ships had been missed during the War, because destroyers had expended all their torpedoes in an initial salvo.
Built of steel, ''Rattlesnake'' was un-armoured with the exception of a -inch protective deck.
The British built a series of destroyers (the  to ) which were about 1,400&nbsp;tons standard displacement, had four  guns and eight torpedo tubes; the American  of 1938 similar in size, but carried five  guns and ten torpedo tubes.
A class of six ships is envisaged.
In spite of all this variety, destroyers adopted a largely similar pattern.
The spectacular unauthorized demonstration of the turbine powered ''Turbinia'' at the 1897 Spithead Navy Review, which, significantly, was of torpedo boat size, prompted the Royal Navy to order a prototype turbine powered destroyer,  of 1899.
They also have two Kashtan CIWSs, each capable of engaging six targets automatically by either its armament of two GSh-6-30 Gatling guns or four 9M311 (SA-N-11) surface-to-air missiles.
Some World War II–vintage ships were modernized for anti-submarine warfare, and to extend their service lives, to avoid having to build (expensive) brand-new ships.
is due to receive two s from Germany within the coming years.
These ships are expected to enter service between 2018-2019.
In her trials in 1889, ''Kotaka'' demonstrated that she could exceed the role of coastal defense, and was capable of accompanying larger warships on the high seas.
Stating that he had originally been strong and healthy, he continued, "life on a destroyer in winter, with bad food, no comforts, would sap the powers of the strongest men in the long run.
Examples include the British , US , and the Soviet s.
* Operates two s. These ships are armed with Brahmos missiles, which have a range of , in the anti-ship role.
Additionally, three more  destroyers are being built.
The design of these ships were inspired by the United States's  destroyers and carry the AEGIS Combat System.
For air defense, each ''Udaloy'' is armed with four AK-630 CIWSs, mounted parallel to each other mid ship.
A number of torpedo gunboat classes followed, including the ''Grasshopper'' class, the , the  and the  - all built for the Royal Navy during the 1880s and the 1890s.
They are to replace the aging s. The first unit, FGS ''Baden-Wurttemberg'' F125, will be commissioned in 2016 with "F" being the NATO hull classification for a frigate.
* Operates five s. These ships are classified as frigates by Spain and carry the NATO hull classification symbol "F 1xx" for frigate, but are described destroyers by other navies.
These stealthy ships are armed with anti-ship missiles and Aster surface-to-air missiles.
Three more units scheduled to be delivered by 2016.
