As of 2002 there are four areas in Detroit with significant Asian and Asian American populations.
In March 2009, the two newspapers reduced home delivery to three days a week, print reduced newsstand issues of the papers on non-delivery days and focus resources on Internet-based news delivery.
W. Westcott II'', which delivers mail to lake freighters on the Detroit River, is the world's only floating post office.
The per capita income for the city was $14,118.
The Eastern Market farmer's distribution center is the largest open-air flowerbed market in the United States and has more than 150 foods and specialty businesses.
Belle Isle Park contains such attractions as the James Scott Memorial Fountain, the Belle Isle Conservatory, the Detroit Yacht Club on an adjacent island, a half-mile (800 m) beach, a golf course, a nature center, monuments, and gardens.
Over a 60-year period, white flight occurred in the city.
River Days, a five-day summer festival on the International Riverfront lead up to the Windsor–Detroit International Freedom Festival fireworks, which draw super sized-crowds ranging from hundreds of thousands to over three million people.
Four major Interstate Highways surround the city.
Governor George W. Romney ordered the Michigan National Guard into Detroit, and President Johnson sent in U.S. Army troops.
Due to industrial restructuring and loss of jobs in the auto industry, Detroit lost considerable population from the late 20th century to present.
These include the $82 million reconstruction of downtown's David Whitney Building (now an Aloft Hotel and luxury residences), the Woodward Garden Block Development in Midtown, the residential conversion of the David Broderick Tower in downtown, the rehabilitation of the Book Cadillac Hotel (now a Westin and luxury condos) and Fort Shelby Hotel (now Doubletree) also in downtown, and various smaller projects.
The U.S. Supreme Court took up the case February 27, 1974.
On June 11, 2015, Meijer opened its second supercenter store in the city.
As in other major American cities in the postwar era, construction of an extensive highway and freeway system around Detroit and pent-up demand for new housing stimulated suburbanization; highways made commuting by car easier.
Live music has been a prominent feature of Detroit's nightlife since the late 1940s, bringing the city recognition under the nickname 'Motown'.
The violent crime rate is one of the highest in the United States.
The next largest population groups were Whites, at 10 percent, and Hispanics, at 6 percent.
Also founded in 1935 and based in Detroit the Michigan Chronicle is one of the oldest and most respected African-American weekly newspapers in America.
Detroit's city flag reflects its French colonial heritage.
The Detroit Department of Transportation (DDOT) provides service to the outer edges of the city.
Some other neighborhoods remain distressed with abandonment of properties, partly revitalised by initiatives like Blight Busters, or renovated by new inhabitants for affordable housing and homesharing, like students and young entrepreneurs.
Out of the total population, 53.6% of those under the age of 18 and 19.8% of those 65 and older had income at or below the federally defined poverty line.
Campus Martius, a reconfiguration of downtown's main intersection as a new park was opened in 2004.
A portion of Detroit next to eastern Hamtramck includes Bangladeshi Americans, Indian Americans, and Pakistani Americans; nearly all of the Bangladeshi population in Detroit lives in that area.
The image is often used as a symbol of Detroit and the statue itself is occasionally dressed in sports jerseys to celebrate when a Detroit team is doing well.
Detroit remains one of the most racially segregated cities in the United States.
Gordy moved Motown to Los Angeles in 1972 to pursue film production, but the company has since returned to Detroit.
Detroit is served by various private schools, as well as parochial Roman Catholic schools operated by the Archdiocese of Detroit.
In 1932, Eddie "The Midnight Express" Tolan from Detroit won the 100- and 200-meter races and two gold medals at the 1932 Summer Olympics.
On August 18, 1970, the NAACP filed suit against Michigan state officials, including Governor William Milliken, charging ''de facto'' public school segregation.
The Detroit Pistons have won three NBA titles.
The SEMCOG Commuter Rail line will extend from Detroit's New Center area to The Henry Ford, Dearborn, Detroit Metropolitan Airport, Ypsilanti, and Ann Arbor when it is opened.
Neighborhoodscout.com reported a crime rate of 62.18 per 1,000 residents for property crimes, and 16.73 per 1,000 for violent crimes (compared to national figures of 32 per 1,000 for property crimes and 5 per 1,000 for violent crime in 2008).
Among the most notable redevelopment projects are the Book Cadillac Hotel and the Fort Shelby Hotel; the David Broderick Tower; and the David Whitney Building.
By the 1670s, the war weakened Iroquois laid claim to virtually all of Northern Ohio and Lake country as far as the City as hunting grounds&mdash;even south to the Ohio River valley in northern Kentucky, and had absorbed many other Iroquoian peoples by adoption, after defeating them in war.
At one time it was estimated that 40% of lights were not working.
The city's Greektown and three downtown casino resort hotels serve as part of an entertainment hub.
The north side of Lake Erie was held by the Huron and Neutral peoples until the 1650s, when the Iroquois pushed both and the Erie people away from the Lake and beaver rich feeder streams in Beaver Wars during the six years 1649–1655.
With the Pistons' first of three NBA titles in 1989, the city of Detroit has won titles in all four of the major professional sports leagues.
By 2008, three major casino resort hotels established operations in the city.
The metropolitan area, known as Metro Detroit, is home to 4.3 million people and lies at the heart of the Great Lakes Megalopolis area, with around 60 million people.
More recently, the population of Downtown Detroit, Midtown Detroit, and various other neighborhoods has increased.
The metropolitan area has many nationally prominent live music venues.
The growth of the auto industry was reflected by changes in businesses throughout the Midwest and nation, with the development of garages to service vehicles and gas stations, as well as factories for parts and tires.
The result was 43 dead, 467 injured, over 7,200 arrests, and more than 2,000 buildings destroyed, mostly in black residential and business areas.
Little Caesars Arena a new home for the Detroit Red Wings, with attached residential, hotel, and retail use is under construction set to open in fall 2017.
Martin Luther King, Jr. gave a major speech in Detroit that foreshadowed his "I Have a Dream" speech in Washington, D.C. two months later.
border, has a total population of about 5.7 million.
Willow Run Airport, in far-western Wayne County near Ypsilanti, is a general aviation and cargo airport.
In college sports, Detroit's central location within the Mid-American Conference has made it a frequent site for the league's championship events.
Young also worked to improve Detroit's transportation system, but tension between Young and his suburban counterparts over regional matters was problematic throughout his mayoral term.
Over the course of three days, 34 people were killed, of whom 25 were African American, and approximately 600 were injured, 75% black people.
They shortened the name to ''Detroit''.
A 2009 parcel survey found about a quarter of residential lots in the city to be undeveloped or vacant, and about 10% of the city's housing to be unoccupied.
According to an estimate of the Michigan Metropolitan Information Center, from 2008 to 2009 the percentage of non-Hispanic White residents increased from 8.4% to 13.3%.
In 1941 at peak times, a streetcar ran on Woodward Avenue every 60 seconds.
Furthermore, Britain had solicited countrymen to overshadow the French populous in the 1760s (See below and main article).
The first election of the new 11-member board of education occurred on November 8, 2005.
The M-1 Rail Line is expected to open in mid-2017, running along Woodward Avenue from downtown to the New Center area.
The peak population was 1.8 million people.
During the Mexican Repatriation of the 1930s many Mexicans in Detroit were willingly repatriated or forced to repatriate.
A memorial to Joe Louis at the intersection of Jefferson and Woodward Avenues was dedicated on October 16, 1986.
These neighborhoods are concentrated in the northeast and on the city's fringes.
Grand Circus Park stands near the city's theater district, Ford Field, home of the Detroit Lions, and Comerica Park, home of the Detroit Tigers.
The gasoline crises of 1973 and 1979 also affected Detroit and the U.S. auto industry.
Artist Tyree Guyton created the controversial street art exhibit known as the Heidelberg Project in 1986, using found objects including cars, clothing and shoes found in the neighborhood near and on Heidelberg Street on the near East Side of Detroit.
It was the last line of what had once been a 534-mile network of electric streetcars.
To deal with vacancy issues, the city has begun demolishing the derelict houses, razing 3,000 of the total 10,000 in 2010, but the resulting low density creates a strain on the city's infrastructure.
Important history of America and the Detroit area are exhibited at The Henry Ford in Dearborn, the United States' largest indoor-outdoor museum complex.
The city slopes gently from the northwest to southeast on a till plain composed largely of glacial and lake clay.
The city is also home to rappers Big Sean and Danny Brown.
In 2011, Mayor Bing announced a plan to categorize neighborhoods by their needs and prioritize the most needed services for those neighborhoods.
Inside Detroit, meanwhile, hosts tours, educational programming, and a downtown welcome center.
As the world's traditional automotive center, the city hosts the North American International Auto Show.
Motown Motion Picture Studios with  produces movies in Detroit and the surrounding area based at the Pontiac Centerpoint Business Campus for a film industry expected to employ over 4,000 people in the metro area.
The Graystone International Jazz Museum documents jazz in Detroit.
Following the American Revolutionary War and United States independence, Britain ceded Detroit along with other territory in the area under the Jay Treaty (1796), which established the northern border with Canada.
The city skyline may be viewed from the island.
The subsequent ''Milliken v. Bradley'' decision had wide national influence.
Of every three Detroit residents, one lives in poverty.
Other institutions in the city include the College for Creative Studies, Lewis College of Business, Marygrove College and Wayne County Community College.
Detroit's 713,777 residents represent 269,445 households, and 162,924 families residing in the city.
Many of those residents own small businesses or work in blue collar jobs, and the population in that area is mostly Muslim.
I-275 runs north–south from I-75 in the south to the junction of I-96 and I-696 in the north, providing a bypass through the western suburbs of Detroit.
The Catholic school population in Detroit has decreased due to the increase of charter schools, increasing tuition at Catholic schools, the small number of African-American Catholics, White Catholics moving to suburbs, and the decreased number of teaching nuns.
The federal government prohibited discrimination in defense work but when in June 1943, Packard promoted three blacks to work next to whites on its assembly lines, 25,000 whites walked off the job.
In the first decade of the 21st century, about two-thirds of the total black population in metropolitan area resided within the city limits of Detroit.
The University Commons-Palmer Park district in northwest Detroit, near the University of Detroit Mercy and Marygrove College, anchors historic neighborhoods including Palmer Woods, Sherwood Forest, and the University District.
Seen in panorama, Detroit's waterfront shows a variety of architectural styles.
The most heavily represented sectors are manufacturing (particularly automotive), finance, technology, and health care.
The Detroit Tigers have won four World Series titles.
In the early 20th century thousands of Mexicans came to Detroit to work in agricultural, automotive, and steel jobs.
the mean income of Detroit is below the overall U.S. average by several thousand dollars.
The city also lends its name to an early and pioneering genre of electronic dance music, "Detroit techno".
Aretha Franklin, another Detroit R&B star, carried the Motown Sound; however, she did not record with Berry's Motown Label.
The following month on December 11 the city officially exited bankruptcy.
Detroit is the center of a three-county urban area (population 3,734,090, area of , a 2010 United States Census) six-county metropolitan statistical area (2010 Census population of 4,296,250, area of ), and a nine-county Combined Statistical Area (2010 Census population of 5,218,852, area of ).
Due to growing Detroit charter schools enrollment as well as a continued exodus of population, the city planned to close many public schools.
Midtown's anchors are the city's largest single employer Detroit Medical Center, Wayne State University, and the Henry Ford Health System in New Center.
Despite the Renaissance Center and other projects, the downtown area continued to lose businesses to the automobile dependent suburbs.
The ''Metro Times'', founded in 1980, is a weekly publication, covering news, arts & entertainment.
The I-96 freeway runs northwest–southeast through Livingston, Oakland and Wayne counties and (as the Jeffries Freeway through Wayne County) has its eastern terminus in downtown Detroit.
Major stores and hotels closed and many large office buildings went vacant.
Prior to the American Civil War, the city's access to the Canada–US border made it a key stop for refugee slaves gaining freedom in the North along the Underground Railroad.
I-94 (Edsel Ford Freeway) runs east–west through Detroit and serves Ann Arbor to the west (where it continues to Chicago) and Port Huron to the northeast.
In 2012, crime in the city was among the reasons for more expensive car insurance.
Following the shift of population and jobs to its suburbs, other states or nations, the city has focused on becoming the metropolitan region's economic and cultural center.
The prohibition of alcohol from 1920 to 1933 resulted in the Detroit River becoming a major conduit for smuggling of illegal Canadian spirits.
The city became the fourth-largest in the country for a period.
By 2000 Troy had the largest Asian American population in the tricounty area, surpassing Detroit.
This group of skyscrapers was an attempt to keep businesses in downtown.
City ordinances and substantially large contracts must be approved by the council.
The most significant companies based in Detroit include: General Motors, Quicken Loans, Ally Financial, Compuware, Shinola, American Axle, Little Caesars, DTE Energy, Lowe Campbell Ewald, Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan, and Rossetti Architects.
The elected board of education was re-established following a city referendum in 2005.
The ''Detroit Free Press'' and ''The Detroit News'' are the major daily newspapers, both broadsheet publications published together under a joint operating agreement called the Detroit Newspaper Partnership.
The plans for the project call for mixed-use residential on the blocks surrounding the arena and the renovation the vacant 14-story Eddystone Hotel.
The city hosted the Detroit Indy Grand Prix on Belle Isle Park from 1989 to 2001, 2007 to 2008, and 2012 and beyond.
In the 1964-1965 school year there were about 110 Catholic grade schools in Detroit, Hamtramck, and Highland Park and 55 Catholic high schools in those three cities.
Downtown's population of young professionals is growing and retail is expanding.
The region grew based on the lucrative fur trade, in which numerous Native American people had important roles.
Detroit has struggled with high crime for decades.
In 1896, a thriving carriage trade prompted Henry Ford to build his first automobile in a rented workshop on Mack Avenue.
In practice, the location was too far west of the Iroquois' center to prevent settlement and war on others poaching Beaver pelts.
During the same time period, the sprawling Detroit metropolitan area, which surrounds and includes the city, grew to contain more than half of Michigan's population.
Areas of the city closer to the Detroit River are also patrolled by the United States Border Patrol.
The DMC, a regional Level I trauma center, consists of Detroit Receiving Hospital and University Health Center, Children's Hospital of Michigan, Harper University Hospital, Hutzel Women's Hospital, Kresge Eye Institute, Rehabilitation Institute of Michigan, Sinai-Grace Hospital, and the Karmanos Cancer Institute.
Snowfall, which typically falls in measurable amounts between November 15 through April 4 (occasionally in October and very rarely in May), averages  per season, although historically ranging from  in 1881−82 to  in 2013−14.
Public and charter school students in the city have performed poorly on standardized tests.
The  development was originally called the Gratiot Park.
While the MAC Basketball Tournament moved permanently to Cleveland starting in 2000, the MAC Football Championship Game has been played at Ford Field in Detroit since 2004, and annually attracts 25,000 to 30,000 fans.
Lafayette Park is a revitalized neighborhood on the city's east side, part of the Ludwig Mies van der Rohe residential district.
Many of the area's prominent museums are located in the historic cultural center neighborhood around Wayne State University and the College for Creative Studies.
In 2001, the first portion of the International Riverfront was completed as a part of the city's 300th anniversary celebration, with miles of parks and associated landscaping completed in succeeding years.
Held since 1924, America's Thanksgiving Parade is one of the nation's largest.
Two new downtown stadiums for the Detroit Tigers and Detroit Lions opened in 2000 and 2002, respectively, returning the Lions to the city proper.
Many Lithuanians settled in Detroit during the World War II era, especially on the city's Southwest side in the West Vernor area, where the renovated Lithuanian Hall reopened in 2006.
British negotiations with the Iroquois would both prove critical and lead to a Crown policy limiting the west of the Alleghenies settlements below the Great Lakes&mdash; which gave many an American migrant-to-be ''a Casus belli'' for supporting the American Revolution.
The under construction (to open in 2016) M-1 Rail Line (see below) will serve as a link between the Detroit People Mover and SEMCOG Commuter Rail/Detroit Amtrak station.
In 1805, fire destroyed most of the Detroit settlement, which consisted mostly of wooden buildings.
Local artists and bands rose to prominence in the 1960s and 70s including: the MC5, The Stooges, Bob Seger, Amboy Dukes featuring Ted Nugent, Mitch Ryder and The Detroit Wheels, Rare Earth, Alice Cooper, and Suzi Quatro.
Detroit's lowest elevation is along the Detroit River, at a surface height of .
Construction activity, particularly rehabilitation of historic downtown buildings, has increased markedly.
The sculpture, commissioned by ''Sports Illustrated'' and executed by Robert Graham, is a  long arm with a fisted hand suspended by a pyramidal framework.
In 2011, the Port Authority Passenger Terminal opened with the riverwalk connecting Hart Plaza to the Renaissance Center.
During World War II, the government encouraged retooling of the American automobile industry in support of the Allied powers, leading to Detroit's key role in the American Arsenal of Democracy.
In the 1990s and the new millennium, the city has produced a number of influential hip hop artists, including Eminem, the hip-hop artist with the highest cumulative sales, hip-hop producer J Dilla, rapper and producer Esham and hip hop duo Insane Clown Posse.
Downtown Detroit has held an increased role as a cultural destination in the 21st century, with the restoration of several historic theatres and entertainment venues, highrise renovations, new sports stadiums, and a riverfront revitalization project.
They are mostly Chinese and Indian but the population also includes Filipinos, Koreans, and Pakistanis.
Berry Gordy, Jr. founded Motown Records which rose to prominence during the 1960s and early 1970s with acts such as Stevie Wonder, The Temptations, The Four Tops, Smokey Robinson & The Miracles, Diana Ross & The Supremes, the Jackson 5, Martha and the Vandellas, The Spinners, Gladys Knight & the Pips, The Marvelettes, The Elgins, The Monitors, The Velvelettes and Marvin Gaye.
In 2016, further corruption charges were brought against 12 principals, a former school superintendent and supply vendor for a $12 million kickback scheme.
As mayor, Young sought to revive the city by seeking to increase investment in the city's declining downtown.
In the 2010 American Community Survey, median household income in the city was $25,787, and the median income for a family was $31,011.
Detroit surrendered without a fight to British troops during the War of 1812 in the Siege of Detroit.
Vanguard has agreed to assume all debts and pension obligations.
A 2011 op-ed in ''The New York Times'' attributed the decreased segregation rating to the overall exodus from the city, cautioning that these areas may soon become more segregated.
A portion was known as the Willow Run Expressway.
Nearly two-thirds of all murders in Michigan in 2011 occurred in Detroit.
Known as the world's automotive center, "Detroit" is a metonym for that industry.
Winters are cold, with moderate snowfall and temperatures not rising above freezing on an average 44&nbsp;days annually, while dropping to or below  on an average 4.4&nbsp;days a year; summers are warm to hot with temperatures exceeding  on 12&nbsp;days.
Hooker, among other important blues musicians migrated from his home in Mississippi bringing the Delta blues to northern cities like Detroit.
The city became the 4th-largest in the nation in 1920, after only New York City, Chicago and Philadelphia, with the influence of the booming auto industry.
Some people were leaving at that time but, really, it was after Milliken that you saw mass flight to the suburbs.
The metro area has many other hospitals including William Beaumont Hospital, St. Joseph's, and University of Michigan Medical Center.
Archer prioritized downtown development and easing tensions with Detroit's suburban neighbors.
As many as 500 researchers, and staff will work out of the IBio Center.
The Fortune label was a family-operated label located on Third Avenue in Detroit, and was owned by the husband and wife team of Jack Brown and Devora Brown.
For every 100 females there were 89.1 males.
Although the rate of violent crime dropped 11 percent in 2008, violent crime in Detroit has not declined as much as the national average from 2007 to 2011.
Thunderstorms are frequent in the Detroit area.
It has been making ends meet on a month-to-month basis with the help of bond money held in a state escrow account and has instituted mandatory unpaid days off for many city workers.
Concerts hosted by Live Nation perform throughout the Detroit area.
On November 7, 2014 the city's plan for exiting bankruptcy was approved.
N'Namdi Gallery opened in a  complex in Midtown.
"By the 1920s the city had become a stronghold of the KKK," whose members opposed Catholic and Jewish immigrants, as well as black Americans.
On July 25, 2013, Meijer, a midwestern retail chain, opened its first supercenter store in Detroit,; this was a 20 million dollar, 190,000-square-foot store in the northern portion of the city and it also is the centerpiece of a new 72 million dollar shopping center named Gateway Marketplace.
In 2007, Downtown Detroit was recognized as a best city neighborhood in which to retire among the United States' largest metro areas by CNN Money Magazine editors.
During this period some referred to Detroit as the ''Paris of the West'' for its architecture, grand avenues in the Paris style, and for Washington Boulevard, recently electrified by Thomas Edison.
Between 2000 and 2010 the city's population fell by 25 percent, changing its ranking from the nation's 10th-largest city to 18th.
(See Flag of Detroit).
The riverfront includes Tri-Centennial State Park and Harbor, Michigan's first urban state park.
On Saturdays, about 45,000 people shop the city's historic Eastern Market.
Of the three Catholic high schools in the city, two are operated by the Society of Jesus and the third is co-sponsored by the Sisters, Servants of the Immaculate Heart of Mary and the Congregation of St.
Conservation efforts managed to save many architectural pieces since the 2000s and allowed several large-scale revitalisations.
The Great Migration brought rural blacks from the South; they were outnumbered by southern whites who also migrated to the city.
Despite development efforts, his combative style during his five terms in office was not well received by many suburban residents.
In Southwest Detroit and western Detroit there are smaller, scattered Asian communities including an area in the westside adjacent to Dearborn and Redford Township that has a mostly Indian Asian population, and a community of Vietnamese and Laotians in Southwest Detroit.
That year the city elected Dennis Archer, a former Michigan Supreme Court justice.
With expansion of the American automobile industry in the early 20th century, the Detroit area emerged as a significant metropolitan region within the United States.
The city is north of Windsor, Ontario.
By the 1940s the Mexican community began to settle what is now Mexicantown.
From there, the Suburban Mobility Authority for Regional Transportation (SMART) provides service to the suburbs.
I-75 (Chrysler and Fisher freeways) is the region's main north–south route, serving Flint, Pontiac, Troy, and Detroit, before continuing south (as the Detroit–Toledo and Seaway Freeways) to serve many of the communities along the shore of Lake Erie.
Detroit is connected via Interstate&nbsp;75 (I-75) and I-96 to Kings Highway 401 and to major Southern Ontario cities such as London, Ontario and the Greater Toronto Area.
In 1976, the federal government offered $600 million for building a regional rapid transit system, under a single regional authority.
The team plays in the National Premier Soccer League, and its nickname is ''Le Rouge''.
It is an important source of popular music legacies celebrated by the city's two familiar nicknames, the ''Motor City'' and ''Motown''.
Detroit has made the most bids to host the Summer Olympics without ever being awarded the games: seven unsuccessful bids for the 1944, 1952, 1956, 1960, 1964, 1968 and 1972 games.
Automakers laid off thousands of employees and closed plants in the city, further eroding the tax base.
With its proximity to Canada and its facilities, ports, major highways, rail connections and international airports, Detroit is an important transportation hub.
