The seal contained three shields depicting the arms of Exeter along with those of the first chairman and vice-chairman of the council (Lord Clinton and the Earl of Morley).
The history of Christianity in the South West of England remains to some degree obscure.
The ''chief'' or upper portion of the shield depicts an ancient ship on wavers, for Devon's seafaring traditions.
Berry Pomeroy still celebrates "Queen's Day" for Elizabeth I.
Swimmer Sharron Davies and diver Tom Daley were born in Plymouth.
The western boundary with Cornwall was set at the River Tamar by King Æthelstan in 936.
These divisions would become starkly apparent during the English Civil War of 1642-46, when the county split apart along religious and cultural lines.
Several 'Bere's indicate Anglo-Saxon wood groves, as 'leighs' indicate clearings.
The winning design was created by website contributor Ryan Sealey, and won 49% of the votes cast.
Devon's second major rock system is the Culm Measures, a geological formation of the Carboniferous period that occurs principally in Devon and Cornwall.
The poet Samuel Taylor Coleridge, the crime writer Agatha Christie and the poet Ted Hughes lived in Devon (his funeral and cremation were held there).
Devon has also featured in most of the civil conflicts in England since the Norman conquest, including the Wars of the Roses, Perkin Warbeck's rising in 1497, the Prayer Book Rebellion of 1549, and the English Civil War.
Winters are generally mild and the county often experiences some of the mildest winters in the world for its latitude, with average daily maximum temperatures in January approaching .
As well as agriculture, much of the economy of Devon is linked with tourism.
was an avid Elizabethan outdoorsman probably born in Devon who became an attorney for The Council For New England, and built the New England fur-trading-plantation called Ma-Re Mount or Merrymount around a West Country-style Maypole, much to the displeasure of Pilgrim and Puritan colonists.
The oldest rocks which can be dated are those of the Devonian period which are approximately 395–345 million years old.
The Met Office, the UK's national and international weather service, moved to Exeter in 2003.
From the late sixteenth century onwards, zealous Protestantism - or ‘puritanism’ - became increasingly well-entrenched in some parts of Devon, while other districts of the county remained much more conservative.
As recently as the 19th century, a crowd of 17,000 at Devonport, near Plymouth, attended a match between the champions of Devon and Cornwall.
Devon has a variety of festivals and traditional practices, including the traditional orchard-visiting Wassail in Whimple every 17 January, and the carrying of flaming tar barrels in Ottery St. Mary, where people who have lived in Ottery for long enough are called upon to celebrate Bonfire Night by running through the village (and the gathered crowds) with flaming barrels on their backs.
The Devonshire cream tea, involving scones, jam and clotted cream, is thought to have originated in Devon (though claims have also been made for neighbouring counties); in other countries, such as Australia and New Zealand, it is known as a "Devonshire tea".
and Croyde), along with parts of North Cornwall and South Wales, are the main centres of surfing in Britain.
(However, for ecclesiastical purposes these were nevertheless in the Archdeaconry of Cornwall and in 1876 became part of the Diocese of Truro.)
Nonetheless in 2015 the dairy industry was still suffering from the low prices offered for wholesale milk by major dairies and especially large supermarket chains.
The supporters are a Devon bull and a sea lion.
The Diocese of Exeter remains the Anglican diocese including the whole of Devon.
Like neighbouring Cornwall to the west, historically Devon has been disadvantaged economically compared to other parts of Southern England, owing to the decline of a number of core industries, notably fishing, mining and farming.
The singer and songwriter Rebecca Newman was born and raised in Exmouth.
Devon was constituted as a shire of the Kingdom of England thereafter.
Devon has a mostly comprehensive education system.
There is also Schumacher College.
There are 37 state and 23 independent secondary schools.
The Romans held the area under military occupation for around 350 years.
The county has more mileage of road than any other county in England.
One erroneous theory is that the "shire" suffix is due to a mistake in the making of the original letters patent for the Duke of Devonshire, resident in Derbyshire.
Devon's toponyms include many with the endings "coombe/combe" and "tor".
The table also shows the population change in the ten years to the 2011 census by subdivision.
In 1549, the Prayer Book Rebellion caused the deaths of thousands of people from Devon and Cornwall.
There are five rugby league teams in Devon.
Population (April 2011)
There is a general account by W. P. Hiern and others in ''The Victoria History of the County of Devon'', vol.
In the Brittonic, Devon is known as ,  and , each meaning "deep valleys."
Botanical reports begin in the 17th century and there is a ''Flora Devoniensis'' by Jones and Kingston in 1829, and a ''Flora of Devon'' in 1939 by Keble Martin and Fraser.
The claimant count of the unemployed and people receiving very low incomes is close to the national average of 4.5% in Torbay, Plymouth and Exeter.
The Methodism of John Wesley proved to be very popular with the working classes in Devon in the 19th century.
East Devon has the first seaside resort to be developed in the county, Exmouth and the more upmarket Georgian town of Sidmouth, headquarters of the East Devon District Council.
The county's economy followed the declining trend of British seaside resorts since the mid-20th century, but with some recent revival and regeneration of its resorts, particularly focused around camping; sports such as surfing, cycling, sailing and heritage.
Morton wrote a 1637 book ''New English Canaan'' about his experiences, partly in verse, and may have thereby become America's first poet to write in English.
The position of churches bearing his name, including one within the old Roman walls of Exeter, are nearly always near the coast, reminding us that in those days travelling was done mainly by sea.
In April 2006 the council unveiled a new logo which was to be used in most everyday applications, though the coat of arms will continue to be used for "various civic purposes".
Methodist chapels became important social centres, with male voice choirs and other church-affiliated groups playing a central role in the social lives of working class Devonians.
Network Rail began repair work  and the line reopened on 4 April 2014.
Similarly, with westerly or southwesterly winds and high pressure the area around Torbay and Teignmouth will often be very warm, with long sunny spells due to shelter by high ground (Foehn wind).
In the valleys and lowlands of south and east Devon the soil is more fertile, drained by rivers including the Exe, the Culm, the Teign, the Dart, and the Otter.
Methodism still plays a large part in the religious life of Devon today, although the county has shared in the post-World War II decline in British religious feeling.
The Latin motto adopted was ''Auxilio Divino'' (by Divine aid), that of Sir Francis Drake.
Other ancient customs which survive include Dartmoor step dancing, and "Crying The Neck".
This formation stretches from Bideford to Bude in Cornwall, and contributes to a gentler, greener, more rounded landscape.
It also shows the proportion of residents in each district reliant upon lowest income and/or joblessness benefits, the national average proportion of which was 4.5% as at August 2012, the year for which latest datasets have been published.
Incomes in much of the South Hams and in villages surrounding Exeter and Plymouth are above the national average.
Its sister cliff is the  Little Hangman, which marks the western edge of coastal Exmoor.
On 6 March 1962 a further grant of crest and supporters was obtained.
The Torbay conurbation of Torquay, Paignton and Brixham on the south coast is now administratively independent of the county.
It is also found on the western, north and eastern borders of Dartmoor.
North Devon is very rural with few major towns except Barnstaple, Great Torrington, Bideford and Ilfracombe.
On 17 October 2006, the flag was hoisted for the first time outside County Hall in Exeter to mark Local Democracy Week, receiving official recognition from the county council.
Apart from these areas of high moorland the county has attractive rolling rural scenery and villages with thatched cob cottages.
On the night of 4 February 2014, amid high winds and extremely rough seas, part of the sea wall at Dawlish was breached washing away around  of the wall and the ballast under the railway immediately behind.
Combined as a ceremonial county, Devon's area is  and its population is about 1.1 million.
It is part of South West England, bounded by Cornwall to the west, Somerset to the northeast, and Dorset to the east.
The 2001 UK foot and mouth crisis harmed the farming community severely.
The county's biggest non-league club's is Bideford F.C.
It can be seen that the most populous district of Devon is East Devon but only if excluding Torbay which has marginally more residents and Plymouth which has approximately double the number of residents of either of these.
This geological period was named after Devon by Roderick Murchison and Adam Sedgwick in the 1840s and is the only British county whose name is used worldwide as a geological time period.
1922, at Great Torrington).
A genetic study carried out by the University of Oxford & University College London discovered separate genetic groups in Cornwall and Devon, not only were there differences on either side of the Tamar, with a division almost exactly along the modern county boundary dating back to the 6th Century but also between Devon and the rest of Southern England, and similarities with the modern northern France, including Brittany.
claimants (August 2012)  % of 2011 population
Welsh ''cwm'', Cornish ''komm'') and 'tor' (Old Welsh ''twrr'' and Scots Gaelic ''tòrr'' from Latin ''turris''; 'tower' used for granite formations) are rare  Celtic loanwords in English and their frequency is greatest in Devon which shares a boundary with Brittonic speaking Cornwall.
All these features make Devon a popular holiday destination.
Lyfing became Bishop of Crediton in 1027 and shortly afterwards became Bishop of Cornwall.
The two dioceses of Crediton and Cornwall, covering Devon and Cornwall, were permanently united under Edward the Confessor by Lyfing's successor Bishop Leofric, hitherto Bishop of Crediton, who became first Bishop of Exeter under Edward the Confessor, which was established as his cathedral city in 1050.
Rugby Union is popular in Devon with two teams – Exeter Chiefs play in the Aviva Premiership and Plymouth Albion who are, as of 2011, in the RFU Championship.
''See also: List of mountains and hills of Devon''
However, there are references to "Defenascire" in Anglo-Saxon texts from before 1000 AD (this would mean "Shire of the Devonians"), which translates to modern English as "Devonshire".
Devon became a frontier between Brittonic  and Anglo-Saxon Wessex, and it was largely absorbed into Wessex by the mid 9th century.
One of the features of the North Devon coast is that Bideford Bay and the Hartland Point peninsula are both west-facing, Atlantic facing coastlines; so that a combination of an off-shore (east) wind and an Atlantic swell produce excellent surfing conditions.
The sedimentary rocks in more eastern parts of the county include Permian and Triassic sandstones (giving rise to east Devon's well known fertile red soils); Bunter pebble beds around Budleigh Salterton and Woodbury Common and Jurassic rocks in the easternmost parts of Devon.
Plymouth Titans, Exeter Centurions, Devon Sharks from Torquay, North Devon Raiders from Barnstaple and East Devon Eagles from Exmouth.
The Anglo-Saxon settlement of Britain resulted in the partial assimilation of Dumnonia into the Kingdom of Wessex during the eighth and ninth centuries.
The measures are so called either from the occasional presence of a soft, sooty coal, which is known in Devon as ''culm'', or from the contortions commonly found in the beds.
The county's wildlife is protected by several wildlife charities such as the Devon Wildlife Trust, a charity which looks after 40 nature reserves.
The attractive lifestyle of the area is drawing in new industries which are not heavily dependent upon geographical location; Dartmoor, for instance, has recently seen a significant rise in the percentage of its inhabitants involved in the financial services sector.
The towns of Torquay and Paignton are the principal seaside resorts on the south coast.
This revival has been aided by the designation of much of Devon's countryside and coastline as the Dartmoor and Exmoor national parks, and the Jurassic Coast and Cornwall and West Devon Mining Landscape World Heritage Sites.
Thomas Morton (1576–1647?)
The term Devonshire may have originated around the 8th century, when it changed from ''Dumnonia'' (Latin) to ''Defenascir''.
The Exeter to Plymouth railway of the LSWR needs to be reopened to connect Cornwall and Plymouth to the rest of the UK railway system on an all weather basis.
John Oxenham (1536–1580) was a lieutenant of Drake but considered a pirate by the Spanish.
This distinctive form of crown is formed from the sails and sterns of ships, and is associated with the Royal Navy.
The last recorded sitting was in 1748.
A popular challenge among birders is to find over 100 species in the county in a day.
Dartmoor is thought to have been occupied by Mesolithic hunter-gatherer peoples from about 6000 BC.
Kents Cavern in Torquay had produced human remains from 30–40,000 years ago.
Their exurbs and rural villages contribute to low unemployment in the administrative county as shown below.
Since 1974 the county is ranked fourth by area (due to the creation of Cumbria) amongst ceremonial counties and is the third largest non-metropolitan county.
This includes the delivery of Cranbrook station, plus four new stations (including Edginswell) as a priority.
Another Devon sport was outhurling which was played in some regions until the 20th century (e.g.
Rising temperatures have led to Devon becoming the first place in modern Britain to cultivate olives commercially.
The variety of habitats means that there is a wide range of wildlife (see Dartmoor wildlife, for example).
Dave Hill of rock band Slade was born in Flete House which is in the South Hams district of Devon.
The City of Exeter is the county town; seven other districts of East Devon, Mid Devon, North Devon, South Hams, Teignbridge, Torridge, and West Devon are under the jurisdiction of Devon County Council; Plymouth and Torbay are each a part of Devon but administered as unitary authorities.
The actor Matthew Goode was raised in Devon, and Bradley James, also an actor, was born there.
In Australia, Devon is a name for luncheon meat (processed ham).
Population (April 2001)
Jane McGrath, who married Australian cricketer Glenn McGrath was born in Paignton, her long battle with and subsequent death from breast cancer inspired the formation of the McGrath Foundation, which is one of Australia's leading charities.
In the Sub-Roman period the church in the British Isles was characterised by some differences in practice from the Latin Christianity of the continent of Europe and is known as Celtic Christianity; however it was always in communion with the wider Roman Catholic Church.
JSA and Income Support claimants (August 2001) % of 2001 population
Smaller outcrops of younger rocks also exist, such as Cretaceous chalk cliffs at Beer Head and gravels on Haldon, plus Eocene and Oligocene ball clay and lignite deposits in the Bovey Basin, formed around 50 million years ago under tropical forest conditions.
There are also many successful professional racehorse trainers based in Devon.
Only one school in Exeter, Mid Devon, Torridge and North Devon have a sixth form – the schools in other districts mostly have sixth forms, with all schools in West Devon and East Devon having a sixth form.
Another famous Devonian is the model and actress Rosie Huntington-Whiteley, who was born in Plymouth and raised in Tavistock.
"Devon County Council" but "Devonshire" continues to be used in the names of the "Devonshire and Dorset Regiment" and "The Devonshire Association".
Parts of the historic county of Devon formed part of the diocese of Wessex, while nothing is known of the church organisation of the Celtic areas.
Motorcycle speedway is also supported in the county, with both the Exeter Falcons and Plymouth Devils succeeding in the National Leagues in recent years.
Before the changes to English counties in 1974, Devon was the third largest county by area and the largest of the counties not divided into county-like divisions (only Yorkshire and Lincolnshire were larger and both were sub-divided into ridings or parts, respectively).
The South West Coast Path runs along the entire length of both, around 65% of which is named as Heritage Coast.
The main part of the shield displays a red crowned lion on a silver field, the arms of Richard Plantagenet, Earl of Cornwall.
Rural market towns in the county include Barnstaple, Bideford, Honiton, Newton Abbot, Okehampton, Tavistock, Totnes and Tiverton.
During the forming of a county council by the Local Government Act 1888 adoption of a common seal was required.
All Devon services are diesel-hauled, since there are no electrified lines in the county.
Devon straddles a peninsula and so has two separate coastlines, on the Bristol Channel and Celtic Sea in the north, and on the English Channel in the south.
Henry Every, described as the most notorious pirate of the late 17th century, was probably born in the village of Newton Ferrers.
Another famous mariner and Devonian was Robert Falcon Scott, the leader of the unfortunate Terra Nova Expedition to reach the geographical South Pole.
Inland, the Dartmoor National Park lies wholly in Devon, and the Exmoor National Park lies in both Devon and Somerset.
Exmouth marks the western end of the Jurassic Coast World Heritage Site.
The term "Devon" is normally used for everyday purposes e.g.
Devon's Exmoor coast has the highest cliffs in southern Britain, culminating in the Great Hangman, a  "hog's-back" hill with an  cliff-face, located near Combe Martin Bay.
Unique experiences in Europe are particularly concentrated on food and drink, the South West Coast Path and watersports, including sea-view restaurants in North-West Devon (such as one example belonging to Damien Hurst); surfing there, indoor and outdoor folk music festivals across the county and sailing in the  hill-surrounded inlet (ria) at Salcombe.
Both 'coombe' (valley or hollow, cf.
Danish raids also occurred sporadically along many coastal parts of Devon between around 800AD and just before the time of the Norman conquest, including the silver mint at ''Hlidaforda'' Lydford in 997 and Taintona (a settlement on the Teign estuary) in 1001.
In summer, easterly or southeasterly winds mean the area around Saunton and Croyde often records among the highest temperatures in Britain, exceeding  about twice every decade.
The inland terrain is rural, generally hilly, and has a low population density in comparison to many other parts of England.
Devon derives its name from Dumnonia, which, during the British Iron Age,  Roman Britain, and Early Medieval was the homeland of the Dumnonii Brittonic Celts.
The colours of the flag are those popularly identified with Devon, for example, the colours of Exeter University, the rugby union team, and the Green and White flag flown by the first Viscount Exmouth at the Bombardment of Algiers (now on view at the Teign Valley Museum), as well as one of the county's football teams, Plymouth Argyle.
In the 2014/2015 football season Exeter City F.C.
The main settlements in Devon are the cities of Plymouth, a historic port now administratively independent, Exeter, the county town, and Torbay, the county's tourist centre.
Later, the area began to experience Saxon incursions from the east around 600 AD, firstly as small bands of settlers along the coasts of Lyme Bay and southern estuaries and later as more organised bands pushing in from the east.
Western Christianity came to Devon when it was over a long period incorporated into the kingdom of Wessex and the jurisdiction of the bishop of Wessex.
The arrival of William of Orange to launch the Glorious Revolution of 1688 took place at Brixham.
There was no established coat of arms for the county until 1926: the arms of the City of Exeter were often used to represent Devon, for instance in the badge of the Devonshire Regiment.
Both the universities of Exeter and Plymouth have co-formed the Peninsula College of Medicine and Dentistry which has bases in Exeter and Plymouth.
Devon's tin miners enjoyed a substantial degree of independence through Devon's Stannary Parliament, which dates back to the 12th century.
William Camden, in his 1607 edition of ''Britannia'', described Devon as being one part of an older, wider country that once included Cornwall:
During the English Reformation, churches in Devon officially became affiliated with the Church of England.
Celtic and Roman practices were the first known religions in Devon, although in the first centuries AD, Christianity was introduced to Devon.
The Roman Catholic Diocese of Plymouth was established in the mid 19th century.
About 703 Devon and Cornwall were included in the separate diocese of Sherborne and in 900 this was again divided into two, the Devon bishop having from 905 his seat at Tawton (now Bishop's Tawton) and from 912 at Crediton, birthplace of St Boniface.
Rainfall varies significantly across the county, ranging from over  on parts of Dartmoor, to around  in the rain shadow along the coast in southeastern Devon and around Exeter.
and Plymouth Argyle F.C.
There are three tertiary (FE) colleges and an agricultural college (Bicton College, near Budleigh Salterton).
Peter Cook the satirist, writer and comedian was born in Torquay, Devon.
Devon County Council adopted a "ship silhouette" logo after the 1974 reorganisation, adapted from the ship emblem on the coat of arms, but following the loss in 1998 of Plymouth and Torbay re-adopted the coat of arms.
It is dedicated to the study and conservation of wild birds looks after several areas, such as Beesands Ley.
Saint Petroc is said to have passed through Devon, where ancient dedications to him are even more numerous than in Cornwall: a probable seventeen (plus Timberscombe just over the border in Somerset), compared to Cornwall's five.
On 11 October 1926, the county council received a grant of arms from the College of Arms.
Devon is divided into two Watsonian vice-counties: north and south, the boundary being an irregular line approximately across the higher part of Dartmoor and then along the canal eastwards.
This suggests the Anglo-Saxon migration into Devon was limited rather than a mass movement of people.
Devon has three professional football teams, based in each of its three most populous towns and cities.
Devon has produced tin, copper and other metals from ancient times.
The beaches of Bideford Bay (Woolacombe, Saunton, Westward Ho!
Devon generally has a mild climate, heavily influenced by the North Atlantic Drift.
Devon also has its own flag which has been dedicated to Saint Petroc, a local saint with dedications throughout Devon and neighbouring counties.
Devon County Council has proposed a "Devon Metro" scheme to improve rail services in the county and offer a realistic alternative to car travel.
The crest is the head of a Dartmoor Pony rising from a "Naval Crown".
Exeter International Airport is a base for Flybe.
In winter snow is relatively uncommon away from high land, although there are exceptions, such as the snowfalls of February 2009, and December 2010.
To the north of Dartmoor are the Culm Measures and Exmoor.
Historically Devon was divided into 32 hundreds: Axminster, Bampton, Black Torrington, Braunton, Cliston, Coleridge, Colyton, Crediton, East Budleigh, Ermington, Exminster, Fremington, Halberton, Hartland, Hayridge, Haytor, Hemyock, Lifton, North Tawton and Winkleigh, Ottery, Plympton, Roborough, Shebbear, Shirwell, South Molton, Stanborough, Tavistock, Teignbridge, Tiverton, West Budleigh, Witheridge, and Wonford.
which competes in the Southern Football League Premier Division and Tiverton Town F.C.
Devon has been home to a number of customs, such as its own form of Devon wrestling, similar in some ways to Cornish wrestling.
Since then some parts of the agricultural industry have begun to diversify and recover, with a strong local food sector and many artisan producers.
Saxon endings in -worthy (from Anglo-Saxon ''worthig'') indicate larger settlements.
Sandstones and shales were deposited in North and South Devon beneath tropical seas.
The Devon Bird Watching and Preservation Society (DBWPS) is a county bird society with a long and distinguished history dating back to 1928.
In shallower waters, limestone beds were laid down in the area now near Torquay and Plymouth.
Ruined medieval settlements of Dartmoor longhouses indicate that dispersed rural settlement (OE ''tun'', now often -ton) was very similar to that found in Cornish 'tre-' settlements, however these are generally described with the local placename -(a)cott, from the Old English for homestead, cf.
1 (1906); pp.&nbsp;55–130, with map.
compete in Football League Two, while Torquay United F.C compete in the Conference Premier.
'''Devon''' (; archaically known as '''Devonshire''') is a county of England, reaching from the Bristol Channel in the north to the English Channel in the south.
Examples include Dawlish, Exmouth and Sidmouth on the south coast, and Ilfracombe and Lynmouth on the north.
The north and south coasts of Devon each have both cliffs and sandy shores, and the county's bays contain seaside resorts, fishing towns, and ports.
The county has given its name to a number of culinary specialities.
The line was closed.
East Devon and Teignbridge have the largest school populations, with West Devon the smallest (with only two schools).
Other intercity services are operated by CrossCountry, to Manchester Piccadilly, Edinburgh Waverley, Glasgow Central, Dundee, Aberdeen and Penzance, and South West Trains, operating express services between London Waterloo and Exeter St Davids on the West of England Main Line.
Singer-songwriter Ben Howard grew up in Totnes, a small town in Devon.
The flag was adopted in 2003 after a competition run by BBC Radio Devon.
Since the rise of seaside resorts with the arrival of the railways in the 19th century, Devon's economy has been heavily reliant on tourism.
Trevor Francis, former Nottingham Forest and Birmingham City professional footballer was born and brought up in Plymouth.
Devon also boasts a field hockey club who play in the National Premier League, the University of Exeter Hockey Club
