The government also plans to raise the total number of taxis to 18,000 gradually.
Dhaka North City CorporationDhaka South City Corporation
An elevated expressway system is under construction.
A mass uprising in 1990 led to the restoration of parliamentary democracy.
It continues to confront challenges faced by growing metropolises in developing countries, including poverty, pollution and congestion.
Some references also say that it was derived from a Prakrit dialect called Dhaka Bhasa; or Dhakka, used in the Rajtarangini for a watch-station; or it is the same as Davaka, mentioned in the Allahabad pillar inscription of Samudragupta as an eastern frontier kingdom.
It says that in 2011 it achieved a continuous water supply 24 hours per day 7 days a week, an increase in revenues so that operating costs are more than covered, and a reduction of water losses from 53% in 2003 to 29% in 2010.
Approximately 87% of the annual average rainfall of  occurs between May and October.
Though restaurants offering multinational cuisine and fast-food chains like KFC, Pizza Hut, Nando's, Pizza Inn, Sbarro and A&W have opened up their outlets in major areas of the city, Dhaka's delicacies such as Biriani from ''Haji's'' , ''Nanna's'' and ''Fakhruddin'', ''Dhaka Cheese'', ''Star Kabab'', ''Burhani'', ''Lassi'' and ''Phuchka'' are highly popular among locals and tourists.
Jamdanis are 100% hand weaved and originate from the Mughal era.
The Defence Ministry and the Bangladesh Armed Forces headquarters are located in Dhaka Cantonment.
Dhaka has the distinction of having hosted the first official Test cricket match of the Pakistan cricket team in 1954 against India.
It grew into a regional economic centre during the 17th and 18th centuries, serving as a hub for Eurasian traders, including Bengalis, Marwaris, Gujaratis, Armenians, Arabs, Persians, Greeks, Dutchmen, Frenchmen, Englishmen and the Portuguese.
Most diplomatic missions are located in North Dhaka.
Dhaka District has an area of 1,463.60&nbsp;square kilometres (565&nbsp;sq&nbsp;mi) with a population of 18,305,671 in 2012; and is bounded by the districts of Gazipur, Tangail, Munshiganj, Rajbari, Narayanganj, Manikganj.
The Gonobhaban, the official residence of the Prime Minister, is situated on the north side of Parliament.
The works of the national poet Kazi Nazrul Islam and national anthem writer Rabindranath Tagore have a widespread following across Dhaka.
In 1906, the All India Muslim League was formed at the Ahsan Manzil, during a conference on liberal education hosted by Nawab Sir Khawja Salimullah.
They are also used as practice ground by different football clubs and visiting foreign national football teams.
With the dawn of the Industrial Revolution in Great Britain, Dhaka became a leading centre of the jute trade, as Bengal accounted for the largest share of the world's jute production.
The education system is divided into 5 levels: Primary (from grades 1 to 5), Junior (from grades 6 to 8), Secondary (from grades 9 to 10), Higher Secondary (from grades 11 to 12) and tertiary.
The British Council plays an important role helping students to achieve GCSE and A Level qualifications from examination boards in the United Kingdom.
There is also a small Shia sect, and an Ahmadiya community.
The main expansion of the city took place under Mughal governor Shaista Khan.
According to the Far Eastern Economic Review, Dhaka will be home to 25 million people by the end of 2025.
These occasions are observed with public ceremonies and rallies in public grounds.
Groundwater levels are dropping at two to three metres every year.
Private education, healthcare, architecture, engineering and consultancy services are major sectors of the urban economy.
Hinduism is the second-largest religion and comprises 7% of the population.
In 1971, it became the capital of an independent Bangladesh.
The city then measured , with a population of nearly one million.
It gained prestige as the ''Oxford of the East'' in its early years.
Relatively low-cost and non-polluting cycle rickshaws, nevertheless, cause traffic congestion and have been banned from many parts of the city.
The National Parliament House is located in the modernist capital complex designed by Louis Kahn in Sher-e-Bangla Nagar.
Islam is the dominant religion of the city, with 90% of the population being Muslim, and a majority belonging to the Sunni sect.
Bengal was reunited in 1911.
The utility plans to substitute surface water for groundwater through the construction of four large water treatment plants until 2020 at a cost of  (Saidabad Phase II and III, Padma/Pagla and Khilkhet).
Dhaka's people congregate at the Shaheed Minar and the Jatiyo Smriti Soudho to remember the national heroes of the liberation war.
The Mughal Empire conquered the region during the late 16th-century.
The Bangabandhu National Stadium was the main venue for all three editions.
Tropical vegetation and moist soils characterise the land, which is flat and close to sea level.
North South University, East West University, University of Asia Pacific, American International University – Bangladesh, BRAC University, Primeasia University, United International University and Ahsanullah University of Science and Technology ''(see:List of universities in Bangladesh)'', most of which are located in Mohakhali, Gulshan, Banani, Baridhara, Bashundhara, Uttara and Dhanmondi areas of the city.
File:Bahadur Shah Park Sadarghat Dhaka 003.jpg|Khawja Hafizullah Obelisk in Bahadur Shah Park
Mughal Bengal generated 50% of the Mughal Empire's GDP, which at the time constituted 25% of world GDP.
File:Statue located inside the Armenian Church in Dhaka.jpg|A sculpture in the former Armenian district
The continuing growth reflects ongoing migration from rural areas to the Dhaka urban region, which accounted for 60% of the city's growth in the 1960s and 1970s.
More recently, the city's population has also grown with the expansion of city boundaries, a process that added more than a million people to the city in the 1980s.
The four plants are expected to have a combined capacity of  per year, compared to a 2010 supply of  per year that is mainly from groundwater.
It is the largest city in the Bengal region.
Recent years have seen the widespread construction of shopping malls, multiplexes, hotels and restaurants attracting Dhaka's growing middle class and wealthy residents.
It was liberated by Bangladesh-India Allied Forces on 16 December 1971 with the surrender of Pakistan.
The city was a centre of the worldwide muslin industry, with 80,000 skilled weavers.
File:Tomb Of Three Leader 3.A.M.R.jpg|Three Leaders Mausoleum, Suhrawardy Udyan, Shahbag
Dhaka became known as the ''City of Mosques'' in Bengal.
The Sadarghat River Port on the banks of the Buriganga River serves for the transport of goods and passengers upriver and to other ports in Bangladesh.
Protests and strikes, and violence amongst police, students and political groups frequently disrupt public university campuses.
Capital Development Authority (RAJUK)
Ministry of Housing and Public Works
The city, in combination with localities forming the wider metropolitan area, is home to over 15&nbsp;million .
Dhaka also has a large population of European, Chinese, Korean, Indian, Pakistani, Nepali, Burmese and Sri Lankan expatriates working in executive jobs in different industries.
The city lies on the lower reaches of the Ganges Delta and covers a total area of .
The history of urban settlement in the area of modern-day Dhaka dates to the 1st century.
It was also described as the ''Venice of the East''.
Consultants from Civil Engineering Department of BUET and engineers of SWO of Bangladesh Army, Roads and Highways Department, Local Government Engineering Department and Rajdhani Unnayan Kartripakkha have worked hard to turn this project into reality.
The unemployment rate in Dhaka was 23% in 2013.
Smaller segments practice Christianity and Buddhism.
The main offices of most publishing houses in Bangladesh are based in Dhaka.
Dhaka remained a centre of revolutionary and political activity, as student activism and demands for autonomy increased.
Alternatively, this name may refer to ''the hidden goddess'' Dhakeshwari, whose shrine is located in the south-western part of the city.
During the political and constitutional crisis in 1971, the military junta led by Yahya Khan refused to transfer power to the newly elected National Assembly, causing mass riots, civil disobdience and a movement for self-determination.
File:Greek Mausoleum.JPG|19th century Greek mausoleum on the grounds of the University of Dhaka
2011), Dhaka City Corporation has been divided into two administrative parts&nbsp;– these are (1) Dhaka North City Corporation and (2) Dhaka South City Corporation – for ensuring better civic facilities.
Dhaka faces tremendous challenges of congestion and inadequate infrastructure.
Dhaka Electric Supply Company LimitedDhaka Power Distribution Company Limited
Dhaka hosts 48 resident embassies and high commissions and numerous international organisations.
The old city of Dhaka was the Mughal capital of Bengal.
At the height of its medieval glory, Dhaka was regarded as one of the wealthiest and most prosperous cities in the world.
Aside from Chittagong, Dhaka has a water-borne sewage system, but this serves only 22% of the population while another 30% are served with septic tanks.
'''Dhaka''' (, ;  ,  , or   ) is the capital and largest city of Bangladesh.
In total the city has 130 wards and 725 ''mohallas''.
Dhaka has the largest number of schools, colleges and universities of any Bangladeshi city.
Islam Khan Chishti was the first administrator of the city.
''Pohela Baishakh'', the Bengali New Year, falls annually on 14 April and is popularly celebrated across the city.
Public buses are operated by the state-run Bangladesh Road Transport Corporation (BRTC) and by private companies and operators.
Dhaka is also the press, media and entertainment centre of Bangladesh.
Dhaka was the commercial capital of the empire.
It is also a major city of South Asia and among the OIC states.
In the ensuing Bangladesh Liberation War, the Mukti Bahini launched regular guerrilla attacks and ambush operations against Pakistani forces.
Large parts of the city were burnt and destroyed, including Hindu neighbourhoods.
With the defeat of the Nawab of Bengal at the Battle of Buxar in 1764, British East India company gained the right to collect taxes from the Mughal province of Benga-Bihar.
Dhaka Water Supply & Sewerage Authority
The population is growing by an estimated 4.2% per year, one of the highest rates amongst the Asian cities.
The city is a microcosm of the entire country, with diverse religious and ethnic communities.
The most popular dressing style for women are ''sarees'' or ''salwar kameez'', while men usually prefer western clothing to the traditional ''lungi''.
Two of the largest shopping malls in Dhaka and perhaps in the Indian subcontinent are Jamuna Future Park and Bashundhara City shopping mall.
Dhakai Bakarkhani is the traditional food or snack of the people of old Dhaka.
This area is also credited for the revival of the Jamdani because of the many local saree stores selling and promoting these locally hand-made age old traditional Bengali sarees.
Dhaka is also home to over 300,000 Bihari refugees, who are descendants of displaced Muslims from eastern India during 1947 and sought refuge in East Pakistan.
The city has historically attracted numerous migrant workers.
Nevertheless, DWASA announced in 2012 that it will develop a new wellfield with 46 wells providing  of water per day at a cost of  of which  will be financed by the government of South Korea.
The city formally passed to the control of the British East India Company in 1793 and Dhaka got plugged into the imperial mercantile networks of the British Empire.
Kamalapur railway station, Airport railway station, Banani railway station, Tejgaon railway station, Cantonment railway station and Gendaria railway station are railway stations providing trains on suburban and national routes operated by the state-run Bangladesh Railway.
Ministry of Road Transport and Bridges&nbsp;∟Road Transport and Highways Division
It was estimated at 69.2% in 2001.
File:Crescent Lake - Chandrima Uddan (07).jpg|Crescent Lake, Parliament District
In 2011 Bangladesh's capital development authority, Rajdhani Unnayan Kartripakkha (RAJUK), made rainwater harvesting for new houses mandatory in an effort to address water scarcity and reduce flooding.
It was central to the economy of Mughal Bengal, which generated 50% of Mughal GDP.
In domestic Twenty20 cricket, Dhaka has a Bangladesh Premier League franchise known as Dhaka Gladiators.
Alongside public institutes of higher education there are some forty-five private universities in Dhaka.
To fight rising traffic congestion and population, the national government has recently implemented a policy for rapid urbanisation of surrounding areas and beyond by the introduction of a ten-year relief on income tax for new construction of facilities and buildings outside Dhaka.
Cricket and football are the two most popular sports in Dhaka and across the nation.
Along with Bangladeshi cuisine and South Asian variants, a large variety of Western and Chinese cuisine is served at numerous restaurants and eateries.
Dhaka is the first city to hold the games three times.
The city's water table has sunk by 50 metres in the past four decades and the closest underground water is now over 60 metres below ground level.
Dhaka Education BoardIntermediate and Secondary Education, Dhaka
In August 1975, Sheikh Mujib was assassinated in a military coup.
Only two-thirds of households in Dhaka are served by the city water supply system.
The city hosted two important caravansaries of the subcontinent: the Bara Katra and Choto Katra, located on the riverfront of the Buriganga.
Dhaka also hosted South Asian Games for three times in 1985, 1993 and 2010.
The city has the largest number of cycle rickshaws and is known as the ''Rickshaw Capital of the World''.
It is famous for its quality and taste and it was highly praised by the royal court of the Mughal Empire in Delhi.
Dhaka is located in central Bangladesh at , on the eastern banks of the Buriganga River.
, funding had been secured for the first plant which is under construction thanks to a  contribution from Danish development assistance.
The Six point movement in 1966 was widely supported by the city's residents.
The Dhaka City Corporation is a self-governing corporation which runs the affairs of the city.
They are required to have air conditioning; the fleet consists mostly of Toyota Allions, Toyota Corollas and Toyota Premios.
Eurasian traders built neighbourhoods in Farashganj (French Bazaar), Armanitola (Armenian Quarter) and Portogola (Portuguese Quarter).
Water bodies and wetlands around Dhaka are facing destruction as these are being filled up to construct multi-storied buildings and other real estate developments.
The city is home to a number of regional and international development organisations, including the permanent secretariat of BIMSTEC.
It was the host for the opening ceremony of the 2011 Cricket World Cup while the Sher-e-Bangla National Cricket Stadium, exclusively used for cricket hosted 6 matches of the tournament including two quarter-final matches.
It includes Narayanganj city, the Dhaka Export Processing Zone, Tongi, Savar, Keraniganj and Gazipur city.
On 7 March 1971, Awami League leader Sheikh Mujibur Rahman addressed a massive public gathering at the Ramna Race Course Maidan in Dhaka, in which he declared the beginning of the independence struggle.
The city's diverse economy registered a gross municipal product of US$85&nbsp;billion in 2008.
Ministry of Local Government, Rural Development and Co-operatives&nbsp;∟ Local Government Division
It was used during Pakistan colonial era for Test matches when no Bengalis were selected in team and a matting pitch was used.
In the 1980s, Bangladesh pioneered the formation of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) and hosted its first summit in Dhaka.
As the capital of the People's Republic of Bangladesh, Dhaka is the home to numerous state and diplomatic institutions.
It hosts several major arts festivals, including the annual Ekushey Book Fair, the Dhaka Literature Festival and the biannual Dhaka Art Summit.
The Dhaka Elevated Expressway would run from Shahjalal International Airport-Kuril-Banani-Mohakhali-Tejgaon-Saatrasta-Moghbazar Rail Crossing-Khilgaon-Kamalapur-Golapbagh to Dhaka-Chittagong Highway at Kutubkhali Point.
Students who pass this examination proceed to two years of Higher Secondary or intermediate training, which culminate in a Higher Secondary School Certificate (HSC) Examination.
It has one of the largest concentrations of multinational companies in South Asia.
The city's name was Jahangir Nagar (''City of Jahangir'') in the 17th century.
The five years of Primary education concludes with a Primary Education Completion (PEC) Examination, the three years of Junior education concludes with Junior School Certificate (JSC) Examination, and next two years of Secondary education concludes with a Secondary School Certificate (SSC) Examination.
They have higher standards in terms of comfort but are more expensive.
Ministry of Power, Energy and Mineral Resources&nbsp;∟ Power Division
It is one of the world's most populated cities, with a population of 17 million people in the Greater Dhaka Area.
The region was part of the ancient district of Bikrampur, which was ruled by the Hindu Sena dynasty.
The city has a per-capita income of US$3,100 (the lowest among the world's megacities); and an estimated 34% of households live below the poverty line.
Half the workforce is employed in household and unorganised labour, while about 800,000 work in the textile industry.
In the 1990s and 2000s, Dhaka experienced improved economic growth and the emergence of affluent business districts and satellite towns.
Ministry of Local Government, Rural Development and Co-operatives&nbsp;∟ Local Government Division
This leaves Dhaka susceptible to flooding during the monsoon seasons owing to heavy rainfall and cyclones.
The Supreme Court, the Dhaka High Court and the Foreign Ministry are located in the Ramna area.
The name was dropped soon after the emperor's death.
The leading English-language newspapers include  ''The Daily Star'', ''Dhaka Tribune'', ''The Financial Express'', ''The Independent'' and ''New Age''.
A single medium range Jamdani saree may take as long as 3&nbsp;months to complete.
The Prime Minister's Office is located in Tejgaon.
The Bangabhaban is the official residence and workplace of the President of Bangladesh, who is the ceremonial head of state under the constitution.
Between 1905 and 1912, it was the capital of British Eastern Bengal and Assam.
Subsequently, East Pakistan came under a non-co-operation movement against the Pakistani state.
Birthdays of Rabindranath Tagore and Kazi Nazrul Islam are observed respectively as Rabindra Jayanti and Nazrul Jayanti.
The technologically advanced Bangladeshi pharmaceutical industry is also concentrated in Dhaka.
Dhaka experiences a hot, wet, and humid tropical climate.
The city had well-laid out gardens, monuments, mosques, temples, bazaars, churches and caravansaries.
The University of Dacca was established in 1921.
Under the Köppen climate classification, Dhaka has a tropical savanna climate.
The long-standing inhabitants of the old city are known as ''Dhakaia'' and have a distinctive dialect and culture.
Between 15,000 and 20,000 of the Rohingya, Santal, Khasi, Garo, Chakma and Mandi tribal peoples reside in the city.
The Awami League was formed at the Rose Garden Palace in 1949 as the Bengali alternative to the domination of the Muslim League in Pakistan.
The origins of the name for Dhaka are uncertain.
Major Bangladeshi companies headquartered in the Dhaka include Beximco, Rahimafrooz, Biman Bangladesh Airlines, Petrobangla, Akij Group, Bashundhara Group, Jamuna Group, Transcom Group, Aarong, PRAN-RFL Group and Square Pharmaceuticals among others.
The treatment plants will draw water from more distant and less polluted rivers up to  from the city.
Bangladesh Railway has been operating commuter rail services in suburban areas as well as to neighbouring Narayanganj and Gazipur cities using DEMU trains.
It consists of 49 thanas – Lalbagh, Wari, Chowkbazar, Armanitola, Kotwali, Hazaribagh, Sutrapur, Bangsal, Ramna, Shahbag, Gendaria, Motijheel, Mohakhali, Malibagh, Kawran bazar, Paltan, Kalabagan, Dhanmondi, Mohammadpur, Lalmatia, Rajarbagh, Tejgaon, Nakhalpara, Panthapath, Jatrabari, Kadamtali, New Market, Azampur, Khilkhet, Rampura, Hatirpool, Gulshan, Mirpur, Pallabi, Shah Ali, Turaag, Sabujbagh, Baridhara, Dhaka Cantonment, Demra, Shyampur, Badda, Kafrul, Kamrangir char, Khilgaon, Uttara, Uttarkhan, Sher-e-Bangla Nagar, Dakkshinkhan etc.
Notable private universities are
The city also has Ismaili, Sikh, Harijan, Hrishi & Bahá'í Faith communities.
Under Islamic rule, it became part of the historic district of Sonargaon, the regional administrative hub of the Delhi and the Bengal Sultanates.
The Mohammedan Sports Club and Abahani are two of the most famous football and cricket teams, maintaining a fierce rivalry, specially in Bangladesh Premier League.
Domestic service flies to Chittagong, Sylhet, Rajshahi, Cox's Bazar, Jessore, Barisal, Saidpur and international services fly to major cities in Asia, the Middle East, North Africa and Western Europe.
It was declared as the legislative capital of Pakistan in 1962.
Ministry of Education  Ministry of Primary and Mass Education
Dhaka was struck with numerous air raids by the Indian Air Force in December.
The Asian Development Bank estimated in 2007 that by 2015 a severe supply shortage would occur if the utility did not reduce groundwater abstraction.
Khan christened it as "Jahangir Nagar" (''City of Jahangir'') in honour of the Emperor Jahangir.
With the rapid growth of the city, the force has been raised to 26,661 personnel and the establishment of 49 police stations has been completed.
There are 52 universities in Dhaka.
Dhaka Medical College and Sir Salimullah Medical College are two famous medical colleges in the nation.
Large crowds of people gather on the streets of Shahbag, Ramna Park and the campus of the University of Dhaka for celebrations.
Moreover, a lack of co-ordination among them and centralisation of all powers by Government of Bangladesh, keeps the development and maintenance of the city in a chaotic situation.
The city had an influential press, with prominent newspapers like the  ''Ittefaq'' and the ''Weekly Holiday''.
The city has endured periods of martial law, war and natural calamities.
This is in addition to holding several examinations for professional bodies in the United Kingdom, including the UK medical Royal Colleges and Accountancy.
The Bangladesh Sports Control Board, responsible for promoting sports activities across the nation is based in Dhaka.
The main commercial areas of the city are Motijheel, Dilkusha, Kawran Bazar, Gulshan, Mohakhali and Banani.
Dhaka Metropolis cricket team represents Dhaka city in National Cricket League, a region based domestic first-class cricket competition in Bangladesh.
The Dhaka Metro feasibility study has been completed.
Dhaka bore the brunt of the army's atrocities, witnessing a genocide and a campaign of widescale repression, with the arrest, torture and murder of the city's civilians, students, intelligentsia, political activists and religious minorities.
Highway links to the Indian cities of Kolkata and Agartala have been established by the BRTC which also runs regular bus services to those cities from Dhaka.
The Bengali Language Movement reached its peak in 1952.
Since independence, Dhaka has seen the establishment of numerous public and private colleges and universities that offer undergraduate and graduate degrees as well as a variety of doctoral programmes.
