A disjunct population of this species has been reported from the area of Trabzon and Rize in northeastern Turkey near the border with Georgia in the 1990s by two Turkish zoologists (Serez and Eroglu).
However, studies on dhole mtDNA and microsatellite genotype showed that there are no clear subspecific distinctions.
Faeces are often deposited in what appear to be communal latrines.
Their growth rate is much faster than that of wolves, being similar in rate to that of coyotes.
A dhole may have been presented as a gift to Ibbi-Sin as tribute.
Although opportunistic, dholes have a seeming aversion to hunting cattle and their calves.
They may defecate in conspicuous places, though a territorial function is unlikely, as faeces are mostly deposited within the clan's territory rather than the periphery.
They may suffer from rabies, canine distemper, mange, trypanosomiasis, canine parvovirus, and endoparasites such as cestodes and roundworms.
They will tear open their prey's flanks and disembowel it, eating the heart, liver, lungs and some sections of the intestines.
Dholes are vulnerable to a number of different diseases, particularly in areas where they are sympatric with other canid species.
When urinating, dholes, especially males, may raise one hind leg or both to result in a handstand.
A fictional version of the Dhole, imbued with supernatural abilities, appears in the Season 6 episode of the X-Files titled Alpha.
The '''dhole''' (''Cuon alpinus'') is a canid native to Central, South and Southeast Asia.
Playful dholes will open their mouths with their lips retracted and their tails held in a vertical position whilst assuming a play bow.
Javan rusas are hunted in Java.
In 1827, Charles Hamilton Smith claimed that it was derived from a language spoken in 'various parts of the East'.
In eastern Siberia, they prey on roe deer, Manchurian wapiti, wild boar, musk deer, and reindeer, while in Primorye they feed on sika deer and goral, too.
Clans typically number 5-12 individuals in India, though clans of 40 have been reported.
Dholes are far less territorial than wolves, with pups from one clan often joining another without trouble once they mature sexually.
Persecution of dholes still occurs with varying degrees of intensity according to region.
There are currently no other confirmed recent reports of dhole being present in Russia.
Unlike wolf packs, in which the breeding pair monopolises food, dholes give priority to the pups when feeding at a kill, allowing them to eat first.
The species was first described in literature in 1794 by an explorer named Pesteref, who encountered dholes during his travels in far eastern Russia.
Dholes were once thought to be a major factor in reducing Asiatic cheetah populations, though this is doubtful, as cheetahs live in open areas as opposed to forested areas favoured by dholes.
There are numerous records of leopards being treed by dholes.
In 2016, the Korean company Sooam Biotech was reported to be attempting to clone the dhole using dogs as surrogate mothers to help conserve the species.
In tropical forests, the dhole competes with tigers and leopards, targeting somewhat different prey species, but still with substantial dietary overlap.
It is listed as Endangered by the IUCN, as populations are decreasing and estimated at fewer than 2,500 adults.
Escaping tigers are usually killed, while tigers which stand their ground have a greater chance of survival.
The people of India do not eat dhole flesh, and their fur is not considered overly valuable.
Dholes frequently drive their prey into water bodies, where the targeted animal's movements are hindered.
Also, other characteristics of the prey, such as sex, arboreality, and aggressiveness, may play a role in prey selection.
They do not use a killing bite to the throat.
Friendly or submissive greetings are accompanied by horizontal lip retraction and the lowering of the tail, as well as licking.
Late Middle Pleistocene dholes were virtually indistinguishable from their modern descendants, save for their greater size, which closely approached that of the grey wolf.
Dominant dholes are hard to identify, as they do not engage in dominance displays as wolves do, though other clan members will show submissive behaviour toward them.
This fear and superstition was not however shared by neighbouring Tungusic peoples.
It is a diurnal pack hunter which preferentially targets medium and large sized ungulates.
The Montefalcone family's coat of arms had a pair of red dogs as supporters.
Methods used for dhole hunting included poisoning, snaring, shooting and clubbing at den sites.
Tigers are extremely dangerous opponents for dholes, as they have sufficient strength to kill a single dhole with one paw strike.
Unlike other canids, there is no evidence of dholes using urine to mark their territories or travel routes.
Due to their rarity, dholes were never harvested for their skins in large numbers in the Soviet Union, and were sometimes accepted as dog or wolf pelts (being labeled as "half wolf" for the latter).
They occur in most of India south of the Ganges, particularly in the Central Indian Highlands and the Western and Eastern Ghats of the southern states.
It stands 17–22 inches at the shoulder and measures three feet in body length.
They live in clans rather than packs, as the latter term refers to a group of animals that always hunt together.
The demon dogs accompanying Hellequin in Mediaeval French passion plays, as well as the ones inhabiting the legendary forest of Brocéliande, have been attributed to dholes.
Dholes still occur in Tibet, and may still inhabit North Korea.
The Merriam-Webster Dictionary theorises that it may have come from the  (‘wolf’).
Once prey is secured, dholes will tear off pieces of the carcass and eat in seclusion.
In 2014, the Indian government sanctioned its first dhole conservation breeding centre  at the Indira Gandhi Zoological Park (IGZP) in Visakhapatnam.
The dorsal and lateral guard hairs in adults measure 20–30&nbsp;mm in length.
Though not as fast as jackals and foxes, they can chase their prey for many hours.
Their range is highly fragmented in the Malaysian Peninsula, Sumatra, Java, Vietnam and Thailand.
Maximum longevity in captivity is 15–16 years.
They may occur in Kashmir's Ladakh area.
Dhole packs occasionally attack Asiatic black bears and sloth bears.
alpinus'' itself arose during the late Middle Pleistocene, by which point the transformation of the lower molar into a single cusped, slicing tooth had been completed.
Before embarking on a hunt, clans go through elaborate prehunt social rituals involving nuzzling, body rubbing and homo- and heterosexual mounting.
During mating, the female assumes a crouched, cat-like position.
The presence of dholes in Myanmar was confirmed by camera trapping in 11 areas and, alongside leopards, have apparently replaced tigers as the country's top predators.
During this time, the pack feeds the mother at the den site.
Richard Lydekker wrote nearly 80 years later that the word was not used by the natives living within the species' range.
In the winter coat, the back is clothed in a saturated rusty-red to reddish colour with brownish highlights along the top of the head, neck and shoulders.
Two years later, Smith connected this word with  ‘mad, crazy’, and erroneously compared the Turkish word with  and  (cfr.
It has a wide and massive skull with a well-developed sagittal crest, and its masseter muscles are highly developed compared to other canid species, giving the face an almost hyena-like appearance.
The dhole has been protected in Russia since 1974, though it is vulnerable to poison left out for wolves.
Once weaning begins, the adults of the clan will regurgitate food for the pups until they are old enough to join in hunting.
Since leopards are smaller than tigers and more likely hunt dholes, dhole packs tend to react more aggressively toward them than they do towards tigers.
Serows are among the only ungulate species capable of effectively defending themselves against dhole attacks, due to their thick, protective coats and short, sharp horns capable of easily impaling dholes.
When attacking prey, they emit screaming ''KaKaKaKAA'' sounds.
Brian Houghton Hodgson kept captured dholes in captivity, and found, with the exception of one animal, they remained shy and vicious even after 10 months.
Though usually antagonistic toward wolves, they may hunt and feed alongside one another.
Adults may weigh over , with females usually weighing  less than males.
In China, the animal is listed as a category II protected species under the Chinese wildlife protection act of 1988.
They are shown waiting by a tree, with a woman or spirit trapped up it, a scene reminiscent of dholes treeing tigers.
Instead, the pair lie on their sides facing each other in a semicircular formation.
In Indochina, dholes suffer heavily from nonselective hunting techniques such as snaring.
In Mongolia, they prey on argali and rarely Siberian ibex.
The animal's fearsome reputation in India is reflected by the number of pejorative names it possesses in Hindi, which variously translate as "red devil", "devil dog", "jungle devil", or "hound of Kali".
Dholes in the Moscow Zoo moult once a year from March to May.
During a pursuit, one or more dholes may take over chasing their prey, while the rest of the pack keeps up at a steadier pace behind, taking over once the other group tires.
Some authorities have accepted this report, but others considered it to be unreliable.
The tail is very luxuriant and fluffy, and is mainly of a reddish-ocherous colour, with a dark brown tip.
majori'' had lost the last lower molar altogether.
The fossil record indicates that the species also occurred in North America, with remains being found in Beringia and Mexico.
Dhole-like animals are described in numerous old European texts, including the Ostrogoth sagas, where they are portrayed as hell hounds.
Also, in 2011 to 2013, local government officials and herders reported the presence of several packs at altitudes of 2,000 to 3,500 meters near the Taxkorgan Reserve in the Karakoram/Pamir Mountains  region  of the Xinjiang Autonomous Region, on  China’s  border  with Pakistan, Tajikistan  and  Afghanistan.
The dhole is a highly social animal, living in large clans without rigid dominance hierarchies and containing multiple breeding females.
It is unknown if dholes continue to inhabit Tien Shan, though they occur in small numbers in Gansu Province, with one pack being sighted in the Qilian Mountains within that province in 2006; Camera-trap surveys in the Yanchiwan National Nature Reserve in the northern edge of this Gansu Province in 2013-2014 confirmed the continued presence of several packs and a female adult with pups in this area at altitudes of approximately 2,500 to 4,000 meters.
Along with leopards, dholes typically target animals in the 30–175&nbsp;kg range (mean weights of 35.3&nbsp;kg for dhole and 23.4&nbsp;kg for leopard), while tigers selected for prey animals heavier than 176&nbsp;kg (but their mean prey weight was 65.5&nbsp;kg).
More than one female dhole may den and rear their litters together in the same den.
It is genetically close to species within the genus ''Canis'', though its skull is convex rather than concave in profile, it lacks a third lower molar, and the upper molars sport only a single cusp as opposed to 2–4.
Subsequent studies on the canid genome revealed that the dhole and African wild dog are closely related to members of the genus ''Canis'', and that both are more closely related to grey wolves, coyotes, golden wolves, golden jackals, and Ethiopian wolves than the more basal black-backed and side-striped jackals are.
There are no recent reports from  Mongolia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan or Tajikistan, though one specimen was caught in southern China's Jiangxi district.
Dholes have a complex body language.
The lower parts of the limbs are whitish, with dark brownish bands on the anterior sides of the forelimbs.
Most chases are short, lasting only 500 m. When chasing fleet-footed prey, they run at a pace of 30&nbsp;mph.
The dhole's distinctive morphology has been a source of much confusion in determining the species' systematic position among the canidae.
Other sounds include whines (food soliciting), growls (warning), screams, chatterings (both of which are alarm calls) and yapping cries.
The stomach and rumen are usually left untouched.
Some dens may have up to six entrances leading up to  of interconnecting tunnels.
By the age of six months, pups accompany the adults on hunts, and will assist in killing large prey such as sambar by the age of eight months.
Unlike wolf packs, dhole clans may contain more than one breeding female.
George Simpson placed the dhole in the subfamily Simocyoninae alongside the African wild dog and the bush dog, on account of all three species' similar dentition.
Prey weighing less than 50&nbsp;kg is usually killed within two minutes, while large stags may take 15 minutes to die.
Japanese author Uchida Roan wrote 犬物語 (''Inu monogatari''; A dog's tale) in 1901 as a nationalistic critique of the declining popularity of indigenous dog breeds, which he asserted were descended from the dhole.
Intragroup fighting is rarely observed.
The winter fur was prized by the Chinese, who bought dhole pelts in Ussuriysk during the late 1860s for a few silver rubles.
The muzzle and forehead are greyish-reddish.
Dholes once occurred in the Indo-Gangetic Plain's Terai region.
The general tone of the fur is reddish, with the brightest hues occurring in winter.
In Central Asia, dholes primarily inhabit mountainous areas; in the western half of its range, they live mostly in alpine meadows and high-montane steppes high above sea level, while in the east, they mainly ranges in montane taigas, though may appear along coastlines.
In Semirechye, fur coats made from dhole skin were considered the warmest, but were very costly.
Dholes sometimes drive tiger, leopards, and bears (see below) from their kills.
Subsequent authors, including Juliet Clutton-Brock, noted greater morphological similarities to canids of the genera ''Canis'', ''Dusicyon'' and ''Alopex'' than to either ''Speothos'' or ''Lycaon'', with any resemblance to the latter two being due to convergent evolution.
Dholes are primarily diurnal hunters, hunting in the early hours of the morning.
There is at least one record of a lone wolf associating with a pair of dholes in Debrigarh Wildlife Sanctuary.
In some areas, dholes are sympatric to tigers and leopards.
Hodgson later took note of the dhole's physical distinctiveness from the genus ''Canis'' and assigned it to a new genus ''Cuon''.
Such clans usually consist of 12 individuals, but groups of over 40 are known.
It has 6–7 pairs of teats, sometimes eight.
Dholes produce whistles resembling the calls of red foxes, sometimes rendered as ''coo-coo''.
There is one record of a pack bringing down an Indian elephant calf in Assam, despite desperate defense of the mother resulting in numerous losses to the pack.
In 2011, dhole packs were recorded by camera traps in the Chitwan National Park.
The earliest known member of the genus ''Cuon'' is the Chinese ''Cuon majori'' of the Villafranchian period.
Prey animals in India include chital, sambar, muntjac, mouse deer, swamp deer, wild boar, gaur, water buffalo, banteng, cattle, nilgai, goats, Indian Hares, Himalayan Field Rats and langurs.
It is unlikely that these zones contain viable populations, considering most sightings involve small groups or solitary specimens, and they're likely decreasing in number due to the lack of prey.
They rarely hunt nocturnally, except on moonlit nights, indicating they greatly rely on sight when hunting.
Dholes still occur in northeastern Bangladesh's forest reserves in the Sylhet area, as well the Chittagong Hill Tracts in the southeast.
The creation of reserves under Project Tiger provided some protection for dhole populations sympatric with tigers.
Four kinds of den have been described; simple earth dens with one entrance (usually remodeled striped hyena or porcupine dens); complex cavernous earth dens with more than one entrance; simple cavernous dens excavated under or between rocks; and complex cavernous dens with several other dens in the vicinity, some of which are interconnected.
They are described as living in packs numbering hundreds of individuals, and that even Shere Khan and Hathi make way for them when they descend into the jungle.
One population extends from South, Central, and North India (south of the Ganges) into Burma, and the other extends from India north of the Ganges into northeastern India, Burma, Thailand and the Malaysian Peninsula.
In India, Myanmar, Indochina, Indonesia and China, they prefer forested areas in alpine zones, and occasionally also in plains regions.
According to Richard Lydekker, adult dholes are nearly impossible to tame, though pups are docile and can even be allowed to play with domestic dog pups until they reach early adulthood.
These "cities" may be developed over many generations of dholes, and are shared by the clan females when raising young together.
Dholes do not use rendezvous sites to meet their pups as wolves do, though one or more adults will stay with the pups at the den while the rest of the pack hunts.
The tunnel opens into an antechamber, from which extends more than one passage.
The situation of dholes in the Himalaya and north-west India is precarious, and populations fragmented.
With Mowgli and Kaa's help, the Seeonee wolf pack manages to wipe out the dholes by leading them through bee hives and torrential waters before finishing off the rest in battle.
The possible earliest written use of the word in English occurred in 1808 by soldier Thomas Williamson, who encountered the animal in Ramghur district.
When attacking bears, dholes will attempt to prevent them from seeking refuge in caves, and lacerate their hindquarters.
and at Riparo Fredian in northern Italy The vast Pleistocene range of this species also included numerous islands in Asia that this species no longer inhabits, such as Sri Lanka, Borneo, and possibly Palawan in the Philippines.
Dhole packs may steal leopard kills, while leopards may kill dholes if they encounter them singly or in pairs.
In the Tien Shan and Tarbagatai Mountains, dholes prey on Siberian ibexes, arkhar, roe deer, maral and wild boar.
How this sound is produced is unknown, though it is thought to help in coordinating the pack when travelling through thick brush.
The upper molars are weak, being one-third to one-half the size of those of wolves, and have only one cusp as opposed to 2–4, as is usual in canids, an adaptation thought to improve shearing ability, thus allowing it to compete more successfully with kleptoparasites.
also ; ), which are in fact from the Proto-Germanic *''dwalaz'' ‘foolish, stupid’.
In the Altai and Sayan Mountains, they prey on musk deer and reindeer.
Also, one single individual was claimed to have been shot recently in 2013 in the nearby Kabardino-Balkaria Republic (a subject republic of Russia immediately north of Georgia in the Central Caucasus); its remains (including a skull) were analyzed by a biologist from the Kabardino-Balkarian State University in May 2015, who concluded the skull was from a dhole.
They do not scrape the earth with their feet as other canids do to mark their territories.
In north-east India, they inhabit Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Meghalaya, and West Bengal.
The dhole only rarely takes domestic livestock.
This closeness to ''Canis'' may have been confirmed in a menagerie in Madras where, according to zoologist Reginald Pocock, a dhole interbred with a golden jackal.
The origin of dholes in Sumatra and Java is, as of 2005, unclear, as they show greater relatedness to dholes in India, Burma and China rather than with those in nearby Malaysia.
Dens are typically located under dense scrub or on the banks of dry rivers or creeks.
Oxen are killed more often than cows are, probably because they are given less protection.
The etymology of ''dhole'' is unclear.
They occasionally blind their prey by attacking the eyes.
Dholes eat fruit and vegetable matter more readily than other canids.
In 2014, camera trap videos in the montane  tropical forests at 2,000 meters in the Kerinci Seblat National Park in Sumatra revealed the continued presence of this species.
In the early 20th century, dhole pelts reached eight rubles in Manchuria.
Although they have not been recorded in Pakistan, they once occurred in the alpine steppes extending into Kashmir.
Livestock stall-fed at night and grazed near homes are never attacked.
The dhole is protected under Schedule 2 of the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972.
Today they occur in the Jigme Dorji National Park.
In Bhutan, dholes have recovered from a poisoning campaign during the 1970s, and became re-established in the 1990s.
They are generally tolerant of scavengers at their kills.
In captivity, they eat various kinds of grasses, herbs and leaves, seemingly for pleasure rather than just when ill.
The gestation period lasts 60–63 days, with litter sizes averaging 4–6 pups.
In summertime in the Tien Shan Mountains, dholes eat large quantities of mountain rhubarb.
Once large prey is caught, one dhole will grab the prey's nose, while the rest of the pack pulls the animal down by the flanks and hindquarters.
In the absence of further data, the researchers involved in the study speculated that Javan and Sumatran dholes could have been introduced to the islands by humans.
The fur trade does not pose a significant threat to dholes.
Like African wild dogs and dingoes, dholes will avoid killing prey close to their dens.
The dholes are despised by the wolves because of their destructiveness, their habit of not living in dens and the hair between their toes.
The British naturalist Brian Hodgson gave the dhole the binomial name ''Canis primaevus'' and proposed that it was the progenitor of the domestic dog.
Dholes appear in Rudyard Kipling's ''Red Dog'', where they are portrayed as aggressive and bloodthirsty animals which descend from the Deccan Plateau into the Seeonee Hills inhabited by Mowgli and his adopted wolf pack to cause carnage among the jungle's denizens.
Dholes have been also recently reported from the Altyn-Tagh (Altun) Mountains in the southern portion of the Xinjiang Autonomous Region close to Tibet as well.
Domestic dogs may kill dholes, though they will feed alongside them on occasion.
In Thailand, clans rarely exceed three individuals.
Native Indian people killed dholes primarily to protect livestock, while British sporthunters during the British Raj did so under the conviction that dholes were responsible for drops in game populations.
Recently, on October 12, 2015, this research team reported the preliminary conclusion that no real evidence exists of a living population of the dhole in Turkey (or in the Kabardino-Balkaria Republic), pending DNA analysis of samples from the original 1994 Serez-Eroglu skins.
The throat, chest, flanks, belly and the upper parts of the limbs are less brightly coloured, and are more yellowish in tone.
Recently, in August 2015, researchers from the National Museum of Natural History from Sofia, Bulgaria (including Dr. Nikolai Spassov, the current director of this museum) and the Karadeniz Technical University began an expedition to track and document this possible Turkish population of dhole.
It resembled ''Canis'' in its physical form more than the modern species, which has greatly reduced molars, whose cusps have developed into sharply trenchant points.
During the Pleistocene, the dhole ranged throughout Asia, Europe and North America, but became restricted to its historical range 12,000–18,000 years ago.
He stated that dhole was a common local name for the species.
In this manner, they closely resemble African wild dogs in social structure.
Infectious pathogens such as ''Toxocara canis'' are present in their faeces.
The dhole might still be present in the Tunkinsky National Park in extreme southern Siberia near Lake Baikal.
There is no copulatory tie characteristic of other canids when the male dismounts.
In northern Laos, dholes have been studied recently (2012) in protected areas.
Dholes were persecuted throughout India for bounties until they were given protection by the Wildlife Protection Act of 1972.
The rostrum is shorter than that of domestic dogs and most other canids.
By the Middle Pleistocene, ''C.
Factors contributing to this decline include habitat loss, loss of prey, competition with other species, persecution, and disease transfer from domestic dogs.
The first study on the origins of the species was conducted by paleontologist Erich Thenius, who concluded that the dhole was a post-Pleistocene descendant of a golden jackal-like ancestor.
According to Charles Hamilton Smith, the dangerous wild canids mentioned by Scaliger as having lived in the forests of Montefalcone could have been based on dholes, as they were described as unlike wolves in habits, voice and appearance.
