As the disease progresses a lack of insulin may also develop.
The net effect is persistently high levels of blood glucose, poor protein synthesis, and other metabolic derangements, such as acidosis.
There however is some short-term mortality risk of less than 1% from the surgery.
In other circumstances, general practitioners and specialists share care in a team approach.
Dietary factors also influence the risk of developing type&nbsp;2 DM.
Metformin is generally recommended as a first line treatment for type&nbsp;2 diabetes, as there is good evidence that it decreases mortality.
Still, type&nbsp;1 diabetes can be accompanied by irregular and unpredictable high blood sugar levels, frequently with ketosis, and sometimes with serious low blood sugar levels.
**Insulin gene mutations
Weight loss surgery in those with obesity is sometimes an effective measure in those with type 2 DM.
In addition to the known ones above, they include blurry vision, headache, fatigue, slow healing of cuts, and itchy skin.
Aspirin is also recommended for people with cardiovascular problems, however routine use of aspirin has not been found to improve outcomes in uncomplicated diabetes.
Compared to those without diabetes, those with the disease have a 1.2 to 1.5-fold greater rate of decline in cognitive function.
In 2010, diabetes-related emergency room (ER) visit rates in the United States were higher among people from the lowest income communities (526 per 10,000 population) than from the highest income communities (236 per 10,000 population).
Acute complications can include diabetic ketoacidosis, nonketotic hyperosmolar coma, or death.
Inhalable insulin has been developed.
people with plasma glucose at or above 7.8&nbsp;mmol/l (140&nbsp;mg/dl), but not over 11.1&nbsp;mmol/l (200&nbsp;mg/dl), two hours after a 75&nbsp;g oral glucose load are considered to have impaired glucose tolerance.
The primary complications of diabetes due to damage in small blood vessels include damage to the eyes, kidneys, and nerves.
In countries using a general practitioner system, such as the United Kingdom, care may take place mainly outside hospitals, with hospital-based specialist care used only in case of complications, difficult blood sugar control, or research projects.
Diabetes-related foot problems (such as diabetic foot ulcers) may occur, and can be difficult to treat, occasionally requiring amputation.
The term "diabetes" or "to pass through" was first used in 230&nbsp;BCE by the Greek Apollonius of Memphis.
**Cytomegalovirus infection
Several other signs and symptoms can mark the onset of diabetes although they are not specific to the disease.
A number of skin rashes that can occur in diabetes are collectively known as diabetic dermadromes.
Control of blood pressure and maintaining proper foot care are important for people with the disease.
A Caesarean section may be performed if there is marked fetal distress or an increased risk of injury associated with macrosomia, such as shoulder dystocia.
A high blood bilirubin level may result from red blood cell destruction.
Type&nbsp;2 DM is the most common type of diabetes mellitus.
The cause is unknown.
Doses of insulin are then increased to effect.
Many drugs impair insulin secretion and some toxins damage pancreatic beta cells.
Diabetes mellitus is also occasionally known as "sugar diabetes" to differentiate it from diabetes insipidus.
At this stage, high blood sugar can be reversed by a variety of measures and medications that improve insulin sensitivity or reduce the liver's glucose production.
*Exocrine pancreatic defects
**β-adrenergic agonists
The rare disease diabetes insipidus has similar symptoms to diabetes mellitus, but without disturbances in the sugar metabolism (''insipidus'' means "without taste" in Latin) and does not involve the same disease mechanisms.
The major long-term complications relate to damage to blood vessels.
Diabetic animals are more prone to infections.
Even those who are not obese often have a high waist–hip ratio.
Low blood sugar is common in persons with type 1 and type 2 DM.
These include smoking, elevated cholesterol levels, obesity, high blood pressure, and lack of regular exercise.
Diabetes at least doubles a person's risk of early death.
The word "diabetes" is first recorded in English, in the form ''diabete'', in a medical text written around 1425.
Ultimately, the word comes from Greek διαβαίνειν (''diabainein''), meaning "to pass through," which is composed of δια- (''dia''-), meaning "through" and βαίνειν (''bainein''), meaning "to go".
*Type 1 DM results from the pancreas's failure to produce enough insulin.
Type&nbsp;1 and type&nbsp;2 diabetes were identified as separate conditions for the first time by the Indian physicians Sushruta and Charaka in 400-500&nbsp;CE with type&nbsp;1 associated with youth and type&nbsp;2 with being overweight.
A positive result, in the absence of unequivocal high blood sugar, should be confirmed by a repeat of any of the above methods on a different day.
When the glucose concentration in the blood remains high over time, the kidneys will reach a threshold of reabsorption, and glucose will be excreted in the urine (glycosuria).
People with diabetes can benefit from education about the disease and treatment, good nutrition to achieve a normal body weight, and exercise, with the goal of keeping both short-term and long-term blood glucose levels within acceptable bounds.
The earliest surviving work with a detailed reference to diabetes is that of Aretaeus of Cappadocia (2nd or early 3rd century CE).
Middle-aged animals are most commonly affected.
*Gestational diabetes is the third main form and occurs when pregnant women without a previous history of diabetes develop high blood-sugar levels.
Ancient Greek physician Aretaeus of Cappadocia (fl.
1st century CE) used that word, with the intended meaning "excessive discharge of urine", as the name for the disease.
Afrezza, under development by pharmaceuticals company MannKind Corporation, was approved by the FDA for general sale in June 2014.
This process is mainly controlled by the hormone glucagon, which acts in the opposite manner to insulin.
An advantage to inhaled insulin is that it may be more convenient and easy to use.
**Maturity onset diabetes of the young
In the early stage of type&nbsp;2, the predominant abnormality is reduced insulin sensitivity.
, an estimated 415 million people had diabetes worldwide, with type 2 DM making up about 90% of the cases.
Type&nbsp;2 DM is due primarily to lifestyle factors and genetics.
The original products were withdrawn due to side effects.
Gestational diabetes is fully treatable, but requires careful medical supervision throughout the pregnancy.
However, evidence supports less than or equal to somewhere between 140/90&nbsp;mmHg to 160/100&nbsp;mmHg; the only additional benefit found for blood pressure targets beneath this range was an isolated decrease in stroke risk, and this was accompanied by an increased risk of other serious adverse events.
Moderate hypoglycemia may easily be mistaken for drunkenness; rapid breathing and sweating, cold, pale skin are characteristic of hypoglycemia but not definitive.
Effects can range from feelings of unease, sweating, trembling, and increased appetite in mild cases to more serious issues such as confusion, changes in behavior such as aggressiveness, seizures, unconsciousness, and (rarely) permanent brain damage or death in severe cases.
A number of lifestyle factors are known to be important to the development of type&nbsp;2 DM, including obesity (defined by a body mass index of greater than 30), lack of physical activity, poor diet, stress, and urbanization.
Other "macrovascular" diseases are stroke, and peripheral vascular disease.
The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that diabetes mellitus resulted in 1.5 million deaths in 2012, making it the 8th leading cause of death.
Additionally, proximal diabetic neuropathy causes painful muscle wasting and weakness.
In genetically susceptible people, the onset of diabetes can be triggered by one or more environmental factors, such as a viral infection or diet.
The American Diabetes Association since 2003 uses a slightly different range for impaired fasting glucose of 5.6 to 6.9&nbsp;mmol/l (100 to 125&nbsp;mg/dl).
Among dietary factors, data suggest that gliadin (a protein present in gluten) may play a role in the development of type 1 diabetes, but the mechanism is not fully understood.
The Latin word comes from ''mell''-, which comes from ''mel'', meaning "honey"; sweetness; pleasant thing, and the suffix -''ītus'', whose meaning is the same as that of the English suffix "-ite".
Gestational diabetes usually resolves after the birth of the baby.
The defective responsiveness of body tissues to insulin is believed to involve the insulin receptor.
Sensitivity and responsiveness to insulin are usually normal, especially in the early stages.
Of these two prediabetic states, the latter in particular is a major risk factor for progression to full-blown diabetes mellitus, as well as cardiovascular disease.
This form was previously referred to as "insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus" (IDDM) or "juvenile diabetes".
Damage to the eyes, known as diabetic retinopathy, is caused by damage to the blood vessels in the retina of the eye, and can result in gradual vision loss and blindness.
"Type 3 diabetes" has been suggested as a term for Alzheimer's disease as the underlying processes may involve insulin resistance by the brain.
Beyond these two types, there is no agreed-upon standard nomenclature.
This represents 8.3% of the adult population, with equal rates in both women and men.
The long-term complications recognised in humans are much rarer in animals.
The ICD-10 (1992) diagnostic entity, ''malnutrition-related diabetes mellitus'' (MRDM or MMDM, ICD-10 code E12), was deprecated by the World Health Organization when the current taxonomy was introduced in 1999.
There is growing evidence that the underlying determinants of diabetes are a reflection of the major forces driving social, economic and cultural change: globalization, urbanization, population ageing, and the general health policy environment.
Damage to the nerves of the body, known as diabetic neuropathy, is the most common complication of diabetes.
Diabetes is a more variable than once though and people may have combinations of forms.
The principles of treatment (weight loss, oral antidiabetics, subcutaneous insulin) and management of emergencies (e.g.
The term "type&nbsp;1 diabetes" has replaced several former terms, including childhood-onset diabetes, juvenile diabetes, and insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM).
Diabetes was one of the first diseases described, with an Egyptian manuscript from c. 1500 BCE mentioning "too great emptying of the urine".
The majority of type&nbsp;1 diabetes is of the immune-mediated nature, in which a T-cell-mediated autoimmune attack leads to the loss of beta cells and thus insulin.
The term "diabetes", without qualification, usually refers to diabetes mellitus.
Diabetes mellitus cases due to a known defect are classified separately.
According to the current definition, two fasting glucose measurements above 126&nbsp;mg/dl (7.0&nbsp;mmol/l) is considered diagnostic for diabetes mellitus.
**Pancreatic neoplasia
There is no known preventive measure for type&nbsp;1 diabetes.
Other complications include an impaired counterregulatory response to low blood sugar, infection, gastroparesis (which leads to erratic absorption of dietary carbohydrates), and endocrinopathies (e.g., Addison's disease).
The goal of treatment is an HbA1C level of 6.5%, but should not be lower than that, and may be set higher.
The term "mellitus" or "from honey" was added by the Briton John Rolle in the late 1700s to separate the condition from diabetes insipidus, which is also associated with frequent urination.
Several other groups of drugs, mostly given by mouth, may also decrease blood sugar in type II DM.
, trends suggested the rate would continue to rise.
From 2012 to 2015, approximately 1.5 to 5.0 million deaths each year resulted from diabetes.
Insulin can inhibit the breakdown of glycogen or the process of gluconeogenesis, it can stimulate the transport of glucose into fat and muscle cells, and it can stimulate the storage of glucose in the form of glycogen.
Genetic mutations (autosomal or mitochondrial) can lead to defects in beta cell function.
The increase in rates in developing countries follows the trend of urbanization and lifestyle changes, including increasingly sedentary lifestyles, less physically demanding work and the global nutrition transition, marked by increased intake of foods that are high energy-dense but nutrient-poor (often high in sugar and saturated fats, sometimes referred to as the "Western-style" diet).
When insulin is used in type&nbsp;2 diabetes, a long-acting formulation is usually added initially, while continuing oral medications.
Excess body fat is associated with 30% of cases in those of Chinese and Japanese descent, 60–80% of cases in those of European and African descent, and 100% of Pima Indians and Pacific Islanders.
sweetened with honey; honey-sweet).
The primary cause is excessive body weight and not enough exercise.
In the United States, diabetes cost $245 billion in 2012.
The "other specific types" are a collection of a few dozen individual causes.
Eating lots of white rice also may increase the risk of diabetes.
A lack of exercise is believed to cause 7% of cases.
The symptoms may relate to fluid loss and polyuria, but the course may also be insidious.
Lost blood volume will be replaced osmotically from water held in body cells and other body compartments, causing dehydration and increased thirst (polydipsia).
The word ''mellitus'' ( or ) comes from the classical Latin word ''mellītus'', meaning "mellite" (i.e.
Galen named the disease "diarrhea of the urine" (diarrhea urinosa).
Many are able to maintain normal blood sugar levels with little or no medications following surgery and long-term mortality is decreased.
This type can be further classified as immune-mediated or idiopathic.
Evidence for the efficacy of this remains equivocal, however.
*Genetic defects of β-cell function
However another 2.2 million deaths worldwide were attributable to high blood glucose and the increased risks of cardiovascular disease and other associated complications (e.g.
Diabetes mellitus is classified into four broad categories: type&nbsp;1, type&nbsp;2, gestational diabetes, and "other specific types".
Damage to the kidneys, known as diabetic nephropathy, can lead to tissue scarring, urine protein loss, and eventually chronic kidney disease, sometimes requiring dialysis or kidney transplant.
This increases the osmotic pressure of the urine and inhibits reabsorption of water by the kidney, resulting in increased urine production (polyuria) and increased fluid loss.
The first described cases are believed to be of type&nbsp;1 diabetes.
In addition, given the associated higher risks of cardiovascular disease, lifestyle modifications are recommended to control blood pressure.
Insulin is used by about two-thirds of the body's cells to absorb glucose from the blood for use as fuel, for conversion to other needed molecules, or for storage.
The greatest increase in rates has however been seen in low- and middle-income countries, where more than 80% of diabetic deaths occur.
The following is a comprehensive list of other causes of diabetes:
This term, however, has no biologic basis and should not be used.
Type&nbsp;2 diabetes — which accounts for 85-90% of all cases — can often be prevented or delayed by maintaining a normal body weight, engaging in physical exercise, and consuming a healthful diet.
The body obtains glucose from three main places: the intestinal absorption of food, the breakdown of glycogen, the storage form of glucose found in the liver, and gluconeogenesis, the generation of glucose from non-carbohydrate substrates in the body.
Type 1 DM must be managed with insulin injections.
It occurs in about 2–10% of all pregnancies and may improve or disappear after delivery.
Attention is also paid to other health problems that may accelerate the negative effects of diabetes.
'''Diabetes mellitus''' ('''DM'''), commonly referred to as '''diabetes''', is a group of metabolic diseases in which there are high blood sugar levels over a prolonged period.
Severe cases can lead to unconsciousness and must be treated with intravenous glucose or injections with glucagon.
Some cases of diabetes are caused by the body's tissue receptors not responding to insulin (even when insulin levels are normal, which is what separates it from type&nbsp;2 diabetes); this form is very uncommon.
Any disease that causes extensive damage to the pancreas may lead to diabetes (for example, chronic pancreatitis and cystic fibrosis).
It causes approximately 10% of diabetes mellitus cases in North America and Europe.
Lower glucose levels result in decreased insulin release from the beta cells and in the breakdown of glycogen to glucose.
Insulin is released into the blood by beta cells (β-cells), found in the islets of Langerhans in the pancreas, in response to rising levels of blood glucose, typically after eating.
The symptoms can include numbness, tingling, pain, and altered pain sensation, which can lead to damage to the skin.
Insulin plays a critical role in balancing glucose levels in the body.
Other forms of diabetes mellitus include congenital diabetes, which is due to genetic defects of insulin secretion, cystic fibrosis-related diabetes, steroid diabetes induced by high doses of glucocorticoids, and several forms of monogenic diabetes.
It is preferable to measure a fasting glucose level because of the ease of measurement and the considerable time commitment of formal glucose tolerance testing, which takes two hours to complete and offers no prognostic advantage over the fasting test.
Effective treatment was not developed until the early part of the 20th century, when Canadians Frederick Banting and Charles Herbert Best isolated and purified insulin in 1921 and 1922.
Risks to the baby include macrosomia (high birth weight), congenital heart and central nervous system abnormalities, and skeletal muscle malformations.
Type 2 DM may be treated with medications with or without insulin.
Type&nbsp;1 diabetes is partly inherited, with multiple genes, including certain HLA genotypes, known to influence the risk of diabetes.
Type&nbsp;1 diabetes can affect children or adults, but was traditionally termed "juvenile diabetes" because a majority of these diabetes cases were in children.
Mild to moderate cases are self-treated by eating or drinking something high in sugar.
Diabetes mellitus occurs throughout the world but is more common (especially type 2) in more developed countries.
Likewise, the term "type&nbsp;2 diabetes" has replaced several former terms, including adult-onset diabetes, obesity-related diabetes, and noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM).
Abnormal insulin action may also have been genetically determined in some cases.
This form was previously referred to as "non insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus" (NIDDM) or "adult-onset diabetes".
The body mass index cutoffs for when surgery is appropriate are not yet clear.
This was followed by the development of the long-acting insulin NPH in the 1940s.
The type of fats in the diet is also important, with saturated fats and trans fatty acids increasing the risk and polyunsaturated and monounsaturated fat decreasing the risk.
These phenomena are believed to occur no more frequently than in 1% to 2% of persons with type&nbsp;1 diabetes.
Some are available by mouth, such as metformin, while others are only available by injection such as GLP-1 agonists.
Medications used to treat diabetes do so by lowering blood sugar levels.
**Mitochondrial DNA mutations
kidney failure), which often lead to premature death and are often listed as the underlying cause on death certificates rather than diabetes.
If left untreated, diabetes can cause many complications.
In severe cases, perinatal death may occur, most commonly as a result of poor placental perfusion due to vascular impairment.
**Defects in proinsulin conversion
However, the specific defects are not known.
The relationship between type 2 diabetes and the main modifiable risk factors (excess weight, unhealthy diet, physical inactivity and tobacco use) is similar in all regions of the world.
Specialized footwear is widely used to reduce the risk of ulceration, or re-ulceration, in at-risk diabetic feet.
Female dogs are twice as likely to be affected as males, while according to some sources, male cats are also more prone than females.
However, after pregnancy approximately 5–10% of women with gestational diabetes are found to have diabetes mellitus, most commonly type 2.
There are three main types of diabetes mellitus:
The word ''diabetes'' ( or ) comes from Latin ''diabētēs'', which in turn comes from Ancient Greek διαβήτης (''diabētēs'') which literally means "a passer through; a siphon."
He hypothesized a correlation of diabetes with other diseases and he discussed differential diagnosis from the snakebite which also provokes excessive thirst.
This sweet taste had been noticed in urine by the ancient Greeks, Chinese, Egyptians, Indians, and Persians.
Indian physicians around the same time identified the disease and classified it as ''madhumeha'' or "honey urine", noting the urine would attract ants.
Some data indicate rates are roughly equal in women and men, but male excess in diabetes has been found in many populations with higher type 2 incidence, possibly due to sex-related differences in insulin sensitivity, consequences of obesity and regional body fat deposition, and other contributing factors such as high blood pressure, tobacco smoking and alcohol intake.
Labor induction may be indicated with decreased placental function.
Most affected people are otherwise healthy and of a healthy weight when onset occurs.
Diseases associated with excessive secretion of insulin-antagonistic hormones can cause diabetes (which is typically resolved once the hormone excess is removed).
Dietary changes known to be effective in helping to prevent diabetes include maintaining a diet rich in whole grains and fiber, and choosing good fats, such as the polyunsaturated fats found in nuts, vegetable oils, and fish.
It is recommended that this option be considered in those who are unable to get both their weight and blood sugar under control.
"Brittle" diabetes, also known as unstable diabetes or labile diabetes, is a term that was traditionally used to describe the dramatic and recurrent swings in glucose levels, often occurring for no apparent reason in insulin-dependent diabetes.
The disease was considered rare during the time of the Roman empire, with Galen commenting he had only seen two cases during his career.
Diabetes is due to either the pancreas not producing enough insulin or the cells of the body not responding properly to the insulin produced.
Since cardiovascular disease is a serious complication associated with diabetes, some have recommended blood pressure levels below 130/80&nbsp;mmHg.
**Fibrocalculous pancreatopathy
In both species, all breeds may be affected, but some small dog breeds are particularly likely to develop diabetes, such as Miniature Poodles.
*Type 2 DM begins with insulin resistance, a condition in which cells fail to respond to insulin properly.
The global economic cost of diabetes in 2014 was estimated to be  billion.
Several viruses have been implicated, but to date there is no stringent evidence to support this hypothesis in humans.
**Insulin receptor mutations
The increase of incidence of type 1 diabetes reflects the modern lifestyle.
Prolonged high blood glucose can cause glucose absorption in the lens of the eye, which leads to changes in its shape, resulting in vision changes.
Insulin and some oral medications can cause low blood sugar.
Diabetes is a part of the wider condition known as metabolic syndrome.
Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) resembles type&nbsp;2 DM in several respects, involving a combination of relatively inadequate insulin secretion and responsiveness.
Type&nbsp;1 diabetes can only be treated with insulin, typically with a combination of regular and NPH insulin, or synthetic insulin analogs.
