Diamonds are not very reactive.
Substantial conductivity is commonly observed in nominally undoped diamond grown by chemical vapor deposition.
Taken together, these factors affect the overall appearance of a polished diamond and most diamantaires still rely upon skilled use of a loupe (magnifying glass) to identify diamonds 'by eye'.
Diamond has a cleavage plane and is therefore more fragile in some orientations than others.
Some diamonds, known as ''harzburgitic'', are formed from inorganic carbon originally found deep in the Earth's mantle.
In 2005, Russia produced almost one-fifth of the global diamond output, according to the British Geological Survey.
Approximately 90% of diamond grinding grit is currently of synthetic origin.
Production has increased over time and now an accumulated total of  have been mined since that date.
The Diamond Trading Company (DTC) is a subsidiary of De Beers and markets rough diamonds from De Beers-operated mines.
The magma for such a volcano must originate at a depth where diamonds can be formed— or more (three times or more the depth of source magma for most volcanoes).
These minerals are rich in chromium (Cr) or titanium (Ti), elements which impart bright colors to the minerals.
Diamonds are naturally lipophilic and hydrophobic, which means the diamonds' surface cannot be wet by water but can be easily wet and stuck by oil.
The associated technique is well developed; it is considered as a routine and can be performed by technicians.
Plastic deformation is the cause of color in some brown and perhaps pink and red diamonds.
Diamonds can scratch other diamonds, but this can result in damage to one or both stones.
As a part of reducing its influence, De Beers withdrew from purchasing diamonds on the open market in 1999 and ceased, at the end of 2008, purchasing Russian diamonds mined by the largest Russian diamond company Alrosa.
The conditions for diamond formation to happen in the lithospheric mantle occur at considerable depth corresponding to the requirements of temperature and pressure.
This is 22% to 73% of the age of the Earth.
Historically, diamonds were found only in alluvial deposits in Guntur and Krishna district of the Krishna River delta in Southern India.
CVD diamonds can usually be identified by an orange fluorescence.
The oxidized surface can be reduced by heat treatment under hydrogen flow.
In particular, under oceanic plates the temperature rises more quickly with depth, beyond the range required for diamond formation at the depth required.
Diamond prospectors continue to search the globe for diamond-bearing kimberlite and lamproite pipes.
The cutting and polishing of rough diamonds is a specialized skill that is concentrated in a limited number of locations worldwide.
The De Beers company, as the world's largest diamond mining company, holds a dominant position in the industry, and has done so since soon after its founding in 1888 by the British imperialist Cecil Rhodes.
But diamonds (sp3C) are unstable against high temperature (above about  ) under atmospheric pressure.
One contributory factor is the geological nature of diamond deposits: several large primary kimberlite-pipe mines each account for significant portions of market share (such as the Jwaneng mine in Botswana, which is a single large-pit mine that can produce between  to  of diamonds per year).
Those techniques are also used for some diamonds simulants, such as silicon carbide, which pass the thermal conductivity test.
Therefore, the crystallographic structure of the diamond to be cut is analyzed using X-ray diffraction to choose the optimal cutting directions.
"Perfect" crystals (at the atomic lattice level) have never been found, so both natural and synthetic diamonds always possess characteristic imperfections, arising from the circumstances of their crystal growth, that allow them to be distinguished from each other.
Screening devices based on diamond type detection can be used to make a distinction between diamonds that are certainly natural and diamonds that are potentially synthetic.
The diamond supply chain is controlled by a limited number of powerful businesses, and is also highly concentrated in a small number of locations around the world.
*The diamond can be split by a single, well calculated blow of a hammer to a pointed tool, which is quick, but risky.
Secondary alluvial diamond deposits, on the other hand, tend to be fragmented amongst many different operators because they can be dispersed over many hundreds of square kilometers (e.g., alluvial deposits in Brazil).
A large trade in gem-grade diamonds exists.
Both markets value diamonds differently.
*The hardness of diamond and its ability to cleave strongly depend on the crystal orientation.
In addition to mined diamonds, synthetic diamonds found industrial applications almost immediately after their invention in the 1950s; another  of synthetic diamond is produced annually for industrial use (in 2004; in 2014 it's , 90% of which is produced in China).
The extreme hardness and high value of diamond means that gems are typically polished slowly using painstaking traditional techniques and greater attention to detail than is the case with most other gemstones; these tend to result in extremely flat, highly polished facets with exceptionally sharp facet edges.
Whereas the thermal probe can separate diamonds from most of their simulants, distinguishing between various types of diamond, for example synthetic or natural, irradiated or non-irradiated, etc., requires more advanced, optical techniques.
Once purchased by Sightholders (which is a trademark term referring to the companies that have a three-year supply contract with DTC), diamonds are cut and polished in preparation for sale as gemstones ('industrial' stones are regarded as a by-product of the gemstone market; they are used for abrasives).
Color in diamond has two additional sources: irradiation (usually by alpha particles), that causes the color in green diamonds; and plastic deformation of the diamond crystal lattice.
That is to say, this heat treatment partially removes oxygen-containing functional groups.
Somewhat related to hardness is another mechanical property ''toughness'', which is a material's ability to resist breakage from forceful impact.
De Beers and its subsidiaries own mines that produce some 40% of annual world diamond production.
The hardness of diamond contributes to its suitability as a gemstone.
The Kimberley Process aims to ensure that conflict diamonds do not become intermixed with the diamonds not controlled by such rebel groups.
Unlike many other gems, it is well-suited to daily wear because of its resistance to scratching—perhaps contributing to its popularity as the preferred gem in engagement or wedding rings, which are often worn every day.
The growth occurs under low pressure (below atmospheric pressure).
These diamonds are generally small, perfect to semiperfect octahedra, and are used to polish other diamonds.
The change was mostly due to the numbers: the Argyle mine, with its  of diamonds per year, makes about one-third of global production of natural diamonds; 80% of Argyle diamonds are brown.
Certain ''indicator minerals'' typically occur within diamantiferous kimberlites and are used as mineralogical tracers by prospectors, who follow the indicator trail back to the volcanic pipe which may contain diamonds.
Those properties determine the major industrial application of diamond in cutting and polishing tools and the scientific applications in diamond knives and diamond anvil cells.
The identification of stolen diamonds presents a set of difficult problems.
Diamonds can be identified by their high thermal conductivity.
The most time-consuming part of the cutting is the preliminary analysis of the rough stone.
De Beers still advertises diamonds, but the advertising now mostly promotes its own brands, or licensed product lines, rather than completely "generic" diamond products.
The dispersion of white light into spectral colors is the primary gemological characteristic of gem diamonds.
The toughness of natural diamond has been measured as 7.5–10 MPa·m1/2.
Those flaws are concealed through various diamond enhancement techniques, such as repolishing, crack filling, or clever arrangement of the stone in the jewelry.
Not all diamonds found on Earth originated on Earth.
The word is from the ancient Greek ἀδάμας – ''adámas'' "unbreakable".
The cutter has to decide which flaws are to be removed by the cutting and which could be kept.
It is possible to treat regular diamonds under a combination of high pressure and high temperature to produce diamonds that are harder than the diamonds used in hardness gauges.
The structure gradually changes into sp2C above this temperature.
The most common indicator minerals are chromium garnets (usually bright red chromium-pyrope, and occasionally green ugrandite-series garnets), eclogitic garnets, orange titanium-pyrope, red high-chromium spinels, dark chromite, bright green chromium-diopside, glassy green olivine, black picroilmenite, and magnetite.
A volcanic pipe containing diamonds is known as a ''primary source'' of diamonds.
Diamonds may be etched by laser with marks invisible to the naked eye.
They also use specially made instruments to aid them in the identification process.
N. W. Ayer's marketing included product placement, advertising focused on the diamond product itself rather than the De Beers brand, and associations with celebrities and royalty.
And the firm created new markets in countries where no diamond tradition had existed before.
Diamond is not suitable for machining ferrous alloys at high speeds, as carbon is soluble in iron at the high temperatures created by high-speed machining, leading to greatly increased wear on diamond tools compared to alternatives.
Coatings are increasingly used to give a diamond simulant such as cubic zirconia a more "diamond-like" appearance.
This demand has been satisfied in large part by synthetic diamonds, which have been manufactured by various processes for more than half a century.
Colored diamonds contain impurities or structural defects that cause the coloration, while pure or nearly pure diamonds are transparent and colorless.
Today, most commercially viable diamond deposits are in Russia (mostly in Sakha Republic, for example Mir pipe and Udachnaya pipe), Botswana, Australia (Northern and Western Australia) and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Roughly 49% of diamonds originate from Central and Southern Africa, although significant sources of the mineral have been discovered in Canada, India, Russia, Brazil, and Australia.
Those potentially synthetic diamonds require more investigation in a specialized lab.
Diamonds cut glass, but this does not positively identify a diamond because other materials, such as quartz, also lie above glass on the Mohs scale and can also cut it.
During eruption these pipes are open to the surface, resulting in open circulation; many xenoliths of surface rock and even wood and fossils are found in volcanic pipes.
Optical techniques can distinguish between natural diamonds and synthetic diamonds.
Primitive interstellar meteorites were found to contain carbon possibly in the form of diamond.
An alternative, and completely different growth technique is chemical vapor deposition (CVD).
In 2008, the Wittelsbach Diamond, a  blue diamond once belonging to the King of Spain, fetched over US$24&nbsp;million at a Christie's auction.
Mining companies' expenses average $40 to $60 per carat for natural colorless diamonds, while synthetic manufacturers' expenses average $2,500 per carat for synthetic, gem-quality colorless diamonds.
Some of them may be considered as classical, such as round, pear, marquise, oval, hearts and arrows diamonds, etc.
80% of mined diamonds (equal to about  annually), are unsuitable for use as gemstones, and used industrially.
Diamonds that have come to the Earth's surface are generally quite old, ranging from under 1&nbsp;billion to 3.3&nbsp;billion years old.
The Gemological Institute of America (GIA) classifies low saturation yellow and brown diamonds as diamonds in the ''normal color range'', and applies a grading scale from "D" (colorless) to "Z" (light yellow).
*Most diamonds contain visible non-diamond inclusions and crystal flaws.
This slogan is now being used by De Beers Diamond Jewelers, a jewelry firm which is a 50%/50% joint venture between the De Beers mining company and LVMH, the luxury goods conglomerate.
Diamond-bearing rock is carried from the mantle to the Earth's surface by deep-origin volcanic eruptions.
The conductivity and blue color originate from boron impurity.
This is a relatively rare occurrence.
The largest of these found in the universe so far, BPM 37093, is located  away in the constellation Centaurus.
Diamond is less stable than graphite, but the conversion rate from diamond to graphite is negligible at standard conditions.
Similarly, natural diamonds usually have minor imperfections and flaws, such as inclusions of foreign material, that are not seen in synthetic diamonds.
The Kimberley Process was developed to monitor the trade in rough diamonds and prevent their being used to fund violence.
Such impact events create shock zones of high pressure and temperature suitable for diamond formation.
However, when diamond surfaces are chemically modified with certain ions, they are expected to become so hydrophilic that they can stabilize multiple layers of water ice at human body temperature.
Diamond has a wide bandgap of  corresponding to the deep ultraviolet wavelength of 225 nanometers.
Long residence in the cratonic lithosphere allows diamond crystals to grow larger.
This test takes about 2–3 seconds.
Very small diamonds of micrometer and nanometer sizes, known as ''microdiamonds'' or ''nanodiamonds'' respectively, have been found in meteorite impact craters.
"Black", or Carbonado, diamonds are not truly black, but rather contain numerous dark inclusions that give the gems their dark appearance.
The recent expansion of this industry in India, employing low cost labor, has allowed smaller diamonds to be prepared as gems in greater quantities than was previously economically feasible.
The gang broke through a perimeter fence and raided the cargo hold of a Swiss-bound plane.
The WFDB consists of independent diamond bourses in major cutting centers such as Tel Aviv, Antwerp, Johannesburg and other cities across the USA, Europe and Asia.
After initial cutting, the diamond is shaped in numerous stages of polishing.
The most familiar uses of diamonds today are as gemstones used for adornment, a use which dates back into antiquity, and as industrial abrasives for cutting hard materials.
Before the use of X-rays became commonplace, the separation was done with grease belts; diamonds have a stronger tendency to stick to grease than the other minerals in the ore.
Only a very small fraction of the diamond ore consists of actual diamonds.
This is a stringent tracking system of diamonds and helps protect the "conflict free" label of Canadian diamonds.
Cutting centers with lower cost of labor, notably Surat in Gujarat, India, handle a larger number of smaller carat diamonds, while smaller quantities of larger or more valuable diamonds are more likely to be handled in Europe or North America.
Several methods for identifying synthetic diamonds can be performed, depending on the method of production and the color of the diamond.
Some of them are special, produced by certain companies, for example, Phoenix, Cushion, Sole Mio diamonds, etc.
The most common impurity, nitrogen, causes a slight to intense yellow coloration depending upon the type and concentration of nitrogen present.
This test is destructive, as a diamond can scratch another diamond, and is rarely used nowadays.
The gemstone moissanite (silicon carbide) can be treated as a diamond simulant, though more costly to produce than cubic zirconia.
Diamonds have been adapted for many uses because of the material's exceptional physical characteristics.
Bourses are the final tightly controlled step in the diamond supply chain; wholesalers and even retailers are able to buy relatively small lots of diamonds at the bourses, after which they are prepared for final sale to the consumer.
These depths are estimated between  though occasionally diamonds have crystallized at depths about .
This means pure diamond should transmit visible light and appear as a clear colorless crystal.
Before exporting, rough diamonds are certificated by the government of the country of origin.
Diamond-bearing volcanic pipes are closely related to the oldest, coolest regions of continental crust (cratons).
As the hardest known naturally occurring material, diamond can be used to polish, cut, or wear away any material, including other diamonds.
It involves feeding a mixture of gases (typically 1 to 99 methane to hydrogen) into a chamber and splitting them to chemically active radicals in a plasma ignited by microwaves, hot filament, arc discharge, welding torch or laser.
Their high refractive index is also indicative, but other materials have similar refractivity.
Four characteristics, known informally as the ''four Cs'', are now commonly used as the basic descriptors of diamonds: these are ''carat'' (its weight), ''cut'' (quality of the cut is graded according to proportions, symmetry and polish), ''color'' (how close to white or colorless; for fancy diamonds how intense is its hue), and ''clarity'' (how free is it from inclusions).
Diamond cutters use this attribute to cleave some stones, prior to faceting.
Boron substitutes for carbon atoms in the diamond lattice, donating a hole into the valence band.
In some of the more politically unstable central African and west African countries, revolutionary groups have taken control of diamond mines, using proceeds from diamond sales to finance their operations.
Currently, one of the most prominent Indian mines is located at Panna.
Diamonds can be sold already set in jewelry, or sold unset ("loose").
Because it can only be scratched by other diamonds, it maintains its polish extremely well.
Although most gem-grade diamonds are sold newly polished, there is a well-established market for resale of polished diamonds (e.g.
Lazare Kaplan, a US-based company, developed this method.
Popigai crater in Russia may have the world's largest diamond deposit, estimated at trillions of carats, and formed by an asteroid impact.
In 1772, Antoine Lavoisier used a lens to concentrate the rays of the sun on a diamond in an atmosphere of oxygen, and showed that the only product of the combustion was carbon dioxide, proving that diamond is composed of carbon.
These typically small surface volcanic craters extend downward in formations known as volcanic pipes.
Scientific evidence indicates that white dwarf stars have a core of crystallized carbon and oxygen nuclei.
Other colors may also be reproduced such as blue, green or pink, which are a result of the addition of boron or from irradiation after synthesis.
Industrial use of diamonds has historically been associated with their hardness, which makes diamond the ideal material for cutting and grinding tools.
N. W. Ayer & Son, the advertising firm retained by De Beers in the mid-20th century, succeeded in reviving the American diamond market.
Diamonds can also form under other naturally occurring high-pressure conditions.
Some countries, such as Venezuela, are not party to the agreement.
Early diamond identification tests included a scratch test relying on the superior hardness of diamond.
Stones in the D-Z color range can be examined through the DiamondSure UV/visible spectrometer, a tool developed by De Beers.
Diamonds occur most often as euhedral or rounded octahedra and twinned octahedra known as ''macles''.
Therefore, diamond cutting is traditionally considered as a delicate procedure requiring skills, scientific knowledge, tools and experience.
De Beers is currently the world's largest operator of diamond production facilities (mines) and distribution channels for gem-quality diamonds.
Industrial diamonds are valued mostly for their hardness and thermal conductivity, making many of the gemological characteristics of diamonds, such as the 4 Cs, irrelevant for most applications.
De Beers sold off the vast majority of its diamond stockpile in the late 1990s – early 2000s and the remainder largely represents working stock (diamonds that are being sorted before sale).
In the U.S., diamonds have been found in Arkansas, Colorado, Wyoming, and Montana.
The hardest natural diamonds mostly originate from the Copeton and Bingara fields located in the New England area in New South Wales, Australia.
Alrosa had to suspend their sales in October 2008 due to the global energy crisis, but the company reported that it had resumed selling rough diamonds on the open market by October 2009.
The magma in volcanic pipes is usually one of two characteristic types, which cool into igneous rock known as either kimberlite or lamproite.
The Crater of Diamonds State Park in Arkansas is open to the public, and is the only mine in the world where members of the public can dig for diamonds.
After the development of Argyle diamond mine in Australia in 1986, and marketing, brown diamonds have become acceptable gems.
WFDB's additional activities include sponsoring the World Diamond Congress every two years, as well as the establishment of the ''International Diamond Council'' (IDC) to oversee diamond grading.
Instead, diamond identification relies on its superior thermal conductivity.
For example, the diamond might be intended for display or for wear, in a ring or a necklace, singled or surrounded by other gems of certain color and shape.
The mining and distribution of natural diamonds are subjects of frequent controversy such as concerns over the sale of ''blood diamonds'' or ''conflict diamonds'' by African paramilitary groups.
Small amounts of defects or impurities (about one per million of lattice atoms) color diamond blue (boron), yellow (nitrogen), brown (lattice defects), green (radiation exposure), purple, pink, orange or red.
Hardness tests are infrequently used in practical gemology because of their potentially destructive nature.
It needs to address a large number of issues, bears much responsibility, and therefore can last years in case of unique diamonds.
The pipes contain material that was transported toward the surface by volcanic action, but was not ejected before the volcanic activity ceased.
The Kimberley Process does not apply to local sales of rough diamonds within a country.
The magma itself does not contain diamond; instead, it acts as an elevator that carries deep-formed rocks (xenoliths), minerals (xenocrysts), and fluids upward.
A diamond simulant is a non-diamond material that is used to simulate the appearance of a diamond, and may be referred to as diamante.
The high thermal conductivity of diamond makes it suitable as a heat sink for integrated circuits in electronics.
These different shapes and habits of some diamonds result from differing external circumstances.
There are 28 registered diamond bourses in the world.
In May 2009, a  blue diamond fetched the highest price per carat ever paid for a diamond when it was sold at auction for 10.5&nbsp;million Swiss francs (6.97&nbsp;million euro or US$9.5&nbsp;million at the time).
'''Diamond''' ( or ) is a metastable allotrope of carbon, where the carbon atoms are arranged in a variation of the face-centered cubic crystal structure called a diamond lattice.
This is done by requiring diamond-producing countries to provide proof that the money they make from selling the diamonds is not used to fund criminal or revolutionary activities.
The boundary between gem-quality diamonds and industrial diamonds is poorly defined and partly depends on market conditions (for example, if demand for polished diamonds is high, some lower-grade stones will be polished into low-quality or small gemstones rather than being sold for industrial use).
One thermistor functions as a heating device while the other measures the temperature of the copper tip: if the stone being tested is a diamond, it will conduct the tip's thermal energy rapidly enough to produce a measurable temperature drop.
Specialized applications include use in laboratories as containment for high pressure experiments (see diamond anvil cell), high-performance bearings, and limited use in specialized windows.
The weight reduction upon cutting is significant and can be of the order of 50%.
There are also commercial deposits being actively mined in the Northwest Territories of Canada and Brazil.
These diamonds may have formed in the intrastellar environment, but as of 2008, there was no scientific consensus on how carbonado diamonds originated.
Techniques such as Raman spectroscopy should easily identify such a treatment.
This makes Antwerp a de facto "world diamond capital".
The formation of natural diamond requires very specific conditions—exposure of carbon-bearing materials to high pressure, ranging approximately between 45 and 60 kilobars (4.5 and 6 GPa), but at a comparatively low temperature range between approximately .
Once diamonds have been transported to the surface by magma in a volcanic pipe, they may erode out and be distributed over a large area.
Diamonds (especially those with rounded crystal faces) are commonly found coated in ''nyf'', an opaque gum-like skin.
Synthetic diamonds are diamonds manufactured in a laboratory, as opposed to diamonds mined from the Earth.
D-J colored diamonds can be screened through the Swiss Gemmological Institute's Diamond Spotter.
The majority of commercially available synthetic diamonds are yellow and are produced by so-called ''high-pressure high-temperature'' (HPHT) processes.
In the 20th century, experts in gemology developed methods of grading diamonds and other gemstones based on the characteristics most important to their value as a gem.
Several possible shapes are considered, but the final decision is often determined not only by scientific, but also practical considerations.
The Canadian Government has set up a body known as the Canadian Diamond Code of Conduct to help authenticate Canadian diamonds.
In 2000, the WFDB and The International Diamond Manufacturers Association established the World Diamond Council to prevent the trading of diamonds used to fund war and inhumane acts.
Because of its extremely rigid lattice, it can be contaminated by very few types of impurities, such as boron and nitrogen.
These include alluvial deposits and deposits along existing and ancient shorelines, where loose diamonds tend to accumulate because of their size and density.
Other specialized applications also exist or are being developed, including use as semiconductors: some blue diamonds are natural semiconductors, in contrast to most diamonds, which are excellent electrical insulators.
Two major flaws still hinder the effectiveness of the Kimberley Process: (1) the relative ease of smuggling diamonds across African borders, and (2) the violent nature of diamond mining in nations that are not in a technical state of war and whose diamonds are therefore considered "clean".
In a diamond, each carbon atom is surrounded by neighboring four carbon atoms forming a tetrahedral shaped unit.
The rate at which temperature changes with increasing depth into the Earth varies greatly in different parts of the Earth.
