When administered orally, it is rapidly absorbed and has a fast onset of action.
Diazepam was detected in 26% of cases of people suspected of driving under the influence of drugs in Sweden, and its active metabolite nordazepam was detected in 28% of cases.
Diazepam also decreases prolactin release in rats.
The solution for parenteral injection should be protected from light and kept from freezing.
* Treatment of complications with a hallucinogen crisis and stimulant overdoses and psychosis, such as LSD, cocaine, or methamphetamine
As such, it can leach into the plastic bags and tubing used for intravenous infusions.
Diazepam is stored preferentially in some organs, including the heart.
It easily crosses both the blood–brain barrier and the placenta, and is excreted into breast milk.
Diazepam occurs as solid white or yellow crystals with a melting point of 131.5 to 134.5&nbsp;°C.
In 1985 the patent ended, and there are now more than 500 brands available on the market.
Benzodiazepine treatment should be discontinued as soon as possible by a slow and gradual dose reduction regimen.
The higher the dose and the longer the drug is taken, the greater the risk of experiencing unpleasant withdrawal symptoms.
Between 50 and 64% of rats will self-administer diazepam.
Absorption by any administered route and the risk of accumulation is significantly increased in the neonate, and withdrawal of diazepam during pregnancy and breast feeding is clinically justified.
Sometimes, it is used by stimulant users to "come down" and sleep and to help control the urge to binge.
The main active metabolite of diazepam is desmethyldiazepam (also known as nordazepam or nordiazepam).
* Treatment of tetanus, together with other measures of intensive treatment
* Palliative treatment of stiff person syndrome
Other classical benzodiazepines include chlordiazepoxide, clonazepam, lorazepam, oxazepam, nitrazepam, temazepam, flurazepam, bromazepam, and clorazepate.
Diazepam appears to act on areas of the limbic system, thalamus, and hypothalamus, inducing anxiolytic effects.
In the United States it was the highest selling medication between 1968 and 1982, selling more than two billion tablets in 1978 alone.
Diazepam is highly protein-bound, with 96 to 99% of the absorbed drug being protein-bound.
GABAA receptors containing α2 mediate the anxiolytic actions and to a large degree the myorelaxant effects.
Adverse effects such as sedation, benzodiazepine dependence, and abuse potential limit the use of benzodiazepines.
Long-term use of benzodiazepines such as diazepam is associated with drug tolerance, benzodiazepine dependence, and benzodiazepine withdrawal syndrome.
However, benzodiazepines such as diazepam can be used for their muscle-relaxant properties to alleviate pain caused by muscle spasms and various dystonias, including blepharospasm.
It is also the first line of defense for a rare disorder called stiff-person syndrome.
Because flumazenil is a short-acting drug, and the effects of diazepam can last for days, several doses of flumazenil may be necessary.
A single dose of diazepam modulates the dopamine system in similar ways to how morphine and alcohol modulate the dopaminergic pathways.
Diazepam has anticonvulsant properties.
It is commonly used to treat a range of conditions including anxiety, alcohol withdrawal syndrome, benzodiazepine withdrawal syndrome, muscle spasms, seizures, trouble sleeping, and restless legs syndrome.
They are intended for use in "buddy aid" or "self aid" administration of the drugs in the field prior to decontamination and delivery of the patient to definitive medical care.
Dose increases may overcome the effects of tolerance, but tolerance may then develop to the higher dose and adverse effects may increase.
GABAA receptors containing α3 and α5 also contribute to benzodiazepines myorelaxant actions, whereas GABAA receptors comprising the α5 subunit were shown to modulate the temporal and spatial memory effects of benzodiazepines.
Dosages should be determined on an individual basis, depending on the condition being treated, severity of symptoms, patient body weight, and any other conditions the person may have.
Benzodiazepines do not have any pain-relieving properties themselves, and are generally recommended to avoid in individuals with pain.
The United States military employs a specialized diazepam preparation known as   Convulsive Antidote, Nerve Agent (CANA), which contains diazepam.
This increased chloride ion influx hyperpolarizes the neuron's membrane potential.
Infusions or repeated intravenous injections of diazepam when managing seizures, for example, may lead to drug toxicity, including respiratory depression, sedation and hypotension.
Hypotension may be treated with levarterenol or metaraminol.
Sustained repetitive firing seems limited by benzodiazepines' effect of slowing recovery of sodium channels from inactivation.
** Impaired balance
After absorption, diazepam is redistributed into muscle and adipose tissue.
* Treatment of anxiety, panic attacks, and states of agitation
* Preventative treatment of oxygen toxicity during hyperbaric oxygen therapy
* Short-term treatment of insomnia
* Treatment of neurovegetative symptoms associated with vertigo
Intravenous diazepam or lorazepam are first-line treatments for status epilepticus.
Males abuse benzodiazepines as commonly as females.
In Northern Ireland in cases where drugs were detected in samples from impaired drivers who were not impaired by alcohol, benzodiazepines were found in 87% of cases.
Therapy should be discontinued if any of these signs are noted, although if dependence has developed, therapy must still be discontinued gradually to avoid severe withdrawal symptoms.
During the course of therapy, tolerance to the sedative effects usually develops, but not to the anxiolytic and myorelaxant effects.
In the United States it is about 0.40 USD per dose.
GABAA receptors containing the α1 subunit mediate the sedative, the anterograde amnesic, and partly the anticonvulsive effects of diazepam.
* Impaired motor function
Diazepam has been shown to be able to substitute for the behavioural effects of barbiturates in a primate study.
Diazepam is mainly used to treat anxiety, insomnia, panic attacks and symptoms of acute alcohol withdrawal.
Diazepam is on the World Health Organization's List of Essential Medicines, the most important medications needed in a basic health system.
Although not usually fatal when taken alone, a diazepam overdose is considered a medical emergency and generally requires the immediate attention of medical personnel.
The benzodiazepines gained popularity among medical professionals as an improvement over barbiturates, which have a comparatively narrow therapeutic index, and are far more sedative at therapeutic doses.
Though not routinely indicated, activated charcoal can be used for decontamination of the stomach following a diazepam overdose.
Equal prudence should be used whether dependence has occurred in therapeutic or recreational contexts.
In this regard, benzodiazepines are second only to opiates, the study found in 39.2% of visits.
Additionally, after cessation of benzodiazepines, cognitive deficits may persist for at least six months; it is unclear whether these impairments take longer than six months to abate or if they are permanent.
This may play a role in explaining diazepam's anticonvulsant properties.
Baclofen or tizanidine is sometimes used as an alternative to diazepam.
One CANA kit is typically issued to service members, along with three Mark I NAAK kits, when operating in circumstances where chemical weapons in the form of nerve agents are considered a potential hazard.
These metabolites are conjugated with glucuronide, and are excreted primarily in the urine.
Benzodiazepine drugs including diazepam increase the inhibitory processes in the cerebral cortex.
Diazepam drug misuse can occur either through recreational misuse where the drug is taken to achieve a high or when the drug is continued long term against medical advice.
It has been one of the most frequently prescribed medications in the world since its launch in 1963.
Rebound anxiety, more severe than baseline anxiety, is also a common withdrawal symptom when discontinuing diazepam or other benzodiazepines.
Continual daily doses of diazepam quickly build to a high concentration in the body (mainly in adipose tissue), far in excess of the actual dose for any given day.
Diazepam is used for the emergency treatment of eclampsia, when IV magnesium sulfate and blood-pressure control measures have failed.
Long term use can result in tolerance, dependence, and withdrawal symptoms on dose reduction.
The elderly are more prone to adverse effects of diazepam, such as confusion, amnesia, ataxia, and hangover effects, as well as falls.
Long-term use of diazepam for the management of epilepsy is not recommended; however, a subgroup of individuals with treatment-resistant epilepsy benefit from long-term benzodiazepines, and for such individuals, clorazepate has been recommended due to its slower onset of tolerance to the anticonvulsant effects.
It is odorless, and has a slightly bitter taste.
Most of the drug is metabolised; very little diazepam is excreted unchanged.
After this initial success, other pharmaceutical companies began to introduce other benzodiazepine derivatives.
Its other active metabolites include the minor active metabolites temazepam and oxazepam.
These adverse reactions are more likely to occur in children, the elderly, and individuals with a history of drug or alcohol abuse and or aggression.
Long-term therapy in these people is not recommended.
The states of California and Florida offer diazepam to condemned inmates as a pre-execution sedative as part of their lethal injection program, although the state of California has not executed a prisoner since 2006.
It is not recommended during pregnancy or breastfeeding.
* Adjunctive treatment of spastic muscular paresis (paraplegia/tetraplegia) caused by cerebral or spinal cord conditions such as stroke, multiple sclerosis, or spinal cord injury (long-term treatment is coupled with other rehabilitative measures)
The antidote for an overdose of diazepam (or any other benzodiazepine) is flumazenil (Anexate).
Diazepam should be stored at room temperature (15–30&nbsp;°C).
Diazepam may be quantified in blood or plasma to confirm a diagnosis of poisoning in hospitalized patients, provide evidence in an impaired driving arrest, or to assist in a medicolegal death investigation.
This drug is only used in cases with severe respiratory depression or cardiovascular complications.
The United States Pharmacopoeia lists diazepam as soluble 1 in 16 ethyl alcohol, 1 in 2 of chloroform, 1 in 39 ether, and practically insoluble in water.
Most commercial immunoassays for the benzodiazepine class of drugs cross-react with diazepam, but confirmation and quantitation are usually performed using chromatographic techniques.
'''Diazepam''', first marketed as '''Valium''', is a medication of the benzodiazepine family that typically produces a calming effect.
The oral forms should be stored in air-tight containers and protected from light.
The elimination half-life of diazepam and also the active metabolite desmethyldiazepam increases significantly in the elderly, which may result in prolonged action, as well as accumulation of the drug during repeated administration.
While benzodiazepine drugs such as diazepam can cause anterograde amnesia, they do not cause retrograde amnesia; information learned before using benzodiazepines is not impaired.
This has been found by measuring sodium-dependent high-affinity choline uptake in mouse brain cells ''in vitro'', after pretreatment of the mice with diazepam ''in vivo''.
The anticonvulsant properties of diazepam and other benzodiazepines may be in part or entirely due to binding to voltage-dependent sodium channels rather than benzodiazepine receptors.
The anticonvulsant effects of diazepam can help in the treatment of seizures due to a drug overdose or chemical toxicity as a result of exposure to sarin, VX, or soman (or other organophosphate poisons), lindane, chloroquine, physostigmine, or pyrethroids.
Benzodiazepine drugs such as diazepam initially had widespread public support, but with time the view changed to one of growing criticism and calls for restrictions on their prescription.
Drug tolerance may also develop to infusions of diazepam if it is given for longer than 24 hours.
Diazepam is a drug of potential abuse and can cause drug dependence.
Because of these active metabolites, the serum values of diazepam alone are not useful in predicting the effects of the drug.
Less commonly, paradoxical side effects can occur, including nervousness, irritability, excitement, worsening of seizures, insomnia, muscle cramps, changes in libido,  and in some cases, rage and violence.
Patients from the aforementioned groups should be monitored very closely during therapy for signs of abuse and development of dependence.
Withdrawal from diazepam or other benzodiazepines often leads to withdrawal symptoms similar to those seen during barbiturate or alcohol withdrawal.
While psychiatrists continue to prescribe diazepam for the short-term relief of anxiety, neurology has taken the lead in prescribing diazepam for the palliative treatment of certain types of epilepsy and spastic activity, for example, forms of paresis.
The benzodiazepines are also far less dangerous; death rarely results from diazepam overdose, except in cases where it is consumed with large amounts of other depressants (such as alcohol or opioids).
Diazepam should not be administered if a precipitate has formed and does not dissolve.
When diazepam is administered IM, absorption is slow, erratic, and incomplete.
Diazepam at high doses has been found to decrease histamine turnover in mouse brain via diazepam's action at the benzodiazepine-GABA receptor complex.
It has several pharmacologically active metabolites.
Benzodiazepines may also cause or worsen depression.
Diazepam is a long-acting "classical" benzodiazepine.
Diazepam has been found as an adulterant in heroin.
It differs from some other anticonvulsive drugs with which it was compared.
Diazepam undergoes oxidative metabolism by demethylation (CYP 2C9, 2C19, 2B6, 3A4, and 3A5), hydroxylation (CYP 3A4 and 2C19) and glucuronidation in the liver as part of the cytochrome P450 enzyme system.
It may also be used to cause memory loss during certain medical procedures.
Very rarely dystonia can occur.
Diazepam is therefore only recommended for short-term therapy at the lowest possible dose owing to risks of severe withdrawal problems from low doses even after gradual reduction.
Certain select patient groups show a higher rate of notable withdrawal symptoms, up to 100%.
The onset of action is one to five minutes for IV administration and 15–30 minutes for IM administration.
* Reflex tachycardia
Diazepam is highly lipid-soluble, and is widely distributed throughout the body after administration.
Other benzodiazepines and zolpidem and zopiclone also were found in high numbers.
This use, however, is not typically recommended as the benefits are small and side effects are common.
Diazepam has a range of side effects common to most benzodiazepines, including:
It is 2.5 times more potent than its predecessor, which it quickly surpassed in terms of sales.
Its mechanism of action is by increasing the effect of the neurotransmitter ''gamma''-Aminobutyric acid (GABA).
It can also be used to stop seizures in dogs and cats.
Diazepam has a biphasic half-life of about one to three days, and two to seven days for the active metabolite desmethyldiazepam.
Diazepam was the most commonly detected benzodiazepine.
They include suicide, decreased breathing, and an increased risk of seizures if used too frequently in those with epilepsy.
The GABAA receptors are ligand-gated chloride-selective ion channels that are activated by GABA, the major inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain.
Diazepam may increase, in some people, the propensity toward self-harming behaviours and, in extreme cases, may provoke suicidal tendencies or acts.
The impairment is worsened by consumption of alcohol, because both act as central nervous system depressants.
People suspected of being dependent on benzodiazepine drugs should be very gradually tapered off the drug.
Diazepam, as with other benzodiazepine drugs, can cause tolerance, physical dependence, substance use disorder, and benzodiazepine withdrawal syndrome.
Tolerance often develops to the muscle relaxant effects of benzodiazepines such as diazepam.
In humans, tolerance to the anticonvulsant effects of diazepam occurs frequently.
Both of these kits deliver drugs using autoinjectors.
D. J. Greenblatt and colleagues reported in 1978 on two patients who had taken 500 and 2000&nbsp;mg of diazepam, respectively, went into moderately deep comas, and were discharged within 48 hours without having experienced any important complications, in spite of having high concentrations of diazepam and its metabolites desmethyldiazepam, oxazepam, and temazepam, according to samples taken in the hospital and as follow-up.
Serious side effects are rare.
Benzodiazepines, including diazepam, nitrazepam, and flunitrazepam, account for the largest volume of forged drug prescriptions in Sweden, a total of 52% of drug forgeries being for benzodiazepines.
However, lorazepam has advantages over diazepam, including a higher rate of terminating seizures and a more prolonged anticonvulsant effect.
Dialysis is minimally effective.
Absorption appears to depend on several factors, such as temperature, concentration, flow rates, and tube length.
Tolerance develops to the therapeutic effects of benzodiazepines; for example tolerance occurs to the anticonvulsant effects and as a result benzodiazepines are not generally recommended for the long-term management of epilepsy.
Diazepam was the second benzodiazepine invented by Dr. Leo Sternbach of Hoffmann-La Roche at the company's Nutley, New Jersey, facility following chlordiazepoxide (Librium), which was approved for use in 1960.
The mechanism of tolerance to benzodiazepines includes uncoupling of receptor sites, alterations in gene expression, down-regulation of receptor sites, and desensitisation of receptor sites to the effect of GABA.
Diazepam was first synthesized by Leo Sternbach, and was first manufactured by Hoffmann-La Roche.
Due to additives such as benzoic acid/benzoate in the injectable form.
After stopping, cognitive problems may persist for six months or longer.
Many drivers had blood levels far exceeding the therapeutic dose range, suggesting a high degree of abuse potential for benzodiazepines and zolpidem and zopiclone.
Diazepam can absorb into plastics, so liquid preparations should not be kept in plastic bottles or syringes, etc.
Withdrawal symptoms can occur from standard dosages and also after short-term use, and can range from insomnia and anxiety to more serious symptoms, including seizures and psychosis.
Diazepam, along with oxazepam, nitrazepam and temazepam, represents 82% of the benzodiazepine market in Australia.
Diazepam has no effect on GABA levels and no effect on glutamate decarboxylase activity, but has a slight effect on gamma-aminobutyric acid transaminase activity.
Diazepam is the drug of choice for treating benzodiazepine dependence with its long half-life allowing easier dose reduction.
It can be taken by mouth, inserted into the rectum, injected into muscle, or injected into a vein.
Diazepam may produce less intense withdrawal symptoms due to its long elimination half-life.
Diazepam was the top-selling pharmaceutical in the United States from 1969 to 1982, with peak sales in 1978 of 2.3 billion tablets.
Emesis is contraindicated.
It is also used as a premedication for inducing sedation, anxiolysis, or amnesia before certain medical procedures (e.g., endoscopy).
When given into a vein, effects begin in one to five minutes and last up to an hour.
About 29.3% of drug-related suicide attempts involve benzodiazepines, making them the most frequently represented class in drug-related suicide attempts.
** Impaired coordination
Occasionally excitement or agitation may occur.
* Treatment of the symptoms of alcohol, opiate, and benzodiazepine withdrawal
For each subunit, many subtypes exist (α1–6, β1–3, and γ1–3).
Differences in rates of withdrawal (50–100%) vary depending on the patient sample.
Urgent action by national governments has been recommended to improve prescribing patterns of benzodiazepines such as diazepam.
The bioavailability after oral administration is 100%, and 90% after rectal administration.
Binding of benzodiazepines to this receptor complex promotes binding of GABA, which in turn increases the total conduction of chloride ions across the neuronal cell membrane.
Diazepam binds with high affinity to glial cells in animal cell cultures.
The British Pharmacopoeia lists it as being very slightly soluble in water, soluble in alcohol, and freely soluble in chloroform.
It is sometimes used intermittently for the prevention of febrile seizures that may occur in children under five years of age.
Diazepam in doses of 5&nbsp;mg or more causes significant deterioration in alertness performance combined with increased feelings of sleepiness.
Artificial respiration and stabilization of cardiovascular functions may also be necessary.
Diazepam may impair the ability to drive vehicles or operate machinery.
Overdoses of diazepam with alcohol, opiates and/or other depressants may be fatal.
Blood or plasma diazepam concentrations are usually in a range of 0.1–1.0&nbsp;mg/l in persons receiving the drug therapeutically, 1–5&nbsp;mg/l in those arrested for impaired driving, and 2–20&nbsp;mg/l in victims of acute overdose.
Adverse effects of benzodiazepines such as diazepam include anterograde amnesia and confusion (especially pronounced in higher doses) and sedation.
Benzodiazepines have a relatively low toxicity in overdose.
* Pre- or postoperative sedation, anxiolysis and/or amnesia (e.g., before endoscopic or surgical procedures)
About one-third of individuals who take benzodiazepines for longer than four weeks become dependent and experience withdrawal syndrome on cessation.
Diazepam is used as a short-term sedative and anxiolytic for cats and dogs, sometimes used as an appetite stimulant.
Diazepam is rarely used for the long-term treatment of epilepsy because tolerance to its anticonvulsant effects usually develops within six to 12 months of treatment, effectively rendering it useless for that purpose.
The muscle relaxant properties of diazepam are produced via inhibition of polysynaptic pathways in the spinal cord.
The wholesale cost in the developing world is about 0.01 USD per dose as of 2014.
Diazepam inhibits acetylcholine release in mouse hippocampal synaptosomes.
As a result, the difference between resting potential and threshold potential is increased and firing is less likely.
The distribution half-life of diazepam is two to 13 minutes.
The risk of pharmacological dependence on diazepam is significant, and patients experience symptoms of benzodiazepine withdrawal syndrome if it is taken for six weeks or longer.
Withdrawals can be life-threatening, particularly when excessive doses have been taken for extended periods of time.
Tolerance to the cognitive-impairing effects of benzodiazepines does not tend to develop with long-term use, and the elderly are more sensitive to them.
A large-scale study in the US, conducted by SAMHSA, using data from 2011, determined  benzodiazepines were present in 28.7% of emergency department visits involving nonmedical use of pharmaceuticals.
Benzodiazepines are positive allosteric modulators of the GABA type A receptors (GABAA).
Patients with severe attacks of apnea during sleep may suffer respiratory depression (hypoventilation), leading to respiratory arrest and death.
Withdrawal symptoms can sometimes resemble pre-existing conditions and be misdiagnosed.
