In fact, the majority of the myths about dingoes simply call them "dogs" (whether that role was adopted, or whether there was no difference for the storyteller, is unknown), and other introduced animals, such as the water buffalo and the domestic cat, have been adopted into the indigenous Aboriginal culture in the forms of rituals, traditional paintings and dreamtime stories.
The precise economic impact is not known in this case, and it is unlikely that the rescue of some calves compensates for the necessary costs of control measures.
Dingoes in the Northern Territory are regarded as having an important conservational value, since interbreeding of dingoes and other domestic dogs is low in the area.
This theory was based on the morphological similarities of dingo skulls and the skulls of these subspecies of wolves.
There are myths about shapeshifters (human to dingo or vice versa), "dingo-people," and the creation of certain landscapes or elements of those landscapes, like waterholes or mountains.
However, compared to the European grey wolf, dingoes have an approximately 30% lower relative brain size, reduced facial expressions, reduced impressive behaviour, curled tails that can be carried over the back, and generally a permanent fertility in males—features that all known domestic dogs share and are considered to be caused by domestication.
Establishment of artificial packs in captive dingoes have failed.
Pups of subordinate females usually get killed by the alpha female, which causes the population increase to be low even in good times.
Hunting success depends on the health and condition of the adult bovines and on their ability to defend their calves.
An older taxonomy, used throughout most of the 20th century, applied the epithet ''Canis familiaris dingo''.
It was also considered that dingoes travel over long distances to reach areas with richer prey populations, and the control methods were often concentrated along "paths" or "trails" and in areas that were far away from sheep areas.
While locating a cattle herd, dingoes have been observed to make several feint attacks, during which they concentrate on the calves at first then, later on, attack the mothers to distract them.
In addition, a loss of genetic diversity (thus resulting in a higher susceptibility to diseases) might occur due to a small founding population, and negative changes could occur simply because the dogs were captive-bred.
The wild dog population of Australia now includes dingoes and a wide panoply of feral domestic dogs (mostly mixed-breeds and dingo-hybrids) having an enormous variety of colours.
Their main period of activity is around dusk and dawn.
Dingoes were seen as predators that killed wantonly, rather than out of hunger (similar claims are made today concerning dingo-hybrids).
During lactation, females have no higher need of water than usual, since they consume the urine and feces of the pups and therefore recycle the water and keep the den clean.
Evidence indicates a discord concerning the status of these dogs, as well.
Wild dogs hunt feral livestock such as goats and pigs, as well as native prey and introduced animals.
Opinion is divided about the keeping of dingoes as pets or as working dogs.
Subordinate dingoes will approach a more dominant dog in a slightly crouched posture, ears flat and tail down, to ensure peace in the pack.
Apart from their own experiences, pups also learn through observation.
Then again, some do not consider dingoes feral any more but completely wild, since they have been living under natural selection for a very long time.
Likewise, the scientific name of the dingo might be ''Canis lupus dingo'', but the dingo is regarded as a separate species, nonetheless.
Owners of dingoes and other domestic dogs are sometimes asked to neuter their pets and keep them under observation to reduce the number of stray/feral dogs and prevent interbreeding with dingoes (for instance under the ''Territory Parks and Wildlife Conservation Act (2000)'').
Inexperienced dingoes, or those that kill "for fun," sometimes cause significant damage to the sheep's hind legs, which often causes death.
The size of packs often appears to correspond to the size of prey that appears in the pack's territory.
Thus, one writer considered the New Guinea singing dog, the Basenji, the Carolina Dog and certain other dog populations to be dingoes.
In the gulf region of Queensland, feral pigs and agile wallabies are the dingo's main prey.
The dingo has a wild and uncontrollable face in other stories, and there are many tales about dingoes that kill and eat humans (for example, the Mamu, which catches and devours the spirit of every child who roams too far from the campfire).
Attacks can also be caused by mistaken reactions of humans to aggressive and dominant behaviour of dingoes.
There is presently no information regarding what opinions the public has regarding the conservation of dingoes.
As a result, it was assumed that dingoes and other similar Asian dogs belong to a group of domestic dogs that went feral at a very early time.
It is also argued that the thylacine was a flexible predator that should have withstood the competition by the dingo, but was instead wiped out due to human persecution.
The cattle industry may benefit from the predation of dingoes on rabbits, kangaroos and rats.
Research on the real extent of the damage, though, and the reason for this problem, only started recently.
Although the loss of cattle can rise up to 30%, the normal loss rate is about 0–10%.
Although this is a possible result of the dingo's introduction, critics regard the evidence for this as insubstantial.
In Australia, dens are mostly underground.
This behaviour possibly developed as an adaptation to the fluctuating environmental conditions in Australia.
* Queensland: Dingoes and their hybrids are regarded as pests under the ''Land Protection (Pest and Stock Route Management) Act 2002''.
Dingo pups can also be killed by lungworms, whipworms, hepatitis, coccidiosis, lice and ticks.
On private land, the killing of wild dogs is allowed when with permission from the territory.
According to the present state of knowledge, it is not possible to get Australian dingoes to bark more frequently by putting them in contact with other domestic dogs.
About 10% of the dogs captured—all younger than 12 months—were later recaptured far away from their first location.
Since dingoes were the largest wild placental mammals in Australia at the time of European colonisation and looked similar to domestic dogs, their origin has always been questioned and much debated.
Observations concerning the mutual impact of dingoes and red fox and cat populations suggest dingoes limit the access of foxes and cats to certain resources.
The term "wild dog," itself, sometimes only includes dingoes and their hybrids or respectively excludes dingoes.
Estimates from the 1990s assumed a proportion of dingo-hybrids of about 78% in the wild.
First, there is no real clarity regarding at what point a dog is regarded as a "pure" dingo, and, secondly, no distinguishing feature is completely reliable—it is not known which characteristics permanently remain under the conditions of natural selection.
Dingoes in general drink one litre of water a day in the summer and about half a litre a day in winter.
The dingoes are granted a certain protection in areas that are managed by the ''National Parks Act (1975)''.
Dingoes are regarded as widespread in Sulawesi, but their distribution in the rest of Indonesia is unknown.
She suffered serious puncture wounds to her leg.
Potentially, the dingo came to Australia and the islands of South East Asia and the Pacific during the course of expansion of the Austronesian culture.
Conservation of pure and survivable dingo populations is promising in remote areas, where contact with humans and other domestic dogs is rare.
Supposedly, only few dingoes and dingo-hybrids would reach an old age, since the owners would not know how to handle them.
In the case of reddish individuals, there can be small, distinctive, dark stripes on the shoulders.
They also exist in the large desert in the northwest of the state.
The appearance of a wild dog is sometimes very important when it comes to the cultural and economical impact.
To reach Australia from Asia, there would have been at least 50&nbsp;km of open sea to be crossed, even at the lowest sea level.
Wild dogs are responsible for a wide range of negative and undesired impacts on the livestock industry of Australia, and they have been regarded as pests since the start of the European livestock industry.
Although it remained difficult to provide consistent and clear diagnostic features, the study placed morphological limits on what can be considered a dingo.
This theory implies that the oldest-known fossils are 4,000 years old and were found on Timor, where the dogs coexisted for a time with pigs and sheep.
Their exact descent, place of origin and date of arrival in Australia were not identified, nor whether they had once been domesticated or half-domesticated and had gone feral, or whether they had already existed as truly wild animals.
It is further assumed that they would have been tamed there and then transported to various places in the world.
Outside Australia, dingoes were proven to exist in Thailand, based on comparisons between the skulls of Thai dogs and those of fossil and present-day dingoes.
The ownership of dingoes as pets and their breeding is widely criticised.
Dr. Bradley Smith said that Fraser Island has a problem with humans and not with the dingoes, that dogs who were labelled "aggressive" were simply behaving naturally.
However, this law also allows that dingoes can be controlled in areas where they have a proven impact on the environment.
It was described as a bite intention, during which the receiver is never touched or hurt.
However, some people speculated that these dogs were cross-breeds of dingoes and shepherd dogs.
Compared to most domestic dogs, the bark of a dingo is short and monosyllabic, and is rarely used.
The loss of calves in observed areas where dingoes were controlled was higher than in other areas.
This taxonomy assumed that domestic dogs are a distinct species from ''Canis lupus'', with the dingo classified as a subspecies of domestic dog.
One theory holds that other domestic dogs will adopt the role of the "pure" dingo.
In some states, dingoes are regarded as declared pests and landowners are allowed to control the local populations.
Here, individual beings have a significant meaning or sometimes become part of the landscape.
Even within the scientific community, the dingo is given several names.
Furthermore, some humans do not realise how adaptive and quick dingoes are.
The numbers of cattle losses is much more variable and less well-documented.
Today, the word "dingo" still stands for "coward" and "cheat," with verb and adjective forms used, as well.
Losses for the livestock industry alone were estimated to be as high as $18 million.
Dingoes have also been bred for sale or use as working dogs.
Since the environment is the same on both sides of the fence, the dingo was assumed to be a strong factor for the regulation of these species.
The wild specimens had been selected based on similarities of external appearance to exclude the influence of dingo-hybrids and domestic dogs as far as possible.
In the rainforests of the north, the main prey consists of magpie geese, rodents and agile wallabies.
According to a survey among cattle owners in 1995, performed by the Park and Wildlife Service, owners estimated their annual losses due to wild dogs (depending on the district) to be from 1.6% to 7.1%.
Unlike wolves, dingoes can react to social cues and gestures from humans.
Both the dingo and domestic dog are classified as subspecies of ''Canis lupus'' in Mammal Species of the World.
The second position is relatively new and is of the opinion that people must accept that the dingo has changed and that it is impossible to bring the "pure" dingo back.
He believed that these dogs could become very decent pets.
The dingo is connected to holy places, totems, rituals and dreamtime characters.
Tourists are drawn to the experience of personally interacting with dingoes.
Nonetheless, it is regarded as unlikely that the control measures could completely eradicate the dingo in Central Australia, and the elimination of all wild dogs is not considered a realistic option.
* In November 2012, a six-month-old dingo was killed by rangers on Fraser Island after continued aggressive and dangerous behaviour towards people.
More recent studies have concluded that the previous assumptions about the origins  of the dingo are incorrect, with the dingo appearing to have no ancestral relationship with the wolf.
However, there are reports of dingoes that were agitated by the presence of humans, such as around camps in national parks, near streets or suburbs.
Based on skull characteristics, size, fur colour and breeding cycles, distinct regional populations could be seen to exist between Australia and Asia, but not within Australia.
Additionally, dogs under human care would also be susceptible.
As dingoes age, they succumb to their natural instincts and become more likely to escape into the wild.
However, the American Rare Breed Association (ARBA) regards the dingo as a breed belonging to the Spitz and Primitive Group.
Some attacks might result from the "play" of young pups, especially with children.
During heat, dingoes are harder to manage than other domestic dogs which, combined with their attachment to their owners, can lead to problems, since they want to follow their owners and never miss the opportunity to feed.
They also scent-rub, whereby a dog rolls its neck, shoulders, or back on something that is usually associated with food or the scent markings of other dogs.
Both positions are controversially discussed.
However, this seems to be common only on Fraser Island, where the dingoes are extensively used as a symbol to enhance the attraction of the island.
Again, no differences could be found, regardless of the type of examination used.
Populations must be controlled, and dingoes can be kept as pets under certain conditions.
The average Australian dingo is  tall at the shoulders and measures  from nose to tail tip.
Additionally, the disappearance of dingoes might increase the prevalence of kangaroo, rabbit and turkey numbers.
Despite accordant claims, these findings did not show that only dingo females mate with non-dingo males and not vice versa.
Control measures are strictly confined to livestock areas, and other domestic dogs are controlled in general.
Similar to how Europeans acquired dingoes, the Aboriginal people of Australia acquired dogs from the immigrants very quickly.
Additionally, they were seen as promiscuous or as devils with a venomous bite or saliva, and so they could be killed unreservedly.
New studies suggest dingoes may have originated in southern China, travelling to Australia anywhere between 4600 and 18,300 years ago.
In addition, dingoes have strong toileting instincts and can easily be housebroken.
After serving more than three years of her sentence, Lindy was released from prison when the jacket of the baby was found in a dingo den.
Only a cohesive coordinated control in all areas could be efficient in the long run, if at all.
During this time, dingoes may actively defend their territories using vocalisations, dominance behaviour, growling and barking.
17 tracked dingoes have survived 22 days without water in the winter.
But if it is considered to be "just" a variant of the domestic dog, it is regarded as a pest and should be eradicated.
Calves usually suffer less lethal wounds than sheep due to their size and the protection by the adult cattle, and therefore have a higher chance of surviving an attack.
Dingoes usually remain in one area and do not undergo seasonal migrations.
The findings would not allow such a conclusion, since the mating of a dingo female with a non-dingo male could not be detected via analyses of mtDNA.
Another criticism is that adult dingoes are viewed by some to be unsuitable as pets in the same ways as other domestic dogs.
In addition, some tourists seemed to be confused by the high number of rules in some parks, and they have been prompted in some cases to actively feed the wild animals.
In some stories, dingoes are the central characters, while in others, they are only minor ones.
One time, it is an ancestor from the dreamtime who created humans and dingoes or gave them their current shape.
The main criticism is that the activities and the resulting consequences of the dingo conservation groups, "dingo farms" and legislation for legal ownership of dingoes for people in public, is seen to be an additional threat to the survival of the pure dingoes.
In South Australia, dingoes can only be kept in specially licensed zoos, circuses and authorised research institutions.
In continent-wide examinations, 80% of the diet of wild dogs consisted of 10 species: red kangaroo, swamp wallaby, cattle, dusky rat, magpie goose, common brushtail possum, long-haired rat, agile wallaby, European rabbit and the common wombat.
The periods of activity are short (often less than one hour) with short times of resting.
On the other hand, dingoes have been "rehabilitated" in some way, by changing their status from pests to "Australia's native dog" or, more subtly, from a subspecies of the domestic dog to that of the grey wolf.
About 170 species (from insects to buffalo) have been identified as part of the dingo's diet.
Under New South Wales state policy in parks, reserves and other areas not used by agriculture, these populations are only to be controlled when they pose a threat to the survival of other native species.
This theory would be supported by the assumption that the simultaneous appearance of certain stone tools was caused by Indian influence, but other authorities dispute this.
Although attacks by red foxes are possible, such attacks are more rare than previously thought.
In mid-1994, the Australian National Kennel Council (ANKC) officially recognised the dingo as Australia's national dog breed, and a breed standard was published some years later.
Among the indigenous Australians, dingoes were also used as hunting aids, living hot water bottles and camp dogs.
Young dingoes usually become independent at the age of three to six months or they disperse at the age of 10 months when the next mating season starts.
In some parts of Australia, it is assumed that the loss of calves can be minimised if horned cattle are used instead of polled.
The group dynamics of dingoes should have successfully kept devils away from carrion, and since dingoes are able to break bones, little would have been left for the devils to scavenge.
Kangaroo hunts are probably more successful in open areas than in places with high densities of vegetation, and juvenile kangaroos are killed more often than adults.
Therefore, its importance declined over time.
* Australian Capital Territory: Dingoes are regarded as protected under the ''Nature Conservation Act (1980)''.
Hybrids of dingoes and domestic dogs exist today in all wild dog populations of Australia, with their numbers having increased to such a degree that any completely "pure" populations may no longer exist.
Males become sexually mature between the ages of one and three years.
Barking was observed to make up only 5% of vocalisations.
Therefore, only a small proportion of the injured or killed sheep and goats are eaten, which seems to be the rule and not the exception.
Apart from the well-known case in which an infant was taken from a campsite (see below), there have been numerous confirmed dingo attacks, often involving people feeding wild dingoes, particularly on Fraser Island, a special center of dingo-related tourism (see main article).
To determine the origin and time of arrival of Australian dingoes, mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) sequences of 211 dingoes and 19 archaeological samples from pre-European Polynesia were compared with mtDNA samples of 676 domestic dogs and 38 grey wolves in 2004.
The phenomenon of interbreeding between both is then attributed to the statement that all wolf-like species can interbreed and produce fertile offspring.
The fur colour is mostly sandy to reddish brown, but can include tan patterns and sometimes be black, light brown, or white.
During further analyses in the late 1990s, researchers examined 14 loci and detected a significantly lower genetic variability among Australian dingoes than among domestic dogs, leading to consideration of the possibility of a small founding population.
In the wilderness, dingoes howl over long distances to attract other members of the pack, to find other dogs, or to keep intruders at bay.
In this vein, dingoes would have the right to be recognised as a dog breed, and domestication would be the only reliable way of ensuring the survival of the "pure" dingo.
* On 26 April 2011, a three-year-old girl was attacked on Fraser Island by two dingoes.
However, it is suspected that the pre-estrus may last as long as 60 days in the wild.
* South Australia: Dingoes and their hybrids are considered pests in the sheep areas inside (south) of the Dingo Fence under the ''Animal and Plant Control Board (Agricultural Protection and Other Purposes) Act (1986)''.
The dingo is listed in Group 4 (hound) of the ANKC.
From the third hybrid generation on, a decrease in fertility and an increase in genetic damage was observed among the coyote-hybrids and jackal-hybrids.
The dingo is not regarded as a dog breed by the Fédération Cynologique Internationale.
Livestock guardian dogs can effectively minimise livestock losses, but are less effective on wide open areas with widely distributed livestock.
The legs are about half the length of the body and the head put together.
Sarcoptic mange is a widespread parasitic disease among the dingoes of Australia, but is seldom debilitating.
Observations have shown that each kind of howling has several variations, though their purpose is unknown.
Information concerning cultural importance to indigenous people and the importance of dingoes and the impact of control measures on other species is also lacking in some areas.
Often, a dog may chase and outrun a single sheep, only to turn away suddenly and chase another.
This narrow range of major prey indicates these wild dogs are rather specialised, but in the tropical rainforests of northeastern Australia, dingoes are supposed to be opportunistic hunters of a wide range of mammals.
Among dingoes in captivity, the pre-estrus was observed to last 10–12 days.
In the case of sheep and goats, a zero-tolerance attitude is common.
However, since only a few differences in the enzymes of different species of the genus ''Canis'' could be found, it was assumed that a lack of differences might not indicate a close taxonomic relationship.
According to studies, control measures can eliminate 66% to 84% of a wild dog population, but the population can reach its old numbers very quickly over the course of a year, depending on the season, such as by immigration of young dogs from other areas.
Reports from some parts of Australia indicate that wild dogs now hunt in packs there, where they had previously been solitary hunters.
Australian dingoes are invariably heavier than Asian ones.
To make dingoes more suitable as lapdogs, breeders would need to cross them with other domestic dogs.
Attacks then occur with humans seen as competition, and dingoes simply reacting to protect their food supply.
This might be connected to the dingo's way of hunting and the size of their favoured prey, as well as to the low number of dingoes in the time before European colonisation.
In the year 1946, these efforts were directed to a single goal, and the Dingo Fence was finally completed.
Fences are reliable in keeping wild dogs from entering certain areas, but they are expensive to build, need permanent maintenance, and only cause the problem to be relocated.
Nearly nothing is known about the relationship of wild dogs and feral cats, except both mostly live in the same areas.
According to David Jenkins, the breeding and reintroduction of pure dingoes is no easy option and, at the time, there were no studies that seriously dealt with this topic, especially in areas where dingo populations are already present.
* Sheepdogs were introduced from the Indus Valley in Asia, over Timor by Indian seafarers, based on similarities in skeletal anatomy of Indian pariah dogs and Iranian wolves.
It was noted in Western Australia in the 1970s that young dogs can travel for long distances when necessary.
This fear exists because the majority of these breeding activities effectively expedite the interbreeding of dingoes and other domestic dogs, when the identification of a pure dingo is not absolutely correct respectively when hybrids are sold as "pure" dingoes.
As a result, it is assumed that a disappearance of the dingoes may cause an increase of red fox and feral cat numbers and, therefore, a higher pressure on native animals.
In contrast to the captive dingoes, captured dingo males from Central Australia did show evidence of a male breeding cycle.
Dingoes will normally make their dens in deserted rabbit holes and hollow logs close to an essential supply of water.
The ''Domestic (Feral and Nuisance) Animal Act (1994)'' requires every dog owner to have their dogs under control at all times.
Furthermore, wild dogs are involved in the spread of echinococcosis among cattle and sheep.
Soon after the dingo's brother was killed by rangers, although documented incidents for this dog never reached the serious Code E level his brother's had.
The cattle industry can tolerate low to moderate, and sometimes high, grades of wild dogs (therefore dingoes are not so easily regarded as pests in these areas).
Free-roaming dogs are the primary host of Echinococcosis (tapeworms) and have an infection rate of 70 to 90%.
The behaviour of humans might undermine efforts to guard against dingo attacks.
Due to the increased availability of water, native and introduced prey, livestock and human-provided food, this population is on the increase.
In Barcaldine, Queensland, up to one-fifth of all sheep are killed by dingoes annually, a situation which has been described as an "epidemic".
These results also indicated that there hasn't been any significant introduction of other domestic dog on the Australian continent prior to the arrival of the Europeans.
Indigenous Australians would take dingo pups from the den and tame them until sexual maturity and the dogs would leave.
Furthermore, they can be a danger to the livestock or be killed by control measures themselves when they are not sufficiently supervised by their owners.
