However, a functional peptide involved in the vision of a theoretical dinosaur has been inferred using analytical phylogenetic reconstruction methods on gene sequences of related modern species such as reptiles and birds.
Further research has found medullary bone in the carnosaur ''Allosaurus'' and the ornithopod ''Tenontosaurus''.
Finally, in Europe, dromaeosaurids, rhabdodontid iguanodontians, nodosaurid ankylosaurians, and titanosaurian sauropods were prevalent.
However, at least some modern birds (such as hummingbirds) can be facultatively ammonotelic, excreting most of the nitrogenous wastes as ammonia.
The tallest and heaviest dinosaur known from good skeletons is ''Giraffatitan brancai'' (previously classified as a species of ''Brachiosaurus'').
Cranial modifications like horns and crests are common dinosaurian traits, and some extinct species had bony armor.
There is general agreement that some behaviors that are common in birds, as well as in crocodiles (birds' closest living relatives), were also common among extinct dinosaur groups.
From a behavioral standpoint, one of the most valuable dinosaur fossils was discovered in the Gobi Desert in 1971.
Another notable evolutionary event of the Jurassic was the appearance of true birds, descended from maniraptoran coelurosaurians.
The description of feathered dinosaurs has not been without controversy; perhaps the most vocal critics have been Alan Feduccia and Theagarten Lingham-Soliar, who have proposed that some purported feather-like fossils are the result of the decomposition of collagenous fiber that underlaid the dinosaurs' skin, and that maniraptoran dinosaurs with vaned feathers were not actually dinosaurs, but convergent with dinosaurs.
Predatory theropod dinosaurs, which occupied most terrestrial carnivore niches during the Mesozoic, most often fall into the  category when sorted by estimated weight into categories based on order of magnitude, whereas recent predatory carnivoran mammals peak in the  category.
This material, as well as the output of the intestines, emerges from the cloaca.
First, at about 215&nbsp;million years ago, a variety of basal archosauromorphs, including the protorosaurs, became extinct.
Many dinosaurs were quite small: ''Xixianykus'', for example, was only about  long.
The first Antarctic dinosaur to be discovered, the ankylosaurid ''Antarctopelta oliveroi'', was found on James Ross Island in 1986, although it was 1994 before an Antarctic species, the theropod ''Cryolophosaurus ellioti'', was formally named and described in a scientific journal.
Instead, dinosaurs, like many extinct forms of reptile sub-groups, did not exhibit characteristics which were traditionally regarded as reptilian, such as a sprawling limb posture or ectothermy (colloquially referred to as "cold-bloodedness").
The popular preoccupation with dinosaurs has ensured their appearance in literature, film, and other media.
The term is derived from the Greek words δεινός (''deinos'', meaning "terrible", "potent", or "fearfully great") and σαῦρος (''sauros'', meaning "lizard" or "reptile").
Extrapolating from the illustration of this bone, the animal may have been  long and weighed  kg ( lb).
Unfortunately, many valuable dinosaur specimens were damaged or destroyed due to the pair's rough methods: for example, their diggers often used dynamite to unearth bones (a method modern paleontologists would find appalling).
Both definitions result in the same set of animals being defined as dinosaurs: "Dinosauria = Ornithischia + Saurischia", encompassing theropods (mostly bipedal carnivores and birds), ankylosaurians (armored herbivorous quadrupeds), stegosaurians (plated herbivorous quadrupeds), ceratopsians (herbivorous quadrupeds with horns and frills), ornithopods (bipedal or quadrupedal herbivores including "duck-bills"), and sauropodomorphs (mostly large herbivorous quadrupeds with long necks and tails).
Eggs are usually laid in a nest.
There are several proposed advantages for the large size of sauropods, including protection from predation, reduction of energy use, and longevity, but it may be that the most important advantage was dietary.
* exoccipitals (bones at the back of the skull) do not meet along the midline on the floor of the endocranial cavity, the inner space of the braincase
It included a ''Velociraptor'' attacking a ''Protoceratops'', providing evidence that dinosaurs did indeed attack each other.
* fourth trochanter (projection where the caudofemoralis muscle attaches on the inner rear shaft) on the femur (thighbone) is a sharp flange
However, the evolution of dinosaur vocalization is less certain.
Many prehistoric animal groups are popularly conceived of as dinosaurs, such as ichthyosaurs, mosasaurs, plesiosaurs, pterosaurs, and pelycosaurs (especially ''Dimetrodon''), but are not classified scientifically as dinosaurs, and none had the erect hind limb posture characteristic of true dinosaurs.
Although some later groups of dinosaurs featured further modified versions of these traits, they are considered typical for Dinosauria; the earliest dinosaurs had them and passed them on to their descendants.
Image:Edmontosaurus pelvis left.jpg|''Edmontosaurus'' pelvis (showing ornithischian structure&nbsp;– left side)
The largest known carnivorous dinosaur was ''Spinosaurus'', reaching a length of , and weighing 7–20.9&nbsp;tonnes (7.7–23 short tons).
* apex of deltopectoral crest (a projection on which the deltopectoral muscles attach) located at or more than 30% down the length of the humerus (upper arm bone)
Dinosaurs today inhabit every continent, and fossils show that they had achieved global distribution by at least the early Jurassic period.
One example is a site in Inner Mongolia that has yielded the remains of over 20 ''Sinornithomimus'', from one to seven years old.
While dinosaurs were ancestrally bipedal (as are all modern birds), some prehistoric species were quadrupeds, and others, such as ''Ammosaurus'' and ''Iguanodon'', could walk just as easily on two or four legs.
When laying eggs, females grow a special type of bone between the hard outer bone and the marrow of their limbs.
Paleontologists think that ''Eoraptor'' resembles the common ancestor of all dinosaurs; if this is true, its traits suggest that the first dinosaurs were small, bipedal predators.
Some are herbivorous, others carnivorous, including seed-eaters, fish-eaters, insectivores, and omnivores.
Another difficulty of determining distinctly dinosaurian features is that early dinosaurs and other archosaurs from the late Triassic are often poorly known and were similar in many ways; these animals have sometimes been misidentified in the literature.
* fourth trochanter asymmetrical, with distal, lower, margin forming a steeper angle to the shaft
Jules Verne's 1864 novel ''Journey to the Center of the Earth'', Sir Arthur Conan Doyle's 1912 book ''The Lost World'', the iconic 1933 film ''King Kong'', the 1954 ''Godzilla'' and its many sequels, the best-selling 1990 novel ''Jurassic Park'' by Michael Crichton and its 1993 film adaptation are just a few notable examples of dinosaur appearances in fiction.
In the 1970s, John Ostrom revived the dinosaur–bird theory, which gained momentum in the coming decades with the advent of cladistic analysis, and a great increase in the discovery of small theropods and early birds.
Since the 1990s, a number of additional feathered dinosaurs have been found, providing even stronger evidence of the close relationship between dinosaurs and modern birds.
However, even Walter Alvarez has acknowledged that there were other major changes on Earth even before the impact, such as a drop in sea level and massive volcanic eruptions that produced the Indian Deccan Traps, and these may have contributed to the extinctions.
Birds are classified as belonging to the subgroup Maniraptora, which are coelurosaurs, which are theropods, which are saurischians, which are dinosaurs.
This is similar to some modern reptile groups such as lizards, in which many forms are largely silent (though like dinosaurs they possess well-developed senses of hearing) but use complex coloration and display behaviors to communicate.
Some sauropods also evolved tooth batteries, best exemplified by the rebbachisaurid ''Nigersaurus''.
In the northern continents of North America and Asia, the major theropods were tyrannosaurids and various types of smaller maniraptoran theropods, with a predominantly ornithischian herbivore assemblage of hadrosaurids, ceratopsians, ankylosaurids, and pachycephalosaurians.
Flowering plants were greatly radiating, with the first grasses appearing by the end of the Cretaceous.
Despite their unrefined methods, the contributions of Cope and Marsh to paleontology were vast: Marsh unearthed 86 new species of dinosaur and Cope discovered 56, a total of 142 new species.
A variety of other skeletal features are shared by dinosaurs.
('''NB:''' the terms "lizard hip" and "bird hip" are misnomers&nbsp;– birds evolved from dinosaurs with "lizard hips".)
In Europe, dinosaur fossils were generally believed to be the remains of giants and other biblical creatures.
Gymnosperm plants (particularly conifers), a potential food source, radiated in the late Triassic.
Dinosaurs are a varied group of animals from taxonomic, morphological and ecological standpoints.
CT-scanning of ''Aerosteon'''s fossil bones revealed evidence for the existence of air sacs within the animal's body cavity.
However, a majority of contemporary paleontologists concerned with dinosaurs reject the traditional style of classification in favor of phylogenetic taxonomy; this approach requires that, for a group to be natural, all descendants of members of the group must be included in the group as well.
Those, along with multiple trackways, suggest that gregarious behavior was common in many early dinosaur species.
The discovery that birds are a type of dinosaur showed that dinosaurs in general are not, in fact, extinct as is commonly stated.
Birds, at over  living species, are the most diverse group of vertebrates besides perciform fish.
It is considered a transitional fossil, in that it displays features of both groups.
The Chinese, whose modern word for dinosaur is ''kǒnglóng'' (恐龍, or "terrible dragon"), considered them to be dragon bones and documented them as such.
The feud probably originated when Marsh publicly pointed out that Cope's reconstruction of an ''Elasmosaurus'' skeleton was flawed: Cope had inadvertently placed the plesiosaur's head at what should have been the animal's tail end.
Fossils of the troodonts ''Mei'' and ''Sinornithoides'' demonstrate that some dinosaurs slept with their heads tucked under their arms.
Though the taxonomic name has often been interpreted as a reference to dinosaurs' teeth, claws, and other fearsome characteristics, Owen intended it merely to evoke their size and majesty.
Although the exact origin and timing of the evolution of dinosaurs is the subject of active research, the current scientific consensus places their origin between 231 and 243 million years ago.
After recovery, the tissue was rehydrated by the science team.
Areas of the skeleton with important similarities include the neck, pubis, wrist (semi-lunate carpal), arm and pectoral girdle, furcula (wishbone), and breast bone.
Between 1815 and 1824, the Rev William Buckland, a professor of geology at Oxford, collected more fossilized bones of ''Megalosaurus'' and became the first person to describe a dinosaur in a scientific journal.
In most living species, uric acid is excreted along with feces as a semisolid waste.
Direct dating of the bones themselves has supported the later date, with U–Pb dating methods resulting in a precise age of 64.8 ± 0.9 million years ago.
Such modifications, originating in the last common ancestor of a certain taxonomic group, are called the synapomorphies of such a group.
While his assertion was not initially well-received, later intensive field studies of fossil beds lent weight to his claim.
The extraction of ancient DNA from dinosaur fossils has been reported on two separate occasions; upon further inspection and peer review, however, neither of these reports could be confirmed.
By September 17, 2008, 1047 different species of dinosaurs had been named.
Comparisons between the scleral rings of dinosaurs and modern birds and reptiles have been used to infer daily activity patterns of dinosaurs.
* concave articular surface for the fibula of the calcaneum (the top surface of the calcaneum, where it touches the fibula, has a hollow profile)
Throughout the remainder of this article, the term "dinosaur" is sometimes used generically to refer to both the avian and non-avian dinosaurs combined, while at other times it is used to refer to the non-avian dinosaurs specifically, and the avian dinosaurs are sometimes simply referred to as "birds".
Oxygen levels in the atmosphere also started to fluctuate and would ultimately fall considerably.
Since the first dinosaur fossils were recognized in the early 19th century, mounted fossil dinosaur skeletons have been major attractions at museums around the world, and dinosaurs have become an enduring part of world culture.
This mass extinction is known as the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event.
Few of the specimens that are recovered are complete skeletons, and impressions of skin and other soft tissues are rare.
Under phylogenetic nomenclature, dinosaurs are usually defined as the group consisting of ''Triceratops'', Neornithes modern birds, their most recent common ancestor (MRCA), and all descendants.
Early saurischians—"lizard-hipped", from the Greek ''sauros'' (σαῦρος) meaning "lizard" and ''ischion'' (ἰσχίον) meaning "hip joint"—retained the hip structure of their ancestors, with a pubis bone directed cranially, or forward.
The first few lines of early dinosaurs diversified through the Carnian and Norian stages of the Triassic, possibly by occupying the niches of the groups that became extinct.
Of particular note have been the fossils of the Yixian Formation, where a variety of theropods and early birds have been found, often with feathers of some type.
One of the best examples of soft-tissue impressions in a fossil dinosaur was discovered in Pietraroia, Italy.
For example, ''Anchiornis huxleyi'' is currently the smallest non-avialan dinosaur described from an adult specimen, with an estimated weight of 110&nbsp;grams and a total skeletal length of .
Eventually, most paleontologists began to accept the idea that the mass extinctions at the end of the Cretaceous were largely or at least partly due to a massive Earth impact.
The type of collagen an animal has in its bones varies according to its DNA and, in both cases, this collagen was of the same type found in modern chickens and ostriches.
Similar reports have come from other parts of the world, including China.
It has also been suggested that Dinosauria be defined with respect to the MRCA of ''Megalosaurus'' and ''Iguanodon'', because these were two of the three genera cited by Richard Owen when he recognized the Dinosauria.
The large sizes of some dinosaur groups, as well as their seemingly monstrous and fantastic nature, have ensured dinosaurs' regular appearance in best-selling books and films, such as ''Jurassic Park''.
Research into the genetics of American alligators has also revealed that crocodylian scutes do possess feather-keratins during embryonic development, but these keratins are not expressed by the animals before hatching.
Additionally, many other prehistoric animals, including mosasaurs, ichthyosaurs, pterosaurs, plesiosaurs, and ''Dimetrodon'', while often popularly conceived of as dinosaurs, are not taxonomically classified as dinosaurs.
An earlier study predicted that about 3400&nbsp;dinosaur genera existed, including many that would not have been preserved in the fossil record.
The bulk of the evidence now suggests that a bolide  wide hit in the vicinity of the Yucatán Peninsula (in southeastern Mexico), creating the approximately  Chicxulub Crater and triggering the mass extinction.
After 1897, the search for dinosaur fossils extended to every continent, including Antarctica.
In traditional taxonomy, birds were considered a separate class that had evolved from dinosaurs, a distinct superorder.
This early bird is so dinosaur-like that, without a clear impression of feathers in the surrounding rock, at least one specimen was mistaken for ''Compsognathus''.
The taxon '''Dinosauria''' was formally named in 1842 by paleontologist Sir Richard Owen, who used it to refer to the "distinct tribe or sub-order of Saurian Reptiles" that were then being recognized in England and around the world.
However, as no further evidence of sauropods of this size has been found, and the discoverer, Edward Cope, had made typographic errors before, it is likely to have been an extreme overestimation.
Although known for large size, many Mesozoic dinosaurs were human-sized or smaller, and modern birds are generally small in size.
With the backing of Prince Albert, the husband of Queen Victoria, Owen established the Natural History Museum, London, to display the national collection of dinosaur fossils and other biological and geological exhibits.
On average, atmospheric temperatures were also much higher; the poles, for example, were  warmer than today.
Interpretations of behavior in fossil species are generally based on the pose of skeletons and their habitat, computer simulations of their biomechanics, and comparisons with modern animals in similar ecological niches.
Meanwhile, Australia was home to a fauna of basal ankylosaurians, hypsilophodonts, and iguanodontians.
Entry of the word "dinosaur" into the common vernacular reflects the animals' cultural importance: in English, "dinosaur" is commonly used to describe anything that is impractically large, obsolete, or bound for extinction.
Within the archosaur group, dinosaurs are differentiated most noticeably by their gait.
At the same time, several groups of dinosaurian herbivores evolved more sophisticated ways to orally process food.
Dinosaurs may have appeared as early as 243 million years ago, as evidenced by remains of the genus ''Nyasasaurus'' from that period, though known fossils of these animals are too fragmentary to tell if they are dinosaurs or very close dinosaurian relatives.
Using one of the above definitions, dinosaurs can be generally described as archosaurs with hind limbs held erect beneath the body.
Still, the idea that non-avian dinosaurs were uniformly gigantic is a misconception based in part on preservation bias, as large, sturdy bones are more likely to last until they are fossilized.
Large animals are more efficient at digestion than small animals, because food spends more time in their digestive systems.
Ornithischia includes a variety of species which were primarily herbivores.
Modern birds inhabit most available habitats, from terrestrial to marine, and there is evidence that some non-avian dinosaurs (such as ''Microraptor'') could fly or at least glide, and others, such as spinosaurids, had semi-aquatic habits.
Other mass-death sites have been discovered subsequently.
In addition, many species regurgitate pellets, and fossil pellets that may have come from dinosaurs are known from as long ago as the Cretaceous period.
Dinosaurs stand with their hind limbs erect in a manner similar to most modern mammals, but distinct from most other reptiles, whose limbs sprawl out to either side.
In 1699, Edward Lhuyd, a friend of Sir Isaac Newton, was responsible for the first published scientific treatment of what would now be recognized as a dinosaur when he described and named a sauropod tooth, "Rutellum implicatum", that had been found in Caswell, near Witney, Oxfordshire.
Rhynchosaurs and dicynodonts survived (at least in some areas) at least as late as early-mid Norian and early Rhaetian, respectively, and the exact date of their extinction is uncertain.
Cope's collection is now at the American Museum of Natural History in New York, while Marsh's is on display at the Peabody Museum of Natural History at Yale University.
This posture is due to the development of a laterally facing recess in the pelvis (usually an open socket) and a corresponding inwardly facing distinct head on the femur.
Evidence of endothermy in Mesozoic dinosaurs includes the discovery of polar dinosaurs in Australia and Antarctica as well as analysis of blood-vessel structures within fossil bones that are typical of endotherms.
::::*†'''Ceratopsia''' (quadrupeds with frills; many also had horns)
While all modern birds have high metabolisms and are "warm blooded" (endothermic), a vigorous debate has been ongoing since the 1960s regarding how far back in the dinosaur lineage this trait extends.
They also excrete creatine, rather than creatinine like mammals.
Evidence suggests that egg laying and nest building are additional traits shared by all dinosaurs.
"What was once formally considered unique to birds was present in some form in the ancestors of birds", O'Connor said.
Trackways of hundreds or even thousands of herbivores indicate that duck-bills (hadrosaurids) may have moved in great herds, like the American bison or the African springbok.
Beginning in 1852 with a passing mention in Charles Dickens ''Bleak House'', dinosaurs have been featured in large numbers of fictional works.
Ceratopsians developed a method of slicing with teeth stacked on each other in batteries, and iguanodontians refined a method of grinding with tooth batteries, taken to its extreme in hadrosaurids.
Unlike birds, the ornithischian pubis also usually had an additional forward-pointing process.
Volcanic activity was decreasing, which led to a cooling trend as levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide dropped.
While some early bird-like species may have already been arboreal as well (including dromaeosaurids such as ''Microraptor'') most non-avialan dinosaurs seem to have relied on land-based locomotion.
Their main competitors were the pseudosuchia, such as aetosaurs, ornithosuchids and rauisuchians, which were more successful than the dinosaurs.
Scientific debate continues regarding the specific ways in which dinosaur temperature regulation evolved.
There is evidence that many types of slow-growing dinosaurs, including various theropods, sauropods, ankylosaurians, ornithopods, and ceratopsians, formed aggregations of immature individuals.
The surviving lineages of neornithine birds, including the ancestors of modern ratites, ducks and chickens, and a variety of waterbirds, diversified rapidly at the beginning of the Paleogene period, entering ecological niches left vacant by the extinction of Mesozoic dinosaur groups such as the arboreal enantiornithines, aquatic hesperornithines, and even the larger terrestrial theropods (in the form of ''Gastornis'', eogruiids, bathornithids, ratites, geranoidids, mihirungs, and "terror birds").
The idea of dinosaurs as ectothermic and sluggish remained a prevalent view until Robert T. "Bob" Bakker, an early proponent of dinosaur endothermy, published an influential paper on the topic in 1968.
The study of these "great fossil lizards" soon became of great interest to European and American scientists, and in 1842 the English paleontologist Richard Owen coined the term "dinosaur".
proposed that a sudden increase in iridium levels, recorded around the world in the period's rock stratum, was direct evidence of the impact.
In 2016 the estimated number of dinosaur species that existed in the Mesozoic era was estimated to be 1,543–2,468.
If the bone was not re-deposited into that stratum by weathering action, it would provide evidence that some dinosaur populations may have survived at least a half million years into the Cenozoic Era.
The stegosaurians appear to have gone extinct at some point in the late early Cretaceous or early late Cretaceous.
Sauropods, like the earlier prosauropods, were not oral processors, but ornithischians were evolving various means of dealing with food in the mouth, including potential cheek-like organs to keep food in the mouth, and jaw motions to grind food.
A good understanding of how dinosaurs moved on the ground is key to models of dinosaur behavior; the science of biomechanics, pioneered by Robert McNeill Alexander, has provided significant insight in this area.
When the fossilized bone was treated over several weeks to remove mineral content from the fossilized bone-marrow cavity (a process called demineralization), Schweitzer found evidence of intact structures such as blood vessels, bone matrix, and connective tissue (bone fibers).
Some scientists propose that the meteorite impact caused a long and unnatural drop in Earth's atmospheric temperature, while others claim that it would have instead created an unusual heat wave.
However, the multiple skeletal features also shared by the two groups represent another important line of evidence for paleontologists.
He found that vocal cords in the larynx probably evolved multiple times among reptiles, including crocodilians, which are able to produce guttural roars.
By contrast, ornithischians—"bird-hipped", from the Greek ''ornitheios'' (ὀρνίθειος) meaning "of a bird" and ''ischion'' (ἰσχίον) meaning "hip joint"—had a pelvis that superficially resembled a bird's pelvis: the pubis bone was oriented caudally (rear-pointing).
By the late Cretaceous, the environment was changing dramatically.
Based on current fossil evidence from dinosaurs such as ''Oryctodromeus'', some ornithischian species seem to have led a partially fossorial (burrowing) lifestyle.
This contrasts sharply with the size of Cenozoic mammals, estimated by the National Museum of Natural History as about .
Primitive birds and many non-avialan dinosaurs often lay eggs in communal nests, with males primarily incubating the eggs.
Some non-dinosaurian archosaurs, including rauisuchians, also had erect limbs but achieved this by a "pillar erect" configuration of the hip joint, where instead of having a projection from the femur insert on a socket on the hip, the upper pelvic bone was rotated to form an overhanging shelf.
At the peak of the Mesozoic, there were no polar ice caps, and sea levels are estimated to have been from  higher than they are today.
Dinosaur evolution after the Triassic follows changes in vegetation and the location of continents.
Until the late 20th century, all groups of dinosaurs were believed to be extinct; however, the fossil record indicates that birds are the modern descendants of feathered dinosaurs, having evolved from theropod ancestors during the Jurassic Period, and are now termed "avian dinosaurs".
The mode of Mesozoic dinosaur body masses is between one and ten metric tonnes.
Collectively, dinosaurs as a clade are divided into two primary branches, Saurischia and Ornithischia.
Several deinonychosaur and oviraptorosaur specimens have also been found preserved on top of their nests, likely brooding in a bird-like manner.
When dinosaurs appeared, they were not the dominant terrestrial animals.
In 2008, scientists described ''Aerosteon riocoloradensis'', the skeleton of which supplies the strongest evidence to date of a dinosaur with a bird-like breathing system.
Among other materials found in the bone was collagen, as in the ''Tyrannosaurus'' bone.
The crests and frills of some dinosaurs, like the marginocephalians, theropods and lambeosaurines, may have been too fragile to be used for active defense, and so they were likely used for sexual or aggressive displays, though little is known about dinosaur mating and territorialism.
This was followed by the Triassic–Jurassic extinction event (about 200&nbsp;million years ago), that saw the end of most of the other groups of early archosaurs, like aetosaurs, ornithosuchids, phytosaurs, and rauisuchians.
As such, birds were the only dinosaur lineage to survive the mass extinction event.
The creature was named ''Hadrosaurus foulkii''.
Scientists will probably never be certain of the largest and smallest dinosaurs to have ever existed.
This supposed "cold-bloodedness" was used to imply that the ancient dinosaurs were relatively slow, sluggish organisms, even though many modern reptiles are fast and light-footed despite relying on external sources of heat to regulate their body temperature.
Saurischia includes those taxa sharing a more recent common ancestor with birds than with Ornithischia, while Ornithischia includes all taxa sharing a more recent common ancestor with ''Triceratops'' than with Saurischia.
Because feathers are often associated with birds, feathered dinosaurs are often touted as the missing link between birds and dinosaurs.
Cannibalism amongst some species of dinosaurs was confirmed by tooth marks found in Madagascar in 2003, involving the theropod ''Majungasaurus''.
Other large carnivorous theropods included ''Giganotosaurus'', ''Carcharodontosaurus'' and ''Tyrannosaurus''.
Most of these specimens were unearthed in the lagerstätte of the Yixian Formation, Liaoning, northeastern China, which was part of an island continent during the Cretaceous.
Although it has been suggested that most dinosaurs were active during the day, these comparisons have shown that small predatory dinosaurs such as dromaeosaurids, ''Juravenator'', and ''Megapnosaurus'' were likely nocturnal.
After the work of Gerhard Heilmann in the early 20th century, the theory of birds as dinosaur descendants was abandoned in favor of the idea of their being descendants of generalized thecodonts, with the key piece of evidence being the supposed lack of clavicles in dinosaurs.
The ratio between egg volume and body mass of adults among these dinosaurs suggest that the eggs were primarily brooded by the male, and that the young were highly precocial, similar to many modern ground-dwelling birds.
The consensus among scientists who support this theory is that the impact caused extinctions both directly (by heat from the meteorite impact) and also indirectly (via a worldwide cooling brought about when matter ejected from the impact crater reflected thermal radiation from the sun).
A discovery of features in a ''Tyrannosaurus rex'' skeleton provided evidence of medullary bone in extinct dinosaurs and, for the first time, allowed paleontologists to establish the sex of a fossil dinosaur specimen.
The interpretation of dinosaurs as gregarious has also extended to depicting carnivorous theropods as pack hunters working together to bring down large prey.
Instead, bird calls are produced by the syrinx, a vocal organ found only in birds, and which is not related to the larynx, meaning it evolved independently from the vocal organs in reptiles.
Conifers and pteridophytes were the most common plants.
Many modern birds are highly social, often found living in flocks.
Dinosaurs are ubiquitous in advertising; numerous companies have referenced dinosaurs in printed or televised advertisements, either in order to sell their own products or in order to characterize their rivals as slow-moving, dim-witted, or obsolete.
Many fields of study contribute to our understanding of dinosaurs, including physics (especially biomechanics), chemistry, biology, and the earth sciences (of which paleontology is a sub-discipline).
He therefore concluded it to be the thigh bone of a giant human similar to those mentioned in the Bible.
Giant prehistoric mammals such as ''Paraceratherium'' (the largest land mammal ever) were dwarfed by the giant sauropods, and only modern whales approach or surpass them in size.
This behavior, which may have helped to keep the head warm, is also characteristic of modern birds.
While some academics argue that oxygen levels were much higher than today, others argue that biological adaptations seen in birds and dinosaurs indicate that respiratory systems evolved beyond what would be necessary if oxygen levels were high.
The heaviest and longest dinosaur may have been ''Amphicoelias fragillimus'', known only from a now lost partial vertebral neural arch described in 1878.
Dinosaurs are represented on every continent by both extant species and fossil remains.
Dinosaur mania was exemplified by the fierce rivalry between Edward Drinker Cope and Othniel Charles Marsh, both of whom raced to be the first to find new dinosaurs in what came to be known as the Bone Wars.
In 1858, William Parker Foulke discovered the first known American dinosaur, in marl pits in the small town of Haddonfield, New Jersey.
This medullary bone, which is rich in calcium, is used to make eggshells.
These stones are swallowed by animals to aid digestion and break down food and hard fibers once they enter the stomach.
For example, ''Hua Yang Guo Zhi'', a book written by Chang Qu during the Western Jin Dynasty (265–316), reported the discovery of dragon bones at Wucheng in Sichuan Province.
The planet's temperature was also much more uniform, with only  separating average polar temperatures from those at the equator.
