He sought to identify himself with the warlike kings Ardashir (r. 226–41) and Shapur I (r. 241–72), who had sacked Roman Antioch and skinned the Emperor Valerian (r. 253–260) to decorate his war temple.
Diocletian delegated further on 1 March 293, appointing Galerius and Constantius as Caesars, junior co-emperors.
In Emesa he was apparently still alive and in good health: he issued the only extant rescript in his name there, but after he left the city, his staff, including the prefect (Numerian's father-in-law, and as such the dominant influence in the Emperor's entourage) Aper, reported that he suffered from an inflammation of the eyes.
– specially in relatively peaceful regions without a great military presence.
He did not even perform the ceremonies investing him with his ninth consulate; he did them in Ravenna on 1 January 304 instead.
At some time in 299, the emperors took part in a ceremony of sacrifice and divination in an attempt to predict the future.
In his own palace, statues and portraits of his former companion emperor were torn down and destroyed.
Aurelian's achievements were ignored, the revolt of Carausius was backdated to the reign of Gallienus, and it was implied that the tetrarchs engineered Aurelian's defeat of the Palmyrenes; the period between Gallienus and Diocletian was effectively erased.
Diocletian's reforms shifted the governors' main function to that of the presiding official in the lower courts: whereas in the early Empire military and judicial functions were the function of governor, and procurators had supervised taxation; under the new system ''vicarii'' and governors were responsible for justice and taxation, and a new class of ''duces'' ("dukes"), acting independently of the civil service, had military command.
In the early empire (30 BC&nbsp;– AD 235) the Roman government paid for what it needed in gold and silver.
The Sarmatians requested that Diocletian either help them recover their lost lands or grant them pasturage rights within the empire.
They were probably given more free rein over their codes than the later compilers of the ''Codex Theodosianus'' (438) and ''Codex Justinianus'' (529) would have.
Rescripts, authoritative interpretations issued by the emperor in response to demands from disputants in both public and private cases, were a common duty of second- and third-century emperors.
The Sassanid king Bahram II could not field an army against them as he was still struggling to establish his authority.
No details survive for these events.
In preparation for their future roles, Constantine and Maxentius were taken to Diocletian's court in Nicomedia.
Rumors alleging that Diocletian's death was merely being kept secret until Galerius could come to assume power spread through the city.
Augustus, the first Emperor, had nominally shared power with his colleagues, and more formal offices of Co-Emperor had existed from Marcus Aurelius on.
Weakened by illness, Diocletian left the imperial office on 1 May 305, and became the first Roman emperor to abdicate the position voluntarily.
Maximian's campaigns were not proceeding as smoothly.
The historian A.H.M.
The meeting was undertaken with a sense of solemn pageantry.
Penalties are laid out for various pricing transgressions.
His co-ruler had to be from outside his family, raising the question of trust.
The temporary apostasy of some Christians, and the surrendering of scriptures, during the persecution played a major role in the subsequent Donatist controversy.
Most officials who had served under Carinus, however, retained their offices under Diocletian.
By 2 November, he had only reached Citivas Iovia (Botivo, near Ptuj, Slovenia).
From this structure came the offices of different ''magistri'', like the ''Magister officiorum'' ("Master of offices"), and associated secretariats.
He campaigned against the Sarmatians again in 294, probably in the autumn, and won a victory against them.
Decurions were made liable for any shortfall in the amount of tax collected.
The Tetrarchic Emperors were more or less sovereign in their own lands, and they travelled with their own imperial courts, administrators, secretaries, and armies.
Salt and vinegar were poured in his wounds, and he was slowly boiled over an open flame.
Diocletian's reduction of the Praetorian Guards to the level of a simple city garrison for Rome lessened the military powers of the prefect – although a prefect like Asclepiodotus was still a trained general – but the office retained much civil authority.
The fact that the edict began with a long rhetorical preamble betrays at the same time a moralizing stance as well as a weak grasp of economics – perhaps simply the wishful thinking that criminalizing a practice was enough to stop it.
Italy, which had long been exempt from taxes, was included in the tax system from 290/291 as a diocesis.
By 301, however, the system was in trouble, strained by a new bout of inflation.
Diocletian was in a less comfortable position than most of his predecessors, as he had a daughter, Valeria, but no sons.
Jones estimated 30,000 bureaucrats for an empire of 50–65 million inhabitants, which works out to approximately 1,667 or 2,167 inhabitants per imperial official as averages empire-wide.
Alexandria, however, whose defense was organized under Domitianus' former ''corrector'' Aurelius Achilleus, was to hold out until a later date, probably March 298.
A deputation from the Roman Senate met with the emperors, renewing its infrequent contact with the Imperial office.
On 1 March 293 at Milan, Maximian gave Constantius the office of caesar.
He thus became the first Roman emperor to voluntarily abdicate his title.
There is no consensus about how effectively the edict was enforced.
Diocletian's reign marks the end of the classical period of Roman law.
The events might have represented a formal end to Carus' eastern campaign, which probably ended without an acknowledged peace.
Galerius, aided by Diocletian, campaigned successfully against Sassanid Persia, the empire's traditional enemy.
The proportion of the adult male population, excluding slaves, serving in the army increased from roughly 1 in 25 to 1 in 15, an increase judged excessive by some modern commentators.
Julianus' forces were weak, however, and were handily dispersed when Carinus' armies moved from Britain to northern Italy.
Bureaucratic and military growth, constant campaigning, and construction projects increased the state's expenditures and necessitated a comprehensive tax reform.
He met with Galerius in Mesopotamia.
When Diocletian reappeared in public on 1 March 305, he was emaciated and barely recognizable.
Both these views had some truth to them, despite the biases of their authors: Diocletian and the tetrarchs did greatly expand the army, and the growth was mostly in frontier regions, where the increased effectives of the new Diocletianic legions seem to have been mostly spread across a network of strongholds.
He ordered Maximian, who had attempted to return to power after his retirement, to step down permanently.
The modern historian Timothy Barnes takes his official birthday, 22 December, as his actual birthdate.
He contracted a minor illness while on campaign, but his condition quickly worsened and he chose to travel in a litter.
It also tied his success to that of the Senate, whose support he would need in his advance on Rome.
The navy's forces increased from approximately 45,000 men to approximately 65,000 men.
As with most emperors, much of Diocletian's daily routine rotated around legal affairs—responding to appeals and petitions, and delivering decisions on disputed matters.
Diocletian was demonized by his Christian successors: Lactantius intimated that Diocletian's ascendancy heralded the apocalypse, and in Serbian mythology, Diocletian is remembered as Dukljan, the adversary of God.
The ''magister memoriae'' (secretary) of Diocletian and Galerius, Sicorius Probus, was sent to Narseh to present terms.
Diocletian was conservative in matters of religion, a man faithful to the traditional Roman pantheon and understanding of demands for religious purification, but Eusebius, Lactantius and Constantine state that it was Galerius, not Diocletian, who was the prime supporter of the purge, and its greatest beneficiary.
Tiridates III, Arsacid claimant to the Armenian throne and Roman client, had been disinherited and forced to take refuge in the empire after the Persian conquest of 252–53.
His appointment is unusual in that it was impossible for Diocletian to have been present to witness the event.
Diocletian moved into Egypt to suppress him, first putting down rebels in the Thebaid in the autumn of 297, then moving on to besiege Alexandria.
Lactantius has written of the perverse accompaniments to the edict; of goods withdrawn from the market, of brawls over minute variations in price, of the deaths that came when its provisions were enforced.
Public records of all taxes were made public.
On 20 December 303, Diocletian cut short his stay in Rome and left for the north.
The city was sent into a mourning from which it was only retrieved by public declarations of his survival.
That accounts for the strained relationship between the central power and local elites: sometime during 303, an attempted military sedition in Seleucia Pieria and Antioch made Diocletian to extract a bloody retribution on both cities by putting to death a number of their council members for failing their duties of keeping order in their jurisdiction.
Western Christians were aware of this count but did not use it; Dionysius Exiguus replaced the anno Diocletiani era with his anno Domini era because he did not wish to continue the memory of a tyrant who persecuted Christians.
A second fire occurred sixteen days after the first.
By the end of his reign, Diocletian had secured the entire length of the Danube, provided it with forts, bridgeheads, highways, and walled towns, and sent fifteen or more legions to patrol the region; an inscription at Sexaginta Prista on the Lower Danube extolled restored ''tranquilitas'' at the region.
Diocletian visited Egypt once, over the winter of 301–2, and issued a grain dole in Alexandria.
With tears in his eyes, he told them of his weakness, his need for rest, and his will to resign.
During the third century crisis (235–285), the government resorted to requisition rather than payment in debased coinage, since it could never be sure of the value of money.
Under this 'tetrarchy', or "rule of four", each emperor would rule over a quarter-division of the empire.
Emperors in the forty years preceding Diocletian's reign had not managed these duties so effectively, and their output in attested rescripts is low.
He would reverse the consequences of the edicts, and return all confiscated property to Christians.
This did not bode well for the future security of the tetrarchic system.
If the panegyric detailing the ceremony implied that the true center of the empire was not Rome, but where the emperor sat ("...the capital of the empire appeared to be there, where the two emperors met"), it simply echoed what had already been stated by the historian Herodian in the early third century: "Rome is where the emperor is".
On 13 December, he seemed to have finally died.
Diocletian's reforms also increased the number of financial officials in the provinces: more ''rationales'' and ''magistri privatae'' are attested under Diocletian's reign than before.
He might have been attempting to persuade them to ally themselves with Rome, thus reviving the old, Rome-friendly, Palmyrene sphere of influence, or simply attempting to reduce the frequency of their incursions.
Through coercion and threats, he eventually convinced Diocletian to comply with his plan.
Diocletian was not the only challenger to Carinus' rule: the usurper M. Aurelius Julianus, Carinus' ''corrector Venetiae'', took control of northern Italy and Pannonia after Diocletian's accession.
It has even been suggested that Maximian usurped the title and was only later recognized by Diocletian in hopes of avoiding civil war.
When the Battle of the Margus began, Carinus' prefect Aristobulus also defected.
Other historians are not so certain.
Most in the crowd believed they knew what would follow; Constantine and Maxentius, the only adult sons of a reigning emperor, men who had long been preparing to succeed their fathers, would be granted the title of caesar.
Diocletian and Maximian were both present on 11 November 308, to see Galerius appoint Licinius to be augustus in place of Severus, who had died at the hands of Maxentius.
The title was also claimed by Carus' other surviving son, Carinus, but Diocletian defeated him in the Battle of the Margus.
Galerius rescinded the edict in 311, announcing that the persecution had failed to bring Christians back to traditional religion.
However, Diocletian was to offer proof of his deference towards the Senate by retaining Aristobulus as ordinary consul and colleague for 285 (one of the few instances during the Late Empire in which an emperor admitted a ''privatus'' as his colleague) and by creating senior senators Vettius Aqulinus and Junius Maximus ordinary consuls for the following year – for Maximus, it was his second consulship.
Diocletian made requisition into tax.
All Manichean property was to be seized and deposited in the imperial treasury.
Fluctuations in the value of the currency made collection of taxes in kind the norm, although these could be converted into coin.
He ordered that the deacon Romanus of Caesarea have his tongue removed for defying the order of the courts and interrupting official sacrifices.
The two emperors agreed on a joint campaign against the Alamanni.
Proconsuls, for example, were often both judges of first instance and appeal, and the governors of some provinces took appellant cases from their neighbors.
He later gave him the proconsulate of Africa and the post of urban prefect for 295.
Diocletian returned to the East, progressing slowly.
Diocletian argued that forbidding Christians from the bureaucracy and military would be sufficient to appease the gods, but Galerius pushed for extermination.
Numerianus' generals and tribunes called a council for the succession, and chose Diocles as Emperor, in spite of Aper's attempts to garner support.
(By comparison, the ratio in 12th-century Song dynasty China was one bureaucrat for every 15,000 people.)
Instead, they were seen as the gods' representatives, effecting their will on earth.
The nomadic pressures of the European Plain remained and could not be solved by a single war; soon the Sarmatians would have to be fought again.
Around 287 Diocletian assumed the title ''Iovius'', and Maximian assumed the title ''Herculius''.
The conditions of the resulting Peace of Nisibis were heavy: Armenia returned to Roman domination, with the fort of Ziatha as its border; Caucasian Iberia would pay allegiance to Rome under a Roman appointee; Nisibis, now under Roman rule, would become the sole conduit for trade between Persia and Rome; and Rome would exercise control over the five satrapies between the Tigris and Armenia: Ingilene, Sophanene (Sophene), Arzanene (Aghdznik), Corduene (Carduene), and Zabdicene (near modern Hakkâri, Turkey).
Diocletian retired to his homeland, Dalmatia.
He lived on for four more years, spending his days in his palace gardens.
The first forty years of his life are mostly obscure.
Diocletian secured the empire's borders and purged it of all threats to his power.
In the most basic terms, the edict was ignorant of the law of supply and demand: it ignored the fact that prices might vary from region to region according to product availability, and it ignored the impact of transportation costs in the retail price of goods.
Most taxes were due on each year on 1 September, and levied from individual landowners by ''decuriones'' (decurions).
He heard of Maximian's third claim to the throne, his forced suicide, his ''damnatio memoriae''.
On 20 November, he appeared in public to dedicate the opening of the circus beside his palace.
In addition to their roles as judges and tax collectors, governors were expected to maintain the postal service (''cursus publicus'') and ensure that town councils fulfilled their duties.
Under Constantine's rule, Christianity would become the empire's preferred religion.
According to Lactantius, Diocletian and Galerius entered into an argument over imperial policy towards Christians while wintering at Nicomedia in 302.
Diocletian's policy of preserving a stable silver coinage was abandoned, and the gold ''solidus'' became the empire's primary currency instead.
Over the winter of 284–85, Diocletian advanced west across the Balkans.
Galerius convinced Diocletian that the culprits were Christians, conspirators who had plotted with the eunuchs of the palace.
On 20 November, he celebrated, with Maximian, the twentieth anniversary of his reign (''vicennalia''), the tenth anniversary of the tetrarchy (''decennalia''), and a triumph for the war with Persia.
The titles were probably meant to convey certain characteristics of their associated leaders.
Admittedly, Diocletian's praetorian prefects—Afranius Hannibalianus, Julius Asclepiodotus, and Aurelius Hermogenianus—aided in regulating the flow and presentation of such paperwork, but the deep legalism of Roman culture kept the workload heavy.
No details survive, but surviving inscriptions indicate that Diocletian took the title ''Sarmaticus Maximus'' after 289.
The palace is preserved in great part to this day and forms the historic core of Split, the second-largest city of modern Croatia.
In two battles, Galerius won major victories over Narseh.
Stability emerged after the defeat of Licinius by Constantine in 324.
His every appearance was stage-managed.
At the conclusion of the peace, Tiridates regained both his throne and the entirety of his ancestral claim.
The Codex Gregorianus includes rescripts up to 292, which the Codex Hermogenianus updated with a comprehensive collection of rescripts issued by Diocletian in 293 and 294.
His parents gave him the Greek name Diocles, or possibly Diocles Valerius.
The Roman people did not give enough deference to his supreme authority; it expected him to act the part of an aristocratic ruler, not a monarchic one.
Rates shifted to take inflation into account.
On 23 February 303, Diocletian ordered that the newly built church at Nicomedia be razed.
Although further persecutionary edicts followed, compelling the arrest of the Christian clergy and universal acts of sacrifice, the persecutionary edicts were ultimately unsuccessful; most Christians escaped punishment, and pagans too were generally unsympathetic to the persecution.
Diocletian exacted an oath of allegiance from the defeated army and departed for Italy.
Diocletian found much to be offended by in Manichean religion: its novelty, its alien origins, the way it corrupted the morals of the Roman race, and its inherent opposition to long-standing religious traditions.
In 296, Diocletian issued an edict reforming census procedures.
Diocletian's edicts emphasized the common liability of all taxpayers.
But then it was already a long established practice that Rome itself was only a ceremonial capital, as the actual seat of the Imperial administration was determined by the needs of defense.
Narseh moved south into Roman Mesopotamia in 297, where he inflicted a severe defeat on Galerius in the region between Carrhae (Harran, Turkey) and Callinicum (Ar-Raqqah, Syria) (and thus, the historian Fergus Millar notes, probably somewhere on the Balikh River).
He asserted that Aper had killed Numerian and concealed it.
The executions continued until at least 24 April 303, when six individuals, including the bishop Anthimus, were decapitated.
He visited Syria Palaestina the following spring,  His stay in the East saw diplomatic success in the conflict with Persia: in 287, Bahram II granted him precious gifts, declared open friendship with the Empire, and invited Diocletian to visit him.
The Augusti would not meet again until 303.
It soon became impossible to avoid taking some cases to the emperor for arbitration and judgment.
Galerius and Constantius would become Augusti after the departure of Diocletian and Maximian.
There is a contemporary issue of coins suggestive of an imperial ''adventus'' (arrival) for the city, but some modern historians state that Diocletian avoided the city, and that he did so on principle, as the city and its Senate were no longer politically relevant to the affairs of the empire and needed to be taught as much.
Constantine ignored those parts of Diocletian's rule that did not suit him.
This edict introduced a general five-year census for the whole empire, replacing prior censuses that had operated at different speeds throughout the empire.
It was too much for one person to control, and Diocletian needed a lieutenant.
In 294, Narseh, a son of Shapur who had been passed over for the Sassanid succession, came to power in Persia.
After his accession, Diocletian and Lucius Caesonius Bassus were named as consuls and assumed the ''fasces'' in place of Carinus and Numerianus.
In an attempt to resolve the difficulty and slowness of transmitting orders to the frontier, the new capitals of the tetrarchic era were all much closer to the empire's frontiers than Rome had been: Trier sat on the Rhine, Sirmium and Serdica were close to the Danube, Thessaloniki was on the route leading eastward, and Nicomedia and Antioch were important points in dealings with Persia.
Within Persia, however, Narseh was destroying every trace of his immediate predecessors from public monuments.
In full view of the army, Diocles drew his sword and killed Aper.
As such, he took part in Carus' subsequent Persian campaign.
Galerius was reinforced, probably in the spring of 298, by a new contingent collected from the empire's Danubian holdings.
The senior Co-Emperors formally adopted Galerius and Constantius as sons in 293.
This style of presentation was not new—many of its elements were first seen in the reigns of Aurelian and Severus—but it was only under the tetrarchs that it was refined into an explicit system.
By March 284, Numerian had only reached Emesa (Homs) in Syria; by November, only Asia Minor.
Diocletian was led to devise a new system of taxation.
This practice could be sustained only by requisitioning precious metals from private citizens in exchange for state-minted coin (of a far lower value than the price of the precious metals requisitioned).
The relationship between Diocletian and Maximian was quickly couched in religious terms.
Diocletian was awash in paperwork, and was nearly incapable of delegating his duties.
These officials represented the interests of the fisc, which collected taxes in gold, and the Imperial properties.
The most that can be said about built structures under Diocletian's reign is that he rebuilt and strengthened forts at the Upper Rhine frontier (where he followed the works built under Probus along the Lake Constance-Basel and the Rhine–Iller–Danube line), on the Danube- where a new line of forts on the far side of the river, the ''Ripa Sarmatica'', was added to older, rehabilitated fortresses – in Egypt, and on the frontier with Persia.
In 287, he returned to lay claim to the eastern half of his ancestral domain and encountered no opposition.
Arrears became the norm for most troops.
The oracle responded that the impious on Earth hindered Apollo's ability to provide advice.
An investigation was commissioned, but no responsible party was found.
Before the end of February, a fire destroyed part of the Imperial palace.
Some historians state that Diocletian adopted Maximian as his ''filius Augusti'', his "Augustan son", upon his appointment to the throne, following the precedent of some previous Emperors.
He destroyed the Augustan illusion of imperial government as a cooperative affair between emperor, army, and senate.
These relationships implied a line of succession.
Provincial and diocesan paid officials (there were unpaid supernumeraries) numbered about 13–15,000 based on their staff establishments as set by law.
The other 50% were with the emperor(s) in his or their comitatus, with the praetorian prefects, with the grain supply officials in the capital (later, the capitals, Rome and Constantinople), Alexandria, and Carthage and officials from the central offices located in the provinces.
In modern accounts, the site has been located between the Mons Aureus (Seone, west of Smederevo) and Viminacium, near modern Belgrade, Serbia.
In a 31 March 302 rescript from Alexandria, he declared that low-status Manicheans must be executed by the blade, and high-status Manicheans must be sent to work in the quarries of Proconnesus (Marmara Island, Turkey) or the mines of Phaeno in southern Palestine.
Later during both 299 and 302, as Diocletian was then residing in the East, it was Galerius' turn to campaign victoriously on the Danube.
In 295 and 296 Diocletian campaigned in the region again, and won a victory over the Carpi in the summer of 296.
In the East, Diocletian engaged in diplomacy with desert tribes in the regions between Rome and Persia.
The edict goes on to list in detail over one thousand goods and accompanying retail prices not to be exceeded.
His rule was unpopular, and it was later alleged that he had mistreated the Senate and seduced his officers' wives.
Since military upkeep took the largest portion of the imperial budget, any reforms here would be especially costly.
Building on third-century trends towards absolutism, he styled himself an autocrat, elevating himself above the empire's masses with imposing forms of court ceremonies and architecture.
A stretch of land containing the later strategic strongholds of Amida (Diyarbakır, Turkey) and Bezabde came under firm Roman military occupation.
Diocletian separated and enlarged the empire's civil and military services and reorganized the empire's provincial divisions, establishing the largest and most bureaucratic government in the history of the empire.
The ''Edict on Maximum Prices'' (''Edictum De Pretiis Rerum Venalium'') was issued two to three months after the coinage edict, somewhere between 20 November and 10 December 301.
Narseh did not advance from Armenia and Mesopotamia, leaving Galerius to lead the offensive in 298 with an attack on northern Mesopotamia via Armenia.
The shift from military acclamation to divine sanctification took the power to appoint emperors away from the army.
Under the Christian Constantine, Diocletian was maligned.
Where Diocletian's system of rescripts shows an adherence to classical tradition, Constantine's law is full of Greek and eastern influences.
In an act of ''clementia'' denoted by the epitomator Aurelius Victor as unusual, Diocletian did not kill or depose Carinus' traitorous praetorian prefect and consul Ti.
Under the governance of the jurists Gregorius, Aurelius Arcadius Charisius, and Hermogenianus, the imperial government began issuing official books of precedent, collecting and listing all the rescripts that had been issued from the reign of Hadrian (r. 117–38) to the reign of Diocletian.
In a public ceremony at Antioch, the official version of events was clear: Galerius was responsible for the defeat; Diocletian was not.
Diocletian therefore issued his ''Edict on Coinage'', an act re-tariffing all debts so that the ''nummus'', the most common coin in circulation, would be worth half as much.
The position of ''decurion'', member of the city council, had been an honor sought by wealthy aristocrats and the middle classes who displayed their wealth by paying for city amenities and public works.
