Prosymnus died before Dionysus could honor his pledge, so in order to satisfy Prosymnus' shade, Dionysus fashioned a phallus from an olive branch and sat on it at Prosymnus' tomb.
The Dionysian world by the Hellenistic period is a hedonistic but safe pastoral into which other semi-divine creatures of the countryside such as centaurs, nymphs, and the god Pan and Hermaphrodite have been co-opted.
Other versions claim that Zeus recreated him in the womb of Semele, or gave Semele the heart to eat to impregnate her.
Hermes bade the couple to raise the boy as a girl, to hide him from Hera's wrath.
'''Morychus''' (Μόρυχος, "smeared") in Sicily, because his icon was smeared with wine lees at the vintage.
Moreoever, the confrontation of Dionysus and Pentheus also ends with Pentheus dying, torn into pieces by the mad women, including his mother.
These travels took something of the form of military conquests; according to Diodorus Siculus he conquered the whole world except for Britain and Ethiopia.
Some modern scholars such as Martin Hengel, Barry Powell, Robert M. Price, and Peter Wick, among others, argue that Dionysian religion and Christianity have notable parallels.
The second element '''' is associated with Mount Nysa, the birthplace of the god in Greek mythology, where he was nursed by nymphs (the Nysiads),  but according to Pherecydes of Syros, '''' was an archaic word for "tree".
Such comparisons surface in details of paintings by Poussin.
'''Iacchus''', possibly an epithet of Dionysus and associated with the Eleusinian Mysteries.
He was the youngest and the only one to have a mortal mother.
Later, when his daughter embraced him, she too turned to gold.
After a competition Aeschylus is chosen in preference to Euripides.
In the Orphism tradition of ancient Greece, he was referred to as Dionysus Zagreus, served as its patron god connected to death and immortality, and symbolized the one who guides reincarnation.
In Phrygia the goddess Cybele, better known to the Greeks as Rhea, cured him and taught him her religious rites, and he set out on a progress through Asia teaching the people the cultivation of the vine.
Wine played an important role in Greek culture with the cult of Dionysus the main religious focus for unrestrained consumption.
Dionysus heard and consented; he told Midas to wash in the river Pactolus.
Each meeting must seek prior senatorial approval through a praetor.
This procession is presumed to be the cult model for the human followers of his Dionysian Mysteries.
In Greek mythology, he is presented as a son of Zeus and the mortal Semele, thus semi-divine or heroic: and as son of Zeus and Persephone or Demeter, thus both fully divine, part-chthonic and possibly identical with Iacchus of the Eleusinian Mysteries.
Midas recognized him, and treated him hospitably, entertaining him for ten days and nights with politeness, while Silenus entertained Midas and his friends with stories and songs.
It was established c.200 BC in the Aventine grove of Stimula by a priestess from Campania, near the temple where Liber Pater ("The Free Father") had a State-sanctioned, popular cult.
Dionysus had a strange birth that evokes the difficulty in fitting him into the Olympian pantheon.
He typically wears a panther or leopard skin and carries a Thyrsus – a long stick or wand topped with a pine cone.
It banned the former Bacchic cult organisations.
Titian's ''Bacchus and Ariadne'' (1522–23) and ''The Bacchanal of the Andrians'' (1523-26), both painted for the same room, offer an influential heroic pastoral, while Diego Velázquez in ''The Triumph of Bacchus'' (or ''Los borrachos'' - "the drinkers", c. 1629) and Jusepe de Ribera in his ''Drunken Silenus'' choose a genre realism.
In Eleusis, he is known as a son of Zeus and Demeter.
Then he found that his bread, meat, and wine turned to gold.
Another parallel can be seen in ''The Bacchae'' where Dionysus appears before King Pentheus on charges of claiming divinity which is compared to the New Testament scene of Jesus being interrogated by Pontius Pilate.
Besides the grapevine and its wild barren alter-ego, the toxic ivy plant, both sacred to him, the fig was also his symbol.
The Maenads are in an insane frenzy when Pentheus sees them (earlier in the play they had ripped apart a herd of cattle), and they catch him but mistake him for a wild animal.
Walter Burkert relates, "Quite frequently Dionysus is portrayed with bull horns, and in Kyzikos he has a tauromorphic image,"  and refers also to an archaic myth in which Dionysus is slaughtered as a bull calf and impiously eaten by the Titans.
Dionysus turned into a fierce lion and unleashed a bear on board, killing those he came into contact with.
According to Ptolemy Chennus in the Library of Photius, "Dionysus was loved by Chiron, from whom he learned chants and dances, the bacchic rites and initiations."
Scholars from the 16th century onwards, especially Gerard Vossius, also discussed the parallels between the biographies of Dionysus/Bacchus and Moses (Vossius named his sons Dionysius and Isaac).
Scholars of comparative mythology identify both Dionysus and Jesus with the dying-and-returning god mythological archetype.
Zeus rescued the unborn Dionysus by sewing him into his thigh.
Dionysus fled and took refuge with Thetis, and sent a drought which stirred the people into revolt.
This is attested on two tablets that had been found at Mycenaean Pylos and dated to the 12th or 13th century BC, but at the time, there could be no certainty on whether this was indeed a theonym.
In a similar story, Dionysus desired to sail from Icaria to Naxos.
Nietzsche claimed that the oldest forms of Greek Tragedy were entirely based on suffering of Dionysus.
Therefore, he came to her wreathed in bolts of lightning; mortals, however, could not look upon an undisguised god without dying, and she perished in the ensuing blaze.
Other psychological interpretations place Dionysus' emotionality in the foreground, focusing on the joy, terror or hysteria associated with the god.
The Furietti Centaurs and ''Sleeping Hermaphroditus'' reflect related subjects, which had by this time become drawn into the Dionysian orbit.
Foreseen by Dionysus, the youth was killed in an accident riding a bull maddened by the sting of an Ate's gadfly.
In Ovid's ''Metamorphoses'' Bacchus begins this story as a young child, found by the pirates, but transforms to a divine adult when on board.
Powell, in particular, argues precursors to the Catholic notion of transubstantiation can be found in Dionysian religion.
The earliest attested form of the name is Mycenaean Greek , ''di-wo-nu-so'', written in Linear B syllabic script, presumably for /Diwo(h)nūsoio/.
In this version, Dionysus is born by two "mothers" (Semele and Zeus) before his birth, hence the epithet ''dimētōr'' (of two mothers) associated with his being "twice-born".
The priest was ordered to sacrifice Callirhoe but he killed himself instead.
His name, thought to be a theonym in Linear B tablets as ''di-wo-nu-so'' (KH Gq 5 inscription), shows that he may have been worshipped as early as c. 1500–1100 BC by Mycenean Greeks; other traces of the Dionysian-type cult have been found in ancient Minoan Crete.
According to Herodotus:
Zeus used the heart to recreate him in his thigh, hence he was again "the twice-born".
When Dionysus grew up, he discovered the culture of the vine and the mode of extracting its precious juice, being the first to do so; but Hera struck him with madness, and drove him forth a wanderer through various parts of the earth.
Dionysus, as patron of the Athenian dramatic festival, the ''Dionysia'', wants to bring back to life one of the great tragedians.
He did so, and when he touched the waters the power passed into them, and the river sands changed into gold.
An oracle then claimed that the land would stay dry and barren as long as Lycurgus was alive.
In some Roman sources, the ritual procession of Bacchus in a tiger-drawn chariot, surrounded by maenads, satyrs and drunks, commemorates the god's triumphant return from the conquest of India, the historical prototype for the Roman Triumph.
In the Roman pantheon, Sabazius became an alternative name for Bacchus.
In the mosaic, other gods appear but may only be lesser representations of the centrally imposed Dionysus.
They have in common with satyrs and nymphs that they are creatures of the outdoors and are without true personal identity."
This story was told in Homer's epic, ''Iliad'' 6.136-7.
He touched and turned to gold an oak twig and a stone.
According to the myth, Zeus gave the infant Dionysus to the care of Hermes.
In a cult hymn from Olympia, at a festival for Hera, Dionysus is invited to come as a bull; "with bull-foot raging."
On the eleventh day, he brought Silenus back to Dionysus.
The details of the story, including its resolution, make the Dionysus story radically different than the one of Jesus, except for the parallel of the arrest, which is a detail that appears in many biographies as well.
This was an etiological myth that explained why the sands of the Pactolus were rich in gold.
The mid-Byzantine Veroli Casket shows the tradition lingering in Constantinople around 1000 AD, but probably not very well understood.
Dionysus consented, though was sorry that he had not made a better choice.
A mystery cult to Bacchus was brought to Rome from the Greek culture of southern Italy or by way of Greek-influenced Etruria.
The marble Dancer of Pergamon is an original, as is the bronze Dancing Satyr of Mazara del Vallo, a recent recovery from the sea.
The old man had been drinking, and had wandered away drunk, and was found by some peasants, who carried him to their king (alternatively, he passed out in Midas' rose garden).
Young Dionysus was also said to have been one of the many famous pupils of the centaur Chiron.
Later variants include '''' and '''' in Boeotia;  '''' in Thessaly; '''' and '''' in Ionia; and '''' in Aeolia, besides other variants.
Dionysus then drove King Lycurgus insane and had him slice his own son into pieces with an axe in the belief that he was a patch of ivy, a plant holy to Dionysus.
His cult is also a "cult of the souls"; his maenads feed the dead through blood-offerings, and he acts as a divine communicant between the living and the dead.
His people had him drawn and quartered.
Other elements, such as the celebration by a ritual meal of bread and wine, also have parallels.
It appears to have served as an explanation of the secret objects that were revealed in the Dionysian Mysteries.
According to a legend, when Alexander the Great reached a city called Nysa near the Indus river, the locals said that their city was founded by Dionysus in the distant past and their city was dedicated to the god Dionysus.
One version of the story is that Hermes took the boy to King Athamas and his wife Ino, Dionysus' aunt.
However, when the god was on board, they sailed not to Naxos but to Asia, intending to sell him as a slave.
In these, the treatment of the god himself ranged from severe archaising or Neo Attic types such as the Dionysus Sardanapalus to types showing him as an indolent and androgynous young man, often nude.
However several scholars dispute this parallel, since while Jesus, during the trial before Pilate, did not affirm openly he was a god nor asked for any honor, Dionysus was arrested by Pentheus after making the women of Thebes mad and complaining about the fact that the city of Thebes, and its king, have refused to honor him.
This narrative was apparently used in several Greek and Roman cults, and variants of it are found in Callimachus and Nonnus, who refer to this Dionysus with the title Zagreus, and also in several fragmentary poems attributed to Orpheus.
The ''Bibliotheca'' seems to be following Pherecydes, who relates how the infant Dionysus, god of the grapevine, was nursed by the rain-nymphs, the Hyades at Nysa.
Another myth according to Nonnus involves Ampelos, a satyr, who was loved by Dionysus.
He continued to appeal to the rich of Imperial Rome, who populated their gardens with Dionysian sculpture, and by the 2nd century AD were often buried in sarcophagi carved with crowded scenes of Bacchus and his entourage.
The god, and still more often his followers, were commonly depicted in the painted pottery of Ancient Greece, much of which was vessels for wine.
Callirrhoe was a Calydonian woman who scorned Coresus, a priest of Dionysus, who threatened to afflict all the women of Calydon with insanity (see Maenad).
Dionysus has remained an inspiration to artists, philosophers and writers into the modern era.
In CS Lewis' Prince Caspian (part of ''The Chronicles of Narnia''), Bacchus is a dangerous-looking, androgynous young boy who helps Aslan awaken the spirits of the Narnian trees and rivers.
The pinecone that tipped his thyrsus linked him to Cybele.
The cult was suppressed by the State with great ferocity; of the 7,000 arrested, most were executed.
The most famous part of his wanderings is his expedition to India, which is said to have lasted several years.
Dionysus feared for his mother, whom he had not seen since birth.
In Nietzsche's 1886 work ''Beyond Good and Evil'', and later works ''The Twilight of the Idols'', ''The Antichrist'' and ''Ecce Homo'', Dionysus is conceived as the embodiment of the unrestrained will to power.
One of the Homeric hymns recounts how, while disguised as a mortal sitting beside the seashore, a few sailors spotted him, believing he was a prince.
So Dionysus turned the mast and oars into snakes, and filled the vessel with ivy and the sound of flutes so that the sailors went mad and, leaping into the sea, were turned into dolphins.
In some variants, he had her crown put into the heavens as the constellation Corona; in others, he descended into Hades to restore her to the gods on Olympus.
Dionysus is also strongly associated with satyrs, centaurs, and sileni.
Dionysus was exceptionally attractive.
It is a beneficent wand but also a weapon, and can be used to destroy those who oppose his cult and the freedoms he represents.
Out of the twelve Olympians, he was of the few that could restore the deceased from the underworld back to life.
Alternatively, he was raised by Maro.
Modern scholarship treats much of Livy's account with skepticism; more certainly, a Senatorial edict, the ''Senatus consultum de Bacchanalibus'' was distributed throughout Roman and allied Italy.
The 4th-century BC Derveni Krater, the unique survival of a very large scale Classical or Hellenistic metal vessel of top quality, depicts Dionysus and his followers.
Zeus turned the Titans into dust with his thunderbolts, but only after the Titans ate everything but the heart, which was saved, variously, by Athena, Rhea, or Demeter.
He was a patron deity and founding hero at Leptis Magna, birthplace of the emperor Septimius Severus, who promoted his cult.
They tried to bind him with ropes, but no type of rope could hold him.
Initiates worshipped him in the Dionysian Mysteries, which were comparable to and linked with the Orphic Mysteries, and may have influenced Gnosticism.
He bypassed the god of death, known as Thanatos, thus successfully returning Semele to Mount Olympus.
Overjoyed, as soon as he got home, he ordered the servants to set a feast on the table.
Late Neo-Platonists such as Damascius explore the implications of this at length.
They attempted to kidnap him and sail him far away to sell for ransom or into slavery.
In an alternative version, sometimes shown in art, Lycurgus tries to kill Ambrosia, a follower of Dionysus, who was transformed into a vine that twined around the enraged king and restrained him, eventually killing him.
A jealous Hera again attempted to kill the child, this time by sending Titans to rip Dionysus to pieces after luring the baby with toys.
She bore him a son named Oenopion, but he committed suicide or was killed by Perseus.
In Livy's account, the new Bacchic mysteries were originally restricted to women and held only three times a year; but were corrupted by the Etruscan-Greek version, and thereafter drunken men and women of all ages and social classes cavorted in a sexual free-for-all five times a month.
Midas asked that whatever he might touch should be changed into gold.
The snake and phallus were both symbols of Dionysus in ancient Greece, a symbolism that continued in Roman culture with Bacchus.
Dionysus is represented by city religions as the protector of those who do not belong to conventional society and thus symbolizes everything which is chaotic, dangerous and unexpected, everything which escapes human reason and which can only be attributed to the unforeseeable action of the gods.
Appearing as an old crone (in other stories a nurse), Hera befriended Semele, who confided in her that Zeus was the actual father of the baby in her womb.
The Homeric hymn to Dionysus places it "far from Phoenicia, near to the Egyptian stream".
Moreover, it has been noted that the details of Dionysus death and rebirth are starkly different both in content and symbolism from Jesus, with Dionysus being (in the most common myth) torn to pieces and eaten by the titans and  "eventually restored to a new life" from the heart that was left over.
His festivals were the driving force behind the development of Greek theatre.
Another different account claims Dionysus ordered Theseus to abandon Ariadne on the island of Naxos for he had seen her as Theseus carried her onto the ship and had decided to marry her.
Diodorus' sources equivocally identified the mother as Demeter.
Malcolm Bull notes that "It is a measure of Bacchus's ambiguous position in classical mythology that he, unlike the other Olympians, had to use a boat to travel to and from the islands with which he is associated".
His ''thyrsus'' is sometimes wound with ivy and dripping with honey.
There are differences in the details of the event while the resurrection of Christ was placed in a specific historical and geographical context.
He prayed to Dionysus, begging to be delivered from starvation.
In the Cretan version of the same story, which Diodorus Siculus follows, Dionysus was the son of Zeus and Persephone, the queen of the Greek underworld.
'''Pseudanor''' (literally "false man", referring to his feminine qualities), in Macedonia.
Other versions have Zeus giving him to Rhea, or to Persephone to raise in the Underworld, away from Hera.
Also known as '''Bacchus''' ( or ; , ''Bakkhos''), the name adopted by the Romans and the frenzy he induces, ''bakkheia''.
File:Fane Table.jpg|A Bacchus themed table.
He is often shown riding a leopard, wearing a leopard skin, or in a chariot drawn by panthers, and may also be recognized by the thyrsus he carries.
Others placed it in Anatolia, or in Libya ("away in the west beside a great ocean"), in Ethiopia (Herodotus), or Arabia (Diodorus Siculus).
Though Zeus begged her not to ask this, she persisted and he agreed.
The god himself is drawn in a chariot, usually by exotic beasts such as lions or tigers, and is sometimes attended by a bearded, drunken Silenus.
Liber was a native Roman god of wine, fertility, and prophecy, patron of Rome's plebeians (citizen-commoners) and a close equivalent to Bacchus-Dionysus ''Eleutherios''.
A winnowing fan was used to separate the chaff from the grain.
The top was made in Florence (c.1736) and the gilded wood base in Britain or Ireland, c.1736-1740.
Bacchic subjects in art resumed in the Italian Renaissance, and soon became almost as popular as in antiquity, but his "strong association with feminine spirituality and power almost disappeared", as did "the idea that the destructive and creative powers of the god were indissolubly linked".
A '''' prefix is found in other names, such as that of the Dioscures, and may derive from ''Dios'', the genitive of the name of Zeus.
In Roman culture, Liber, Bacchus and Dionysus became virtually interchangeable equivalents.
Hera pretended not to believe her, and planted seeds of doubt in Semele's mind.
Elizabeth Kessler has theorized that a mosaic appearing on the triclinium floor of the House of Aion in Nea Paphos, Cyprus, details a monotheistic worship of Dionysus.
Pentheus is torn to shreds, and his mother (Agave, one of the Maenads), not recognizing her own son because of her madness, brutally tears his limbs off as he begs for his life.
His mother was a mortal woman, Semele, the daughter of king Cadmus of Thebes, and his father was Zeus, the king of the gods.
Few sources reject some of the parallels between the cult of Dionysus and Christ, asserting that the similarities are superficial, often general and universal parallels found in many stories, both historical and mythical, and that the symbolism represented by the similar themes are radically different.
A better-known story is that of his descent to Hades to rescue his mother Semele, whom he placed among the stars.
Some are armed with the ''thyrsus'', some dance or play music.
But, apart from some reliefs of maenads, Dionysian subjects rarely appeared in large sculpture before the Hellenistic period, when they became common.
This interpretation explains how ''Nysa'' could have been re-interpreted from a meaning of "tree" to the name of a mountain: the axis mundi of Indo-European mythology is represented both as a world-tree and as a world-mountain.
The rebirth in both versions of the story is the primary reason why Dionysus was worshipped in mystery religions, as his death and rebirth were events of mystical reverence.
The only survivor was the helmsman, Acoetes, who recognized the god and tried to stop his sailors from the start.
This story survives in full only in Christian sources whose aim was to discredit pagan mythology.
In his Thracian mysteries, he wears the ''bassaris'' or fox-skin, symbolizing a new life.
Peters suggests the original meaning as "he who runs among the trees", or that of a "runner in the woods".
'''Melanaigis''' ("of the black goatskin") at the Apaturia festival.
A third descent by Dionysus to Hades is invented by Aristophanes in his comedy ''The Frogs''.
Hellenistic sculpture also includes for the first time large genre subjects of children and peasant, many of whom carry Dionysian attributes such as ivy wreaths, and "most should be seen as part of his realm.
Dionysus was a god of resurrection and he was strongly linked to the bull.
In some cults, he arrives from the east, as an Asiatic foreigner; in others, from Ethiopia in the South.
He is sometimes categorised as a dying-and-rising god.
He is a god of epiphany, "the god that comes", and his "foreignness" as an arriving outsider-god may be inherent and essential to his cults.
Dionysus was the last god to be accepted into Mt.
A few months later, Dionysus was born on Mount Pramnos in the island of Ikaria, where Zeus went to release the now-fully-grown baby from his thigh.
Upset, Midas strove to divest himself of his power (the Midas Touch); he hated the gift he had coveted.
He then hired a Tyrrhenian pirate ship.
'''Oeneus''', as god of the wine press.
When King Lycurgus of Thrace heard that Dionysus was in his kingdom, he imprisoned Dionysus' followers, the Maenads.
Flemish Baroque painting frequently painted the Bacchic followers, as in Van Dyck's ''Drunken Silenus'' and many works by Rubens; Poussin was another regular painter of Bacchic scenes.
Depictions of the proverb ''Sine Cerere et Baccho friget Venus'' were a particular feature of Northern Mannerism, but the subject was also painted several times by Rubens.
Károly Kerényi characterizes Dionysus as representative of the psychological life force (Greek ''Zoê'').
As a result of their acts the women are banished from Thebes, ensuring Dionysus's revenge.
The Fates granted Ampelos a second life as a vine, from which Dionysus squeezed the first wine.
Curious, Semele demanded of Zeus that he reveal himself in all his glory as proof of his godhood.
He made the descent from a reputedly bottomless pool on the coast of the Argolid near the prehistoric site of Lerna.
Those who jumped off the ship were mercifully turned into dolphins.
In the Greek pantheon, Dionysus (along with Zeus) absorbs the role of Sabazios, a Thracian/Phrygian deity.
Theories regarding such parallels were popular in the 19th century.
'''Lyaeus''', or '''Lyaios''' (Λυαῖος, "deliverer", literally "loosener"), one who releases from care and anxiety.
They point to the symbolism of wine and the importance it held in the mythology surrounding both Dionysus and Jesus Christ; though, Wick argues that the use of wine symbolism in the Gospel of John, including the story of the Marriage at Cana at which Jesus turns water into wine, was intended to show Jesus as superior to Dionysus.
In the Classical period of Greece, the bull and other animals identified with deities were separated from them as their ''agalma'', a kind of heraldic show-piece that concretely signified their numinous presence.
The name "Iacchus" may come from the Ιακχος (''Iakchos''), a hymn sung in honor of Dionysus.
The bull, serpent, tiger, ivy, and wine are characteristic of Dionysian iconography.
Rick Riordan's series of books ''Percy Jackson & The Olympians'' presents Dionysus as an uncaring, childish and spoiled god.
Returning in triumph (he was considered the founder of the triumphal procession) he undertook to introduce his worship into Greece, but was opposed by some princes who dreaded its introduction on account of the disorders and madness it brought with it (e.g.
Some scholars believe that Dionysus is a syncretism of a local Greek nature deity and a more powerful god from Thrace or Phrygia such as Sabazios or Zalmoxis.
In ''The Hellenic Religion of the Suffering God'' (1904), and ''Dionysus and Early Dionysianism'' (1921), the poet Vyacheslav Ivanov elaborates the theory of Dionysianism, tracing the origins of literature, and tragedy in particular, to ancient Dionysian mysteries.
He holds a fennel staff, tipped with a pine-cone and known as a ''thyrsus''.
He was guided by Prosymnus or Polymnus, who requested, as his reward, to be Dionysus' lover.
Bacchus was euhemerised as a wandering hero, conqueror and founder of cities.
'''Dionysus''' (; , ''Dionysos'') is the god of the grape harvest, winemaking and wine, of ritual madness, fertility, theatre and religious ecstasy in Greek mythology.
The statue aspires to suggest both drunken incapacity and an elevated consciousness, but this was perhaps lost on later viewers, and typically the two aspects were thereafter split, with a clearly drunk Silenus representing the former, and a youthful Bacchus often shown with wings, because he carries the mind to higher places.
