Notably, singer Stacy Lattisaw signed with Motown ''after'' achieving success in the disco genre.
Other disco songs from 2014 include "I Want It All" By Karmin and 'Wrong Club" by The Ting Tings.
(1981) on the Epic label.
The song's disco influence, which appears on ''Know Your Enemy'', was described as being "much-discussed".
The British Science Fiction program ''Space: 1999'' (1975) also featured a soundtrack strongly influenced by disco.
There are, however, more minimalistic flavors of disco with reduced, transparent instrumentation, pioneered by Chic (band).
Paul Gootenberg states that "the relationship of cocaine to 1970s disco culture cannot be stressed enough..." During the 1970s, the use of cocaine by well-to-do celebrities led to its "glamorization" and to the widely held view that it was a "soft drug".
Boney M. charted worldwide hits with such songs as "Daddy Cool", "Ma Baker" and "Rivers of Babylon".
By the end of the 1970s, a strong anti-disco sentiment developed among rock fans and musicians, particularly in the United States.
Disco hit the television airwaves with the music/dance variety show ''Soul Train'' in 1971 hosted by Don Cornelius, then Marty Angelo's ''Disco Step-by-Step Television Show'' in 1975, Steve Marcus' ''Disco Magic/Disco 77'', Eddie Rivera's ''Soap Factory'', and Merv Griffin's ''Dance Fever'', hosted by Deney Terrio, who is credited with teaching actor John Travolta to dance for his role in the hit movie ''Saturday Night Fever'', as well as ''DANCE'' based out of Columbia, South Carolina.
Disco clubs were also associated with promiscuity.
The Detroit Spinners were also signed to the Motown label and had a hit with the Stevie Wonder-produced song "It's A Shame" in 1970.
Mixing engineers and record producers, under the direction of arrangers, compiled these tracks into a fluid composition of verses, bridges, and refrains, complete with orchestral builds and breaks.
Progressive rock group Pink Floyd, when creating their rock opera ''The Wall'', used disco-style components in their song, "Another Brick in the Wall, Part 2" (1979)—which became the group's only #1 hit single (in both the US and UK).
Less commonly, some disco dancers wore outlandish costumes, dressed in drag, covered their bodies with gold or silver paint, or wore very skimpy outfits leaving them nearly nude; these uncommon get-ups were more likely to be seen at invitation-only New York City loft parties and disco clubs.
Since disco dances were typically held in liquor licensed-nightclubs and dance clubs, alcoholic drinks were also consumed by dancers; some users intentionally combined alcohol with the consumption of other drugs, such as Quaaludes, for a stronger effect.
Karen Mixon Cook, the first female disco Dj was quoted as saying, "We still pause every July 12th for a moment of silence in honor of Disco."
Also, the film ''The Great Rock 'n' Roll Swindle'' and its soundtrack album contained a disco medley of Sex Pistols songs, entitled ''Black Arabs'' and credited to a group of the same name.)
By the late 1970s most major U.S. cities had thriving disco club scenes, but the largest scenes were in San Francisco, Miami, and most notably New York City.
Norman Whitfield was a producer at Motown, renowned for creating innovative "psychedelic soul" songs.
Ruffin eventually left the record label in the mid-1970s but had a 1980 hit with the disco song "Hold On (To My Love)", which was written and produced by Robin Gibb of The Bee Gees, for his album ''Sunrise''.
Most disco songs have a steady four-on-the-floor beat, a quaver or semi-quaver hi-hat pattern with an open hi-hat on the off-beat, and a heavy, syncopated bass line.
By 1959, the term was used in Paris to describe any of these type of nightclubs.
"A far l'amore comincia tu" ("To make love, your move first") was another success for her internationally, known in Spanish as "En el amor todo es empezar", in German as "Liebelei", in French as "Puisque tu l'aimes dis le lui", and in English as "Do It, Do It Again".
Similarly, Bobby Vinton adapted The Pennsylvania Polka into a song named "Disco Polka".
The orchestral sound usually known as "disco sound" relies heavily on string sections and horns playing linear phrases, in unison with the soaring, often reverberated vocals or playing instrumental fills, while electric pianos and chicken-scratch guitars create the background "pad" sound defining the harmony progression.
Claude François, who re-invented himself as the king of French disco, released "La plus belle chose du monde", a French version of the Bee Gees hit record, "Massachusetts", which became a big hit in Canada and Europe and "Alexandrie Alexandra" was posthumously released on the day of his burial and became a worldwide hit.
as a single in 1966.
Rock artists such as Rod Stewart and David Bowie who added disco elements to their music were accused of being sell outs.
When Whitfield left Motown to set up Whitfield Records, he took Rose Royce under his wing at the new label.
The track "Love Hangover" by Diana Ross, the house anthem at the former, was cited as a particular favourite by many early UK Punks.
Men often wore Pierre Cardin suits, three piece suits with a vest and double-knit polyester shirt jackets with matching trousers known as the leisure suit.
The DJs played "...&nbsp;a smooth mix of long single records to keep people 'dancing all night long'".
Disco was a key influence on the 1980s electronic dance music style called House.
Songs often use syncopation, which is the accenting of unexpected beats.
Justin Timberlake's 2016 song "Can't Stop The Feeling", which shows strong elements of disco, became the 26th song ever to chart at No.
Levan, for example, developed a cult following amongst club-goers, who referred to his DJ sets as "Saturday Mass".
In addition to her disco-influenced attire to award shows and interviews, her Confessions Tour also incorporated various elements of the 1970s, such as disco balls, a mirrored stage design, and the roller derby.
Later in the disco era, popular dance styles were developed, including the "Bump", "Penguin", "Boogaloo", "Watergate" and the "Robot".
Other songs from 2015 like "I Don't Like It, I Love It" by Flo Rida, "Adventure of a Lifetime" by Coldplay, "Back Together" by Robin Thicke and "Levels" by Nick Jonas feature disco elements as well.
Discotheque-goers often wore expensive, extravagant and sexy fashions.
Nu-disco is a 21st-century dance music genre associated with the renewed interest in 1970s and early 1980s disco, mid-1980s Italo disco, and the synthesizer-heavy Euro disco aesthetics.
Cerrone's early hit songs, "Love in C Minor", "Give Me Love" and "Supernature" became major hits in the U.S. and Europe.
This method fast became the standard format for all DJs of the genre.
In Chicago, the ''Step By Step'' disco dance TV show was launched with the sponsorship support of the Coca-Cola company.
Starting in the 1980s, country music began a slow rise in American main pop charts.
Anti-disco sentiment was expressed in some television shows and films.
Early house music was generally dance-based music characterized by repetitive four on the floor beats, rhythms mainly provided by drum machines, off-beat hi-hat cymbals, and synthesized basslines.
Synthesizers are also fairly common in disco, especially in the late 1970s.
He had been signed to Motown since 1970, writing songs for artists like The Jackson 5 and Marvin Gaye, as well as releasing his own successful disco songs like "Love Power" (1975) for the label.
The song is also known under its Spanish title "Para hacer bien el amor hay que venir al sur" (which refers to Southern Europe, since the hit was recorded and taped in Spain).
It was a huge success and its soundtrack became one of the best-selling albums of all time.
Using this equipment, a DJ could do effects such as cutting out all but the throbbing bassline of a song, and then slowly mixing in the beginning of another song using the DJ mixer's crossfader.
Another Euro disco act was Amanda Lear, where Euro-disco sound is most heard in Enigma ("Give a bit of Mmh to me") song (1978).
The event, which involved exploding disco records, ended with a riot, during which the raucous crowd tore out seats and pieces of turf, and caused other damage.
Other prominent European pop and disco groups were Luv' from the Netherlands and Boney M., a group of four West Indian singers and dancers masterminded by West German record producer Frank Farian.
The term is derived from ''discothèque'' (French for "library of phonograph records", but it was subsequently used as a term for nightclubs in Paris).
It fused elements of punk-related rock with different forms of dance music including disco.
Hutch returned to Motown in 1982 and scored a disco hit with his song "In and Out".
In general, the difference between a disco, or any dance song, and a rock or popular song is that in dance music the bass drum hits ''four to the floor'', at least once a beat (which in 4/4 time is 4 beats per measure), whereas in rock the bass hits on one and three and lets the snare take the lead on two and four (the "backbeat").
In 1977, singer, songwriter and producer Willie Hutch signed with Whitfield's new label.
This club played a major formative role in the growth of disco music and nightclub culture in general.
Its dance floor was decorated with an image of the "Man in the Moon" that included an animated cocaine spoon.
A recurring theme on the show ''WKRP in Cincinnati'' was a hostile attitude towards disco music.
It has been described as the arrival of the expression of raw female sexual desire in pop music.
The punk subculture in the United States and United Kingdom was often hostile to disco (although in the UK, many early Sex Pistols fans such as the Bromley Contingent and Jordan quite liked disco, often congregating at nightclubs such as Louise's in Soho and the Sombrero in Kensington.
Andy Gibb, a younger brother to the Bee Gees, followed with similarly-styled solo hits such as "I Just Want to Be Your Everything", "(Love Is) Thicker Than Water" and "Shadow Dancing".
It has been noted that British punk rock critics of disco were very supportive of the pro-black/anti-racist reggae genre.
According to Peter Braunstein, the "massive quantities of drugs ingested in discotheques produced the next cultural phenomenon of the disco era: rampant promiscuity and public sex.
The disco sound has soaring vocals over a steady "four-on-the-floor" beat, an eighth note (quaver) or 16th note (semi-quaver) hi-hat pattern with an open hi-hat on the off-beat, and a prominent, syncopated electric bass line.
At the request of Motown that he produce songs in the disco genre, Marvin Gaye released "Got To Give It Up" in 1978, despite his dislike of disco.
At first, many dancers improvised their own dance styles and dance steps.
While the dance floor was the central arena of seduction, actual sex usually took place in the nether regions of the disco: bathroom stalls, exit stairwells, and so on.
It contained the disco hit "Baby, That's Backatcha".
These mixing techniques were also applied to radio DJs, such as Ted Currier of WKTU and WBLS.
Notable DJs include Rex Potts (Loft Lounge, Sarasota, Florida), Karen Cook, Jim Burgess, Walter Gibbons, John "Jellybean" Benitez, Richie Kaczar of Studio 54, Rick Gianatos, Francis Grasso of Sanctuary, Larry Levan, Ian Levine, Neil "Raz" Rasmussen & Mike Pace of L'amour Disco in Brooklyn, Preston Powell of Magique, Jennie Costa of Lemontrees, Tee Scott, Tony Smith of Xenon, John Luongo, Robert Ouimet of The Limelight, and David Mancuso.
House music has also fused with several other genres creating fusion subgenres, such as euro house, tech house, electro house and jump house.
from her last ever album, ''What You Need'', before retiring.
Because record sales were often dependent on floor play in leading clubs, DJs were also important to the development and popularization of disco music.
In the 1990s, disco and its legacy became more accepted by music artists and listeners alike, as more songs and films were released that referenced disco.
Platform shoes and boots for both genders and high heels for women were popular footwear.
Jello Biafra of the Dead Kennedys, in the song "Saturday Night Holocaust", likened disco to the cabaret culture of Weimar-era Germany for its apathy towards government policies and its escapism.
In September 1964, ''Playboy'' magazine used the word ''disco'' as a shorthand for a discothèque-styled nightclub.
Disco fashions were very trendy in the late 1970s.
The promiscuity and public sex at discos was part of a broader trend towards exploring a freer sexual expression in the 1970s, an era that is also associated with "swingers clubs, hot tubs, and key parties."
However, disco music remained relatively successful in the early 1980s, with big hits like Irene Cara's "Flashdance... What a Feeling", K.C.
Other Latin rhythms such as the rhumba, the samba and the cha-cha-cha are also found in disco recordings, and Latin polyrhythms, such as a rhumba beat layered over a merengue, are commonplace.
They were the first act to follow him from Motown to Whitfield Records and made their only ever entry onto the UK Singles Chart with the disco single "You + Me = Love" (#43) in 1976, which also made #2 on the US Dance Charts.
Early records were the "standard" 3&nbsp;minute version until Tom Moulton came up with a way to make songs longer, wanting to take a crowd to another level and keep them dancing longer, he found that was impossible with 45-RPM vinyl discs of the time (which could usually hold no more than 5&nbsp;minutes of good-quality music).
This Swedish quartet, which sang in English, had hits as "Waterloo" (1974), "Fernando" (1976), "Take a Chance on Me" (1978), "Gimme!
To the mainstream public M.F.S.B.
George McCrae's "Rock Your Baby" became the United Kingdom's first number one disco single.
Lattisaw continued to enjoy success as a contemporary R&B/pop artist throughout the 1980s.
While performers and singers garnered much public attention, record producers working behind the scenes played an important role in developing the "disco sound".
The pair spent the week teaching disco dancing to dancers in the disco clubs.
Some notable professional dance troupes of the 1970s included Pan's People and Hot Gossip.
The Bee Gees used Barry Gibb's falsetto to garner hits such as "You Should Be Dancing", "Stayin' Alive", "Night Fever", "More Than A Woman" and "Love You Inside Out".
Disco can be seen as a reaction against both the domination of rock music and the stigmatization of dance music by the counterculture during this period.
In January 1979, rock critic Robert Christgau argued that homophobia, and most likely racism, were reasons behind the backlash, a conclusion seconded by John Rockwell.
Robbie Williams' disco hit "Rock DJ" was the UK's fourth best-selling single the same year.
In the late 1970s, Studio 54 in New York City was arguably the most well known nightclub in the world.
Examples include ''S.W.A.T.''
'''Disco''' is a genre of dance music containing elements of funk, soul, pop, and salsa.
Rafaella Carrà worked with Bob Sinclar on the new single "Far l'Amore" which was released on YouTube on 17 March 2011.
It was popular with both men and women, from many different backgrounds.
By far the most successful Euro disco act was ABBA.
The 12" single became and remains a standard in discos today.
The group's second album ''Metal Box'' fully embraced the "studio as instrument" methodology of disco.
Every song they wrote was written with an eye toward giving it "deep hidden meaning" or D.H.M.
Early disco was dominated with producers and labels such as Salsoul Records (Ken, Stanley, and Joseph Cayre), West End Records (Mel Cheren), Casablanca (Neil Bogart), and Prelude (Marvin Schlachter), to name a few.
Many Motown groups who had left the record label charted with disco songs.
The German group Kraftwerk also had an influence on Euro disco.
as the backup band, hit Billboard Number 1 in March 1973, and has been called "disco".
The rhythm is laid down by prominent, syncopated basslines (with heavy use of broken octaves, that is, octaves with the notes sounded one after the other) played on the bass guitar and by drummers using a drum kit, African/Latin percussion, and electronic drums such as Simmons and Roland drum modules.
Whereas Ocean's 1979 song ''American Hearts'' was backed with an orchestral arrangement played by the Los Angeles Symphony Orchestra, his 1981 song ''"One of Those Nights (Feel Like Gettin' Down)"'' had a more bare, stripped-down sound, with no orchestration or symphonic arrangements.
Examples of early-1980s' dance sound performers include D. Train, Kashif, and Patrice Rushen.
The slogans "disco sucks" and "death to disco" became common.
The biggest disco hit of the year as of June was "Get Lucky" by Daft Punk, featuring Nile Rodgers on guitar.
The producer-oriented sound was having difficulty mixing well with the industry's artist-oriented marketing system.
In 1974 New York City's WPIX-FM premiered the first disco radio show.
As well, house did not use the lush string sections that were a key part of the disco sound.
In 2013, several 1970s' style disco and funk songs charted, and the pop charts had more dance songs than at any other point since the late 1970s.
The music typically layered soaring, often-reverberated vocals, often doubled by horns, over a background "pad" of electric pianos and "chicken-scratch" rhythm guitars played on an electric guitar.
They left the record company in 1975 (Jermaine Jackson, however, remained with the label) after hits like "I Want You Back" (1969) and "ABC" (1970), and even the disco hit "Dancing Machine" (1974).
He went on to score hits in the disco genre with "Rock With You" (1979), "Don't Stop 'Til You Get Enough" (1979) and "Billie Jean" (1983) for Epic Records.
In one scene of the 1980 comedy film ''Airplane!
Her greatest international hit single was "Tanti Auguri" ("Best Wishes"), which has become a popular song with gay audiences.
As disco's popularity sharply declined in the United States, abandoned by major U.S. record labels and producers, European disco continued evolving within the broad mainstream pop music scene.
Early house music commercial success in Europe saw songs such as "Pump Up The Volume" by MARRS (1987), "House Nation" by House Master Boyz and the Rude Boy of House (1987), "Theme from S'Express" by S'Express (1988) and "Doctorin' the House" by Coldcut (1988) in the pop charts.
Early songs with disco elements include "You Keep Me Hangin' On" (The Supremes, 1966), "Only the Strong Survive" (Jerry Butler, 1968), "The Love You Save" by Jackson 5 (1970), "Soul Makossa" (Manu Dibango, 1972), "Superstition" by Stevie Wonder (1972) Eddie Kendricks' "Keep on Truckin'" (1973) and "The Love I Lost" by Harold Melvin & The Blue Notes (1973).
Six months prior to the chaotic event, popular progressive rock radio station WDAI (WLS-FM) had suddenly switched to an all-disco format, disenfranchising thousands of Chicago rock fans and leaving Dahl unemployed.
Electric Light Orchestra's 1975 hit Evil Woman, although described as Orchestral Rock, featured a violin sound that became a staple of disco.
The Four Seasons left Motown in 1974 and went on to have a disco hit with their song "December, 1963 (Oh, What A Night)" (1975) for Warner Curb Records.
Producers Giorgio Moroder, whom AllMusic described as "one of the principal architects of the disco sound" with the Donna Summer hit "I Feel Love" (1977), and Jean-Marc Cerrone were involved with Euro disco.
The genre was also shaped by Tom Moulton, who wanted to extend the enjoyment of dance songs — thus creating the extended mix or "remix".
The group's founder John Lydon, the former lead singer for the Sex Pistols, told the press that disco was the only music he cared for at the time.
From 1974 through 1977, disco music continued to increase in popularity as many disco songs topped the charts.
Record producer Giorgio Moroder's soundtracks to ''American Gigolo'', ''Flashdance'' and ''Scarface'' (which also had a heavy disco influence) proved to be successful.
In 1979 the music industry in the United States was undergoing its worst slump in decades, and disco, despite its mass popularity, was blamed.
As well as charting on both the R&B (#55) and Dance Charts (#29), it became one of only two songs of his to chart on the UK Singles Chart (#51).
(A Man After Midnight)".
Since the early to mid-1990s, house music has been infused in mainstream pop and dance music worldwide.
In 2008 a video of a performance of her only UK hit single, 'Do It, Do It Again', was featured in the Dr. Who episode 'Midnight'.
From 1978 to 1979, Summer continued to release hits such as "Last Dance", "Bad Girls", "Heaven Knows", "No More Tears (Enough Is Enough)", "Hot Stuff" and "On the Radio", all very successful disco songs.
Interest in disco dancing also helped spawn dance competition TV shows such as ''Dance Fever'' (1979).
New Jersey rock critic Jim Testa wrote "Put a Bullet Through the Jukebox", a vitriolic screed attacking disco that was considered a punk call to arms.
Some cities had disco dance instructors or dance schools, which taught people how to do popular disco dances such as ''"touch dancing,'' ''"the hustle,'' and ''the cha cha.''
However, one single, "The Night", was released in Britain in 1975, and thanks to popularity from the Northern Soul circuit, reached #7 on the UK Singles Chart.
The Undisputed Truth, a Motown recording act assembled by Whitfield as a means for being able to experiment with his psychedelic soul production techniques, found success with their 1971 song "Smiling Faces Sometimes".
The group produced the album soundtrack to the 1976 film ''Car Wash'', which contained the huge disco hit "Car Wash".
"Le Freak" was a popular 1978 single that is regarded as an iconic song of the genre.
The sound was enriched with solo lines and harmony parts played by a variety of orchestral instruments, such as harp, violin, viola, cello, trumpet, saxophone, trombone, clarinet, flugelhorn, French horn, tuba, English horn, oboe, flute (sometimes especially the alto flute and occasionally bass flute), piccolo, timpani and synth strings, string section or a full string orchestra.
Powerful, bass-heavy, hi-fi sound systems were viewed as a key part of the disco club experience.
Even hard-core mainstream rockers mixed elements of disco with their typical rock 'n roll style in songs.
Post-punk's mantra of constantly moving forward lent itself to both openness to and experimentation with elements of disco and other styles.
Her book ''The Complete Guide to Disco Dancing'' (Warner Books, 1978) was the first to name, break down and codify popular disco dances as dance forms and distinguish between disco freestyle, partner and line dances.
Notable examples include Earth Wind & Fire's "Boogie Wonderland" with The Emotions (1979), Mike Oldfield's "Guilty" (1979) Blondie's "Heart of Glass" (1978), Cher's "Hell on Wheels" and "Take Me Home" (both 1979), Barry Manilow's "Copacabana" (1978), David Bowie's "John I'm Only Dancing (Again)" (1975), Rod Stewart's "Da Ya Think I'm Sexy?"
The Four Seasons themselves were briefly signed to Motown's MoWest label, a short-lived subsidiary for R&B/soul artists based on the West Coast, and there the group produced one album, ''Chameleon'' (1972) - to little commercial success in America.
Disco was the last mass popular music movement that was driven by the baby boom generation.
With the help of José Rodriguez, his remasterer, he pressed a single on a 10" disc instead of 7".
The Eagles gave nods to disco with "One of These Nights" (1975) and "Disco Strangler" (1979), Paul McCartney & Wings did "Goodnight Tonight" (1979), Queen did "Another One Bites the Dust" (1980), The Rolling Stones did "Miss You" (1978) and "Emotional Rescue" (1980), Chicago did "Street Player" (1979), The Clash did "Ivan Meets G.I.
The group Rose Royce, although they were never signed to Motown, toured with Edwin Starr, who introduced them to Whitfield, his producer.
Casablanca Records had been releasing fewer records in the 1980s, and was shut down in 1986 by parent company PolyGram.
The Sugarhill Gang used Chic's "Good Times" as the foundation for their 1979 hit "Rapper's Delight", generally considered to be the song that first popularized rap music in the United States and around the world.
Some in the media, in celebratory tones, declared disco "dead" and rock revived.
In the early 2000s the dance-punk (new rave in the United Kingdom) emerged as a part of a broader post punk revival.
The Martian, a 2015 film, extensively uses disco music as a soundtrack, although for the main character, astronaut Mark Watney, there's only one thing worse than being stranded on Mars: it's being stranded on Mars with nothing but disco music.
We were going, 'fuck the blues, fuck the black experience'."
The rising popularity of disco came in tandem with developments in the role of the DJ.
They cut the next single on a 12" disc, the same format as a standard album.
The disco fad was also picked up even by "non-pop" artists, including the 1979 U.S. number one hit "No More Tears (Enough Is Enough)" by Easy listening singer Barbra Streisand in a duet with Donna Summer.
Diana Ross was one of the first Motown artists to embrace the disco sound with her successful 1976 outing "Love Hangover" from her self-titled album.
Even some heavy metal songs released during the later part of the 1990s utilized the hi-hat cymbal beat which was reminiscent of disco.
By the following year the term was being used in the United States to describe that type of club, and a type of dancing in those clubs.
When Mancuso threw his first house parties, the gay community (members of whom comprised much of The Loft's attendee roster) was often harassed in New York gay bars and dance clubs.
Bold colours were popular for both genders.
The Hues Corporation's 1974 "Rock the Boat", a U.S. #1 single and million-seller, was one of the early disco songs to hit #1.
The label continued to release successful disco songs into the 1980s with Rick James' "Super Freak" (1981), Teena Marie's "Behind The Groove" (1980) and The Commodores' "Lady (You Bring Me Up)" (1981).
Mixing engineers had an important role in the disco production process, because disco songs used as many as 64 tracks of vocals and instruments.
Other women wore tight, revealing, sexy clothes, such as backless halter tops, "hot pants" or body-hugging spandex bodywear or "catsuits".
By 1964, ''discotheque'' and the shorthand ''disco'' were used to describe a type of sleeveless dress worn when going out to nightclubs.
In Italy Raffaella Carrà is the most successful disco act.
The shorter seven-inch vinyl single version of the MacArthur Park was Summer's first single to reach number one on the Hot 100; it does not include the balladic second movement of the song, however.
Other chart-topping disco hits that year included "Rock Your Baby" by George McCrae.
Even the ''I Love Lucy'' theme was not spared from being disco-ized.
The anti-disco backlash, combined with other societal and radio industry factors, changed the face of pop radio in the years following Disco Demolition Night.
"Mancuso introduced the technologies of tweeter arrays (clusters of small loudspeakers, which emit high-end frequencies, positioned above the floor) and bass reinforcements (additional sets of subwoofers positioned at ground level) at the start of the 1970s in order to boost the treble and bass at opportune moments, and by the end of the decade sound engineers such as Richard Long had multiplied the effects of these innovations in venues such as the Garage."
Disco was a worldwide phenomenon, but its popularity drastically declined in the United States in 1980, and disco was no longer popular in the U.S. by 1981.
1), Justin Timberlake's "Take Back The Night" (No.
House music is a genre of electronic dance music that originated in Chicago in the early 1980s.
Gladys Knight & The Pips, who recorded the most successful version of "I Heard It Through The Grapevine" (1967) before Marvin Gaye, scored hits such as "Baby, Don't Change Your Mind" (1977) and "Bourgie, Bourgie" (1980) in the disco era.
In addition, the perceived positivity, lack of irony, and earnestness of the hippies informed proto-disco music like M.F.S.B.
Michael Jackson was the lead singer of The Jackson 5, one of Motown's premier acts in the early 1970s.
"The DJ was central to the ritual of 1970s dance culture, but the dancing crowd was no less important, and it was the combination of these two elements that created the conditions for the dance floor dynamic."
Klaxons, LCD Soundsystem, Death From Above 1979, The Rapture and Shitdisco were among acts associated with the genre.
DJs would select songs and grooves according to what the dancers wanted, transitioning from one song to another with a DJ mixer and using a microphone to introduce songs and speak to the audiences.
In the northwestern sections of the United Kingdom, the Northern Soul explosion, which started in the late 1960s and peaked in 1974, made the region receptive to Disco, which the region's Disc Jockeys were bringing back from New York City.
MFSB also released "TSOP (The Sound of Philadelphia)", featuring vocals by The Three Degrees, and this was the third disco song to hit number one; "TSOP" was written as the theme song for ''Soul Train''.
In 1982, Afrika Bambataa released the single "Planet Rock", which incorporated electronica elements from Kraftwerk's "Trans-Europe Express" and "Numbers" as well as YMO's "Riot in Lagos".
The Isley Brothers, whose short tenure at the company had produced the hit "This Old Heart Of Mine (Is Weak For You)" in 1966, went on release successful disco songs like "That Lady" (1973) and "It's A Disco Night (Rock, Don't Stop)" (1979).
