Because of the expense, the brakes were only standard on the Chrysler Crown and the Town and Country Newport in 1950.
The Jensen 541, with four-wheel disc brakes, followed in 1956.
Accordingly, motorcycle discs are usually stainless steel, drilled, slotted or wavy to disperse rain water.
Sticking can result from infrequent vehicle use, failure of a seal or rubber protection boot allowing debris entry, dry-out of the grease in the mounting mechanism and subsequent moisture incursion leading to corrosion, or some combination of these factors.
Due to the high heat tolerance and mechanical strength of ceramic composite discs, they are often used on exotic vehicles where the cost is not prohibitive to the application.
As the front brakes perform most of the braking effort, this can be a reasonable compromise.
Discs are thin, often about 2&nbsp;mm.
Once the disc has some level of variation in thickness, uneven pad deposition can accelerate, sometimes resulting in changes to the crystal structure of the metal that composes the disc in extreme situations.
It is typically measured about  from the outside diameter of the disc.
These discs were mounted inboard near the transmission, and were powered by the vehicle's central hydraulic system.
Mountain bike disc brakes may range from simple, mechanical (cable) systems, to expensive and powerful, multi-piston hydraulic disc systems, commonly used on downhill racing bikes.
The result is that the thicker-hotter sections receive even more pad material than the thinner-cooler sections, contributing to a further increase in the variation in the disc's thickness.
Disc brakes are now common on motorcycles, mopeds and even mountain bikes.
It is not uncommon to be able to look at the cars, either live in person or on television and see the brake discs glowing red during application.
The difference between minimum and maximum value on the dial is called lateral run-out.
Various types of brake calipers are also used on bicycle rim brakes.
Successful application required technological progress, which began to arrive in the 1950s, leading to a critical demonstration of superiority at the Le Mans auto race in 1953.
Although these are fashionable, there is no evidence that they improve braking performance, nor do they add to the stiffness of the fork.
In racing and very-high-performance road cars, other disc materials have been employed.
Bikes that are particularly fast or heavy may have vented discs.
This "cross-drilling" is done for a number of reasons: heat dissipation, surface-water dispersal, brake squeal elimination, mass reduction, or marketing cosmetics.
For proper break in, the disc surface should be refreshed (either by machining the contact surface or by replacing the disc as a whole) every time the pads are changed on a vehicle.
This was accomplished by small balls set into oval holes leading to the brake surface.
Even if the disc surface is machined, the cementite within the disc will not wear or absorb heat at the same rate as the cast iron surrounding it, causing the uneven thickness and uneven heating characteristics of the disc to return.
As the pads pass by the thicker section of the disc, they are forced outwards.
To retard the wheel, friction material in the form of brake pads, mounted on the brake caliper, is forced mechanically, hydraulically, pneumatically, or electromagnetically against both sides of the disc.
Because the "motor" is small, an uncommon feature of bicycle brakes is that the pads retract to eliminate residual drag when the brake is released.
This is connected to the ''wheel'' and/or the ''axle''.
Slotted discs are generally not used on standard vehicles because they quickly wear down brake pads; however, this removal of material is beneficial to race vehicles since it keeps the pads soft and avoids vitrification of their surfaces.
This allows the metal to metal parts to move independently of each other and thereby eliminate the buildup of energy that can create a frequency that is heard as brake squeal, groan, or growl.
Carbon brakes have occasionally been applied to road cars, by the French Venturi sports car manufacturer in the mid 1990s for example, but need to reach a very high operating temperature before becoming truly effective and so are not well suited to road use.
The Jaguar racing team won, using disc brake equipped cars, with much of the credit being given to the brakes' superior performance over rivals from firms like Ferrari, equipped with drum brakes.
This type of thickness variation has many causes, but there are three primary mechanisms which contribute the most to the propagation of disc thickness variations connected to uneven pad transfer.
Although less common, discs are also used on road bicycles for all-weather cycling with predictable braking, although drums are sometimes preferred as harder to damage in crowded parking, where discs are sometimes bent.
Lack of sufficient research caused reliability problems, such as sticking and corrosion, especially in regions using salt on winter roads.
Some lining wear indicators, located either as a semi-metallic layer within the brake pad material or with an external "sensor", are also designed to squeal when the lining is due for replacement.
This reduces wear from debris, and also provides protection from rain and snow, which would make the discs slippery, and unreliable.
Once enough of the friction material has worn away, the pad's steel backing plate (for glued pads) or the pad retainer rivets (for riveted pads) will bear directly upon the disc's wear surface, reducing braking power and making scratches on the disc.
They were optional, however, on other Chryslers, priced around $400, at a time when an entire Crosley Hot Shot retailed for $935.
Calipers are of two types, floating or fixed.
The SAE maintains a specification for the manufacture of grey iron for various applications.
A brake disc is a heat sink, but the loss of heat sink mass may be balanced by increased surface area to radiate away heat.
However, there is still plenty of cooling for reliable operation.
Instead of the disc with caliper squeezing on it, this system used twin expanding discs that rubbed against the inner surface of a cast-iron brake drum, which doubled as the brake housing.
Passenger rail cars and light rail vehicles often use disc brakes outboard of the wheels, which helps ensure a free flow of cooling air.
Compared to drum brakes, disc brakes offer better stopping performance because the disc is more readily cooled.
Generally a brake pad that aggressively abrades more disc material away, such as metallic pads, will create more brake dust.
The machining process is performed in a brake lathe, which removes a very thin layer off the disc surface to clean off minor damage and restore uniform thickness.
They are also found in industrial applications where the ceramic disc's light weight and low-maintenance properties justify the cost relative to alternatives.
In the U.S., drums are allowed and are typically preferred for their lower purchase price, despite higher total lifetime cost and more frequent service intervals.
Wear rates tend to be high, and braking may be poor or grabby until the brake is hot.
(Lacking the option of a fork brace, USD forks may be best stiffened by an oversize front axle).
Disc brakes are increasingly used on very large and heavy road vehicles, where previously large drum brakes were nearly universal.
When this is not done properly the brake pads will see an uneven distribution of stress and heat, resulting in an uneven, seemingly random, deposition of pad material.
The foot of the driver applied to the brake pedal naturally resists this change, and thus more force is applied to the pads.
Between 1989 and 2005, manufacturing of brake discs migrated predominantly to China.
Most brake squeal is produced by vibration (resonance instability) of the brake components, especially the pads and discs (known as ''force-coupled excitation'').
Dust on the brakes may also cause squeal and commercial brake cleaning products are designed to remove dirt and other contaminants.
A set of pads can be considered for replacement if the thickness of the pad material is the same or less than the thickness of the backing steel.
Sometimes a loud noise or high pitched squeal occurs when the brakes are applied.
The brake pads must usually be replaced regularly (depending on pad material, and drivestyle), and some are equipped with a mechanism that alerts drivers that replacement is needed, such as a thin piece of soft metal that rubs against the disc when the pads are too thin causing the brakes to squeal, a soft metal tab embedded in the pad material that closes an electric circuit and lights a warning light when the brake pad gets thin, or an electronic sensor.
The material is typically grey iron, a form of cast iron.
The first motorcycles to use disc brakes were racing vehicles.
Instead of a pair of horizontal bolts that allow the caliper to move straight in and out respective to the car body, a swinging caliper utilizes a single, vertical pivot bolt located somewhere behind the axle centerline.
For these reasons, a heavy truck with disc brakes can stop in about 120% the distance of a passenger car, but with drums stopping takes about 150% the distance.
Some use a two-piece floating disc style, others use a floating caliper, others use pads that float in the caliper, and some use one moving pad that makes the caliper slide on its mounts, pulling the other pad into contact with the disc.
Lambert, and was first tested on a 1939 Plymouth.
When the thicker section of the disc passes between the pads, the pads will move apart and the brake pedal will raise slightly; this is pedal pulsation.
When the driver presses the brakes, the brake piston pushes on the inside piston and rotates the whole caliper inward, when viewed from the top.
The properties that determine material wear involve trade-offs between performance and longevity.
Many disc brake pads will include some sort of soft steel spring or drag tab as part of the pad assembly, which is designed to start dragging on the disc when the pad is nearly worn out.
Historically, brake discs were manufactured throughout the world with a strong concentration in Europe and America.
As the brake disc heats unevenly it also expands unevenly.
Manufacturers that use drilled discs as OEM typically do so for two reasons: appearance, if they determine that the average owner of the vehicle model will prefer the look while not overly stressing the hardware; or as a function of reducing the unsprung weight of the brake assembly, with the engineering assumption that enough brake disc mass remains to absorb racing temperatures and stresses.
The development of disc-type brakes began in England in the 1890s, but they were not practical or widely available for another 60 years.
Found on some of their more expensive models, it is also an optional brake for all street Porsches at added expense.
Machining can be done in situ (on-car) or off-car (bench lathe).
When braking force is applied, the act of abrasive friction between the brake pad and the disc wears both the disc and pad away.
These variations in the disc surface are usually the result of extensive vehicle road usage.
The objective was to reduce weight, the number of brakes per axle, as well as provide stable friction from very high speeds and all temperatures.
Hot judder is usually produced as a result of longer, more moderate braking from high speed where the vehicle does not come to a complete stop.
This made for lighter braking pressure than with calipers, avoided brake fade, promoted cooler running, and provided one-third more friction surface than standard Chrysler twelve-inch drums.
As the brakes are applied, the pads slide over the varying disc surface.
Some are simply solid, but others are hollowed out with fins or vanes joining together the disc's two contact surfaces (usually included as part of a casting process).
Disc brakes were most popular on sports cars when they were first introduced, since these vehicles are more demanding about brake performance.
Hot spots are classified as concentrated thermal regions that alternate between both sides of a disc that distort it in such a way that produces a sinusoidal waviness around its edges.
The weight and power of the vehicle determines the need for ventilated discs.
This four-wheel disc brake system was built by Auto Specialties Manufacturing Company (Ausco) of St. Joseph, Michigan, under patents of inventor H.L.
It uses one or more pairs of opposing pistons to clamp from each side of the disc, and is more complex and expensive than a floating caliper.
The discs are internally vented much like cast-iron ones, and cross-drilled.
Mass production quickly followed with the 1955  Citroën DS.
All should be coated with an extremely high temperature, high solids lubricant to help reduce annoying squeal.
Most drum brake designs have at least one leading shoe, which gives a servo-effect.
The first development of the modern ceramic brake was made by British engineers working in the railway industry for TGV applications in 1988.
The first is improper selection of brake pads for a given application.
In a properly broken in brake system (with properly selected pads), this transfer is natural and actually is a major contributor to the braking force generated by the brake pads.
A fixed caliper does not move relative to the disc and is thus less tolerant of disc imperfections.
The result is that the thicker sections see higher levels of stress.
Uneven pad transfer will often lead to a thickness variation of the disc.
Chrysler developed a unique braking system, offered from 1949 to 1953.
Disc brakes also recover more quickly from immersion (wet brakes are less effective than dry ones).
Modern cars use different hydraulic circuits to actuate the brakes on each set of wheels as a safety measure.
Most leading vehicle manufacturers recommend brake disc skimming (US: turning) as a solution for lateral run-out, vibration issues and brake noises.
An alleged disadvantage of cross drilling for racing or other severe conditions is that the holes might become a source of stress cracks.
To prevent scarring, it is prudent to periodically inspect the brake pads for wear.
Discs have now become the more common form in most passenger vehicles, although many (particularly light weight vehicles) use drum brakes on the rear wheels to keep costs and weight down as well as to simplify the provisions for a parking brake.
In some rear disc calipers, the parking brake activates a mechanism inside the caliper that performs some of the same function.
Service shops will sometimes respond to any disc problem by changing out the discs entirely, This is done mainly where the cost of a new disc may actually be lower than the cost of labour to resurface the old disc.
Consequences may include reduced fuel efficiency, extreme heating of the disc or excessive wear on the affected pad.
The number of pistons in a caliper is often referred to as the number of 'pots', so if a vehicle has 'six pot' calipers it means that each caliper houses six pistons.
This small thickness variation can begin the cycle of uneven pad transfer.
The extreme heat generated in these systems is easily visible during night racing, especially at shorter tracks.
Another cause of uneven material transfer is improper break in of a pad/disc combination.
These brakes helped the company to win the 1953 24 Hours of Le Mans, developed in the UK by Dunlop.
The thickness variation can be felt by the driver when it is approximately  or greater (on automobile discs).
This type of squeal should not negatively affect brake stopping performance.
Most bicycle brake discs are made of steel.
Often uneven pad transfer is confused for disc warping.
Early brake pads (and linings) contained asbestos, producing dust which should not be inhaled.
Over time, vented brake discs may develop severe rust corrosion inside the ventilation slots, compromising the strength of the structure and needing replacement.
The disc contact area for the brake pads will be kept clean by regular use, but a vehicle that is stored for an extended period can develop significant rust in the contact area that may reduce braking power for a time until the rusted layer is worn off again.
Cold judder, on the other hand, is the result of uneven disc wear patterns or disc thickness variation (DTV).
Today's owners consider the Ausco-Lambert very reliable and powerful, but admit its grabbiness and sensitivity.
Another is disc brakes fade less when hot, and in a heavy vehicle air and rolling drag and engine braking are small parts of total braking force, so brakes are used harder than on lighter vehicles, and drum brake fade can occur in a single stop.
Scarring (US: Scoring) can occur if brake pads are not changed promptly when they reach the end of their service life and are considered worn out.
The vehicle manual will indicate the proper pattern for tightening as well as a torque rating for the bolts.
The hydraulic design also helps multiply braking force.
Still-larger discs are used for railroad cars and some airplanes.
Beginning in the 1960s on racing cars, it is now common for high-performance cars, motorcycles and even bicycles, to have brakes with drilled holes or slots.
Calipers have evolved from simple single-piston units to two-, four- and even six-piston items.
No repair is possible for the cracks, and if cracking becomes severe, the disc must be replaced.
They are: adhesive and abrasive.
These vibrations are the result of uneven thermal distributions, or ''hot spots''.
Disc face runout due to hub face runout or contamination will typically have a period of 1 minimum and 1 maximum per revolution of the brake disc.
In Europe, stopping distance regulations essentially require disc brakes for heavy vehicles.
Slotting is the preferred method in most racing environments to remove gas and water and to deglaze brake pads.
Small hairline cracks may appear in any cross drilled metal disc as a normal wear mechanism, but in the severe case the disc will fail catastrophically.
Composite brakes can withstand temperatures that would make steel discs bendable.
The seal distorts approximately 1/10 of a millimeter.
When practical, pads that are near the wear-out point should be replaced immediately, as complete wear out leads to scarring damage and unsafe braking.
Machining the disc as necessary will maximise the mileage out of the current discs on the vehicle.
Many early implementations for automobiles located the brakes on the inboard side of the driveshaft, near the differential, while most brakes today are located inside the wheels.
If the scarring is deeper but not excessive, it can be repaired by machining off a layer of the disc's surface.
This allows the disc to expand in a controlled symmetrical way and with less unwanted heat transfer to the hub.
The discs are commonly made from cast iron and a certain amount of surface rust is normal.
In extreme situations, this uneven heating can actually cause the crystal structure of the disc material to change.
As a way of avoiding thermal stress, cracking and warping, the disc is sometimes mounted in a half loose way to the hub with coarse splines.
This can lead to the caliper's pads rubbing on the disc when the brake is not engaged or engaging it at an angle.
The American Crosley Hot Shot is often given credit for the first production disc brakes.
Brake pads are designed for high friction with brake pad material embedded in the disc in the process of bedding while wearing evenly.
In Pennsylvania, which has one of the most rigorous auto safety inspection programs in North America, an automotive disc cannot pass safety inspection if any scoring is deeper than , and must be replaced if machining will reduce the disc below its minimum safe thickness.
This occurs when the brake pads are heated to the point that the material begins to break-down and transfer to the disc.
Typical hub/disc assembly run-out specifications for passenger vehicles are around .
Some types of alloy wheels and brake arrangements will provide enough open space to view the pads without removing the wheel.
The first mass production use of the modern disc brake was in 1955, on the Citroën DS, which featured caliper-type front disc brakes among its many innovations.
Modern motorcycle discs tend to have a floating design whereby the disc "floats" on bobbins and can move slightly, allowing better disc centering with a fixed caliper.
Friction causes the disc and attached wheel to slow or stop.
Machining on-car with proper equipment can also eliminate lateral run-out due to hub-face non-perpendicularity.
The result is a moderately loud metallic squealing noise, alerting the vehicle user that service is required, and this will not normally scar the disc if the brakes are serviced promptly.
Pads which are effective at low temperatures, such as when braking for the first time in cold weather, often are made of materials which decompose unevenly at higher temperatures.
When the hotter sections of the discs reach extremely high temperatures ( ), the metal can undergo a phase transformation and the carbon which is dissolved in the steel can precipitate out to form carbon-heavy carbide regions known as cementite.
The discs spread apart to create friction against the inner drum surface through the action of standard wheel cylinders.
BMW R1100S) or below (e.g.
Yamaha TRX850) the swinging arm:  a low mount is marginally better for CG purposes, while an upper siting keeps the caliper cleaner and better-protected from road obstacles.
Run-out is measured using a dial indicator on a fixed rigid base, with the tip perpendicular to the brake disc's face.
This iron carbide is very different from the cast iron the rest of the disc is composed of.
The result was a carbon-fibre-reinforced ceramic process which is now used in various forms for automotive, railway, and aircraft brake applications.
The brake ''disc'' (or ''rotor'' in American English) is usually made of cast iron, but may in some cases be made of composites such as reinforced carbon–carbon or ceramic matrix composites.
Cracking is limited mostly to drilled discs, which may develop small cracks around edges of holes drilled near the edge of the disc due to the disc's uneven rate of expansion in severe duty environments.
Brake failure can result from failure of the piston to retract, which is usually a consequence of not operating the vehicle during prolonged storage outdoors in adverse conditions.
It is extremely hard, very brittle, and does not absorb heat well.
Mechanically this is unnecessary unless the discs have reached manufacturer's minimum recommended thickness, which would make it unsafe to use them, or vane rusting is severe (ventilated discs only).
Early disc brakes (such as on the early Honda fours and the Norton Commando) sited the calipers on top of the disc, ahead of the fork slider.
MV Agusta was the first to offer a front disc brake motorcycle to the public on a small scale in 1965, on their relatively expensive 600 touring motorcycle, using a mechanical brake linkage.
Incorrect fitting can distort (warp) discs; the disc's retaining bolts (or the wheel/lug nuts, if the disc is simply sandwiched in place by the wheel, as on many cars) must be tightened progressively and evenly.
Reliable caliper-type disc brakes first appeared in 1953 on the Jaguar C-Type racing car.
Depending on the properties of the material of both the pad and the disc and the configuration and the usage, pad and disc wear rates will vary considerably.
Some discs are both drilled and slotted.
Runout can be caused either by deformation of the disc itself or by runout in the underlying wheel hub face or by contamination between the disc surface and the underlying hub mounting surface.
However, the limited choice of metals in this period meant that he had to use copper as the braking medium acting on the disc.
Discs can be machined to eliminate thickness variation and lateral run-out.
In 1969 Honda introduced the more affordable CB750, which had a single hydraulically-actuated front disc brake (and a rear drum brake), and which sold in huge numbers.
The third primary mechanism of uneven pad material transfer is known as "pad imprinting."
The poor state of the roads at this time, no more than dusty, rough tracks, meant the copper wore quickly making the system impractical.
A modern development, particularly on inverted ("upside down", or "USD") forks is the radially mounted caliper.
Although this gave the brake pads better cooling, it is now almost universal practice to site the caliper behind the slider (to reduce the angular momentum of the fork assembly).
In reality, the majority of brake discs which are diagnosed as "warped" are actually simply the product of uneven transfer of pad material.
This tends to give the driver better "feel" and helps to avoid impending lockup.
The Crosley disc was a Goodyear development, a caliper type with ventilated disc, originally designed for aircraft applications.
This creates a smooth, even interface between the pad and the disc.
It commonly occurs when a motorist decelerates from speeds of around  to about , which results in severe vibrations being transmitted to the driver.
Drum brake conversions for Hot Shots were quite popular.
The typical external sensor is fundamentally different from the noises described above (when the brakes are applied) because the wear sensor noise typically occurs when the brakes are not used.
Generally road-going vehicles have two brake pads per caliper, while up to six are installed on each racing caliper, with varying frictional properties in a staggered pattern for optimum performance.
DTV is usually attributed to the following causes: waviness and roughness of disc surface, misalignment of axis (runout), elastic deflection, wear and friction material transfers.
Unlike car disc brakes that are buried within the wheel, bike disc brakes are in the airstream and have optimum cooling.
The "ventilated" disc design helps to dissipate the generated heat and is commonly used on the more-heavily-loaded front discs.
The piston is allowed to move out freely, but the slight amount of drag caused by the seal stops the piston from fully retracting to its previous position when the brakes are released, and so takes up the slack caused by the wear of the brake pads, eliminating the need for return springs.
A floating disc also avoids disc warping and reduces heat transfer to the wheel hub.
Chrysler discs were "self energizing," in that some of the braking energy itself contributed to the braking effort.
