Many studies have focused on the average change in behavior across participants, with some studies indicating disgust stimuli intensifies the severity of moral judgments.
Jonathan Haidt proposed that one’s instant judgments about morality are experienced as a "flash of intuition" and that these affective perceptions operate rapidly, associatively, and outside of consciousness.
The emotion of disgust may have an important role in understanding the neurobiology of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), particularly in those with contamination preoccupations.
Researchers have found that sensitivity to disgust is negatively correlated to aggression because feelings of disgust typically bring about a need to withdraw while aggression results in a need to approach.
The study consisted of four runs and in the visual runs participants viewed movies of individuals smelling the contents of a glass (conditions: disgusting, pleasant, or neutral) and expressing the facial expressions of the respective emotions.
* foods (spoiled foods);
A dental phobia comes from experiencing disgust when thinking about the dentist and all that entails.
It invokes a characteristic facial expression, one of Paul Ekman's six universal facial expressions of emotion.
Disgust is also theorized as an evaluative emotion that can control moral behavior.
The origin of disgust can be defined by motivating the avoidance of offensive things, and in the context of a social environment, it can become an instrument of social avoidance.
Being deemed disgusting produces a variety of cognitive effects that result in exclusion from the perceived inner group.
Moral disgust "pertains to social transgressions" and includes behaviors such as lying, theft, murder, and rape.
Disgust may produce specific autonomic responses, such as reduced blood pressure, lowered heart-rate and decreased skin conductance along with changes in respiratory behaviour.
With respect to studies using rats, prior research of signs of a conditioned disgust response have been experimentally verified by Grill and Norgren (1978) who developed a systematic test to assess palatability.
First, he discusses representations of disgust in literature, film and fine art.
Research continually has proven a relationship between disgust and anxiety disorders such as arachnophobia, blood-injection-injury type phobias, and contamination fear related obsessive–compulsive disorder (also known as OCD).
50 pictures were presented for four seconds and participants rated each picture on the dimensions disgust and fear.
Feelings of disgust, through rousing social distance, may lead to dehumanization.
The moral-legal argument, he remarks, "leaves much out of account."
For example, Disgust sensitivity is associated with moral hypervigilance, which means people who have higher disgust sensitivity are more likely to think that other people who are suspects of a crime are more guilty.
Both  Calder (2000) and Adolphs (2003) showed that lesions on the anterior insula lead to deficits in the experience of disgust and recognizing facial expressions of disgust in others.
Disgust sensitivity can also relate to various aspects of moral values, which can have a negative or positive impact.
When people see an image of rape or murder, they often turn their heads away to inhibit the incoming visual stimuli from the photograph just like they would if they saw a decomposing body.
Nietzsche became disgusted with the music and orientation of Richard Wagner, as well as other aspects of 19th century culture and morality.
It is believed that the emotion of disgust has evolved as a response to offensive foods that may cause harm to the organism.
In other words, those who feel self-disgust cannot easily condemn others to punishment because they feel that they may also be deserving of punishment.
This points to the universality, as well as survival value of the emotion of disgust.
Nussbaum published ''Hiding From Humanity: Disgust, Shame, and the Law'' in 2004; the book examines the relationship of disgust and shame to a society's laws.
She contrasts this with the "politics of disgust" which she argues denies citizens humanity and equality before the law on no rational grounds and cause palpable social harm.
These researchers showed that as nausea produced conditioned disgust reactions, by administering the rats with an antinausea treatment they could prevent toxin-induced conditioned disgust reactions.
For example, a vegetarian might feel disgust after seeing another person eating meat because he/she has a view of vegetarianism as the pure state-of-being.
Both groups reported similar conscious reactions to the images.
Moral disgust, then, is different from visceral disgust; it is more conscious and more layered in performance.
These findings demonstrate the role of the insula in transforming unpleasant sensory input into physiological reactions, and the associated feeling of disgust.
'''Disgust''' is an emotional response of revulsion to something considered offensive, distasteful, or unpleasant.
The first form is the denial of uniquely human traits, examples include: products of culture and modification.
A disgust reaction to obese individuals was also connected with views of moral values.
Furthermore, she argues this "politics of disgust" has in the past and present had the effects of supporting bigotry in the forms of sexism, racism and antisemitism and links the emotion of disgust to support for laws against Miscegenation and the oppressive caste system in India.
4.6% of women compared to 2.7% of men find the dentist disgusting.
Leviticus includes direct commandments from God to avoid disgust causing individuals, which included people who were sexually immoral and those who had leprosy.
The Taste Reactivity (TR) test has thus become a standard tool in measuring disgust response.
Facial feedback has also been implicated in the expression of disgust.
These findings demonstrate that observing someone else's facial expression of disgust seems to automatically retrieve a neural representation of disgust.
For example, if someone stumbles upon a pool of vomit, he/she will do whatever possible to put as much distance between himself/herself and the vomit as possible, which can include pinching the nose, closing the eyes, or running away.
The results indicated that both fear and disgust stimulus categories resulted in activations in the occipital cortex, prefrontal cortex and in the amygdala.
In contrast, the two groups were similar in their response to threat-inducing pictures, with no significant group differences at any site.
In other words, the feeling of disgust is often associated with a feeling that some image of what is pure has been violated.
It was found that the anterior insula was activated in both the observation of disgusted facial expressions (visual condition) and during the emotion of disgust evoked by unpleasant odors (olfactory condition).
This characteristic facial expression includes slightly narrowed brows, a curled upper lip, wrinkling of the nose and visible protrusions of the tongue, although different elicitors may produce different forms of this expression.
Although limited research has been done on self-disgust, one study found that self-disgust and severity of moral judgments were negatively correlated.
As mentioned earlier, women experience disgust more prominently than men.
* visible signs of infection
Moreover, lesions of the dorsal and medial raphe nuclei (depleting forebrain serotonin) prevented the establishment of lithium chloride-induced conditioned disgust.
* death (dead bodies and organic decay);
Potentially reconciling these effects, a study recently indicated that the direction and size of the effect of disgust stimuli on moral judgment is dependent on an individual's sensitivity to disgust.
The recognition of disgust is also important among species as it has been found that when an individual sees a conspecific looking disgusted after tasting a particular food, he or she automatically infers that the food is bad and should not be eaten.
Recent studies have shown that treatments that reduced serotonin availability or that activate the endocannabinoid system can interfere with the expression of a conditioned disgust reaction in rats.
Nussbaum identifies disgust as a marker that bigoted, and often merely majoritarian, discourse employs to "place", by diminishment and denigration, a despised minority.
In a study by Stark & colleagues (2007), sixty-six participants took part in an event-related fMRI analysis.
The two primary considerations are intrinsic quality (e.g.
Therefore, a person or group that is generally connected with disgusting effects and seen as physically unclean may induce moral avoidance.
and genetic compatibility (e.g.
Some researchers have distinguished between two different forms of dehumanization.
Research has established that when the idea or concept of cleanliness is made salient then people make less severe moral judgments of others.
OCD subjects and healthy volunteers showed activation patterns in response to disgust pictures that differed significantly at the right insula.
Researchers have proposed that many disgust elicitors are disgusting because they are reminders that humans are not diverse from other creatures.
Based on these findings, disgust may be used as an emotional tool to decrease aggression in individuals.
Disgust can be applied towards people and can function as maltreatment towards another human being.
The age of understanding seems to be around ten years old.
This may be explained by assuming that people begin to associate outsiders and foreigners with disease and danger while simultaneously associating health, freedom from disease, and safety with people similar to themselves.
This implies that disgust directed towards the self functions very differently from disgust directed towards other people or objects.
Disgust is one of the basic emotions recognizable across multiple cultures and is a response to something revolting typically involving taste or sight.
At a very young age, children are able to identify different, basic facial emotions.
What the study found was that people were not inclined in making inferences about the mental conditions of these particular disgust inducing groups.
This can occur if the person just wrinkles one's nose without awareness that they are making a disgust expression.
Disgust is also known to have originally evolved as a response to unpleasant food that may have been carriers of disease.
This evidence indicates an innate biological basis for the expression and recognition of disgust.
Research was performed which conducted several functional magnetic resonance images (fMRI) in which participants viewed images of individuals from stigmatized groups that were associated with disgust, which were drug addicts and homeless people.
Moreover, NK incorrectly categorized disgust facial expressions as anger.
However, insula activation was only significantly correlated with ratings of disgust, pointing to a specific role of this brain structure in the processing of disgust.
These forms of dehumanization have clear connections to disgust.
Furthermore, they emphasize the role of the insula in feelings of disgust across the senses.
The fact that the insula is necessary for our ability to feel and  recognize the emotion of disgust is further supported by neuropsychological studies.
From more recent theoretical and empirical information, it can be suggested that morality may be guided by basic affective processes.
They also associate them as being morally evil and criminal, thus endorsing them to harsher punishment in the setting of a court.
"In the absence of disgust", he observes, stating their claim, ".
Moral judgments can be traditionally defined or thought of as directed by standards such as impartiality and respect towards others for their well-being.
An example of this is if groups were to avoid people from outside of their own particular group.
In another intensive fMRI study by Wicker & colleagues (2003), disgust reactions to visual and olfactory stimuli were compared.
Research suggests that the experience of disgust can alter moral judgments.
Wilson links shame and guilt to disgust (now transformed, wholly or partially, into self-disgust) primarily as a consequence rooted in self-consciousness.
The difference in activity pattern was large: the reaction to a single image could predict a person's political leanings with 95% accuracy.
Sensitivity to disgust rises during pregnancy, along with levels of the hormone progesterone.
Unlike the other two domains, moral disgust "motivates avoidance of social relationships with norm-violating individuals" because those relationships threaten group cohesion.
An example of disgust in action can be found from the Bible in the book of Leviticus.
According to the book ''The Hydra's Tale: Imagining Disgust'' by Robert Rawdon Wilson, disgust may be further subdivided into physical disgust, associated with physical or metaphorical uncleanliness, and moral disgust, a similar feeling related to courses of action.
Those especially sensitive to pathogen disgust might be motivated by a desire to avoid the possibility of an open wound on the victim of the aggression; however, for those sensitive to sexual disgust, some sexual object must be present for them to be especially avoidant of aggression.
Wilson does this in two ways.
Finally, electrically stimulating the anterior insula through implanted electrodes produced sensations in the throat and mouth that were "difficult to stand".
Other studies have shown that lesions to the area postrema and the parabrachial nucleus of the pons but not the nucleus of the solitary tract prevented conditioned disgust.
The emotion of disgust can be described to serve as an affective mechanism following occurrences of negative social value, provoking repulsion, and desire for social distance.
Leigh Turner (2004) has argued that "reactions of disgust are often built upon prejudices that should be challenged and rebutted."
It was found that the facial expression of disgust is readily recognizable across cultures.
Removing "disgust" from public discourse constitutes an important step in achieving humane and tolerant democracies.
This study coincides with disgust following the law of contagion, which explains that contact with disgusting material renders one disgusting.
However, additional studies have found the reverse effect, and recent studies have suggested that the average effect of disgust on moral judgments is small or absent.
Thus, Wilson argues that, for example, contempt is acted out on the basis of the visceral emotion, disgust, but is not identical with disgust.
A number of writers on the theory of disgust find it to be the proto-legal foundation of human law.
Seeing someone else's facial emotional expressions triggers the neural activity that would relate to our own experience of the same emotion.
Martha Nussbaum, a jurist and ethicist, explicitly rejects disgust as an appropriate guide for legislating, arguing the "politics of disgust" is an unreliable emotional reaction with no inherent wisdom.
Scientists have conjectured that pregnancy requires the mother to "dial down" her immune system so that the developing embryo won't be attacked.
On the other hand, writers, such as Kass, find wisdom in adhering to one's initial feelings of disgust.
The patients also reported having reduced sensations of disgust themselves.
Self-report and behavioural studies found that disgust elicitors include:
This is in contrast to findings related to disgust, which typically results in harsher judgments of transgressions.
Moral disgust should be understood as culturally determined; physical disgust as more universally grounded.
Although disgust was first thought to be a motivation for humans to only physical contaminants, it has since been expanded to apply to moral and social moral contaminants as well.
Musically sensitive people may even be disgusted by the cacophony of inharmonious sounds.
Referring to a passage in Doris Lessing's ''The Golden Notebook'', Wilson writes that "the dance between disgust and shame takes place.
Nussbaum argues the harm principle supports the legal ideas of consent, the Age of majority and privacy and protects citizens.
Disgust has also figured prominently in the work of several other philosophers.
Disgust is experienced primarily in relation to the sense of taste (either perceived or imagined), and secondarily to anything which causes a similar feeling by sense of smell, touch, or vision.
Specifically, f-MRI studies have provided evidence for the activation of the insula in disgust recognition, as well as visceral changes in disgust reactions such as the feeling of nausea.
One’s disgust sensitivity can be either high or low.
Unlike the emotions of fear, anger, and sadness, disgust is associated with a decrease in heart rate.
outlines three domains of disgust: ''pathogen disgust'', which "motivates the avoidance of infectious microorganisms"; ''sexual disgust'', "which motivates the avoidance of dangerous sexual partners and behaviors"; and ''moral disgust'', which motivates people to avoid breaking social norms.
Pathogen disgust arises from a desire to survive and, ultimately, a fear of death.
(See Martha Nussbaum, ''From Disgust to Humanity: Sexual Orientation and Constitutional Law'').
For example; "I am disgusted by the hurtful things that you are saying."
The results of this study support the idea that NK suffered damage to a system involved in recognizing social signals of disgust, due to a damaged insula caused by neurodegeneration.
In the olfactory runs, the same participants inhaled disgusting or pleasant odorants.
Some other research suggests that an individual’s level of disgust sensitivity is due to their particular experience of disgust.
Wilson examines the claims of several jurists and legal scholars—such as William Ian Miller—that disgust must underlie positive law.
The importance of disgust recognition and the visceral reaction of "feeling disgusted" is evident when considering the survival of organisms, and the evolutionary benefit of avoiding contamination.
Self-disgust "may reflect a pervasive condition of self-loathing that makes it difficult to assign deserving punishment to others".
The inability to recognize expressions of disgust appears in carriers of the Huntington gene before other symptoms appear.
In ''The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals'', Charles Darwin wrote that disgust is a sensation that refers to something revolting.
Patients suffering from major depression have been found to display greater brain activation to facial expressions of disgust.
In discussing specific neural locations of disgust, research has shown that forebrain mechanisms are necessary for rats to acquire conditioned disgust for a specific emetic (vomit-inducing) substance (such as lithium chloride).
Since there are characteristic facial expressions (the clenched nostrils, the pursed lips)—as Charles Darwin, Paul Ekman, and others have shown—they may be represented with more or less skill in any set of circumstances imaginable.
Failure to attribute distinctively human traits to a group leads to animalistic dehumanization, which defines the object group or individual as savage, crude, and similar to animals.
This facial expression is also produced in blind individuals and is correctly interpreted by individuals born deaf.
When given a stimulus intraorally which had been previously paired with a nausea-inducing substance, rats will show conditioned disgust reactions.
Furthermore, electrical stimulation of the anterior insula conducted during neurosurgery triggered nausea, the feeling of wanting to throw up and uneasiness in the stomach.
Furthermore, Sprengelmeyer (1997) found that the brain activation associated with disgust included the insula and part of the gustatory cortex that processes unpleasant tastes and smells.
This evidence suggests that disgust is experienced and recognized almost universally and strongly implicates its evolutionary significance.
Disgust is one of the basic emotions of Robert Plutchik's theory of emotions and has been studied extensively by Paul Rozin.
NK’s neural damage included the insula and putamen and it was found that NK’s overall response to disgust-inducing stimuli was significantly lower than that of controls.
The patient showed a reduction in disgust-response on eight categories including food, animals, body  products, envelope violation and death.
Though different cultures find different things disgusting, the reaction to the grotesque things remains the same throughout each culture; people and their emotional reactions in the realm of disgust remain the same.
capsule, putamen and globus pallidus.
Jean-Paul Sartre wrote widely about experiences involving various negative emotions related to disgust.
Furthermore, in looking at the different disgust and vomiting reactions between rats and shrews the authors showed that these reactions (particularly vomiting) play a crucial role in the associative processes that govern food selection across species.
From this, moral intuitions are believed to be stimulated prior to conscious moral cognitions which correlates with having a greater influence on moral judgments.
To protect the mother, this lowered immune system is then compensated by a heightened sense of disgust.
It has been demonstrated that a similar mechanism may apply to emotions.
Second, since people know what disgust is as a primary, or visceral, emotion (with characteristic gestures and expressions), they may imitate it.
Disgust may have an important role in certain forms of morality.
Adults, however, are able to make the distinction.
Similarly, when a group experiences someone who cheats, murders, or rapes another member of the group, its reaction is to shun or expel that person from the group.
That is, the making of the facial expression of disgust leads to an increased feeling of disgust.
A slow choreography unfolds before the mind's-eye."
Young children tend to associate a face showing disgust with anger instead of being able to identify the difference.
there would be either total barbarism or a society ruled solely by force, violence and terror."
This behavioral immune system has been found to make sweeping generalizations because "it is more costly to perceive a sick person as healthy than to perceive a healthy person as sickly".
This is reflected in a study about dental phobia.
Animalistic dehumanization may generate feelings of disgust and revulsion.
The effect also seems to be limited to a certain aspect of morality.
The mirror-neuron matching system found in monkeys and humans is a proposed explanation for such recognition, and shows that our internal representation of actions is triggered during the observation of another’s actions.
Furthermore, disgust appears to be uniquely associated with purity judgments, not with what is just/unjust or what is harmful/caregiving, while other emotions such as fear, anger, and sadness are "unrelated to moral judgments of purity".
A common example of this is found in human beings who show disgust reactions to mouldy milk or contaminated meat.
The higher one’s disgust sensitivity is, the greater the tendency to make stricter moral judgments.
Many patients suffering from Huntington's disease, a genetically transmitted progressive neurodegenerative disease, are unable to recognize expressions of disgust in others and also don't show reactions of disgust to foul odors or tastes.
There may even be "disgust worlds" in which disgust motifs so dominate that it may seem that entire represented world is, in itself, disgusting.
* animals (fleas, ticks, lice, cockroaches, worms, flies, rats, and mice);
OCD subjects showed significantly greater neural responses to disgust-invoking images, specifically in the right insula.
In conservatives, the basal ganglia and amygdala and several other regions showed increased activity, while in liberals other regions of the brain increased in activity.
In a series of significant studies by Paul Ekman in the 1970s, it was discovered that facial expressions of emotion are not culturally determined, but universal across human cultures and thus likely to be biological in origin.
People with Huntington's disease are impaired at recognition of anger and fear, and experience a notably severe problem with disgust recognition.
He compares it to a "behavioral immune system" that is the "first line of defense" against potentially deadly agents such as dead bodies, rotting food, and vomit.
As an affective instrument for reducing motivations for social interaction, disgust can be anticipated to interfere with dehumanization or the maltreatment of persons as less than human.
The facial expression of disgust was found to be one of these facial expressions.
avoidance of inbreeding such as the incest taboo).
Therefore, examining images of homeless people and drug addicts caused disgust in the response of the people who participated with this study.
For those especially sensitive to moral disgust, they would want to be less aggressive because they want to avoid hurting others.
Functional MRI experiments have revealed that the anterior insula in the brain is particularly active when experiencing disgust, when being exposed to offensive tastes, and when viewing facial expressions of disgust.
One particular neuropsychological study focused on patient NK who was diagnosed with a left hemisphere infarction involving the insula, internal
Taking a further look into hygiene, disgust was the strongest predictor of negative attitudes toward obese individuals.
body symmetry, facial attractiveness, etc.)
The above-mentioned main disgust stimuli are similar to one another in the sense that they can all potentially transmit infections, and are the most common referenced elicitors of disgust cross-culturally.
found that disgust plays a role in the development and intensification of moral judgments of purity in particular.
When they see others different from themselves, they have an evolved sense of danger arising from a biological desire to avoid potential pathogens brought on by foreigners.
Disgust can be a cause and consequence of dehumanization.
Sexual disgust arises from a desire to avoid "biologically costly mates" and a consideration of the consequences of certain reproductive choices.
When this state-of-being is violated, the vegetarian feels disgust.
Although not a justification by any means, this could be an evolutionary explanation for why some people feel racism.
Wilson argues that there are many such "intellectual" compound affects—such as nostalgia and outrage—but that disgust is a fundamental and unmistakable example.
Jones & Fitness (2008) coined the term "moral hypervigilance" to describe the phenomenon that individuals who are prone to physical disgust will also be prone to moral disgust.
* body products (feces, urine, vomit, sexual fluids, saliva, and mucus);
The second form is the denial of human nature, examples include: emotionality and personality.
