This modifies the game world, affecting the story without punishing the player or forcing them to choose one style of play over another.
Gamasutra also listed it as one of the ten best games of 2012, while ''Eurogamer'' readers' voted it as the top game of 2012.
The full Arkane teamincluding their offices in Lyon, France, and Austin, Texasworked on the game.
A variety of pre-order incentives were announced for the game, including a ''Dishonored''-themed, 72-card deck of Tarot cards, a USB whale-oil lamp, and a smartphone decal.
Sneaking up behind enemies allows the player to silently subdue them, and unconscious or dead bodies can be moved and hidden.
Watters also mentioned lulls in enemy intelligence, but he said that it remained tenacious enough to keep the enemies formidable.
If much chaos is caused, the city remains in turmoil and is overrun with the plague.
The game is played from a first-person perspective and allows the player to undertake a series of assassination missions in a variety of ways, with an emphasis on player choice.
Games Game of the Year awards, and GameSpot's Best of 2012 series listed ''Dishonored'' as the ''Best Action/Adventure Game'', ''Best PS3 Game'', and ''Best Xbox 360 Game''.
The Tallboy design evolved into a lamplighter that would light street lamps with whale oil tanks, but after further development, the designers considered that their tall, mechanical legs allowed them to burn the dead and deal with plague-infected citizens while remaining above them and avoiding infection, leading to their final design as a guard armed with a bow.
After returning to the pub, Havelock confirms they have done enough damage to move on the Lord Regent.
The first installment of the story-based DLC ''The Knife of Dunwall'' was praised for its level design, which encouraged exploration to find hidden content and alternative routes through areas.
The city guards, for example, have small heads, low shoulders, and big hands, with animations that blend human and monkey movements.
The designers would then observe how players interacted with the level, using their abilities and powers to test whether the area provided a suitable challenge for the available powers, and then redesigned the level as needed.
Joystiq's Alexander Sliwinski was disappointed by the abrupt ending, and that the story did not explore much of the developed world of Dunwall, but said that the overall experience left him wanting more.
Corvo signals to Samuel, who ferries him to the former Lord Regent's lighthouse.
Some existing powers went through several revisions: a version of "Bend Time" caused the player to unfreeze enemies when touched; "Possession" allowed the player to control a victim remotely without inhabiting their body, but this offered less challenge.
''Game Informer''s Joe Juba also wrote that the game punishes players for taking certain paths, particularly one of violence, which results in more difficult gameplay and a perceived less satisfying ending, encouraging stealth over alternatives.
For other technologies, designers conceptualized using 18th-century technology to build modern items and vehicles, and creating 18th-century items using modern tools.
Reviewers also said that the game's variety encourages replaying.
Corvo is aided by the Loyalists, led by Admiral Havelock (John Slattery), and members: Piero Joplin (Brad Dourif)an inventor who builds Corvo's mask and supplies him with gadgets; Treavor Pendleton (Derek Phillips)a member of parliament; Samuel (Ryan Cutrano)a commoner who ferries Corvo to and from his missions; Overseer Teague Martin (Joel Johnstone); and Callista Curnow (Lena Headey)the caretaker for the Empress' daughter Young Lady Emily (Chloë Grace Moretz).
''Dishonored'' features role-playing game elements, such as the ability to upgrade powers and to make moral choices with a focus on non-linear consequences.
The game world is a series of self-contained, mission-focused areas designed for multiple avenues of exploration in terms of in-game movement and powers.
''Dishonored'' designer Ricardo Bare served as the content's creative director.
Corvo becomes an infamous assassin after he is framed for the empress' murder.
Carrie Fisher and Gregg Berger provide the voices of the loudspeakers found throughout the city relaying government propaganda.
Before the creation of Dunwall—inspired by late nineteenth-century London and Edinburgh—the game was set to take place in medieval Japan and seventeenth-century London.
The ending varies depending upon the level of chaos the player has caused throughout the game.
Samples of Licht's ambient themes were used in the game's few cinematic scenes, although Licht was not involved in scoring them.
Smith explained "Everybody just wants to be told in a video game that you’re great, no matter what you do.
For example, an NPC who disapproves of violence may refuse to support the player, or may even betray them.
Following its release, the game won several awards, including the 2012 Spike Video Game award for Best Action-Adventure Game and the 2013 BAFTA award for Best Game, and was repeatedly recognized as the best action-adventure game of 2012 and one of that year's best games.
Corvo can eliminate either Slackjaw or Granny Rags, who is revealed to be a witch called Vera Moray.
Corvo infiltrates Boyle's masquerade ball, deduces which of the three sisters is the Lord Regent's mistress, and disposes of her.
According to Gies, the game can initially seem unstructured from a level-design perspective, but after exploring them it becomes clear about how much thought went into different actions a player can take, allowing them to experiment instead of focusing on rigid objective-driven design.
This can affect the active mission and future missions.
The pair avoided the busier streets and focused on side streets and alleyways that would better suit the game's world.
''Edge'' also named Arkane Studios as the ''Studio of the Year''.
The city is a center for fishing and whaling; whale oil is a valuable resource which is needed to power the city.
Some features and ideas were removed during the design process, including a mental institution where Corvo would have faced sound-sensitive patients.
Reviewers likened ''Dishonored'' to well-received games from the early 2000s such as ''Deus Ex'' and the ''Thief'' video game series.
Antonov and Mitton employed a textile carpet designer in Russia to design and paint some of the in-game art.
Interactive Achievement Awards, the game was nominated for ''Adventure Game of the Year'' and ''Outstanding Achievement'' awards for ''Art Direction'', ''Game Direction'', ''Gameplay Engineering'', and ''Story''.
The sequel features Corvo and Emily as playable characters.
The team found retaining the large exterior they wanted while creating and disguising a smaller interior that was easier to traverse challenging.
In the same month, the game was used as inspiration for prosthetic makeup effects on the television reality show ''Face Off''.
Jurors from the Entertainment Software Association and the Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences selected "Regent", a piece of artwork for the game by artist Sergey Kolesov, to be one of 16 works for the 2012 Into the Pixel art exhibition.
The following day, Corvo is due to be executed.
Outstanding Achievement in Gameplay Engineering
The Outsider (Billy Lush) offers to help Corvo in his quest.
''Dishonored'' is the first Arkane Studios game Bethesda published after Bethesda parent ZeniMax Media bought Arkane in August 2010.
Dale also called it the first true stealth game for a long time, and the closest comparison to ''Thief'' in the current generation of games.
Viktor Antonov, Sebastien Mitton, Jean-Luc Monnet, Julien Roby
Adventure Game of the Year
''Dishonored'' also won the ''Audience Choice'' award at the 2013 Game Developer's Choice Awards, and received four nominations for ''Best Game Design'', ''Best Narrative'', ''Best Visual Arts'', and ''Game of the Year''.
Schreier stated that the game "blends the do-what-you-want structure of ''Deus Ex'' with the masterful world design of ''BioShock''."
Saving is disabled during combat.
Dale called ''Dishonored'' "one of the greatest games of this generation", and wrote that it excelled by drawing inspiration from older games and allowing players to figure out solutions without advice.
+ List of awards and nominations
Bethesda Softworks developed a spin-off iOS game, ''Dishonored: Rat Assassin'', which it released free of charge on 30 August 2012.
''Game Informer'' named it the ''Best Action game'' and one of the 50 best games of 2012.
Once finished with Havelock, Corvo may or may not rescue Emily.
They defined paths to the target areas, and developed and expanded them.
Criticism fell on the overarching narrative, which was considered predictable, and problems in controlling the player's character.
The team came under pressure to excise a scene from the end of the game where Samuel, in response to a player killing indiscriminately throughout the game, can betray Corvo by alerting enemies to his presence.
Problems in the player's control of Corvo were raised; Whitehead noted the controls were unresponsive when used in contextual situations.
The videos show the discovery of whale-oil fuel, the Outsider granting his mark to a small boy in search of revenge, and Piero creating Corvo's mask.
Game Developers Choice Awards
Whitehead criticized his experience of enemies that can see Corvo from a great distance yet sometimes remain unaware of him while in his enemies' peripheral vision.
However, it was decided that it was unrealistic that an enemy could stand directly in front of a player hiding in shadows and not detect them.
The city of Dunwall, designed to be a "contemporary and cool" "period piece", was inspired by late-19th and early-20th-century London and Edinburgh.
Corvo rescues Emily and eliminates the brothers.
If only a small amount of chaos has been caused, a golden age dawns and the plague is finally overcome.
"The Drunken Whaler" appeared in the game's trailer and attracted a positive reception during its presentation at the 2012 Electronic Entertainment Expo (E3).
It was released worldwide in October 2012 for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 3, and Xbox 360.
During the 2012 Thanksgiving holiday weekend (2325 November), it was the number-one game on Steam.
Colantonio and Smith were concerned that optional use of the Heart would result in some players missing the information it provides, but they considered that it was a part of giving the player the freedom to choose how to play.
Enemy artificial intelligence (AI) will respond to sound and can be distracted using sound to lure guards away from their positions.
Guards have several states of alertness, ranging from normal to suspicious; they can become aware of the player's presence or can actively search for them.
During the mission, Corvo meets Granny Rags and Slackjaw.
Corvo is aided in his quest by the Loyalistsa resistance group fighting to reclaim Dunwall, and the Outsidera powerful being who imbues Corvo with magical abilities.
They then populated the areas with NPCs, which they assigned to patrol routes and functions.
All three videos were created by animation studio Psyop and marketing firm Rokkan, narrated by Chloë Grace Moretz, and scored by Daniel Licht.
Outstanding Achievement in Story
The main supernatural powers are unlocked and purchased using ''runes''—artifacts carved from whale bone—and each can be upgraded.
He is framed for her murder and forced to become an assassin, seeking revenge on those who conspired against him.
The ''Definitive Edition'', a remastered version of the game featuring improved graphics, and all released DLC was released on the PlayStation 4 and Xbox One in August 2015.
The player requires mana to use these abilities; mana partially regenerates after use to allow "Blink" and "Dark Vision" powers to be used, but mana potions are required to regenerate more mana, restricting the use of higher cost abilities like "Possession" and "Bend Time".
The infected, known as "weepers", cry blood and can become violent.
He infiltrates the lighthouse and either subdues Pendleton and Martin or finds that Havelock, to ensure the Loyalists' actions are never known, has already killed them.
The Hound Pits pub, which acts as a base for the player, was initially a larger structure.
Order is maintained by the Tallboys, heavily armored officers on tall, mechanical legs, and districts are separated by barriers known as "Walls of Light", which are made of energy and disintegrate unauthorized people who try to cross them.
''Dishonored'' was named ''Best Action Adventure Game'' at the 2012 Spike Video Game Awards and was nominated for ''Best Graphics'', ''Best PS3 Game'',  ''Best Studio'' (Arkane Studios), ''Best Xbox 360 Game'', and ''Game of the Year''.
The player can use weapons including a sword, grenades, a crossbow, and pistols.
Sliwinski said that the controls worked well.
Following its debut, the trailer was watched over 850,000 times on YouTube, and it was awarded the Machinima Best Trailer award.
Each ''Tales from Dunwall'' episode received a gold Clio Award for achievement in advertising.
Instead of restricting these exploits, the team tried to design levels to accommodate them.
Using violence allows missions to be completed in less time than using a stealth approach, but violence consumes more in-game resources such as health and mana potions, which are required more often in direct combat.
The designers conceived the Tallboys as town criers.
Arkane Studios founder Raphaël Colantonio and ''Deus Ex'' developer Harvey Smith were the game's creative directors, and ''Deus Ex'' designer Ricardo Bare was its Lead Designer.
The player can also look through keyholes to gain insight into closed rooms.
''Dishonored'' – Lady Boyle's Last Party
''Computer and Video Games'' Alex Dale praised the variety and replayability of the game, and said, "''Dishonored'' doesn't demand you see everything it has to offer, although it is compulsive enough to ensure you will".
Interactive Achievement Awards
''Dishonored'' takes place in the industrial city of Dunwall, where technology and otherworldly forces coexist.
Exploring each level opens new paths and alternatives for accomplishing mission goals, and it is possible to complete all missions, eliminating all of Corvo's targets, in a non-lethal manner.
In North America, ''Dishonored'' was the fourth best-selling game of October 2012, selling 460,200 physical units, exceeded only by ''Pokémon Black Version 2'', ''Resident Evil 6'' and ''NBA 2K13''.
Other characters include Granny Rags (Susan Sarandon)a former aristocrat now blind and deranged after years of living on the streets; Daud (Michael Madsen)leader of a group of assassins known as "the Whalers"; and Slackjaw (Al Rodrigo)a gang leader.
The player's actions are not judged to be good or evil, but instead are tracked by a "chaos" system that records the amounts of friendly fire, violence, and deaths the player causes.
The game has four difficulty levels which modify the effectiveness of health and mana (magic) potions, and enemies' awareness, damage delivered, and responsiveness.
Arendt said that the game's flexibility was also a shortcoming, with certain playing styles favoring certain abilities that when fully upgraded, preclude the desire to explore levels for further enhancements and resources.
Enemies communicate their states of alertness to their allies, increasing the alertness level throughout the mission.
The player must defeat waves of enemies, complete time-trial challenges, and perform a series of drop assassinations in which the player kills a target by dropping from a location above the target.
''The Telegraph''s Tom Hoggins said it is like the "thinking man's games from the turn of the century which cherished player choice and control", comparing it against contemporary "noisy, brash thrill-rides obsessed with military ooh-rah and barely interactive set pieces".
PlayStation 4 and Xbox One versions of the game were released in August 2015.
Attendees of the 2012 Eurogamer Expo named it the number-one game of the show.
''Kotaku''s Jason Schreier contrasted ''Dishonored'' with other contemporary video games, and said that where other games may require a player to find a specific solution to defeat an enemy or solve a puzzle, ''Dishonored'' "feels like entering a designer's playpen", providing the player with an array of tools and then allowing them to experiment with how they interact with, or break, the world.
While resting at the pub, Corvo is taken to a dream world where he meets the Outsider, who brands Corvo with his mark.
He described the music as an "evil fog" that fades in and out of the game without being initiated by any scripted moments or to warn of impending danger, instead creating the impression of ever-present danger.
However, the gameplay was generally considered an improvement, providing more intricate level design and nuanced world building that produced gameplay requiring a more thoughtful approach.
The Heart provides contextual verbal feedback to the player, offering insight into a particular location, the secrets or history of a character, and its own origins.
Best Action Adventure Game
The capital of the Empire of the Isles, Dunwall is ruled by an oppressive regime that came to power following the assassination of the Empress and the kidnapping of her daughter.
Discussing the use of violence and the consequences of in-game freedom, developer Joe Houston recounted his experience while watching a tester play a mission to infiltrate a masquerade ball; Houston determined that not killing the NPCs opened up more objectives and interactions, but the tester systematically killed every NPC in the level, which Houston found disconcerting.
The government uses the plague as an excuse to take or purge citizens as they wish.
Golden Joystick Awards
Corvo removes the High Overseer and discovers Emily in a brothel called the Golden Cat under the supervision of twins Custis and Morgan Pendleton.
The city is stricken with a plague spread by rats, which is killing the poor and isolating the rich.
Upon waking he  learns that his drink was poisoned by Samuel at the behest of Havelock and his Loyalist allies Treavor Pendleton and Teague Martin to prevent him interfering in their plan to install Emily as Empress and rule through her.
Smith, Colantonio, Antonov, and Mitton spent three years in pre-production.
The system also influences which of the game's two endings is reached, with variations based on which characters live or die.
Corvo is sent by the Loyalists to eliminate the conspirators behind the Lord Regent's plot, and the player is given the option to kill or otherwise neutralize Corvo's targets, the first of which is High Overseer Campbell.
''Eurogamer''s Dan Whitehead, The Verge's Arthur Gies, and Giant Bomb's Patrick Klepek criticized the end of the game for its generic missions, "late narrative missteps", and abrupt ending.
Balancing the effectiveness of the player's powers was considered difficult.
The Heart was originally designed as a method of identifying assassination targets using vibration and sound mechanics.
Set in the fictional, plague-ridden industrial city of Dunwall, ''Dishonored'' follows the story of Corvo Attano, bodyguard to the Empress of the Isles.
In his cell, a letter from Empire Loyalists is smuggled to Corvo, and he is given the means to escape.
The Heart's gameplay role continued to change, and it continued to provide narration on its perceptions of different characters, which helped to reinforce the narrative themes and to differentiate the city's social classes in a more subtle alternative to having the characters provide expository dialogue.
In frustration, the designers decided to simply close off the third floor entirely.
Magic and ranged weapons are assigned to the player character's left hand control and a sword is assigned to the right hand control.
Corvo returns to the pub to find it overrun with guards and that Havelock has killed many of the Loyalists.
The 2013 British Academy of Film and Television awards saw the game win the ''Best Game'' award and receive nominations for ''Game Design'' and ''Story''.
According to G4's Jake Gaskill, the AI worked well in combat, with enemies employing different tactics and effectively countering attacks, but when not alerted, enemies would ignore actions directly in front of them.
Described as a mixture of God and the Devil, The Outsider imprints his mark on Corvo, imbuing him with magical abilities, and provides him with a mechanically altered human heart (April Stewart) that tells Corvo secrets.
Movement through and exploration of levels is designed to support the player character's abilities, rather than specific paths that are aimed at a particular gameplay style, such as hacking or sneaking.
Keefer wrote that in-game mechanics like the powers and equipment are not essential and did not detract from the story,  but served as optional bonuses in levels that can be completed with creativity and cleverness.
A sequel, ''Dishonored 2'', will be released on 11 November 2016.
Daniel Licht composed the game's score—an ambient, violin-heavy presentation designed to represent 19th-century London.
''Dishonored'' was released on Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 3, and Xbox 360 platforms in North America and France on 9 October 2012, on 11 October in Australia and 12 October in Europe and the United Kingdom.
The main character of ''Dishonored'', whom the player controls, is Corvo Attano, the former bodyguard to Dunwall's Empress Jessamine Kaldwin (April Stewart).
'''''Dishonored''''' is a 2012 stealth action-adventure video game developed by Arkane Studios and published by Bethesda Softworks.
For the same event, Eurogamer named ''Dishonored'' as its "Game of the Show".
Other recognition included: "Best of Show" by Digital Trends; "Best of E3 Selection" by Yahoo Games and Game Revolution; "The Best Game at E3" by Cinema Blend; and "Top 10 Game of E3" by ''Paste'' magazine and ''Stuff''; Kotaku listed the "Blink" ability as one of the "Top 27 Game Ideas" at the event.
In 2013, GamingBolt ranked ''Dishonored'' as the 95th Greatest Video Game Ever Made, and in 2015, Rock, Paper, Shotgun listed it as the 23rd best PC First-Person Shooter ever made, while ''PC Gamer'' named it the 6th greatest PC Game.
Sokolov is taken to the pub for interrogation, under which he divulges the identity of the Lord Regent's financier, Lady Boyle.
A set of three animated videos, titled ''Tales from Dunwall'', serving as a prequel to ''Dishonored'', were released in September 2012.
Samuel, betraying you and firing off that flare, was something we had to fight for."
''Dishonored'' won ''Best Overall Action Game'' and ''Best PC Action Game'' in IGN's Best of 2012 awards, and was nominated for ''Best Overall Game'' and ''Best Action Game'' on both PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 platforms.
It was also considered that making certain areas dark hid the designers' work and contrasted poorly with well-lit areas.
If the player remains concealed from guards, their alertness will drop to "aware", but it will not return to normal in that mission.
Outstanding Real-Time Visuals in a Video Game
The city's design is modeled on London and Edinburgh between the late 1800s and the early 1900s.
The world map was designed as a single piece of art and was sectioned so the designers were clear on where each mission takes place.
The game designers chose Corvo to remain silent so that players could project themselves onto the character.
''Dishonored'' was displayed for the public at the 2012 Electronic Entertainment Expo (E3), and received four nominations from the Game Critics Awards for Best Action/Adventure Game, Best Console Game, Best Original Game, and the overall Best of Show award.
Coins must be collected to upgrade weapons and gadgets.
Each design was hand drawn.
The game drew frequent comparisons to another mobile game, ''Fruit Ninja''.
Initially, only three bone charms can be active at any time; up to six can be active through optional upgrades.
News.com.au's William Colvin  wrote that the game's only shortcoming could be that it offered too many options, and Watters stated the game achieves a rare feat of being "compulsively replayable".
''Dishonored'' received positive reviews, focusing on the missions' individual narratives and the freedom available in completing them.
The Visual Effects Society nominated Viktor Antonov, Sebastien Mitton, Jean-Luc Monnet, and Julien Roby for ''Outstanding Real-Time Visuals in a Video Game''.
The story, however, was generally criticized.
Antonov described his inspiration from London as "a big metropolis, it's messy, it's chaotic and intense&nbsp;...&nbsp;and it's both exotic and familiar to Americans and to Europeans".
Corvo defeats Daud and his assassins before traveling through Daud's territory and into the sewers where he finds Granny Rags attempting to cook Slackjaw.
DLC incentives offered in-game packs for the player character, including the "Arcane Assassin", "Shadow Rat", "Backstreet Butcher", and "Acrobatic Killer" packs that offer enhancements for the player character's abilities, money, and a statue of one of the game's creatures.
Missions can be completed through stealth, combat, or a combination of both.
The team already had ideas for developing a similar game, but until Bethesda approached them, Arkane had no specific ideas.
After a philosopher discovered that whale oil—known in the city as trans—can be used as a fuel, the government used it to develop powerful weaponry, which in turn bred government corruption.
The designers did not consider all of the powers they conceived during development, such as a power to become a shadow that could move along walls, to be suitable for the game.
Mitton established defining groups for characters such as rich, poor, and hostile with specific anatomy and posture designs, and animators created stylized movements for each social class and specific characters to help convey emotions.
After many decades, Corvo dies of natural causes and Empress Emily Kaldwin I the Wise buries him beside Empress Jessamine.
When Corvo wakes, he is a prisoner of the assassin Daud and his men, who killed the Empress and intend to claim the bounty placed on Corvo's head by the now Lord Regent Havelock.
During the first week of sales in the United Kingdom, ''Dishonored'' became the second best-selling game on all available formats behind ''FIFA 13'' (in its third week), the number-one selling PC game, and the biggest launch of an original game in 2012, exceeding ''Sleeping Dogs''.
Interrogating Corvo, the Lord Regent confesses that he masterminded the assassination and framed Corvo.
''Dishonored'' was officially released to manufacturing on 28 September 2012.
Additionally, Daud also has his own gadgets, such as stun mines, a concealed wrist-mounted bow, "Chokedust" grenade, which dazes enemies; and arc mines that disintegrate enemies.
Havelock's journal reveals that the Lord Regent suspects that Emily is Corvo's daughter.
The Heart is a human heart modified with technology and the supernatural, that helps the player to find collectible items in the levels, and "plays a part related to informing the player's decisions about when to apply violence or not, making it a really interesting, more subtle part of the power fantasy."
At the 2013 Golden Joystick Awards, ''Dishonored'' received six nominations for ''Game of the Year'', ''Best Newcomer'', ''Best Storytelling'', ''Studio of the Year'' (Arkane Studios), ''Best Visual Design'', and ''Best Gaming Moment'' for "Lady Boyle's Last Party".
The game's visuals and design were generally praised; Gaskill said that the art style is unique and the game world is both vivid and fully realized, and Gies stated that the game has a "unifying vision and design that stands apart from its contemporaries as something different".
Filling out the interior of the pub required too many stairs and rooms, and the large amount of climbing made navigation confusing.
Whitehead also stated that the unique, inventive, and distinctive missions allowed for memorable gameplay that subverted the overarching story.
Samuel sets Corvo adrift on the river and flees.
He discovers where Havelock has taken Emily, and can save Piero, Sokolov and Calista.
The development team researched unexpected ways the player could combine Corvo's special powers, such as combining a high jump with the ability to teleport in order to travel greater distances than either ability allowed independently.
It features Daud (again voiced by Michael Madsen) as a playable character, with his own abilities including: "Void Gaze", which combines the functions of Corvo's "Dark Vision" with those of The Heart, guiding Daud to runes and bone charms; his own version of "Blink", which allows him to pause time; and an ability which allows Daud to summon his assassin followers.
Two story-based campaign DLC packs were announced in October 2012 for release in 2013, and follow the assassin Daud as he seeks redemption for murdering Empress Jessamine in ''Dishonored''s main story.
Bethesda Softworks first announced ''Dishonored'' as a first-person, stealth, action-adventure game for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 3, and Xbox 360 platforms on 7 July 2011.
