Partners Federal Credit Union, the credit union for employees of The Walt Disney Company, provides nearly 20 ATMs backstage for cast member use and maintains an express branch at the Team Disney Anaheim building.
The earliest documented draft of Disney's plans was sent as a memo to studio production designer Dick Kelsey on August 31, 1948, where it was referred to as a "Mickey Mouse Park", based on notes Walt made during his and Ward Kimball's trip to Chicago Railroad Fair the same month, with a two-day stop in
The park was opened one year and one day later.
'''Disneyland Park''', originally '''Disneyland''', is the first of two theme parks built at the Disneyland Resort in Anaheim, California, opened on July 17, 1955.
This sparked some controversy with supporters of the traditional band.
Every year in October, Disneyland has a Halloween promotion.
Fantasyland was originally styled in a medieval European fairground fashion, but its 1983 refurbishment turned it into a Bavarian village.
In 1982, Disney dropped the idea for individual ride tickets to a single admission price with unlimited access to all attractions, "except shooting galleries".
Ouimet quickly set about reversing certain trends, especially concerning cosmetic maintenance and a return to the original infrastructure maintenance schedule, in hopes of restoring Disneyland's former safety record.
** Independence Day Week: ''Disney's Celebrate America: A 4th of July Concert in the Sky''
The physical location of the monorail station did not change, but the original station building was demolished as part of the hotel downsizing, and the new station is now separated from the hotel by several Downtown Disney buildings, including ESPN Zone and the Rainforest Café.
Special holiday-themed groups are also added each year, such as the Main Street Carolers during the Christmas season.
File:Busy Tomorrowland July 16 2009 myjedilightsaber Cropped.jpg|'''Tomorrowland'''(Space Mountain in 2009)
Main Street, U.S.A. is reminiscent of the Victorian period of America with the train station, town square, movie theater, city hall, firehouse complete with a steam-powered pump engine, emporium, shops, arcades, double-decker bus, horse-drawn streetcar, jitneys and other bits of memorabilia.
The  gauge Jolly Trolley can also be found in this area, though it closed as an attraction in 2003 and is now present only for display purposes.
In Fantasyland, these classic stories of everyone's youth have become realities for youngsters&nbsp;– of all ages&nbsp;– to participate in."
The initial concept, the Mickey Mouse Park, started with an  plot across Riverside Drive.
When signing credit card receipts, guests are asked for their "autograph".
The Tomorrowland attractions have been designed to give you an opportunity to participate in adventures that are a living blueprint of our future."
It is from this point that characters start playing their part.
At one point, while in Fantasyland, Linkletter tried to give coverage to Cummings, who was on the pirate ship.
* The Firehouse Five Plus Two (originally a band composed of Imagineers) found at the Firehouse on Main Street.
In September 1959, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev spent thirteen days in the United States, with two requests: to visit Disneyland and to meet John Wayne, Hollywood's top box-office draw.
It is now home to the Jedi Training Academy interactive stage show where children are chosen as Jedi ''padawan'' and taught how to use a lightsaber.
The design of Main Street, U.S.A. uses the technique of forced perspective to create an illusion of height.
This area is the home of the famous Club 33.
The other train was identical, but blue in color, August 1963.
The Frito-Lay Company saw the popularity of the item and began selling them regionally in 1964, and then nationwide in 1966.
It is a two-story stage where the lower stage rises from below floor level.
Approximately 30% of days will be designated as "value", mainly weekdays when school is in session, 44% will be designated as "regular", and 26% will be designated as "peak", mostly during holidays and weekends in July.
Our adventures are designed to give you the feeling of having lived, even for a short while, during our country's pioneer days."
The park was renamed "Disneyland Park" to distinguish it from the larger complex under construction.
The 14-acre land—which will also be duplicated at Disney's Hollywood Studios—will include two new attractions; a ''Millennium Falcon''-inspired attraction that will allow guests in control of a "customized secret mission and a second attraction that places guests in "a climactic battle between the First Order and the resistance".
In the late 1990s, work began to expand the one-park, one-hotel property.
One of Disneyland's signature attractions is its Disneyland Monorail System monorail service, which opened in Tomorrowland in 1959 as the first daily-operating monorail train system in the Western Hemisphere.
Another likely influence was Benton Harbor, Michigan's nationally famous House of David's Eden Springs Park.
Frontierland is also home to the Golden Horseshoe Saloon, an Old West-style show palace, where the comedic troupe "Billy Hill and the Hillbillies" entertains guests.
During this promotion, or as Disneyland calls it a "party", areas in the park are decorated in a Halloween theme.
On February 28, 2016, Disneyland adopted a demand-based pricing system for single-day admission, charging different prices for "value", "regular", and "peak" days, based on projected attendance.
Disneyland has featured a number of different parades traveling down the park's central Main Street&nbsp;– Fantasyland corridor.
Formerly the area was home to Indian Village, where indigenous tribespeople demonstrated their dances and other customs.
On April 14, 2016, construction began north of Frontierland, on the site where Big Thunder Ranch was located, in addition to some backstage areas.
File:Adventureland at Disneyland IMG 3879 (cropped).jpg|'''New Orleans Square'''(The Haunted Mansion and ''Fantasmic!''
Henry Ford's Museum and Greenfield Village, a place with attractions like a Main Street and steamboat rides, which he had visited eight years earlier.
While people wrote letters to Disney about visiting the Walt Disney Studios, he realized that a functional movie studio had little to offer to visiting fans, and began to foster ideas of building a site near the Burbank studios for tourists to visit.
Traffic was delayed on the two-lane Harbor Boulevard.
Outside consultants McKinsey & Company were brought in to help streamline operations, resulting in many changes and cutbacks.
Walt Disney used to drive the fire engine around the park before it opened, and it has been used to host celebrity guests and in the parades.
It was originally the only attraction on the property; its name was changed to Disneyland Park to distinguish it from the expanding complex in the 1990s.
In Holiday Magic'' firework show and ''A Christmas Fantasy Parade'', well the Haunted Mansion and It's a Small World are temporarily redecorated in a holiday theme.
Based on Price's analysis (for which he would be recognized as a Disney Legend in 2003), Disney acquired  of orange groves and walnut trees in Anaheim, southeast of Los Angeles in neighboring Orange County.
File:6308-DisneyLandMonoRail-ParkStation.jpg|The blue Mark II ALWEG Monorail train, August 1963.
ABC broadcast the event live, during which many guests tripped over the television camera cables.
After hiring a consultant to help him determine an appropriate site for his project, Disney bought a  site near Anaheim in 1953.
As of March 2007, Mickey and his "toon" friends no longer climb the Matterhorn but the climbing program continues.
Disney did not call ''Celebrate!
It has two narrow lanes and runs underneath the Monorail track.
One of the most popular parades was the Main Street Electrical Parade, which now resides at the Magic Kingdom at Walt Disney World in Lake Buena Vista, Florida.
Attractions that had been in the park on opening day had one ride vehicle painted gold, and the park was decorated with fifty Golden Mickey Ears.
Famous figures who were scheduled to show up every two hours showed up all at once.
There are many specialty stores on Main Street including: a candy store, jewelry and watch shop, a silhouette station, a store that sells Disney collectible items created by various artists, and a hat shop where you have the option of creating your own ear hat along with a personalized embroidery.
File:Disneyland Fantasyland IMG 3950.jpg|'''Fantasyland'''(''Peter Pan's Flight'' and the ''Matterhorn Bobsleds'')
While this idea was not original to Disney, its business advantages were obvious: in addition to guaranteeing that everyone paid a large sum even if they stayed for only a few hours and rode only a few rides, the park no longer had to print tickets or ticket books, staff ticket booths, or provide staff to collect tickets or monitor attractions for people sneaking on without tickets.
Disney does report the time the Flag Retreat is scheduled on its Times Guide, offered at the entrance turnstiles and other locations.
In October 2009, Grier announced his retirement, and was replaced by George Kalogridis.
Initial attractions included ''Rocket to the Moon'', Astro-Jets and Autopia; later, the first incarnation of the Submarine Voyage was added.
Every evening at dusk, there is a military-style flag retreat to lower the U.S.
Some parents threw their children over the crowd's shoulders to get them onto rides, such as the King Arthur Carrousel.
File:6308-340DisneyLandChopper-R.jpg|A Los Angeles Airways S-61L helicopter lifting off from the Disneyland heliport, August 1963.
The second crash in Compton, California on August 14, 1968, killed 21.
Most of the original main street vehicles were designed by Bob Gurr.
Each 1900s-era train departs Main Street Station on an excursion that includes scheduled station stops at: New Orleans Square Station; Toontown Depot; and Tomorrowland Station.
Both trains were created especially for Disneyland.
His designers began working on concepts, though the project grew much larger than the land could hold.
It is very popular with Disneyland guests, as it is home to some of the park's most popular attractions: ''Pirates of the Caribbean'' and the ''Haunted Mansion'', with nighttime entertainment in ''Fantasmic!''.
Fantasyland is the area of Disneyland of which Walt Disney said, "What youngster has not dreamed of flying with Peter Pan over moonlit London, or tumbling into Alice's nonsensical Wonderland?
With a  gauge, the most common narrow track gauge used in North America, the track runs in a continuous loop around Disneyland through each of its realms.
U.S. Route 101 (later Interstate 5) was under construction at the same time just north of the site; in preparation for the traffic Disneyland was expected to bring, two more lanes were added to the freeway before the park was finished.
The "city" is also home to cartoon character's houses such as the house of Mickey Mouse, Minnie Mouse and Goofy, as well as Donald Duck's boat.
All of the vehicles found on Main Street, U.S.A., grouped together as the Main Street Vehicles attraction, were designed to accurately reflect turn-of-the-century vehicles, including a  gauge tramway featuring horse-drawn streetcars, a double-decker bus, a fire engine, and an automobile.
Major buildings backstage include the Frank Gehry-designed Team Disney Anaheim, where most of the division's administration currently works, as well as the Old Administration Building, behind Tomorrowland.
Emmer was a long-time Disney cast member who had worked at Disneyland in his youth prior to moving to Florida and held multiple executive leadership positions at the Walt Disney World Resort.
Encircling Disneyland and providing a grand circle tour is the Disneyland Railroad (DRR), a  narrow gauge short-line railway consisting of five oil-fired and steam-powered locomotives, in addition to three passenger trains and one passenger-carrying freight train.
Walt Disney had a longtime interest in transportation, and trains in particular.
Disneyland Park introduced the Paint the Night parade and Disneyland Forever fireworks show, and Sleeping Beauty Castle is decorated in diamonds with a large "60" logo.
At the center of Disneyland and immediately North of Central Plaza stands Sleeping Beauty Castle, which provides entrance to Fantasyland.
Various other street performers appear throughout the park, some seasonally.
In an effort to boost profits, various changes were begun by then-executives Cynthia Harriss and Paul Pressler.
Currently, the Mark VII is running with the colors red, blue and orange.
Fans of the park decried the perceived decline in customer value and park quality and rallied for the dismissal of the management team.
Since 2009, Disneyland has moved to a rotating repertoire of firework spectaculars.
The area underwent a major transformation in 1967 to become ''New Tomorrowland'', and then again in 1998 when its focus was changed to present a "retro-future" theme reminiscent of the illustrations of Jules Verne.
* Characters from Alice in Wonderland who stage a wacky game of "Disneyland Musical Chairs" at Coca-Cola Corner each afternoon.
From May 5, 2005 through November 7, 2008, as part of Disneyland's 50th anniversary, ''Walt Disney's Parade of Dreams'' was presented, celebrating several of the classic Disney stories including ''The Lion King'', ''The Little Mermaid'', ''Alice in Wonderland'', and ''Pinocchio''.
** Mickey's Halloween Party Exclusive: ''Halloween Screams''
Disney visited the park and ultimately bought one of the older miniature trains originally used there; the colony had the largest miniature railway setup in the world at the time.
His ideas evolved to a small play park with a boat ride and other themed areas.
Buildings along Main Street are built at  scale on the first level, then  on the second story, and  scale on the third—reducing the scale by  each level up.
Disneyland debuted a new nighttime parade called "Paint the Night", on May 22, 2015, as part of the park's 60th anniversary.
'), Bekonscot Model Village & Railway, Beaconsfield, England.
Critter Country opened in 1972 as "Bear Country", and was renamed in 1988.
Backstage areas are generally off-limits to park guests.
* The All-American College Band, composed of student musicians from colleges and universities around the U.S., which performs during summer.
"On stage" refers to any area of the resort that is open to guests.
The reason for doing so is that they would start a new higher energy band.
Five generations of monorail trains have been used in the park, since their lightweight construction means they wear out quickly.
By 1960, Walt Disney Productions bought out all other shares, a partnership which would eventually lead to the Walt Disney Corporation's acquisition of ABC in the mid-1990s.
Over the years, it was eventually replaced with Club Buzz, a Buzz Lightyear-themed stage and show featuring the space character from the ''Toy Story'' films.
It is the first area guests see when they enter the park (if not entering by monorail), and is how guests reach Central Plaza.
There's Magic in the Stars''
Similarly to Disney himself, Ouimet and Emmer could often be seen walking the park during business hours with members of their respective staff, wearing cast member name badges, standing in line for attractions, and welcoming guests' comments.
The show is normally offered at 8:45 or 9:30&nbsp;pm if the park is scheduled to close at 10&nbsp;pm or later, but shows have started as early as 5:45&nbsp;pm.
It is a popular myth that Walt Disney derived inspiration from his boyhood town of Marceline, Missouri, but it was actually more closely based on Imagineer, Harper Goff's hometown of Fort Collins, Colorado.
After nearly a decade of deferred maintenance, the original park was showing signs of neglect.
The celebration started on May 5, 2005 and ended on September 30, 2006, and was followed by the "Year of a Million Dreams" celebration, lasting twenty-seven months and ending on December 31, 2008.
The horse-drawn streetcars are also used by the park entertainment, including The Dapper Dans.
* The Dapper Dans barbershop quartet, which performs on Main Street.
Disney hired Harrison Price from Stanford Research Institute to gauge the proper area to locate the theme park based on the area's potential growth.
In 2003, a dark ride called The Many Adventures of Winnie the Pooh replaced the Country Bear Jamboree, which closed in 2001.
The Midway Plaisance there included a set of attractions representing various countries from around the world and others representing various periods of man; it also included many rides including the first Ferris wheel, a "sky" ride, a passenger train that circled the perimeter, and a Wild West Show.
File:Big Thunder Mountain Railroad.JPG|'''Frontierland'''(Big Thunder Mountain Railroad in 2008)
File:Disneyland Main Street.jpg|'''Main Street, U.S.A.'''(July 4, 2010)
Fantasyland has the most fiber optics in the park; more than half of them are in Peter Pan's Flight.
The Golden Horseshoe Revue was an American frontier-themed vaudeville show starring Sluefoot Sue and Pecos Bill.
The Sleeping Beauty castle is also known to become snow-capped and decorated with colorful lights during the holidays as well.
Some characters have specific areas where they are scheduled to appear, but can be found wandering as well.
Disneyland spends about $41,000 per night on the fireworks show.
"To create a land that would make this dream reality", said Walt Disney, "we pictured ourselves far from civilization, in the remote jungles of Asia and Africa."
Other mountain climbers could also be seen on the Matterhorn from time to time.
Arriving guests were transported to the Disneyland Hotel via tram.
Most of them have off-white flat roofs that support HVAC units and footpaths for cast members.
A stretch of the road, wedged between Tomorrowland and Harbor Boulevard, is called Schumacher Road.
With a few minor exceptions, such as July 4 and New Year's Eve, shows must finish by 10&nbsp;pm due to the conditions of the permit issued by the City of Anaheim.
After the extremely negative press from the preview opening, Walt Disney invited attendees back for a private "second day" to experience Disneyland properly.
Cast members who are in charge of a specific team are called "leads," as in a film or theater "lead role".
He started to visit other parks for inspiration and ideas, including Tivoli Gardens in Denmark, Efteling in the Netherlands, and Greenfield Village, Playland, and Children's Fairyland in the United States; and (according to the film director Ken Annakin, in his autobiography 'So You want to be a film director?
That way, when the door is open, guests will not accidentally see a person out of character backstage.
Shortly afterward, he selected Greg Emmer as Senior Vice President of Operations.
The attraction opened in 1959, was redesigned in 1972, closed in 1992 for reasons of security and the new installation of pneumatic ram firework shell mortars for "Believe, There's Magic in the Stars", and reopened 2008 with new renditions and methods of storytelling and the restored work of Eyvind Earle.
While watching them ride the merry-go-round, he came up with the idea of a place where adults and their children could go and have fun together, though his dream lay dormant for many years.
In July 2015, Disneyland celebrated its 60th anniversary.
The "Happiest Homecoming on Earth" was an eighteen-month-long celebration (held through 2005 and 2006) of the fiftieth anniversary of the Disneyland Park, also celebrating Disneyland's milestone throughout Disney parks worldwide.
As part of the Casa de Fritos operation at Disneyland, "Doritos" (Spanish for "little golden things") were created at the park to recycle old tortillas that would have been discarded.
Since 2000, presentations have become more elaborate, featuring new pyrotechnics, launch techniques and story lines.
Matt Ouimet, the former president of the Disney Cruise Line, was promoted to assume leadership of the Disneyland Resort in late 2003.
Star Tours was closed in July 2010, and replaced with Star Tours–The Adventures Continue in June 2011.
Billy Hill and the Hillbillies have played their guitars and banjos in a bluegrass-and-comedy show, but recently moved to Knott's Berry Farm.
The Disneyland Band, which has been part of the park since its opening, plays the role of the Town Band on Main Street, U.S.A.
Opened in 2001, Disney California Adventure Park was built on the site of Disneyland's original parking lot.
File:6505-Disneyland&Hotel.jpg|Aerial photo of Disneyland and the surrounding area, including the Disneyland Hotel with its Monorail Station, the Disneyland Heliport, orange groves, Santa Ana Freeway and Melodyland Theater, May 1965
He chose the latter, leaving many drinking fountains dry.
Toontown features two main attractions: Gadget's Go Coaster and Roger Rabbit's Car Toon Spin.
'', which debuted in 1992, is a popular multimedia nighttime show on the Rivers of America.
File:Star Wars Land 3.jpg|'''''Star Wars'' Land''' (future) (Working title; Star Wars Land conceptual drawing, 2016)
Space Mountain and the Haunted Mansion are temporarily re-themed as part of the promotion.
The boundary between on and off-stage is demarcated at every access point.
These include Inn Between (behind the Plaza Inn), Eat Ticket (near the Team Disney Anaheim building behind Mickey's Toontown), and Westsider Grill (located approximately behind New Orleans Square).
An opening date has not been announced.
In 2004, Disneyland introduced a new air launch pyrotechnics system, reducing ground level smoke and noise and decreasing negative environmental impacts.
The first person to buy a ticket and enter the park was David MacPherson with ticket number 2, as Roy O. Disney arranged to pre-purchase ticket number 1 from Curtis Lineberry, the manager of admissions.
He initially envisioned building a tourist attraction adjacent to his studios in Burbank to entertain fans who wished to visit; however, he soon realized that the proposed site was too small.
The next day, the park's official public opening day, crowds gathered in line as early as 2:00&nbsp;am.
Entertainment and attractions include Big Thunder Mountain Railroad, the Mark Twain Riverboat, the Sailing Ship Columbia, Pirate's Lair on Tom Sawyer Island, and Frontierland Shootin' Exposition.
Our scientists today are opening the doors of the Space Age to achievements that will benefit our children and generations to come.
* The Ragtime Pianist at Coca-Cola Refreshment Corner (also known as "Coke Corner") on Main Street.
One-Day, One-Park, Adult Admission Prices over time
Walt Disney's Enchanted Tiki Room which is located at the entrance to Adventureland is the first feature attraction to employ Audio-Animatronics, a computer synchronization of sound and robotics.
In earlier years, the offices where administrative work took place were referred to as "production offices".
Guests paid a small admission fee to get into the park, but admission to most of the rides and attractions required guests to purchase tickets, either individually or in a book, that consisted of several coupons, initially labeled "A" through "C".
There are several points of entry from outside the park to the backstage areas: Ball Gate (from Ball Road), T.D.A.
The service ended after two fatal crashes in 1968: The crash in Paramount, California, on May 22, 1968 killed 23 (the worst helicopter accident in aviation history at that time).
During the 1955 inauguration Walt Disney dedicated Tomorrowland with these words: "Tomorrow can be a wonderful age.
From the late 1950s to 1968 Los Angeles Airways provided regularly scheduled helicopter passenger service between Disneyland and Los Angeles International Airport (LAX) and other cities in the area.
* '''2015-2016 fireworks repertoire'''
Adventureland, Frontierland, and Tomorrowland are arrayed on both sides of the castle.
The ceremony is usually held between 4:00 and 5:00&nbsp;pm, depending on the entertainment being offered on Main Street, USA, to prevent conflicts with crowds and music.
The road is so called because it generally follows outside the path of Disneyland's berm.
The concept for Disneyland began when Walt Disney was visiting Griffith Park in Los Angeles with his daughters Diane and Sharon.
The Grand Circle Tour then concludes with a visit to the "Grand Canyon/Primeval World" dioramas before returning passengers to Main Street, U.S.A.
Disneyland producer Ward Kimball had rocket scientists Wernher von Braun, Willy Ley, and Heinz Haber serve as technical consultants during the original design of Tomorrowland.
From Disneyland's opening day until 1982, the price of the attractions was in addition to the price of park admission.
Many Disney characters can be found throughout the park, greeting visitors, interacting with children, and posing for photos.
Disneyland originated many concepts which have become part of the corporate culture of Disney Parks as a whole, and which in turn spread to its other parks.
"A" coupons allowed admission to the smaller rides and attractions such as the vehicles on Main Street, whereas "C" coupons were used for the most common attractions like the Peter Pan ride, or the Tea Cups.
Main Street is also home to the Disney Art Gallery and the Opera House which showcases ''Great Moments with Mr. Lincoln'' a show featuring an Audio-Animatronic version of the president.
Disneyland was dedicated at an "International Press Preview" event held on Sunday, July 17, 1955, which was only open to invited guests and the media.
It uses Frontierland and New Orleans Square as the spectator arena.
This generated negative publicity since Pepsi sponsored the park's opening; disappointed guests believed the inoperable fountains were a cynical way to sell soda, while other vendors ran out of food.
"Stage managers" are responsible for overseeing the operation of the park.
Throughout all the iterations of Disneyland during the seventeen or so years when Disney was conceiving it, one element remained constant: a train encircling the park.
During the Christmas season, Disneyland presents "A Christmas Fantasy" Parade.
In Holiday Magic'', which has been running since 2000, except for a hiatus in 2005 during the park's 50th anniversary celebration.
With the creation of Downtown Disney in 2001, the new destination is Downtown Disney, instead of the Disneyland Hotel.
The park did however hire people of Asian descent, such as Ty Wong and Bob Kuwahara.
Each cast member's job is called a "role".
Finding Nemo Submarine Voyage opened on June 11, 2007, resurrecting the original Submarine Voyage which closed in 1998.
The park's management team during the mid-1990s was a source of controversy among fans and employees.
According to Walt Disney, "All of us have cause to be proud of our country's history, shaped by the pioneering spirit of our forefathers.
** 2005&nbsp;– 2014: ''Remember... Dreams Come True''
Disneyland Park, the Disneyland Hotel, the site of the original parking lot, and acquired surrounding properties were earmarked to become part of the Disneyland Resort.
