In attacking shipping, the problems of inaccuracy were amplified by the fact that the target could be moving, and could change its direction between the time that the bombs were released and the time that they arrived.
Udet, then a stunt pilot, flew one in aerobatic displays during the 1936 Berlin Olympic Games.
Both the Imperial Japanese Navy (IJN) and the United States Navy invested considerable effort on dive bombers.
The US Navy overcame its hostility to Mitchell's findings and deployed the Curtiss F8C Falcon biplane from 1925 on carriers, while the Marine Corps operated them from land bases as the Helldiver, a name later reused by Curtiss for other dive bombers.
A bomb can be dropped far from a target's air defences using a guidance system to hit the target, ensuring greater accuracy and minimizing risk to the crew.
A few weeks later, Lieutenant Arthur Gould dived to just  to hit buildings near Arras.
At over  unladen, one of the biggest single engine fighter bombers of the war, it could carry ten  HVARs.
The writings of Colonel J. F. C. Fuller a staff officer and Basil Liddell-Hart a military journalist propounded the concept of mobile tank forces supported by ground-attack aircraft creating a breakthrough.
Rudel co-wrote a post-war book about his experiences and consulted with the US Air Force.
Japan started the war with a very good design, the carrier-borne Aichi D3A ("Val").
Diving towards the target simplifies the bomb's trajectory and allows the pilot to keep visual contact throughout the bomb run.
These were eagerly studied by Heinz Guderian, who created the combination of Panzers and Junkers Ju 87s that proved so potent in Poland and France.
On 9 April 1942 the Royal Navy aircraft carrier  escorted by the destroyer  were attacked by more than 32 Aichi D3As and both were sunk shortly before eight defending RN FAA Fairey Fulmars, of 806 Squadron,  could reach them.
The US Army Air Corps (USAAC) adopted the Douglas Havoc, first flying in January 1939, for a similar role, although originally ordered by France.
Once under water, they curved upwards and punctured the pressure hull below the waterline, disabling or sinking the submarine.
Commanders urged pilots to dive from their cruising altitude to under  to have a better chance of hitting small targets, such as gun emplacements and trenches.
The results showed that a vertical dive into the wind sighting along the top of rather than through the sight was best.
This puts great strains on both pilot and aircraft.
The RAF, with the cancellation of the Hawker Henley and having noted the success of Stukas in Poland, took delivery instead.
The primary source of error is the effect of wind on the bomb's flight path after release.
Some were held back for the United States Army Air Force after the attack on Pearl Harbor, but did not see combat.
The combination of these two forces, drag and gravity, results in a complex pseudo-parabolic trajectory.
Air brakes on modern aircraft function in a similar manner in bleeding off excessive speed.
The Tallboy was developed by Vickers designer Barnes Wallis who followed it up with the even larger  Grand Slam earthquake bomb which was used to destroy railway viaducts and bridges, targets that could previously only be damaged in diving attacks.
These rockets were fitted with iron spikes and fired at a shallow angle into the sea.
Heavy casualties produced by air to ground attack on trenches set the minds of senior officers in the newly created Royal Air Force against dive bombing.
On 14 November 1914, four Avro 504s attacked the Zeppelin factory at Friedrichshafen on Lake Constance, diving from  to  to ensure hits.
Henceforward attacks were mostly confined to kamikaze.
Bomb sighting becomes trivial, requiring only a straight line of sight to the target.
As this exposed the aircraft and crew to destructive ground fire in their unprotected open cockpits, few chose to follow this order.
The Curtiss SBC Helldiver was a biplane dive bomber that had been taken aboard the USS Yorktown (CV-5) in 1934, but it was slow at .
Beginning on 18 June 1918, the Royal Air Force (formerly the Royal Flying Corps) ordered large numbers of the Sopwith TF.2 Salamander, a single seat biplane.
The Japanese sent 54 D3A Vals carrying  bombs to attack parked aircraft at Wheeler Field and Ford Island.
As the Royal Navy again took control of the Fleet Air Arm, it  began to receive the Fairey Swordfish from 1936 and Blackburn Skuas from November 1938.
Second Lieutenant William Henry Brown, a Canadian from British Columbia serving with the RFC and flying a Royal Aircraft Factory S.E.5a, made the first attack on a vessel on 14 March 1918 destroying an ammunition barge on a canal at Bernot near St Quentin, diving to  to release his bombs.
The Royal Flying Corps developed strafing with diving aircraft using both machine guns and small bombs as a deliberate tactic.
Based on the Sopwith Snipe it had  of armour in the front end to protect the pilot and fuel against ground fire.
Fifty ex-US Navy examples were flown to Halifax, Nova Scotia by Curtiss pilots and embarked on the French aircraft carrier ''Béarn'' in a belated attempt to help France, which surrendered whilst they were mid-Atlantic.
It flew close support for General William Slim's Burma campaign bombing Japanese supply routes, bridges and artillery.
However, the British Government's Chief Scientist, Henry Tizard, formed a panel of experts, which recommended using rockets.
Dive brakes were employed on many designs to create drag which slowed the aircraft in its dive and increased accuracy.
The Vultee Vengeance was developed in the US as a private venture dive bomber for export.
Of the 37 Salamanders produced before the end of October 1918, only two were delivered to France, and the war ended before those planes could see action.
It had armoured protection for the pilot and fuel system to attack at low level but lacked dive brakes for a vertical dive.
Both naval staffs opposed the view taken by the respective airmen.
The Fairey Albacore was also designed to act as a dive bomber and was used extensively in this role during World War Two.
The Imperial Japanese Navy ordered the Heinkel He 50 in 1931 as a floatplane and carrier-based dive bomber and embarked some on new carriers from 1935 in a developed form as the Heinkel He 66, from which the Aichi D1A was further developed in Japan.
The most successful dive bomber pilot was Hans-Ulrich Rudel who made 2,530 sorties.
Although new aircraft could still be dived toward their targets, they were no longer optimized for steep diving attacks.
Losses were such that it was rapidly withdrawn from operations over the United Kingdom.
As aircraft grew more powerful, dive bombing became a favoured tactic particularly against small targets such as ships.
The United States Army Air Force took a version of the Dauntless with a different tailwheel tire and no arrester hook as the Douglas A-24 Banshee.
As Zeppelins were tethered close to stores of hydrogen, results were often spectacular.
Dive bombing would allow a low-cost Luftwaffe to operate effectively in the tactical role.
The aircraft did not encounter opposing modern fighters, which concealed from the Luftwaffe its vulnerability.
The Stuka could be used as aerial artillery moving far ahead of the main forces with Panzers to smash enemy strong points without waiting for the horse-drawn artillery to catch up.
When the bomb is dropped, the force of gravity simply increases its speed along its nearly vertical trajectory.
Sanderson's bomb hit its target and the raids were repeated.
An example of this problem can be seen in the attempts to attack the Japanese carriers using B-17s at altitude early in the Battle of Midway, with no hits scored.
A '''dive bomber''' is a bomber aircraft that dives directly at its targets in order to provide greater accuracy for the bomb it drops.
Sadly, it was also accident-prone, achieving the highest casualty rate during training of any USAAF aircraft and was officially restricted to no more than a 70-degree dive.
The Japanese introduced the Aichi D3A Val monoplane as a successor to the biplane Aichi D1A in 1940 with trials aboard the carriers Kaga and Akagi.
Brown's technique was emulated by other British squadrons.
In 1919, United States Marine Corps pilot Lt. L. H. Sanderson mounted a rifle in front of the windshield of his Curtiss JN-4 (a training aircraft) as an improvised bomb sight, loaded a bomb in a canvas bag attached to the plane's underside, and made a solo attack in support of US Marines trapped by Haitians during the United States occupation of Haiti.
In the case of a bomber flying horizontally, the bomb will initially only be travelling forward.
The RAF cancelled their requirement and relegated the Hawker Henley dive bomber to other roles, while the Fleet Air Arm's Blackburn Skua was expected to do double duty, as a fighter when out of reach of land-based fighter support, and as a dive bomber.
The invasion of Poland and the Battle of France saw the Stuka used to devastating effect.
On 27 November 1915, Lieutenant Duncan Grinnell-Milne arrived in his Royal Aircraft Factory B.E.2c over railway marshalling yards near Lys in Northern France, to find the target already crowded by other bombers.
Dive bombing was most widely used before and during World War II; its use declined during the war, when its vulnerability to enemy fighters became apparent.
The United States Army Air Force took delivery of a few North American Mustangs from a British order but, as there were no funds to buy more fighters, they were modified as dive bombers with a new wing and dive brakes.
It was rushed to Europe for use on D-Day and later used by Navy aircraft in the Pacific.
Wallis also designed a bomb that bounced across water to destroy the Eder and Moehne dams, which needed to be hit repeatedly at the same spot under water to be breached but had nets to protect against torpedoes.
In the Soviet counter-offensive, Operation Kutuzov, which concluded Kursk, the Luftwaffe claimed 35 tanks destroyed in a single day.
In crates headed for the Philippines, they were diverted to Australia and operated from Charters Towers in Queensland.
Most tactical aircraft today allow bombing in shallow dives to keep the target visible, but true dive bombers have not been a part of military forces since the start of the jet age.
But it had to fly in a nose up attitude to maintain level flight, which made landings difficult.
The first use of dive bombing by the Royal Flying Corps, which had been urging its pilots to drop bombs at heights below  in order to hit within  of the target since February 1915, was later that year.
Udet was impressed with the Stuka's performance in Spain, so he ordered that the Junkers Ju 88 medium bomber should also be retrofitted as a dive bomber.
Within hours the Imperial Japanese Navy had lost four of its aircraft carriers and many experienced naval airmen, both of which Japan would have difficulty in replacing.
On 12/13 May 1940, Stukas flew 300 sorties against strong French defensive positions at the Battle of Sedan.
The German battleship ''Tirpitz'' was subjected to countless attacks, many while in dock and immobile, but was not sunk until the British brought in enormous  Tallboy bombs to ensure that even a near miss would be effective.
Lack of a sufficiently powerful, reliable powerplant fatally compromised its utility, it never performed in the dive bomber role, and the requirement was eventually dropped.
The staff officer to the Royal Tank Corps Lieutenant-Colonel J. F. C. Fuller published findings which were later taken up by Heinz Guderian to form the basis for the blitzkrieg tactics of using dive bombers with tanks employed by the Germans in 1939-40.
They were very successful in this role in the early days of Operation Barbarossa before the Red Army Air Force countered with modern fighters, such as the Yakovlev Yak-1 and later Yakovlev Yak-3
An aircraft diving vertically minimizes its horizontal velocity component.
Some recorded altitude at the top and bottom of their dive in log books and squadron records, but not the steepness of the dive.
He was awarded the Military Cross for this and other exploits.
Through the pioneering efforts by the Luftwaffe's Fritz X and the USAAF's Azon, controlled-trajectory bombs evolved into today's smart bombs.
The Luftwaffe confiscated a Chinese export shipment and ordered more.
This allows attacks on point targets and ships, which were difficult to attack with conventional "level" bombers, even ''en-masse''.
The RAF used them on Hurricanes in June 1942 against Rommel's tanks.
On 5 April 1942, the heavy cruisers  and  were leaving Colombo, Ceylon to join the British Eastern Fleet, but had been spotted by Japanese reconnaissance aircraft.
No Allied Air Force operated a modern dive bomber at the outbreak of the Second World War, although both the Royal Navy and the US Navy had shipboard dive bombers.
None of these were dive bombers.
The bomb travels a virtually straight line between release and impact, eliminating the need for complex calculations.
This was only effective for "area bombing", however, since the path of the bomb is only roughly estimated.
This enabled German forces to make a fast and unexpected breakthrough of the French lines, eventually leading to the German advance to the Channel and the cutting off of much of the Allied army.
The RAF had chosen the single-engined Fairey Battle and the twin-engined Bristol Blenheim as its tactical bombers.
It was considered too vulnerable to German fighters for use in Europe or North Africa, but large numbers flew in Burma from March 1943.
By January 1943, American pilots who had been flying in RAF Eagle Squadrons before the US entered the war, converted from Supermarine Spitfires to Republic P-47 Thunderbolts to form the USAAF 4th Air Fighter Group.
Some were modified to destroy tanks with heavy calibre, 37mm ''Bordkanone'' BK 3,7 autocannons mounted in gun pods below the wings.
Additionally, gravity accelerates the bomb downward.
Both were level bombers with similar bomb-loads and entered service in 1937.
First flown in October 1942 as the North American A-36 Apache, they arrived in Morocco in April 1943 to assist with driving the Afrika Korps out of Africa.
The Hawker Henley had a top speed only  slower than the Hawker Hurricane fighter from which it was derived.
A rocket has a much flatter trajectory than a bomb, allowing it to be launched with reasonable accuracy from a shallow dive, and could be fitted on existing aircraft.
German ''blitzkrieg'' tactics utilised dive bombers in place of artillery to support highly mobile ground troops.
When Italy joined the war on the Axis side, Breda Ba 65s were shipped to North Africa for use against the British but they also proved vulnerable.
It first flew in March 1941.
By setting the bombsight to this "range angle", the aircraft can time the drop of its bombs at the instant when the target is lined up in the sight.
Some 23 Breda Ba 65s were flown by Italian pilots also in support of Nationalist Forces.
To maximise speed and range, the Japanese had dispensed with armour protection and self-sealing fuel tanks, which proved to be very costly when the US Navy deployed the new Essex-class aircraft carriers, which each carried 36 of the faster Grumman F6F Hellcats.
Condor Legion experience in Spain demonstrated the value of dive bombers especially on the morale of troops or civilians unprotected by air cover.
He dived from  to  before releasing his  bombs.
The cost in pilots was very high, with casualties on some days reaching 30 percent.
But the heavy casualties to unprotected pilots cast a pall on the results and influenced RAF thinking for 20 years.
The British Expeditionary Force had set up strong defensive positions on the west bank of the Oise River to block rapidly advancing German armour.
It was to prove a potent weapon against surface ships.
With a sleek fuselage, retracting landing gear and a powerful licensed Daimler-Benz 601 engine, it could outpace pursuing Grumman F4F Wildcats.
This forward motion is opposed by the drag of the air, so the forward motion decreases over time.
In addition, most higher-altitude gunners and gunnery systems were designed to calculate the lateral movement of a target; while diving, the target appears almost stationary.
This limited the class to light bomber designs with ordnance loads in the range of  although there were larger examples.
The SMS Ostfriesland was sunk and so later were the USS Alabama, USS Virginia and USS New Jersey.
Colonel, later General, Billy Mitchell arrived in France with the first US Army and Air Force units soon after 6 April 1917 and began to organize the US Army Air Force flying French Salmson 2s, a spotter plane.
A second and simpler technique is to bomb from a shallow dive angle, sometimes referred to as "glide bombing".
At the Battle of Cambrai on 20 November 1917, 320 Mark IV tanks and 300 aircraft, mostly Sopwith Camels and Airco DH 5s with  bombs, were used to suppress artillery and machine guns.
The Sopwith Salamander was developed as the first dedicated ground attack fighter.
The Apache did not fly with the RAF, but served with US squadrons in Sicily, Italy and, by late summer of 1943, was based in India for use over Burma and China.
Sopwith Camels and Royal Aircraft Factory S.E.5as were used in early 1918 to dive bomb targets from various heights, with different bombs and with and without the use of the Aldis gunsight, which had been invented in 1916 to aid pilots to calculate the deflection required to hit a traversing German plane.
Japan's industrial output dropped from a peak in 1942, while that of the US increased by a quarter in two years from 1942 to 1944.
The American and Japanese navies and the Luftwaffe chose vertical dive bombers whose slow speed had dire consequences when they encountered modern fighters.
The drawback of modifying and strengthening an aircraft for near-vertical dives was the loss of performance.
The Vultee Vengeance, mostly used by the RAF and RAAF in Burma, was designed to be trimmed for diving, with no lift to distort the dive.
The initial impact at Cambrai was highly successful.
This required some 50,000 modifications, increasing its weight by 5 tons and reducing speed by .
Only the Wehrmacht learned from the Battle of Cambrai (1917) in using dive bombers in conjunction with tanks.
Caltech developed the  High Velocity Aircraft Rocket (HVAR) with a  warhead for the US Navy.
The most famous examples are the Junkers Ju 87 ''Stuka'', which was widely used during the opening stages of World War II, the Aichi D3A ''"Val"'' dive bomber, which sank more Allied warships during the war than any other Axis aircraft, and the Douglas SBD Dauntless, which sank more Japanese shipping than any other allied aircraft type.
It had a zero incidence wing, which was perfect for vertical dives as there was no lift from wing or tailplane in a dive.
In principle, it obviated the need for a vertical dive.
After World War II, the rise of precision-guided munitions and improved anti-aircraft defences – both fixed gunnery positions and fighter interception – led to a fundamental change in dive bombing.
The Fulmars shot down four D3As and damaged two while losing two Fulmars to the more numerous D3As.
The Junkers Ju 88 and Petlyakov Pe-2 were widely used in this role.
By February 1941, most had been shot down by British fighters.
Stukas quickly broke the defences, and a crossing was forced long before German artillery arrived.
If the range for a given set of conditions is calculated, simple trigonometry can be used to find the angle between the aircraft and the target.
Tests against a stationary target showed an average error of  from a release height of  and a dive angle of 70 degrees.
In the 1930s and early 1940s, dive bombing was the best method for attacking high-value compact targets, like bridges and ships, with accuracy.
With four 0.303 Browning guns and another rear-facing, it was expected to defend against air attack with a top speed of  at sea level, which was a comparable low altitude speed with other navies' carrier borne fighters in 1938-39.
Five airframes left behind in Halifax later reached the RAF, who quickly relegated them to the status of ground instructional airframes for the training of mechanics.
When released from an aircraft, a bomb carries with it the aircraft's velocity.
Many were also supplied to the Soviet Air Force, which also used the Ilyushin Il-2 Sturmovik ground-attack aircraft in huge numbers.
From December 1942, the Dauntless was replaced with the faster, but more complex and trouble-prone Curtiss SB2C Helldiver.
Later, using a tank buster Stuka with 20mm cannon, he claimed over 100 Soviet tanks destroyed, mostly at the Battle of Kursk in July 1943.
New weapons, such as rockets, allowed for better accuracy from smaller dive angles and from greater distances.
The Japanese were now on the defensive.
In contrast, when a horizontal bomber veers offline while approaching the bomb release point, turning to the angle that would correct this also changes the speed of the aircraft over the ground (when there is a wind) and thereby changes the range as well.
The aircraft was very fast at low altitude.
Opposite conclusions were drawn by the RAF and USAS, from two very different tests regarding the usefulness of dive bombers, with the RAF concluding that the cost in pilots was too high to justify the results and the USAS considering it as a potent anti-ship weapon.
In the post-war era, this role was replaced with a combination of improved and automated bombsights, larger weapons and even nuclear warheads that greatly reduced the need for accuracy, and finally by precision guided weapons as they became available in the 1960s.
It was certainly not near vertical, as these early aircraft could not withstand the stresses of a sustained vertical dive.
Mitchell became a strong advocate of dive bombers after witnessing British and French aerial attacks.
The Stuka had 7.92mm machine guns or 20mm cannons mounted in the wings.
In Morocco on 11 November 1942, American Curtiss P-40 Warhawks shot down 15 Ju 87Ds in one encounter.
A dive bomber dives at a steep angle, normally between 45 and 90 degrees, and thus requires an abrupt pull-up after dropping its bombs.
He also insisted, against the advice of Ernst Heinkel, that the Heinkel He 177 bomber, ordered in November 1937, be able to dive bomb.
The Royal Naval Air Service developed dive bombing as a tactic against Zeppelin hangars and formed and trained a squadron at Manchester for this task.
First flown in 1935, it was a single-seat dive bomber carrying the same bomb load as the Stuka with a  speed advantage in level flight.
The skies over Sedan also showed the Stuka's weakness when met with fighter opposition; six French Curtiss H-75s attacked a formation of unescorted Ju 87s, shooting down 11 out of 12 without loss.
So not until 1934 did the Air Ministry issue specifications for both land-based and carrier-based dive bombers.
The British Army had used rockets against low-flying bombers during the Battle of Britain by enlarging the tube from  to  and fitting high explosive warheads; it became an anti-tank weapon.
Japanese wartime production of bombers of all types was just 16% of the US output.
Against small targets, a single-engine dive bomber could achieve four times the accuracy at one tenth of the cost of a four engine heavy bomber, such as the projected Ural bomber, and it could reach the battlefield well ahead of field artillery.
Both aircraft were used at Pearl Harbor on 7 December 1941.
The British Air Ministry issued a specification 4/34 in 1934 for a ground attack aircraft with dive bombing capability.
The TF stood for “Trench Fighter,” and the aircraft was designed to attack German trenches with both Vickers .303 machine guns and  bombs.
The horizontal bomber was thus ill-suited for tactical bombing, particularly in close support.
Pilots in the Pacific later developed a technique of skip bombing which required flying at low level and dropping a spherically-nosed conventional bomb onto the sea, at a shallow angle, which then bounced back into the air.
Several early Junkers Ju 87 dive bombers, which first flew in on 13 September 1935, were shipped secretly from Germany to Spain to assist General Francisco Franco's Nationalist rebels in the Spanish Civil War.
''Soryu'' and ''Kaga'' were ablaze within six minutes, while ''Akagi'', hit only once, exploded as the bomb ignited fuel and bombs in the hangar.
Large formations could drop bombs on an area hoping to hit a specific target, but there was no guarantee of success, and huge areas around the target would also be hit.
Attempts at using high-altitude bombing in near-proximity to troops often ended in tragedy, with bombs both hitting their targets and friendly troops indiscriminately.
On 12 November 1944, two  Tallboy bombs were dropped by Avro Lancasters from  and hit the German battleship ''Tirpitz'' at supersonic speeds, sinking it.
Successful strikes on marine vessels by horizontal bombers were extremely rare.
To compensate, many dive bombers were designed to be trimmed out, either through the use of special dive flaps (such as Fairey Youngman flaps) or through changes in tailplane trim that must be readjusted when the dive is completed.
At the Battle of Midway on 7 June 1942, after most of the torpedo bombers had been shot down without a single hit, Dauntlesses from  found four Japanese carriers, in the vulnerable stage of refuelling and rearming aircraft for a second strike.
As the bomber dives, the aim could be continually adjusted.
The Royal Naval Air Service was targeting the Zeppelin sheds in Germany and occupied Belgium and found it worthwhile to dive onto these sheds to ensure a hit, despite the increased casualties from ground fire.
The later Salmson 4 was to be a ground attack and dive bomber, but production was cancelled at the end of the war.
On 8 October 1914, a Sopwith Tabloid with two  bombs attacked a hangar at Düsseldorf after a dive to .
Mitchell by now assistant chief of the Air Service United States Army arranged tests with captured German and obsolete US ships in June and July 1921 and repeated over the next two years using Royal Aircraft Factory S.E.5as as dive bombers and Handley Page O/400s and Martin NBS-1s as level bombers carrying bombs of different weights up to .
Six were shot down.
Targets were often likely to be a small or fast-moving and the need for accuracy made dive bombers essential.
By late 1944, the RAF was able to hit stationary targets with greater accuracy from greater heights inflicting far more damage with less risk.
Seven were shot down and many others destroyed on the ground at Marine Corps Air Station Ewa At the Battle of the Coral Sea, Dauntlesses sank the light carrier ''Shoho'' and damaged the fleet carrier ''Shokaku'' together with Douglas TBD Devastator torpedo bombers.
It operated in the Royal Australian Air Force, Indian Air Force as well as the RAF.
The Stuka was even more vulnerable to the Hawker Hurricane with its  speed edge and eight machine guns, which it first met over France and then in larger numbers in the Battle of Britain.
The RAF ordered the US-built Vultee A-31 Vengeance in 1943, but it to was similarly relegated to target towing after a brief operation period in secondary theatres.
The angle of dive in these attacks was again not recorded.
Just 200 were built and it was relegated to target towing.
