The facility is expected to solve the recurring electricity shortages, decrease the nation's reliance on Ethiopia for energy, reduce costly oil imports for diesel-generated electricity, and thereby buttress the GDP and lower debt.
Most arrived within the past few years, including the Somali money transfer company Dahabshiil and BDCD, a subsidiary of Swiss Financial Investments.
Extreme geographic points include: to the north, Ras Doumera and the point at which the border with Eritrea enters the Red Sea in the Obock Region; to the east, a section of the Red Sea coast north of Ras Bir; to the south, a location on the border with Ethiopia west of the town of As Ela; and to the west, a location on the frontier with Ethiopia immediately east of the Ethiopian town of Afambo.
About 94% of residents adhere to Islam, a religion that has been predominant in the region for more than 1,000 years.
Conditions in the jails are considered worse, with no formal system of care.
For some occasions such as festivals, women may adorn themselves with specialized jewelry and head-dresses similar to those worn by the Berber tribes of the Maghreb.
The judicial system consists of courts of first instance, a High Court of Appeal, and a Supreme Court.
This officially marked the establishment of the ''Republic of Djibouti'', named after its capital city.
Wildlife of Djibouti is also listed as part of Horn of Africa biodiversity hotspot and the Red Sea and Gulf of Aden coral reef hotspot.
Most local Muslims adhere to the Sunni denomination, following the Shafi'i school.
After independence, Djibouti had two regiments commanded by French officers.
Islam entered the region very early on, as a group of persecuted Muslims had sought refuge across the Red Sea in the Horn of Africa at the urging of the Islamic prophet Muhammad.
The referendum turned out in favour of a continued association with France, partly due to a combined yes vote by the sizable Afar ethnic group and resident Europeans.
The Constitution of Djibouti names Islam as the sole state religion, and also provides for the equality of citizens of all faiths (Article 1) and freedom of religious practice (Article 11).
At an average altitude of , the area includes the Goda massif, with a peak of .
A burgeoning commercial hub, the nation is the site of various foreign military bases, including Camp Lemonnier.
These idioms are the mother tongues of the Somali and Afar ethnic groups, respectively.
The two largest ethnic groups are the Somali (60%) and the Afar (35%).
The Council of Ministers (cabinet) is responsible to the legislature and presided over by the President.
Taddesse Tamrat explains Sultan Umar's military expedition as an effort to consolidate the Muslim territories in the Horn, in much the same way as Emperor Yekuno Amlak was attempting to unite the Christian territories in the highlands during the same period.
There were also allegations of widespread vote rigging.
France's 13th Demi-Brigade of the Foreign Legion is based in Djibouti, but not in Djibouti City.
Djibouti is likewise an active participant in Arab League and African Union affairs.
The gabay (epic poem) has the most complex length and meter, often exceeding 100 lines.
As the headquarters of the IGAD regional body, Djibouti has been an active participant in the Somalian peace process, hosting the Arta conference in 2000.
However, it was announced in June 2010 that Phase I of the project had been delayed.
Net enrollments in middle school over the same period rose by 72.4% for girls and 52.2% for boys.
Institutions of higher learning in the country include the University of Djibouti.
The remaining 5% of Djibouti's population primarily consists of Arabs, Ethiopians and Europeans (French and Italians).
About 93.1% of Djibouti's women and girls have undergone female genital mutilation (female circumcision), a pre-marital custom mainly endemic to Northeast Africa and parts of the Near East that has its ultimate origins in Ancient Egypt.
It comes in many varieties, including songs for weddings, war, praise and boasting.
These two states inevitably came into conflict over Shewa and territories further south.
Following the establishment of the Federal Government of Somalia in 2012, a Djibouti delegation also attended the inauguration ceremony of Somalia's new president.
The Djibouti area has been inhabited since at least the Neolithic.
Djibouti was ranked the 177th safest investment destination in the world in the March 2011 Euromoney Country Risk rankings.
Traditional Arabian garb such as the male jellabiya (''jellabiyaad'' in Somali) and the female jilbāb is also commonly worn.
Djibouti is the southernmost country on the Arabian Plate.
The government subsequently prepared a comprehensive reform plan aimed at modernizing the educational sector over the 2000–10 period.
The Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) regional body also has its headquarters in Djibouti City.
It was subsequently renamed to the French Territory of the Afars and the Issas in 1967.
In 2012, the Djibouti government also enlisted the services of the China Harbor Engineering Company Ltd for the construction of an ore terminal.
The Diocese of Djibouti serves the small local Catholic population, which it estimates numbered around 7,000 individuals in 2006.
In the early 2000s, it looked outward for a model of army organization that would best advance defensive capabilities by restructuring forces into smaller, more mobile units instead of traditional divisions.
Djibouti is a multilingual nation.
The first war which involved the Djiboutian Armed Forces was the Djiboutian Civil War between the Djiboutian government, supported by France, and the Front for the Restoration of Unity and Democracy (''FRUD'').
In recent years, a number of politicians and intellectuals have also penned memoirs or reflections on the country.
Groups of memorizers and reciters (''hafidayaal'') traditionally propagated the well-developed art form.
Long-horned humpless cattle bones have likewise been discovered at Asa Koma, suggesting that domesticated cattle was present by around 3,500 years ago.
Among the most prominent such historical works is the medieval ''Futuh Al-Habash'' by Shihāb al-Dīn, which chronicles the Adal Sultanate army's conquest of Abyssinia during the 16th century.
Relations with Eritrea are tense due to territorial claims over the Ras Doumeira peninsula.
The Afar are familiar with the ''ginnili'', a kind of warrior-poet and diviner, and have a rich oral tradition of folk stories.
The investor Tarek bin Laden has been linked to the project.
In antiquity, the territory was part of the Land of Punt.
Harbi was killed in a plane crash two years later.
The site's ware is characterized by punctate and incision geometric designs, which bear a similarity to the Sabir culture phase 1 ceramics from Ma'layba in Southern Arabia.
The impasse ended in a power-sharing agreement in 2000.
The non-denominational Muslims largely belong to Sufi orders of varying schools.
According to the International Religious Freedom Report 2008, while Muslim Djiboutians have the legal right to convert to or marry someone from another faith, converts may encounter negative reactions from their family and clan or from society at large, and they often face pressure to go back to Islam.
Djibouti is a semi-presidential republic, with executive power resting in the central government, and legislative power in both the government and the Djiboutian National Assembly.
A lot of Djibouti's original art is passed on and preserved orally, mainly through song.
Local dishes are commonly prepared using a lot of Middle Eastern spices, ranging from saffron to cinnamon.
Commercial activities revolve around the country's free trade policies and strategic location as a Red Sea transit point.
The 2010 maternal mortality rate per 100,000 births for Djibouti is 300.
According to the country profile related to biodiversity of wildlife in Djibouti, the nation contains more than 820 species of plants, 493 species of invertebrates, 455 species of fish, 40 species of reptiles, 3 species of amphibians, 360 species of birds and 66 species of mammals.
Founded in 1285 by the Walashma dynasty, it was centered in Zeila.
The Somali Issa and Afar make up the two largest ethnic groups.
Most of Djibouti is part of the Ethiopian xeric grasslands and shrublands ecoregion.
In 2001, the Djiboutian government leased the former French military base Camp Lemonnier to the United States Central Command for operations related to Combined Joint Task Force Horn of Africa (CJTF-HOA).
Djibouti's economy is largely concentrated in the service sector.
At the post-secondary level, emphasis has also been placed on producing qualified instructors and encouraging out-of-school youngsters to pursue vocational training.
Djibouti has eight mountain ranges with peaks of over 1,000 m (3,281&nbsp;ft).
Other scholars propose that the Afroasiatic family developed in situ in the Horn, with its speakers subsequently dispersing from there.
From 2004–05 to 2007–08, net enrollments of girls in primary school rose by 18.6%; for boys, it increased 8.0%.
That is, they only use five pitches per octave in contrast to a heptatonic (seven note) scale such as the major scale.
The life expectancy at birth is about 62 for both females and males.
In Djibouti the number of midwives per 1,000 live births is 6 and the lifetime risk of death for pregnant women 1 in 93.
Funds have especially gone toward building telecommunications infrastructure and increasing disposable income by supporting small businesses.
The initiative identified areas in need of attention and produced concrete recommendations on how to go about improving them.
To expand the modest industrial sector, a 56 megawatt geothermal power plant slated to be completed by 2018 is being constructed with the help of OPEC, the World Bank and the Global Environmental Facility.
Afar oral literature is also quite musical.
They also have an extensive repertoire of battle songs.
Traditional Afar music resembles the folk music of other parts of the Horn of Africa such as Ethiopia; it also contains elements of Arabic music.
Guelleh was sworn in for his second six-year term after a one-man election on 8 April 2005.
Although opposition groups boycotted the ballot over changes to the constitution permitting Guelleh to run again for office, international observers generally described the election as free and fair.
Most species of wildlife are found in the northern part of the country, in the ecosystem of the Day Forest National Park.
This is compared with 461.6 in 2008 and 606.5 in 1990.
Married women tend to sport head-scarves referred to as ''shash'' and often cover their upper body with a shawl known as ''garbasaar''.
During its first year, Djibouti joined the Organization of African Unity (now the African Union), the Arab League and United Nations.
In particular, school enrollment, attendance, and retention rates have all steadily increased, with some regional variation.
Arabic and French constitute the country's two official languages.
From 1862 until 1894, the land to the north of the Gulf of Tadjoura was called ''Obock'' and was ruled by Somali and Afar Sultans, local authorities with whom France signed various treaties between 1883 and 1887 to first gain a foothold in the region.
A landslide 98.8% of the electorate supported disengagement from France, officially marking Djibouti's independence.
To improve the environment for direct foreign investment, the Djibouti authorities in conjunction with various non-profit organizations have launched a number of development projects aimed at highlighting the country's commercial potential.
Djibouti has a total area of .
Opposition parties are allowed limited freedom, but the main opposition party, the Union for National Salvation, boycotted the 2005 and 2008 elections, citing government control of the media and repression of the opposition candidates.
Owing to its growth potential, the fishing and agro-processing sector, which represents around 15% of GDP, has also enjoyed rising investment since 2008.
The first mention of the Land of Punt dates to the 25th century BC.
Djibouti also hosts a number of immigrants and refugees from neighboring states, with Djibouti City nicknamed the "French Hong Kong in the Red Sea" due to its cosmopolitan urbanism.
Since the 2000s, the Djiboutian authorities have strengthened ties with China.
The Somali clan component is mainly composed of the Issas, a sub-clan of the larger Dir.
The war ended in a government victory, and FRUD became a political party.
''Xalwo'' (pronounced "halwo") or halva is a popular confection eaten during festive occasions, such as Eid celebrations or wedding receptions.
About 94% of Djibouti's male population have also reportedly undergone male circumcision.
Many nomadic people wear a loosely wrapped white cotton robe called a ''tobe'' that goes down to about the knee, with the end thrown over the shoulder (much like a Roman toga).
It is bordered by Eritrea in the north, Ethiopia in the west and south, and Somalia in the southeast.
Djibouti is strategically located near some of the world's busiest shipping lanes, controlling access to the Red Sea and Indian Ocean.
Additionally, Djibouti has a long tradition of Islamic literature.
Both languages belong to the larger Afroasiatic family.
Djibouti's population grew rapidly during the latter half of the 20th century, increasing from about 83 thousand in 1960 to around 872 thousand by 2013.
In 1958, on the eve of neighboring Somalia's independence in 1960, a referendum was held in Djibouti to decide whether to join the Somali Republic or to remain with France.
Through close contacts with the adjacent Arabian Peninsula for more than 1,000 years, the Somali and Afar ethnic groups in the region became among the first populations on the continent to embrace Islam.
Its borders extend ,  of which are shared with Eritrea,  with Ethiopia, and  with Somalia.
In 1967, a second plebiscite was held to determine the fate of the territory.
In the late 19th century, the colony of French Somaliland was established following treaties signed by the ruling Somali and Afar sultans with the French and its railroad to Dire Dawa (and later Addis Ababa) allowed it to quickly supersede Zeila as the port for southern Ethiopia and the Ogaden.
Several well-developed Somali forms of verse include the ''gabay'', ''jiifto'', ''geeraar'', ''wiglo'', ''buraanbur'', ''beercade'', ''afarey'' and ''guuraw''.
Although legally proscribed in 1994, the procedure is still widely practiced, as it is deeply ingrained in the local culture.
Due to limited rainfall, vegetables and fruits are the principal production crops, and other food items require importation.
To assure a robust credit and deposit sector, the government requires commercial banks to maintain 30% of shares in the financial institution; a minimum of 300 million Djiboutian francs in up-front capital is mandatory for international banks.
The country emerged from a decade-long civil war at the end of the 1990s, with the government and the Front for the Restoration of Unity and Democracy (FRUD) signing a peace treaty in 2000.
The Ifat Sultanate was a medieval kingdom in the Horn of Africa.
Most Somali songs are pentatonic.
The Djiboutian government has especially focused on developing and improving institutional infrastructure and teaching materials, including constructing new classrooms and supplying textbooks.
The history of Djibouti is recorded in the poetry and songs of its nomadic people, and goes back thousands of years to a time when the peoples of Djibouti traded hides and skins for the perfumes and spices of ancient Egypt, India and China.
In the early 1990s, tensions over government representation led to armed conflict between Djibouti's ruling People's Rally for Progress (PRP) party and the Front for the Restoration of Unity and Democracy (FRUD) opposition group.
Both speak Afroasiatic languages, which serve as recognized national languages.
In 1977, a third referendum took place.
Peanuts are sometimes added to enhance texture and flavor.
Somalis have a rich musical heritage centered on traditional Somali folklore.
Shortly after the referendum was held, the former ''Côte française des Somalis'' (French Somaliland) was renamed to ''Territoire français des Afars et des Issas''.
The services sector constituted around 79.7% of the GDP, followed by industry at 17.3%, and agriculture at 3%.
Additionally, between Djibouti City and Loyada are a number of anthropomorphic and phallic stelae.
It was inherited from the colonial period, and is the primary language of instruction.
Djibouti is a multiethnic country.
This forest area is the main habitat of the endangered and endemic Djibouti francolin (a bird), and another recently noted vertebrate, ''Platyceps afarensis'' (a colubrine snake).
The referendum was again marred by reports of vote rigging on the part of the French authorities.
The majority of those who had voted no were Somalis who were strongly in favour of joining a united Somalia as had been proposed by Mahmoud Harbi, Vice President of the Government Council.
According to linguists, the first Afroasiatic-speaking populations arrived in the region during this period from the family's proposed urheimat ("original homeland") in the Nile Valley, or the Near East.
Djibouti is a one party dominant state, with the People's Rally for Progress (RPP) controlling the legislature and the executive since its foundation in 1979 (the party currently rules as a part of the Union for a Presidential Majority, which holds all seats).
It serves as a key refueling and transshipment center, and is the principal maritime port for imports to and exports from neighboring Ethiopia.
Guelleh was re-elected to a third term later that year, with 80.63% of the vote in a 75% turnout.
The National Assembly (formerly the ''Chamber of Deputies'') is the country's legislature, consisting of 65 members elected every five years.
The country's coastline stretches , with terrain consisting mainly of plateaux, plains and highlands.
In November 2007, the Djibouti national football team beat Somalia's national squad 1–0 in the qualification rounds for the 2010 FIFA World Cup, marking its first ever World Cup-related win.
A decade later, the Djiboutian people voted for independence.
Approximately 76% of local residents are urban dwellers; the remainder are pastoralists.
The Djibouti firm Salt Investment (SIS) began a large-scale operation to industrialize the plentiful salt in Djibouti's Lake Assal region.
The President shares executive power with his or her appointee, the Prime Minister, currently Abdoulkader Kamil Mohamed.
It covers an area of  of Juniperus procera forest, with many of the trees rising to  height.
The fundamental academic system was significantly restructured and made compulsory; it now consists of five years of primary school and four years of middle school.
Balwo is a Somali musical style centered on love themes that is popular in Djibouti.
Djibouti is a multi-ethnic nation with a population of over 828,324 inhabitants.
A radical group continued to fight the government, but signed its own peace treaty in 2001.
The exception is a strip along the Red Sea coast, which is part of the Eritrean coastal desert.
'''Djibouti''' ( ;  '''', , , ), officially the '''Republic of Djibouti''', is a country located in the Horn of Africa.
Unmarried or young women, however, do not always cover their heads.
In 1894, Léonce Lagarde established a permanent French administration in the city of Djibouti and named the region French Somaliland.
The port also serves as an international refueling center and transshipment hub.
The GDP (purchasing power parity) in 2013 was estimated at $2.505 billion, with a real growth rate of 5% annually.
The baroorodiiq is composed to commemorate the death of a prominent poet or figure.
In the late 1990s, the Djiboutian authorities revised the national educational strategy and launched a broad-based consultative process involving administrative officials, teachers, parents, national assembly members and NGOs.
Hassan Gouled Aptidon, a Somali politician who had campaigned for a yes vote in the referendum of 1958, eventually wound up as the nation's first president (1977–1999).
In formal settings, it consists of Modern Standard Arabic.
The country became a member of FIFA in 1994, but has only taken part in the qualifying rounds for the African Cup of Nations as well as the FIFA World Cup in the mid-2000s.
In 2012, the Djiboutian government in collaboration with DP World started construction of the Doraleh Container Terminal, a third major seaport intended to further develop the national transit capacity.
In December 2014, the ruling Union for the Presidential Majority also signed a framework agreement with the Union of National Salvation coalition, which paves the way for opposition legislators to enter parliament and for reformation of the national electoral agency.
Security forces frequently make illegal arrests.
It also contains many species of woody and herbaceous plants, including boxwood and olive trees, which account for 60% of the total identified species in the country.
Djibouti hosts France’s largest military presence abroad, Japan’s only foreign base, while China is building its first overseas base ever in the country.
According to the temple murals at Deir el-Bahari, the Land of Punt was ruled at that time by King Parahu and Queen Ati.
Fertility is at 2.63 children per woman.
Worth $64 million, the project is scheduled to be completed within two years and will enable Djibouti to export a further 5,000 tons of salt per year to markets in Southeast Asia.
The government has also introduced new private sector policies targeting high interest and inflation rates, including relaxing the tax burden on enterprises and allowing exemptions on consumption tax.
Halva is made from sugar, corn starch, cardamom powder, nutmeg powder and ghee.
He took 100% of the votes in a 78.9% turnout.
Since the Djiboutian franc is pegged to the U.S. dollar, it is generally stable and inflation is not a problem.
The last election was held on 22 February 2013.
Djibouti joined the United Nations the same year, on 20 September 1977.
The Djibouti-Loyada stelae are of uncertain age, and some of them are adorned with a T-shaped symbol.
Somali songs are usually the product of collaboration between lyricists (''midho''), songwriters (''laxan'') and singers (''codka'' or "voice").
In 1900, during the early part of the colonial era, there were virtually no Christians in the  territories, with only about 100–300 followers coming from the schools and orphanages of the few Catholic missions in the French Somaliland.
Per capita income is around $2,874 (PPP).
As a result of the Education Planning Act and the medium-term action strategy, substantial progress has been registered throughout the educational sector.
Spicy dishes come in many variations, from the traditional ''Fah-fah'' or "''Soupe Djiboutienne''" (spicy boiled beef soup), to the ''yetakelt wet'' (spicy mixed vegetable stew).
About 70% of the seaport's activity consists of imports to and exports from neighboring Ethiopia, which depends on the harbour as its main maritime outlet.
, the manpower available for military service was 170,386 males and 221,411 females aged 16 to 49.
Operating at an annual capacity of 4 million tons, the desalination project has lifted export revenues, created more job opportunities, and provided more fresh water for the area's residents.
The Djiboutian franc is the currency of Djibouti.
It lasted from 1896 until 1967, when it was renamed the ''Territoire Français des Afars et des Issas'' (TFAI) ("French Territory of the Afars and the Issas").
In Djibouti there are about 18 doctors per 100,000 persons.
Reporters Without Borders claims that Dirir Ibrahim Bouraleh died from injuries sustained under torture by Sergeant Major Abdourahman Omar Said from 23 - 27 April 2011.
Djibouti maintains close ties with the governments of Somalia, Ethiopia, France and the United States.
It also has military units deployed in Somalia and Sudan.
In addition, the new law introduced secondary-level vocational instruction and established university facilities in the country.
Djibouti's gross domestic product expanded by an average of more than 6 percent per year, from US$341 million in 1985 to US$1.5 billion in 2015.
French serves as a statutory national language.
Secondary schools also require a Certificate of Fundamental Education for admission.
The Mousa Ali range is considered the country's highest mountain range, with the tallest peak on the border with Ethiopia and Eritrea.
Nearby Zeila (now in Somalia) was the seat of the medieval Adal and Ifat Sultanates.
Jean-Paul Noel Abdi, president of the Djiboutian League of Human Rights, was arrested on 9 February 2011 after reporting on opposition protests in connection with the Arab Spring earlier that month.
Djibouti has a long tradition of poetry.
