The year 1960 marked another turning point in Shostakovich's life: he joined the Communist Party.
His chamber output includes 15 string quartets, a piano quintet, two piano trios, and two pieces for string octet.
The article condemned ''Lady Macbeth'' as formalist, "coarse, primitive and vulgar".
Yuri Lyubimov says that at this time "he waited for his arrest at night out on the landing by the lift, so that at least his family wouldn't be disturbed."
Shostakovich's conservative idiom has grown increasingly popular with audiences both within and beyond Russia, as the avant-garde has declined in influence and debate about his political views has developed.
Shostakovich's orchestral works include 15 symphonies and six concerti.
He was intrigued by Jewish music’s "ability to build a jolly melody on sad intonations".
The book alleged that many of the composer's works contained coded anti-government messages, that would place Shostakovich in a tradition of Russian artists outwitting censorship that goes back at least to the early 19th century poet Alexander Pushkin.
"A composer friend bribed Shostakovich's housemaid to regularly deliver the contents of Shostakovich's office waste bin to him, instead of taking it to the garbage.
After the symphony's premiere, Yevtushenko was forced to add a stanza to his poem which said that Russians and Ukrainians had died alongside the Jews at Babi Yar.
However, ''Pravda'' criticized ''The Limpid Stream'' for incorrectly displaying peasant life on the collective farm.
The influence of the latter in particular is evident in his letters, which include wry parodies of Soviet officialese.
Shostakovich's music shows the influence of many of the composers he most admired: Bach in his fugues and passacaglias; Beethoven in the late quartets; Mahler in the symphonies and Berg in his use of musical codes and quotations.
Shostakovich married his first wife, Nina Varzar, in 1932.
In order to preserve the image of Shostakovich (a vital bridge to the people of the Union and to the West), the government assigned the name "Stalingrad" to the symphony, giving it the appearance of a mourning of the dead in the bloody Battle of Stalingrad.
"Target achieved so far: 75% (right leg broken, left leg broken, right hand defective).
The revisionist view was put forth by Solomon Volkov in the 1979 book ''Testimony'', which was claimed to be Shostakovich's memoirs dictated to Volkov.
Of course they understood, they understood what was happening around them and they understood what the Fifth was about."
In addition, in joining the party, Shostakovich was also committing himself to finally writing the homage to Lenin that he had promised before.
In May 1958, during a visit to Paris, Shostakovich recorded his two piano concertos with André Cluytens, as well as some short piano works.
1 and 2 (1999), the Violin Concerto No.
In his lighter moods, sport was one of his main recreations, although he preferred spectating or umpiring to participating (he was a qualified football referee).
Shostakovich's response to official criticism and, what is more important, the question of whether he used music as a kind of covert dissidence is a matter of dispute.
In some of his later works (e.g., the Twelfth Quartet), he made use of tone rows.
Shortly after the "Muddle Instead of Music" article, ''Pravda'' published another, "Ballet Falsehood," that criticized Shostakovich’s ballet ''The Limpid Stream''.
Eyewitness accounts testify that Shostakovich was "white as a sheet" when he went to take his bow after the third act.
Shostakovich's musical response to these personal crises was the Eighth String Quartet, composed in only three days.
Yuri Lyubimov comments, "The fact that he was more vulnerable and receptive than other people was no doubt an important feature of his genius".
Even Soviet music critics who had praised the opera were forced to recant in print, saying they "failed to detect the shortcomings of ''Lady Macbeth'' as pointed out by ''Pravda''".
For Shostakovich, it was a humiliating experience culminating in a New York press conference where he was expected to read a prepared speech.
Zoshchenko himself noted the contradictions in the composer's character: "he is&nbsp;... frail, fragile, withdrawn, an infinitely direct, pure child&nbsp;... but he is also hard, acid, extremely intelligent, strong perhaps, despotic and not altogether good-natured (although cerebrally good-natured)".
He was diffident by nature: Flora Litvinova has said he was "completely incapable of saying 'No' to anybody."
Oleg Prokofiev commented that "he tried to help so many people that&nbsp;... less and less attention was paid to his pleas."
These included his patron Marshal Tukhachevsky (shot months after his arrest); his brother-in-law Vsevolod Frederiks (a distinguished physicist, who was eventually released but died before he got home); his close friend Nikolai Zhilyayev (a musicologist who had taught Tukhachevsky; shot shortly after his arrest); his mother-in-law, the astronomer Sofiya Mikhaylovna Varzar (sent to a camp in Karaganda); his friend the Marxist writer Galina Serebryakova (20 years in camps); his uncle Maxim Kostrykin (died); and his colleagues Boris Kornilov and Adrian Piotrovsky (executed).
In letters written to his friend Ivan Sollertinsky, Shostakovich recounted the horror with which he watched as Stalin shuddered every time the brass and percussion played too loudly.
Others still in the Conservatory experienced an atmosphere that was thick with suspicion.
The symphony gave Shostakovich compositional trouble, as he attempted to reform his style into a new idiom.
Shostakovich's daughter, Galina, recalled her father consulting her and Maxim about the possibility of Ustvolskaya becoming their stepmother.
Yet, like the Tenth Symphony, this quartet incorporates quotations from several of his past works and his musical monogram: Shostakovich confessed to his friend Isaak Glikman "I started thinking that if some day I die, nobody is likely to write a work in memory of me, so I had better write one myself."
The composer wrote the first three movements in Leningrad and completed the work in Kuibyshev (now Samara) where he and his family had been evacuated.
McBurney traces this to the avant-garde artistic circles of the early Soviet period in which Shostakovich moved early in his career, and argues that these borrowings were a deliberate technique to allow him to create "patterns of contrast, repetition, exaggeration" that gave his music the large-scale structure it required.
A related complaint is that Shostakovich's style is vulgar and strident: Stravinsky wrote of ''Lady Macbeth'': "brutally hammering&nbsp;... and monotonous".
Once he joined the Party, several articles denouncing individualism in music were published in ''Pravda'' under his name, though he did not actually write them.
This was part of an ongoing anti-formalism campaign intended to root out all Western compositional influence as well as any perceived "non-Russian" output.
For Shostakovich, the loss of money was perhaps the largest blow.
Even before the Stalinist anti-Semitic campaigns in the late 1940s and early 1950s, Shostakovich showed an interest in Jewish themes.
In 1948, Shostakovich, along with many other composers, was again denounced for formalism in the Zhdanov decree.
Around this time, his health also began to deteriorate.
His last work was his Viola Sonata, which was first performed on 28 December 1975, four months after his death.
And Shostakovich is acting tragic, that means he's on the side of the fascists.'"
The Ninth Symphony (1945), in contrast, was much lighter in tone.
That year saw Shostakovich again turn to the subject of anti-Semitism in his Thirteenth Symphony (subtitled ''Babi Yar'').
Despite this, Shostakovich continued to compose the symphony and planned a premiere at the end of 1936.
Shostakovich, who was a great admirer of Stravinsky and had been influenced by his music, had no alternative but to answer in the affirmative.
Shostakovich's works are broadly tonal and in the Romantic tradition, but with elements of atonality and chromaticism.
It features a number of musical quotations and codes (notably the DSCH and Elmira motifs, Elmira Nazirova being a pianist and composer who had studied under Shostakovich in the year prior to his dismissal from the Moscow Conservatoire), the meaning of which is still debated, whilst the savage second movement, according to ''Testimony'', is intended as a musical portrait of Stalin himself.
Opinions are divided how great a risk this was: the poem had been published in Soviet media, and was not banned, but it remained controversial.
Rehearsals began that December, but after a number of rehearsals Shostakovich, for reasons still debated today, decided to withdraw the symphony from the public.
The symphony was first premiered by the Bolshoi Theatre orchestra in Kuibyshev and was soon performed abroad in London and the United States.
Shostakovich is reported to have said: "When the Eighth was performed, it was openly declared counter-revolutionary and anti-Soviet.
The photograph for which he posed was published in newspapers throughout the country.
Vocal works are also a prominent feature of his late output, setting texts often concerned with love, death and art.
During the forties and fifties, Shostakovich had close relationships with two of his pupils: Galina Ustvolskaya and Elmira Nazirova.
His longtime collaborator Yevgeny Mravinsky said that "Shostakovich very often explained his intentions with very specific images and connotations."
During 1936 and 1937, in order to maintain as low a profile as possible between the Fourth and Fifth symphonies, Shostakovich mainly composed film music, a genre favored by Stalin and lacking in dangerous personal expression.
The work marked a great shift in style for the composer due to the substantial influence of Gustav Mahler and a number of Western-style elements.
However, Salonen has since performed and recorded several of Shostakovich's works, including the Piano Concertos Nos.
Stravinsky the thinker I despise."
In later life, Shostakovich suffered from chronic ill health, but he resisted giving up cigarettes and vodka.
He was fond of satirical writers such as Gogol, Chekhov and Mikhail Zoshchenko.
Shostakovich's relationship with Stravinsky was profoundly ambivalent; as he wrote to Glikman, "Stravinsky the composer I worship.
It is also uncertain to what extent Shostakovich expressed his opposition to the state in his music.
He explained the disappointment at the competition to suffering from appendicitis and the jury being all-Polish.
It is known that he incorporated many quotations and motifs in his work, most notably his signature DSCH theme.
The Symphony ranks alongside the Fifth and Seventh as one of his most popular works.
English composer and musicologist Robin Holloway described his music as "battleship-grey in melody and harmony, factory-functional in structure; in content all rhetoric and coercion."
The Romanian composer and Webern disciple Philip Gershkovich called Shostakovich "a&nbsp;hack in a trance".
Prokofiev's influence is most apparent in the earlier piano works, such as the first sonata and first concerto.
However, the symphony did not escape criticism.
Its stage premiere on 18 January 1930 opened to generally poor reviews and widespread incomprehension amongst musicians.
The consequences of the decree for composers were harsh.
After the competition Shostakovich met the conductor Bruno Walter, who was so impressed by the composer's First Symphony that he conducted it at its Berlin premiere later that year.
In the background to all this remained Shostakovich's first, open marriage to Nina Varzar until her death in 1954.
Consequently, commissions began to fall off, and his income fell by about three quarters.
His favourite football club was Zenit Leningrad, which he would watch regularly.
In 1951 the composer was made a deputy to the Supreme Soviet of RSFSR.
When asked if he believed in God, Shostakovich said "No, and I am very sorry about it."
According to Shostakovich scholar Gerard McBurney, opinion is divided on whether his music is "of visionary power and originality, as some maintain, or, as others think, derivative, trashy, empty and second-hand".
Much of this period was spent writing his opera, ''Lady Macbeth of the Mtsensk District'', which was first performed in 1934.
However, the most compelling performance was the Leningrad premiere by the Radio Orchestra in the besieged city.
His piano works include two solo sonatas, an early set of preludes, and a later set of 24 preludes and fugues.
After graduation, Shostakovich initially embarked on a dual career as concert pianist and composer, but his dry style of playing was often unappreciated (his American biographer, Laurel Fay, comments on his "emotional restraint" and "riveting rhythmic drive").
This is most apparent in the late chamber works, which portray what is described in Grove's Dictionary as a "world of purgatorial numbness"; in some of these he included the use of tone rows, although he treated these as melodic themes rather than serially.
In 1959, Shostakovich appeared on stage in Moscow at the end of a concert performance of his Fifth Symphony, congratulating Leonard Bernstein and the New York Philharmonic Orchestra for their performance (part of a concert tour of the Soviet Union).
Shostakovich is in many ways a polar counter-force for Stravinsky.
After the outbreak of war between the Soviet Union and Germany in 1941, Shostakovich initially remained in Leningrad.
This meant he was easily persuaded to sign official statements, including a denunciation of Andrei Sakharov in 1973; on the other hand he was willing to try to help constituents in his capacities as chairman of the Composers' Union and Deputy to the Supreme Soviet.
It was described as "the result of the general success of Socialist construction, of the correct policy of the Party", and as an opera that "could have been written only by a Soviet composer brought up in the best tradition of Soviet culture".
It was also at this time that Shostakovich composed the first of his string quartets.
They have been orchestrated by the British composer Gerard McBurney and this work was premiered in December 2011 by the Los Angeles Philharmonic.
Shostakovich co-signed protests together with Yevtushenko and fellow Soviet artists Kornei Chukovsky, Anna Akhmatova, Samuil Marshak, and the French philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre.
Shostakovich also played the piano solos in recordings of the Cello Sonata, Op.
Other works include the operas ''Lady Macbeth of Mtsensk'', ''The Nose'' and the unfinished ''The Gamblers'' based on the comedy of Nikolai Gogol; six concertos (two each for piano, violin and cello); two piano trios; and a large quantity of film music.
A preoccupation with his own mortality permeates Shostakovich's later works, among them the later quartets and the Fourteenth Symphony of 1969 (a song cycle based on a number of poems on the theme of death).
Pierre Boulez dismissed Shostakovich's music as "the second, or even third pressing of Mahler".
40 with cellist Daniil Shafran and also with Mstislav Rostropovich; the Violin Sonata, Op.
In addition his '"Theme from the film ''Pirogov'', Opus 76a: Finale" was played as the cauldron was lit at the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens, Greece.
Steinberg tried to guide Shostakovich in the path of the great Russian composers, but was disappointed to see him 'wasting' his talent and imitating Igor Stravinsky and Sergei Prokofiev.
Nicolas Nabokov, who was present in the audience, witnessed Shostakovich starting to read "in a nervous and shaky voice" before he had to break off "and the speech was continued in English by a suave radio baritone".
His influence can also be seen in some Nordic composers, such as Lars-Erik Larsson.
William Walton, his British contemporary, described him as "the greatest composer of the 20th century".
(The meeting of the two composers was not very successful, however; observers commented on Shostakovich's extreme nervousness and Stravinsky's "cruelty" to him.)
He taught Ustvolskaya from 1937 to 1947.
Surely, she prolonged his life by several years."
which precipitated the denunciation; and the Fourth Symphony, described in Grove's Dictionary as "a colossal synthesis of Shostakovich's musical development to date".
The conference resulted in the publication of the Central Committee’s Decree "On V. Muradeli’s opera ''The Great Friendship''," which was targeted towards all Soviet composers and demanded that they only write "proletarian" music, or music for the masses.
Among the most popular are the Fifth and Seventh Symphonies and the Eighth and Fifteenth Quartets.
For instance, he said in 1987:
Mikhail Druskin remembers that even as a young man the composer was "fragile and nervously agile".
The nature of their relationship is far from clear: Mstislav Rostropovich described it as "tender".
In the 1980s, the Finnish conductor and composer Esa-Pekka Salonen was critical of Shostakovich and refused to conduct his music.
The symphonies are distributed fairly evenly throughout his career, while the quartets are concentrated towards the latter part.
He outwardly conformed to government policies and positions, reading speeches and putting his name to articles expressing the government line.
Shostakovich also attended Alexander Ossovsky's history of music classes.
99, music to the film '''' (1955–1956), as well as the Suites composed for ''The Gadfly''.
That same year Shostakovich was obliged to compose the cantata ''Song of the Forests,'' which praised Stalin as the "great gardener."
Shostakovich was in many ways an obsessive man: according to his daughter he was "obsessed with cleanliness"; he synchronised the clocks in his apartment; he regularly sent cards to himself to test how well the postal service was working.
Many of his Russian contemporaries, and his pupils at the Leningrad Conservatory, however, were strongly influenced by his style (including German Okunev, Boris Tishchenko, whose 5th Symphony of 1978 is dedicated to Shostakovich's memory, Sergei Slonimsky, and others).
The Glinka archive 'contained a huge number of pieces and compositions which were completely unknown or could be traced quite indirectly,' Digonskaya said."
Some of those cast-offs eventually found their way into the Glinka.
According to Galina Vishnevskaya, who knew the Shostakoviches well, this marriage was a very happy one: "It was with her that Dmitri Dmitriyevich finally came to know domestic peace...
The restrictions on Shostakovich's music and living arrangements were eased in 1949, when Stalin decided that the Soviets needed to send artistic representatives to the Cultural and Scientific Congress for World Peace in New York City, and that Shostakovich should be amongst them.
The Fourth Symphony was also the first in which the influence of Mahler came to the fore, prefiguring the route Shostakovich was to take to secure his rehabilitation, while he himself admitted that the preceding two were his least successful.
Some modern composers have been critical.
The accused composers, including Shostakovich, were summoned to make public apologies in front of the committee.
In September 1937, he began to teach composition at the Leningrad Conservatory, which provided some financial security but interfered with his own creative work.
The composer's response to his denunciation was the Fifth Symphony of 1937, which was musically more conservative than his earlier works.
He was further inspired to write with Jewish themes when he examined Moisei Beregovski’s thesis on the theme of Jewish folk music in 1946.
It features Vishnevskaya as Katerina, Nicolai Gedda as Sergei, Dimiter Petkov as Boris Ismailov and a brilliant supporting cast under Rostropovich's direction.
In the late 1920s and early 1930s, Shostakovich worked at TRAM, a proletarian youth theatre.
At the time of the Eighth Symphony's premiere, the tide had turned for the Red Army.
By 1946, however, it was the subject of criticism.
Shostakovich did not expect this second article because the general public and press already accepted this music as "democratic"&nbsp;– that is, tuneful and accessible.
A colour film of Shostakovich supervising one of his operas, from his last year, was also made.
In a cardboard file were some "300 pages of musical sketches, pieces and scores" in the hand of Shostakovich.
Musicians and scholars including Laurel Fay and Richard Taruskin contest the authenticity and debate the significance of ''Testimony'', alleging that Volkov compiled it from a combination of recycled articles, gossip, and possibly some information direct from the composer.
Music critics and the authorities alike, including those who had earlier accused Shostakovich of formalism, claimed that he had learned from his mistakes and had become a true Soviet artist.
In all other respects she is splendid: clever, cheerful, straightforward and very likeable."
In 1927 he wrote his Second Symphony (subtitled ''To October''), a patriotic piece with a great pro-Soviet choral finale.
Shostakovich was among those who were dismissed from the Conservatoire altogether.
In 1918, he wrote a funeral march in memory of two leaders of the Kadet party, murdered by Bolshevik sailors.
The publication of the ''Pravda'' editorials coincided with the composition of Shostakovich's Fourth Symphony.
His first major musical achievement was the First Symphony (premiered 1926), written as his graduation piece at the age of nineteen.
Other works include three operas, several song cycles, ballets, and a substantial quantity of film music; especially well known is ''The Second Waltz'', Op.
He initially wrote eight songs that were meant to represent the hardships of being Jewish in the Soviet Union.
More widely, 1936 marked the beginning of the Great Terror, in which many of the composer's friends and relatives were imprisoned or killed.
Shostakovich studied piano with Leonid Nikolayev after a year in the class of Elena Rozanova, composition with Maximilian Steinberg, and counterpoint and fugue with Nikolay Sokolov, with whom he became friends.
It was understood that Nikita Khrushchev, the First Secretary of the Communist Party from 1958 to 1964, was looking for support from the leading ranks of the intelligentsia in an effort to create a better relationship with the Soviet Union’s artists.
On the other, his son recalled that the event reduced Shostakovich to tears, and he later told his wife Irina that he had been blackmailed.
There was at least one recording of the cleaned up version, Katerina Ismailova that Shostakovich had made to satisfy Soviet censorship.
In later life, Krzysztof Meyer recalled, "his face was a bag of tics and grimaces".
The composer was well into the work when the fatal articles appeared.
When he arrived, he saw that Joseph Stalin and the Politburo were there.
The influence of Russian church and folk music is very evident in his works for unaccompanied choir of the 1950s.
He was particularly enamoured of the Symphony of Psalms, presenting a copy of his own piano version of it to Stravinsky when the latter visited the USSR in 1962.
Despite his efforts to hide the real meaning in the work, the Union of Composers refused to approve his music in 1949 under the pressure of the anti-Semitism that gripped the country.
Shostakovich died of lung cancer on 9 August 1975 and after a civic funeral was interred in the Novodevichy Cemetery, Moscow.
67), dedicated to the memory of Sollertinsky, with a bittersweet, Jewish-themed ''totentanz'' finale.
This piece also finds Shostakovich at his most extreme with musical language, with twelve-tone themes and dense polyphony used throughout.
Shostakovich recorded the two concertos in stereo in Moscow for Melodiya.
The symphony sets a number of poems by Yevgeny Yevtushenko, the first of which commemorates a massacre of Ukrainian Jews during the Second World War.
Therefore, the public, and most importantly the authorities, wanted another triumphant piece from the composer.
Shostakovich never forgave Nabokov for this public humiliation.
He later had his appendix removed in April 1927.
His Twelfth Symphony, which portrays the Bolshevik Revolution and was completed in 1961, was dedicated to Vladimir Lenin and called "The Year 1917."
During this time he turned increasingly to chamber works, a field that permitted the composer to explore different and often darker ideas without inviting external scrutiny.
Beginning in 1958 he suffered from a debilitating condition that particularly affected his right hand, eventually forcing him to give up piano playing; in 1965 it was diagnosed as poliomyelitis.
Nabokov did not hesitate to publish that this demonstrated that Shostakovich was "not a free man, but an obedient tool of his government."
Sollertinsky introduced the composer to the music of Gustav Mahler, which had a strong influence on his music from the Fourth Symphony onwards.
1 and the song cycle ''From Jewish Folk Poetry.''
A major achievement was the recording of the original, unexpurgated score for Lady Macbeth of Mtsensk by EMI.
In the next few years, he composed three categories of work: film music to pay the rent, official works aimed at securing official rehabilitation, and serious works "for the desk drawer".
The Winter War was a bitter experience for the Red Army, the parade never happened, and Shostakovich would never lay claim to the authorship of this work.
Although he did little work in this post, it shielded him from ideological attack.
Gavriil Popov wrote that it was "splendid in its joie de vivre, gaiety, brilliance, and pungency
''From Jewish Folk Poetry'' could not be performed until after Stalin’s death in March 1953, along with all the other works that were forbidden.
On the one hand, the apparat was undoubtedly less repressive than it had been before Stalin's death.
Israel Nestyev asked whether it was the right time for "a light and amusing interlude between Shostakovich's significant creations, a temporary rejection of great, serious problems for the sake of playful, filigree-trimmed trifles."
He was a close friend of Marshal of the Soviet Union Mikhail Tukhachevsky, who was executed in 1937 during the Great Purge.
He married his second wife, Komsomol activist Margarita Kainova, in 1956; the couple proved ill-matched, and divorced three years later.
No one wanted their work to be understood as formalist, so many resorted to accusing their colleagues of writing or performing anti-proletarian music.
Later, Shostakovich's purported memoir, ''Testimony'', stated: "I'll never believe that a man who understood nothing could feel the Fifth Symphony.
The relationship with Nazirova seems to have been one-sided, expressed largely through his letters to her, and can be dated to around 1953 to 1956.
Shostakovich continued to compose chamber music, notably his Second Piano Trio (Op.
This event has been interpreted variously as a show of commitment, a mark of cowardice, the result of political pressure, or as his free decision.
On several occasions, he displayed a remarkable ability to remember what his mother had played at the previous lesson, and would get "caught in the act" of playing the previous lesson's music while pretending to read different music placed in front of him.
Instead, they got the Eighth Symphony, perhaps the ultimate in sombre and violent expression within Shostakovich's output.
The cycle was written at a time when the post-war anti-Semitic campaign was already under way, with widespread arrests including of I. Dobrushin and Yiditsky, the compilers of the book from which Shostakovich took his texts.
Andrei Zhdanov, Chairman of the RSFSR Supreme Soviet, accused Shostakovich and other composers (such as Sergei Prokofiev and Aram Khachaturian) for writing inappropriate and formalist music.
Fay documents these allegations in her 2002 article 'Volkov's ''Testimony'' reconsidered', showing that the only pages of the original ''Testimony'' manuscript that Shostakovich had signed and verified are word-for-word reproductions of earlier interviews given by the composer, none of which are controversial.
