The settlement was later renamed Novomoskovsk.
Same situation was with presidential elections, strong support had Leonid Kuchma and Viktor Yanukovych.
After the death of Stalin and appointment of Khrushchev, who had spent his early working years in Ukraine, as party secretary, the industrialisation of Dnipropetrovsk became even more profound, with the Southern (Yuzhne) Missile and Rocket factory being set up in the city.
During the 1960s, these powerful rocket engines were used as launch vehicles for the first Soviet space ships.
In March 2014 the city's Lenin Square was renamed "Heroes of Independence Square" in honor of the people killed during Euromaidan.
In order to comply with the 2015 decommunization law the city was renamed '''Dnipro''' in May 2016.
(2) Conversion to 2007 Sterling used RPI data from Table 63 of ''National Income Expenditure and Output of the United Kingdom 1855–1965'', by CH Feinstein, pub Cambridge University Press, 1972 and  Retail Prices Index: annual index numbers of retail prices 1948–2007 (RPI) (RPIX) (3) Conversion to 2007 US Dollars used the calculated 2007 Sterling value and the average exchange rate for 2007  $1 =£0.49987, taken from  FXHistory: historical currency exchange rates.
Recently the city built a new soccer stadium; the Dnipro-Arena has a capacity of 31,003 people and was built as a replacement for Dnipro's old stadium, Stadium Meteor.
); The Potemkin palace; university (never built); botanical garden on Monastyrskyi Island and wide straight avenues through the city.
A vital industrial centre of Soviet Ukraine, Dnipropetrovsk was one of the key centres of the nuclear, arms, and space industries of the Soviet Union.
In the same year as the latter took place, the youth group 'Eksperiment', an organisation promoting increased cultural awareness amongst Ukrainians, was founded in the city.
It would have been better to have used contemporary ruble/dollar exchange rates and US RPI data, but the latter were not available to author (March 2008).
The major industries preferred to locate their offices close to their factories and away from the centre of town.
Currently around 55, 000 students study in Dnipropetrovsk, a significant number of whom are students from abroad.
From any of the three hills in the city, one can see a view of the river, islands, parks, outskirts, river banks and other hills.
In 1976 in line with the city's 1926 renaming a large monumental statue of Grigoriy Petrovsky was placed on the square in front of the city's station.
The original town of Yekaterinoslav was founded in 1776, not in the current location, but at the confluence of the River Samara with the River Kil'chen' at Loshakivka, north of the Dnieper.
Metallurgical enterprises are based in the city and account for over 47% of its industrial output.
This was the foundation of the Dnipropetrovsk Automobile Factory.
The governor of the oblast is the Dnipropetrovsk Oblast Rada speaker, appointed by the President of Ukraine.
not convicted) in Dnipropetrovsk oblast were either held in Preliminary Prison 4 in Kryvyi Rih or in "detention blocks" in Dnipropetrovsk; this contravened Ukrainian Law "On preliminary incarceration".
Administratively, the city is divided into "districts in city" ("raiony v misti").
The population of ''Yekaterinoslav-Kil'chen''' were (according to some sources) transferred to the new site.
The city experienced occupation by German and Austrian-Hungarian armies that were allies of Ukrainian Hetman Pavlo Skoropadskyi and helped him to keep authority in the country.
Immediately after its foundation, Dnipro, or as it was then known Yekaterinoslav, began to develop exclusively on the right bank of the Dnieper River.
'''Dnipropetrovsk''' ( , officially '''Dnipro''', Дніпро) or '''Dnepropetrovsk''' ( ),  is Ukraine's fourth largest city, with about one million inhabitants.
After complaints by the ombudsman (Nina Karpacheva) the head of the State prison department of Ukraine (Vladimir Levochkin) arranged that finances were given for the provision of women's cells in Dnipropetrovsk Preliminary Prison, making the lives of the 15,000 unconvicted women-detainees easier from August 2000.
In the Regional State Administration building protesters dismantled Viktor Yanukovych portrait.
At times the anarchists of Nestor Makhno held the city, and at others Denikin's Volunteer Army.
The railway crossed the Dnieper at Ekaterinoslav.
This is expected to both improve air quality and reduce transport issues from heavy freight lorries that pass through the city centre.
At this point Dnipropetrovsk became one of the most important manufacturing cities in the Soviet Union, producing many goods from small articles like screws and vacuum cleaners to aircraft engine pieces and ballistic missiles.
Officially, Yuzhmash manufactured agricultural tractors and special kitchen equipment for everyday needs, such as mincing-machines or juicers for peaceful Soviet households.
However, this was not the only development and many other factories, especially metallurgical and heavy-manufacturing plants, were set up in the city.
The central thoroughfare is known as Akademik Yavornitskyi Prospekt, a, wide and long boulevard that stretches east to west through the centre of the city.
In 1965, the secret Plant #586 was transferred to the Ministry of General Machine-Building of the USSR.
Hence following the 2015 law on decommunization the city had to be renamed.
No citizen of a foreign country (even of the socialist ones) was allowed to visit the city or district of Dnipropetrovsk.
Part of Lazar' Globa's gardens still exist and are now called Globa Park.
Plans were reconsidered and scaled back.
The first fortified town in what is now Dnipropetrovsk was probably built in the mid-16th century,  In 1635, the Polish Government built the Kodak fortress above the Dnieper Rapids at ''Kodaky'' (on the south-eastern outskirts of modern Dnipropetrovsk), partly as a result of rivalry in the region between Poland, Turkey and Crimean Khanate, and partly to maintain control over Cossack activity (i.e.
By the end of the 1970s, this plant became the major centre for designing, constructing, manufacturing, testing and deploying strategic and space missile complexes in the Soviet Union.
The Dnieper River keeps the climate mild.
Other daytime services include suburban trains to towns and villages in the surrounding Dnipropetrovsk Oblast.
The city is served by an Dnipropetrovsk International Airport  and is connected to European and Middle Eastern cities with daily flights.
Metals and metallurgy is the city’s core industry in terms of output.
At the present time the completion date is unknown.
During Makarov’s directorship, Yuzhmash designed and manufactured four generations of missile complexes of different types.
A mix of snow and rain happens usually in December.
A combination of yet another Russo-Turkish war that broke out later in 1787, bureaucratic procrastination, defective workmanship, and theft resulted in what was built being less than originally planned.
Other buildings, such as the Potemkin Palace were given over to the proletariat, in this case as the students' union of the Dnipropetrovsk National University.
They later became known as Zaporozhian Cossacks (Zaporizhia – the lands south of Prydniprovye, translate as "The Land Beyond the Weirs Rapids").
In the ten years that followed, women under investigation (i.e.
This is one of the main reasons why much of Dnipropetrovsk's central avenue, Akademik Yavornitskyi Prospekt, is designed in the style of Stalinist Social Realism.
The Dnipro-Arena hosted the 2010 FIFA World Cup qualification game between Ukraine and England on 10 October 2009.
The main shareholder in the airline is Ukrainian-Israeli entrepreneur Ihor Kolomoyskyi's Privat Group, a global business group, based in the city and grouped around the Privatbank.
In June 1990, the women’s department of Dnipropetrovsk preliminary prison was destroyed in prison riots.
The city also has big food processing and light industry factories.
The council has 29 standing commissions which play an important role in controlling of the city and its merchants.
None of the group's capital is publicly traded on the stock exchange.
The "severely polluted air and water" and allegedly "vast areas of decimated landscape" of Dnipropetrovsk and Donetsk are considered by some to be an environmental crisis.
The Higher Mining School opened in 1899, and by 1913 it had grown into the Mining Institute.
From 1902 to 1933, the historian of the Zaporozhian Cossacks, Dmytro Yavornytsky, was Director of the Dnipropetrovsk Museum, which was later named after him.
In 1783, Yekaterinoslav was refounded on its current site, on the south bank of the Dnieper, near the Zaporozhian village of Polovytsia.
''Katerynoslav'') until 1925, the city was formally inaugurated by the Russian Empress Catherine the Great in 1787 as the administrative centre of the newly acquired vast territories of imperial ''New Russia'', including those ceded to Russia by the Ottoman Empire under the Treaty of Küçük Kaynarca (1774).
For children of pre-school age there are 174 institutions, also a lot of out-of -school institutions such as center of out-of-school work.
In June and July 2007, Dnipropetrovsk experienced a wave of serial killings that were dubbed by the media as the work of the Dnipropetrovsk maniacs.
In recent years the situation has, however, been improving, with a number of new used trams bought from the German cities of Dresden and Magdeburg, and a number of roads, including Schmidt Street and Moskovsky Street being reconstructed with modern road-building techniques.
Simultaneously the Dnipropetrovsk City Council vowed to supports "the preservation of Ukraine as a single and indivisible state", although some members called for separatism and for federalization of Ukraine.
This was a period of raids and fighting causing considerable devastation and depopulation in that area; the area became known as the Wild Fields.
It has several facilities devoted to heavy industry that produce a wide range of products, including cast-iron, rolled metal, pipes, machinery, different mining combines, agricultural equipment, tractors, trolleybuses, refrigerators, different chemicals and many others.
On 19 May 2016 the Ukrainian parliament passed a bill to officially rename the city to the name ''Dnipro''.
In 2006 Dnipropetrovsk hosted the All-Ukrainian Olympiad in Information Technology; in 2008, that for Mathematics, and in 2009 the semi-final of the All-Ukrainian Olympiad in Programming for the Eastern Region.
However, hundreds of thousands of workers and engineers in the city of Dnipropetrovsk worked in this plant and members of their families (up to 60% of the city population!)
On 27 April 2012, four bombs exploded near four tram stations in Dnipropetrovsk, injuring 26 people.
The city is the centre of Ukrainian bandy.
In 1951 the Southern Machine-building Factory began manufacturing and testing new military rockets for the battlefield.
The size of the cathedral was reduced, and it was completed in 1835.
More than 50,000 people worked at Yuzhmash.
These systems were used not only for purely military purposes by the Ministry of Defense, but also for astronomic research, for global radio and television network and for ecological monitoring.
Known as '''Ekaterinoslav''' ( , , translit.
Dnipropetrovsk has also dominated in the aerospace industry since the 1950s; construction department Yuzhnoye Design Bureau and Yuzhmash are well known to the specialists all over the world.
Because of its military industry, Dnipropetrovsk was a closed city until the 1990s.
The Soviet Ministry of Defense included Yuzhmash in its strategic plans.
Over the next few decades, until the October Revolution in 1917 the city did not change much in appearance and the predominant architectural style remained that of neo-classicism.
In the last decades city has generally supported candidates belonging to the Party of Regions and (in the 1990s) Communist Party of Ukraine in national and local elections.
However, FC Dnipro Dnipropetrovsk is not a multi-sport club.
It is  southeast of the capital Kiev on the Dnieper River, in the south-central part of Ukraine.
Dnipropetrovsk is a major industrial centre of Ukraine.
Domestic connections exist between Dnipropetrovsk and Kiev, Lviv, Simferopol, Odessa, Ivano-Frankivsk, Truskavets, Donetsk, Kharkiv and many other smaller Ukrainian cities, whilst international destinations include, amongst others, Minsk in Belarus, Moscow's Kursky Station and Saint Petersburg's Vitebsky Station in Russia, Baku – the capital of Azerbaijan, and the Bulgarian seaside resort of Varna.
In June 2014 another Lenin monument was removed and replaced by a monument to the Ukrainian military fighting the War in Donbass
It is visible from many points in Dnipropetrovsk.
On the night of ¾ August 1635, the Cossacks of Ivan Sulyma captured the fort by surprise, burning it down and butchering the garrison of about 200 West European mercenaries under Jean Marion.
The ruins of the Kodak are visible now.
Potemkin's plans for the city were extremely ambitious.
A few areas retain their historical character: all of Central Avenue, some street-blocks on the main hill (the Nagorna part) between Pushkin Prospekt and Embankment, and sections near Globa (formerly known as Chkalov park until it was recently renamed) and Shevchenko parks have been untouched for 150 years.
As a result of all this industrialisation the city's inner suburbs became increasingly polluted and were gradually given over to large, unsightly industrial enterprises.
These included space launch vehicles Kosmos, Tsyklon-2, Tsyklon-3 and Zenit.
Work on other stations was abandoned when the city ran out of money for this project; two of these abandoned building works are in the central portion of Akademik Yavornitskyi Prospekt.
The range of these first missiles was only .
On 26 January an 3,000 anti-Yanukovych activists attempt to capture the local regional state administration building failed.
The influential metallurgical mill company founded and mostly owned by the local business oligarch Viktor Pinchuk.
The first "General Constructor" and head of the "Southern" design office was Mikhail Yangel, a prominent scientist and outstanding designer of space rockets, who managed not only the design office, but the entire factory from 1954 to 1971.
Temperatures as high as  have been recorded in May.
It is a good example of constructivist architecture from the late period of the Soviet Union.
Many sewing and dress-making factories work for France, Canada, Germany and Great Britain , using the most advanced technologies, materials and design.
Other buildings of the era that did not fit the typical architectural style of the time in Dnipropetrovsk include, the Ukrainian-influenced  Grand Hotel Ukraine, the Russian revivalist style railway station (since reconstructed), and the art-nouveau Astoriya building on Akademik Yavornitskyi Prospekt.
Presently, there are 8 of them.
By the 1980s, this plant manufactured 67 different types of space ships, 12 space research complexes and 4 defense space rocket systems.
At the end of the 1950s, Yuzhmash became the main Soviet design and manufacturing centre for different types of missile complexes.
The change of river's direction is caused by its proximity to the Azov Upland located southeast of the city.
Construction stopped after the death of Potemkin and his sponsor, Empress Catherine, who was succeeded by her son Paul I known for his open antipathy to his mother's policies and undertakings.
Completion of the next two stations is necessary to make the municipal subway system profitable.
Joseph Stalin suggested special secret training for highly qualified engineers and scientists to become rocket construction specialists.
Since that time leaders of the Soviet military industrial complex preferred Yuzhmash rocket models.
As early as July 1944, the State Committee of Defense in Moscow decided to build a large military machine-building factory in Dnipropetrovsk on the location of the pre-war aircraft plant.
Late November 2015 about 300 streets, 5 of the 8 city districts and one metro station were renamed to comply with decommunization laws.
Most long-distance trains tend to run at night to reduce the amount of daytime hours spent travelling by each passenger.
The boom was caused by two men: John Hughes, a Welsh businessman who built an iron works at what is now Donetsk (then Yuzovka) in 1869–72, and developed the Donetsk coal deposits; and the Russian geologist Alexander Pol, who discovered the Krivoy Rog iron ore in 1866, during archaeological research.
Once the bolsheviks had taken power in Dnipropetrovsk the city was gradually purged of tsarist-era monuments and monumental architecture was stripped of Imperial coats of arms and other non-socialist symbolism.
After the Russian February revolution in 1917, Ekaterinoslav became a city within autonomy of Ukrainian People's Republic under Tsentralna Rada government.
Dnipropetrovsk was under Nazi occupation from 17 August 1941 to 25 October 1943.
Winter is not so cold (average day temperature in January is , but when there is no snow and the wind blows hard, it feels extremely cold.
Dniproavia, an airline, has its head office on the grounds of Dnipropetrovsk International Airport.
Cossacks and the Russian army had fought against the Ottoman Empire for control of this area in the Russo-Turkish War (1768–1774).
In the 2015 Ukrainian local elections Borys Filatov of the patriotic UKROP was elected Mayor of Dnipro.
Many pre-revolution buildings were also reconstructed to suit new purposes.
Neo-classical structures of brick and stone construction were preferred and the city began to take on the appearance of a typical European city of the era.
Later, due to damage from the Second World War, a number of large buildings were reconstructed.
Other times are mainly dry with a few showers.
This island is one of the most interesting places in the city.
The most popular routes are from Kiev, Donetsk, Kharkiv and Zaporizhia.
Dnipropetrovsk's river port is located close to the area surrounding the central railway station, on the banks of the river.
For example, the Emperor Nicholas II Commercial Institute in Dnipropetrovsk was reconstructed to serve as the administrative centre for the Dnipropetrovsk Oblast, a function it fulfils to this day.
This missile plant became a significant factor in the arms race of the Cold War.
Aviatorske, urban-type settlement located near the Dnipropetrovsk International Airport, is also a part of Dnipropetrovsk Municipality.
The city's municipal roads also suffer from the same funding problems as the trams, with many of them in a very poor technical state.
The fort was rebuilt by French engineer Guillaume Le Vasseur de Beauplan for the Polish Government in 1638, and had a mercenary garrison.
Privat Group is in business conflict with the Interpipe, also based in Dnipropetrovsk area.
Employment in the city is concentrated in large-sized enterprises.
Amongst the most important buildings of this era are the Transfiguration Cathedral, and a number of buildings in the area surrounding Akademik Yavornitskyi Prospekt.
The city also houses the Ukrainian Premier League and UEFA Europa League football club, FC Dnipro Dnipropetrovsk.
The cathedral's foundation stone was laid by Empress Catherine II and Austrian Emperor Joseph II, during Catherine's Crimean journey on , which was heralded as the official date of founding the city.
There was no need to build skyscrapers in the city in Soviet times.
Some prisoners had to do this 14 or 15 times.
The Zaporozhian village of ''Polovytsia'' was founded in the late-1760s, between the settlements of Stari (Old) and Novi (New) Kodaky.
Under the leadership of Yangel, KBYu produced such powerful rocket engines that the range of these ballistic missiles was practically without limits.
Two days later about 2,000 public sector employees called an indefinite rally in support of the Yanukovych government.
through what is today the city of Dnipropetrovsk.
The best time for visiting the city is in late spring — late April and May, and early in autumn: September, October, when the city's trees turn yellow.
Dnipropetrovsk has some highways crossing through the city.
87 institutions that are recognized on all Ukrainian and regional levels.
However the site had been badly chosen because spring waters were transforming the city into a bog.
In official reports for the general audience there was no information about the production of rockets or spaceships.
Dozens of people were killed and hundreds wounded.
The Soviet state provided billions of Soviet rubles to finance Yuzhmash projects.
The next year this plant officially changed its name into "the Southern Machine-building Factory" (Yuzhnyi mashino-stroitel’nyi zavod) or in abbreviated Russian, simply Yuzhmash.
One of the city's streets, Akademik Yavornitskyi Prospekt, links the two major architectural ensembles of the city and constitutes an important thoroughfare through the centre, which along with various suburban radial road systems, provides some of the area's most vital transport links for both suburban and inter-urban travel.
The current council was elected in 2015.
The military rocket systems manufactured in Dnipropetrovsk became the major component of the newly born Soviet Missile Forces of Strategic Purpose.
Nevertheless, the cathedral as originally designed was never to be built.
According to contemporaries, Yuzhmash was a separate entity inside the Soviet state.
"However, the city is characterized with significant pollution of air with industrial emissions."
See also List of mayors and political chiefs of the Dnipropetrovsk city administration.
Most new office buildings are built in the same architectural style as the old buildings.
During the summer, Dnipropetrovsk is very warm (average day temperature in July is , even hot sometimes .
In December 1945, thousands of German prisoners of war began construction and built the first sections and shops in the new factory.
In the summertime, there are some routes available by hydrofoils on the Dnieper River, whilst various tourist ships on their way down the river, (Kiev–Kherson–Odessa) tend to make a stop in the city.
Russian defeat in the Russo-Japanese War in 1905, among other things, resulted in widespread revolts against the government in many places of Russia, Ekaterinoslav being one of the major hot spots.
After 2014 events of Euromaidan, mass demonstrations and clashes in central city, Regions lost its influence, and Dnipropetrovsk supported Petro Poroshenko.
The foremost local bandy club is Dnipro Dnipropetrovsk, which won the Ukrainian championship in 2014.
Since the independence of Ukraine in 1991 and the economic development that followed, a number of large commercial and business centres have been built in the city's outskirts.
The city grew quickly; new suburbs appeared: Amur, Nyzhnodniprovsk and the factory areas developed.
According to media reports, Dnipropetrovsk was relatively quiet during the 2014 pro-Russian unrest in Ukraine, with pro-Russian Federation protestors outnumbered by those opposing outside intervention.
On a national/international stage however, no team from the city has met with the same level of success experienced by FC Dnipro.
In the heart of the city is Soborna Square, which includes the majestic cathedral founded by order of Catherine the Great in 1787.
In 1917, a monument to Catherine the Great that stood in front of the Mining Institute was replaced with one of Russian academic Mikhail Lomonosov.
Dnipropetrovsk Governor Kolesnikov called the anti-Yanukovych protesters 'extreme radical thugs from other regions'.
For the first time in the world space industry, the Dnipropetrovsk missile plant organised the serial production of space Sputniks.
Dnipropetrovsk also has a metro system, opened in 1995, which consists of one line and 6 stations.
The city was originally envisioned as the Russian Empire's 3rd capital city, after Moscow and Saint Petersburg.
Under the leadership of Yangel’s successor, V. Utkin, the KBYu created a unique space-rocket system called Energia-Buran.
the central portion of the city's metro line has seen renewed construction efforts and the metro has been transferred to municipal ownership in the hope that this will help it secure a loan from the European Bank for Development and Reconstruction.
Steel, oil & gas, chemical and energy are sectors of the group's prime influence and expertise.
Dnipropetrovsk has five single-mandate parliamentary constituencies entirely within the city, through which members of parliament (MPs) are elected to represent the city in Rada.
Other badly damaged buildings were, more often than not, demolished completely and replaced with new structures.
the city is also seeing construction of a southern urban bypass, which will allow automobile traffic to proceed around the city centre.
At the last (2014) general election, were won by PPB and independent candidates with.
Notable buildings built in the era preceding the Bolsheviks' rise to power and the establishment of communist Ukraine and later its absorption into the Soviet Union, include the main building of the National Mining University, which was built in 1899–1901, the art-nouveau inspired building of the city's former Duma, the Dnipropetrovsk National Historical Museum, and the Mechnikov Regional Hospital.
The City Council Assambly makes up the administration's legislative branch, thus effectively making it a city 'parliament' or rada.
On 19 May 2016 the official name of the city was changed to ''Dnipro''.
This is why the Soviet government approved of the KGB’s secrecy about Yuzhmash and its products.
22 February 2014 was also the day that Yanukovych was ousted out of office, after violent events in Kiev.
The municipal council is made up of 12 elected members, who are each elected to represent a certain district of the city for a four-year term.
The general designer and director of Yuzhmash supervised the work of numerous research institutes, design centres and factories all over the Soviet Union from Moscow, Leningrad and Kiev, to Voronezh and Yerevan.
The low-rise tenant houses of the Khrushchev era (Khrushchyovkas) gave way to the construction of high-rise prefabricated apartment blocks (similar to German Plattenbaus).
The club is owned by the Privat Group.
Privat Group controls thousands of companies of virtually every industry in Ukraine, European Union, Georgia, Ghana, Russia, Romania, United States and other countries.
By 1782, the city population was 2,194.
For practical purposes, the Prydniprovye lands remained a self-governing border area until the destruction of the Zaporizhian Sich in 1775.
