degree is a vocational degree (first professional degree), in that students are trained to apply or practice a knowledge, rather than generate it, similar to other students in vocational schools or institutes.
Most doctorates are awarded with specific Latin designations for the field of research (except for engineering, where the designation is German) instead of a general degree for all fields (e.g., the Ph.D.).
), and Dental degrees (D.M.D./D.D.S.
A special designation is the ''Dr.
The habilitation is still used for academic recruitment purposes in many countries within the EU, and involves either a new long thesis (a second book) or a portfolio of research publications.
A dissertation or thesis is prepared under the supervision of a tutor or director.
in law after a J.D.
A special diploma was created called the "accreditation to supervise research" (''Habilitation à diriger des recherches''), a professional qualification to supervise doctoral work.
Doctoral programs in Argentina are overseen by the National Commission for University Evaluation and Accreditation, an agency in Argentina’s Ministry of Education, Science and Technology.
In Engineering and Science, required coursework varies between 60 and 70 ECTS.
Higher doctorates are often also awarded ''honoris causa'' when a university wishes to formally recognize an individual's achievements and contributions to a particular field.
The successful completion of this thesis conveyed the ''doctorandus'' title, implying that the student's initial studies were finished.
* Complete graduate coursework.
A doctoral degree can be revoked or rescinded by the university that awarded it.
The time required to complete a research doctorate varies from three years, excluding undergraduate study, to six years or more.
or equivalent in physical therapy after DPT, in pharmacy after Pharm.D.
), various doctorates in engineering, such as the US Doctor of Engineering (D.Eng.)
Alternatively, after obtaining the ''laurea'' or the ''laurea magistrale'' one can complete a "Master's" (first-level Master's after the ''laurea''; second-level Master's after the ''laurea magistrale'') of one or two years, usually including an internship.
Its roots can be traced to the early church when the term "doctor" referred to the Apostles, church fathers, and other Christian authorities who taught and interpreted the Bible.
The older-style doctorates, now usually called higher doctorates in the United Kingdom, take much longer to complete, since candidates must show themselves to be leading experts in their subjects.
was established by Harvard University for the same reasons that the M.D.
In Belgium's Flemish Community the doctorandus title was only used by those who actually started their doctoral work.
), Doctor of Management (D.M.
Any Doctor attending the public defense is allowed to challenge the candidate with questions.
or dr. if approved by the ''Dienst Uitvoering Onderwijs'' though according to the opportunity principle, little effort monitors such frauds.
Typically the candidate submits a collection of previously published, peer-refereed work, which is reviewed by a committee of internal and external academics who decide whether the candidate deserves the doctorate.
M.Sc./M.B.A./LL.M./M.A.)
Those who have multiple doctor (dr.) titles may use the title dr.mult.
The dissertation can either be a monograph or it an edited collection of 3 to 7 journal articles.
The degree is conferred after a successful dissertation defence.
When a university wishes to formally recognize an individual's contributions to a particular field or philanthropic efforts, it may choose to grant a doctoral degree ''honoris causa'' (i.e., "for the sake of the honor"), the university waiving the usual formal requirements for bestowal of the degree.
The jury then deliberates in private and then declares the candidate admitted or "postponed".
All graduate programs in Brazilian public universities are tuition-free (mandated by the Brazilian constitution).
Sometimes, normal work and research activity are combined.
A unanimous vote of the reviewers nominates Doctors granted "Apto Cum Laude" for an "Extraordinary Award" (''Premio Extraordinario de Doctorado'').
The admissions process varies by institution.
The first doctorates to female students were granted in 1678 to Elena Cornaro Piscopia at the University of Padua, in 1732 to Laura Bassi at Bologna University, in 1754 to Dorothea Erxleben at Halle University and in 1785 to María Isidra de Guzmán y de la Cerda at Complutense University, Madrid.
After the pre-examiners approve, the doctoral candidate applies the faculty for permission to print the thesis.
An Italian "Master's" is not the same as a master's degree; it is intended to be more focused on professional training and practical experience.
Most British universities award degrees ''honoris causa'' to recognise individuals who have made a substantial contribution to a particular field.
Doctoral degrees are regulated by Royal Decree (R.D.
The International Affairs Office of the U.S. Department of Education lists over 20 "frequently" awarded research doctorate titles accepted by the National Science Foundation (NSF) as representing degrees equivalent in research content to the Ph.D.
The higher doctorates are stated to be "A higher level of award", which is not covered by the qualifications frameworks.
:# ''Professional and practice-based (or practitioner) doctorates'' – e.g.
The doctorate is a formal requirement for a docenture or professor's position, although these in practice require postdoctoral research and further experience.
After completion, which normally consumes 4 years, the candidate is commonly awarded the degree of ''Doutor'' (Doctor) followed by the main area of specialization, e.g.
Those who obtained a degree in a foreign country can only use the Dutch title drs.
The right was granted by the pope to the University of Paris in 1213 where it became a universal license to teach ''licentia ubiquie docendi''.
In the UK, the (junior) doctorate is a qualification awarded at FHEQ level 8/level 12 of the FQHEIS on the national qualifications frameworks.
However, Dutch university programmes tend to include advanced subject matter that e.g., at Harvard is taught in Ph.D.-courses (for instance advanced quantum mechanics or general relativity in a Dutch course for the master's degree in theoretical physics).
Every Ph.D. thesis has to be promoted by a full university professor who has the role of principal advisor.
The first reference to the term ''Doctor of (field/trade)'' was printed in an English Dictionary (printed 1675).
This program is called .
This law remained in effect until 1954, when the University of Salamanca joined in commemoration of its septecentenary.
In India, doctorates are offered by universities.
The Doctor of Theology (Th.D., or D.Th.)
All candidates for a bar license must pass the bar exam (''Shihou shiken''), attend the Legal Training and Research Institute and pass the practical exam (''Nikai Shiken'' or ''Shihou Shushusei koushi'').
In Egypt, the doctorate (abbreviated as M.D.)
(This diploma is similar in spirit to the older State doctorate, and the requirements for obtaining it are similar to those necessary to obtain tenure in other systems.)
It is possible to graduate three years after the master's degree, while much longer periods are not uncommon.
with the professional degree.
This right remained a bone of contention between the church authorities and universities that were slowly distancing themselves from the Church.
Physics, Chemistry, Biological and Life Sciences, etc.)
The most common doctoral degree is Ph.D. Others include D.B.A.
Professional and practice-based doctorates such as the EdD, DClinPsy, MD, DBA and EngD are full doctorates at the same level as the PhD in the national qualifications frameworks; they are not first professional degrees but are "often post-experience qualifications".
The holder of a ''Habilitation'' receives the authorization to teach a certain subject (''venia legendi'').
''/''Dott.ssa'', or as ''Dr.
For the higher doctorate, the candidate writes a major thesis and has to defend it orally in which the candidate (called ''præces'') defends this thesis against two official opponents as well as opponents from the auditorium (''ex auditorio'').
Advanced Practice Registered Nurses were expected to completely transition to the Doctor of Nursing Practice by 2015, and physical therapists to the Doctor of Physical Therapy by 2020.
The most common research doctorate is the Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D. or D.Phil.).
The term "doctor" derives from the Latin ''docere'' meaning "to teach/teacher".
), Doctor of Medicine (D.M., M.D.
All doctorate holders are reciprocally recognised as equivalent in Germany and Spain ( according to the "Bonn Agreement of November 14, 1994").
Originally the terms "master" and "doctor" were synonymous, but over time the doctorate came to be regarded as a higher qualification than the master's degree.
), Doctor of Psychology (Psy.D), Doctor of Social Work (D.S.W.
On the other hand, some doctorates are considered both research and professional doctorates (such as the Ed.D., D.Min., D.B.A., D.M.)
* A 2-year (or longer) period of studies concludes with a public dissertation presented to a panel of 3 Professors.
After reviewer approval, the candidate prints the thesis (generally more than 100 copies) and sends it to colleagues, friends and family with an invitation to the public defense.
In the Pontifical system, a Licentiate is equivalent to an advanced master's degree, or the post-master's coursework required in preparation for a doctorate.
Before the formalism of a recognized degree, written records indicate "Doctor of Medicine", or simply Teacher of Medicine.
Some graduate students are additionally supported by institutional scholarships granted by federal government agencies like CNPq (''Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico'') and CAPES (''Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento do Pessoal de Ensino Superior'').
A degree of ''Doutor'' usually enables an individual to apply for a junior faculty position equivalent to a US Assistant Professor.
DD, LLD, DSc, DLitt; higher level than junior doctorates, usually awarded either for a substantial body of work over an extended period or as Honorary degrees.
(also awarded in Japan and South Korea), the UK Engineering Doctorate, the German engineering doctorate ''Doktor-Ingenieur'' (''Dr.-Ing.'')
physics, chemistry, biology, mathematics, computer science and information technology);
99/2011) (in Spanish), three marks can be granted: Unsatisfactory (''No apto''), Pass (''Apto'') and "Cum laude" (''Apto Cum Laude'') as maximum mark.
Licentiate degrees generally have fewer requirements than Ph.D. Sweden similarly awards both the Licentiate's degree as a lower-level doctorate and the proper doctorate as a higher-level degree.
The redaction of a comprehensive thesis constitutes the bulk of the doctoral work.
The maximum number of jury members is 8.
The promotor (professor) determines whether the thesis quality suffices and can be submitted to the committee of experts.
Pharmacy Council of India permits a few colleges to offer Pharm D course (Doctorate in Pharmacy).
382 of 11 July 1980), referring to the reform of academic teaching, training and experimentation in organisation and teaching methods.
D degree (Doctor of Pharmacy) takes 6 years.
In terms of number of institutions offering the awards, the most common doctorates of this type in UKCGE surveys carried out in 2008 and 20013 were the Doctor of Science (DSc), Doctor of Letters (DLitt), Doctor of Law (LLD), Doctor of Music (DMus) and Doctor of Divinity (DD); in the 2008 survey the Doctor of Technology (DTech) tied with the DD.
The defense generally lasts 45 minutes in scientific fields, followed by 1 – 2 and a half hours of questions from the jury or other doctors present.
In some fields, this diploma was abolished in the 1980s: in physics and mathematics, the student could obtain directly a ''kandidaat (candidate) ''degree in two years.
This date preceded all other academic titles and when created, formal degrees, such as the Scottish M.B.
Immediately after the defence, the supervisor, the opponent and the candidate drink coffee with the public.
The higher doctorate is similar in some respects to the habilitation in some European countries.
The doctoral dissertation takes place in public.
* Obtain such understanding of the general theory of science and letters and such knowledge of neighbouring research fields that they are able to follow the development of these fields.
According to the National Institute of Statistics (INE), less than 5% of M.Sc.
For instance, until the early 20th century few academic staff or professors in English-speaking universities held doctorates, except for very senior scholars and those in holy orders.
Some 15,000 new doctoral matriculations occur every year and ~10,000 doctorates are awarded.
The way to show that these general requirements have been met is:
Complutense University was the only one in Spain authorised to confer the doctorate.
Some universities consider undergraduate degrees in professional areas such as engineering, medicine or law as qualifications for pursuing doctorate level degrees.
Many universities offer Ph.D./D.Phil.
The title is not mandatory.
Entrance is not as controlled as in undergraduate studies, where a strict numerus clausus is applied.
There are a variety of doctoral degrees, with the most common being the Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.), which is awarded in many different fields, ranging from the humanities to the scientific disciplines.
The Third Council of the Lateran of 1179 guaranteed the access—at that time largely free of charge—of all able applicants.
to the doctorate, e.g., ''Dr.
* Prepare and publicly defend a dissertation (a monograph or a compilation thesis of peer-reviewed articles).
All universities have the right to award doctorates.
A '''doctorate''' (from Latin ''docere'', "to teach") or '''doctor's degree''' (from Latin ''doctor'', "teacher") or '''doctoral degree''' (from the ancient formalism ''licentia docendi'') is an academic degree awarded by universities that, in most countries, qualifies the holder to teach at the university level in the degree's field, or to work in a specific profession.
In 1970, the right was extended to all Spanish universities.
New regulations concerning this distinction were set in 2006.
), Doctor of Musical Arts (D.M.A.
The most common way is to work as ''promovendus''/''assistant in opleiding'' (aio)/''onderzoeker in opleiding'' (oio) (research assistant with additional courses and supervision), perform extensive research and write a dissertation consisting of published articles (over a period of four or more years, averaging about 5.5).
If approved, the candidate receives the doctorate.
It is considered an additional academic qualification rather than an academic degree formally.
), Doctor of Information Security (D.I.S.
Although the title doctor is informally called Ph.D., legally no Ph.D. degree exists.
The habilitation results in an award of a formal "Dr.
The second-level degree, called a "laurea magistrale" (''Master's degree''), is obtained after two additional years, specializing in a branch of the field.
The Quality Assurance Agency states in the Framework for Higher Education Qualifications of UK Degree-Awarding Bodies (which covers junior doctorates but not higher doctorates) that:
Upon approval from the university, the candidate receives a "Diploma de Estudios Avanzados" (part qualified doctor, equivalent to M.Sc.).
In the Russian Empire the academic degree "doctor of the sciences" (''doktor nauk'') marked the highest academic degree that can be achieved by an examination.
The ''ammattikorkeakoulu'' institutes (institutes of higher vocational education that are not universities but often called "Universities of Applied Sciences" in English) do not award doctoral or other academic degrees.
It takes on average three to five years.
The supervisors and promotor lose prestige among their colleagues should they allow a substandard thesis to be submitted.
Research doctorates are awarded in recognition of academic research that is publishable, at least in principle, in a peer-refereed academic journal.
(''medicinae veterinariae''; veterinary medicine);
However, some universities differentiate between honorary and substantive doctorates, using the degree of Doctor of the University (D.Univ.)
(Doctor of Divinity and Legum Doctor of Laws) were likely the first, at least recorded, "doctor" titles (but still not a formal licentia or degree).
Outside of the academic context, the designation is often dropped.
Exceptions are based on their individual academic merit.
Students can enroll in a doctorate system after achieving a master's degree (or equivalent).
The diploma is a first-degree.
Entry requirements include master's degree.
degree in Egypt) before applying.
A doctorate is required in order to teach at the University.
and the German natural science doctorate ''Doctor rerum naturalium'' (''Dr.rer.nat.'').
Generally longer times to degree are typical in American programs in comparison to those in most other countries.
), and the contemporary German Ph.D.
(''medicinae''; medicine);
They are usually of longer duration than a regular bachelor's degree (e.g.
Any member of the public then has an opportunity to raise questions, although this is rare.
is equivalent to the Ph.D. degree.
Bachelor of Arts degree); 2) a five-year candidate's degree (e.g.
Currently, there are approximately 2,151 postgraduate careers in the country, of which 14% were doctoral degrees.
The École Saint-Thomas-d'Aquin of the Université catholique de Louvain, for instance, has offered the opportunity for students who had already earned a doctorate to earn the degree of Maître Agregé (''Magister Aggregatus'').
Pharm.D., D.Min., or D.S.W.).
Its Diploma has the force of a public document.
When granting this permission, the faculty names the ''opponent'' for the thesis defence, who must also be an outside expert, with at least a doctorate.
Oxford became the first university to institute the new degree, although naming it the DPhil.
In 2009 there were 308 professional doctorate programs in the UK, up from 109 in 1998, with the most popular being the EdD (38 institutions), DBA (33), EngD/DEng (22), MD/DM (21), and DClinPsy/DClinPsych/ClinPsyD (17).
In Australia, the term is on occasion applied to the ''Scientiae Juridicae Doctor'' (S.J.D.
), to name a few, according to the U.S. Department of Education (2008), are not considered an academic Doctorate.
In many cases Masters level programs were relabeled as doctoral programs.
The requirement was removed in 2005, leaving the decision to individual universities, which may delegate the authority to faculties or individual professors.
Finishing Ph.D. qualifying exams confers Ph.D. candidate status, allowing dissertation work to begin.
In the public defense the doctor is notified if the thesis has passed or not passed.
When the dissertation is ready, the faculty names two expert pre-examiners with doctoral degrees from the outside the university.
As stated above, professional degrees indicated by the "Doctor of" prefix should not be compared to the Doctorate.
Some are only offered in the US, such as Doctor of Audiology (Au.D.
Although the honorific does not become part of the name, holders can demand that the title appear in official documents.
), Doctor of Ministry (D.Min.
Because no national criteria define this last distinction, many institutions do not award it.
Many professional titles, such as ''ingegnere'' (engineer) are awarded only upon passing a post-graduation examination (''esame di stato''), and registration in the relevant professional association.
The old candidate's degree was relabeled as the bachelor's degree and the doctorandus' by the master's degree.
; usually include taught elements and have a professional, rather than academic, orientation
In some countries professional doctorates are awarded in certain fields where there may be comparatively less or no scholarly education and scholarly research.
''Candidatus/Candidata Magisterii''), generally compared to a master's degree; 3) a ph.d. degree, which replaced the licentiate in 1988; 4) a doctor's degree (e.g.
These first professional degrees were created to help strengthen professional training programs.
For the Ph.D. degree, the candidate writes a thesis and defends it orally at a formal disputation.
Nationally important schools such as Indian Institute of Management,National Institute of Industrial Engineering call their doctoral programmes fellow programmes.
(''medicinae dentariae''; dentistry);
28 and the Presidential Decree  No.
An approved project earns a master's degree that grants access to a Ph.D. program and initiates the period of research.
The opponent follows with a short talk on the topic, after which the pair critically discuss the dissertation.
Practices vary from one country to another.
), Doctor of Veterinary Medicine (D.V.M.
The final degree is called a "dottorato di ricerca" (''Ph.D.'')
degree holders are admitted to Ph.D. programmes.
(''theologiae''; theology);
The doctorate (Latin: ''doctum'', "that which is taught") appeared in medieval Europe as a license to teach Latin: ''licentia docendi'' at a medieval university.
Its duration depends on the field.
Funding is more available for natural and engineering sciences than in letters.
US research doctorates are awarded for successfully completing and defending independent research presented in the form of a dissertation, along with advanced study.
Many programs gauge the potential of a student applying to their program and grant a master's degree upon completion of the necessary Ph.D. course work.
Prof.'' (or simply ''Professore'') or ''Maestro''.
(A three-year extended research program, leading to the magister's degree was phased out to meet the international standards of the Bologna Process.)
The proceedings take two to three hours.
Entrance examinations are held for almost all programs.
Possible reasons include plagiarism, criminal or unethical activities of the author, or malfunction or manipulation of academic evaluation processes.
This system was generally adopted by the USSR/Russia and many post-Soviet countries.
The opponent and the candidate conduct a formal debate, usually wearing white tie, under the supervision of the thesis supervisor.
Higher doctorates are awarded in recognition of a substantial body of original research undertaken over the course of many years.
