Many students who are not in receipt of external funding may choose to undertake the degree part-time, thus reducing the tuition fees, as well as creating free time in which to earn money for subsistence.
In Argentina, the admission to a Ph.D. program at public Argentine University requires the full completion of a Master's degree or a Licentiate's degree.
However, some UK universities still maintain the option of submitting a thesis for the award of a higher doctorate.
The licentiate (''filosofian lisensiaatti'' or ''FL'') requires only 2–3 years of research, and is sometimes done before a FT.
At this stage, the student is known as a "Ph.D. student" or "doctoral student".
Ph.D. students often have to take on debt to undertake their degree.
A Master's degree is required, and the doctorate combines approximately 4–5 years of research (amounting to 3-5 scientific articles, some of which must be first-author) and 60 ECTS points of studies.
Ph.D.s are awarded for a wide range of programs in the sciences (e.g., biology, physics, mathematics, etc.
Many universities have established research-intensive ''Graduiertenkollegs'' ("graduate colleges"), which are graduate schools that provide funding for doctoral studies.
Graduate schools increasingly encourage their students to seek outside funding; many are supported by fellowships they obtain for themselves or by their advisers' research grants from government agencies such as the National Science Foundation and the National Institutes of Health.
The Ph.D. must then be completed within the next 3 years.
For full-time Ph.D.s, a 4-year time limit has now been fixed and students must apply for an extension to submit a thesis past this point.
In Sweden, the doctorate of philosophy was introduced at Uppsala University's Faculty of Philosophy in 1863.
A minimum of three years of study are required, in one only stage:
), a degree for professional educators.
The reforms at the Humboldt University transformed the Faculty of Philosophy or Arts (and its more recent successors such as the Faculty of Sciences) from a lower faculty into one on par with the Faculties of Law and Medicine.
His/her research may be carried out in a laboratory, at a university, or in a company.
Besides these sources of funding, there are also various competitive scholarships, bursaries, and awards available, such as those offered by the federal government via NSERC, CIHR, or SSHRC.
Similar expectations are implied by the Quality Assurance Agency's Code for Supervision (Quality Assurance Agency, 1999; cited in Wilkinson, 2005).
No dissertation or original work was required, only lengthy residency requirements and examinations.
for '''', Doctor of Philosophy; "Dr.
All Doctor Degree holders are reciprocally recognized as equivalent in Germany and Spain ("Bonn Agreement of November 14, 1994").
Sweden currently has two research-level degrees, the Licentiate's degree, which is comparable to the Danish degree formerly known as the Licentiate's degree and now as the ph.d., and the higher doctorate of philosophy, ''Filosofie Doktor''.
Depending on the specific field of study, completion of a Ph.D. program usually takes four to eight years of study after the Bachelor's Degree; those students who begin a Ph.D. program with a master's degree may complete their Ph.D. degree a year or two sooner.
Typically, Ph.D. programs require applicants to have a bachelor's degree in a relevant field (and, in many cases in the humanities, a master's degree), reasonably high grades, several letters of recommendation, relevant academic coursework, a cogent statement of interest in the field of study, and satisfactory performance on a graduate-level exam specified by the respective program (e.g., GRE, GMAT).
Meanwhile, the leading universities, in cooperation with the learned societies, set up a network of scholarly journals.
To counter this, the United States introduced the Doctor of Arts degree in 1970 with seed money from the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching.
A career in academia generally requires a Ph.D., though in some countries, it is possible to reach relatively high positions without a doctorate.
Initially, the titles of master and doctor were used interchangeably for the final degrees—being that the title ''Doctor'' merely was a formality bestowed on a Teacher/Master of the art—but by the late Middle Ages the terms Master of Arts and Doctor of Theology/Divinity, Doctor of Law, and Doctor of Medicine had become standard in most places (though in the German and Italian universities the term ''Doctor'' was used for all faculties).
Overall, 57% of students who begin a Ph.D. program in the US will complete their degree within ten years, approximately 30% will drop out or be dismissed, and the remaining 13% of students will continue on past ten years.
APAs are paid for a duration of 3 years, while a 6-month extension is usually possible upon citing delays out of the control of the student.
At some universities, there may be training for those wishing to supervise Ph.D. studies.
Hence, the Superior Graduate Schools in Italy  (''''), also called ''Schools of Excellence'' ('''') such as Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa and Sant'Anna School of Advanced Studies still keep their reputed historical ''"Diploma di Perfezionamento"'' Ph.D. title by law and MIUR Decree.
The University of London introduced the DSc in 1860, but as an advanced study course, following on directly from the BSc, rather than a research degree.
Major shifts toward graduate education were foretold by the opening of Clark University in 1887, which only offered graduate programs, and the Johns Hopkins University which focused on its Ph.D. program.
Some Ph.D. programs require the candidate to successfully complete requirements in pedagogy (taking courses on higher level teaching and teaching undergraduate courses) or applied science (e.g., clinical practice and predoctoral clinical internship in Ph.D. programs in clinical, counseling, or school psychology).
Since 2002, there has been a move by research councils to fund interdisciplinary doctoral training centres which concentrate resources on fewer higher quality centres.
Completion requirements vary.
It was no longer necessary to study in Germany.
This was soon followed by other universities, including the University of Cambridge establishing its ScD in the same year and the University of London transforming its DSc into a research degree in 1885.
"more and more foreign policy professionals are required to hold master's or Ph.D. degrees to compete in their field."
These authors report empirical data on the benefits that a Ph.D. candidate may gain if he or she publishes work, and note that Ph.D. students are more likely to do this with adequate encouragement from their supervisors.
This often is followed by a preliminary, a comprehensive examination, or a series of cumulative examinations where the emphasis is on breadth rather than depth of knowledge.
The average stipend in Russia (as of August 2011) is $430 a year ($35/month).
Detailed requirements for the  award of a Ph.D. degree vary throughout the world and even from school to school.
This supervisor is informally referred to as ''Doktorvater'' or ''Doktormutter'', which literally translate as "doctor's father" or "doctor's mother", respectively.
Apart from Tribhuvan University, many other Universities and private colleges such as South Western State College facilitate scholars to pursue PhD study.
The first higher doctorate in the modern sense was Durham University's DSc, introduced in 1882.
There were many exceptions to this, however.
Commonly, students with a master's degree or equivalent are accepted to a doctoral entrance exam.
''The Economist'' published an article citing various criticisms against the state of Ph.D.s.
The Ph.D. is a terminal degree in many fields.
In 2014, the median age of new Ph.D. graduates was 30.4 years of age.
degree in 1824, replacing the Magister's degree as the highest degree, while Uppsala University of Sweden renamed its Magister's degree ''Filosofie Doktor'' (fil.
student'', but also "doctoral candidate" or "Ph.D. candidate" once the student has completed all of the coursework and comprehensive examinations and is working on their thesis or dissertation.
Depending on the university, doctoral students (''Doktoranden'') can be required to attend formal classes or lectures, some of them also including exams or other scientific assignments, in order to get one or more certificates of qualification (Qualifikationsnachweise).
In Germany, admission to a doctoral program is generally on the basis of having an advanced degree (i.e., a master's degree, ''diplom'', ''magister'', or ''staatsexamen''), mostly in a related field and having above-average grades.
In the United States, by contrast, private universities and state universities alike were independent of the federal government.
Many U.S. Ph.D. students work as teaching assistants or research assistants.
Practically all the funding came from the central government, and could be cut off if the professor was politically unacceptable.
for '''', Doctor of the Natural Sciences; "Dr.
The degree represents the traditional Faculty of Philosophy and encompasses subjects from biology, physics and chemistry, to languages, history and social sciences, being the highest degree in these disciplines.
(Doctor of Science), which may be granted on the recommendation of a committee of examiners on the basis of a substantial portfolio of submitted (and usually published) research.
The standard requirement is a bachelor's degree with either first-class or upper second-class honours.
After two or two and a half years it is expected the research work of the doctoral candidate to be submitted in the form of oral qualification, where suggestions and corrections about the research hypothesis and methodology, as well as on the course of the research work are performed.
A clear distinction is made between an "earned doctorate", which is awarded for completion of a course of study and a thesis or dissertation, and an "honorary doctorate", a title granted by a university to a successful or notable person who has not completed doctoral academic work or completed a dissertation at the university.
At some Canadian universities, most Ph.D. students receive an award equivalent to part or all of the tuition amount for the first four years (this is sometimes called a tuition deferral or tuition waiver).
Australian citizens, permanent residents and New Zealand citizens are not charged course fees for their Ph.D. or research master's degree, with exception to the student services and amenities fee (SSAF) which is set by each university and typically involves the largest amount allowed by the Australian government.
A Ph.D. Student has to follow some courses offered by the graduate school while continuing his/her research at laboratory.
In the US, Canada, India and Denmark, for example, many universities require coursework in addition to research for Ph.D. degrees.
These typically have a more formal taught component consisting of smaller research projects, as well as a 40,000–60,000 word thesis component, which together are officially considered equivalent to a Ph.D. degree.
A Ph.D. candidate must submit a project, thesis or dissertation often consisting of a body of original academic research, which is in principle worthy of publication in a peer-reviewed journal.
The most common of these are the government-funded Australian Postgraduate Award (APA), which provides a living stipend to students of approximately A$25,800 a year (tax free).
Indeed, Dinham and Scott (2001) have argued that the worldwide growth in research students has been matched by increase in a number of what they term "how-to" texts for both students and supervisors, citing examples such as Pugh and Phillips (1987).
This situation changed in the early 19th century through the educational reforms in Germany, most strongly embodied in the model of the University of Berlin, founded and controlled by the Prussian government in 1810.
These reforms proved extremely successful, and fairly quickly the German universities started attracting foreign students, notably from the United States.
Since the early 1990s, British funding councils have adopted a policy of penalising departments where large proportions of students fail to submit their theses in four years after achieving Ph.D.-student status (or pro rata equivalent) by reducing the number of funded places in subsequent years.
In the last few years, there have been many changes in the rules relating to a Ph.D. in India .
Germany is one of the few nations engaging these issues, and it has been doing so by reconceptualising Ph.D. programs to be training for careers, outside academia, but still at high-level positions.
According to the  International Standard Classification of Education (ISCED) 2011, for purposes of international educational statistics, Kandidat Nauk (Candidate of Sciences) belongs to ISCED level 8, or "doctoral or equivalent", together with Ph.D., D.Phil., D.Litt., D.Sc., LL.D., Doctorate or similar.
The degrees were uncommon and not a prerequisite for employment as a professor; rather, they were seen as distinctions similar to the British (higher) doctorates (D.Litt., D.Sc.).
), social work (DSW), nursing (DNP), public administration (DPA), business administration (DBA), and music (DMA).
In the universities of Medieval Europe, study was organized in four faculties: the basic faculty of arts, and the three higher faculties of theology, medicine, and law (canon law and civil law).
The requirements to earn a Ph.D. degree varies considerably according to the country, institution, and time period, from entry-level research degrees to higher doctorates.
In some cases, the Executive Directors of some types of foundations may be expected to hold a Ph.D.
Universities award other types of doctorates besides the Ph.D., such as the Doctor of Musical Arts (D.M.A.
These two models were first distinguished by Acker, Hill and Black (1994; cited in Wisker, 2005).
The credit points attached to the degree are all in the product of the research, which is usually an 80,000 word thesis that makes a significant new contribution to the field.
The arts faculty, which in Germany was labelled the faculty of philosophy, started demanding contributions to research, attested by a dissertation, for the award of their final degree, which was labelled Doctor of Philosophy (abbreviated as Ph.D.)—originally this was just the German equivalent of the Master of Arts degree.
The Ph.D. degree is only received after a successful defense of the candidate's thesis is performed (four or five years after the enrollment), and most of the times also requiring the most important results having been published in at least one peer-reviewed high impact international journal.
Wisker (2005) has noticed how research into this field has distinguished between two models of supervision:
Some programs may require all Ph.D. candidates to teach, which may be done under the supervision of their supervisor or regular faculty.
Furthermore, it is usually required that by the end of eighteen to thirty-six months after the first registration, the student will have successfully completed the comprehensive exams.
Indeed, the higher faculties had largely atrophied, since medical training had shifted to teaching hospitals, the legal training for the common law system was provided by the Inns of Court (with some minor exceptions, see Doctors' Commons), and few students undertook formal study in theology.
In German-speaking nations; most Eastern European nations; successor states of the former Soviet Union; most parts of Africa, Asia, and many Spanish-speaking countries, the corresponding degree to a Doctor of Philosophy is simply called "Doctor" (''Doktor''), and the subject area is distinguished by a Latin suffix (e.g., "Dr.
''dr'') is an advanced academic degree awarded by universities in most fields  as well as by the Polish Academy of Sciences, regulated by the Polish parliament acts and the government orders, in particular by the Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the Republic of Poland.
The motivation may also include increased salary, but in many cases this is not the result.
In the next two decades, NYU, the University of Pennsylvania, Harvard, and Princeton also began granting the degree.
The latter is equivalent to the Ph.D.
Originally this was a license to teach, awarded shortly before the award of the master or doctor degree by the diocese in which the university was located, but later it evolved into an academic degree in its own right, in particular in the continental universities.
If approved by her or his "thesis director (or directors)", the study will be presented to a panel of 5 distinguished scholars.
The title of Ph.D. is awarded to a scientist who 1) completed a minimum of 3 years of Ph.D. studies (Pol.
The social standing of doctors in Spain is evidenced by the fact that only Ph.D. holders, Grandees and Dukes can take seat and cover their heads in the presence of the King.
degree; officially, the ph.d. is not considered a doctorate, but unofficially, it is referred to as "the smaller doctorate", as opposed to the dr.
After 1984, only one type of doctoral degree remained, called "doctorate" (''Doctorat'').
Professors across the humanities and Sciences focused on their advanced research.
# A 3-year (or longer) period of research.
About 88% of Russian students studying at state universities study at the expense of budget funds.
Scandinavian countries were among the early adopters of a degree known as a doctorate of philosophy, based upon the German model.
Alternate arrangements exist whereby a student is allowed to let their registration in the program lapse at the end of six years and re-register once the thesis is completed in draft form.
In the United States, the Ph.D. degree is the highest academic degree awarded by universities in most fields of study.
The doctorates in the higher faculties were quite different from the current Ph.D. degree in that they were awarded for advanced scholarship, not original research.
It is, however, not uncommon for students to be unable to complete all the requirements within six years, particularly given that funding packages often support students for only two to four years; many departments will allow program extensions at the discretion of the thesis supervisor and/or department chair.
Ph.D. students are sometimes offered a scholarship to study for their Ph.D. degree.
In the case of the University of Oxford, for example, "The one essential condition of being accepted&nbsp;... is evidence of previous academic excellence, and of future potential."
A Ph.D. student or candidate is conventionally required to study on campus under close supervision.
In some subjects, doing a Masters in Philosophy (M.Phil.)
as the proper doctorate and a higher degree than the ph.d., whereas in Norway, the historically analogous dr. philos.
While a significant portion of postgraduate students finance their tuition and living costs with teaching or research work at private and state-run institutions, international institutions, such as the Fulbright Program and the Organization of American States (OAS), have been known to grant full scholarships for tuition with apportions for housing.
), engineering, and humanities (e.g., history, literature, musicology, etc.
Late in the 20th century, "publish or perish" became increasingly important in colleges and smaller universities.
"Doctor of Sciences" (DSc. )
If a student fails to make satisfactory progress, he or she may be offered the opportunity to write up and submit for an MPhil degree as is the case at the King's College London and University of Manchester.
degree is officially regarded as equivalent to the new ph.d.
Some institutions such as Colciencias, Colfuturo and Icetex grant scholarships or provide awards in the form of forgivable loans
China or Brazil) is there a shortage of Ph.D.s.
These programmes are designed to provide students with a greater range of skills than a standard Ph.D.; and for the university they are a means of gaining an extra years' fees from public sources.
Instead, under the tutelage of a single professor or advisory committee, they are expected to conduct independent research.
As another encountered situation, the company and the institute can sign together a funding agreement so that the student still has a public doctoral contract, but is daily located in the company (for example, it is particularly the case of (French) Scientific Cooperation Foundation).
This research degree of doctor of philosophy was the first to be given in North America.
These courses include a Master of Research (MRes) in the first year, which consists of a taught component as well as laboratory rotation projects.
The Ph.D. admission is granted by a graduate school (in French, "école doctorale").
Occasionally a "sandwich Ph.D." will be awarded by two universities.
is a prerequisite to starting a Ph.D. For funding/fellowship, it is required to qualify for the National Eligibility Test for Lectureship and Junior Research fellowship (NET for LS and JRF)  conducted by the federal research organisation Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) and University Grants Commission (UGC).
''doktor''), abbreviated to Ph.D. (Pol.
This Committee should be composed of examiners that are external to the program, and at least one of them should also be external to the institution.
Usually, former students, research assistants or lecturers from the same university, may be spared from attending extra classes.
In many cases, depending on the discipline, a dissertation consists of a comprehensive literature review, an outline of methodology, and several chapters of scientific, social, historical, philosophical, or literary analysis.
At English-speaking universities, a student may also be required to demonstrate English language abilities, usually by achieving an acceptable score on a standard examination (for example the Test of English as a Foreign Language).
A PhD degree is a prerequisite for heading a university department in Ukraine.
According to the new rules described by UGC, universities must have to conduct entrance exams in general ability and the selected subject.
Other universities such as Aalto University award degrees such as ''tekniikan tohtori'' (''TkT'', engineering), ''taiteen tohtori'' (''TaT'', art), etc., which are translated in English to Doctor of Science (D.Sc.
A Ph.D. is also required in some positions outside academia, such as research jobs in major international agencies.
Even though in Germany the name of the doctorate was adapted accordingly after the philosophy faculty started being split up − e.g.
The Swedish term fil.
A similar evolution happened in many other continental European universities, and at least until reforms in the early 21st century many European countries (e.g.
From this stage on, the bulk of the student's time will be devoted to his or her own research, culminating in the completion of a Ph.D. thesis or dissertation.
Research by Casey suggests that, over all subjects, Ph.D.s provide an earnings premium of 26%, but notes that master's degrees provide a premium of 23% already.
Any doctor attending the public presentations is allowed to challenge the candidate with questions on his research.
The technical-rationality model of supervision, emphasising technique;
The degree, named after its historic roots as a ''Doctorate'' licensed to one allowed to profess a "Philosophia", has been formally awarded by European universities since the Medieval era circa 1150-1200.
After successful completion of the course work, the students are required to give presentations of the research proposal (plan of work or synopsis) at the beginning, submit progress reports, give a pre-submission presentation and finally defend the thesis in an open defence viva-voce.
Independence was high, but funding was low.
A candidate must submit a project or thesis or dissertation often consisting of a body of original academic research, which is in principle worthy of publication in a peer-reviewed context.
The Ministry of Science keeps a National Registry of Theses called TESEO.
Research degrees first appeared in the UK in the late nineteenth century in the shape of the Doctor of Science (DSc or ScD) and other such "higher doctorates".
In India, generally a master's degree is required to gain admission to a doctoral program.
or "Ph.D.", is an academic title awarded at the end of a course of not less than three years, admission to which is based on entrance examinations and academic rankings in the Bachelor of Arts ("Laurea Triennale") and Master of Arts ("Laurea Magistrale" or "Laurea Specialistica").
While the standard Ph.D. follows the Bologna process, the M.D.-Ph.D. programme may be completed in two years.
In Germany, the national government funded the universities and the research programs of the leading professors.
Four marks can be granted: Unsatisfactory, Pass, Satisfactory, and Excellent.
This is typically done after one or two years, and the research work done may count towards the PhD degree.
At the end of the lecture, the PhD candidate can be seen as "confirmed" - faculty members give their approval and trust that the study is well directed and will with high probability result in the candidate being successful.
By the 1890s, Harvard, Columbia, Michigan and Wisconsin were building major graduate programs, whose alumni were hired by new research universities.
These difficulties are increasingly being felt by graduates of professional degrees, such as law school, looking to find employment.
All doctoral programs are of a research nature.
A doctoral degree (Pol.
In Federal Democratic Republic of Nepal, generally a master's degree is required to gain admission to a doctoral program.
Most students left the university before becoming masters of arts, whereas regulars (members of monastic orders) could skip the arts faculty entirely.
The doctoral candidate's work should be presented in a dissertation or thesis prepared under the supervision of a tutor or director, and reviewed by a Doctoral Committee.
After clearing these tests, the shortlisted candidates need to appear for an interview by the available supervisor/guide.
Scientific studentships are usually paid at a higher rate, for example, in London, Cancer Research UK, the ICR and the Wellcome Trust stipend rates start at around £19,000 and progress annually to around £23,000 a year; an amount that is tax and national insurance free.
for doctorates in the faculty of natural sciences − in most of the English-speaking world the name of Doctor of Philosophy was retained for research doctorates in all disciplines.
The number of Ph.D. diplomas awarded by US universities has risen nearly every year since 1957, according to data compiled by the US National Science Foundation.
The number of places on offer each year and details of the entrance examinations are set out in the examination announcement.
Doctoral degrees are regulated by ''Real Decreto'' (Royal Decree in Spanish) R.D.
In many countries a candidate must defend this work before a panel of expert examiners appointed by the university.
This requirement was introduced in 2007 due to concerns about terrorism and weapons proliferation.
To a lesser extent, the UK research councils have tackled the issue by introducing, since 1992, the EngD.
According to the new rules, most universities conduct entrance exams in general ability and the selected subject.
Students may also take part in tutoring, work as research assistants, or (occasionally) deliver lectures, at a rate of typically £25–30 per hour, either to supplement existing low income or as a sole means of funding.
These tend not to be solely academic, but combine academic research, a taught component and a professional qualification.
Some universities in the non-English-speaking world have begun adopting similar standards to those of the anglophone Ph.D. degree for their research doctorates (see the Bologna process).
A '''Doctor of Philosophy''' ('''Ph.D.'''
Before 1984 three research doctorates existed in France: the State doctorate (''doctorat d'État'', the old doctorate introduced in 1808), the third cycle doctorate (''doctorat de troisième cycle'', created in 1954 and shorter than the State doctorate) and the diploma of doctor-engineer (''diplôme de docteur-ingénieur ''created in 1923), for technical research.
With the popularity of distance education and e-learning technologies, some universities now accept students enrolled into a distance education part-time mode.
The confirmation lecture can be seen as a trial run for the final public defense, though faculty members at this stage can still largely influence the direction of the research.
Mark C. Taylor opines that total reform of Ph.D. programs in almost every field is necessary in the U.S., and that pressure to make the necessary changes will need to come from many sources (students, administrators, public and private sectors, etc.).
In the last case, the company hires the student as an engineer and the student is supervised by both the company's tutor and a labs' professor.
A person who attains a doctorate of philosophy is automatically awarded the academic title of doctor.
clinical psychology (D.Clin.Psych.
It was impossible for professors who were not approved by Berlin to train graduate students.
A formal oral defence is generally not part of the examination of the thesis, largely because of the distances that would need to be traveled by the overseas examiners.
In the article "The Peril of Credential Creep in Foreign Policy", it is stated that
The average tuition fee in graduate school is $2,000 per year.
The American students would go to Germany to obtain a Ph.D. after having studied for a bachelor's degrees at an American college.
These were, however, very advanced degrees, rather than research-training degrees at PhD level – Harold Jeffreys said that getting a Cambridge ScD was "more or less equivalent to being proposed for the Royal Society".
Most of postgraduate students in Colombia must finance their tuition fees by means of teaching assistant seats or research works.
phil., "the grand doctorate".
In North America, professors are increasingly being required to have a Ph.D., because the percentage of faculty with a Ph.D. is used as a university ratings measure.
