A knight's head appeared at the top of the emblem.
As part of a general decline in the commercial vehicle field during the 1970s, Dodge eliminated their LCF Series heavy-duty trucks in 1975, along with the Bighorn and medium-duty D-Series trucks, and affiliated S Series school buses were dropped in 1978.
All of these were also sold in selected export markets badged either as Fargo or De Soto.
For its part, the US Government provided more than $6 billion in loans at 21%, called a "bridge loan" or "bailout".
Not only did this style dominate the racetrack for 4 full years, its aerodynamic improvements forever changed the face of NASCAR racing.
The Dodge brand has withstood the multiple ownership changes at Chrysler from 1998 to 2009, including its short-lived merger with Daimler-Benz AG from 1998 to 2007, its subsequent sale to Cerberus Capital Management, its 2009 bailout by the United States government, and its subsequent Chapter 11 bankruptcy and acquisition by Fiat.
The 1973 oil crisis and its subsequent impact on the American automobile industry led Chrysler to develop the K platform of compact to midsize cars for the 1981 model year.
Stagnation in development was becoming apparent, however, and the public responded by dropping Dodge Brothers to fifth place in the industry by 1925.
Currently, both the Journey and the Ram are available to Argentinian customers.
Dodge introduced what they called the "Adult Toys" line to boost its truck sales in the late 1970s, starting off with the limited edition Lil' Red Express pickup (featuring, a 360 c.i.
Dodge never got the radical Airflow styling that was the cause of depressed sales of Chryslers and DeSotos from 1934 to 1937, as a passenger sedan, but it was used on commercial truck for a short time.
A second emblem was revealed during the unveiling of the 2011 Durango, which used the same five-point shield-shaped outline of the old emblem, but with the ram's head replaced with a chrome cross reminiscent of the brand's signature cross-haired grille.
From early 2012 on, model year 2010 cars were available.
In 2013, Dodge re-introduced a compact car based on an Alfa-Romeo design called the Dart.
This has allowed Chrysler LLC to fully merge with Fiat to form FCA, Fiat Chrysler Automobiles, in 2014.
For a time during the 1980s, Dodge also imported a line of small pickups from Mitsubishi.
They would eventually drop these products altogether and used the plants to produce engines (in the UK) and "real" Renault truck models in Spain.
The location was replaced by a larger facility at Hastings Street and Monroe Avenue, which is now a parking garage for the Greektown Casino Hotel (Hastings Street at this location has been renamed Chrysler Service Drive).
A modified version of the Ram's head logo is still used for the Ram brand, with "RAM" written across the bottom in bold white or black lettering.
In 2011, Dodge, Ram, and Dodge's Viper were separated.
For 2000, the new Neon became the Chrysler Neon.
This basic and durable front-wheel drive platform spawned a whole range of new models at Dodge during the 1980s, including the groundbreaking Dodge Caravan.
In 1971, the Dodge 1500, a rebadged Hillman Avenger from the United Kingdom was introduced.
Sized between smaller SUVs (like the Chevrolet Blazer and Ford Explorer) and larger models (like the Chevrolet Tahoe and Ford Expedition), Durango was both a bit more and bit less of everything.
This is a set up similar to PSA Peugeot Citroën, which positions Peugeot as its conservative mainstream brand while Citroën is more performance-based, as well as Hyundai Motor Group having its two mainstream brands, Kia Motors and Hyundai Motor Company focusing on performance and mid-luxury, respectively.
Changes to the car, save for superficial things like trim levels and colors, remained minimal until 1927, when the new Senior six-cylinder line was introduced.
With a Federal Loan in hand, Chrysler quickly set to work on new models that would leave the past behind, while reorganizing to pay the government loan which stood at 29%.
Buyers, understandably, were confused and chose to shop the competition rather than figure out what was going on at Dodge.
(Among the American press, it has drawn comparisons to the decades-long set up of Chevrolet and Pontiac at General Motors before the phase-out of Pontiac in 2010.)
Because of their fuel efficiency major motorhome manufacturer  Thor Motor Coach made several Class C and Class A Motorhomes available on the Dodge Sprinter Chassis including their popular Four Winds Siesta & Chateau Citation product lines.
In 2014, SRT was merged back into Dodge.
That will not fit the campaign for truck buyers.
The Dart was replaced by a new Aspen for 1976, and Coronet and Charger were effectively replaced by the Diplomat for 1977, which was actually a fancier Aspen.
Rebadged as the Ram Van and Ram Wagon for 1981, this venerable design carried on for 33 years with little more than cosmetic and safety updates all the way to 2003.
Later came the more widely available Warlock.
The two should have distinct themes."
Like almost every other automaker, Dodge sold lightly facelifted revisions of its 1942 design through the 1948 season.
The combined company will be based in London.
Except for the Colt and Slant Six models of the Dart, Dodge's lineup was quickly seen as extremely inefficient.
This innovation raised Dodge's profile among serious truck buyers who needed power for towing or large loads.
For 2003, the revamped Neon appeared in Canada as the Dodge SX 2.0.
The Dodge brothers both died of complications due to influenza in 1920 and the company was sold to Dillon, Read & Co. in 1925 before being sold to Chrysler in 1928.
The rear-drive chassis was then used in early 2008 to build a new Challenger, with styling reminiscent of the original 1970 Challenger.
Dodge Brothers cars continued to rank second place in American sales in 1920.
On October 1, 1925, Dodge Brothers, Inc., acquired a 51% interest in Graham Brothers, Inc., for $13&nbsp;million and the remaining 49% on May 1, 1926.
The first vehicle made in Argentina was the D-100 "Sweptilte" pickup.
Patton's men tied the bodies to the hoods of the Dodges, returning to headquarters in Dublán and an excited reception from US newspapermen.
(DeSoto and Dodge would swap places in the market for the 1933 model year, Dodge dropping down between Plymouth and DeSoto.)
* Forward Look: Virgil Exner's radical Forward Look redesign of Chrysler's vehicles for the 1955 model year was emphasized by the adoption of a logo by the same name, applied to all Chrysler Corporation vehicles.
Wilmer was named board chairman in November, 1926.
By 1914, John and Horace had created the new four-cylinder Dodge Model 30.
Soon after, the housing bubble began to collapse the American market, and on May 1, 2009, Chrysler and GM filed for bankruptcy on the same day.
The first logo features the word "DODGE" with two inclined stripes.
However, it should be noted that even though the Ram trucks are marketed separately from Dodge cars, Ram President Fred Diaz has stated that "Ram trucks will always and forever be Dodges.
Dodge trucks adopted the ram as the hood ornament for the 1940 model year with the 1950 models as the last.
Although similar to the Star of David, the Dodge brothers were not Jewish; they were Methodists.
In 1993, Dodge began marketing cars and pick-ups directly in Argentina.
The Intrepid, Stratus, and Neon updates of the 1998 to 2000 timeframe were largely complete before Daimler's presence, and Dodge's first experience of any platform sharing with the German side of the company was the 2005 Magnum station wagon, introduced as a replacement for the Intrepid.
Chrysler would over the years come to rely heavily on their relationship with Mitsubishi.
In 1998, the Dakota pickup started production in a new plant in Campo Largo, Paraná by Mercedes-Benz, which belongs to its former partner Daimler AG.
Other "Adult Toys" from Dodge included the "Macho Power Wagon" and "Street Van".
The manufacturer was acquired by Volkswagen in 1981.
Further cost savings were explored in the form of an extensive platform-sharing arrangement with Mitsubishi, which spawned the Caliber subcompact as a replacement for the Neon and the Avenger sedan.
The design had four horizontal bars broken in the middle by one vertical bar with an "O" in the center.
With steadily upgraded styling and ever-stronger engines every year through 1960, Dodge found a ready market for its products as America discovered the joys of freeway travel.
Dodge trucks, which have been sold at Canadian Plymouth dealers since 1973, continued without change.
One of its designers came up with the meaningless name Fratzog for the logo, which ultimately stuck.
The newly formed company went on to fully repay that loan, remortgaging to reduce the interest rate several times down to 6%.
Full-size models evolved gradually during this time.
Dodge vehicles have been sold in the Middle East for a considerably longer period.
There are now rumours that Dodge cars will be re-badged as Fiats in the Australian market as has happened in Europe.
Bigger Dodges, though, remained rooted in old habits.
Like its predecessor, the new Challenger coupe was available with a powerful V8 engine (base models featured a V6).
The 880 continued into 1965, the year a completely new full-size body was put into production, the Polara entered the medium price class and the Monaco was added as the top series.
Dodge vehicles mainly consisted of trucks and full-sized passenger cars through the 1970s, though it did make some inroads into the compact car market during this time.
On June 1, 2011 the Dodge name was dropped from the rest of Europe when it was replaced by the Fiat brand, where Fiat rebadged the Dodge Journey as the Fiat Freemont.
Additionally, while the Ram Trucks division will remain separate (although the Dodge Durango will remain in production as a Dodge), the SRT division was merged back into Dodge.
However, for model year 2011, the Caravan C/V was rebranded as a Ram, called the Ram C/V.
* Pentastar: From 1982 to 1995, Dodge used Chrysler's Pentastar logo on its cars and trucks to replace the Dodge crest, although it had been used for corporate recognition since late 1962.
Eventually Dodge was sold to Chrysler Corporation in 1928.
The Caravan not only helped save Chrysler as a serious high-volume American automaker, but also spawned an entirely new market segment that remains popular today: the minivan.
Dodge re-entered the Australian market in 2006 with the Caliber, their first offering since the AT4/D5N trucks in 1979 and the first Dodge passenger car to be marketed in Australia since the Phoenix sedan was discontinued in 1973.
The result was that Dodge sales in the middle price class collapsed.
Like the trucks, though, Chrysler's dire financial straits of the late 1970s precluded any major updates for the vans for many years.
In Spring 2007, DaimlerChrysler reached an agreement with Cerberus Capital Management to dump its Chrysler Group subsidiary, of which the Dodge division was a part.
In 2009, trucks were spun off into the separate Ram brand, named after the brand's most popular truck, the Dodge Ram.
His brother Horace then died of cirrhosis in December of the same year (reportedly out of grief at the loss of his brother, to whom he was very close).
Borrowing the recently introduced Chrysler Horizon from their European division, Dodge was able to get its new Omni subcompact on the market fairly quickly.
The diluting of the Chrysler name did not go well in Canada, especially as the nameplate had been pushed as a luxury line since the 1930s.
A version using the updated styling was made for the Mexican Market but was never imported to the U.S. or Canada.
In a move that never lived up to the expectations of its driving forces, Chrysler Corporation merged with Daimler-Benz AG in 1998 to form DaimlerChrysler.
Civilian production at Dodge was restarted by late 1945, in time for the 1946 model year.
The Chrysler Cirrus and Mitsubishi-built Dodge Avenger were dropped.
The first machine shop where the brothers worked together as parts suppliers for Olds and Ford was located at the Boydell Building on Beaubien Street at Lafayette in 1900.
police interceptor engine and visible big rig-style exhaust stacks).
Dodge also imported a version of Mitsubishi's popular Montero (Pajero in Japan) as the Raider from 1987 to 1989.
However, throughout the 1920s Dodge gradually lost its ranking as the third best-selling automobile manufacturer, slipping down to seventh in the U.S. market.
Once again, though, Dodge was left with outdated products during the 1980s as the market evolved.
In Mexico, the Hyundai Accent, Hyundai Atos, and Hyundai H100 were branded as "Dodge", Dodge Attitude, "Verna by Dodge", "Atos by Dodge" and "Dodge H100" respectively, and sold at Chrysler/Dodge dealers.
Dodge entered the Japanese market in mid-2007, and re-entered the Chinese market in late 2007.
At the same time, Dodge got a version of the Plymouth Duster, marketed as the Dodge Demon.
Dodge also offered a cargo version of its best-selling Caravan for many years, at first calling it the Mini Ram Van (a name originally applied to short-wheelbase B-Series Ram Vans) and later dubbing it the Caravan C/V (for "Cargo Van").
In a reversal of what happened for 1965, the St. Regis was an upsized Coronet.
The Dodge line, along with most of the corporation's output, was restyled in the so-called "Wind Stream" look for 1935.
Styling was not initially Dodge's strong point during this period, though that began to change by 1953 under the direction of corporate design chief Virgil Exner.
The logo first appeared on the 1962 Polara 500 and the mid-year 1962 Custom 880.
Following Chrysler's takeover of the British Rootes Group, Simca of France, and Barreiros of Spain, and the resultant establishment of Chrysler Europe in the late 1960s, the Dodge brand was used on light commercial vehicles, most of which were previously branded Commer or Karrier, on pickup and van versions of the Simca 1100, on the Spanish Dodge Dart, and on heavy trucks built in Spain.
Everything came to a head in 1979 when Chrysler's new chairman, Lee Iacocca, requested and received federal loan guarantees from the United States Congress in an effort to save the company from having to file bankruptcy.
The Forward Look logo consisted of two overlapped boomerang shapes, suggesting space age rocket-propelled motion.
Redesigned for 2006 as a 2007 model, the economical diesel-powered Sprinters have become very popular for city usage among delivery companies like FedEx and UPS in recent years.
This basic format of a dual line with Six and Eight models continued through 1933, and the cars were gradually streamlined and lengthened in step with prevailing trends of the day.
It was built there until 2001 with petrol and diesel engines and regular, extended and crew cabs.
Following World War II and the successful application of four-wheel drive to the truck line, Dodge introduced a civilian version that it called the Power Wagon.
Dodge vehicles are now available in many countries throughout the world.
The knight's head without the crest would be used for 1959.
Later that year, was the introduction of new Intrepid sedan, totally different from its boxy Dynasty predecessor and, in 1994, the new second generation Dodge Ram pickup was introduced with bold styling that departed radically from the boxy designs of trucks made by the big 3 for two decades prior.
* New logo: In 2010, with the separation of the Ram brand, two new Dodge logos were unveiled.
In advertisements and on dealer signage, Dodge's Pentastar was red, while Chrysler-Plymouth's was blue.
The three Graham brothers, Robert, Joseph and Ray, assumed management positions in Dodge Brothers before departing early in 1927.
For 2011 a new unibody Durango based on the Jeep Grand Cherokee was released.
Dillon, Read & Co. offered non-voting stock on the market in the new Dodge Brothers, Inc., firm, and along with the sale of bonds was able to raise $160&nbsp;million, reaping a $14&nbsp;million (net) profit.
The 1973 oil crisis caused significant changes at Dodge, as well as Chrysler as a whole.
Dodge is well-known today for being a player in the muscle car market of the late 1960s and early 1970s.
It was also integrated into the design of such parts as steering wheel center hubs and road wheel covers.
Image:Dodge Brothers Motor Vehicles Belt Buckle.JPG|Dodge Brothers logo used from 1914 to 1927 (seen here on a modern belt buckle)
The  UAW, being partners throughout the process, were paid well and above $3.9 billion in 2013 as Sergio's plan for full consolidation has continued on schedule.
That same year, Henry Ford decided to stop paying stock dividends to finance the construction of his new River Rouge complex.
The Neon in particular was a hit, buoyed by a clever marketing campaign and good performance.
The new 1953 bodies were smaller and based on the Plymouth.
Light- and medium-duty models were offered first, then a heavy-duty range was added during the 1930s and 1940s.
The Ram was redesigned again for 2002 (the Dakota in 2005), basically as an evolution of the original but now featuring the revival of Chrysler's legendary Hemi V8 engine.
A chassis-cab version was also offered, for use with bigger cargo boxes or flatbeds.
However, the Freemont is not available in the Ireland or UK Fiat lineup.
In 1960, it partnered with Fevre-Basset as a local manufacturer.
To enhance production, in 1932 Chrysler built a factory in Los Angeles, California where Chrysler, DeSoto, Dodge and Plymouth vehicles were built until the factory closed in 1971.
By early 2012 no new cars were being brought into Australia aside from the new facelifted 2012 Journey.
Dodge (along with the rest of Chrysler) added safety features such as a smooth, flat dashboard with no protruding knobs, curved in door handles, and padded front-seat backs for the benefit of the rear-seat occupants.
Another major restyle arrived for the 25th-anniversary 1939 models, which Dodge dubbed the Luxury Liner series.
As the Dodge Division's logo, Fratzog was incorporated in various badges and emblems on Dodge vehicles.
First was their introduction of Cummins' powerful and reliable B Series turbo-diesel engine as an option for 1989.
The Polara and Monaco were changed mostly in appearance for the next ten years or so.
In 2014, the cross logo was replaced by the word "DODGE" on the Durango steering wheel.
The Intrepid used what Chrysler called "cab forward" styling, with the wheels pushed out to the corners of the chassis for maximum passenger space.
The DaimlerChrysler merger of 1999 made it possible for Dodge to explore new ideas; hence the European-styled Mercedes-Benz Sprinter line of vans was brought over and given a Dodge styling treatment.
Current models are marketed with Hyundai logos instead of the "Ram" logo on previous model years.
The 2011 Durango shrank slightly to size comparable to the original model.
In fairness, this was true of most American automakers at the time, but Chrysler was also not in the best financial shape to do anything about it.
not initially successful, the Dart range that succeeded the Lancer in 1963 would prove to be one of the division's top sellers for many years.
Thus the B Series, introduced for 1971, offered both car-like comfort in its Sportsman passenger line or expansive room for gear and materials in its Tradesman cargo line.
Wilmer was a banker with no auto experience and Haynes remained as president.
One notable instance was in May when the 6th Infantry received a reported sighting of Julio Cárdenas, one of Villa's most trusted subordinates.
1957 saw the introduction of a new automatic transmission, three-speed TorqueFlite.
Chrysler borrowed $250 million from Prudential in 1954 to finance expansion, acquisition, and updating the outdated styling of their car lines that was contributed to Chrysler failing to benefit from the postwar boom as GM and Ford were.
Both PowerFlite and TorqueFlite were controlled by mechanical push-buttons until 1965.
Ram will always have the Dodge emblem inside and outside and they will be 'vinned' (from the acronym VIN, or Vehicle Identification Number) as a Dodge.
The redesigned version for 2004 grew a little bit in every dimension, becoming a full-size SUV (and thus somewhat less efficient), but was still sized between most of its competitors on either side of the aisle.
(Mitsubishi has more recently purchased Dakota pickups from Dodge and restyled them into their own Raider line for sale in North America.)
The first fruit of Chrysler's crash development program was the "K-Car", the Dodge version of which was the Dodge Aries.
Dodge came to Argentina in the early 20th century with imported cars and trucks.
Using the mid-sized Dakota pickup's chassis as a base, they built the four-door Durango SUV with seating for eight people and created a new niche.
In an effort to reach every segment of the market, Dodge even reached a hand across the Pacific to its partner, Mitsubishi Motors, and marketed their subcompact as the Colt to compete with the AMC Gremlin, Chevrolet Vega, and Ford Pinto.
As Plymouth cars were sold at Chrysler dealerships, Dodge branded vehicles were sold as a lower cost alternative to DeSoto.
However, just after the 1942 models were introduced, Japan's attack on Pearl Harbor forced the shutdown of Dodge's passenger car assembly lines in favor of war production in February 1942.
Image:Fratzog.jpg|Fratzog, used 1962–1981
All Plymouth-Chrysler and Dodge-Chrysler dealers became Chrysler-Dodge-Jeep dealers.
At the very least, Chrysler was able to use some of its other resources.
Instead, Dodge tried something new in 1997.
The Dodge Spirit sedan was well received in numerous markets worldwide.
This was a mild form of streamlining, which saw sales jump remarkably over the previous year (even though Dodge as a whole still dropped to fifth place for the year after two years of holding down fourth).
Rationalizing Chrysler's broad lineup was a priority, and Dodge's sister brand Plymouth was withdrawn from the market.
The Omni remained in the line through 1990.
Despite all this, Dodge Brothers' sales had already dropped to seventh place in the industry by 1927, and Dillon, Read began looking for someone to take over the company on a more permanent basis.
The present iteration of the Ram's-head logo appeared in 1993, standardizing on that logo in 1996 for all vehicles except the Viper, which uses the Viper's Head.
Continuing financial problems meant that even Dodge's light-duty models – renamed as the Ram Pickup line for 1981 – were carried over with the most minimal of updates until 1993.
Dodge chose not use the full model lines and engines available to them, the 2.7L V6 being available in the Journey and Avenger instead of the 3.2 in the North American versions.
The most common of these was the Dodge 50 series, widely used by utility companies and the military, but rarely seen outside the UK, and the Spanish-built heavy-duty 300 series available as 4x2, 6x4, 8x2, and 8x4 rigids, as well as 4x2 semi-trailer tractors.
As the Dodge brothers decided to produce their own vehicle, John Dodge was once quoted as saying, “Someday, people who own a Ford are going to want an automobile”, and introduced their first car in 1914.
A long-wheelbase edition of the remaining Six was added for 1936 and would remain a part of the lineup for many years.
Later that year, Chrysler Group was renamed FCA US LLC, corresponding with the merger of Fiat S.p.A. and Chrysler Group into the single corporate structure of Fiat Chrysler Automobiles.
At the same time, they increased the number of models imported from Japanese partner Mitsubishi starting in 1971: first came a smaller Colt (based on Mitsubishi's Galant line), then a revival of the Challenger (Dodge Challenger) in 1976 as a compact hardtop coupe with nothing more than a four-cylinder under the hood, rather than the booming V8s of yore.
Lt. George S. Patton led ten soldiers and two civilian guides in three Dodge Model 30 touring cars to conduct a raid at a ranch house in San Miguelito, Sonora.
Following the Global Financial Crisis, Chrysler introduced the facelifted model of the Caliber and discontinued the Avenger imports.
To fit better in the Chrysler Corporation lineup, alongside low-priced Plymouth and medium-priced DeSoto, Dodge's lineup for early 1930 was trimmed down to a core group of two lines and thirteen models (from three lines and nineteen models just over a year previous).
The second model to be introduced was the Nitro, with the Avenger and Journey followed.
Prices started out just above DeSoto but were somewhat less than top-of-the-line Chrysler, in a small-scale recreation of General Motors' "step-up" marketing concept.
Dodge vehicles would not return to the UK until the introduction of the Neon, badged as a Chrysler, in the mid-1990s.
In contrast, recent speculation has suggested that the Dodge nameplate would continue on until at least 2015, due to consistent sales of the Journey.
In 2010, Dodge started sales of the imported pickup Ram 2500.
Dodge was among the first to introduce car-like features to its trucks, adding the plush Adventurer package during the 1960s and offering sedan-like space in its Club Cab bodies of the 1970s.
Image:DodgeBros.JPG|Dodge Brothers emblem c. 1910, removed from the gate of the Dodge Main plant before its 1981 demolition
All voting stock was retained by Dillon, Read.
Dodge introduced the Ram's all-new "big-rig" styling treatment for 1994.
Since then all new Dodge models have been sold in Canada under the Dodge name.
The Warren Truck Assembly location was opened in 1938, and Dodge trucks have been made there ever since.
It was the first new Dodge model produced under FCA.
From 1949  until 1954, Fluid Drive could be combined with "Gyro-Matic," a semi-automatic transmmission which reduced (but didn't eliminate) the need to shift gears.
By 1910 the Dodge Main factory was built in Hammtramck, where it remained until 1979.
When the Ram truck was redesigned for the 1994 model year, the Ramcharger was discontinued in the American and Canadian markets.
* Star: The original Dodge was a circle, with two Greek deltas intertwined representing the letter "D", forming a six-pointed star in the middle; an interlocked "DB" was at the center of the star, and the words "Dodge Brothers Motor Vehicles" encircled the outside edge.
Chrysler was prolific in its production of war materiel from 1942 to 1945, and Dodge in particular was well known to both average citizens and thankful soldiers for their tough military-spec truck models and ambulances like the WC54.
