One account states its clutch consisted of a single egg.
Many remains were found, including bones of at least 17 dodos in various stages of maturity (though no juveniles), and several bones obviously from the skeleton of one individual bird, which have been preserved in their natural position.
Osteological and DNA analysis has since led to the dissolution of the family Raphidae, and the dodo and solitaire are now placed in their own subfamily, Raphinae, within the family Columbidae.
It is not known how the young were fed, but related pigeons provide crop milk.
The beak also appears to have been able to withstand high force loads, which indicates a diet of hard food.
This view is supported by the fact that the Mare aux Songes swamp, where most dodo remains have been excavated, is close to the sea in south-eastern Mauritius.
The openings of the bony nostrils were elongated along the length of the beak, and they contained no bony septum.
These findings were made public in December 2005 in the Naturalis museum in Leiden.
The small Mauritian flying fox and the snail ''Tropidophora carinata'' lived on Mauritius and Réunion, but vanished from both islands.
Studies of the cantilever strength of its leg bones indicate that it could run quite fast.
The dodo's closest genetic relative was the also extinct Rodrigues solitaire, the two forming the subfamily Raphinae of the family of pigeons and doves.
The description was most probably mingled with that of a cassowary, and Cauche's writings have other inconsistencies.
Birds of this genus are also white and black with slender beaks, fitting the old descriptions of the Réunion solitaire.
It was only slightly smaller than the dodo and the solitaire, and it too is thought to have been related to the crowned pigeons.
Savery's several later images all show greyish birds, possibly because he had by then seen another specimen.
He was successful, and also found remains of other extinct species.
The image shows a particularly fat bird and is the source for many other dodo illustrations.
Each was also placed in its own monotypic family (Raphidae and Pezophapidae, respectively), as it was thought that they had evolved their similarities independently.
As far as is known, the Portuguese never mentioned the bird.
All post-1638 depictions appear to be based on earlier images, around the time reports mentioning dodos became rarer.
Two species of ant from Mauritius have been named after the dodo: ''Pseudolasius dodo'' in 1946 and ''Pheidole dodo'' in 2013.
Weight estimates have varied from study to study.
After the castle was occupied by Danish forces in 1702, the museum collection was assimilated into the Royal Danish collection.
To prevent malaria, the British had covered the swamp with hard core during their rule over Mauritius, which had to be removed.
In 1993, Bradley C. Livezey proposed that males would have weighed  and females .
In extant birds, such as frugivorous (fruit-eating) pigeons, kinetic premaxillae help with consuming large food items.
Even the 1662 account has been questioned by Errol Fuller, as the reaction to distress cries matches what was described for the red rail.
The situation is similar to many finds of moa remains in New Zealand marshes.
In 1865, the same year that George Clark started to publish reports about excavated dodo fossils, the newly vindicated bird was featured as a character in Lewis Carroll's ''Alice's Adventures in Wonderland''.
In any case, the dodo was probably extinct by 1700, about a century after its discovery in 1598.
An egg claimed to be that of a dodo is stored in the museum of East London, South Africa.
Casts of the head can today be found in many museums worldwide.
Julian Hume has suggested this island was l’île aux Benitiers in Tamarin Bay, on the west coast of Mauritius.
Some plants, such as ''Casearia tinifolia'' and the palm orchid, have also become extinct.
Similarly, the phrase "to go the way of the dodo" means to become extinct or obsolete, to fall out of common usage or practice, or to become a thing of the past.
The skull was rediscovered by J. T. Reinhardt in 1840.
Apart from these remains, a dried foot, which belonged to the Dutch professor Pieter Pauw, was mentioned by Carolus Clusius in 1605.
Furthermore, cyanobacteria thrived in the conditions created by the excrements of animals gathered around the swamp, which died of intoxication, dehydration, trampling, and miring.
It was mummified, but the skin has perished.
The English writer Sir Hamon L'Estrange witnessed a live bird in London and described it as follows:
The Copenhagen skull (specimen ZMUC 90-806) is known to have been part of the collection of Bernardus Paludanus in Enkhuizen until 1651, when it was moved to the museum in Gottorf Castle, Schleswig.
Philip Burnard Ayres found the first subfossil bones in 1860, which were sent to Richard Owen at the British Museum, who did not publish the findings.
Like many animals that evolved in isolation from significant predators, the dodo was entirely fearless of humans.
A species of isopod from a coral reef off Réunion was named ''Hansenium dodo'' in 1991.
Such mass mortalities would have further jeopardised a species already in danger of becoming extinct.
Such a limited distribution across the island could well have contributed to its extinction.
The bird depicted probably lived in the menagerie of Mughal Emperor Jahangir, located in Surat, where English traveller Peter Mundy also claimed to have seen dodos.
On each side, it had six ribs, four of which articulated with the sternum through sternal ribs.
Apart from these sketches, it is unknown how many of the twenty or so 17th-century illustrations of the dodos were drawn from life or from stuffed specimens, which affects their reliability.
Depictions of the large crop hinted at a relationship with pigeons, in which this feature is more developed than in other birds.
Others have contested his hypothesis and suggested that the decline of the tree was exaggerated, or seeds were also distributed by other extinct animals such as ''Cylindraspis'' tortoises, fruit bats or the broad-billed parrot.
This remaining soft tissue has since degraded further; the head was dissected by Strickland and Melville, separating the skin from the skull in two halves.
This in turn supports the hypothesis that the ancestors of those birds reached the Mascarene islands by island hopping from South Asia.
Whether the dodo survived the journey is unknown, and the letter was destroyed by fire in the 19th century.
The English writer Sir Thomas Herbert was the first to use the word ''dodo'' in print in his 1634 travelogue, claiming it was referred to as such by the Portuguese, who had visited Mauritius in 1507.
The dodo achieved widespread recognition from its role in the story of ''Alice's Adventures in Wonderland'', and it has since become a fixture in popular culture, often as a symbol of extinction and obsolescence.
The dodo appears as a supporter on the coat of arms of Mauritius.
Subfossil bones have also been found inside caves in highland areas, indicating that it once occurred on mountains.
According to Hume, Cheke, and Valledor de Lozoya, it appears that all depictions of white dodos were based on Roelant Savery's 1611 painting ''Landscape with Orpheus and the animals'', or on copies of it.
It is the last recorded live dodo in captivity.
The following cladogram shows the dodo's closest relationships within the Columbidae, based on Shapiro et al., 2002:
When the journal was published in 1646, it was accompanied by an engraving of a dodo from Savery's "Crocker Art Gallery sketch".
The dodo's appearance in life is evidenced only by drawings, paintings, and written accounts from the 17th century.
Some authors also believed the birds described were of a species similar to the Rodrigues solitaire, as it was referred to by the same name, or even that there were white species of both dodo and solitaire on the island.
Louis Etienne Thirioux, an amateur naturalist at Port Louis, also found many dodo remains around 1900 from several locations.
The swamp yielded the remains of over 300 dodos, but very few skull and wing bones, possibly because the upper bodies were washed away or scavenged while the lower body was trapped.
The dodo differed from other pigeons mainly in the small size of the wings and the large size of the beak in proportion to the rest of the cranium.
This collection includes paintings of other Mauritian animals as well, including a red rail.
The dodo was variously declared a small ostrich, a rail, an albatross, or a vulture, by early scientists.
In 2014, DNA of the only known specimen of the recently extinct spotted green pigeon (''Caloenas maculata'') was analysed, and it was found to be a close relative of the Nicobar pigeon, and thus also the dodo and Rodrigues solitaire.
Most tropical specimens were preserved as dried heads and feet.
Rats were perhaps not much of a threat to the nests, since dodos would have been used to dealing with local land crabs.
Some early travellers found dodo meat unsavoury, and preferred to eat parrots and pigeons; others described it as tough but good.
Anthonie Cornelis Oudemans suggested that the discrepancy between the paintings and the old descriptions was that the paintings showed females, and that the species was therefore sexually dimorphic.
In the 19th century, research was conducted on a small quantity of remains of four specimens that had been brought to Europe in the early 17th century.
The forehead was high in relation to the beak, and the nostril was located low on the middle of the beak and surrounded by skin, a combination of features shared only with pigeons.
For many years the dodo and the Rodrigues solitaire were placed in a family of their own, the Raphidae (formerly Dididae), because their exact relationships with other pigeons were unresolved.
In 1626 Adriaen van de Venne drew a dodo that he claimed to have seen in Amsterdam, but he did not mention if it was alive, and his depiction is reminiscent of Savery's ''Edwards's Dodo''.
''Walghe'' means "tasteless", "insipid", or "sickly", and ''vogel'' means "bird".
Temple overlooked reports from the 1940s that found that tambalacoque seeds germinated, albeit very rarely, without being abraded during digestion.
Subsequent excavations suggested that dodos and other animals became mired in the Mare aux Songes while trying to reach water during a long period of severe drought about 4,200 years ago.
This was partly because, for religious reasons, extinction was not believed possible until later proved so by Georges Cuvier, and partly because many scientists doubted that the dodo had ever existed.
In his 18th-century classic work ''Systema Naturae'', Carl Linnaeus used ''cucullatus'' as the specific name, but combined it with the genus name ''Struthio'' (ostrich).
It may be what remains of one of the stuffed dodos known to have been at the menagerie of Emperor Rudolph II, possibly the specimen painted by Hoefnagel or Savery there.
The carpometacarpus of the dodo was more robust than that of the solitaire, however.
Contemporary depictions show a large crop, which was probably used to add space for food storage and to produce crop milk.
It has also been suggested that ''dodo'' was an onomatopoeic approximation of the bird's call, a two-note pigeon-like sound resembling "doo-doo".
It has been suggested that the dodo may already have been rare or localised before the arrival of humans on Mauritius, since it would have been unlikely to become extinct so rapidly if it had occupied all the remote areas of the island.
The pelvis was wider than that of the solitaire and other relatives, yet was comparable to the proportions in some smaller, flighted pigeons.
The skull, trunk and pelvic limbs were peramorphic, meaning that they changed considerably with age.
The near-coastal placement and wetness of the Mare aux Songes led to a high diversity of plant species, whereas the surrounding areas were drier.
A 2016 study estimated the weight at , based on CT scans of composite skeletons.
Extinct Mauritian reptiles include the saddle-backed Mauritius giant tortoise, the domed Mauritius giant tortoise, the Mauritian giant skink, and the Round Island burrowing boa.
When 17th-century paintings of white dodos were discovered by 19th-century naturalists, it was assumed they depicted these birds.
It has been depicted with brownish-grey plumage, yellow feet, a tuft of tail feathers, a grey, naked head, and a black, yellow, and green beak.
The Latin name ''cucullatus'' ("hooded") was first used by Juan Eusebio Nieremberg in 1635 as ''Cygnus cucullatus'', in reference to Carolus Clusius's 1605 depiction of a dodo.
A fruitfly gene within a region of a chromosome required for flying ability was named "dodo".
It has been suggested that this might be the remains of the bird that Hamon L'Estrange saw in London, the bird sent by Emanuel Altham, or a donation by Thomas Herbert.
In the following years, the bird was hunted by sailors and invasive species, while its habitat was being destroyed.
Though the wings were small, well-developed muscle scars on the bones show that they were not completely vestigial, and may have been used for display behaviour and balance; extant pigeons also use their wings for such purposes.
Subfossil remains and remnants of the birds that were brought to Europe in the 17th century show that dodos were very large birds, up to  tall.
It is thought that he included the dodo because he identified with it and had adopted the name as a nickname for himself because of his stammer, which made him accidentally introduce himself as "Do-do-dodgson", his legal surname.
Some ascribe it to the Dutch word ''dodoor'' for "sluggard", but it is more probably related to ''Dodaars'', which means either "fat-arse" or "knot-arse", referring to the knot of feathers on the hind end.
The lack of mammalian herbivores competing for resources on these islands allowed the solitaire and the dodo to attain very large sizes and flightlessness.
This gave the dodo a good sense of smell, which may have aided in locating fruit and small prey.
In 1863, Owen requested the Mauritian Bishop Vincent Ryan to spread word that he should be informed if any dodo bones were found.
63% of the fossils found in the swamp belonged to turtles of the extinct ''Cylindraspis'' genus, and 7.1% belonged to dodos, which had been deposited within several centuries, 4,000 years ago.
Its feeding habits must have been versatile, since captive specimens were probably given a wide range of food on the long sea journeys.
The Natural History Museum, American Museum of Natural History, Cambridge University Museum of Zoology, the Senckenberg Museum, and others have almost complete skeletons, assembled from the dissociated subfossil remains of several individuals.
The name dodo has been used by scientists naming genetic elements, honoring the dodo's flightless nature.
Comparison of mitochondrial cytochrome ''b'' and 12S rRNA sequences isolated from a tarsal of the Oxford specimen and a femur of a Rodrigues solitaire confirmed their close relationship and their placement within the Columbidae.
Statistical analysis of these records by Roberts and Solow gives a new estimated extinction date of 1693, with a 95% confidence interval of 1688–1715.
Though some contemporary writers noted the importance of Thrioux's specimens, they were not scientifically studied, and were largely forgotten until 2011, when sought out by a group of researchers.
The travel journal of the Dutch ship ''Gelderland'' (1601–1603), rediscovered in the 1860s, contains the only known sketches of living or recently killed specimens drawn on Mauritius.
The preferred habitat of the dodo is unknown, but old descriptions suggest that it inhabited the woods on the drier coastal areas of south and west Mauritius.
The book's popularity made the dodo a well-known icon of extinction.
It has been suggested that the maximum size attained by the dodo and the solitaire was limited by the amount of crop milk they could produce for their young during early growth.
The fact that no juvenile dodos have been found in the Mare aux Songes swamp may indicate that they produced little offspring, that they matured rapidly, that the breeding grounds were far away from the swamp, or that the risk of miring was seasonal.
The meaning may not have been derived from ''penguin'' (the Portuguese referred to them as "''fotilicaios''" at the time), but from ''pinion'', a reference to the small wings.
The confusion began when Willem Ysbrandtszoon Bontekoe, who visited Réunion around 1619, mentioned fat, flightless birds that he referred to as "Dod-eersen" in his journal, though without mentioning their colouration.
The sclerotic rings inside the eye were formed by eleven ossicles (small bones), similar to the amount in other pigeons.
Oudemans suggested that as Mauritius has marked dry and wet seasons, the dodo probably fattened itself on ripe fruits at the end of the wet season to survive the dry season, when food was scarce; contemporary reports describe the bird's "greedy" appetite.
The 2002 study indicated that the ancestors of the dodo and the solitaire diverged around the Paleogene-Neogene boundary.
A mention of a "young ostrich" taken on board a ship in 1617 is the only other reference to a possible juvenile dodo.
The Nicobar and spotted green pigeon were placed at the base of a lineage leading to the Raphinae, which indicates the flightless raphines had ancestors that were able to fly, were semi-terrestrial, and inhabited islands.
There were supposedly only 13 specimens left, all estimated to be about 300 years old.
Most of the leg bones were more robust than those of extant pigeons and the solitaire, but the length proportions were little different.
Since then, a large amount of subfossil material has been collected on Mauritius, mostly from the Mare aux Songes swamp.
One dodo was reportedly sent as far as Nagasaki, Japan in 1647, but it was long unknown whether it arrived.
Worldwide, 26 museums have significant holdings of dodo material, almost all found in the Mare aux Songes.
It has also been suggested that the dodo might have eaten crabs and shellfish, like their relatives the crowned pigeons.
The cranium (excluding the beak) was wider than it was long, and the frontal bone formed a dome-shape, with the highest point above the hind part of the eye sockets.
The supposed "white dodo" (or "solitaire") of Réunion is now considered an erroneous conjecture based on contemporary reports of the Réunion ibis and 17th-century paintings of white, dodo-like birds by Pieter Withoos and Pieter Holsteyn that surfaced in the 19th century.
Cheke and Hume believe the painted specimen was white, owing to albinism.
Another Englishman, Emmanuel Altham, had used the word in a 1628 letter, in which he also claimed the origin was Portuguese.
Though many small skeletal elements were found during the recent excavations of the swamp, few were found during the 19th century, probably owing to the employment of less refined methods when collecting.
In 1766, Linnaeus coined the new binomial ''Didus ineptus'' (meaning "inept dodo").
The bird was first used as an example of human-induced extinction in ''Penny Magazine'' in 1833, and have since been referred to as an "icon" of extinction.
Very few feathers remain on the head.
The name was translated into German as ''Walchstök'' or ''Walchvögel'', by Jakob Friedlib.
Some hunted dodos only for their gizzards, as this was considered the most delicious part of the bird.
The earliest known picture of a dodo specimen in Europe is from a c. 1610 collection of paintings depicting animals in the royal menagerie of Emperor Rudolph II in Prague.
Because these vary considerably, and because only some illustrations are known to have been drawn from live specimens, its exact appearance in life remains unresolved, and little is known about its behaviour.
They pointed to the very short keratinous portion of the beak, with its long, slender, naked basal part.
Mathurin Jacques Brisson coined the genus name ''Raphus'' (referring to the bustards) in 1760, resulting in the current name ''Raphus cucullatus''.
According to most representations, the dodo had greyish or brownish plumage, with lighter primary feathers and a tuft of curly light feathers high on its rear end.
Until 1860, the only known dodo remains were the four incomplete 17th-century specimens.
Because of the possible single-egg clutch and the bird's large size, it has been proposed that the dodo was K-selected, meaning that it produced a low number of altricial offspring, which required parental care until they matured.
Sir Richard Owen and Alfred Newton both wanted to be first to describe the post-cranial anatomy of the dodo, and Owen bought a shipment of dodo bones originally meant for Newton, which led to rivalry between the two.
The former specimen was found in 1904 in a cave near Le Pouce mountain, and is the only known complete skeleton of an individual dodo.
The ibis was reassigned to the genus ''Threskiornis'', now combined with the specific epithet '''' from the binomial ''R.
The dodo is used as a mascot for many kinds of products, especially in Mauritius.
In 2011, the nephilid spider ''Nephilengys dodo'', which inhabits the same woods as the dodo once did, was named after the bird to raise awareness of the urgent need for protection of the Mauritius biota.
The dodo may instead have used its large, hooked beak in territorial disputes.
The extinction of the dodo within less than a century of its discovery called attention to the previously unrecognised problem of human involvement in the disappearance of entire species.
It was donated by Marjorie Courtenay-Latimer, whose great aunt had received it from a captain who claimed to have found it in a swamp on Mauritius.
Yet the fact that the dodo survived hundreds of years of volcanic activity and climactic changes shows the bird was resilient within its ecosystem.
Few contemporary accounts are reliable, as many seem to be based on earlier accounts, and none were written by scientists.
Statute 8 of the museum states "That as any particular grows old and perishing the keeper may remove it into one of the closets or other repository; and some other to be substituted."
The first record of the word ''Dodaars'' is in Captain Willem Van West-Zanen's journal in 1602.
Strickland stated that although not identical, these birds shared many distinguishing features of the leg bones, otherwise known only in pigeons.
Several stuffed dodos were also mentioned in old museum inventories, but none are known to have survived.
They have been attributed to the professional artist Joris Joostensz Laerle, who also drew other now-extinct Mauritian birds, and to a second, less refined artist.
The IUCN Red List accepts Cheke's rationale for choosing the 1662 date, taking all subsequent reports to refer to red rails.
This clade consists of generally ground-dwelling island endemic pigeons.
It is probably a female, as the foot is 11% smaller and more gracile than the London foot, yet appears to be fully grown.
Crude drawings of the red rail of Mauritius were also misinterpreted as dodo species; ''Didus broeckii'' and ''Didus herberti''.
Though the dodo has historically been considered fat and clumsy, it is now thought to have been well-adapted for its ecosystem.
In 2010, the curator of the museum proposed using genetic studies to determine its authenticity.
That whole stuffed dodos were present in Europe indicates they had been brought alive and died there; it is unlikely that taxidermists were on board the visiting ships, and spirits were not yet used to preserve biological specimens.
In 1866, Clark explained his procedure to ''The Ibis'', an ornithology journal: he had sent his coolies to wade through the centre of the swamp, feeling for bones with their feet.
The pelvic elements were thicker than those of flighted pigeons to support the higher weight, and the pectoral region and the small wings were paedomorphic, meaning that they were underdeveloped and retained juvenile features.
Newton moved his focus to the Réunion solitaire instead.
In 1842, Danish zoologist Johannes Theodor Reinhardt proposed that dodos were ground pigeons, based on studies of a dodo skull he had discovered in the collection of the Natural History Museum of Denmark.
Though some dodo bones have been found with healed fractures, it had weak pectoral muscles and more reduced wings in comparison.
They included the first articulated specimen, which is the first subfossil dodo skeleton found outside the Mare aux Songes, and the only remains of a juvenile specimen, a now lost tarsometatarsus.
Another large, flightless pigeon, the Viti Levu giant pigeon (''Natunaornis gigoura''), was described in 2001 from subfossil material from Fiji.
No records of dodos by these are known, although the Portuguese name for Mauritius, "Cerne (swan) Island", may have been a reference to dodos.
Thirioux donated the specimen to the Museum Desjardins (now Natural History Museum at Mauritius Institute).
A 1601 map from the ''Gelderland'' journal shows a small island off the coast of Mauritius where dodos were caught.
One of the original names for the dodo was the Dutch "''Walghvogel''", first used in the journal of Vice Admiral Wybrand van Warwijck, who visited Mauritius during the Second Dutch Expedition to Indonesia in 1598.
Strickland and Melville established that the dodo was anatomically similar to pigeons in many features.
The closest living relative of the dodo is the Nicobar pigeon.
The sternum  was large, but small in relation to the body compared to those of much smaller pigeons that are able to fly.
Anthony Cheke pointed out that some descriptions after 1662 use the names "Dodo" and "Dodaers" when referring to the red rail, indicating that they had been transferred to it after the disappearance of the dodo itself.
The specimen was exhibited at the Oxford museum from at least the 1860s and until 1998, where-after it was mainly kept in storage to prevent damage.
It has also been suggested that the weight depended on the season, and that individuals were fat during cool seasons, but less so during hot.
By 1896 it was mentioned as being without its integuments, and only the bones are believed to remain today, though its present whereabouts are unknown.
Together, these two skeletons represent the most completely known dodo remains, including bone elements previously unrecorded (such as knee-caps and various wing bones).
An illustration made for the 1648 published version of this journal, showing the killing of dodos, a dugong, and possibly Mascarene grey parakeets, was captioned with a Dutch poem, here in Hugh Strickland's 1848 translation:
Mauritius had previously been visited by Arab vessels in the Middle Ages and Portuguese ships between 1507 and 1513, but was settled by neither.
It sold for £44,450.
The painting shows a whitish specimen and was apparently based on a stuffed specimen then in Prague; a ''walghvogel'' described as having a "dirty off-white colouring" was mentioned in an inventory of specimens in the Prague collection of the Holy Roman Emperor Rudolf II, to whom Savery was contracted at the time (1607–1611).
A famous painting of his from 1626, now called ''Edwards's Dodo'' as it was once owned by the ornithologist George Edwards, has since become the standard image of a dodo.
Because details such as markings of the beak, the form of the tail feathers, and colouration vary from account to account, it is impossible to determine the exact morphology of these features, whether they signal age or sex, or if they even reflect reality.
In 2005, after a hundred years of neglect, a part of the Mare aux Songes swamp was excavated by an international team of researchers (International Dodo Research Project).
Based on behavioural and morphological evidence, Jolyon C. Parish proposed that the dodo and Rodrigues solitaire should be placed in the Gourinae subfamily along with the ''Groura'' pigeons and others, in agreement with the genetic evidence.
It may instead be an aberrant ostrich egg.
This crew also called them "griff-eendt" and "kermisgans", in reference to fowl fattened for the Kermesse festival in Amsterdam, which was held the day after they anchored on Mauritius.
The dodo, which may be a juvenile, seems to have been dried or embalmed, and had probably lived in the emperor's zoo for a while together with the other animals.
