Dog training books, classes and television programs proliferated as the process of commodifying the pet dog continued.
Dog types are broad categories based on function, genetics, or characteristics.
This is the time at which female dogs will have their first estrous cycle.
A 2005 paper states "recent research has failed to support earlier findings that pet ownership is associated with a reduced risk of cardiovascular disease, a reduced use of general practitioner services, or any psychological or physical benefits on health for community dwelling older people.
The Humane Society of the United States (HSUS) estimates that approximately 3 to 4&nbsp;million of those dogs and cats are euthanized yearly in the United States.
We know little about these dogs, nor about the dogs that live in developed countries that are feral, stray or are in shelters, yet the great majority of modern research on dog cognition has focused on pet dogs living in human homes.
In Persian mythology, two four-eyed dogs guard the Chinvat Bridge.
They are powerful animals, and are said to be able to kill a tiger.
This gives dogs the ability to recognize emotional human sounds, making them friendly social pets to humans.
A male canine is referred to as a dog, while a female is called a bitch.
Each dog is trained specifically for the detection of single disease from the blood glucose level indicative to diabetes to cancer.
The dog was classified as ''Canis familiaris'', which means "Dog-family" or the family dog.
The dog's limp ears may be the result of atrophy of the jaw muscles.
The loss of a dog can lead to strong emotional responses with demands for more liberal wolf hunting regulations.
The same study found that while dog involvement in road traffic accidents was difficult to quantify, dog-associated road accidents involving injury more commonly involved two-wheeled vehicles.
The most popular Korean dog dish is ''gaejang-guk'' (also called ''bosintang''), a spicy stew meant to balance the body's heat during the summer months; followers of the custom claim this is done to ensure good health by balancing one's ''gi'', or vital energy of the body.
The same survey shows nearly 40% of American households own at least one dog, of which 67% own just one dog, 25% two dogs and nearly 9% more than two dogs.
Comparing dogs and wolves, dogs have adaptations in genes involved in starch digestion that contribute to an increased ability to thrive on a starch-rich diet.
Humans would also have derived enormous benefit from the dogs associated with their camps.
The cohabitation of dogs and humans would have greatly improved the chances of survival for early human groups, and the domestication of dogs may have been one of the key forces that led to human success.
These communication behaviors include eye gaze, facial expression, vocalization, body posture (including movements of bodies and limbs) and gustatory communication (scents, pheromones and taste).
In 2003, the ICZN ruled in its Opinion 2027 that if wild animals and their domesticated derivatives are regarded as one species, then the scientific name of that species is the scientific name of the wild animal.
In China and South Vietnam dogs are a source of meat for humans.
A common breeding practice for pet dogs is mating between close relatives (e.g.
Medical detection dogs are capable of detecting diseases by sniffing a person directly or samples of urine or other specimens.
selection for tameness), and emotional processing.
Nearly all dog breeds' genetic closeness to the gray wolf are due to admixture, except several Arctic dog breeds are close to the Taimyr wolf of North Asia due to admixture.
Wolves, and their dog descendants, would have derived significant benefits from living in human camps—more safety, more reliable food, lesser caloric needs, and more chance to breed.
DNA microsatellite analyses of 85 dog breeds showed they fell into four major types of dogs that were statistically distinct.
Moreover, children have a much higher chance to be bitten in the face or neck.
Other health benefits are gained from exposure to immune-stimulating microorganisms, which, according to the hygiene hypothesis, can protect against allergies and autoimmune diseases.
One study demonstrated that children with ADHD and conduct disorders who participated in an education program with dogs and other animals showed increased attendance, increased knowledge and skill objectives, and decreased antisocial and violent behavior compared to those who were not in an animal-assisted program.
In the 1950s and 1960s, dogs were kept outside more often than they tend to be today (using the expression "in the doghouse" to describe exclusion from the group signifies the distance between the doghouse and the home) and were still primarily functional, acting as a guard, children's playmate, or walking companion.
Domestic dogs often display the remnants of countershading, a common natural camouflage pattern.
As the oldest domesticated species, with estimates ranging from 9,000–30,000 years BCE, the minds of dogs inevitably have been shaped by millennia of contact with humans.
In 14th-century England, ''hound'' (from ) was the general word for all domestic canines, and ''dog'' referred to a subtype of hound, a group including the mastiff.
Dogs may have as many as 300 million odour receptors in their nose, while humans may have only 5 million.
However, the percentage of dogs in US animal shelters that are eventually adopted and removed from the shelters by their new legal owners has increased since the mid-1990s from around 25% to a 2012 average of 40% among reporting shelters (with many shelters reporting 60–75%).
The median longevity of mixed-breed dogs, taken as an average of all sizes, is one or more years longer than that of purebred dogs when all breeds are averaged.
Modern dogs are more closely related to ancient wolf fossils that have been found in Europe than they are to modern gray wolves.
Although it is said that the "dog is man's best friend" regarding 17–24% of dogs in developed countries, in the developing world they are feral, village or community dogs, with pet dogs uncommon.
Dogs are found in and out of the Muthappan Temple and offerings at the shrine take the form of bronze dog figurines.
Theobromine is toxic to dogs because, although the dog's metabolism is capable of breaking down the chemical, the process is so slow that even small amounts of chocolate can be fatal, especially dark chocolate.
A Colorado study found bites in children were less severe than bites in adults.
Modern domestic dogs use humans to solve their problems for them.
Dogs may have provided warmth, as referred to in the Australian Aboriginal expression "three dog night" (an exceptionally cold night), and they would have alerted the camp to the presence of predators or strangers, using their acute hearing to provide an early warning.
The longest-lived breeds, including Toy Poodles, Japanese Spitz, Border Terriers, and Tibetan Spaniels, have median longevities of 14 to 15 years.
The nicotine in tobacco can also be dangerous.
pointers and hounds), rodent control, guarding, helping fishermen with nets, detection dogs, and pulling loads, in addition to their roles as companions.
As the breed standard only deals with the externally observable qualities of the dog (such as appearance, movement, and temperament), separately tested qualities (such as ability or health) are not part of the judging in conformation shows.
Earlier studies have shown that people who keep pet dogs or cats exhibit better mental and physical health than those who do not, making fewer visits to the doctor and being less likely to be on medication than non-guardians.
Service dogs such as guide dogs, utility dogs, assistance dogs, hearing dogs, and psychological therapy dogs provide assistance to individuals with physical or mental disabilities.
These dates imply that the earliest dogs arose in the time of human hunter-gatherers and not agriculturists.
In one study, new guardians reported a highly significant reduction in minor health problems during the first month following pet acquisition, and this effect was sustained in those with dogs through to the end of the study.
Anthropologists believe the most significant benefit would have been the use of dogs' robust sense of smell to assist with the hunt.
Despite their descent from wolves and classification as Carnivora, dogs are variously described in scholarly and other writings as carnivores or omnivores.
Dogs are able to read and react appropriately to human body language such as gesturing and pointing, and to understand human voice commands.
Although initially thought to have originated as an artificial variant of an extant canid species (variously supposed as being the dhole, golden jackal, or gray wolf), extensive genetic studies undertaken during the 2010s indicate that dogs diverged from an extinct wolf-like canid in Eurasia 40,000 years ago.
Thus, many breeds will have an occasional "blaze", stripe, or "star" of white fur on their chest or underside.
They are required to wear leather dog booties when searching mosques or Muslim homes.
On 5 December 2011, Pusuke, the world's oldest living dog recognized by Guinness Book of World Records, died aged 26 years and 9 months.
The English word ''dog'' comes from Middle English ''dogge'', from Old English ''docga'', a "powerful dog breed".
In 1982, the first edition of Mammal Species of the World listed ''Canis familiaris'' under ''Canis lupus'' with the comment: "Probably ancestor of and conspecific with the domestic dog, ''familiaris''.
In 2005, the third edition of Mammal Species of the World upheld Opinion 2027 with the name ''Lupus'' and the note: "Includes the domestic dog as a subspecies, with the dingo provisionally separate - artificial variants created by domestication and selective breeding".
The smallest known adult dog was a Yorkshire Terrier, that stood only  at the shoulder,  in length along the head-and-body, and weighed only .
However, neutering increases the risk of urinary incontinence in female dogs, and prostate cancer in males, as well as osteosarcoma, hemangiosarcoma, cruciate ligament rupture, obesity, and diabetes mellitus in either sex.
(As a possible example, at the Natufian culture site of Ain Mallaha in Israel, dated to 12,000 BC, the remains of an elderly human and a four-to-five-month-old puppy were found buried together).
According to statistics published by the American Pet Products Manufacturers Association in the National Pet Owner Survey in 2009–2010, it is estimated there are 77.5&nbsp;million people with pet dogs in the United States.
Dogs were an important part of life for the Athabascan population in North America, and were their only domesticated animal.
While the dishes are still popular in Korea with a segment of the population, dog is not as widely consumed as beef, chicken, and pork.
Male French Bulldogs, for instance, are incapable of mounting the female.
Jewish law requires Jews to feed dogs (and other animals that they own) before themselves, and make arrangements for feeding them before obtaining them.
Pet guardianship has also been associated with increased coronary artery disease survival, with human guardians being significantly less likely to die within one year of an acute myocardial infarction than those who did not own dogs.
In general, toy dogs produce from one to four puppies in each litter, while much larger breeds may average as many as twelve.
Dogs perform many roles for people, such as hunting, herding, pulling loads, protection, assisting police and military, companionship and, more recently, aiding handicapped individuals.
In Hindu mythology, Yama, the god of death owns two watch dogs who have four eyes.
A number of common human foods and household ingestibles are toxic to dogs, including chocolate solids (theobromine poisoning), onion and garlic (thiosulphate, sulfoxide or disulfide poisoning), grapes and raisins, macadamia nuts, xylitol, as well as various plants and other potentially ingested materials.
In 2015, a study found that pet owners were significantly more likely to get to know people in their neighborhood than non-pet owners.
Neutering reduces problems caused by hypersexuality, especially in male dogs.
Dog feces can also contain hookworms that cause cutaneous larva migrans in humans.
Dogs were depicted to symbolize guidance, protection, loyalty, fidelity, faithfulness, watchfulness, and love.
Proponents of eating dog meat have argued that placing a distinction between livestock and dogs is western hypocrisy, and that there is no difference with eating the meat of different animals.
Most breeds of dog are at most a few hundred years old, having been artificially selected for particular morphologies and behaviors by people for specific functional roles.
While dog training as an organized activity can be traced back to the 18th century, in the last decades of the 20th century it became a high-profile issue as many normal dog behaviors such as barking, jumping up, digging, rolling in dung, fighting, and urine marking (which dogs do to establish territory through scent), became increasingly incompatible with the new role of a pet dog.
The majority of contemporary people with dogs describe their pet as part of the family, although some ambivalence about the relationship is evident in the popular reconceptualization of the dog–human family as a pack.
A 19th century version of ''gaejang-guk'' explains that the dish is prepared by boiling dog meat with scallions and chili powder.
The paws of a dog are half the size of those of a wolf, and their tails tend to curl upwards, another trait not found in wolves The dog has developed into hundreds of varied breeds, and shows more behavioral and morphological variation than any other land mammal.
In Greek mythology, Cerberus is a three-headed watchdog who guards the gates of Hades.
Later genetic studies strongly supported dogs and gray wolves forming two sister monophyletic clades within the one species, and that the common ancestor of dogs and extant wolves is extinct.
Cultural depictions of dogs in art extend back thousands of years to when dogs were portrayed on the walls of caves.
The results provide evidence that keeping pets may have positive effects on human health and behaviour, and that for guardians of dogs these effects are relatively long-term.
In some breeds, such as the Braque du Bourbonnais, puppies can be born with a short tail or no tail at all.
Tigers in Manchuria, Indochina, Indonesia, and Malaysia are reputed to kill dogs with the same vigor as leopards.
This influence on human society has given them the nickname "man's best friend" in the Western world.
The list of goods, services and places available is enormous: from dog perfumes, couture, furniture and housing, to dog groomers, therapists, trainers and caretakers, dog cafes, spas, parks and beaches, and dog hotels, airlines and cemeteries.
In Great Britain, 24% of soil samples taken from public parks contained ''T.
Research has, however, pointed to significantly less absenteeism from school through sickness among children who live with pets."
Despite their close genetic relationship and the ability to inter-breed, there are a number of diagnostic features to distinguish the gray wolves from domestic dogs.
Compared to equally sized wolves, dogs tend to have 20% smaller skulls and 30% smaller brains.
In many cultures, there are strong social and emotional bonds between humans and their dogs that can be seen as family members or working team members.
The incidence of dog bites in the US is 12.9 per 10,000 inhabitants, but for boys aged 5 to 9, the incidence rate is 60.7 per 10,000.
They would have benefited from humans' upright gait that gives them larger range over which to see potential predators and prey, as well as color vision that, at least by day, gives humans better visual discrimination.
Every year, between 6 and 8&nbsp;million dogs and cats enter US animal shelters.
Dog meat is also consumed in some parts of Switzerland.
Animal-assisted intervention research has shown that animal-assisted therapy with a dog can increase social behaviors, such as smiling and laughing, among people with Alzheimer's disease.
Spaying or castrating dogs helps keep overpopulation down.
Dogs are highly susceptible to theobromine poisoning, typically from ingestion of chocolate.
between half- and full siblings).
Through this selective breeding, the dog has developed into hundreds of varied breeds, and shows more behavioral and morphological variation than any other land mammal.
People and dogs have become increasingly integrated and implicated in each other's lives, to the point where pet dogs actively shape the way a family and home are experienced.
The father of a litter is called the ''sire'', and the mother is called the ''dam''.
An experimental study showed compelling evidence that Australian dingos can outperform domestic dogs in non-social problem-solving, indicating that domestic dogs may have lost much of their original problem-solving abilities once they joined humans.
In Philippine mythology, Kimat who is the pet of Tadaklan, god of thunder, is responsible for lightning.
A litter refers to the multiple offspring at one birth which are called puppies or pups from the French ''poupée,'' "doll", which has mostly replaced the older term "whelp".
Unlike other domestic species which were primarily selected for production-related traits, dogs were initially selected for their behaviors.
Some other signs are abdominal pain, loss of coordination, collapse, or death.
By the 16th century, ''dog'' had become the general word, and ''hound'' had begun to refer only to types used for hunting.
The origin of the domestic dog (''Canis lupus familiaris'' or ''Canis familiaris'') is not clear.
The tympanic bullae are large, convex and almost spherical in gray wolves, while the bullae of dogs are smaller, compressed and slightly crumpled.
''Toxocara canis'' (dog roundworm) eggs in dog feces can cause toxocariasis.
Dogs have been viewed and represented in different manners by different cultures and religions, over the course of history.
A study with Rico showed that he knew the labels of over 200 different items.
Other cultures, such as Polynesia and pre-Columbian Mexico, also consumed dog meat in their history.
According to the Humane Society of the United States, 3–4&nbsp;million dogs and cats are put down each year in the United States and many more are confined to cages in shelters because there are many more animals than there are homes.
Dog meat is consumed in some East Asian countries, including Korea, China, and Vietnam, a practice that dates back to antiquity.
Dogs are also susceptible to parasites such as fleas, ticks, and mites, as well as hookworms, tapeworms, roundworms, and heartworms.
Dogs can be exposed to the substance by scavenging garbage or ashtrays; eating cigars and cigarettes.
Dog breeds are groups of animals that possess a set of inherited characteristics that distinguishes them from other animals within the same species.
In Islam, dogs are viewed as unclean because they are viewed as scavengers.
(Middle English ''bicche'', from Old English ''bicce'', ultimately from Old Norse ''bikkja'') The process of birth is whelping, from the Old English word ''hwelp''; the modern English word "whelp" is an alternate term for puppy.
For example, when in the presence of a pet dog, people show reductions in cardiovascular, behavioral, and psychological indicators of anxiety.
These genes have been shown to affect the catecholamine synthesis pathway, with the majority of the genes affecting the fight-or-flight response (i.e.
The largest known dog was an English Mastiff which weighed  and was  from the snout to the tail.
It is common for most breeds to shed their coat.
Being the most abundant carnivore, feral and free-ranging dogs have the greatest potential to compete with wolves.
Dogs also carried much of the load in the migration of the Apache and Navajo tribes 1,400 years ago.
Whole genome sequencing indicates that the dog, the gray wolf and the extinct Taymyr wolf diverged at around the same time 27,000–40,000 years ago.
Both of these are acute conditions, and can kill rapidly.
In 1978, a review aimed at reducing the number of recognized ''Canis'' species proposed that "''Canis dingo'' is now generally regarded as a distinctive feral domestic dog.
relatives nor by other highly intelligent mammals such as great apes.
Dogs generally show reduced fear and aggression compared to wolves.
The tallest dog is a Great Dane that stands  at the shoulder.
Striped hyenas are major predators of village dogs in Turkmenistan, India, and the Caucasus.
Yet, although several programs are ongoing to promote pet adoption, less than a fifth of the owned dogs come from a shelter.
As with many canids, one of the primary functions of a dog's tail is to communicate their emotional state, which can be important in getting along with others.
Hunting scenes were popular in the Middle Ages and the Renaissance.
Competition would favor the wolf that is known to kill dogs, however wolves tend to live in pairs or in small packs in areas where they are highly persecuted, giving them a disadvantage facing large dog groups.
In some cultures, however, dogs are also a source of meat.
The dogs of Thibet are twice the size of those seen in India, with large heads and hairy bodies.
It is estimated that 13–16&nbsp;million dogs are killed and consumed in Asia every year.
Use of dogs as pack animals in these cultures often persisted after the introduction of the horse to North America.
As a result of this physical and social evolution, dogs, more than any other species, have acquired the ability to understand and communicate with humans and they are uniquely attuned to our behaviors.
The dog is now listed among the many other Latin-named subspecies of ''Canis lupus'' as ''Canis lupus familiaris''.
The benefits of contact with a dog also include social support, as dogs are able to not only provide companionship and social support themselves, but also to act as facilitators of social interactions between humans.
Dogs are also vulnerable to some of the same health conditions as humans, including diabetes, dental and heart disease, epilepsy, cancer, hypothyroidism, and arthritis.
In 1957, a husky-terrier mix named Laika became the first animal to orbit the Earth.
Local humane societies, SPCAs, and other animal protection organizations urge people to neuter their pets and to adopt animals from shelters instead of purchasing them.
Inbreeding depression is considered to be due largely to the expression of homozygous deleterious recessive mutations.
Spayed female dogs are less likely to develop some forms of cancer, affecting mammary glands, ovaries, and other reproductive organs.
One study indicated that wheelchair users experience more positive social interactions with strangers when they are accompanied by a dog than when they are not.
This influence on human society has given them the sobriquet, "man's best friend".
The global dog population is estimated at 900 million and rising.
There does not seem to be any gender preference among dogs as pets, as the statistical data reveal an equal number of female and male dog pets.
Emigrants from Siberia that walked across the Bering land bridge into North America may have had dogs in their company, and one writer suggests that the use of sled dogs may have been critical to the success of the waves that entered North America roughly 12,000 years ago, although the earliest archaeological evidence of dog-like canids in North America dates from about 9,400 years ago.
There have been two major trends in the changing status of pet dogs.
Some breeds of dogs are prone to certain genetic ailments such as elbow and hip dysplasia, blindness, deafness, pulmonic stenosis, cleft palate, and trick knees.
These live their lives as scavengers and have never been owned by humans, with one study showing their most common response when approached by strangers was to run away (52%) or respond with aggression (11%).
Mortality due to infection was found to increase significantly with increases in inbreeding.
While all dogs are genetically very similar, natural selection and selective breeding have reinforced certain characteristics in certain populations of dogs, giving rise to dog types and dog breeds.
The word also shows the familiar petname diminutive ''-ga'' also seen in ''frogga'' "frog", ''picga'' "pig", ''stagga'' "stag", ''wicga'' "beetle, worm", among others.
In the UK between 2003 and 2004, there were 5,868 dog attacks on humans, resulting in 5,770 working days lost in sick leave.
From the 1980s, there have been changes in the role of the pet dog, such as the increased role of dogs in the emotional support of their human guardians.
During the day they are kept chained up, and are let loose at night to guard their masters' house.
Compared to wolves, dogs have a more domed forehead.
Although the numbers of dogs killed each year are relatively low, it induces a fear of wolves entering villages and farmyards to take dogs.
Another study indicated that after undergoing training to solve a simple manipulation task, dogs that are faced with an insoluble version of the same problem look at the human, while socialized wolves do not.
Dogs are highly variable in height and weight.
A 2015 study estimated that 1.8% of the U.S. population is bitten each year.
The term ''dog'' may ultimately derive from the earliest layer of Proto-Indo-European vocabulary.
In the United States, about 10,000 cases of ''Toxocara'' infection are reported in humans each year, and almost 14% of the U.S. population is infected.
Camp dogs would also have benefited from human tool use, as in bringing down larger prey and controlling fire for a range of purposes.
In 2016, a study found that there were only 11 fixed genes that showed variation between wolves and dogs.
''Canis familiaris'' is used for domestic dogs, although taxonomically it should probably be synonymous with ''Canis lupus.''"
Dog communication is about how dogs "speak" to each other, how they understand messages that humans send to them, and how humans can translate the ideas that dogs are trying to transmit.
Hunter god Muthappan from North Malabar region of Kerala has a hunting dog as his mount.
A dominance model of dog–human relationships has been promoted by some dog trainers, such as on the television program ''Dog Whisperer''.
Dogs are also the oldest domesticated animal.
Domestic dogs have been selectively bred for millennia for various behaviors, sensory capabilities, and physical attributes.
About 22% of boxer puppies die before reaching 7 weeks of age.
However, pet dog populations grew significantly after World War II as suburbanization increased.
In Norse mythology, a bloody, four-eyed dog called Garmr guards Helheim.
Dogs can detect odour in one part per trillion, as their brain's olfactory cortex is (relative to total brain size) 40 times larger than humans.
Unlike obligate carnivores, dogs can adapt to a wide-ranging diet, and are not dependent on meat-specific protein nor a very high level of protein in order to fulfill their basic dietary requirements.
They have been bred for herding livestock, hunting (e.g.
They are said to watch over the gates of Naraka.
Behavioral scientists have uncovered a surprising set of social-cognitive abilities in the otherwise humble domestic dog.
They will experience subsequent estrous cycles semiannually, during which the body prepares for pregnancy.
It has been estimated around 2% of dog-related injuries treated in UK hospitals are domestic accidents.
The scientific evidence is mixed as to whether companionship of a dog can enhance human physical health and psychological wellbeing.
Dog behavior is the internally coordinated responses (actions or inactions) of the domestic dog (individuals or groups) to internal and/or external stimuli.
