The multinational media conglomerate Al Jazeera Media Network is based in Doha with its wide variety of channels of which Al Jazeera Arabic, Al Jazeera English, Al Jazeera Documentary Channel, Al Jazeera Mubasher, beIN Sports Arabia and other operations are based in the TV Roundabout in the city.
Qatar's first radio station, Mosque Radio, began broadcasting in the 1960s from Doha.
Qatar, however, was not asked to fly the prescribed Trucial flag.
It provided separate faculties for both men and women.
The collapse of the pearl trade caused a significant population drop throughout the entire country.
A British political resident noted that should the supply of pearls drop, Qatar would 'practically cease to exist'.
The Ottomans held a passive role in Qatar's politics from the 1890s onward until fully relinquishing control during the beginning of the first World War.
From the 1950s to 1970s, the population of Doha grew from around 14,000 inhabitants to over 83,000, with foreign immigrants constituting about two-thirds of the overall population.
The Al Thani migrated to Doha from Fuwayrit shortly after Bin Tarif's death in 1847 under the leadership of Mohammed bin Thani.
The Al Jazeera Arabic news channel began broadcasting from Doha in 1996.
Instead, the government shifted their focus toward the Doha Bay area, which housed districts such as Al Dafna and West Bay.
Major Ömer Bey compiled a report on Al Bidda in January 1872, stating that it was an "administrative centre" with around 1,000 houses and 4,000 inhabitants.
Oil concessions in the 1920s and 1930s, and subsequent oil drilling in 1939, heralded the beginning of slow economic and social progress in the country.
Bahrain became a party to the treaty, and it was assumed that Qatar, perceived as a dependency of Bahrain by the British, was also a party to it.
This has all been as a result of Doha's massive growth in a short period of time, which has resulted in congestion on its roads.
They are Al Ahli, Al Arabi, Al Sadd, Al Sailiya, El Jaish, Lekhwiya and Qatar SC.
The earliest documented mention of Al Bidda was made in 1681, by the Carmelite Convent, in an account which chronicles several settlements in Qatar.
In 2001, Qatar became the first country in the Middle East to hold a women's tennis tournament: Qatar holds both the Qatar Open for Women and the ladies ITF (International Tennis Federation) tournament.
This was replaced by Hamad International Airport in 2014.
It acknowledged British authority in the Persian Gulf and sought to end piracy and the slave trade.
The Doha Tribeca Film Festival (DTFF), partnered with the American-based Tribeca Film Festival, was held annually in Doha from 2009 to 2012.
Doha is the economic centre of Qatar.
The first university in the state, Qatar University, was opened in 1973.
In 2014, Abdullah Al Attiyah, a senior government official, announced that Qatar would be spending $65bn on new infrastructure projects in upcoming years in preparation for the 2022 World Cup as well as progressing towards its objectives set out in the Qatar National Vision 2030.
Doha was classified as the eastern section of Katar.
The city also hosted the 3rd West Asian Games in December 2005.
Discussions regarding temperature control have also been features of various scheduled events involving large crowds.
Pelly's mission to Bahrain and Qatar and the peace treaty that resulted were milestones in Qatar's history.
By December 1871, Jassim Al Thani authorized the Ottomans to send 100 troops and equipment to Al Bidda.
Thirty-nine new hotels were under construction in 2011.
Al-Suwaidi then paid the fine in full following threats of further action by the British.
A.H. Nott, a British naval commander, demanded that Salemin bin Nasir Al-Suwaidi, chief of the Sudan tribe in Al Bidda, take Ghuleta into custody and warned him of consequences in the case of non-compliance.
Others include utilizing whiter and brighter construction materials to increase the albedo effects.
This was proceeded by the opening of the first formal girls' school three years later.
The restoration was completed in 2008.
However, the shallow water of the bay prevented bigger ships from entering the port until the 1970s, when its deep-water port was completed.
Aspire Academy was launched in 2004 with the aim of creating world-class athletes.
Education City, a 14&nbsp;km2 education complex launched by non-profit organization Qatar Foundation, began construction in 2000.
Beginning in the late 20th century, the government launched numerous initiatives to diversify the country's economy in order to decrease its dependence on oil and gas resources.
The name "Doha" may have originated from the Arabic ''Ad-Dawḥa'', "the big tree".
In December 2010, Qatar won the rights to host the 2022 FIFA World Cup.
Real estate prices experienced a further spike after Qatar won the rights to host the 2022 FIFA World Cup.
The new airport is almost twice the size of the former and features two of the longest runways in the world.
Following decrees by the Emir for the allocation of land to churches, the first Catholic church, Our Lady of the Rosary, was opened in Doha in March 2008.
The population increased to around 12,000 inhabitants in the first half of the 20th century due to the flourishing pearl trade.
The first formal boys' schools was established in Doha in 1952, followed three years later by the establishment of a girls' school.
Prior to this, the town of Doha served as a stronghold for Bedouin fighters who resisted Ottoman rule.
The pearl market collapsed that year, forcing Jassim Al Thani to sell the country's pearl harvest at half its value.
Al-Suwaidi obliged the British request in February 1840 and also arrested the pirate Jasim bin Jabir and his associates.
Al Bidda fort served as the final point of retreat for Ottoman troops.
He refers to the town as 'Bedih' and describes the geography and defensive structures in the area.
In November 1839, an outlaw from Abu Dhabi named Ghuleta took refuge in Al Bidda, evoking a harsh response from the British.
Buildings at the time were simple dwellings of one or two rooms, built from mud, stone and coral.
In the United States, a number of retired government officials sent a letter to Harvard expressing their opposition to Harvard's teaching of Shariah law in Qatar.
Due to excessive heat from the sun during the summer, some Doha-based building companies have attempted various forms of cooling technology to alleviate the  extremely torrid climatic conditions.
The latter has hosted more than 50 sporting events since its inception, including some events during the 2006 Asian Games.
The church structure is discreet and Christian symbols are not displayed on the outside of the building.
Doha was founded in the 1820s as an offshoot of Al Bidda.
In April 1913, the Ottomans agreed to a British request that they withdraw all their troops from Qatar.
Additionally, land policies resulted in the total land area increasing to over 7,100 hectares by 1995, an increase from 130 hectares in the middle of the 20th century.
In the proceeding years, the Al Thani assumed control of the town.
Parts constructed after the 1950s were demolished whereas older structures were refurbished.
Al-Kass Sports Channel's headquarters is also located in Doha.
Since 2008, the Sony Ericsson Championships (equivalent to the ATP's season-ending Championships) has taken place in Doha, in the Khalifa International Tennis Complex, and features record prize money of $4.45 million, including a check of $1,485,000 for the winner, which represents the largest single guaranteed payout in women's tennis.
In 1952, the first formal boys' school was opened in Doha.
Doha has a population of 1,351,000 in a city proper with the population close to 1.5 million.
In 1993, the Qatar Open became the first major sports event to be hosted in the city.
Prices increased 5 to 10% in the first quarter of 2014 from the end of 2013.
Prior to this, expatriates were prohibited from owning land in Qatar.
Since 2004, Doha has been undergoing a huge expansion to its transportation network, including the addition of new highways, the opening of a new airport in 2014, and the currently ongoing construction of an 85&nbsp;km metro system.
On 26 February, the British fired on Al Bidda, striking a fort and several houses.
The city of Doha was formed after seceding from another local settlement known as Al Bidda.
Later that year, the combined forces sacked the two Qatari towns with around 2,700 men in what would come to be known as the Qatari–Bahraini War.
It is Qatar's fastest growing city, with over 50% of the nation's population living in Doha or its surrounding suburbs, and it is also the economic center of the country.
In 2006, the government launched a restoration program to preserve Souq Waqif's architectural and historical identity.
With essentially no effective ruler, Al Bidda and Doha became a sanctuary for pirates and outlaws.
As a result, a number of schemes have been taken to preserve the city's cultural and architectural heritage, such as the Qatar Museums Authority's 'Al Turath al Hai' ('living heritage') initiative.
Sheikha Al Mayassa bint Hamad bin Khalifa Al-Thani.
The Ottomans eventually surrendered after Jassim Al Thani's troops cut off the town's water supply.
On August 26, 2011 it was confirmed that Doha would bid for the 2020 Summer Olympics.
The city is also the location of the Grand Prix of Qatar for the F1 Powerboat World Championship, annually hosting a round in Doha Bay.
One of the largest projects launched by the government was The Pearl-Qatar, an artificial island off the coast of West Bay, which launched its first district in 2004.
Half of the 22&nbsp;km² of surface area which Hamad International Airport was constructed on was reclaimed land.
The gap in the housing market between supply and demand has narrowed, however, and property prices have fallen in some areas following a period which saw rents triple in some areas.
The geology of Doha is primarily composed of weathered unconformity on the top of the Eocene period Dammam Formation, forming dolomitic limestone.
Pearling had come to play a pivotal commercial role in Doha by the 20th century.
English is commonly used as a second language, and a rising lingua franca, especially in commerce.
The city was host to the first ministerial-level meeting of the Doha Development Round of World Trade Organization negotiations.
Qatar officially declared its independence in 1971, with Doha as its capital city.
In 2004, the Foreign Ownership of Real Estate Law was passed, permitting non-Qatari citizens to buy land in designated areas of Doha, including the West Bay Lagoon, the Qatar Pearl, and the new Lusail City.
In 1907, the city accommodated 350 pearling boats with a combined crew size of 6,300 men.
It is designed to accommodate 450,000 people.
It was also selected as host city of a number of sporting events, including the 2006 Asian Games, the 2011 Pan Arab Games and most of the games at the 2011 AFC Asian Cup.
In 2009, the government launched the World Innovation Summit for Education (WISE), a global forum that brings together education stakeholders, opinion leaders and decision makers from all over the world to discuss educational issues.
This, and several other Qatari museums located in the city, like the Arab Museum of Modern Art, falls under the Qatar Museums Authority (''QMA'') which is led by Sheikha Al-Mayassa bint Hamad bin Khalifa Al-Thani, the daughter of the emir of Qatar.
It houses eight universities, the country's top high school, and offices for Al Jazeera's children television channel.
Throughout the summer, the city averages almost no precipitation, and less than  during other months.
A majority of mosques are either Muwahhid or Sunni-oriented.
Additionally, the Khalifa International Stadium is set to undergo an expansion.
They razed the town, forcing between 300 and 400 natives to flee and temporarily take shelter on the islands between the Qatar and the Trucial Coast.
Doha's economy is built primarily on the revenue the country has made from its oil and natural gas industries.
Doha's population currently stands at around one million, with the population of the city more than doubling from 2000 to 2010.
The Museum of Islamic Art in Doha, opened in 2008, is regarded as one of the best museums in the region.
Doha accommodates Education City, an area devoted to research and education.
Despite being mapped as two separate entities, they were referred to under the collective name of Al Bidda in the written description.
In December 2011, the World Petroleum Council held the 20th World Petroleum Conference in Doha.
Numerous football tournaments have been hosted in Doha.
It is situated in the Doha Sports City Complex, which also accommodates the Khalifa International Stadium, the Hamad Aquatic Centre, the Aspire Tower and the Aspire Dome.
The joint Bahraini-Abu Dhabi incursion and subsequent Qatari counterattack prompted the British political agent, Colonel Lewis Pelly, to impose a settlement in 1868.
Since the start of the 21st century, Doha attained significant media attention due to the hosting of several global events and the inauguration of a number of architectural mega-projects.
As a result of Doha's rapid population boom and increased housing demands, real estate prices have raised significantly.
The Doha Film Institute (DFI) is an organisation established in 2010 to oversee film initiatives and create a sustainable film industry in Qatar.
It was officially declared as the country's capital in 1971, when Qatar gained independence.
The city is located on the coast of the Persian Gulf in the east of the country.
In 1828, Mohammed bin Khamis, a prominent member of the Al-Buainain tribe and successor of Buhur bin Jubrun as chief of Al Bidda, was embroiled in controversy.
Qatar was not long in exploiting the new-found wealth from oil concessions, and slum areas were quickly razed to be replaced by more modern buildings.
During the 1970s, all old neighborhoods in Doha were razed and the inhabitants moved to new suburban developments, such as Al Rayyan, Madinat Khalifa and Al Gharafa.
Two years later, Qatar stepped in to host the FIFA World Youth Championship, with all the matches being played in Doha-based stadiums.
Al Sadd, Al Arabi and Qatar SC are the three most successful teams in the league's history.
In the late 1990s, the government planned the construction of Education City, a 2,500 hectare Doha-based complex mainly for educational institutes.
Shortly after Qatar gained independence, many of the districts of old Doha including Al Najada, Al Asmakh and Old Al Hitmi faced gradual decline and as a result much of their historical architecture has been demolished.
Cultural weeks organized by the Ministry of Culture, which featured both Arab and non-Arab cultures, were held in Doha from April to June to celebrate the city's selection.
The first phase of the metro system is expected to be operational by 2019.
At the turn of the 20th century, Doha was divided into 9 main districts.
Doha was chosen as the Arab Capital of Culture in 2010.
In February 1841, British naval squadrons arrived in Al Bidda and ordered Al-Suwaidi to meet the British demand, threatening consequences if he declined.
Doha was founded in the vicinity of Al Bidda sometime during the 1820s.
Bin Tarif died in the Battle of Fuwayrit against the ruling family of Bahrain in 1847.
Doha is the educational center of the country and contains the highest preponderance of schools and colleges.
Doha is highly urbanized.
Other islands off Doha's coast include Palm Tree Island, Shrao's Island, Al Safia Island, and Alia Island.
Humidity is usually the lowest in May and June.
File:Doha Qatar skyline at night Sept 2012.jpg|Doha, Qatar.
At various times, they swapped allegiances between the two prevailing powers in the area: the Al Khalifa and the Saudis.
In January 1823, political resident John MacLeod visited Al Bidda to meet with the ruler and initial founder of Doha, Buhur bin Jubrun, who was also the chief of the Al-Buainain tribe.
While they were garrisoned in the fort, their corvette fired indiscriminately at the townspeople, killing a number of civilians.
In the 2010 census, there were more than 60 districts recorded in Doha Municipality.
The largest portion of expatriates in Qatar are from South-East and South Asian countries, mainly India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Nepal, Philippines, and Bangladesh with large numbers of expatriates also coming from the Levant Arab countries, North Africa, and East Asia.
The Pearl is an artificial island in Doha with a surface area of nearly  The total project has been estimated to cost $15 billion upon completion.
This comes in cheaper forms such as through improvisation of optical phenomena such as shadows and more expensive forms such as ventilation, coolants, refrigerants, cryogenics, cryonics and dehumidifiers.
Despite the compliance, the British demanded a fine of 300 German krones in compensation for the damages incurred by pirates off the coast of Al Bidda; namely for the piracies committed by bin Jabir.
According to Qatar Chamber, expatriate workers have remitted $60bn between 2006 and 2012.
It implicitly recognized the distinctness of Qatar from Bahrain and explicitly acknowledged the position of Mohammed bin Thani as an important representative of the peninsula's tribes.
The majority of residents in Doha are Muslim.
The metropolitan area's population grew from 89,000 in the 1970s to over 434,000 in 1997.
Sporting venues in Doha and its suburbs include:
Some of the districts of Doha include:
At their respective Doha campuses, Harvard and Yale teach Sharia law.
In 1973, the University of Qatar was opened by emiri decree, and in 1975 the Qatar National Museum opened in what was originally the ruler's palace.
Doha is also home to a large number of expatriates from Europe, North America, South Africa, and Australia.
54 percent of the workers' remittances of $60bn were routed to Asian countries, followed by Arab nations that accounted for nearly half that volume (28 percent).
Doha was the host of the official 2005 FIBA Asia Championship, where Qatar's national basketball team finished 3rd, its best performance to date, and subsequently qualified for the Basketball World Cup.
This incident allowed the Al Khalifa additional jurisdiction over the town.
Showing the expansion of the business district.
Al-Suwaidi ultimately declined on the basis that he was uninvolved in bin Jabir's actions.
Three of the nine newly announced stadiums will be constructed in Doha, including Sports City Stadium, Doha Port Stadium, and Qatar University Stadium.
Doha was included in Fortune's 15 best new cities for business in 2011.
During this time, new cultural attractions were constructed in the city, with older ones being restored.
Doha has a hot desert climate (Köppen climate classification ''BWh'').
David Seaton, a British political resident in Muscat, wrote the first English record of Al Bidda in 1801.
Beginning in November 2009, Doha has been host of the The Oryx Cup World Championship, a hydroplane boat race in the H1 Unlimited season.
It comprises one of the municipalities of Qatar.
The country has been divided into seven municipalities since 2006.
The city submitted a bid for the 2016 Olympics.
One year later, Qatar agreed to be a British protectorate with Doha as its official capital.
File:DOha corniche view1.jpg|Doha Corniche
He had murdered a native of Bahrain, prompting the Al Khalifa sheikh to imprison him.
Katara Cultural Village was opened in the city in 2010 and has hosted the Doha Tribeca Film Festival since then.
Land reclamation off the coast has added 400 hectares of land and 30&nbsp;km of coastline.
Due to the high influx of expatriates, the Qatari housing market saw a shortage of supply which led to a rise in prices and increased inflation.
Katara Cultural Village is a small village in Doha launched by sheikh Tamim Al Thani to preserve the cultural identity of the country.
The city is the headquarters of numerous domestic and international organizations, including the country's largest oil and gas companies, Qatar Petroleum, Qatargas and RasGas.
Constructions were suspended in 2012 following concerns that the tower would impede flight traffic.
Later that year, name was changed to ''Municipality of Doha''.
In 1820, British surveyor R.H. Colebrook, who visited Al Bidda, remarked on the recent depopulation of the town.
MacLeod noted that Al Bidda was the only substantial trading port in the peninsula during this time.
India was the top destination of the remittances, followed by the Philippines, while the US, Egypt and the neighbouring UAE trailed.
Arabic is the official language of Qatar.
Historically, Doha had been a commercial port of local significance.
Summer is very long, from May to September, when its average high temperatures surpass  and often approach .
Additionally, the city hosted the 2012 UNFCCC Climate Negotiations and is set to host a large number of the venues for the 2022 FIFA World Cup.
It is bordered by Al Wakrah municipality to the south, Al Rayyan municipality to the west, Al Daayen municipality to the north and Umm Salal municipality to the northwest.
There are seven Doha-based sports clubs with football teams currently competing in the Qatar Stars League, the country's top football league.
Nonetheless, despite these measures, Doha and other Qatari environs could become uninhabitable for humans due to the climate change bringing about extreme heat by the year 2071.
Each month, thousands immigrate to Qatar, and as a result, Doha has witnessed explosive growth rates in population.
The most prestigious tournaments include the 1988 and 2011 editions of the AFC Asian Cup and the 1995 FIFA World Youth Championship.
In 2006, Doha was selected to host the Asian Games, leading to the development of a 250-hectare sporting complex known as Aspire Zone.
Further changes followed with extensive land reclamation, which led to the development crescent-shaped bay.
Several other churches exist in Doha, including the Syro-Malabar Church, Malankara Orthodox Church, Mar Thoma Church (affiliated with the Anglicans, but not part of the Communion), CSI Church, Syro-Malankara Church and a Pentecostal church.
Catholics account for over 90% of the 150,000 Christian population in Doha.
A 2015 study conducted by Numbeo, a crowd-sourced database, named Doha as the 10th most expensive city to live in globally.
It was not until the 1950s and 1960s that the country saw significant monetary returns from oil drilling.
The first edition was held in Doha in November 2009.
There are other initiatives that attempt to counter the heat by increasing the traditional office opening times, other standard white collar workday hours, retail operations late into the evening and weather alteration methods such as cloud seeding.
+Doha mean sea temperature
Bin Tarif had been loyal to the Al Khalifa, however, shortly after the swearing in of a new ruler in Bahrain, bin Tarif grew increasingly suspicious of the ruling Al Khalifa and switched his allegiance to the deposed ruler of Bahrain, Abdullah bin Khalifa, whom he had previously assisted in deposing of.
Winters are cool and the temperature rarely drops below .
A British record later stated ''"that the towns of Doha and Wakrah were, at the end of 1867 temporarily blotted out of existence, the houses being dismantled and the inhabitants deported"''.
In 2015, the Public Works Authority declared their plan to construct a free-flowing road directly linking Al-Wakrah and Mesaieed to Doha in order to decrease traffic congestion in the city.
Dewpoints can surpass  in the summer.
