This consists of an experience with other dolphins that modifies the signal structure of an existing whistle sound.
Wolphins have also been observed in the wild.
In humans, the middle ear works as an impedance equalizer between the outside air's low impedance and the cochlear fluid's high impedance.
They have fundic and pyloric chambers.
Dolphins show various types of playful behavior, often including objects, self-made bubble rings, other dolphins or other animals.
Dolphins and other smaller cetaceans are also hunted in an activity known as dolphin drive hunting.
The military use of dolphins, however, drew scrutiny during the Vietnam War when rumors circulated that the United States Navy was training dolphins to kill Vietnamese divers.
Though not quite as flexible as seals, some dolphins can travel at .
Acts of aggression can become so intense that targeted dolphins sometimes go into exile after losing a fight.
Although they are traveling in these pods, the dolphins do not necessarily swim right next to each other.
All species have a dorsal fin to prevent themselves from involuntarily spinning in the water.
The dolphin is said to be among the creatures which heralded the goddess' descent from the heavens and her mount, the Makara, is sometimes depicted as a dolphin.
There are 40 extant species of dolphins.
Some species also whack fish with their flukes, stunning them and sometimes knocking them out of the water.
Males have two slits, one concealing the penis and one further behind for the anus.
Read, a biologist at the Duke University Marine Laboratory who studies dolphin attacks, points out that dolphins are large and wild predators, so people should be more careful when they interact with them.
However, this study was criticized on several grounds.
The name 'dolphin' is used casually as a synonym for bottlenose dolphin, the most common and familiar species of dolphin.
These ancient whales are the predecessors of modern whales, stretching back to their first ancestor that spent their lives near (rarely in) the water.
Orcas on occasion also hunt whale species larger than themselves.
They also have glands on the eyelids and outer corneal layer that act as protection for the cornea.
Wild males who survive infancy live 31 years on average, and up to 50–60 years.
Reviews of this and other published dolphin-assisted therapy (DAT) studies have found important methodological flaws and have concluded that there is no compelling scientific evidence that DAT is a legitimate therapy or that it affords more than fleeting mood improvement.
The neocortex of many species is home to elongated spindle neurons that, prior to 2007, were known only in hominids.
Some species are well adapted for diving to great depths.
Killer whales have the second largest brain mass of any animal on earth, next to the sperm whale.
The Greeks reimagined the Phoenician god Melqart as Melikertês (Melicertes) and made him the son of Athamas and Ino.
Dolphins are known to teach, learn, cooperate, scheme, and grieve.
India has declared the dolphin as its national aquatic animal in an attempt to protect the endangered Ganges River Dolphin.
Some can also re-route blood from tissue tolerant of water pressure to the heart, brain and other organs.
There have been human health concerns associated with the consumption of dolphin meat in Japan after tests showed that dolphin meat contained high levels of mercury.
Forms of care-giving between fellows and even for members of different species (see Moko (dolphin))  are recorded in various species -  such as trying to save weakened fellows or female pilot whales holding up dead calves for long periods.
In Greek myths, they were seen invariably as helpers of humankind.
Other dolphin hybrids live in captivity around the world or have been reported in the wild, such as a bottlenose-Atlantic spotted hybrid.
The signature whistle of a male bottlenose dolphin tends to be similar to that of his mother, while the signature whistle of a female bottlenose dolphin tends to be more distinguishing.
For example, a 2005 study found dolphins an effective treatment for mild to moderate depression.
"Dolfin" was the name of an aristocratic family in the maritime Republic of Venice, whose most prominent member was the 13th Century Doge Giovanni Dolfin.
These whistles are used in order for dolphins to communicate with one another by identifying an individual.
From 1976 to 1997, 55 whales were taken from the wild in Iceland, 19 from Japan, and three from Argentina.
The Vikramshila Gangetic Dolphin Sanctuary has been created in the Ganges river for the protection of the animals.
Bottlenose dolphins have been found to have signature whistles, a whistle that is unique to a specific individual.
Dolphins have rather small, unidentifiable spouts.
A number of militaries have employed dolphins for various purposes from finding mines to rescuing lost or trapped humans.
Dolphins are capable of making a broad range of sounds using nasal airsacs located just below the blowhole.
Some of the larger dolphin species, especially orcas (killer whales), may also prey on smaller dolphins, but this seems rare.
Rather, they swim within the same general vicinity.
Dolphins are able to communicate to one another by addressing another dolphin through mimicking their whistle.
Likewise, the archaeocetes can be anywhere from near fully terrestrial, to semi-aquatic to fully aquatic, but what defines an archaeocete is the presence of visible legs or asymmetrical teeth.
Dolphins have also been known to kill porpoises for reasons which are not fully understood, as porpoises generally do not share the same diet as dolphins and are therefore not competitors for food supplies.
Similar concerns exist with the consumption of dolphin meat in the Faroe Islands, where prenatal exposure to methylmercury and PCBs primarily from the consumption of pilot whale meat has resulted in neuropsychological deficits amongst children.
The dolphin ear has specific adaptations to the marine environment.
Although dolphins generally interact well with humans, some attacks have occurred, most of them resulting in small injuries.
The Cetacean morbillivirus in particular has been known to cause regional epizootics often leaving hundreds of animals of various species dead.
Non-fatal incidents occur more frequently, both in the wild and in captivity.
While dolphin attacks occur far less frequently than attacks by other sea animals, such as sharks, some scientists are worried about the careless programs of human-dolphin interaction.
Various species of dolphin have been known to engage in sexual behavior up to and including copulation with dolphins of other species.
They showed dolphins real-time footage of themselves, recorded footage, and another dolphin.
The term 'dolphin' can be used to refer to, under the parvorder Odontoceti, all the species in the family Delphinidae (oceanic dolphins) and the river dolphin families Iniidae (South American river dolphins), Pontoporiidae (La Plata dolphin), Lipotidae (Yangtze river dolphin) and Platanistidae (Ganges river dolphin and Indus river dolphin).
In May 2005, a discovery in Australia found Indo-Pacific bottlenose dolphins (''Tursiops aduncus'') teaching their young to use tools.
Captives have vastly reduced life expectancies, on average only living into their 20s, although there are examples of killer whales living longer, including several over 30 years old, and two captive orcas, Corky II and Lolita, are in their mid-40s.
The dolphin ''Moko'' in New Zealand has been observed guiding a female Pygmy Sperm Whale together with her calf out of shallow water where they had stranded several times.
Dolphins also suffer from a wide variety of diseases and parasites.
Dolphins range in size from the  long and  Maui's dolphin to the  and  killer whale.
Despite the controversial nature of the hunt resulting in international criticism, and the possible health risk that the often polluted meat causes, thousands of dolphins are caught in drive hunts each year.
Several species have female-biased sexual dimorphism, with the females being larger than the males.
Sexual encounters may be violent, with male dolphins sometimes showing aggressive behavior towards both females and other males.
Dolphins are common in Greek mythology, and many coins from ancient Greece have been found which feature a man, a boy or a deity riding on the back of a dolphin.
Tilikum has played a role in the death of three people in three different incidents (1991, 1999 and 2010).
They are an informal grouping within the order Cetacea, excluding whales and porpoises, so to zoologists the grouping is paraphyletic.
A group of dolphins is called a "school" or a "pod".
Roughly three categories of sounds can be identified: frequency modulated whistles, burst-pulsed sounds and clicks.
Research in this field has suggested that cetaceans, among others, possess self-awareness.
A well-known historical example of a dolphin in heraldry, was the arms for the former province of the Dauphiné in southern France, from which were derived the arms and the title of the Dauphin of France, the heir to the former throne of France (the title literally means "The Dolphin of France").
These flippers contain four digits.
There are also fewer than ten Pilot Whales, Amazon River Dolphins, Risso's Dolphins, Spinner Dolphins, or Tucuxi in captivity.
Dolphins are still being trained by the United States Navy for other tasks as part of the U.S. Navy Marine Mammal Program.
Cetacean spindle neurons are found in areas of the brain that are homologous to where they are found in humans, suggesting that they perform a similar function.
All dolphins have a thick layer of blubber, thickness varying on climate.
A common-bottlenose hybrid lives at SeaWorld California.
There was a temple to Poseidon and a statue of Arion riding the dolphin.
Critics claim captive life is stressful due to these factors and the requirement to perform circus tricks that are not part of wild killer whale behavior.
Tião had suffered harassment by human visitors, including attempts to stick ice cream sticks down her blowhole.
Dolphins have long played a role in human culture.
Dolphins, alongside other cetaceans, belong to the clade Cetartiodactyla with even-toed ungulates, and their closest living relatives are the hippopotamuses, having diverged about 40 million years ago.
When heraldry developed in the Middle Ages, not much was known about the biology of the dolphin and it was often depicted as a sort of fish.
The age of sexual maturity varies by species and gender.
Their skeletal anatomy allows them to be fast swimmers.
In order to obtain each individual whistle sound, dolphins undergo vocal production learning.
Whereas apes can merely touch the mark on themselves with their fingers, cetaceans show less definitive behavior of self-awareness; they can only twist and turn themselves to observe the mark.
Breathing involves expelling stale air from their blowhole, forming an upward, steamy spout, followed by inhaling fresh air into the lungs, however this only occurs in the polar regions of the oceans.
In addition to their streamlined bodies, some can slow their heart rate to conserve oxygen.
By numbers, dolphins are mostly hunted for their meat, though some end up in dolphinariums.
When cooked, dolphin meat is cut into bite-size cubes and then batter-fried or simmered in a ''miso'' sauce with vegetables.
Skeptics argue that behaviors that are said to identify self-awareness resemble existing social behaviors, and so researchers could be misinterpreting self-awareness for social responses to another individual.
Here, dolphins drive fish towards fishermen waiting along the shore and signal the men to cast their nets.
For example, it is not known whether dolphins are more effective than common pets.
One common feeding method is herding, where a pod squeezes a school of fish into a small volume, known as a bait ball.
Self-awareness, though not well-defined scientifically, is believed to be the precursor to more advanced processes like meta-cognitive reasoning (thinking about thinking) that are typical of humans.
This knowledge is mostly transferred by mothers to daughters, unlike simian primates, where knowledge is generally passed on to both sexes.
These signature whistles are developed during a dolphin's first year; it continues to maintain the same sound throughout its lifetime.
Dolphin meat is dense and such a dark shade of red as to appear black.
The wolphin is a fertile hybrid.
As a result, this species sleeps in very short bursts which last between 4 and 60&nbsp;seconds.
This blubber can help with buoyancy, protection to some extent as predators would have a hard time getting through a thick layer of fat, and energy for leaner times; the primary usage for blubber is insulation from the harsh climate.
Other species kept in captivity are Spotted Dolphins, False Killer Whales and Common Dolphins, Commerson's Dolphins, as well as Rough-toothed Dolphins, but all in much lower numbers than the Bottlenose Dolphin.
Dolphins are not thought to have a good sense of taste, as their taste buds are atrophied or missing altogether.
The Ancient Greeks welcomed dolphins; spotting dolphins riding in a ship's wake was considered a good omen.
Anesthetized dolphins initially show a tail kick reflex.
Dolphins range in size from the  long and  Maui's dolphin to the  and  killer whale.
Dolphins also use nonverbal communication by means of touch and posturing.
The modern dolphin skeleton has two small, rod-shaped pelvic bones thought to be vestigial hind limbs.
Compared to many other species, however, dolphin behavior has been studied extensively, both in captivity and in the wild.
Hundreds if not thousands of Bottlenose Dolphins live in captivity across the world, though exact numbers are hard to determine.
In both ancient and later art, Cupid is often shown riding a dolphin.
The older a male dolphin is, the more likely his body is to be covered with bite scars.
This test is much less definitive than when used for primates, because primates can touch the mark or the mirror, while cetaceans cannot, making their alleged self-recognition behavior less certain.
The dolphin eye is relatively small for its size, yet they do retain a good degree of eyesight.
Various methods of feeding exist among and within species, some apparently exclusive to a single population.
The name is originally from Greek  (''delphís''), "dolphin", which was related to the Greek  (''delphus''), "womb".
There are six species of dolphins commonly thought of as whales, collectively known as blackfish: the killer whale, the melon-headed whale, the pygmy killer whale, the false killer whale, and the two species of pilot whales, all of which are classified under the family Delphinidae and qualify as dolphins.
Fat is located in a layer of blubber between the meat and the skin.
Today, the closest living relatives of cetaceans are the hippopotamuses; these share a semi-aquatic ancestor that branched off from other artiodactyls some 60 million years ago.
Dolphin copulation happens belly to belly; though many species engage in lengthy foreplay, the actual act is usually brief, but may be repeated several times within a short timespan.
Major anatomical changes include the hearing set-up that channeled vibrations from the jaw to the earbone which occurred with ''Ambulocetus'' 49 million years ago, a streamlining of the body and the growth of flukes on the tail which occurred around 43 million years ago with ''Protocetus'', the migration of the nasal openings toward the top of the cranium and the modification of the forelimbs into flippers which occurred with ''Basilosaurus'' 35 million years ago, and the shrinking and eventual disappearance of the hind limbs which took place with the first odontocetes and mysticetes 34 million years ago.
It can be seen as the dolphin equivalent of a name for humans.
Some disagree with these findings, arguing that the results of these tests are open to human interpretation and susceptible to the Clever Hans effect.
Loud underwater noises, such as those resulting from naval sonar use, live firing exercises, and certain offshore construction projects such as wind farms, may be harmful to dolphins, increasing stress, damaging hearing, and causing decompression sickness by forcing them to surface too quickly to escape the noise.
Dolphins are an increasingly popular choice of animal-assisted therapy for psychological problems and developmental disabilities.
When dolphins surface, their lens and cornea correct the nearsightedness that results from the refraction of light; they contain both rod and cone cells, meaning they can see in both dim and bright light, but they have far more rod cells than they do cone cells.
Captives occasionally act aggressively towards themselves, their tankmates, or humans, which critics say is a result of stress.
Because their group members were spread out, this was done in order to continue traveling together.
Dolphins swim by moving their tail fin and rear body vertically, while their flippers are mainly used for steering.
Comparison of a particular animal's brain size with the expected brain size based on such allometric analysis provides an encephalization quotient that can be used as another indication of animal intelligence.
In order to prevent losing one of their pod members, there are higher whistle rates.
Cooked dolphin meat has a flavor very similar to beef liver.
He turned the oars into serpents, so terrifying the sailors that they jumped overboard, but Dionysus took pity on them and transformed them into dolphins so that they would spend their lives providing help for those in need.
Dolphins send out high frequency clicks from an organ known as a melon.
After the ship set sail Dionysus invoked his divine powers, causing vines to overgrow the ship where the mast and sails had been.
This melon consists of fat, and the skull of any such creature containing a melon will have a large depression.
When dolphin meat is eaten in Japan, it is often cut into thin strips and eaten raw as ''sashimi'', garnished with onion and either horseradish or grated garlic, much as with ''sashimi'' of whale or horse meat (''basashi'').
Phalanthus was another legendary character brought safely to shore (in Italy) on the back of a dolphin, according to Pausanias.
Research done on signature whistle usage by other dolphin species is relatively limited.
Living in water with strong currents and potentially dangerous floating debris, it must swim continuously to avoid injury.
There are no known cases of mercury poisoning as a result of consuming dolphin meat, though the government continues to monitor people in areas where dolphin meat consumption is high.
Orcas, the largest species of dolphin, have been involved in fatal attacks on humans in captivity.
Typically dolphins give birth to a single calf, which is, unlike most other mammals, born tail first in most cases.
Dolphin skulls have small eye orbits, long snouts, and eyes placed on the sides of its head.
The researchers counter-argue that the behaviors shown are evidence of self-awareness, as they are very different from normal responses to another individual.
The Japanese government recommends that children and pregnant women avoid eating dolphin meat on a regular basis.
The name was transmitted via the Latin ''delphinus'' (the romanization of the later Greek δελφῖνος – ''delphinos''), which in Medieval Latin became ''dolfinus'' and in Old French ''daulphin'', which reintroduced the ''ph'' into the word.
Though a similar state has been observed with wild sperm whales, it is not known if dolphins in the wild reach this state.
Dolphins are sometimes kept in captivity and trained to perform tricks, but breeding success has been poor and the animals often die within a few months of capture.
Male dolphins may also work together and attempt to herd females in estrus, keeping the females by their side by means of both physical aggression and intimidation, to increase their chances of reproductive success.
Albacore are not netted this way, making albacore the only truly dolphin-safe tuna.
The dolphins are netted only while fishermen are in pursuit of smaller tuna.
Calves are typically born in the spring and summer months and females bear all the responsibility for raising them.
In larger groups, individual whistle sounds are less prominent.
Dolphins have two flippers on the underside toward the head, a dorsal fin and a tail fin.
Dolphins communicate using a variety of clicks, whistle-like sounds and other vocalizations.
They cover their snouts with sponges to protect them while foraging.
Captivity usually bears little resemblance to wild habitat, and captive whales' social groups are foreign to those found in the wild.
Instead of sound passing through the outer ear to the middle ear, dolphins receive sound through the throat, from which it passes through a low-impedance fat-filled cavity to the inner ear.
Dolphins are hunted this way in several places around the world, including the Solomon Islands, the Faroe Islands, Peru, and Japan, the most well-known practitioner of this method.
Archaeoceti is a parvorder comprising ancient whales.
Dolphin meat is high in mercury and may thus pose a health danger to humans when consumed.
The research on other species done so far has yielded varied outcomes and inconclusive results.
Various species of dolphins are kept in captivity.
Playful behaviour that involves an other animal species with active participation of the other animal can also be observed however.
Some species log out of the water, which may allow them to travel faster.
The fusing of the neck vertebrae, while increasing stability when swimming at high speeds, decreases flexibility, which means they are unable to turn their heads.
In captivity, they often develop pathologies, such as the dorsal fin collapse seen in 60–90% of male killer whales.
In the United States, the best known are the SeaWorld marine mammal parks.
Dolphins are known to display non-reproductive sexual behavior, engaging in masturbation, stimulation of the genital area of other individuals using the rostrum or flippers, and homosexual contact.
Fish and squid are the main food, but the false killer whale and the orca also feed on other marine mammals.
In 1995, Marten and Psarakos used television to test dolphin self-awareness.
Furthermore, even gaping wounds restore in such a way that the animal's body shape is restored, and infection of such large wounds seems rare.
'''Dolphins''' are a widely distributed and diverse group of fully aquatic marine mammals.
Dolphins communicate with whistle-like sounds produced by vibrating connective tissue, similar to the way human vocal cords function, and through burst-pulsed sounds, though the nature and extent of that ability is not known.
Traditionally, the stylised dolphins in heraldry still may take after this notion, sometimes showing the dolphin skin covered with fish scales.
They have well-developed hearing—their hearing, which is adapted for both air and water, is so well developed that some can survive even if they are blind.
Dolphins can tolerate and recover from extreme injuries such as shark bites although the exact methods used to achieve this are not known.
The click rate increases when approaching an object of interest.
Their escape is prevented by closing off the route to the ocean with other boats or nets.
Dolphins have also been observed harassing animals in other ways, for example by dragging birds underwater without showing any intent to eat them.
Overall, however, they tend to be dwarfed by other Cetartiodactyls.
Dolphins also seem to have been important to the Minoans, judging by artistic evidence from the ruined palace at Knossos.
Although dolphins are widespread, most species prefer the warmer waters of the tropic zones, but some, like the right whale dolphin, prefer colder climates.
They have a layer of fat, or blubber, under the skin to keep warm in the cold water.
Dolphins tend to travel in pods, upon which there are groups of dolphins that range from a few to many.
Male dolphins engage in acts of aggression apparently for the same reasons as humans: disputes between companions and competition for females.
Accidental by-catch in gill nets and incidental captures in antipredator nets that protect marine fish farms are common and pose a risk for mainly local dolphin populations.
This altruism does not appear to be limited to their own species.
Wild killer whales may travel up to  in a day, and critics say the animals are too big and intelligent to be suitable for captivity.
Membership in pods is not rigid; interchange is common.
The Boto, a species of river dolphin that resides in the Amazon River, are believed to be shapeshifters, or ''encantados'', who are capable of having children with human women.
Dolphin echolocation clicks are amongst the loudest sounds made by marine animals.
Dolphins are present in the coat of arms of Anguilla and the coat of arms of Romania, and the coat of arms of Barbados has a dolphin supporter.
For most of the smaller species of dolphins, only a few of the larger sharks, such as the bull shark, dusky shark, tiger shark and great white shark, are a potential risk, especially for calves.
The brain to body mass ratio in some is second only to humans.
In captivity, a bottlenose and a rough-toothed dolphin produced hybrid offspring.
