Among victims who are still living with their perpetrators high amounts of stress, fear, and anxiety are commonly reported.
According to researcher Joan Durrant at the University of Manitoba, it should therefore not be surprising that corporal punishment "consistently predicts increased levels of antisocial behavior ... as well as dating violence".
UNFPA states, "Despite near-universal commitments to end child marriage, one in three girls in developing countries (excluding China) will probably be married before they are 18.
In 2002, Widney Brown, advocacy director for Human Rights Watch, argued that there are similarities between the dynamics of crimes of passion and honor killings, stating that: "crimes of passion have a similar dynamic to honor killings in that the women are killed by male family members and the crimes are perceived as excusable or understandable".
A 2013 study showed that 40.4% of self-identified lesbians and 56.9% of bisexual women have reported being victims of partner violence.
It has also been reported that one out of every three homeless women are homeless due to having left a DV relationship.
According to one study, the percentage of women who have reported being physically abused by an intimate partner vary from 69% to 10% depending on the country.
Domestic violence can take place in heterosexual and same-sex family relationships, and can involve violence against children in the family or, in some U.S. states, violence against a roommate.
Similarly with the Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women, it classifies violence against women into three categories; one of which being DV – defined as violence against women which takes place "within the family or domestic unit or within any other interpersonal relationship, whether or not the perpetrator shares or has shared the same residence with the woman".
According to Rashida Manjoo, a United Nations special rapporteur on violence against women:  in many countries a woman’s access to property hinges on her relationship to a man.
These policies take discretion away from law enforcement by forcing police officers to arrest suspected domestic violence offenders and prosecutors to prosecute those cases.
Correlation has been found between the experience of abuse and neglect in childhood and perpetrating domestic violence and sexual abuse in adulthood.
Nonsubordination theory, sometimes called dominance theory, is an area of feminist legal theory that focuses on the power differential between men and women.
Political agitation during the 19th century led to changes in both popular opinion and legislation regarding domestic violence within the United Kingdom, the United States and other countries.
When she separates from her husband or when he dies, she risks losing her home, land, household goods and other property.
Another study concluded there is "some support for qualitative research suggesting that court personnel are responsive to the gendered asymmetry of intimate partner violence, and may view female intimate violence perpetrators more as victims than offenders."
Gender norms that promote the inferiority of women may lead to the abuse of women by intimate partners.
Furthermore, these incidents create additional fear and stigma surrounding safe-sex conversations and knowing ones STD status.
Resource theory was suggested by William Goode (1971).
Crimes of passion in Latin America, a region which has a history of treating such killings in an extremely lenient way, have also come to international attention.
Economic abuse may involve preventing a spouse from resource acquisition, limiting what the victim may use, or by otherwise exploiting economic resources of the victim.
Bruises, broken bones, head injuries, lacerations, and internal bleeding are some of the acute effects of a domestic violence incident that require medical attention and hospitalization.
Gay and lesbian relationships have been identified as a risk factor for abuse in certain populations.
A child marriage is a marriage where one or both parties are younger than 18.
DV is among the most underreported crimes worldwide for both men and women.
Social views on domestic violence vary from person to person, and from region to region, but in many places outside the West, the concept is very poorly understood.
Domestic violence hotlines offer advice, support and referral services to those in abusive relationships.
However, in El Salvador and Colombia, which have a very high rate of femicide, only three percent of all femicides are committed by a current or former intimate partner, while in Cyprus, France, and Portugal former and current partners are responsible for more than 80% of all cases of femicide.
WHO includes forced marriage, cohabitation, and pregnancy including wife inheritance within its definition of sexual violence.
Reforming the legislation in order to ensure that DV falls under the scope of the law is important.
A lethality assessment is a tool that can assist in determining the best course of treatment for a client, as well as helping the client to recognize dangerous behaviors and more subtle abuse in their relationship.
Professor Martha Mahoney, of the University of Miami School of Law, also points to the notion of “separation assault”—a phenomenon where a batterer further assaults a victim who is attempting or has attempted to leave an abusive relationship—as additional evidence that domestic violence is used to subordinate victims to their batterers.
While beatings of wives are often a response to "inappropriate" behaviors, in many places extreme acts such as honor killings are approved by a high section of the society.
While in most developed countries domestic violence is considered unacceptable by most people, in many regions of the world the views are different: according to a UNICEF survey, the percentage of women aged 15–49 who think that a husband is justified in hitting or beating his wife under certain circumstances is, for example: 90% in Afghanistan and Jordan, 87% in Mali, 86% in Guinea and Timor-Leste, 81% in Laos, 80% in Central African Republic.
An evolutionary psychological explanation of domestic violence is that it represents male attempts to control female reproduction and ensure sexual exclusivity.
Similarly, heterosexism can play a key role in domestic violence in the LGBT community.
Lehman, regarding his 1997 survey, points to added discrimination and fears that gay and lesbian individuals may face.
One study focusing on Hispanic men indicated that gay men are less likely to have been perpetrators or victims of domestic violence than heterosexual men but that bisexual men are more likely to have been both.
Instead, physicians often looked for undiagnosed bone diseases or accepted parents' accounts of accidental mishaps such as falls or assaults by neighborhood bullies.
For instance, in Malawi some parents arrange for an older man, often called "hyena", to have sex with their daughters as a form of initiation.
Children who grow up in violent homes may be led to believe that such behavior is a normal part of life, therefore it is important to challenge such attitudes when they are present among these children.
While these associations do not prove causation, a number of longitudinal studies suggest that the experience of physical punishment has a direct causal effect on later aggressive behaviors.
Since domestic violence is a pattern of behavior, these incidences may increase in severity and frequency, resulting in an increased probability the children themselves will become victims.
Public (such as through the media) and political discourse debating the relation between Islam, immigration, and violence against women is highly controversial in many Western countries.
It has been found that children who witness mother-assault are more likely to exhibit symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
UNFPA estimates, "Over 67 million women 20-24 year old in 2010 had been married as girls, half of which were in Asia, and one-fifth in Africa."
Males are also more likely to use sexual aggression, although both genders are equally likely to pressure their partner into sexual activities.
Lack of adequate legislation which criminalizes domestic violence, or, alternatively legislation which prohibits consensual behaviors, may hinder the progress in regard to reducing the incidence of DV.
People who endorse nonsubordination theory argue that these policies only serve to further subordinate women by forcing them to take a certain course of action, thus compounding the trauma they experienced during the abuse.
The estimated overlap between domestic violence and child abuse ranges from 30 to 50 percent.
The ''Encyclopedia of Victimology and Crime Prevention'' states, "For several methodological reasons&nbsp;– nonrandom sampling procedures and self-selection factors, among others&nbsp;– it is not possible to assess the extent of same-sex domestic violence.
Awareness, perception, definition and documentation of domestic violence differs widely from country to country.
Stress may be increased when a person is living in a family situation, with increased pressures.
The perpetrator attempts to control all aspects of the victim's life, such as their social, personal, professional and financial decisions.
In northern Ghana, for example, payment of bride price signifies a woman's requirement to bear children, and women using birth control face threats of violence and reprisals.
During the reconciliation stage, the abuser may be kind and loving and then there is a period of calm.
Women who are most dependent on the spouse for economic well being (e.g.
Traditionally, domestic violence (DV) was mostly associated with physical violence.
In 2003, thirty-six major US cities cited DV as one of the primary causes of homelessness in their areas.
However, domestic violence is a regular occurrence experienced by up to one half of people in the United States, and an overwhelming number of victims are female.
Throughout the region of Romulus in Rome and under the laws of Chastisement, wife beating by stick or belt was accepted by the authorities.
Economic abuse is a form of abuse when one intimate partner has control over the other partner's access to economic resources.Marital assets are used as a means of control.
In 1993, the UN published ''Strategies for Confronting Domestic Violence: A Resource Manual''.
This may imply repealing existing laws which discriminate against women: according to the WHO, "when the law allows husbands to physically discipline wives, implementing a programme to prevent intimate partner violence may have little impact".
The Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women classifies violence against women into three categories: that occurring in the family (DV), that occurring within the general community, and that perpetrated or condoned by the State.
Although the exact rates are disputed, there is a large body of cross-cultural evidence that women are subjected to domestic violence significantly more often than men.
The ability of victims of domestic violence to leave the relationship is crucial for preventing further abuse.
Though nonsubordination theory has been discussed at great length in evaluating various forms of sexual violence against women, it also serves as a basis for understanding domestic violence and why it occurs.
This is codified in the laws of some countries – for example, in Yemen, marriage regulations state that a wife must obey her husband and must not leave home without his permission.
As a result, in recent years, many US states have enacted specific laws against strangulation.
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, "A key strategy in preventing domestic violence is the promotion of respectful, nonviolent relationships through individual, community, and societal level change."
According to High Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay: "Some have argued, and continue to argue, that family violence is placed outside the conceptual framework of international human rights.
LGBT people in some parts of the world have very little legal protection from DV, because engaging in homosexual acts is itself prohibited by the "sodomy laws" of those jurisdictions (as of 2014, same-sex sexual acts are punishable by imprisonment in 70 countries and by death in another 5 countries) and these legal prohibitions prevent LGBT victims of DV from reporting the abuse to authorities.
Counseling may be used by offenders to minimize the risk of future domestic violence.
Victims of domestic violence may be trapped in domestic violent situations through isolation, power and control, cultural acceptance, lack of financial resources, fear, shame, or to protect children.
This publication urged countries around the world to treat DV as a criminal act, stated that the right to a private family life does not include the right to abuse family members, and acknowledged that, at the time of its writing, most legal systems considered DV to be largely outside the scope of the law, describing the situation at that time as follows: "Physical discipline of children is allowed and, indeed, encouraged in many legal systems and a large number of countries allow moderate physical chastisement of a wife or, if they do not do so now, have done so within the last 100 years.
The most prominent example is rape within marriage, which for a long time had not been recognised as rape because of the relationship between victim and perpetrator."
A 2009 report on DV in Northern Ireland found that "under-reporting is a concern and domestic abuse is the least likely of all violent crimes to be reported to the police".
Due to economic abuse and isolation, the victim usually has very little money of their own and few people on whom they can rely when seeking help.
Once victims leave their perpetrator, they can be stunned with the reality of the extent to which the abuse has taken away their autonomy.
However, the term can be altered by each state's legislation and can broaden the spectrum of domestic violence, such as in Victoria, where family-like relationships and witnessing any type of violence in the family is defined as a family violence incident.
As a social ideology that implies "heterosexuality is normative, morally superior, and better than homosexuality," heterosexism can hinder services and lead to an unhealthy self-image in sexual minorities.
The United Nations Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women (1993) states that "violence against women is a manifestation of historically unequal power relations between men and women, which has led to domination over and discrimination against women by men and to the prevention of the full advancement of women, and that violence against women is one of the crucial social mechanisms by which women are forced into a subordinate position compared with men".
These factors include genetics and brain dysfunction and are studied by neuroscience.
Understanding and breaking the intergenerational abuse patterns may do more to reduce domestic violence than other remedies for managing the abuse.
The Istanbul Convention states: ""violence against women" is understood as a violation of human rights ''and a form of discrimination against women'' (...)".
The review also found that 70% of female victims in one study were "very frightened" in response to intimate partner violence from their partners, but 85% of male victims reported "no fear".
This is evidenced in part by the fact that domestic violence victims are typically abused in a variety of situations and by a variety of means.
In 2006, a study by the United Nations found that marital rape was a prosecutable offense in at least 104 countries Once widely condoned or ignored by law and society, marital rape is now repudiated by international conventions and increasingly criminalized.
For the victim of abuse, counseling may include an assessment of the presence, extent and types of abuse.
There has been an increase in acknowledgment that a child who is exposed to domestic abuse during their upbringing will suffer developmental and psychological damage.
Research has demonstrated that professionals who experience vicarious trauma show signs of exaggerated startle response, hypervigilance, nightmares, and intrusive thoughts although they have not experienced a trauma personally and do not qualify for a clinical diagnosis of PTSD.
In most legal systems around the world, the issue of DV has been addressed only from the 1990s onwards; indeed, before the late-20th century, in most countries there was very little protection, in law or in practice, against DV.
When the situation is calm, the abused person may be hopeful that the situation will change.
The self-defense aspect is supported by findings that previous victimization is a stronger predictor of perpetration in females than in males.
In recent years, strangulation in the context of DV has received significant attention.
Critics of this model argue that it ignores research linking domestic violence to substance abuse and psychological problems.
According to ''Violence against Women in Families and Relationships'', "Globally, wife-beating is seen as justified in some circumstances by a majority of the population in various countries, most commonly in situations of actual or suspected infidelity by wives or their "disobedience" toward a husband or partner."
Because of the awareness of domestic violence that some children have to face, it also generally impacts how the child develops emotionally, socially, behaviorally as well as cognitively.
Then, tensions begin to build, and the cycle starts again.
In 2011, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention released the 2010 results of their National Intimate Partner and Sexual Violence Survey and report that 44% of lesbian women, 61% of bisexual women, and 35% of heterosexual women experienced domestic violence in their lifetime.
Another 40% occurred after contact and the remainder took place during tactical situations (those involving hostages and attempts to overcome barricades).
In abusive relationships, there may be a cycle of abuse during which tensions rise and an act of violence is committed, followed by a period of reconciliation and calm.
However, they went on to conclude "partner abuse can no longer be conceived as merely a gender problem, but also (and perhaps primarily) as a human and relational problem, and should be framed as such, by everyone concerned."
The WHO stated that:
Barriers to safer-sex included fear of abuse, and deception in safe-sex practices.
UN Women has stated that the legislation should ensure that "a perpetrator of domestic violence, including marital rape, cannot use the fact that he paid bride price as a defence to a domestic violence charge".
Emotional abuse includes threats, isolation, public humiliation, unrelenting criticism, constant personal devaluation, and gaslighting.
Of the most important factors in domestic violence is a belief that abuse, whether physical or verbal, is acceptable.
A 1999 analysis of nineteen studies of partner abuse concluded that "research suggests that lesbians and gay men are just as likely to abuse their partners as heterosexual men."
Critics of nonsubordination theory complain that it offers no solutions to the problems it points out.
Heterosexism in legal and medical institutions can be seen in instances of discrimination, biases, and insensitivity toward sexual orientation.
Another important component is safety planning, which allows the victim to plan for dangerous situations they may encounter, and is effective regardless of their decision on whether remain with their perpetrator.
Feminists have worked systematically since the 1960s to criminalize marital rape internationally.
Domestic violence is now commonly defined broadly to include "all acts of physical, sexual, psychological or economic violence" that may be committed by a family member or intimate partner.
Studies on abuse between gay male or lesbian partners usually rely on small convenience samples such as lesbian or gay male members of an association."
Researchers supporting this theory suggest it is useful to think of three sources of domestic violence: childhood socialization, previous experiences in couple relationships during adolescence, and levels of strain in a person's current life.
These types of marriages are related to violence both in regard to the spousal violence perpetrated inside marriage, and in regard to the violence related to the customs and traditions of these marriage: violence and trafficking related to the payment of dowry and bride price, honor killings for refusing the marriage.
Prior to the mid-1800s, most legal systems viewed wife beating as a valid exercise of a husband's authority over his wife.
The countries which ratified the Council of Europe Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence, the first legally binding instrument in Europe in the field of violence against women, are bound by its provisions to ensure that non-consensual sexual acts committed against a spouse or partner are illegal.
Researchers have also found differing outcomes for men and women in response to intimate partner violence.
With positive reinforcement, the behavior continues.
Of these, 51% were defined as unprovoked or as ambushes, taking place before officers had made contact with suspects.
By contrast, some researchers commonly assume that lesbian couples experience domestic violence at the same rate as heterosexual couples, and have been more cautious when reporting domestic violence among gay male couples.
In some cultures, marriage imposes a social obligation for women to reproduce.
Denying medical care, sleep deprivation, and forced drug or alcohol use, are also forms of physical abuse.
As a result of abuse, victims may experience physical disabilities, chronic health problems, mental illness, limited finances, and poor ability to create healthy relationships.
For statistical purposes, femicide is often defined as any killing of a woman.
While some authors, such as Phyllis Chesler, argue that Islam is connected to violence against women, especially in the form of honor killings, others, such as Tahira Shahid Khan, a professor specializing in women's issues at the Aga Khan University in Pakistan, argue that it is the domination of men and inferior status of women in society that lead to these acts, not the religion itself.
Social stresses, due to inadequate finances or other such problems in a family may further increase tensions.
Several studies have shown that maternal interpersonal violence-related posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) can, despite traumatized mother's best efforts, interfere with their child's response to the domestic violence and other traumatic events.
At para 219, it states: "There are many examples from past practice in Council of Europe member states that show that exceptions to the prosecution of such cases were made, either in law or in practice, if victim and perpetrator were, for example, married to each other or had been in a relationship.
During pregnancy a woman may begin to be abused or long-standing abuse may change in severity, causing negative health effects to the mother and fetus.
Domestic violence may happen in immigrant communities, and often there is little awareness in these communities of the laws and policies of the host country.
Nonsubordination theorists argue that all of these actions—the variety of abusive behaviors and settings, exploiting the victim’s children, and assault upon separation—suggest a larger problem than merely an inability to properly manage anger, though anger may be a byproduct of these behaviors.
(Article 3 – Definitions).
The WHO notes that such violence is often ignored because often "legal systems and cultural norms do not treat as a crime, but rather as a 'private' family matter, or a normal part of life."
First, there are certain recurring patterns in domestic violence that indicate it is not the result of intense anger or arguments, but rather is a form of subordination.
In India, for example, the withholding of food is a documented form of family abuse.
The top countries by rate of femicide are El Salvador, Jamaica, Guatemala, South Africa and Russia (data from 2004–09).
Depression is also common, as victims are made to feel guilty for ‘provoking’ the abuse and are frequently subjected to intense criticism.
PTSD (as experienced by victims) is characterized by flashbacks, intrusive images, exaggerated startle response, nightmares, and avoidance of triggers that are associated with the abuse.
It is now recognized as one of the  most lethal forms of DV; yet, because of the lack of external injuries, and the lack of social awareness and medical training in regard to it, strangulation has often been a rather hidden problem.
Studies conducted by Emory University in 2014 identified 24 trigger for partner violence through web-based surveys, ranging from drugs and alcohol to safe-sex discussions.
Unlike other topics within feminist legal theory, nonsubordination theory focuses specifically on certain sexual behaviors, including control of women’s sexuality, sexual harassment, pornography, and violence against women generally.
Some modern research into predictors of injury from domestic violence suggests that the strongest predictor of injury by domestic violence is participation in reciprocal domestic violence.
Studies have found high incidence of psychopathology among domestic abusers.
Physical abuse is that involving contact intended to cause pain, injury, other physical suffering or bodily harm.
A 2012 report by UNICEF found that 57 percent of Indian boys and 53 percent of girls between the ages of 15 and 19 think wife-beating is justified."
"The estimate of personality disorders in the general population would be more in the 15–20% range ... As violence becomes more severe and chronic in the relationship, the likelihood of psychopathology in these men approaches 100%."
A causalist view of domestic violence is that it is a strategy to gain or maintain power and control over the victim.
In 1850, Tennessee became the first state in the United States to explicitly outlaw wife beating.
Abusive partners may limit occupations and create an occupationally-void environment which reinforces feelings of low self-worth and poor self-efficacy in ability to satisfactorily perform everyday tasks.
her scalp) or in areas where she would be embarrassed to show others her bruises.”  These behaviors can be even more useful to a batterer when the batterer and the victim share children, because the batterer often controls the family’s financial assets, making the victim less likely to leave if it would put her children at risk.
An analysis in the US showed that 106 of the 771 officer killings between 1996 and 2009 occurred during domestic violence interventions.
Responses that focus on children suggest that experiences throughout life influence an individuals' propensity to engage in family violence (either as a victim or as a perpetrator).
As in the case of child marriage, the customs of dowry and bride price contribute to this phenomenon.
If one spouse desires control and power in the relationship, the spouse may resort to abuse This may include coercion and threats, intimidation, emotional abuse, economic abuse, isolation, making light of the situation and blaming the spouse, using children (threatening to take them away), and behaving as "master of the castle".
A 2013 review examined studies from five continents and the correlation between a country's level of gender inequality and rates of domestic violence.
Child sacrifice was also a common practice.
However, during the early 1500s, the laws changed to "The Rule of Thumb", which meant that the husband was allowed to hit his wife with a stick no thicker than his thumb.
Prevention and intervention includes ways to prevent domestic violence by offering safe shelter, crisis intervention, advocacy, and education and prevention programs.
In addition, there is broad consensus that women are more often subjected to severe forms of abuse and are more likely to be injured by an abusive partner, and this is exacerbated by economic or social dependence.
In addition to depression, victims of domestic violence also commonly experience long-term anxiety and panic, and are likely to meet the diagnostic criteria for Generalized Anxiety Disorder and Panic Disorder.
This has been shown to be one of the greatest obstacles facing victims of DV, and the strongest factor that can discourage them from leaving their perpetrators.
Nonsubordination theory contends that it is the batterer’s desire to subordinate the victim, not his uncontainable anger, which explains the frequency of domestic violence.
Victims may experience psychological problems, such as post-traumatic stress disorder.
Female genital mutilation is defined by WHO as "all procedures that involve partial or total removal of the external female genitalia, or other injury to the female genital organs for non-medical reasons."
Domestic violence can take a number of forms, including physical, verbal, emotional, economic, religious, and sexual abuse, which can range from subtle, coercive forms to marital rape and to violent physical abuse such as female genital mutilation and acid throwing that results in disfigurement or death.
Oftentimes the victims are very isolated from other relationships as well such as having few to no friends, this is another method of control for the abuser.
In addition, the Council of Europe adopted a convention which addresses domestic violence and violence against women, and calls for the states which ratify it to create and fully adjudicate laws against acts of violence previously condoned by traditional, culture, custom, in the name of honor, or to correct what is deemed unacceptable behavior.
UNFPA says that, "In the next decade 14.2 million girls under 18 will be married every year; this translates into 39,000 girls married each day and this will rise to an average of 15.1 million girls a year, starting in 2021 until 2030, if present trends continue."
Intimate partner violence has been observed in opposite and same-sex relationships, and in the former instance by both men against women and women against men.
Internalized homophobia also appears to be a barrier in victims seeking help.
The way the individual rights of a family member versus the rights of the family as a unit are balanced vary significantly in different societies.
Nonsubordination theory takes the position that society, and more especially men in society, use sex differences between men and women to perpetuate this power imbalance.
Men face additional gender related barriers in reporting, due to social stigmas regarding male victimization, and an increased likelihood of being overlooked by healthcare providers.
There is a compelling case to end intimate partner violence both in its own right as well as to reduce women and girls vulnerability to HIV/AIDS.
What is viewed as an undue expression of personal autonomy is condemned as unacceptable.
In some cultures, there are ritualized forms of child sexual abuse taking place with the knowledge and consent of the family, where the child is induced to engage in sexual acts with adults, possibly in exchange for money or goods.
A common aspect among abusers is that they witnessed abuse in their childhood, in other words they were participants in a chain of intergenerational cycles of domestic violence.
pushing, pinching, slapping, scratching or kicking), while males are more likely to punch, strangle, beat, burn, or threaten with weapons.
The purpose of these actions is to keep the victim, and sometimes the entire family, subordinate to the batterer, according to nonsubordination theory.
By contrast, fear and avoidance of legal consequences, the tendency to blame their partner, and a narrative focus on their own needs and emotions reduced the likelihood of self-reporting perpetration in men.
The WHO writes that, "Dismantling hierarchical constructions of masculinity and femininity predicated on the control of women, and eliminating the structural factors that support inequalities are likely to make a significant contribution to preventing intimate partner and sexual violence".
Amnesty International’s Secretary General has stated that: "It is unbelievable that in the twenty-first century some countries are condoning child marriage and marital rape while others are outlawing abortion, sex outside marriage and same-sex sexual activity – even punishable by death."
The evidence on the linkages between violence against women and HIV/AIDS highlights that there are direct and indirect mechanisms by which the two interact.
Consequences to these children are likely to be more severe if their assaulted mother develops post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and does not seek treatment due to her difficulty in assisting her child with processing his or her own experience of witnessing the domestic violence.
This could be because of underage immaturity, illness, disability, or the influence of alcohol or other drugs, or due to intimidation or pressure.
A batterer’s unwillingness to allow the victim to leave the relationship substantiates the idea that violence is being used to force the victim to continue to fulfill the batterer’s wishes that she obey him.
The social acceptability of domestic violence also differs by country.
For example, proponents of nonsubordination theory criticize certain approaches that have been taken to address domestic violence in the legal system, such as mandatory arrest or prosecution policies.
Marital rape is non-consensual sexual contact perpetrated against a spouse.
Again, most legal systems fail to criminalize circumstances where a wife is forced to have sexual relations with her husband against her will.
She said, referring to a case that occurred in Bulgaria, "A husband was tried for severely beating his wife and when the judge asked him if he understood what he did and if he's sorry, the husband said "But she's my wife".
Some chronic health conditions that have been linked to victims of domestic violence are arthritis, irritable bowel syndrome, chronic pain, pelvic pain, ulcers, and migraines.
The Maputo Protocol adopted a broader definition, defining violence against women as: "all acts perpetrated against women which cause or could cause them physical, sexual, psychological, and economic harm, including the threat to take such acts; or to undertake the imposition of arbitrary restrictions on or deprivation of fundamental freedoms in private or public life in peace time and during situations of armed conflicts or of war".
There is a lot of discourse surrounding mandatory arrest.
States that have implemented mandatory arrest laws have 60% higher homicide rates which have been shown to be consistent with the decline in reporting rates.
While the genders engage in IPV at about equal rates, females are more likely to use less dangerous forms of physical violence (e.g.
