Its domed octagon design was influenced by Byzantine models.
Though the earliest preserved Russian domes of such type date from the 16th century, illustrations from older chronicles indicate they have existed since the late 13th century.
The use of domes in mausoleums can likewise reflect royal patronage or be seen as representing the honor and prestige that domes symbolized, rather than having any specific funerary meaning.
These are also considered the first geodesic domes.
The Roman foundations of the oval plan Church of St. Gereon in Cologne point to a possible example.
Domes were smooth or ribbed and had a characteristic Fatimid "keel" shape profile.
This divergence with the Roman west from the second third of the 6th century may be considered the beginning of a "Byzantine" architecture.
Extraordinarily thin domes of sun-baked clay 20 feet in diameter, 30 feet high, and nearly parabolic in curve, are known from Cameroon.
Brunelleschi's domes at San Lorenzo and the Pazzi Chapel established them as a key element of Renaissance architecture.
The last major Islamic tomb built in India was the tomb of Safdar Jang (1753–54).
''De Re Aedificatoria'', written by Leon Battista Alberti around 1452, recommends vaults with coffering for churches, as in the Pantheon, and the first design for a dome at St. Peter's Basilica in Rome is usually attributed to him, although the recorded architect is Bernardo Rossellino.
The Syria and Palestine area has a long tradition of domical architecture, including wooden domes in shapes described as "conoid", or similar to pine cones.
Domes have a long architectural lineage that extends back into prehistory and they have been constructed from mud, stone, wood, brick, concrete, metal, glass, and plastic over the centuries.
It is the only such tomb that has been found in Hong Kong and is exhibited as part of the Hong Kong Museum of History.
The number of domes typically has a symbolical meaning in Russian architecture, for example 13 domes symbolize Christ with 12 Apostles, while 25 domes means the same with an additional 12 Prophets of the Old Testament.
Over time, they were made taller and wider.
The Üç Şerefeli Mosque at Edirne developed the idea of the central dome being a larger version of the domed modules used throughout the rest of the structure to generate open space.
The earliest oval domes were used by convenience in corbelled stone huts as rounded but geometrically undefined coverings, and the first examples in Asia Minor date to around 4000 B.C.
Examples of these early churches are the 13-domed wooden Saint Sophia Cathedral in Novgorod (989) and the 25-domed stone Desyatinnaya Church in Kiev (989&ndash;996).
Over the course of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, developments in mathematics and the study of statics led to a more precise formalization of the ideas of the traditional constructive practices of arches and vaults, and there was a diffusion of studies on the most stable form for these structures: the catenary curve.
In Islamic architecture, they are typically made of masonry, rather than timber, with the thick and heavy bulging portion serving to buttress against the tendency of masonry domes to spread at their bases.
This emphasis on geometric essentials would be very influential.
The Crusades, beginning in 1095, also appear to have influenced domed architecture in Western Europe, particularly in the areas around the Mediterranean Sea.
Chatris, the domed kiosks on pillars characteristic of Mughal roofs, were adopted from their Hindu use as cenotaphs.
The simplest technique is to use diagonal lintels across the corners of the walls to create an octagonal base.
Domes built with steel and concrete were able to achieve very large spans.
The wide variety of dome forms in medieval Islam reflected dynastic, religious, and social differences as much as practical building considerations.
Filippo Brunelleschi's octagonal brick domical vault over Florence Cathedral was built between 1420 and 1436 and the lantern surmounting the dome was completed in 1467.
Experimental rammed earth domes were made as part of work on sustainable architecture at the University of Kassel in 1983.
Although it is not known when the first dome was created, sporadic examples of early domed structures have been discovered.
In the 4th century, Roman domes proliferated due to changes in the way domes were constructed, including advances in centering techniques and the use of brick ribbing.
The thrusts generated by a dome are directly proportional to the weight of its materials.
Under the Lodi dynasty there was a large proliferation of tomb building, with octagonal plans reserved for royalty and square plans used for others of high rank, and the first double dome was introduced to India in this period.
Domes in the Middle Ages also tended to be circular, though the church of Santo Tomás de las Ollas in Spain has an oval dome over its oval plan.
The English word "dome" ultimately derives from the Latin ''domus'' ("house")—which, up through the Renaissance, labeled a revered house, such as a ''Domus Dei'', or "House of God", regardless of the shape of its roof.
The multidomed church is a typical form of Russian church architecture that distinguishes Russia from other Orthodox nations and Christian denominations.
Because voussoir domes have lateral support, they can be made much thinner than corresponding arches of the same span.
"True" domes are said to be those whose structure is in a state of compression, with constituent elements of wedge-shaped voussoirs, the joints of which align with a central point.
Domes have been found from early Mesopotamia, which may explain the form's spread.
The earliest known examples date to the first century BC, such as the Tabularium of Rome from 78 BC.
Hence it was widely used in buildings in ancient times, before the advent of composite structures.
The precise definition has been a matter of controversy.
Occasional exceptions include examples of early quincunx churches at Milan and near Cassino.
The first large Imperial Mosque of Istanbul in the imported Baroque style was the Nuruosmaniye Mosque (1748-1755).
The examples found in various European architectural styles are typically wooden.
The more modern and safe method of gold electroplating was applied for the first time in gilding the domes of the Cathedral of Christ the Saviour in Moscow, the tallest Eastern Orthodox church in the world.
"Cross-domed units", a more secure structural system created by bracing a dome on all four sides with broad arches, became a standard element on a smaller scale in later Byzantine church architecture.
One of the finest was the Laleli Mosque of 1759-1764.
Domes with pendentives can be divided into two kinds: ''simple'' and ''compound''.
Their efficiency is said to increase with size.
This shape provides for perfect compression, with none of the tension or bending forces that masonry is weak against.
The half-domes over the apses of Byzantine churches helped to project the chants of the clergy.
Because they reduce the portion of the dome in tension, these domes are strong but have increased radial thrust.
When the base of the dome does not match the plan of the supporting walls beneath it (for example, a dome's circular base over a square bay), techniques are employed to transition between the two.
For small or tall domes with less horizontal thrust, the thickness of the supporting arches or walls can be enough to resist deformation, which is why drums tend to be much thicker than the domes they support.
The optimal shape for a masonry dome of equal thickness is a revolved catenary curve, similar to the curve of a parabola.
The multi-unit mosque uses several domed-squares of similar size along the length of a mosque, or across its width, or both, with the central dome sometimes larger than the others.
The Selimiye Mosque was the first structure built by the Ottomans that had a larger dome than that of the Hagia Sophia.
Dome profiles were varied, with "keel-shaped", bulbous, ogee, stilted domes, and others being used.
Most of these wooden domes have been lost to fires and replaced by flat ceilings.
These can also be thought of as saucer domes upon pendentives.
6th-century church building by the Emperor Justinian used the domed cross unit on a monumental scale, and his architects made the domed brick-vaulted central plan standard throughout the Roman east.
In addition to large Imperial mosques, he produced hundreds of other monuments, including medium-sized mosques such as the Mihrimah, Sokollu, and Rüstem Pasha Mosque and the tomb of Suleiman the Magnificent.
Beginning in the Ilkhanate, Persian domes achieved their final configuration of structural supports, zone of transition, drum, and shells, and subsequent evolution was restricted to variations in form and shell geometry.
Although never very popular in domestic settings, domes were used in a number of 18th century homes built in the Neo-Classical style.
Geometry is a key element of the designs, with the octagon being perhaps the most popular shape used.
Thomas Jefferson, the third president of the United States, installed an octagonal dome above the West front of his plantation house, Monticello.
Its highly symmetrical square plan centers on a circular room covered by a dome, and it proved highly influential on the Georgian architects of 18th century England, architects in Russia, and architects in America, Thomas Jefferson among them.
However, many bulbous domes in eastern Europe were replaced over time in the larger cities during the second half of the eighteenth century in favor of hemispherical or stilted cupolas in the French or Italian styles.
Domes of cut stone were more expensive and never as large, and timber was used for large spans where brick was unavailable.
In modern times, the creation of relatively simple dome-like structures has been documented among various indigenous peoples around the world.
The first was found by a farmer in Mezhirich, Ukraine, in 1965 while he was digging in his cellar and archaeologists unearthed three more.
''Geodesic domes'' are the upper portion of geodesic spheres.
Three other Imperial mosques in Istanbul also add semi-domes to the north and south, doing away with the basilica plan: Şehzade Camii, Sultan Ahmed I Camii, and Yeni Cami.
According to E. Baldwin Smith, from the late Stone Age the dome-shaped tomb was used as a reproduction of the ancestral, god-given shelter made permanent as a venerated home of the dead.
The construction of tomb towers decreased.
They are composed of a framework of triangles in a polyhedron pattern.
Geodesic domes have been used for radar enclosures, greenhouses, housing, and weather stations.
Early Ottoman buildings, for almost two centuries after 1300, were characterized by a blending of Ottoman culture and indigenous architecture, and the pendentive dome was used throughout the empire.
Their appearance in northern Russian architecture predates the Tatar occupation of Russia and so is not easily explained as the result of that influence.
These are generally taken to be the first modern architectural thin shells.
The Taj Mahal is a famous example.
In the case of the ''simple dome'', the pendentives are part of the same sphere as the dome itself; however, such domes are rare.
Another example is the igloo, a shelter built from blocks of compact snow and used by the Inuit people, among others.
Roofing for domes ranged from simple ceramic tile to more expensive, more durable, and more form-fitting lead sheeting.
Russia, which had large supplies of iron, has some of the earliest examples of iron's architectural use.
Another explanation, however, is that the use of the dome shape in construction did not have a single point of origin and was common in virtually all cultures long before domes were constructed with enduring materials.
If the Romans created oval domes, it was only in exceptional circumstances.
Meridional forces (like the meridians, or lines of longitude, on a globe) are compressive only, and increase towards the base, while hoop forces (like the lines of latitude on a globe) are in compression at the top and tension at the base, with the transition in a hemispherical dome occurring at an angle of 51.8 degrees from the top.
They are found in the Near East, Middle East, Persia, and India and may not have had a single point of origin.
He also established the oval dome as a reconciliation of the longitudinal plan church favored by the liturgy of the Counter-Reformation and the centralized plan favored by idealists.
Palladio's two domed churches in Venice are San Giorgio Maggiore (1565&ndash;1610) and Il Redentore (1577&ndash;92), the latter built in thanksgiving for the end of a bad outbreak of plague in the city.
In southwest France, there are over 250 domed Romanesque churches in the Périgord region alone.
The kings of Achaemenid Persia held audiences and festivals in domical tents derived from the nomadic traditions of central Asia.
The earliest domes in the Middle East were built with mud-brick and, eventually, with baked brick and stone.
The earliest masonry domes covered square single room mosques, the archetype of Ottoman architecture.
The type may have an eastern origin, although the issue is also unsettled.
The eyvan mosque type (the eyvan being derived from Seljuk architecture) uses domed-square units in a variety of sizes, heights, and details, with only the possible pair of side units being similar sizes.
Simple domical mausoleums existed in the Hellenistic period.
The historical development from structures like these to more sophisticated domes is not well documented.
The precise definition of "pendentive" has been a source of contention among academics, including whether or not corbelling is permitted under the definition and whether or not the lower portions of a sail vault should be considered pendentives.
They are typically octagonal in plan and use corner squinches to translate a square bay into a suitable octagonal base.
Also called ''segmental domes'' (a term sometimes also used for cloister vaults), or ''calottes'', these have profiles of less than half a circle.
The different terms reflect different arrangements in the surface members.
Pre-Islamic domes in Persia are commonly semi-elliptical, with pointed domes and those with conical outer shells being the majority of the domes in the Islamic periods.
The 7.5 meter wide double dome of Soltan Bakht Agha Mausoleum (1351-1352) is the earliest known example in which the two shells of the dome have significantly different profiles, which spread rapidly throughout the region.
The ''hemispherical dome'' is half of a sphere.
The peak of this classical period, which lasted into the 17th century, came with the architecture of Mimar Sinan.
The Renaissance style spread from Italy in the Early modern period.
Star-shaped domes found at the Moorish palace of the Alhambra in Granada, Spain, the Hall of the Abencerrajes (c. 1333–91) and the Hall of the two Sisters (c. 1333–54), are extraordinarily developed examples of muqarnas domes.
The Seljuq Turks built tower tombs, called "Turkish Triangles", as well as cube mausoleums covered with a variety of dome forms.
Cavities in the form of jars built into the inner surface of a dome may serve to compensate for this interference by diffusing sound in all directions, eliminating echoes while creating a "divine effect in the atmosphere of worship."
New production techniques allowed for cast iron and wrought iron to be produced both in larger quantities and at relatively low prices during the Industrial Revolution.
The instinctive desire to do this resulted in widespread domical mortuary traditions across the ancient world, from the stupas of India to the tholos tombs of Iberia.
It is the most common church plan from the tenth century until the fall of Constantinople in 1453.
The central dome of the Hagia Sophia uses the ribbed method, which accommodates a ring of windows between the ribs at the base of the dome.
With the crowning of Charlemagne as a new Roman Emperor, Byzantine influences were largely replaced in a revival of earlier Western building traditions.
Characteristic of these domes are the use of high drums and several types of discontinuous double-shells, and the development of triple-shells and internal stiffeners occurred at this time.
Due to the scarcity of wood in many areas of the Iranian plateau, domes were an important part of vernacular architecture throughout Persian history.
The weight of materials and the size of the dome were the key references.
Some tombs of the Song Dynasty (960&ndash;1279) have beehive domes.
They are found in Persian, Hellenistic, Roman, and Chinese architecture in the Ancient world, as well as among a number of contemporary indigenous building traditions.
Cultures from pre-history to modern times constructed domed dwellings using local materials.
The earliest true domes found in Chinese tombs were shallow cloister vaults, called ''simian jieding'', derived from the Han use of barrel vaulting.
Materials were considered homogeneous and rigid, with compression taken into account and elasticity ignored.
However, the extensive use of domes did not occur before the 1st century AD.
Seljuk domes included conical, semi-circular, and pointed shapes in one or two shells.
The historicism of the 19th century led to many domes being re-translations of the great domes of the past, rather than further stylistic developments, especially in sacred architecture.
The domes of the Safavid dynasty (1501-1732) are characterized by a distinctive bulbous profile and are considered the last generation of Persian domes.
The use of pendentives to support domes in the Aquitaine region, rather than the squinches more typical of western medieval architecture, strongly implies a Byzantine influence.
A squinch can be a single arch or a set of multiple projecting nested arches placed diagonally over an internal corner.
Ties and chains of iron or wood could be used to resist stresses.
Whereas earlier masonry domes may have had a radius to thickness ratio of 50, the ratio for modern domes can be in excess of 800.
Blending the architectural features of both Byzantine and Persian architecture, the domes used both pendentives and squinches and were made in a variety of shapes and materials.
They were used to cover large buildings in Syria after the eleventh century.
Although architecture in the region would decline following the movement of the capital to Iraq under the Abbasids in 750, mosques built after a revival in the late 11th century usually followed the Umayyad model.
Roman domes are found in baths, villas, palaces, and tombs.
By Hellenistic and Roman times, the domical tholos had become the customary cemetery symbol.
This French definition gradually became the standard usage of the English ''dome'' in the eighteenth century as many of the most impressive Houses of God were built with monumental domes, and in response to the scientific need for more technical terms.
The Gol Gumbaz, or ''Round Dome'', is one of the largest masonry domes in the world.
The whole bulbous structure tapers smoothly to a point.
It likely had a wooden dome.
The earliest discovered may be four small dwellings made of Mammoth tusks and bones.
The large domes of the 19th century included exhibition buildings and functional structures such as gasometers and locomotive sheds.
Additional domes are sometimes used at the corners of the mihrab wall, at the entrance bay, or on the square tower minarets.
The new building materials of the 19th century and a better understanding of the forces within structures from the 20th century has opened up new possibilities.
Oval plan churches became a type in the Renaissance and popular in the Baroque style.
Rather than meeting in the center of the dome, the ribs characteristically intersect one another off-center, forming an empty polygonal space in the center.
A variation of this type has the room covered by one dome and one semi-dome, with additional side chambers.
The dome is not itself Renaissance in style, although the lantern is closer.
The use of iron cramps to join together adjacent stones was known in pre-Islamic India, and was used at the base of domes for hoop reinforcement.
Robert Hooke, who first articulated that a thin arch was comparable to an inverted hanging chain, may have advised Wren on how to achieve the crossing dome of St. Paul's Cathedral.
The "ribs" of a dome are the radial lines of masonry that extend from the crown down to the springing.
In contrast to Persian and Ottoman domes, the domes of Indian tombs tend to be more bulbous.
Russian domes are often gilded or brightly painted.
The publication of Sebastiano Serlio's treatise, one of the most popular architectural treatises ever published, was responsible for the spread of the oval in late Renaissance and Baroque architecture throughout Italy, Spain, France, and central Europe.
The Samanid Mausoleum in Transoxiana dates to no later than 943 and is the first to have squinches create a regular octagon as a base for the dome, which then became the standard practice.
A model of a tomb found with a shallow true dome from the late Han Dynasty (206 BC &ndash; 220 AD) can be seen at the Guangzhou Museum (Canton).
Such domes are often larger in diameter than the drums they sit on, and their height usually exceeds their width.
Modest domes in baths dating from the 2nd and 1st centuries BC are seen in Pompeii, in the cold rooms of the Terme Stabiane and the Terme del Foro.
Early versions of bulbous domes can be seen in mosaic illustrations in Syria dating to the Umayyad period.
At the time it was built, the dome was the highest in the Ottoman Empire when measured from sea level, but lower from the floor of the building and smaller in diameter than that of the nearby Hagia Sophia.
Designed and built by architect Mimar Sinan between 1568 and 1574, when he finished it he was 86 years old, and he considered the mosque his masterpiece.
Bramante's initial design was for a Greek cross plan with a large central hemispherical dome and four smaller domes around it in a quincunx pattern.
The dome was completed by Giacomo della Porta and Domenico Fontana.
Hagia Sophia's central dome arrangement is faithfully reproduced in three Ottoman mosques in Istanbul: the Beyazidiye Mosque, the Kılıç Ali Pasha Mosque, and the Süleymaniye Mosque.
In the 3rd century, Imperial mausoleums began to be built as domed rotundas, rather than as tumulus structures or other types, following similar monuments by private citizens.
According to E. Baldwin Smith, it was a shape likely known to the Assyrians, defined by Greek theoretical mathematicians, and standardized by Roman builders.
Fatimid mausoleums were mostly simple square buildings covered by a dome.
Their low cost eventually led to the development of permanent versions using teflon-coated fiberglass and by 1985 the majority of the domed stadiums around the world used this system.
The practice of building rotating domes for housing large telescopes was begun in the 19th century, with early examples using papier-mâché to minimize weight.
Indeed, the earliest Russian churches, built just after the Christianization of Kievan Rus', were multi-domed, which has led some historians to speculate about how Russian pre-Christian pagan temples might have looked.
There are also a wide variety of forms and specialized terms to describe them.
The area of north-eastern Iran was, along with Egypt, one of two areas notable for early developments in Islamic domed mausoleums, which appear in the tenth century.
The Villa Capra, also known as "La Rotunda", was built by Andrea Palladio from 1565 to 1569 near Vicenza.
In the United States, most public buildings in the late 18th century were only distinguishable from private residences because they featured cupolas.
Justinian's Hagia Sophia was an original and innovative design with no known precedents in the way it covers a basilica plan with dome and semi-domes.
Oculi are common features.
Braced domes often have a very low weight and are usually used to cover spans of up to 150 meters.
The distinct symbolism of the heavenly or cosmic tent stemming from the royal audience tents of Achaemenid and Indian rulers was adopted by Roman rulers in imitation of Alexander the Great, becoming the imperial baldachin.
In the early sixteenth century, the lantern of the Italian dome spread to Germany, gradually adopting the bulbous cupola from the Netherlands.
Tensegrity domes, patented by Buckminster Fuller in 1962, are membrane structures consisting of radial trusses made from steel cables under tension with vertical steel pipes spreading the cables into the truss form.
The dome is 42 meters wide and made of two shells.
Domes have remained important in modern mausoleums, and domed cisterns and icehouses remain common sights in the countryside.
They are thought of in terms of two kinds of forces at right angles from one another.
They are generally thinner than earlier domes and are decorated with a variety of colored glazed tiles and complex vegetal patterns, and they were influential on those of other Islamic styles, such as the Mughal architecture of India.
Domes in pre-Mughal India have a standard squat circular shape with a lotus design and bulbous finial at the top, derived from Hindu architecture.
The celestial symbolism of the dome, however, was the preeminent one by the Christian era.
Wren's structural system became the standard for large domes well into the 19th century.
They became popular in the second half of the 15th century in the Low Countries of Northern Europe, possibly inspired by the finials of minarets in Egypt and Syria, and developed in the 16th and 17th centuries in the Netherlands before spreading to Germany, becoming a popular element of the baroque architecture of Central Europe.
The term comes from the Latin ''ovum'', meaning "egg".
A dome built in front of the mihrab of a mosque, for example, was at least initially meant to emphasize the place of a prince during royal ceremonies.
Architectural shells had their heyday in the 1950s and 1960s, peaking in popularity shortly before the widespread adoption of computers and the finite element method of structural analysis.
An octagon was intermediate between the two.
The synthesis of styles created by this introduction of new forms to the Hindu tradition of trabeate construction created a distinctive architecture.
The validity of this is unclear, as domes built underground with corbelled stone layers are also in compression from the surrounding earth.
Iron and steel beams, steel cables, and pre-stressed concrete have eliminated the need for external buttressing and enabled far thinner domes.
Over time such domes became primarily focal points for decoration or the direction of prayer.
The circle represented perfection, eternity, and the heavens.
Egypt, along with north-eastern Iran, was one of two areas notable for early developments in Islamic mausoleums, beginning in the 10th century.
