From the 1950s, the federal government began to phase out the use of ''Dominion'', which had been used largely as a synonym of "federal" or "national" such as "Dominion building" for a post office, "Dominion-provincial relations", and so on.
East Pakistan gained independence from Pakistan, as Bangladesh, in 1971.
Western Australia did not receive self-government until 1891, mainly because of its continuing financial dependence on the UK Government.
* Dominion Radio Astrophysical Observatory (1960–present); now part of the National Research Council Herzberg Institute of Astrophysics
New Zealand adopted the Statute of Westminster in 1947 and in the same year legislation passed in London gave New Zealand full powers to amend its own constitution.
* Dominion Day (1867–1982): holiday marking Canada's national day; now called Canada Day
'''Dominions''' were semi-independent polities that were under the British Crown, constituting the British Empire, beginning with Canadian Confederation in 1867.
Their status defied exact analysis by both international and constitutional lawyers, but it was clear that they were no longer regarded simply as colonies of Britain.
Arthur Berriedale Keith, in Speeches and Documents on the British Dominions 1918–1931, stated that "the Dominions are sovereign international States in the sense that the King in respect of each of His Dominions (Newfoundland excepted) is such a State in the eyes of international law".
The word ''dominions'' originally referred to the possessions of the Kingdom of England.
Southern Rhodesia (renamed Zimbabwe in 1980) was a special case in the British Empire.
Tilley's suggestion was taken from the 72nd Psalm, verse eight, "He shall have ''dominion'' also from sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends of the earth", which is echoed in the national motto, "A Mari Usque Ad Mare".
* Dominion Bureau of Statistics (1918–1971): superseded by Statistics Canada
When Northern Rhodesia was given independence in 1964 it adopted the new name of Zambia, prompting Southern Rhodesia to shorten its name to Rhodesia, but Britain did not recognise this latter change.
However, the government of Newfoundland "requested the United Kingdom not to have sections 2 to 6—confirming Dominion status—apply automatically to it, until the Newfoundland Legislature first approved the Statute, approval which the Legislature subsequently never gave".
Ireland, which had negotiated the removal of British forces from its territory the year before, remained neutral.
In all of these cases, the word ''dominion'' implied no more than being subject to the English crown.
It was among the colonies declared dominions in 1907.
Four colonies of Australia had enjoyed responsible government since 1856: New South Wales, Victoria, Tasmania and South Australia.
Unlike many dependencies that became republics, Ireland never re-joined the Commonwealth, which agreed to accept the British monarch as head of that association of independent states.
As established by the Irish Free State Constitution Act of the United Kingdom Parliament on 6 December 1922 the new state—which had dominion status in the likeness of that enjoyed by Canada within the British Commonwealth of Nations—comprised the whole of Ireland.
The new government of Canada under the British North America Act of 1867 began to use the phrase "Dominion of Canada" to designate the new, larger nation.
These dominions never had full self-governing status.
* The Dominion of Canada General Insurance Company, founded in 1887; bought out by Travelers in 2013
Nonetheless, though disused, it remains Canada's legal title and the phrase ''Her Majesty's Dominions'' is still used occasionally in legal documents in the United Kingdom.
The initiatives and contributions of British colonies to the British war effort in the First World War were recognised by Britain with the creation of the Imperial War Cabinet in 1917, which gave them a say in the running of the war.
Successive Irish governments undermined the constitutional links with Britain until they were severed completely in 1949.
Although it was never a dominion, it was treated as a dominion in many respects.
The First World War left Britain saddled with enormous debts, and the Great Depression had further reduced Britain's ability to pay for defence of its empire.
The Irish Free State (Ireland from 1937) was a British Dominion between 1922 and 1949.
The colony of Newfoundland enjoyed responsible government from 1855 to 1934.
India also adopted a republican constitution in January 1950.
Diplomatic autonomy soon followed, with the U.S.-Canadian Halibut Treaty (March 1923) marking the first time an international agreement had been entirely negotiated and concluded independently by a Dominion.
The assertiveness of the self-governing colonies was recognised in the Colonial Conference of 1907, which implicitly introduced the idea of the Dominion as a self-governing colony by referring to Canada and Australia as Dominions.
It was not until the late 1930s and early 1940s that the Dominion governments were allowed to establish their own embassies, and the first two of these that were established by the Dominion governments in Ottawa and in Canberra were both established in Washington, D.C., in the United States.
At the other extreme, the conservative Australian government of the day, led by Robert Menzies, took the view that, since Australia had not adopted the Statute of Westminster, it was legally bound by the UK declaration of war—which had also been the view at the outbreak of the First World War—though this was contentious within Australia.
However, after the passage of the Statute of Westminster the language of dependency on the Crown of the United Kingdom ceased, where the Crown itself was no longer referred to as the Crown of any place in particular but simply as "the Crown".
The phrase ''His/Her Majesty's dominions'' is a legal and constitutional phrase that refers to all the realms and territories of the Sovereign, whether independent or not.
In 1871, the Crown Colony of British Columbia became a Canadian province, Prince Edward Island joined in 1873 and Newfoundland in 1949.
This endured until the state's reconstitution as Zimbabwe Rhodesia in 1979 under the terms of the Internal Settlement; this lasted until the Lancaster House Agreement of December 1979, which put it under interim British rule while fresh elections were held.
The Dominions Office merged with the India Office as the Commonwealth Relations Office upon the independence of India and Pakistan in August 1947.
''Dominion'' also occurred in the name of the short-lived Dominion of New England (1686–1689).
Frank Scott theorised that Canada's status as a Dominion ended with the Canadian parliament's declaration of war on Germany on 9 September 1939.
The country achieved independence deemed legal by the international community in April 1980, when Britain granted independence under the name Zimbabwe.
The imperial authorities in London retained direct powers over foreign affairs, constitutional alterations, native administration and bills regarding mining revenues, railways and the governor's salary.
Canada set up its own Department of External Affairs in June 1909, but diplomatic relations with other governments continued to operate through the governors-general, Dominion High Commissioners in London (first appointed by Canada in 1880; Australia followed only in 1910), and British legations abroad.
Full autonomy was granted by the United Kingdom parliament with the Statute of Westminster in December 1931.
The remainder of New South Wales was divided in three in 1859, a change that established most of the present borders of NSW; the Colony of Queensland, with its own responsible self-government, and the Northern Territory (which was not granted self-government prior to federation of the Australian Colonies).
Nova Scotia soon followed by the Province of Canada (which included modern southern Ontario and southern Quebec) were the first Colonies to achieve responsible government, in 1848.
Rhodesia unilaterally declared independence from Britain in 1965 as a result of the British government's insistence on majority rule as a condition for independence.
The Dominions Office was given a separate secretary of state in June 1930, though this was entirely for domestic political reasons given the need to relieve the burden on one ill minister whilst moving another away from unemployment policy.
The word ''Dominion'' has been used with other agencies, laws, and roles:
It also retired the name "Colonial Conference" and mandated that meetings take place regularly to consult Dominions in running the foreign affairs of the empire.
Dominion status was formally defined in the Balfour Declaration of 1926, which recognised these countries as "autonomous Communities within the British Empire", thus acknowledging them as political equals of the United Kingdom.
Canada's first permanent diplomatic mission to a foreign country opened in Washington, D.C., in 1927.
Most took the view that the declaration did not commit the Dominions.
The practice of appointing a High Commissioner instead of a diplomatic representative such as an ambassador for communication between the government of a dominion and the British government in London continues in respect of Commonwealth realms and republics as sovereign states.
Today Canada, Australia, New Zealand and the United Kingdom are sometimes referred to collectively as the "White Commonwealth".
Notable Canadian corporations and organizations (not affiliated with government) that have used ''Dominion'' as a part of their name have included:
The Balfour Declaration was enshrined in the Statute of Westminster 1931 when it was adopted by the British Parliament and subsequently ratified by the Dominion legislatures.
For decades, none of the Dominions was allowed to have its own embassies or consulates in foreign countries.
* Dominion Lands Act (1872): federal lands act; repealed in 1918
In 1972 it adopted a republican constitution to become the Free, Sovereign and Independent Republic of Sri Lanka.
The rise to the status of a Dominion and then full independence for Canada and other possessions of the British Empire did not occur by the granting of titles or similar recognition by the British Parliament but by initiatives taken by the new governments of certain former British dependencies to assert their independence and to establish constitutional precedents.
This was instituted by the British Parliament in the ''British North America Act 1867''.
The foundation of "Dominion" status followed the achievement of internal self-rule in British Colonies, in the specific form of full responsible government (as distinct from "representative government").
Under the second Balfour Declaration, the federal government was regarded as coequal with (and not subordinate to) the British and other Dominion governments, and this was given formal legal recognition in 1942 (when the ''Statute of Westminster'' was retroactively adopted to the commencement of the Second World War 1939).
Between these two extremes, New Zealand declared that as Britain was or would be at war, so it was too.
Continued as a Commonwealth realm until 1972 when it became a republic under the name of Sri Lanka
Following the recommendations of a Royal Commission, parliamentary government was suspended in 1934 due to severe financial difficulties resulting from the depression and a series of riots against the dominion government in 1932.
It was, and is, used to describe territories in which the monarch exercises sovereignty.
The hat will soon fit."
Following the Second Boer War (1899–1902), the British Empire assumed direct control of the Boer Republics, but transferred limited self-government to Transvaal in 1906, and the Orange River Colony in 1907.
Although the Dominions had had no formal voice in declaring war, each became a separate signatory of the June 1919 peace Treaty of Versailles, which had been negotiated by a British-led united Empire delegation.
For example, all transactions concerning visas and lost or stolen passports by citizens of the Dominions were carried out at British diplomatic offices.
* Dominion Astrophysical Observatory (1918–present); now part of the National Research Council Herzberg Institute of Astrophysics
Ultimately, "Canada's example of a peaceful accession to independence with a Westminster system of government came to be followed by 50 countries with a combined population of more than 2-billion people."
Canada, Australia, New Zealand, the Irish Free State, Newfoundland and South Africa (prior to becoming a republic and leaving the Commonwealth in 1961), with their large populations of European descent, were sometimes collectively referred to as the "White Dominions".
''Dominion'', as an official title, was conferred on the Colony of Virginia about 1660 and on the Dominion of New England in 1686.
Australia: "Oh his head is swelling rapidly.
Thus, for example, the British ''Ireland Act, 1949'', recognised that the Republic of Ireland had "ceased to be part of His Majesty’s dominions".
Ultimately, however, Ireland's Oireachtas passed the Republic of Ireland Act 1948, which came into force on 18 April 1949 and unequivocally ended Ireland's links with the British Monarch and the Commonwealth.
The creation of the short-lived Dominion of New England was designed—contrary to the purpose of later dominions—to increase royal control and to reduce the colony's self-government.
The First World War ended the purely colonial period in the history of the Dominions.
* Dominion Observatory (1905–1970): weather observatory in Ottawa; now used as Office of Energy Efficiency, Energy Branch, Natural Resources Canada
Nevertheless, the United Kingdom and other member states of the Commonwealth continued to regard Ireland as a dominion owing to the unusual role accorded to the British Monarch under the Irish External Relations Act of 1936.
This claim was recognised within the Empire by the creation of the Imperial War Cabinet in 1917, and within the community of nations by Dominion signatures to the Treaty of Versailles and by separate Dominion representation in the League of Nations.
Earlier usage of ''dominion'' to refer to a particular territory dates to the 16th century and was used to describe Wales from 1535 to 1801 and New England between 1686 and 1689.
* Dominion Stores, a supermarket chain founded in 1927; following a series of acquisitions the last Dominion stores were renamed as Metro stores in 2008
The self-governing colonies contributed significantly to British efforts to stem the insurrection, but ensured that they set the conditions for participation in these wars.
During the 1890s, the colonies voted to unite and in 1901 they were federated under the British Crown as the Commonwealth of Australia by the ''Commonwealth of Australia Constitution Act''.
The Balfour Declaration of 1926 recognised the Dominions as "autonomous Communities within the British Empire".
However, it was at the Colonial Conference of 1907 when the self-governing colonies of Canada and the Commonwealth of Australia were referred to collectively as ''Dominions'' for the first time.
Colonial governments repeatedly acted to ensure that they determined the extent of their peoples' participation in imperial wars in the military build-up to the First World War.
At the time of the founding of the League of Nations in 1924, the League Covenant made provision for the admission of any "fully self-governing state, Dominion, or Colony", the implication being that "Dominion status was something between that of a colony and a state".
Nonetheless, the federal government continues to produce publications and educational materials that specify the currency of these official titles.
Britain deemed her declaration of war against Germany in August 1914 to extend to all territories of the Empire without the need for consultation, occasioning some displeasure in Canadian official circles and contributing to a brief anti-British insurrection by Afrikaner militants in South Africa later that year.
Prince Edward Island followed in 1851, and New Brunswick and Newfoundland in 1855.
Ireland ceased to be a member of the Commonwealth on 18 April 1949, upon the coming into force of the Republic of Ireland Act 1948.
In any event, Newfoundland's letters patent of 1934 suspended self-government and instituted a "Commission of Government", which continued until Newfoundland became a province of Canada in 1949.
All except for Newfoundland and Prince Edward Island agreed to form a new federation named Canada from 1867.
New Zealand, Canada, and Newfoundland used the word dominion in the official title of the nation, whereas Australia used Commonwealth of Australia and South Africa Union of South Africa.
Use of ''dominion'' to refer to a particular territory dates back to the 16th century and was sometimes used to describe Wales from 1535 to around 1800: for instance, the Laws in Wales Act 1535 applies to "the Dominion, Principality and Country of Wales".
as a pretentious dwarf beneath a massive "dominion" top hat.
British legislative powers over Canadian domestic policy were largely theoretical and their exercise was increasingly unacceptable in the 1870s and 1880s.
The New Zealand Constitution Act 1852 gave New Zealand its own Parliament (General Assembly) and home rule in 1852.
Canada: "Rather large for him, is it not?"
The Constitution of Australia had been drafted in Australia and approved by popular consent.
The provinces had their own legislatures.
The Act also separated the Colony of Victoria (in 1851) from New South Wales.
What was significant about the creation of the Canadian and Australian federations was not that they were instantly granted wide new powers by the Imperial centre at the time of their creation; but that they, because of their greater size and prestige, were better able to exercise their existing powers and lobby for new ones than the various colonies they incorporated could have done separately.
Southern Rhodesia was formed in 1923 out of territories of the British South Africa Company and established as a self-governing colony with substantial autonomy on the model of the dominions.
* The Dominion Atlantic Railway, in Nova Scotia, formed by the 1894 merger of two railways; controlled by the Canadian Pacific Railway after 1911, shut down in 1994
In 1937 Ireland adopted, almost simultaneously, both a new constitution that included powers for a president of Ireland and a law confirming the king's role of head of state in external relations.
Official bilingualism laws also contributed to the disuse of ''dominion'', as it has no acceptable equivalent in French.
Heard went on to document the sizeable body of legislation passed by the British Parliament in the latter part of the 19th century that upheld and expanded its Imperial supremacy to constrain that of its colonies, including the new Dominion government in Canada.
Dominion status as self-governing states, as opposed to symbolic titles granted various British colonies, waited until 1919, when the self-governing Dominions signed the Treaty of Versailles independently of the British government and became individual members of the League of Nations.
Ireland chose to remain neutral.
It is the view of some constitutional lawyers that—although Newfoundland chose not to exercise all of the functions of a Dominion like Canada—its status as a Dominion was "suspended" in 1934, rather than "revoked" or "abolished".
** The Toronto-Dominion Bank, its successor since a 1955 merger with the Bank of Toronto; as of 2016 one of the country's major banks
Issues of colonial self-government spilled into foreign affairs with the Boer War (1899–1902).
However, provision was made in the Act for the Parliament of Northern Ireland to opt out of inclusion in the Irish Free State, which—as had been widely expected at the time—it duly did one day after the creation of the new state, on 7 December 1922.
''(See also: Canadian Confederation).''
The Irish Free State, set up in 1922 after the Anglo-Irish War, was the first Dominion to appoint a non-British, non-aristocratic Governor-General when Timothy Michael Healy took the position in 1922.
When the dominions were first treated as foreign countries by London for the purposes of diplomatic immunity in 1952, Southern Rhodesia was included in the list of territories concerned.
During 1856, responsible government was achieved by New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia, and Tasmania, and New Zealand.
Thus, recently, when referring to one of those sixteen countries within the Commonwealth of Nations that share the same monarch, the phrase ''Commonwealth realm'' has come into common usage instead of ''Dominion'' to differentiate the Commonwealth nations that continue to share the monarch as head of state (Australia, Canada, New Zealand, Jamaica, etc.)
Oliver Cromwell's full title in the 1650s was "Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, and the dominions thereto belonging".
This formally signalled the end of the former dependencies' common constitutional connection to the British crown.
Colonial responsible government began to emerge during the mid-19th century.
Indeed, in the original text of the Constitution Act, 1867, "One" and "Name" were also capitalised.
In spite of popular opinions of empires, the larger Dominions were reluctant to leave the protection of the then-superpower.
They included Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Newfoundland, South Africa, and the Irish Free State, and then from the late 1940s also India, Pakistan, and Ceylon (now Sri Lanka).
The last country officially made a Dominion was Ceylon in 1948.
There were soon signs of growing independence from the other Dominions: Australia opened a diplomatic mission in the US in 1940, as did New Zealand in 1941, and Canada's mission in Washington gained embassy status in 1943.
All matters concerning international travel, commerce, etc., had to be transacted through British embassies and consulates.
The phrase ''Dominion of Canada'' does not appear in the 1867 act nor in the Constitution Act, 1982, but does appear in the Constitution Act, 1871, other contemporaneous texts, and subsequent bills.
When dependent territories that had never been annexed (that is, were not colonies of the Crown), but were mandates, protectorates or trust territories (of the United Nations or the former League of Nations) were granted independence, the United Kingdom act granting independence always declared that such and such a territory "shall form part of Her Majesty's dominions", and so become part of the territory in which the Queen exercises sovereignty, not merely suzerainty.
References to the ''Dominion of Canada'' in later acts, such as the Statute of Westminster, do not clarify the point because all nouns were formally capitalised in British legislative style.
The Union of South Africa was referred to as a Dominion upon its creation in 1910.
After protracted negotiations (that initially included New Zealand), six Australian colonies with responsible government (and their dependent territories) agreed to federate, along Canadian lines, becoming the Commonwealth of Australia, in 1901.
London regarded this declaration as illegal, and applied sanctions and expelled Rhodesia from the sterling area.
It also describes a model of governance in newly independent British colonies, featuring a Westminster parliamentary government and the British monarch as head of state:
The Dominions Section of the Colonial Office was upgraded in June 1926 to a separate Dominions Office; however, initially, this office was held by the same person that held the office of Secretary of State for the Colonies.
Australian Prime Minister John Curtin's unprecedented action (February 1942) in successfully countermanding an order from British Prime Minister Winston Churchill that Australian troops be diverted to defend British-held Burma (the 7th Division was then en route from the Middle East to Australia to defend against an expected Japanese invasion) demonstrated that Dominion governments might no longer subordinate their own national interests to British strategic perspectives.
In South Africa, the Cape Colony became the first British self-governing Colony, in 1872.
This ended the purely colonial status of the dominions.
Initially, the Dominions conducted their own trade policy, some limited foreign relations and had autonomous armed forces, although the British government claimed and exercised the exclusive power to declare wars.
In 1931 the Statute of Westminster recognized the Dominions as sovereign from the United Kingdom (but not the Empire), with which they shared a common allegiance to the Crown, common citizenship and coherent foreign and defence and (in lesser extent) economic and fiscal policy.
The Union of South Africa was formed in 1910 from the four self-governing colonies of the Cape Colony, Natal, the Transvaal, and the Orange Free State (the last two were former Boer republics).
In 1660, King Charles II gave the Colony of Virginia the title of ''dominion'' in gratitude for Virginia's loyalty to the Crown during the English Civil War.
A Canadian War Mission in Washington, D.C., dealt with supply matters from February 1918 to March 1921.
A Dominions section was created within the Colonial Office for this purpose in 1907.
Significantly, Britain initiated the change to complete sovereignty for the Dominions.
In 1930, the Australian prime minister, James Scullin, reinforced the right of the overseas Dominions to appoint native-born governors-general, when he advised King George V to appoint Sir Isaac Isaacs as his representative in Australia, against the wishes of the opposition and officials in London.
In connection with proposals for the future government of British North America, use of the term "Dominion" was suggested by Samuel Leonard Tilley at the London Conference of 1866 discussing the confederation of the Province of Canada (subsequently becoming the Province of Ontario and the Province of Quebec), Nova Scotia and New Brunswick into "One '''''Dominion''''' under the Name of Canada", the first federation internal to the British Empire.
Many distinctive characteristics that once pertained only to Dominions are now shared by other states in the Commonwealth, whether republics, independent realms, associated states or territories.
By a new constitution in 1978, it became the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.
Two other self-governing colonies—New Zealand and Newfoundland—were granted the status of Dominion in the same year.
In 1928, Canada obtained the appointment of a British high commissioner in Ottawa, separating the administrative and diplomatic functions of the governor-general and ending the latter's anomalous role as the representative of the British government in relations between the two countries.
These were followed by the Union of South Africa in 1910 and the Irish Free State in 1922.
* The Dominion Institute, created in 1997 to promote awareness of Canadian history and national identity
After World War II, with ''de facto'' dissolution of political ties between United Kingdom and the Dominions, creation of separate citizenships and conversion of the Commonwealth of Nations into a largely non-political organization, the Dominions became fully independent and became known after the year 1953 as Commonwealth realms.
Defenders of the title ''Dominion''—including monarchists who see signs of creeping republicanism in Canada—take comfort in the fact that the Constitution Act, 1982 does not mention and therefore does not remove the title, and that a constitutional amendment is required to change it.
The principle of Dominion equality with Britain and independence in foreign relations was formally recognised by the Balfour Declaration, adopted at the Imperial Conference of November 1926.
Southern Rhodesia was not one of the territories that were mentioned in the 1931 Statute of Westminster although relations with Southern Rhodesia were administered in London through the Dominion Office, not the Colonial Office.
''The Surprise Packet:''
* Dominion of Canada Rifle Association founded in 1868 and incorporated by an Act of Parliament in 1890
They provided a new model which politicians in New Zealand, Newfoundland, South Africa, Ireland, India, Malaysia could point to for their own relationship with Britain.
This also reflected the change from ''Dominion'' to ''realm''; in the proclamation of Queen Elizabeth II's new titles in 1953, the phrase "of her other Realms and Territories" replaced "Dominion" with another mediaeval French word with the same connotation, "realm" (from ''royaume'').
* Dominion Carillonneur: official responsible for playing the carillons at the Peace Tower since 1916
The legislatures of Colonies with responsible government were able to make laws in all matters other than foreign affairs, defence and international trade, these being powers which remained with the Parliament of the United Kingdom.
Britain's declaration of hostilities against Nazi Germany on 3 September 1939 tested the issue.
The term "realm" does not appear in the Canadian constitution.
This was, however, a matter of political choice rather than legal necessity.
To ensure that Australia had full legal power to act independently, particularly in relation to foreign affairs, defence industry and military operations, and to validate its past independent action in these areas, Australia formally adopted the Statute of Westminster in October 1942 and backdated the adoption to the start of the war in September 1939.
The Commonwealth of Australia was recognised as a dominion in 1901, and the Dominion of New Zealand and the Dominion of Newfoundland were officially given Dominion status in 1907, followed by the Union of South Africa in 1910.
The term "Dominion" is still found in the Canadian constitution where it appears numerous times, but it is largely a vestige of the past, as the Canadian government does not actively use it (''see Canada section'').
While the term may be found in older official documents, and the Dominion Carillonneur still tolls at Parliament Hill, it is now hardly used to distinguish the federal government from the provinces or (historically) Canada before and after 1867.
from those that do not (India, Pakistan, South Africa, etc.).
In the changed post-Second World War conditions this proved a transitory stage, and India became a republic in 1950 and Pakistan adopted a republican form of government in 1956.
Ceylon, which, as a crown colony, was originally promised "fully responsible status within the British Commonwealth of Nations", was formally granted independence as a Dominion in 1948.
The Statute of Westminster 1931 converted this status into legal reality, making them essentially independent members of what was then called the ''British Commonwealth''.
The last major change was renaming the national holiday from Dominion Day to Canada Day in 1982.
Usage of the phrase ''Dominion of Canada'' was employed as the country's name after 1867, predating the general use of the term ''dominion'' as applied to the other autonomous regions of the British Empire after 1907.
Initially, the Foreign Office of the United Kingdom conducted the foreign relations of the Dominions.
The Colony of New Zealand, which chose not to take part in Australian federation, became the Dominion of New Zealand on 26 September 1907; Newfoundland became a Dominion on the same day.
The conditions under which the four separate Australian colonies—New South Wales, Tasmania, Western Australia, South Australia—and New Zealand could gain full responsible government were set out by the British government in the ''Australian Constitutions Act 1850''.
Rhodesia continued with its dominion-style constitution until 1970, and continued to issue British passports to its citizens.
In 1949, it joined Canada and the legislature was restored.
In September 1922, Dominion reluctance to support British military action against Turkey influenced Britain's decision to seek a compromise settlement.
From 1870 the Dominion included two vast neighbouring British territories that did not have any form of self-government: Rupert's Land and the North-Western Territory, parts of which later became the Provinces of Manitoba, Saskatchewan, Alberta, and the separate territories, the Northwest Territories, Yukon and Nunavut.
However, neither the Confederation nor the adoption of the title of "Dominion" granted extra autonomy or new powers to this new federal level of government.
In 1961, the Union of South Africa adopted a new constitution, became a republic, left the Commonwealth (and re-joined following end of Apartheid rule in the 1990s), and became the present-day Republic of South Africa.
In 1907 New Zealand was proclaimed the Dominion of New Zealand.
Senator Eugene Forsey wrote that the powers acquired since the 1840s that established the system of responsible government in Canada would simply be transferred to the new Dominion government:
Under the British North America Act 1867, what is now eastern Canada received the status of "Dominion" upon the Confederation of several British possessions in North America.
The governments of the States (called colonies before 1901) remained under the Commonwealth but retained links to the UK until the passage of the ''Australia Act 1986''.
The Commonwealth of Virginia, a State of the United States, still has "the Old Dominion" as one of its nicknames.
(Until 1893, the Cape Colony also controlled the separate Colony of Natal.)
