The Dominican Republic has the ninth largest economy in Latin America and is the largest economy in the Caribbean and Central American region.
A large Dominican diaspora exists, mostly in the United States.
In 2012 there were approximately 1.7 million people of Dominican descent in the U.S., counting both native- and foreign-born.
Lately, with the rise in tourism and increasing popularity as a Caribbean vacation destination, architects in the Dominican Republic have now begun to incorporate cutting-edge designs that emphasize luxury.
The armed forces have organized a Specialized Airport Security Corps (CESA) and a Specialized Port Security Corps (CESEP) to meet international security needs in these areas.
Salcedo, their home province, changed its name to Provincia Hermanas Mirabal (Mirabal Sisters Province).
France created a wealthy colony Saint-Domingue there, while the Spanish colony suffered an economic decline.
In a 2013 news story, Reuters reported, "The September 23 court ruling retroactively denies Dominican nationality to anyone born after 1929 who does not have at least one parent of Dominican blood or legal resident of the Dominican Republic, under a constitutional clause declaring all others to be either in the country illegally or "in transit."
The country's area is reported variously as  (by the embassy in the United States) and , making it the second largest country in the Antilles, after Cuba.
It is an upper middle-income developing country, with a 2015 GDP per capita of $14,770, in PPP terms.
Some well known merengue performers are Wilfrido Vargas, Johnny Ventura, singer/songwriter Los Hermanos Rosario, Juan Luis Guerra, Fernando Villalona, Eddy Herrera, Sergio Vargas, Toño Rosario, Milly Quezada, and Chichí Peralta.
Economic growth takes place in spite of a chronic energy shortage, which causes frequent blackouts and very high prices.
Later there were Jewish migrants coming from Iberia and Europe in the 1700s.
The United States agreed to use part of the customs proceeds to reduce the immense foreign debt of the Dominican Republic and assumed responsibility for said debt.
Haiti did not recognize the Dominican Republic until 1874.
Many emigrated to Cuba, Puerto Rico (these two being Spanish possessions at the time), or Gran Colombia, usually with the encouragement of Haitian officials who acquired their lands.
The court "alone hears actions against the president, designated members of his Cabinet, and members of Congress when the legislature is in session."
Letters of protest were sent against the mass arrests of government adversaries.
The Dominican peso (DOP, or RD$) is the national currency, with the United States dollar (USD), the Canadian dollar (CAD), and euros (EUR) also accepted at most tourist sites.
The Dominican Republic celebrates Dia de la Altagracia on January 21 in honor of its patroness, Duarte's Day on January 26 in honor of one of its founding fathers, Independence Day on February 27, Restoration Day on August 16, ''Virgen de las Mercedes'' on September 24, and Constitution Day on November 6.
In the national anthem of the Dominican Republic () the term "Dominican" never appears.
Other important lakes are Laguna de Rincón or Cabral, with fresh water, and Laguna de Oviedo, a lagoon with brackish water.
14 in the world for resource mismanagement.
Upon this, the U.S. eased travel restrictions, making it easier for Dominicans to obtain U.S. visas.
A mission based in the United States has been helping to combat AIDS in the country.
+ Mother tongue of the Dominican population, 1950 Census
The largest lake is Enriquillo, a salt lake at  below sea level, the lowest point in the Caribbean.
Trujillo began a campaign against the Catholic Church and planned to arrest priests and bishops who preached against the government.
In fact, the original name for the genre was ''amargue'' ("bitterness," or "bitter music," or blues music), until the rather ambiguous (and mood-neutral) term ''bachata'' became popular.
It is often used in songs as another name for the country.
As a result, hundreds of thousands of Haitians have migrated to the Dominican Republic, with some estimates of 800,000 Haitians in the country, while others put the Haitian-born population as high as one million.
The Dominican Republic has Latin America's third best transportation infrastructure.
A few other small coastal plains are in the northern coast and in the Pedernales Peninsula.
The first recorded smallpox outbreak in the Americas occurred on Hispaniola in 1507.
In addition, it borrowed words from indigenous Caribbean languages particular to the island of Hispaniola.
The emergence of ''bachata'', along with an increase in the number of Dominicans living among other Latino groups in New York, New Jersey, and Florida, has contributed to Dominican music's overall growth in popularity.
In contrast neighboring Haiti has an HIV/AIDS rate more than double that of the Dominican Republic.
In the 20th century, many Arabs (from Lebanon, Syria, and Palestine), Japanese, and, to a lesser degree, Koreans settled in the country as agricultural laborers and merchants.
The second line, which opened in April 2013, is meant to relieve the congestion along the Duarte-Kennedy-Centenario Corridor in the city from west to east.
Utilizing mud, thatched roofs, and mahogany trees, they gave buildings and the furniture inside a natural look, seamlessly blending in with the island’s surroundings.
The Dominican National Police force contains 32,000 agents.
Olympic gold medalist and world champion hurdler Félix Sánchez hails from the Dominican Republic, as does NFL defensive end Luis Castillo.
Dominican rock is also popular.
Haiti's constitution forbade white elites from owning land, and Dominican major landowning families were forcibly deprived of their properties.
Tourism is one of the fueling factors in the Dominican Republic's economic growth.
Children of illegal Haitian immigrants are often stateless and denied services, as their parents are denied Dominican nationality, being deemed transient residents due to their illegal or undocumented status; the children, though often eligible for Haitian nationality, are denied it by Haiti because of a lack of proper documents or witnesses.
The Artibonito is the longest river of Hispaniola and flows westward into Haiti.
The ''Llano Costero del Caribe'' ("Caribbean Coastal Plain") is the largest of the plains in the Dominican Republic.
Remnants of the Taino culture include their cave paintings, as well as pottery designs which are still used in the small artisan village of Higüerito, Moca.
As Toussaint Louverture had done two decades earlier, the Haitians abolished slavery.
Today, emigration from the Dominican Republic remains high.
Of this number approximately 38,272 were white landowners, 38,000 were free mixed people of color, and some 15,000 were slaves.
During the late 1960s Dominican musicians like Johnny Pacheco, creator of the Fania All Stars, played a significant role in the development and popularization of the genre.
The flag has a large white cross that divides it into four quarters.
By the end of his first term in 1934 he was the country's wealthiest person, and one of the wealthiest in the world by the early 1950s; near the end of his regime his fortune was an estimated $800 million.
Baseball is by far the most popular sport in the Dominican Republic.
The Dominican Republic responded with increased efforts to seize drug shipments, arrest and extradite those involved, and combat money-laundering.
Haiti's per capita GDP (PPP) was $1,300 in 2008, or less than one-sixth of the Dominican figure.
Many dishes are made with ''sofrito'', which is a mix of local herbs used as a wet rub for meats and sautéed to bring out all of a dish's flavors.
During the election campaign, Trujillo used the army to unleash his repression, forcing his opponents to withdraw from the race.
The Dominican Republic's economic progress is exemplified by its advanced telecommunication system and transportation infrastructure.
The last meal of the day, which is dinner, is usually served by 5:30 or 6 p.m.
This is part of the regional eLAC2010 plan.
Religious tension between Catholics and Protestants in the country has been rare.
In the rural and rugged mountainous areas, the Haitian administration was usually too inefficient to enforce its own laws.
Snowfall can be seen in rare occasions on the summit of Pico Duarte.
Tourism, American pop culture, the influence of Dominican Americans, and the country's economic ties with the United States motivate other Dominicans to learn English.
After more than three hundred years of Spanish rule the Dominican Republic people declared independence in November 1821.
The first of three late-20th century emigration waves began in 1961 after the assassination of dictator Trujillo, due to fear of retaliation by Trujillo's allies and political uncertainty in general.
As with the culture as a whole, contemporary architects embrace the Dominican Republic's rich history and various cultures to create something new.
He finally negotiated an undisputed border with Haiti in 1935 and achieved the end of the 50-year customs agreement in 1941, instead of 1956.
The island became the site of the first permanent European settlement in the Americas; and the oldest continuously inhabited city and the first seat of the Spanish colonial rule in the New World.
The recent investment in a "Santo Domingo-Santiago Electrical Highway" to carry 345&nbsp;kW power, with reduced losses in transmission, is being heralded as a major capital improvement to the national grid since the mid-1960s.
Projects to extend Wi-Fi hot spots have been made in Santo Domingo.
In 1937, he ordered what became known as the Parsley Massacre or, in the Dominican Republic, as ''El Corte'' (The Cutting), directing the army to kill Haitians living on the Dominican side of the border.
This campaign ended before it was put into place, with his assassination.
In February 1930, when Vásquez attempted to win another term, his opponents rebelled in secret alliance with the commander of the National Army (the former National Guard), General Rafael Leonidas Trujillo Molina.
International migration affects the Dominican Republic greatly, as it receives and sends large flows of migrants.
It is the most extensive metro system in the insular Caribbean and Central American region by length and number of stations.
The Dominican Republic became the second country in Latin America to have 4G LTE wireless service.
In many ways an architectural playground, villas and hotels implement new styles, while offering new takes on the old.
Some generating companies are undercapitalized and at times unable to purchase adequate fuel supplies.
To avoid leaving evidence of the army's involvement, the soldiers used machetes rather than bullets.
Eastwards, France continued to rule Spanish Santo Domingo.
The white cross symbolizes the struggle of the liberators to bequeath future generations a free nation.
A new generation was thence in charge, with the passing of Santana (he died in 1864) and Báez from the scene.
The fierce Caribs drove the Taíno to the northeastern Caribbean during much of the 15th century.
After the 1844 victory in the Dominican War of Independence against Haitian rule the country fell under Spanish colonial rule —the only nation in the hemisphere to do so after gaining its independence.
The communications sector generates about 3.0% of the GDP.
To the north, at distances of , are three extensive, largely submerged banks, which geographically are a southeast continuation of the Bahamas: Navidad Bank, Silver Bank, and Mouchoir Bank.
GDP growth in 2014 and 2015 reached 7.3 and 7.0%, respectively, the highest in the Western Hemisphere.
The author of its lyrics, Emilio Prud'Homme, consistently uses the poetic term '''', that is, "Quisqueyans."
For heartier versions, ''mangú'' is accompanied by deep-fried meat (Dominican salami, typically) and/or cheese.
As the rebels marched toward Santo Domingo, Vásquez ordered Trujillo to suppress them.
In the early 1980s, underemployment, inflation, and the rise in value of the dollar all contributed to a third wave of emigration from the Dominican Republic.
Bachata, a form of music and dance that originated in the countryside and rural marginal neighborhoods of the Dominican Republic, has become quite popular in recent years.
They are the descendants of formerly enslaved African Americans who arrived in the nineteenth century, but only a few elders speak the language today.
The architecture in the Dominican Republic represents a complex blend of diverse cultures.
The U.S. believed Trujillo was the lesser of two or more evils.
This time the PRD presented ex-president Hipolito Mejia as its choice.
The victor was former president (1902–03) Horacio Vásquez Lajara, who had cooperated with the U.S.
They were backed by Pedro Santana, a wealthy cattle rancher from El Seibo, who became general of the army of the nascent republic.
There was considerable economic growth during Rafael Trujillo's long and iron-fisted regime, although a great deal of the wealth was taken by the dictator and other regime elements.
Haitians burn wood charcoal for 60% of their domestic energy production.
The last record of pure Taínos in the country was from 1864.
Some scholars believe that las Casas exaggerated the Indian population decline in an effort to persuade King Carlos to intervene and that ''encomenderos'' also exaggerated it, in order to receive permission to import more African slaves.
The coat of arms pictures a red, white, and blue flag-draped shield with a Bible, a gold cross, and arrows; the shield is surrounded by an olive branch (on the left) and a palm branch (on the right).
According to the 2005 Annual Report of the United Nations Subcommittee on Human Development in the Dominican Republic, the country is ranked No.
Surveying modern villas, one can find any combination of the three major styles: a villa may contain angular, modernist building construction, Spanish Colonial-style arched windows, and a traditional Taino hammock in the bedroom balcony.
The often light treatment of violent criminals has been a continuous source of local controversy.
Some converted Sephardic Jews from Spain were part of early expeditions; only Catholics were allowed to come to the New World.
The occupation regime kept most Dominican laws and institutions and largely pacified the general population.
Also, the Santiago light rail system is in planning stages but currently on hold.
An alternate interpretation is that blue represents the ideals of progress and liberty, whereas white symbolizes peace and unity among Dominicans.
The Dominican Republic is current on foreign private debt.
Since Haiti was unable to adequately provision its army, the occupying forces largely survived by commandeering or confiscating food and supplies at gunpoint.
Other important cities are: Santiago de los Caballeros ( 745,293), La Romana (pop.
This period is also known as the Ephemeral independence.
Many whites fled Santo Domingo for Puerto Rico and Cuba (both still under Spanish rule), Venezuela, and elsewhere.
Heureaux became rampantly despotic and unpopular.
Dominican Republic is located near fault action in the Caribbean.
The average wage in nominal terms is $388 USD per month ($17,829 DOP).
Santo Domingo, the capital, is designated Distrito Nacional (National District).
U.S. mediation by the William Howard Taft and Woodrow Wilson administrations achieved only a short respite each time.
Its subjects are often romantic; especially prevalent are tales of heartbreak and sadness.
This was a time of economic troubles.
In 2008, Fernández was as elected for a third term.
The Taínos nearly disappeared, above all, from European infectious diseases to which they had no immunity.
As a result of the massacre, the Dominican Republic agreed to pay Haiti US$750,000, later reduced to US$525,000.
A civil war in 1965, the country's last, was ended by U.S. military occupation and was followed by the authoritarian rule of Joaquín Balaguer, 1966–1978.
Meals tend to favor meats and starches over dairy products and vegetables.
The contest was won by Medina with 51.21% of the vote, against 46.95% in favor of Mejia.
Actual active duty strength is approximately 32,000.
On the other hand, his administrations have been accused of corruption.
The recently freed Africans led by Toussaint Louverture in 1801, took over Santo Domingo in the east, thus gaining control of the entire island.
The Dominican Republic is the most popular tourist destination in the Caribbean.
The colony of Santo Domingo saw a spectacular population increase during the 17th century, as it rose from some 6,000 in 1637 to about 91,272 in 1750.
U.S. President Grant desired a naval base at Samaná and also a place for resettling newly freed Blacks.
He made the country debt-free in 1947.
In the first half of 2016 the Dominican economy grew 7.4%.
The military government established by the U.S., led by Vice Admiral Harry Shepard Knapp, was widely repudiated by the Dominicans, with many factions within the country leading guerrilla campaigns against U.S. forces.
Radio, television, and international media popularized it further.
English and French buccaneers settled in northwestern Hispaniola coast and, after years of struggles with the French, Spain ceded the western coast of the island to France with the 1697 Treaty of Ryswick, whilst the Central Plateau remained under Spanish domain.
Although the coverage of improved water sources and improved sanitation is with 86% respectively 83% relatively high, there are substantial regional differences.
Many Puerto Rican immigrants settled in Higüey, among other cities, and quickly assimilated due to similar culture.
He claimed the land for Spain and named it ''La Española'', because the diverse climate and terrain reminded him of the country.
A blue ribbon above the shield reads, "Dios, Patria, Libertad" (meaning "God, Fatherland, Liberty").
There were 2,439,997 Internet users in March 2009.
Trujillo was assassinated on May 30, 1961.
Báez was toppled in 1874, returned, and was toppled for good in 1878.
One has breakfast, which can be served 8-9 a.m. Then there is lunch, which is usually the heaviest meal of the day and is usually served at noon sharp.
Two other national highways serve as spur (DR-5) or alternate routes (DR-4).
On November 25, 1960, Trujillo killed three of the four Mirabal sisters, nicknamed ''Las Mariposas'' (The Butterflies).
The national bird is the ''Cigua Palmera'' or Palmchat ("Dulus dominicus").
Toussaint Louverture’s lieutenants and the spread of yellow fever succeeded in driving the French again from Saint-Domingue, which in 1804 the rebels made independent as the Republic of Haiti.
The annual average temperature is .
The country has a baseball league of six teams.
Its roots are in the Congo region of central-west Africa, but it is mixed with European influences in the melodies.
The result was several years of great political instability and civil war.
Preschool education is not mandatory except for the last year.
There is a Korean population of 500.
Self-identified Jews number about 3,000; other Dominicans may have some Jewish ancestry because of marriages among converted Jewish Catholics and other Dominicans since the colonial years.
The western three-eighths of the island is occupied by the nation of Haiti, making Hispaniola one of two Caribbean islands, along with Saint Martin, that are shared by two countries.
Haitian Creole is the largest minority language in the Dominican Republic and is spoken by Haitian immigrants and their descendants.
Despite these efforts, many secondary routes still remain either unpaved or in need of maintenance.
However, the relative calm over which he presided allowed improvement in the Dominican economy.
The Spaniards arrived in 1492.
Boyer's occupation troops, who were largely Dominicans, were unpaid and had to "forage and sack" from Dominican civilians.
A United States occupation lasted eight years between 1916 and 1924, and a subsequent calm and prosperous six-year period under Horacio Vásquez Lajara was followed by the dictatorship of Rafael Leónidas Trujillo Molina until 1961.
Candidate Guillermo Moreno obtained 1.37% of the votes.
In 1808, following Napoleon's invasion of Spain, the ''criollos'' of Santo Domingo revolted against French rule and, with the aid of the United Kingdom (Spain's ally) returned Santo Domingo to Spanish control.
U.S. Marines landed on May 16, 1916, and had control of the country two months later.
At higher elevations the temperature averages  while near sea level the average temperature is .
"Lilís," as the new president was nicknamed, enjoyed a period of popularity.
The Dominican Republic has a noted problem of child labor in its coffee, rice, sugarcane, and tomato industries.
As of February 2015 the rate was 44.67 pesos per dollar.
The Dominican Republic has historically granted extensive religious freedom.
Basketball also enjoys a relatively high level of popularity.
Almost 95% of usage was not billed at all.
The army killed an estimated 17,000 to 35,000 Haitians over six days, from the night of October 2, 1937, through October 8, 1937.
It gradually bends southwards and finishes near the town of Azua, on the Caribbean coast.
By 1492 the island was divided into five Taíno chiefdoms.
The Dominican Republic's population was 9,760,000 in 2007.
There are many privately owned bus companies, such as Metro Servicios Turísticos and Caribe Tours, that run daily routes.
The electricity sector is highly politicized.
The Mirabals had communist ideological leanings as did their husbands.
In 2013, the Dominican team went undefeated ''en route'' to winning the World Baseball Classic.
Though long known for agriculture and mining, the economy is now dominated by services.
There have been accusations that some Haitian immigrants work in slavery-like conditions and are severely exploited.
Threatening the nation's independence were renewed Haitian invasions occurring in 1844, 1845–49, 1849–55, and 1855–56.
It can also be observed on buildings that contain stucco exteriors, arched doors and windows, and red tiled roofs.
Dengue fever has become endemic to the republic, cases of malaria, and Zika virus.
Nevertheless, unemployment, government corruption, and inconsistent electric service remain major Dominican problems.
Money-laundering via the Dominican Republic is favored by Colombian drug cartels for the ease of illicit financial transactions.
Over time, it has been influenced by merengue and by a variety of Latin American guitar styles.
Juan Marichal and Pedro Martinez are the only Dominican-born players in the Baseball Hall of Fame.
The Taíno people relied heavily on the mahogany and guano (dried palm tree leaf) to put together crafts, artwork, furniture, and houses.
The southern coastal plains and the Cibao Valley are the most densely populated areas of the country.
In April 1965, after 19 months of military rule, a pro-Bosch revolt broke out.
Cable Internet and DSL are available in most parts of the country, and many Internet service providers offer 3G wireless internet service.
