By offering the consulship to potential opponents, Domitian may have wanted to compromise these senators in the eyes of their supporters.
As early as 82, or possibly 83, he went to Gaul, ostensibly to conduct a census, and suddenly ordered an attack on the Chatti.
The following day, 14 September, the Senate confirmed Domitian's powers, granting tribunician power, the office of Pontifex Maximus, and the titles of ''Augustus'', and ''Pater Patriae''.
During the night, he was joined by his relatives, including Domitian.
According to Cassius Dio, the conspirators approached Nerva as a potential successor prior to the assassination, suggesting that he was at least aware of the plot.
A highly detailed account of the plot and the assassination is provided by Suetonius, who alleges that Domitian's chamberlain Parthenius was the chief instigator behind the conspiracy, citing the recent execution of Domitian's secretary Epaphroditus as the primary motive.
With the return of Vespasian in late September, his political role was rendered all but obsolete and Domitian withdrew from government devoting his time to arts and literature.
It is not known what the boy's name was, but he died in childhood in 83.
Much more than a "gloomy coda to the...1st century" the Roman Empire prospered between 81 and 96, in a reign that Theodor Mommsen described as the sombre but intelligent despotism of Domitian.
Fuscus successfully drove the Dacians back across the border in mid-85, prompting Domitian to return to Rome and celebrate his second triumph.
Coinage from this era displays a highly consistent degree of quality including meticulous attention to Domitian's titulature and refined artwork on the reverse portraits.
The city and temple of Jerusalem were completely destroyed, its most valuable treasures carried off by the Roman army, and nearly 100,000 people were captured and enslaved.
In 87, Vestal Virgins were found to have broken their sacred vows of lifelong public chastity.
The military campaigns undertaken during Domitian's reign were generally defensive in nature, as the Emperor rejected the idea of expansionist warfare.
Among the most important new structures were an odeon, a stadium, and an expansive palace on the Palatine Hill known as the Flavian Palace, which was designed by Domitian's master architect Rabirius.
Much more than a renovation project, Domitian's building program was intended to be the crowning achievement of an Empire-wide cultural renaissance.
The governor of Germania Inferior, Lappius Maximus, moved to the region at once, assisted by the procurator of Rhaetia, Titus Flavius Norbanus.
Rather than continue his campaign, Vespasian decided to await further orders and send Titus to greet the new Emperor.
By a stroke of luck, a thaw prevented the Chatti from crossing the Rhine and coming to Saturninus' aid.
Around fifty structures were erected, restored or completed, achievements second only to those of Augustus.
The mutinous legions were sent to the front in Illyricum, while those who had assisted in their defeat were duly rewarded.
As Emperor, he saw himself as the new Augustus, an enlightened despot destined to guide the Roman Empire into a new era of Flavian renaissance.
His consulship may therefore have been intended to emphasize the stability and status quo of the regime.
The ''Fasti Ostienses'', the Ostian Calendar, records that the same day the Senate proclaimed Marcus Cocceius Nerva emperor.
Titus Petronius Secundus and Parthenius were sought out and killed.
He received the education of a young man of the privileged senatorial class, studying rhetoric and literature.
Strict control was also maintained over the young Caesar's entourage, promoting away Flavian generals such as Arrius Varus and Antonius Primus and replacing them by more reliable men such as Arrecinus Clemens.
With four legions at his disposal, Vespasian commanded a strength of nearly 80,000 soldiers.
Yet the order of the Senate was only partially executed in Rome, and wholly disregarded in most of the provinces outside Italy.
At the time of Domitian's accession the city was still suffering from the damage caused by the Great Fire of 64, the civil war of 69 and the fire in 79.
As a consequence, the anti-Domitianic tradition was already well established by the end of the 2nd century, and by the 3rd century, even expanded upon by early Church historians, who identified Domitian as an early persecutor of Christians, such as in the Acts of John.
In 85, Agricola was recalled to Rome by Domitian, having served for more than six years as governor, longer than normal for consular legates during the Flavian era.
The revolt had been suppressed and the Empire returned to order.
He appears to have lacked the natural charisma of his brother and father.
By all accounts, Mucianus held the real power in Vespasian's absence and he was careful to ensure that Domitian, still only eighteen years old, did not overstep the boundaries of his function.
Before reaching Italy, Titus learnt that Galba had been murdered and replaced by Otho, the governor of Lusitania (modern Portugal).
According to Suetonius, some were convicted for corruption or treason, others on trivial charges, which Domitian justified through his suspicion:
In accordance with an astrological prediction the Emperor believed that he would die around noon, and was therefore restless during this time of the day.
Reinforcements were needed, and in 87 or 88, Domitian ordered a large-scale strategic withdrawal of troops in the British province.
Construction projects such as these constituted only the most visible part of Domitian's religious policy, which also concerned itself with the fulfilment of religious law and public morals.
Modern history has refuted these claims, suggesting these stories later circulated under Flavian rule as part of a propaganda campaign to diminish success under the less reputable Emperors of the Julio-Claudian dynasty and to maximize achievements under Emperor Claudius (41–54) and his son Britannicus.
The goddess he worshipped the most zealously, however, was Minerva.
His harshness was felt by only a small, but highly vocal minority, who later exaggerated his despotism in favour of the well-regarded Nervan-Antonian dynasty that followed.
Ancient authors have implicated Domitian in the death of his brother, either by directly accusing him of murder, or implying he left the ailing Titus for dead, even alleging that during his lifetime, Domitian was openly plotting against his brother.
By 84, Domitia had returned to the palace, where she lived for the remainder of Domitian's reign without incident.
By the time he was 6 years old, Domitian's mother and sister had long since died, while his father and brother were continuously active in the Roman military, commanding armies in Germania and Judaea.
Whereas his father and brother had concentrated consular power largely in the hands of the Flavian family, Domitian admitted a surprisingly large number of provincials and potential opponents to the consulship, allowing them to head the official calendar by opening the year as an ordinary consul.
Domitian also revived the practice of the imperial cult, which had fallen somewhat out of use under Vespasian.
Tacitus derided Domitian's victory against the Chatti as a "mock triumph", and criticized his decision to retreat in Britain following the conquests of Agricola.
The other major expense was the extensive reconstruction of Rome.
Some rulers handled this arrangement with less subtlety than others.
Tensions among the Flavian troops ran high but so long as either Galba or Otho remained in power, Vespasian refused to take action.
Above all, however, Domitian valued loyalty and malleability in those he assigned to strategic posts, qualities he found more often in men of the equestrian order than in members of the Senate or his own family, whom he regarded with suspicion, and promptly removed from office if they disagreed with imperial policy.
Vespasian accepted and entered an alliance with Gaius Licinius Mucianus, the governor of Syria, against Vitellius.
According to Suetonius, a number of omens had foretold Domitian's death.
As a consequence, Domitian was popular with the people and army but considered a tyrant by members of the Roman Senate.
On the morning of 18 December, the emperor appeared to deposit the imperial insignia at the Temple of Concord but at the last minute retraced his steps to the Imperial palace.
By marrying Vespasia Polla he allied the Flavian family to the more prestigious ''gens Vespasia'', ensuring the elevation of his sons Titus Flavius Sabinus II and Vespasian to senatorial rank.
Nevertheless, several important wars were fought in Gaul, against the Chatti, and across the Danube frontier against the Suebi, the Sarmatians, and the Dacians.
In his biography in the ''Lives of the Twelve Caesars'', Suetonius attests to Domitian's ability to quote the important poets and writers such as Homer or Virgil on appropriate occasions, and describes him as a learned and educated adolescent, with elegant conversation.
Indeed, by the age of eighteen nearly all of his closest relatives had died by war or disease.
Accordingly, those found guilty of any such transgression were condemned to death, either by a manner of their choosing, or according to the ancient fashion, which dictated that Vestals should be buried alive.
The most important of these was ''The Emperor Domitian'', by Brian W. Jones.
Although Tacitus is usually considered to be the most reliable author of this era, his views on Domitian are complicated by the fact that his father-in-law, Gnaeus Julius Agricola, may have been a personal enemy of the Emperor.
Almost simultaneously the Senate had declared Galba, then governor of Hispania Tarraconensis (modern northern Spain), as Emperor of Rome.
With nothing more to be feared, Domitian came forward to meet the invading forces; he was universally saluted by the title of ''Caesar'' and the mass of troops conducted him to his father's house.
A triumphal arch, the Arch of Titus, was erected at the south-east entrance to the Forum to commemorate the successful end of the war.
Domitian and, over a century later, Publius Septimius Geta were the only emperors known to have officially received a ''damnatio memoriae'', though others may have received ''de facto'' ones.
It is not known whether Domitian had other children, but he did not marry again.
The evidence lends some credence to these claims, as the Chatti would later play a significant role during the revolt of Saturninus in 89.
According to Suetonius, Domitia Longina was exiled in 83 because of an affair with a famous actor named Paris.
He divided the province into Lower Moesia and Upper Moesia, and transferred three additional legions to the Danube.
Domitia Longina was the younger daughter of Gnaeus Domitius Corbulo, a respected general and honoured politician who had distinguished himself for his leadership in Armenia.
Dissatisfaction with this state of affairs continued to loom over Nerva's reign, and ultimately erupted into a crisis in October 97, when members of the Praetorian Guard, led by Casperius Aelianus, laid siege to the Imperial Palace and took Nerva hostage.
Among those completed were the Temple of Vespasian and Titus, the Arch of Titus and the Colosseum, to which he added a fourth level and finished the interior seating area.
Under Vespasian and Titus, non-Flavians were virtually excluded from the important public offices.
On the day of the festivities, the Flavian family rode into the capital, preceded by a lavish parade that displayed the spoils of the war.
Otho and Vitellius realized the potential threat posed by the Flavian faction.
Domitian and Stephanus wrestled on the ground for some time, until the Emperor was finally overpowered and fatally stabbed by the conspirators; Stephanus was stabbed by Domitian during the struggle and died shortly afterward.
In his view, the Roman Empire was to be governed as a divine monarchy with himself as the benevolent despot at its head.
Titus assured Domitian that full partnership in the government would soon be his, but neither tribunician power nor ''imperium'' of any kind was conferred upon him during Titus' brief reign.
The political career of Vespasian included the offices of quaestor, aedile, and praetor, and culminated with a consulship in 51, the year of Domitian's birth.
He became personally involved in all branches of the government and successfully prosecuted corruption among public officials.
Because Titus effectively acted as co-emperor with his father, no abrupt change in Flavian policy occurred when Vespasian died on 23 June 79.
Contemporary authors severely criticized this treaty, which was considered shameful to the Romans and left the deaths of Sabinus and Fuscus unavenged.
In Rome, Domitian was placed under house arrest by Vitellius, as a safeguard against Flavian aggression.
Domitian firmly believed in the traditional Roman religion, and personally saw to it that ancient customs and morals were observed throughout his reign.
Significant wars were fought in Britain, where his general Agricola attempted to conquer Caledonia (Scotland), and in Dacia, where Domitian was unable to procure a decisive victory against king Decebalus.
As the Vestals were regarded as daughters of the community, this offense essentially constituted incest.
Domitian toured the European provinces extensively, and spent at least three years of his reign in Germania and Illyricum, conducting military campaigns on the frontiers of the Empire.
Sabinus himself amassed further wealth and possible equestrian status through his services as tax collector in Asia and banker in Helvetia (modern Switzerland).
The question of whether Domitian left the Roman Empire in debt or with a surplus at the time of his death has been fiercely debated.
Having spent the greater part of his early life in the twilight of Nero's reign, his formative years would have been strongly influenced by the political turmoil of the 60s, culminating with the civil war of 69, which brought his family to power.
Fuscus was killed, and the battle standard of the Praetorian Guard was lost.
The Principate allowed the existence of a ''de facto'' dictatorial regime, while maintaining the formal framework of the Roman Republic.
Domitian opened the year following the revolt by sharing the consulship with Marcus Cocceius Nerva, suggesting the latter had played a part in uncovering the conspiracy, perhaps in a fashion similar to the one he played during the Pisonian conspiracy under Nero.
Yet the return of Titus further highlighted the comparative insignificance of Domitian, both militarily and politically.
As a military commander, Vespasian gained early renown by participating in the Roman invasion of Britain in 43.
Cassius Dio, writing nearly a hundred years after the assassination, includes Domitia Longina among the conspirators, but in light of her attested devotion to Domitian—even years after her husband had died—her involvement in the plot seems highly unlikely.
''De Vita Caesarum'' is also the source of several outrageous stories regarding Domitian's marriage life.
Mucianus himself all but disappeared from historical records during this time, and it is believed he died sometime between 75 and 77.
Over the course of the 20th century, Domitian's military, administrative and economic policies were re-evaluated.
The murder itself was carried out by a freedman of Parthenius named Maximus, and a steward of Domitian's niece Flavia Domitilla, named Stephanus.
Domitian was assassinated on 18 September 96, in a palace conspiracy organized by court officials.
The Book of Revelation is thought by some to have been written during this period.
Domitian quickly launched a counteroffensive, personally travelling to the region accompanied by a large force commanded by his praetorian prefect Cornelius Fuscus.
As a compensation measure, the Praetorian Guard demanded the execution of Domitian's assassins, which Nerva refused.
This ambiguity of character was further exacerbated by his remoteness, and as he grew older, he increasingly displayed a preference for solitude, which may have stemmed from his isolated upbringing.
Nevertheless, Domitian appears to have been very popular among the soldiers, spending an estimated three years of his reign among the army on campaigns—more than any emperor since Augustus—and raising their pay by one-third.
According to Suetonius, Domitian wholly feigned his interest in arts and literature, and never bothered to acquaint himself with classic authors.
Domitian was allegedly extremely sensitive regarding his baldness, which he disguised in later life by wearing wigs.
News of Nero's death reached Vespasian as he was preparing to besiege the city of Jerusalem.
By all appearances, the Flavians enjoyed high imperial favour throughout the 40s and 60s.
Nerva was unharmed in this assault, but his authority was damaged beyond repair.
The Senate nonetheless rejoiced at the death of Domitian, and immediately following Nerva's accession as Emperor, passed ''damnatio memoriae'' on his memory: his coins and statues were melted, his arches were torn down and his name was erased from all public records.
The loss of the battle standard, or ''aquila'', was indicative of a crushing defeat and a serious affront to Roman national pride.
He was prone to suspicion, displayed an odd, sometimes self-deprecating sense of humour, and often communicated in cryptic ways.
As Emperor, Domitian quickly dispensed with the republican facade his father and brother had maintained during their reign.
In 80, Domitia and Domitian's only attested son was born.
Eventually the Romans achieved a decisive victory against Decebalus in 106.
The army command may have resented Domitian's decision to retreat, but to him the Caledonian territories never represented anything more than a loss to the Roman treasury.
Again, the Roman army sustained heavy losses, but Trajan succeeded in capturing Sarmizegetusa and, importantly, annexed the Dacian gold and silver mines.
Vespasian was assigned to lead the Roman army against the insurgents, with Titus — who had completed his military education by this time — in charge of a legion.
Decades of civil war during the 1st century BC had contributed greatly to the demise of the old aristocracy of Rome, which a new Italian nobility gradually replaced in prominence during the early part of the 1st century.
Nevertheless, Tacitus admits his debt to the Flavians with regard to his own public career.
For Domitian, this meant that a significant part of his adolescence was spent in the absence of his near relatives.
In his monograph, Jones concludes that Domitian was a ruthless, but efficient autocrat.
Jones compares the executions of Domitian to those under Emperor Claudius (41–55), noting that Claudius executed around 35 senators and 300 equestrians, and yet was still deified by the Senate and regarded as one of the good Emperors of history.
As Emperor, Domitian strengthened the economy by revaluing the Roman coinage, expanded the border defenses of the Empire, and initiated a massive building program to restore the damaged city of Rome.
His ''De Vita Caesarum'' is the source of much of what is known of Domitian.
Nevertheless, the account of Suetonius has dominated imperial historiography for centuries.
His most significant military contribution was the development of the Limes Germanicus, which encompassed a vast network of roads, forts and watchtowers constructed along the Rhine river to defend the Empire.
Shortly following his accession as Emperor, Domitian bestowed the honorific title of ''Augusta'' upon Domitia, while their son was deified, appearing as such on the reverse of coin types from this period.
The armies of Mucianus were nearing Rome but the besieged Flavian party did not hold out for longer than a day.
The other five were less prestigious suffect consulships, which he held in 71, 75, 76, 77 and 79 respectively, usually replacing his father or brother in mid-January.
In approximately 84 or 85 the Dacians, led by King Decebalus, crossed the Danube into the province of Moesia, wreaking havoc and killing the Moesian governor Oppius Sabinus.
As judged by the carved titles of Caesar, Augustus and Germanicus, the related march took place between 84 and 96 AD.
On 24 October 69, the forces of Vitellius and Vespasian met at the Second Battle of Bedriacum, which ended in a crushing defeat for the armies of Vitellius.
When news arrived of Cerialis' victory over Civilis, Mucianus tactfully dissuaded Domitian from pursuing further military endeavours.
Following the failed Pisonian conspiracy against Nero in 65, he had been forced to commit suicide.
In order to avert having to conduct a war on two fronts, Domitian agreed to terms of peace with Decebalus, negotiating free access of Roman troops through the Dacian region while granting Decebalus an annual subsidy of 8 million sesterces.
He ensured that libellous writings, especially those directed against himself, were punishable by exile or death.
After Domitian's assassination, the senators of Rome rushed to the Senate house, where they immediately passed a motion condemning his memory to oblivion.
Modern historians consider this highly implausible however, noting that malicious rumours such as those concerning Domitia's alleged infidelity were eagerly repeated by post-Domitianic authors, and used to highlight the hypocrisy of a ruler publicly preaching a return to Augustan morals, while privately indulging in excesses and presiding over a corrupt court.
In despair, Vitellius attempted to negotiate a surrender.
To usher in the new era, he embarked on ambitious economic, military and cultural programs with the intention of restoring the Empire to the splendour it had seen under the Emperor Augustus.
With regard to Domitian's personality, however, the account of Suetonius alternates sharply between portraying Domitian as the emperor-tyrant, a man both physically and intellectually lazy, and the intelligent, refined personality drawn elsewhere.
To suggest the dynasty owed its accession to murder would have been less than sensitive.
In order to appease the people of Rome an estimated 135 million sestertii was spent on donatives, or ''congiaria'', throughout Domitian's reign.
From Suetonius, we know that she at least accompanied the Emperor to the amphitheatre, while the Jewish writer Josephus speaks of benefits he received from her.
The dislike was mutual.
Instead connections to Claudius and Britannicus were emphasised, and Nero's victims, or those otherwise disadvantaged by him, rehabilitated.
At least twenty senatorial opponents were executed, including Domitia Longina's former husband Lucius Aelius Lamia and three of Domitian's own family members, Titus Flavius Sabinus IV, Titus Flavius Clemens and Marcus Arrecinus Clemens.
From the list of jurors he struck an equestrian who had divorced his wife and taken her back, while an ex-quaestor was expelled from the Senate for acting and dancing.
The dark side of his censorial power involved a restriction in freedom of speech, and an increasingly oppressive attitude toward the Roman Senate.
Trajan continued Domitian's policy and added two more units to the auxiliary forces of Upper Moesia, and then he used the build up of troops for his Dacian wars.
The Emperor also revived the practice of public banquets, which had been reduced to a simple distribution of food under Nero, while he invested large sums on entertainment and games.
Although Jews were heavily taxed, no contemporary authors mention trials or executions based on religious offenses other than those within the Roman religion.
Jones estimates Domitian's annual income at more than 1.2 billion sestertii, of which over one-third would presumably have been spent maintaining the Roman army.
He held six consulships during Vespasian's reign but only one of these, in 73, was an ordinary consulship.
Although the war had officially ended, a state of anarchy and lawlessness pervaded in the first days following the demise of Vitellius.
Equally curtailed by Mucianus were Domitian's military ambitions.
He received the title of ''Caesar'' and was appointed praetor with consular power.
Domitian's youth and early career were largely spent in the shadow of his brother Titus, who gained military renown during the First Jewish–Roman War.
Around noon Domitian, just one month short of his 45th birthday, was dead.
For his victory, the Senate awarded Titus a Roman triumph.
Although the Romans inflicted heavy losses on the enemy, two-thirds of the Caledonian army escaped and hid in the Scottish marshes and Highlands, ultimately preventing Agricola from bringing the entire British island under his control.
At the same time Vitellius and his armies in Germania had risen in revolt and prepared to march on Rome, intent on overthrowing Otho.
However, not only did he reject the title of ''Dominus'' during his reign, but since he issued no official documentation or coinage to this effect, historians such as Brian Jones contend that such phrases were addressed to Domitian by flatterers who wished to earn favors from the emperor.
In his biographical work ''Agricola'', Tacitus maintains that Agricola was forced into retirement because his triumph over the Caledonians highlighted Domitian's own inadequacy as a military commander.
Since the fall of the Republic, the authority of the Roman Senate had largely eroded under the quasi-monarchical system of government established by Augustus, known as the Principate.
4th century writings by Eusebius of Caesarea maintain that Jews and Christians were heavily persecuted toward the end of Domitian's reign.
Modern revisionists have instead characterized Domitian as a ruthless but efficient autocrat whose cultural, economic and political program provided the foundation of the peaceful 2nd century.
Domitian's government exhibited totalitarian characteristics; he saw himself as the new Augustus, an enlightened despot destined to guide the Roman Empire into a new era of brilliance.
Upon his accession he revalued the Roman currency dramatically.
He fortified the coast facing Ireland, and Tacitus recalls that his father-in-law often claimed the island could be conquered with a single legion and a few auxiliaries.
To memorialize the military triumphs of the Flavian family, he ordered the construction of the Templum Divorum and the Templum Fortuna Redux, and completed the Arch of Titus.
He became personally involved in all branches of the administration: edicts were issued governing the smallest details of everyday life and law, while taxation and public morals were rigidly enforced.
In order to justify the divine nature of the Flavian rule, Domitian emphasized connections with the chief deity Jupiter, perhaps most significantly through the impressive restoration of the Temple of Jupiter on the Capitoline Hill.
His competence as a military strategist was criticized by his contemporaries however.
Titus Flavius Norbanus may have been appointed to the prefecture of Egypt, but almost certainly became prefect of the Praetorian Guard by 94, with Titus Petronius Secundus as his colleague.
For this purpose, a new legion was founded, Legio I Minervia, which constructed some 75&nbsp;kilometres (46&nbsp;mi) of roads through Chattan territory to uncover the enemy's hiding places.
In many instances, existing portraits of Domitian, such as those found on the Cancelleria Reliefs, were simply recarved to fit the likeness of Nerva, which allowed quick production of new images and recycling of previous material.
Real power was unmistakably concentrated in the hands of the Flavian faction; the weakened Senate only maintained the facade of democracy.
The precise cause for the rebellion is uncertain, although it appears to have been planned well in advance.
Nevertheless, ancient sources allege poverty for the Flavian family at the time of Domitian's upbringing, even claiming Vespasian had fallen into disrepute under the emperors Caligula (37–41) and Nero (54–68).
Consequently, Titus spent much of his reign coordinating relief efforts and restoring damaged property.
Domitian's tendency towards micromanagement was nowhere more evident than in his financial policy.
Seven legions were sent from Rome, led by Vespasian's brother-in-law Quintus Petillius Cerialis.
In June 71, Titus returned triumphant from the war in Judaea.
This conquest never happened, but some historians believe that the crossing referred to was in fact a small-scale exploratory or punitive expedition to Ireland.
Domitian's foreign policy was realistic, rejecting expansionist warfare and negotiating peace at a time when Roman military tradition dictated aggressive conquest.
Several modern authors such as Dorey have argued the opposite: that Agricola was in fact a close friend of Domitian, and that Tacitus merely sought to distance his family from the fallen dynasty once Nerva was in power.
Whatever the nature of their relationship, Domitian seems to have displayed little sympathy when his brother lay dying, instead making for the Praetorian camp where he was proclaimed emperor.
Turning his attention from Ireland, the following year Agricola raised a fleet and pushed beyond the Forth into Caledonia.
Under the rulers of the Nervan-Antonian dynasty, senatorial authors published histories that elaborated on the view of Domitian as a tyrant.
At any rate, the uprising was strictly confined to Saturninus' province, and quickly detected once the rumour spread across the neighbouring provinces.
Although his text is predominantly negative, it neither exclusively condemns nor praises Domitian, and asserts that his rule started well, but gradually declined into terror.
Although little information survives of the battles fought, enough early victories were apparently achieved for Domitian to be back in Rome by the end of 83, where he celebrated an elaborate triumph and conferred upon himself the title of ''Germanicus''.
Despite his political experience, this was a remarkable choice.
