In the 1930s, he typically appeared as part of a comic trio with Mickey and Goofy, and was given his own film series in 1937 starting with ''Don Donald''.
Disney was particularly impressed with Nash's duck imitation and chose him to voice the new character.
Donald makes several attempts to defeat the shark, each of which proves ineffective, but then finally triumphs and defeats the shark with a single well-placed punch.
Donald has been a very popular character in Europe, particularly in Nordic countries where his weekly magazine ''Donald Duck & Co'' was the most popular comics publication from the 1950s to 2009.
By 2005 around one out of every four Norwegians read the Norwegian edition ''Donald Duck & Co.'' per week, translating to around 1.3&nbsp;million regular readers.
There are times when he fights to keep his temper in check, and he sometimes succeeds in doing so temporarily, but he always returns to his normal angry self in the end.
For example, when he stumbles across other characters in the midst of planning some sort of retaliation or prank, or when things don't go as he'd planned or don't work properly, he often says, "What's the big idea!?".
Donald is most famous for his semi-intelligible speech and his mischievous and temperamental personality.
Italian artist Corrado Mastantuono created Bum Bum Ghigno, a cynical, grumpy and not too good looking Duck who teams up with Donald and Gyro a lot.
After the 1956 film ''Chips Ahoy'', Donald appeared primarily in educational films before eventually returning to theatrical animation in ''Mickey's Christmas Carol'' (1983).
Donald is something of a prankster, and as a result, he can sometimes come across as a bit of a bully, especially in the way he sometimes treats Chip n' Dale and Huey, Dewey and Louie, his nephews.
The eighteen-page story, written by Federico Pedrocchi, is the first to feature Donald as an adventurer rather than simply a comedic character.
Working for the Danish editor Egmont, artist Daniel Branca (1951–2005) and script-writers Paul Halas and Charlie Martin created Sonny Seagull, an orphan who befriends Huey, Dewey and Louie, and his rival, Mr. Phelps.
While at times it is a hindrance, and even a handicap, it has also helped him in times of need.
In the latter show, he is the co-owner of Mickey's night club.
He almost never intends to hurt anyone, and whenever his pranks go too far, he is always very regretful.
Only later, Scrooge reveals to his nephews Rumpus is actually his half-brother.
But despite his apparent slothfulness, Donald proves that he is physically strong.
However the constant search for an outlet to vent his frustration, led the Italian rendition of Donald Duck to seek his catharsis in several ways: in the sixties, vexed by Scrooge's antics and Gladstone luck, he reinvented himself as Paperinik, the ''Duck Avenger'' (as he came to be known outside Italy), an anti-hero at first, a self-assured, well adjusted, brilliant hero in later stories, no longer bound by the self-doubt and the mockery Donald is constantly subjected.
Hannu Raittila, an author, says that Finnish people recognize an aspect of themselves in Donald; Raittila cites that Donald attempts to retrieve himself from "all manner of unexpected and unreasonable scrapes using only his wits and the slim resources he can put his hands on, all of which meshes nicely with the popular image of Finland as driftwood in the crosscurrents of world politics."
Scarpa also came up with Dickie Duck, the granddaughter of Glittering Goldie (Scrooge's possible love-interest from his days in the Klondike) and Kildare Coot, a nephew of Grandma Duck.
The following is a list of children's books in which Donald is the central character.
Christian Pfeiler&nbsp;– former president of D.O.N.A.L.D., a German acronym which stands for "German Organization for Non-commercial Followers of Pure Donaldism"&nbsp;– says Donald is popular in Germany because "almost everyone can identify with him.
Strobl was one of the most productive Disney artists of all time, and drew many stories which Barks wrote and sketched after his retirement.
The short 'Clown of the Jungle' (1947) very much feels like either a Daffy Duck or a Woody Woodpecker cartoon.
Daisy Duck has lost her pink dress and bow and has a new hairdo.
He has appeared over the years in such attractions as Animagique, Mickey Mouse Revue, Mickey's PhilharMagic, Disneyland: The First 50 Magical Years, Gran Fiesta Tour Starring the Three Caballeros and the updated version of '''"it's a small world"'''.
His anger is a great cause of suffering in his life.
The comic anthology ended in 1938.
Donald Duck first appeared in the 1934 cartoon ''The Wise Little Hen'' which was part of the ''Silly Symphonies'' series of theatrical cartoon shorts.
Some of the stories in the series were loosely based on the comics by Carl Barks.
Donald has also appeared in direct-to-video features such as ''Mickey, Donald, Goofy: The Three Musketeers'' (2004), television series such as ''Mickey Mouse Clubhouse'' (2006–2013), and video games such as ''QuackShot'' (1991).
He does in fact have many skills—he is something of a Jack of all Trades.
Since this cost Disney a lot of money, he decided to create a new audience for his films in South America.
Barks placed Donald in the city of Duckburg, which he populated with a host of supporting players, including Neighbour Jones (1944), Uncle Scrooge McDuck (1947), Gladstone Gander (1948), the Beagle Boys (1951), Gyro Gearloose (1952), April, May and June (1953), Flintheart Glomgold (1956), Magica de Spell (1961), and John D. Rockerduck (1961).
Huey, Dewey, and Louie now are teenagers, with distinct clothing, voices, and personalities.
The ''Wall Street Journal'' called Donald Duck "The Jerry Lewis of Germany", a reference to American star Jerry Lewis' popularity in France.
One long-ago-scrapped idea was also to have a bumper boat ride themed to Donald Duck.
Further along the years, he fashioned for himself the additional identities of ''QQ7'', a bumbling secret agent protecting Scrooge's riches and ''DoubleDuck'', a more confident and suave secret agent, in the mold of James Bond, a more equilibrate mold of the heroic Duck Avenger and the tricky QQ7, often accompanied by the beautiful spy ''Kay K''.
In most Disney theatrical cartoons, Mickey and Donald are shown as partners and have little to no rivalry (exceptions being ''The Band Concert''.
Many of Donald's films made after the war recast the duck as the brunt of some other character's pestering.
Tim Pilcher and Brad Books, authors of ''The Essential Guide to World Comics'', described the Donald anthologies as "the Scandinavian equivalent of the UK's ''Beano'' or ''Dandy'', a comic that generations have grown up with, from grandparents to grandchildren."
Many of Taliaferro's characters made the move to Barks' world as well, including Huey, Dewey, and Louie.
Donald's appearance in the cartoon, as created by animator Dick Lundy, is similar to his modern look&nbsp;– the feather and beak colors are the same, as is the blue sailor shirt and hat&nbsp;– but his features are more elongated, his body plumper, and his feet smaller.
Osborne and Taliaferro also introduced several members of Donald's supporting cast, including his nephews, Huey, Dewey, and Louie.
Later, Rumpus also finds out.
Donald's writers and illustrators Carl Barks, Don Rosa and Ub Iwerks are well known in Germany, and have their own fan clubs.
One of the most productive Duck-artist used to be Victor Arriagada Rios, (deceased 2012) better known under the name Vicar.
The aircraft, named the "Ruptured Duck" and carrying a picture of Donald's face above a pair of crossed crutches, was one of sixteen B-25Bs which took off from the aircraft carrier USS ''Hornet'' to bomb Tokyo on April 18, 1942.
Donald is one of a number of characters who are giving performances in a benefit for Mickey's Orphans.
Even though he can at times be lazy, and likes to say that his favorite place to be is in a hammock, once he has committed to accomplishing something he goes for it 100 percent, sometimes resorting to extreme measures to reach his goal.
Donald's first voice was performed by Clarence Nash, who voiced him for 50 years.
There, Donald joins the U.S. Navy, and leaves his nephews Huey, Dewey, and Louie with their Uncle Scrooge, who then has to take care of them.
Taliaferro also gave Donald his very own automobile, a 1934 Belchfire Runabout, in a 1938 story, which is often nicknamed by Donald's "313" car plate in the comic incarnation of Donald's world.
The clip was rebroadcast in November 1984 during a TV special honoring Donald's 50th birthday, with Dick Van Dyke substituting for Walt.
Beyond animation Donald is primarily known for his appearances in comics.
And when he's very excited about something, he usually mutters, "Oh boy, oh boy, oh boy..." under his breath.
Most of these books were published by Whitman Publishing, later called Western Publishing, or one of its subsidiaries.
Donald Duck (named Paolino Paperino) is also a very popular character in Italy, where new stories about him and Scrooge McDuck are hosted in the kids' weekly ''Topolino'' and the monthly ''Paperino''.
Hartman helped Disney establish offices in all Nordic countries before he left Disney in 1941.
He is seen wearing an old-style pilot's uniform with a board with a nail in it in one hand and a lightning bolt in the other hand.
It is through this everyman persona that Donald is able to voice philosophical truths about German society that appeal to both children and adults.
Oddly enough, no other family members, besides Ludwig von Drake, appear in ''Quack Pack'', and all other Duckburg citizens are humans, and not dogs.
However, by the time ''The Mickey Mouse Club'' aired on television (after Bugs vs. Daffy cartoons such as Rabbit Fire), it was shown that Donald always wanted the spotlight.
His nephews appear in the form of angels, and he willingly endures a kick by one of them—that is, of course, until he realizes he has been played for a sap, whereupon he promptly loses his temper.
In the 1990s and early 2000s, these scripts were re-drawn in a style closer to Barks' own by Dutch artist Daan Jippes.
Like most of the aircraft that participated in the mission, the Ruptured Duck was unable to reach its assigned landing field in China following the raid and ended up ditching off the coast near Shangchow, China.
Along with his friend Mickey Mouse, Donald is one of the most popular Disney characters and was included in TV Guide's list of the 50 greatest cartoon characters of all time in 2002.
Animator Ben Sharpsteen also minted the classic ''Mickey, Donald, and Goofy'' comedy in 1935, with the cartoon ''Mickey's Service Station''.
Romano Scarpa (1927–2005), who was a very important and influential Italian Disney artist, created Brigitta McBridge, a female Duck who is madly in love with Scrooge.
For the next few years, Donald made a few more appearances in Disney-themed strips, and by 1936, he had grown to be one of the most popular characters in the ''Silly Symphonies'' comic strip.
He made a comeback as the star of the "Noah's Ark" segment of ''Fantasia 2000'', as first mate to Noah.
Donald made some cameo appearances in ''Bonkers'', before getting his own television show ''Quack Pack''.
Donald became the most popular of the Disney characters in Scandinavia, and Scandinavians recognise him better than Mickey Mouse.
The new publisher meant new illustrators, however: Carl Barks and Jack Hannah.
Since Nash's death, Donald's voice has been performed by Disney animator, Tony Anselmo, who was mentored by Nash for the role.
Donald's new rival girlfriends were Donna and Daisy Duck.
In returning the favor (so to speak), Donald also has tempers and anger issues after returning from fighting in World War II; there is a theory on the Internet that says the reason why Donald is prone to having his tempers and anger issues is because Donald has Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder; said theory mentioned can also be found on YouTube.
At this point, Barks concentrated his major efforts on the Scrooge stories, and Donald's appearances became more focused on comedy or he was recast as Scrooge's reluctant helper, following his rich uncle around the globe.
He also began starring in solo cartoons, the first of which was the January 9, 1937 Ben Sharpsteen cartoon, ''Don Donald''.
He started doing Disney comics in 1987 for the American publisher Gladstone.
Donald's role in the overall series was fairly limited, as he only ended up appearing in a handful of episodes when home on leave.
They also introduced numerous new characters who are today well known in Europe.
While Dick Huemer and Art Babbit were first to animate Donald, Dick Lundy is credited for developing him as a character.
Ted Osborne was the primary writer of these strips, with Al Taliaferro as his artist.
Another of his personality traits is tenacity.
Donald also played an important role in ''Mickey Mouse Works'' and ''House of Mouse''.
Donald Duck rose to fame with his comedic roles in animated cartoons.
He got a new St. Bernard named Bolivar, and his family grew to include cousin Gus Goose and grandmother Elvira Coot.
This scene can be found on the ''Chicken Little'' DVD.
The post-war Donald also starred in educational films, such as ''Donald in Mathmagic Land'' and ''How to Have an Accident at Work'' (both 1959), and made cameos in various Disney projects, such as ''The Reluctant Dragon'' (1941) and the ''Disneyland'' television show (1959).
In 1937 L'Ateljé Dekoratör began publishing ''Musse Pigg Tidningen'' (''Mickey Mouse Magazine''), which had high production values and spanned 23 issues; most of the magazine's content came from local producers, while some material consisted of reprints from ''Mickey Mouse Weekly''.
In 1937, an Italian publisher named Mondadori created the first Donald Duck story intended specifically for comic books.
Additionally, as discussed below- Donald had a stint in the U.S. Army during World War II that culminated with him serving as a commando in the film ''Commando Duck'', and he was frequently away serving in the U.S. Navy in the television cartoon series ''DuckTales''.
He also appears as the mascot for the United States Air Force 319 Aircraft Maintenance Unit at Luke Air Force Base.
He appeared in many of the cartoons, including ''Moving Day''.
The character began appearing regularly in most Mickey Mouse cartoons.
This series featured a modernized Duck family.
Several decades after the war, on account of the fact that Donald was never officially separated from service in either his animated shorts or his comic strips- and as part of Donald's 50th Birthday celebrations- the U.S. Army retired Donald Duck from active duty as a "Buck Sergeant" (i.e.
He however lost his spaceship, and befriended Scrooge, and now is allowed to search through his moneybin time after time, looking for his ship.
Disney comics' fandom is sometimes referred to as "Donaldism", a term which originated in Norway ().
Disney could, however, help Mickey regain popularity by redesigning him, giving him his most appealing design as production for the ''Fantasia'' segment "The Sorcerer's Apprentice" began in 1938.
Barks placed Donald in both domestic and adventure scenarios, and Uncle Scrooge became one of his favorite characters to pair up with Donald.
Anselmo's first performances as Donald is heard in a 1986 ''D-TV'' special, ''D-TV Valentine'' on The Disney Channel, and in his first feature film, ''Who Framed Roger Rabbit'', in 1988.
''Magician Mickey'' and near the end of ''Symphony Hour, ''which were due to Donald's menacing attempts).
Segments include ''Ferdinand the Bull'', a short with Chip 'n' Dale, a segment from ''Lady and the Tramp'', a sneak preview of a coming Disney movie and concludes with Jiminy Cricket performing "When You Wish Upon a Star".
In an alternate opening for the 2005 Disney film ''Chicken Little'', Donald would have made a cameo appearance as "Ducky Lucky".
"Buck Sergeant Duck") in a special ceremony and parade in Torrance, CA in 1984.
Giorgio Cavazzano and Carlo Chendi created ''Umperio Bogarto'', a detective whose name is an obvious parody on Humphrey Bogart.
Donald was most famously drawn by Al Taliaferro, Carl Barks, and Don Rosa.
The second film was ''The Three Caballeros'', in which he meets his rooster friend Panchito.
Donald's two dominant personality traits are his short temper and his positive outlook on life.
The American artist William Van Horn also introduced a new character: Rumpus McFowl, an old and rather corpulent Duck with a giant appetite and laziness, who is first said to be a cousin of Scrooge.
Donald's dialogue in German comics tends to be more sophisticated and philosophical, he "quotes from German literature, speaks in grammatically complex sentences and is prone to philosophical musings, while the stories often take a more political tone than their American counterparts", features especially associated with Erika Fuchs's popular German translations of the comics created by ''The Good Duck Artist'' Carl Barks.
Fleetway in England also began publishing comic-book stories featuring the duck.
He also appears in the new 3-minute Mickey Mouse TV shorts for Disney Channel.
Barks soon took over the major development of the duck as both writer and illustrator.
Amongst other things, he is a good fisher and a good hockey player.
Usually, some character close to Donald annoys him by saying he's being lazy and needs to get some exercise.
With writer/editors Stefan and Unn Printz-Påhlson, Vicar created the character Oona, a prehistoric duck princess who traveled to modern Duckburg by using Gyro's time-machine.
Donald's first appearance was in 1934 in ''The Wise Little Hen'', but it was his second appearance in ''Orphan's Benefit'' which introduced him as a temperamental comic foil to Mickey Mouse.
Donald Duck has played a major role in many Disney theme parks over the years.
The mission was led by Lieutenant Colonel (later General) Jimmy Doolittle.
By 2005 in Finland the Donald Duck anthology ''Aku Ankka'' sold 270,000 copies per issue.
Donald is an anthropomorphic white duck with a yellow-orange bill, legs, and feet.
He's mostly an everyman, but the fierce, harsh temper he has in the American comic appears to be diluted into a meek, weaker personality, prone to comical fits of rage that are mostly subdued by the realization of its impotence.
Hartman found a studio called L'Ateljé Dekoratör, which produced illustrated cards that were published by Sagokonst.
Walt Disney, in his ''Wonderful World of Color'', would sometimes make reference to the rivalry.
Nash voiced Donald for the last time in ''Mickey's Christmas Carol'' in 1983, making Donald the only character in the film to be voiced by his original voice actor.
'''Donald Duck''' is a cartoon character created in 1934 at Walt Disney Productions.
However, his love of bragging often leads him to overestimate his abilities, so that when he sets out to make good on his boasts, he gets in over his head, usually to hilarious effect.
Walt, one time, had presented Donald with a gigantic birthday cake and commented how it was "even bigger than Mickey's", which pleased Donald.
Bob Karp worked on the earliest of these, a story called "Donald Duck Finds Pirate Gold".
In Germany, the comics are published by Ehapa which has since become part of the Egmont empire.
Cartoons from this period, such as the 1935 cartoon ''The Band Concert''&nbsp;– in which Donald repeatedly disrupts the Mickey Mouse Orchestra's rendition of ''The William Tell Overture'' by playing ''Turkey in the Straw''&nbsp;– are regularly hailed by critics as exemplary films and classics of animation.
When he has given up on something he's been trying to do, or something he's been hoping will happen, he tends to say, "Aw, phooey!".
Though a 1931 Disney publication called ''Mickey Mouse Annual'' mentioned a character named Donald Duck, the character's first appearance in comic-strip format was a newspaper cartoon that was based on the short ''The Wise Little Hen'' and published in 1934.
Donald had a rather small part in the animated television series ''DuckTales''.
This does not include comic books or activity books such as coloring books.
Throughout his career, Donald has shown that he's jealous of Mickey and wants his job as Disney's greatest star, similar to the Bugs Bunny and Daffy Duck rivalry.
In 1942, Western Publishing began creating original comic-book stories about Donald and other Disney characters.
While the matter as never clarified, his choice fits the extreme loathing of his first name expressed by his mother Hortense.
This short also introduced a love interest of Donald's, ''Donna Duck'', who evolved into Daisy Duck.
He tragically believes that Daisy has been lost, while she believes the same of him, but they are reunited at the end.
The Ruptured Duck's pilot survived, with the loss of a leg, and later wrote about the Doolittle Raid in the book, later to be the movie, ''Thirty Seconds Over Tokyo'' (Random House pub.
It was shown that Donald wanted to be the Club's founder and wanted to change the name from ''House of Mouse'' to ''House of Duck'', which is obvious in the episodes "The Stolen Cartoons" and "Timon and Pumbaa".
Donald also appeared as a mascot emblem for: 415th Fighter Squadron; 438th Fighter Squadron; 479th Bombardment Squadron; 531st Bombardment Squadron.
By 1978, within Finland there was debate over the morality of Donald Duck.
He also is seen in the parks as a meet-and-greet character.
Italian publisher Mondadori created many of the stories that were published throughout Europe.
When faced with a threat of some kind, for example Pete's attempts to intimidate him, he is initially scared, but his fear is replaced by anger.
Donald is seen repeatedly attacked, harassed, and ridiculed by his nephews, by the chipmunks Chip 'n' Dale, or by other characters such as Humphrey the Bear, Spike the Bee, Bootle Beetle, the Aracuan Bird, Louie the Mountain Lion, or a colony of ants.
In effect, much like Bugs Bunny cartoons from Warner Bros. the Disney artists had reversed the classic screwball scenario perfected by Walter Lantz and others in which the main character is the ''instigator'' of these harassing behaviors, rather than the butt of them.
They also created O.K Quack, an extraterrestrial Duck who landed on earth in a spaceship in the shape of a coin.
He had his own studio where he and his assistants drew the stories sent in by Egmont.
Donald also has been appeared in Japanese comics published by Kodansha and Tokyopop.
Finnish voters placing protest votes typically write "Donald Duck" as the candidate.
Donald's nephews, Huey, Dewey and Louie, would make their first animated appearance a year later in the April 15, 1938 film, ''Donald's Nephews'', directed by Jack King (they had been earlier introduced in the Donald Duck comic strip by Al Taliaferro, see below).
Despite Reginella left a deep trace in Donald's heart, he's still depicted as extremely faithful to Daisy, with a small hiccup deriving by Daisy Duck having a secret identity on her own (''Paperinika''), with Paperinik and Paperinika, both unaware of their secret identities, cultivating a permanent status of belligerent tension.
Matti Holopainen jokingly criticized Donald for living with Daisy while not being married to her, for not wearing trousers, and for, in the words of the ''Library Journal'', being "too bourgeois".
Donald Duck is then arrested for the kidnapping of Mickey, as he is considered to be the chief suspect, due to their rivalry.
The American artists Vic Lockman and Tony Strobl (1915–1991), who were working directly for the American comic books, created Moby Duck.
The rivalry between Mickey and Donald has also been shown in ''Disney's House of Mouse''.
He did, however, continue to provide Donald's voice for commercials, promos and other miscellaneous material until his death in 1985.
Donald also appears as a mascot—such as in the Army Air Corps 309th Fighter Squadron and the U.S. Coast Guard Auxiliary, which showed Donald as a fierce-looking pirate ready to defend the American coast from invaders.
His frustration at Gladstone's luck is comically enhanced: in the Italian comics Donald is chronically unlucky, unable to do or get anything right, with Gladstone taking advantage of his superiority or taking genuine pity of his unlucky cousin and trying several plans to grant him some better luck, always failing.
For this latter show, Donald's uncles Ludwig von Drake (1961) and Scrooge McDuck (1967) were then created in animation.
The first was ''Saludos Amigos'', which consisted of four short segments, two of them with Donald Duck.
As a result, instead of running away, he fights—with ghosts, sharks, mountain goats, giant kites, and even the forces of nature.
Many Donald shorts start with Donald in a happy mood, without a care in the world until something comes along and spoils his day.
The best-known and most popular Duck-artist of this time is American Don Rosa.
Donald Duck is very popular in Germany, where Donald themed comics sell an average of 250,000 copies each week, mostly published in the kids' weekly ''Micky Maus'' and the monthlies ''Donald Duck Special'' (for adults) and ''Lustiges Taschenbuch''.
Japanese artist Shiro Amano worked with Donald on the graphic novel ''Kingdom Hearts'' based on the Disney-Square Enix videogame.
And, more often than not, when he fights, he comes out on top.
In Sweden voters often voted for Donald Duck or the Donald Duck Party as a nonexistent candidate until a 2006 change in voting laws, which prohibited voting for nonexistent candidates.
When he confronts someone who's been antagonizing him, or something that's been frustrating him, he likes to exclaim, "So
Scrooge's popularity grew, and by 1952, the character had a comic book of his own.
Having several full lives to live doesn't hamper Donald's ability to live adventures on his own: he still lives adventures with his uncle Scrooge and his nephews (often acting as a reluctant bumbler, a ballast to the enthusiasm of his nephews and the wanderlust of his uncle), and he lived a starcrossed love story with a princess from another planet, ''Reginella''.
Donald-comics are also being produced in The Netherlands and France.
He is part of the ensemble cast of classic characters in the TV show ''Mickey Mouse Clubhouse'' as well.
In 1932 Bradman and the Australian team were touring North America and he made the news after being dismissed for a duck against New York West Indians.
Donald Duck (''Kalle Anka'' in Sweden, ''Anders And'' in Denmark, ''Andrés Önd'' in Iceland, ''Donald Duck'' in Norway, and ''Aku Ankka'' in Finland) is a very popular character in Nordic countries.
Donald's aggressive nature has its advantages, however.
Barks would later repeat the treasure-hunting theme in many more stories.
Donald Duck has a slightly different character abroad.
One animated short that rivaled the famous Mickey Mouse March song was showing Huey, Dewey, and Louie as Boy Scouts and Donald as their Scoutmaster at a cliff near a remote forest and Donald leads them in a song mirroring the Mouseketeers theme "D-O-N-A-L-D D-U-C-K!
He later worked briefly for the Dutch editors, but moved to work directly for Egmont soon afterwards.
He has actually been seen in more attractions and shows at the parks than Mickey Mouse has.
A daily ''Donald Duck'' comic strip drawn by Taliaferro and written by Bob Karp began running in the United States on February 2, 1938; the Sunday strip began the following year.
After his early appearances, he went on to become part of the famed trio Mickey, Donald, and Goofy.
In 1985 Donald received 291 votes in an election for the Parliament of Sweden (Riksdag).
In the short film, ''Sea Scouts'', Donald is traveling with his nephews in a boat when it's attacked by a shark.
In Truant Officer Donald, for example, when he is tricked into believing he has accidentally killed Huey, Dewey and Louie, he shows great remorse, blaming himself.
Voice performer Clarence Nash auditioned for Walt Disney Studios when he learned that Disney was looking for people to create animal sounds for his cartoons.
In the first, he meets his parrot pal Jose Carioca.
Besides, during that period Mickey Mouse had lost some of his edge since becoming a role model towards children, and so Disney wanted to create a character to portray some of the more negative character traits that could no longer be bestowed on Mickey.
In most of them, publications still continue: Australia, Austria, Argentina, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Colombia, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark (Faroe Islands), Egypt, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Mexico, the Netherlands, Norway, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Slovakia, Spain, Sweden, Thailand, Turkey, the United Kingdom, the United States, and the former Yugoslavia.
During World War II, Disney cartoons were not allowed to be imported into Occupied Europe owing to their propagandistic content.
''Kalle Anka & Co'', Donald's first dedicated Swedish anthology, started in September 1948.
The Italian-produced comic ''PKNA – Paperinik New Adventures'' stars Donald Duck as ''Paperinik'', or ''Duck Avenger'', in his battles against new alien enemies: Evronian Empire, founded by emperor Evron.
