Asses were first domesticated around 3000&nbsp;BC, probably in Egypt or Mesopotamia,  and have spread around the world.
Donkeys may be pastured or stabled with horses and ponies, and are thought to have a calming effect on nervous horses.
With the rise of Christianity, some believers came to see the cross-shaped marking present on donkeys' backs and shoulders as a symbol of the animal's bearing Jesus into Jerusalem on Palm Sunday.
After human labour, the donkey is the cheapest form of agricultural power.
From the 18th century, ''donkey'' gradually replaced ''ass'', and ''jenny'' replaced ''she-ass'', which is now considered archaic.
Remains of domestic donkeys dating to the fourth millennium BC have been found in Ma'adi in Lower Egypt, and it is believed that the domestication of the donkey was accomplished long after the domestication of cattle, sheep and goats in the seventh and eighth millennia BC.
This is believed to be caused by two factors, the first being proven in cat hybrids, that when the chromosome count of the male is the higher, fertility rates drop (as in the case of stallion x jenney).
In 2003, the tomb of either King Narmer or King Hor-Aha (two of the first Egyptian pharaohs) was excavated and the skeletons of ten donkeys were found buried in a manner usually used with high ranking humans.
In general jennies have a conception rate that is lower than that of horses (''i.e.''
Some large donkey breeds such as the Asino di Martina Franca, the Baudet de Poitou and the Mammoth Jack are raised only for mule production.
Donkeys have a notorious reputation for stubbornness, but this has been attributed to a much stronger sense of self-preservation than exhibited by horses.
Owners were protected by law from loss caused by the death or injury of a donkey, showing their value in that time period.
The French philosopher Jean Buridan constructed the paradox called Buridan's ass, in which a donkey, placed exactly midway between water and food, would die of hunger and thirst because he could not find a reason to choose one of the options over the other, and so would never make a decision.
By the second millennium BC, the donkey was brought to Europe, possibly at the same time as viticulture was introduced, as the donkey is associated with the Syrian god of wine, Dionysus.
Some researchers believe the actual number is somewhat higher since many donkeys go uncounted.
The hybrid between a jack and a mare is a mule, valued as a working and riding animal in many countries.
Aesop's ''The Ass in the Lion's Skin'', representational of the almost 20 of his fables that portray donkeys, shows the donkey as a fool.
The niche markets for both milk and meat are expanding.
The Domestic Animal Diversity Information System (DAD-IS) of the FAO lists the burro as a specific breed of ass.
Donkeys are the animals featured most often in Greek proverbs, including such statements of fatalistic resignation as "the donkey lets the rain soak him".
In Australia, where there may be 5 million feral donkeys, they are regarded as an invasive pest and have a serious impact on the environment.
In their native arid and semi-arid climates, donkeys spend more than half of each day foraging and feeding, often on poor quality scrub.
Asses' milk may command good prices: the average price in Italy in 2009 was €15 per litre, and a price of €6 per 100 ml was reported from Croatia in 2008; it is used for soaps and cosmetics as well as dietary purposes.
There are five subspecies of Asiatic wild ass or onager, ''Equus hemionus'', and three subspecies of the kiang, ''Equus kiang'', of the Himalayan upland.
In contrast, horses were represented only in the context of war, ridden by cavalry or pulling chariots.
During the Middle Ages, Europeans used hairs from this cross (or contact with a donkey) as folk remedies to treat illness, including measles and whooping cough.
The loud call or bray of the donkey, which typically lasts for twenty seconds and can be heard for over three kilometres, may help keep in contact with other donkeys over the wide spaces of the desert.
They may also be ridden, or used for threshing, raising water, milling and other work.
During this time, donkeys continued to be shown as stupid, clumsy and slow.
Like other inter-species hybrids, mules and hinnies are usually sterile.
A study of working burros in central Mexico found a weight range of , with an average weight of  for males and  for females.
Jack donkeys are often used to mate with female horses to produce mules; the biological "reciprocal" of a mule, from a stallion and jenny as its parents instead, is called a hinny.
These burials show the importance of donkeys to the early Egyptian state and its ruler.
Some suggest that a donkey needs to be fed only straw (preferably barley straw), supplemented with controlled grazing in the summer or hay in the winter, to get all the energy, protein, fat and vitamins it requires; others recommend some grain to be fed, particularly to working animals, and others advise against feeding straw.
Donkeys are also referred to repeatedly in the writings and imagery of the Hindu and Islamic religions.
Greeks spread both of these to many of their colonies, including those in what are now Italy, France and Spain; Romans dispersed them throughout their empire.
File:Donkey shoe.jpg|A donkey shoe with calkins
They also require salt and mineral supplements, and access to clean, fresh water.
At one time, the synonym ''ass'' was the more common term for the donkey.
In contemporary Israel, the term "Messiah's Donkey" (Chamoro Shel Mashiach חמורו של משיח) stands at the center of a controversial religious-political doctrine, under which it was the Heavenly-imposed "task" of secular Zionists to build up a Jewish State, but once the state is established they are fated to give place to the Religious who are ordained to lead the state.
The donkey has been used as a working animal for at least 5000 years.
In addition, there are reasons not directly related to reproductive biology.
The fall in population is pronounced in developed countries; in Europe, the total number of donkeys fell from 3 million in 1944 to just over 1 million in 1994.
However, the International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature ruled in 2003 that if the domestic species and the wild species are considered subspecies of one another, the scientific name of the wild species has priority, even when that subspecies was described after the domestic subspecies.
In contrast, a few years later, Cervantes' ''Don Quixote'' shows a more positive slant on the donkey, primarily as Sancho Panza's mount, portraying them as steady and loyal companions.
* Perhaps from the name ''Duncan''.
Since then, the world population of donkeys is reported to be rapidly shrinking, falling from 43.7 million to 43.5 million between 1995 and 2000, and to only 41 million in 2006.
Narrative turning points in the Bible (and other stories) are often marked through the use of donkeys&nbsp;— for instance, leading, saddling, or mounting/dismounting a donkey are used to show a change in focus or a decision having been made.
The time lapse involved in rebreeding, and the length of a jenny's gestation, means that a jenny will have fewer than one foal per year.
The African wild ass, ''Equus africanus'', has two subspecies, the Somali wild ass, ''Equus africanus somaliensis'', and the Nubian wild ass, ''Equus africanus africanus'', the principal ancestor of the domestic donkey.
In keeping with their widespread cultural references, donkeys feature in political systems, symbols and terminology in many areas of the world.
''Burro'' is the Spanish and Portuguese word for donkey.
Jesus appeared to be aware of this connection (Matthew 21:1-3, John 12:16).
Italy has several phrases regarding donkeys, including "put your money in the ass of a donkey and they'll call him sir" (meaning, if you're rich, you'll get respect) and "women, donkeys and goats all have heads" (meaning, women are as stubborn as donkeys and goats).
In Hinduism, the goddess Kalaratri's vahana (vehicle) is a donkey.
In Greek myth, Silenus is pictured in Classical Antiquity and during the Renaissance (''illustration, left'') drunken and riding a donkey, and Midas was given the ears of an ass after misjudging a musical competition.
If they are worked long hours or do not have access to pasture, they require hay or a similar dried forage, with no more than a 1:4 ratio of legumes to grass.
Many cultures have colloquialisms and proverbs that include donkeys or asses.
While domesticated species are increasing in numbers,  the African wild ass is an endangered species.
The donkey was the symbol of the Egyptian sun god Ra .
The wild ancestor of the donkey is the African wild ass, ''E.
In the United States, "burro" is used as a loan word by English speakers to describe any small donkey used primarily as a pack animal, as well as to describe the feral donkeys that live in Arizona, California, Oregon, Utah, Texas and Nevada.
As beasts of burden and companions, asses and donkeys have worked together with humans for millennia.
In Jewish Oral Tradition ( Talmud Bavli), the son of David was prophesied as riding on a donkey if the tribes of Israel are undeserving of redemption.
Working donkeys are often associated with those living at or below subsistence levels.
The donkey is a common symbol of the Democratic Party of the United States, originating in a cartoon by Thomas Nast of ''Harper's Weekly'' in the nineteenth century.
British phrases include "to talk the hind legs off a donkey", used to describe someone talking excessively and generally persuasively.
The number of breeds and percentage of world population for each of the FAO's world regions was in 2006:
Donkeys were probably first domesticated by pastoral people in Nubia, and they supplanted the ox as the chief pack animal of that culture.
Donkeys are adapted to marginal desert lands.
They continue to fill important roles in many places today.
This difference is possibly due to donkeys being an important aspect of many Spaniards' lives at this point in time.
The burro became popular as a nationalist symbol in Catalonia, whose residents wanted to assert their identity to resist Spanish centralism.
File:Cyprian Farriers (1900) - TIMEA.jpg|Farriers shoeing a donkey in Cyprus in 1900
Unlike wild and feral horses, wild donkeys in dry areas are solitary and do not form harems.
The secularists in this analogy are "The Donkey" while the religious who are fated to supplant them are a collective "Messiach".
By the Gold Rush years of the 19th century, the burro was the beast of burden of choice of early prospectors in the western United States.
The ancestors of the modern donkey are the Nubian and Somalian subspecies of African wild ass.
Some cultures that prohibit women from working with oxen in agriculture do not extend this taboo to donkeys, allowing them to be used by both sexes.
A book on the subject, published in 1998 by the militant secularist Sefi Rechlevsky, aroused a major controversy in the Israeli public opinion.
There are not enough female zebras breeding in captivity to spare them for hybridizing; there is no such limitation on the number of female donkeys breeding.
Donkey-hide gelatin is produced by soaking and stewing the hide to make a traditional Chinese medicine product.
This means that the proper scientific name for the donkey is ''Equus africanus asinus'' when it is considered a subspecies, and ''Equus asinus'' when it is considered a species.
Donkeys were found in the works of Homer, Aesop and Apuleius, where they were generally portrayed as stupid and stubborn, or servile at best, and generally represented the lower class.
Extinct species include the European ass, ''Equus hydruntinus'', which became extinct during the Neolithic, and the North African wild ass, ''Equus africanus atlanticus'', which became extinct in Roman times.
In a lush climate, donkeys are prone to obesity and are at risk of laminitis.
There are also substantial ''burro'' populations in El Salvador, Guatemala, and Nicaragua.
Donkeys also appear multiple times in Indian folklore as the subject of stories in both the Hitopadesha and the Panchatantra.
In temperate climates the forage available is often too abundant and too rich; over-feeding may cause weight gain and obesity, and lead to metabolic disorders such as founder (laminitis) and hyperlipaemia, or to gastric ulcers.
In the US, the slang terms "dumbass" and "jackass" are used to refer to someone considered stupid.
The bray of the donkey may be used as a simile for loud and foolish speech in political mockery.
The first recorded use of ''donkey'' was in either 1784 or 1785.
Donkeys were featured in literature during the 20th century, including in George Orwell's 1951 ''Animal Farm'', where Benjamin the donkey is portrayed as resilient and loyal.
Working donkeys may need to be shod.
Due to different mating behavior, jacks are often more willing to cover mares than stallions are to breed jennys.
They can meet their nutritional needs on 6 to 7 hours of grazing per day on average dryland pasture that is not stressed by drought.
* Perhaps from Spanish, for its don-like gravity; the donkey was also known as "the King of Spain's trumpeter"
Once a person has earned their confidence they can be willing and companionable partners and very dependable in work.
Thus it is usual to wait one or two further oestrous cycles before rebreeding, unlike the practice with mares.
Donkey hooves are more elastic than those of horses, and do not naturally wear down as fast.
Although formal studies of their behaviour and cognition are rather limited, donkeys appear to be quite intelligent, cautious, friendly, playful, and eager to learn.
In Ethiopia, there are many Amharic proverbs that demean donkeys, such as, "The heifer that spends time with a donkey learns to fart" (Bad company corrupts good morals).
Donkeys were documented as present in what today is Arizona in 1679.
''Zebra hinny, zebret'' and ''zebrinny'' all refer to the cross of a female zebra with a male donkey.
This work had a large influence on the portrayal of donkeys in later cultures, including medieval and renaissance Europe.
Other words used for the ass in English from this time include ''cuddy'' in Scotland, ''neddy'' in southwest England and ''dicky'' in the southeast; ''moke'' is documented in the 19th century, and may be of Welsh or Gypsy origin.
Donkeys are also associated with the theme of wisdom in the Old Testament story of Balaam's ass, and are seen in a positive light through the story of Jesus riding into Jerusalem on a donkey.
Feral donkeys can also cause problems, notably in environments that have evolved free of any form of equid, such as Hawaii.
Latin America & the Caribbean
Zebrinnies are rarer than zedonkies because female zebras in captivity are most valuable when used to produce full-blooded zebras.
A few donkeys are milked or raised for meat; in Italy, which has the highest consumption of equine meat in Europe and where donkey meat is the main ingredient of several regional dishes, only about 1000 donkeys were slaughtered in 2010, yielding approximately 100 tonnes of meat.
William Wordsworth portrayed the donkey as loyal and patient in his 1819 poem ''Peter Bell:A Tale'', using the donkey as a Christian symbol.
In prosperous countries, the welfare of donkeys both at home and abroad has become a concern, and a number of sanctuaries for retired and rescued donkeys have been set up.
In France, for example, only one breed, the Baudet de Poitou, was recognised prior to the early 1990s; by 2005, a further six donkey breeds had official recognition.
Both are critically endangered.
In Mexico, the donkey population is estimated at three million.
In Spanish, burros may also be called '''' ('Mexican donkey'), '''' ('Criollo donkey'), or ''''.
By the end of the fourth millennium BC, the donkey had spread to Southwest Asia, and the main breeding center had shifted to Mesopotamia by 1800 BC.
The hybrid between a stallion and a jenny is a hinny, and is less common.
The '''donkey''' or '''ass''' (''Equus africanus asinus'') is a domesticated member of the horse family, Equidae.
In the Dynasty IV era of Egypt, between 2675 and 2565 BC, wealthy members of society were known to own over 1,000 donkeys, employed in agriculture, as dairy and meat animals and as pack animals.
The words "donkey" and "ass" (or translations thereof) have come to have derogatory or insulting meaning in several languages, and are generally used to mean someone who is obstinate, stupid or silly, In football, especially in the United Kingdom, a player who is considered unskilful is often dubbed a "donkey", and the term has a similar connotation in poker.
The offspring of a zebra-donkey cross is called a zonkey, zebroid, zebrass, or zedonk; ''zebra mule'' is an older term, but still used in some regions today.
According to Old Testament prophecy, the Messiah is said to arrive on a donkey: "Behold, your King is coming to you; He is just and having salvation, Lowly and riding on a donkey, A colt, the foal of a donkey!"
Among donkeys, burros tend to be on the small side.
In contrast to Grecian works, donkeys were portrayed in Biblical works as symbols of service, suffering, peace and humility, most notably in their inclusion in the New Testament Nativity narrative.
A "donkey vote" is a vote that simply writes down preferences in the order of the candidates (1 at the top, then 2, and so on), and is most often seen in countries with ranked voting systems and compulsory voting, such as Australia.
To strengthen their bloodstock, in May 2005, the state of Jalisco imported 11 male and female donkeys from Kentucky.
Likely based on a stronger prey instinct and a weaker connection with man, it is considerably more difficult to force or frighten a donkey into doing something it perceives to be dangerous for whatever reason.
They are portrayed in film beginning with the 1940 Disney film ''Fantasia'', where the donkey is portrayed as a slapstick character who participates in a social faux pas with Bacchus and is punished by Zeus.
About 41 million donkeys were reported worldwide in 2006.
Donkey shoes are similar to horseshoes, but usually smaller and without toe-clips.
Proshka, an ass owned by Russian populist nationalist liberal democratic politician Vladimir Zhirinovsky, became prominent during the 2012 Russian presidential election campaign, when he was filmed in an election advertisement video.
The donkey has a tough digestive system in which roughage is efficiently broken down by hind gut fermentation, microbial action in the caecum and large intestine.
Donkeys (or asses) are mentioned many times in the Bible, beginning in the first book and continuing through both Old and New Testaments, so they became part of Judeo-Christian tradition.
In some areas domestic donkeys have returned to the wild and established feral populations such as those of the Burro of North America and the Asinara donkey of Sardinia, Italy, both of which have protected status.
They are gray in color.
Mules are much more common than hinnies.
The "''ruc català''" or "''burro català''" (Catalan donkey) has become a symbol of Catalonia in Spain.
By the end of the 17th century, changes in pronunciation of both ''ass'' and ''arse'' had caused them to become homophones.
Of the more than 40 million donkeys in the world, about 96% are in underdeveloped countries, where they are used principally as pack animals or for draught work in transport or agriculture.
Apuleius's ''The Golden Ass'' (160 AD), where the narrator is turned into a donkey, is also notable for its portrayal of donkeys as stubborn, foolish, wicked and lowly.
The melancholy Eeyore in ''Winnie the Pooh'' (first published in 1926) is arguably the most famous donkey in Western literature.
The average age of the burros in the study was 6.4 years; evaluated by their teeth, they ranged from 1 to 17 years old.
Donkeys obtain most of their energy from structural carbohydrates.
However, it is the only impure animal that falls under the mitzvah (commandment) of firstborn  ("bechor") consecration that also applies to humans and pure animals (See Petter Chamor).
In developed countries where their use as beasts of burden has disappeared, donkeys are used to sire mules, to guard sheep, for donkey rides for children or tourists, and as pets.
About 1.7 percent of donkey pregnancies result in twins; both foals survive in about 14 percent of those.
They were often contrasted with horses, which were seen as powerful and beautiful.
The largest is the Donkey Sanctuary of England, which also supports donkey welfare projects in Egypt, Ethiopia, India, Kenya, and Mexico.
The original representations of donkeys in Western literature come mainly from the Bible and Ancient Greece.
In the Iberian Peninsula and the Americas, a '''''' is a small donkey.
A donkey is featured as the main figure in the 1966 film ''Au hasard Balthazar'' by Robert Bresson, and, is given a life path of Christian symbolism.
Donkeys were represented in a fairly negative form by the Greeks, but perceptions later changed, partially due to donkeys becoming increasingly symbolically connected to Christianity.
The long history of human donkey use has created a rich store of cultural references:
Each adult donkey establishes a home range; breeding over a large area may be dominated by one jack.
There are more than 40 million donkeys in the world, mostly in underdeveloped countries, where they are used principally as draught or pack animals.
The donkey has been used as a working animal for at least 5000 years.
less than the 60–65% rate for mares).
Renewed attention to the regional burro helped start a breeding campaign for its preservation, and its numbers have increased.
Births of twins are rare, though less so than in horses.
In classical and ancient cultures, donkeys had a part.
By the 19th century, the donkey was portrayed with more positive attributes by popular authors.
In 2000 the number of breeds of donkey recorded worldwide was 97, and in 1995 it was 77.
In the Jewish religion, the donkey is not a kosher animal.
Mexican burros tend to be smaller than their counterparts in the USA, which are both larger and more robust.
The reasons for this difference are not fully understood; the donkey may have different intestinal flora to the horse, or a longer gut retention time.
Donkeys can interbreed with other members of the family Equidae, and are commonly interbred with horses.
Sympathetic portrayals return in Juan Ramon Jimenez's ''Platero and I.''
The foregoing terms generally refer to hybrids produced by breeding a male zebra to a female donkey.
Donkeys can also breed with zebras in which the offspring is called a zonkey (among other names).
In 2003 some friends in Catalonia made bumper stickers featuring the ''burro català'' as a reaction against a national advertising campaign for ''Toro d'Osborne'', a brandy.
Although jennies come into heat within 9 or 10 days of giving birth, their fertility remains low, and it is likely the reproductive tract has not returned to normal.
International organisations People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) and World Animal Protection have accused Zhirinovsky of cruelty to animals.
Few receive adequate food, and in general donkeys throughout the Third World are under-nourished and over-worked.
Further, mares are usually larger than jennys and thus have more room for the ensuing foal to grow in the womb, resulting in a larger animal at birth.
Few species of ass exist in the wild.
A jenny is normally pregnant for about 12 months, though the gestation period varies from 11 to 14 months, and usually gives birth to a single foal.
It needs less food than a horse or pony of comparable height and weight, approximately 1.5 percent of body weight per day in dry matter, compared to the 2–2.5 percent consumption rate possible for a horse.
Zhirinovsky replied to the assertions by stating that similar treatment is commonplace in the Arab world and claimed that his ass has been treated "better than many people".
Throughout the world, working donkeys are associated with the very poor, with those living at or below subsistence level.
In the Zohar, it is considered ''avi avot hatuma'' or the ultimate impure animal, and doubly "impure", as it is both non-ruminant and non-cloven hoofed.
While the word ''ass'' has cognates in most other Indo-European languages, ''donkey'' is an etymologically obscure word for which no credible cognate has been identified.
Regular clipping may be required; neglect can lead to permanent damage.
Small numbers of donkeys are kept for breeding or as pets in developed countries.
In China, donkey meat is considered a delicacy with some restaurants specializing in such dishes, and Guo Li Zhuang restaurants offer the genitals of donkeys in dishes.
Around 1400 AD, one physician listed riding backwards on a donkey as a cure for scorpion stings.
Donkeys hold a significant place in literature, especially in Western cultures.
The lower progesterone production of the jenny may also lead to early embryonic loss.
* Perhaps of imitative origin.
The domestication of donkeys served to increase the mobility of pastoral cultures, having the advantage over ruminants of not needing time to chew their cud, and were vital in the development of long-distance trade across Egypt.
The Muscat or Yemen ass was developed in Arabia.
Donkeys are also less prone to colic.
They are portrayed as work animals, used for agricultural purposes, transport and as beasts of burden, and terminology is used to differentiate age and gender.
They may compete with livestock and native animals for resources, spread weeds and diseases, foul or damage watering holes and cause erosion.
In that controversial ad, Zhirinovsky appeared sitting in a sleigh harnessed with Proshka, then claiming that the "little wretched ass" is the symbol of Russia and that if he would become President a "daring troika" would return as a symbol of Russia instead of the ass; at the end, Zhirinovsky beat Proshka with a whip, made the ass move and had a ride on him through the snow-covered backyard of his dacha.
Due to its widespread domestication and use, the donkey is referred to in myth and folklore around the world.
With the end of the placer mining boom, many of them escaped or were abandoned, and a feral population established itself.
He also said that "when you hear the braying of donkeys, seek Refuge with Allah from Satan for (their braying indicates) that they have seen a devil."
Shakespeare popularized the use of the word "ass" as an insult meaning stupid or clownish in many of his plays, including Bottom's appearance in ''A Midsummer Night's Dream'' (1600).
