Instead, an inexpensive device fitting over hinges is available on the market and should be used to ensure safety..."
The doors can slide in either direction along one axis on parallel overhead tracks, sliding past each other.
A '''bypass door''' is a door unit that has two or more sections.
Traditionally the top half can be opened to allow a horse or other animal to be fed, while the bottom half remains closed to keep the animal inside.
German-made Passive House doors use multiple weatherstrips, including magnetic strips, to meet higher standards.
The standard door sizes in the US run along 2" increments.
They need to be built with heavy duty parts and counterbalance systems for speed enhancement and emergency opening function.
high in Gothic niches, and in the upper panels a double range of niches with figures about .
'''Inward opening doors''' are doors that can only be opened (or forced open) from outside a building.
To prevent injury from glass doors, stickers or other types of warnings are sometimes placed on the glass surface to make it more visible.
The European Standard DIN EN 12519 "Windows and pedestrian doors.
Fixing this specification error will be expensive or time consuming.
That is split into four or five horizontal sections so that they can be raised more easily and don't require a lot of additional space above the door when opening and closing.
In Europe one of the oldest DIN standard applies: DIN 107 "Building construction; identification of right and left side" (first 1922-05, current 1974-04) defines that doors are categorized from the side where the door hinges can be seen.
Being relatively weak structures, they are most commonly used for wardrobes and drying rooms, where security is of less importance than good ventilation, although a very similar structure is commonly used to form window shutters.
The DIN 18101 standard has a normative size (Nennmaß) slightly larger than the panel size (Türblatt) as the standard derives the panel sizes from the normative size being different single door vs double door and molded vs unmolded doors.
In the lower panels there are figures .
Many doors are equipped with locking mechanisms to allow entrance to certain people and keep out others.
The frame typically requires a weather strip at floor level and where the doors meet to prevent water ingress.
Among existing examples, the bronze doors in the church of SS.
Specifying an incorrect hand or swing will cause the door to bind, not close properly or leak (for exterior doors).
* Panels – Large, wider boards used to fill the space between the stiles, rails, and mullions.
Note: In Australia, this is different.
Because of the number of accidents taking place, there has been a surge in the number of lawsuits.
There are simple devices available to attach to the hinge side, ensuring that this type of injury does not occur.
Pet doors may be unidirectional, only allowing pets to exit.
* A '''ledge and brace door''' is made from multiple vertical planks fixed together by two horizontal planks (the ledges) and kept square by a diagonal plank (the brace).
Most modern exterior walls are designed to provide thermal insulation and energy efficiency, which can be indicated by the Energy Star label or the Passive House standards.
The door that moves is called the "active leaf", while the door that remains fixed is called the "inactive leaf".
As a form of courtesy and civility, people often knock before opening a door and entering a room.
The bottom rail is also known as "kick rail".
If the hinges are on the right then it is a right hand (or right hung) door.
* A '''louvred door''' has fixed or movable wooden fins (often called slats or louvers) which permit open ventilation while preserving privacy and preventing the passage of light to the interior.
Upon returning the door to the closed position, power is restored.
The south door of Beauvais Cathedral is in some respects the finest in France; the upper panels are carved in high relief with figure subjects and canopies over them.
File:Namdroling.Temple.India.Door.jpg|A decorated door from the Namdroling Monastery, southern India
When open, doors admit people, animals, ventilation or light.
* A '''false door''' is a wall decoration that looks like a door.
The "top rail" and "bottom rail" are named for their positions.
Door guards protect fingers in door hinges by covering the gap that is created by opening doors by covering the hinges of doors with a piece of rubber or plastic that wraps from the door frame to the door.
These may also be fitted with wooden outer panels to resemble standard internal and external doors.
Panel doors, also called stile and rail doors, are built with frame and panel construction.
However, inward-hinged doors can also escalate an accident by preventing people from escaping the building: people inside the building may press against the doors, and thus prevent the doors from opening.
Cosmas and Damiano, in Rome, are important examples of Roman metal work of the best period; they are in two leaves, each with two panels, and are framed in bronze.
* A '''pet door''' (also known as a dog door or cat flap) is an opening in a door to allow pets to enter and exit without the main door being opened.
In cases where they are improperly installed, employed, or tampered with, the risk of fire can be increased.
* Muntin – Optional vertical members that divide the door into smaller panels.
* A '''garden door''' is any door that opens to a garden or backyard.
The refrigerator rule applies (you can't stand in a fridge, the door always opens towards you) – If the hinges are on the left then it is a left hand (or left hung) door.
The DIN Right and DIN Left marking are also used to categorize matching installation material such as mortise locks (referenced in DIN 107).
* '''Left hand hinge (LHH):''' Standing outside (or on the less secure side, or on the public side of the door), the hinges are on the left and the door opens in (away from you).
Bicyclists often fear collision with an opening car door in case the car's occupant does not look carefully to check that it is safe to open the door.
'''Up-and-over''' or '''overhead''' doors are often used in garages.
Rather than cover the danger area, the approach is to change the shape of the door so that an accessible gap does not form in the first place.
Those of Hagia Sophia at Constantinople, of the 8th and 9th century, are wrought in bronze, and the west doors of the cathedral of Aix-la-Chapelle (9th century), of similar manufacture, were probably brought from Constantinople, as also some of those in St. Marks, Venice.
If the hinges are on the left, it's a DIN Left door (DIN links, DIN gauche), if the hinges are on the right, it's a DIN Right door (DIN rechts, DIN droite).
31-35), which were carved and overlaid with gold.
(Also known as a ''header'')
Thickness:  Most pre-fabricated doors are 1 3/8" thick (for interior doors) or 1 3/4" (exterior).
Today, the exterior doors of most large (especially public) buildings open outward, while interior doors such as doors to individual rooms, offices, suites, etc.
In Eumachia, is a painting of a door with three leaves.
Therefore, they can be easily cleaned and depositing of particles is largely excluded.
According to the National Safety Council in the United States, 300,000 injuries are caused by doors every year.
In addition, young children are vulnerable to injury when they fall against the other (hinged) side of doors and gates, striking projected hinges.
high, being the entrance doors of the town.
According to the US General Services Administration:
:"...It is essential that children's fingers be protected from being crushed or otherwise injured in the hinge space of a swinging door or gate.
While facing the door, if the hinge is on the right side of the door, the door is "Right handed"; or if the hinge is on the left, it is "Left handed".
The term also may refer to what is known as ''patio doors''.
Copper and its alloys were integral in medieval architecture.
These weatherstrips are critical to reduce to a minimum energy losses due to air leakage.
The standard DIN doors are defined in DIN 18101 (published 1955-07, 1985-01, 2014-08).
The most common interior door is 860&nbsp;mm x 1985&nbsp;mm (33.8" x 78.1").
Pushing the door outward at its closed position, through a switch mechanism, disconnects power to the latch and allows the door to swing outward.
Such doors are also popular for use for the entrances to commercial structures, although they are not counted as fire exit doors.
Doors were once believed to be the literal doorway to the afterlife, and some doors leading to important places included designs of the afterlife.
'''Closets:''' small spaces such as closets, dressing rooms, half-baths, storage rooms, cellars, etc.
File:Door in rural Punjab.JPG|Door in rural Punjab
The door curtain was originally made of PVC, but was later also developed in aluminium and acrylic glass sections.
At Kuffeir near Bostra in Syria, Burckhardt found stone doors, 9 to .
They guarantee the tightness of all accesses.
The top half operates independently from the bottom half.
The stiles were the vertical boards, one of which, tenoned or hinged, is known as the hanging stile, the other as the middle or meeting stile.
The ancient Greek and Roman doors were either single doors, double doors, triple doors, sliding doors or folding doors, in the last case the leaves were hinged and folded back.
A matching pair of these doors is called a '''French window''', as it resembles a door-height casement window.
These doors or gates were hung in two leaves, each about  wide and .
File:Door lock.jpg|Front door of a house with typical door furniture: a letter box, door knocker, a latch and two locks
These doors have an operating range of slightly over 90 degrees, so their use is limited to where they come into contact with a side wall when fully open (or where they can be prevented from opening too far by a doorstop).
This is sometimes the case in trains or airplanes, such as for the door to the toilet, which opens inward.
In the United Kingdom, it is common for composite doors to be certified to BS PAS 23/24 and be compliant with '' Secured by Design'', an official UK police initiative.
These were used in historic English houses, mainly as servants' doors.
The doors of the mosques in Cairo were of two kinds; those which, externally, were cased with sheets of bronze or iron, cut out in decorative patterns, and incised or inlaid, with bosses in relief; and those in wood, which were framed with interlaced designs of the square and diamond, this latter description of work being Coptic in its origin.
This is known as a 'breakaway' feature.
Other sheathings of various sizes in bronze have been found, which proves this to have been the universal method adopted to protect the wood pivots.
The doors of the church at Gisors (1575) are carved with figures in niches subdivided by classic pilasters superimposed.
* A '''steel security door''' is one which is made from strong steel, often for use on vaults and safe rooms to withstand attack.
Door furniture or hardware refers to any of the items that are attached to a door or a drawer to enhance its functionality or appearance.
based on infrared or radio waves) can be triggered by a portable remote control, or is installed inside a vehicle.
The panel width may be in the range 485&nbsp;mm to 1360 mmm, and the height may be in the range of 1610&nbsp;mm to 2735&nbsp;mm.
In the tomb of Theron at Agrigentum there is a single four-panel door carved in stone.
In some cases the pivot is central, creating two equal openings.
Accidents vary in severity and frequency.
Doors are generally used to separate interior spaces (rooms, closets, etc.)
* Sill (for exterior doors) – A horizontal sill plate below the door that supports the door frame.
Full door protection uses front and rear anti-finger trapping devices and ensures the hinge side of a door is fully protected.
# A switch is operated manually, perhaps after security checks.
They may either absorb the force of a moving door, or hold the door in place to prevent unintended motion.
Saloon doors that only extend from knee-level to chest-level are known as '''batwing doors'''.
the door swings open towards the outside, or "outswing")
The exact period when the hinge was substituted is not quite known, but the change apparently brought about another method of strengthening and decorating doors, viz, with wrought-iron bands of infinite varieties of design.
Doors are significant in preventing the spread of fire.
There are single piece double garage doors found in some older homes.
(called an Archivolt if the door is arched).
Thus organisations may be at risk when car doors or doors within buildings are unprotected.
* United Airlines Flight 811 (1989)
Flush doors are most commonly employed in the interior of a dwelling, although slightly more substantial versions are occasionally used as exterior doors, especially within hotels and other buildings containing many independent dwellings.
File:Center Family Meeting Room Closeup of Doorway, Village at Pleasant Hill, Kentucky.JPG|Open internal door in a Shaker public building
Doors are often symbolically endowed with ritual purposes, and the guarding or receiving of the keys to a door, or being granted access to a door can have special significance.
A '''door''' is a moving structure used to block off, and allow access to, an entrance to or within an enclosed space, such as a building or vehicle.
In some cases, such as hinged garage doors, the axis may be horizontal, above the door opening.
* A '''trapdoor''' is a door that is oriented horizontally in a floor or ceiling, often accessed via a ladder.
There are many kinds of doors, with different purposes.
As such doors can only be forced open from the outside, building occupants would be prevented from escaping.
Door breaching techniques may be required in these situations to gain access.
For instance, in the UK, Regulation 14 of the Workplace (Health and Safety Regulations) 1992 requires the marking of windows and glass doors to make them conspicuous.
The doors of a French window often open outward onto a balcony, porch, or terrace and they may provide an entrance to a garden.
See note below for Australia where a different orientation is used.
Doors which lead from interior, pressurized, sections of an aircraft to exterior or unpressurized areas can pose extreme risk if they are inadvertently opened during flight.
Two car garage doors (sometimes called double car doors) are a single door 16'-0".
Those of the Pantheon are similar in design, with narrow horizontal panels in addition, at the top, bottom and middle.
* Pan Am Flight 125 (1987)
File:Palazzo Cirillo 03.jpg|A French window, known as patio door in UK, and ''portafinestra'' in Italy, where it is a common window-door type
The Greek scholar Heron of Alexandria created the earliest known automatic door in the 1st century AD during the era of Roman Egypt.
Which level of protection is appropriate should be determined by a risk assessment of the door.
A number of accidents have occurred where outward-opening aircraft doors were opened in flight, often accidentally:
This type consists of vertical tongue and grooved boards held together with battens and diagonal braces.
* A '''bifold door''' is a unit that has several sections, folding in pairs.
If the door opens inward and there is a fire, there can be a crush of people who run for the door and they will not be able to open it.
* '''Australian doors''' are a pair of plywood swinging doors often found in Australian public houses.
There are also door safety products which eject the fingers from the push side of the door as it is being closed.
In many cases the interior side of a door mostly matches its exterior side, but in some other cases there are sharp contrasts between the two sides, such as in the case of the vehicle door.
* Turkish Airlines Flight 981 (1974)
open swings to the outside, or "outswing")
The main parts are listed below:
Typically, doors have an interior side that faces the inside of a space and an exterior side that faces the outside of that space.
The Hildesheim design affected the concept of Gniezno door in Poland.
As a rule three bands from which the ornamental work springs constitute the hinges, which have rings outside the hanging stiles fitting on to vertical tenons run into the masonry or wooden frame.
The formed edges are often made of an engineered material such as Acrovyn.
Sliding glass doors are common in many houses, particularly as an entrance to the backyard.
Double louvred doors were introduced into ''Seagate'', built in Florida in 1929 by Gwendolyn and Powel Crosley, that provided the desired circulation of air with an added degree of privacy in that it is impossible to see through the fins in any direction.
The axis of rotation is usually vertical.
Doors can be hinged so that the axis of rotation is not in the plane of the door to reduce the space required on the side to which the door opens.
high with canopies over them, all carved in cedar.
* A '''sliding glass door''', sometimes called an Arcadia door or patio door, is a door made of glass that slides open and sometimes has a screen (a removable metal mesh that covers the door).
This style of door has been adapted for homes.
Examples might be found on the ceremonial door of a cathedral or in a large vehicle door in a garage or hangar.
Can be glued in or stay as a floating panel.
This prevents any part of a hand being crushed near the hinges – either inside or outside.
In the Hauran in Syria, where timber is scarce the doors were made in stone, and one measuring  by  is in the British Museum; the band on the meeting stile shows that it was one of the leaves of a double door.
When a door has more than one movable section, one of the sections may be called a ''leaf''.
This is achieved by adding a perfectly circular ("bull-nose" shaped) extension to the door, which moves in and out of a cavity as the door opens and closes.
a Rabbet) on the vertical edge(s) where they meet.
Each of the four doors are 139 meters (456 feet) high.
This includes items such as hinges, handles, door stops, etc.
In public buildings, exterior doors should open to the outside in order to comply with any fire codes that may be in force in that jurisdiction.
Besides olive wood, elm, cedar, oak and cypress were used.
All ancient doors were hung by pivots at the top and bottom of the hanging stile which worked in sockets in the lintel and sill, the latter being always in some hard stone such as basalt or granite.
Instead of hinges it has a mechanism, often counterbalanced or sprung, that allows it to be lifted so that it rests horizontally above the opening.
* '''Blast-proof doors''' are constructed to allow access to a structure but also to provide protection from the force of explosions.
A '''Mead door''', developed by S Mead of Leicester, swings both ways.
This term is often used specifically for French windows, double French doors (with lites instead of panels), in place of a sliding glass door.
They are most commonly used in closets, in order to access one side of the closet at a time.
The DIN commission was also responsible for the harmonized European standard DIN EN 14351-1 for exterior doors and DIN EN 14351-2 for interior doors (published 2006-07, 2010-08), which defines the requirements for the CE marking giving standard sizes by examples in the appendix.
* Rails – Horizontal boards at the top, bottom, and optionally in the middle of a door that join the two stiles and split the door into two or more rows of panels.
While in Italy the tendency was to give scale by increasing the number of panels, in France the contrary seems to have been the rule; and one of the great doors at Fontainebleau, which is in two leaves, is entirely carried out as if consisting of one great panel only.
'''Garages:'''  Garage doors are generally 7'-0" or 8'-0" wide for a single-car opening.
The purpose of door guards (also known as hinge guards, anti-finger trapping devices, or finger guards) is to reduce the number of finger trapping accidents in doors, as doors pose a risk to children especially when closing.
It is susceptible to forced entry due to its design.
A 5,000-year-old door has been found by archaeologists in Switzerland.
The bronze doors on the Aachen Cathedral in Germany date back to about AD 800.
The wood doors would seem to have been about 3 in.
A '''selfbolting door''' has special hinges that permit the panel leaf to move laterally, so that the door itself becomes a giant bolt for better security.
The purpose of the safety sensor is to prevent the door from colliding with an object in its path by stopping or slowing its motion.A mechanism is set in modern automatic doors to ensure that door will be in open state in case of power failure.
There is also handle-side door protection, which prevents the door from slamming shut on the frame, which can cause injury to fingers/hands.
This can be a push button switch or a swipe card.
In all these cases the hanging stile had pivots at the top and bottom.
Doors which slide between two wall panels are called '''pocket doors'''.
#* A remote sensor (e.g.
''(For more information, see: Copper in architecture).''
* '''Right hand hinge (RHH):''' Standing outside (or on the less secure side), the hinges are on the right and the door opens in (away from you).
In the Blundell collection is a bas-relief of a temple with double doors, each leaf with five panels.
Australian Standards: AS1288 and AS2208 require glass doors to be made from laminated or toughened glass.
often are accessed through doors smaller than passage doors in one or both dimensions but similar in design.
Whenever a door is opened outwards there is a risk that it could strike another person.
* Doorstop – a thin slat built inside the frame to prevent a door from swinging through when closed, an act which might break the hinges.
Bifolds are most commonly made for closets, but may also be used as units between rooms.
From the technical point of view the Evolution Door is a further development (evolution) of the '''Drehplattentür''' or '''flip panel door''' that normally consists of two rotatable, connected panels which move to each other when opening.
Of others in South Italy and Sicily, the following are the finest: in Sant Andrea, Amalfi (1060); Salerno (1099); Canosa (1111); Troia, two doors (1119 and 1124); Ravello (1179), by Barisano of Trani, who also made doors for Trani cathedral; and in Monreale and Pisa cathedrals, by Bonano of Pisa.
An espagnolette bolt may allow the head and foot of each door to be secured in one movement.
The system is an invention of the Austrian artist Klemens Torggler.
