* ''International School of Management'': Private academy focussing on management and economics, founded in 1990.
The Kaiserstraßen District is located east of the former ramparts of Dortmund and follows the course of the Westenhellweg.
The central junction for the night bus service is Reinoldikirche in the city centre, where all night bus lines start and end.
The city then became one of Germany's most important coal, steel and beer centres until the 1970s.
The orchestra was founded in 1887 and is now called Dortmunder Philharmoniker.
Three more shopping malls occupy the Thier-Galerie, Galeria Kaufhof and Karstadt, as well as large fashion retail clothing stores from Peek & Cloppenburg and C&A.
The minimum service interval is 2.5 minutes, although the usual pattern is that each line runs at 5 to 10 minute intervals.
* ''Fachhochschule für öffentliche Verwaltung Nordrhein-Westfalen'': Academy for public administration.
Dortmund is home to Germany's twelve biggest exhibition centre, Halls of Westphalia which lies near the city center next to Dortmund Airport.
Dortmund comprises 62 neighbourhoods which in turn are grouped into twelve boroughs (called ''Stadtbezirke''), often named after the most important neighbourhood.
As with most communes in the Ruhr area, local transport is carried out by a local, publicly owned company for transport within the city, the DB Regio subsidiary of Deutsche Bahn for regional transport and Deutsche Bahn itself for long-distance journeys.
The RN has a circulation of over 225,000 copies daily.
Each day, it produces a 30-minute regional evening news magazine (called ''Lokalzeit Ruhr''), a 5-minute afternoon news programme, and several radio news programmes.
The reconstruction of the city followed the style of the 1950s, while respecting the old layout and naming of the streets.
It crosses the Dutch-German border as a continuation of the Dutch A67 and crosses the Rhine, leads through the Ruhr valley toward Bochum, becoming B&nbsp;1 (Bundesstraße&nbsp;1) at the Kreuz Dortmund West and eventually merging into the A&nbsp;44 near Holzwickede.
Moreover, Dortmund is part of Westphalian Lowland and adjoins with the Ardey Hills in the south of the city to the Sauerland.
In April 2008, the newly constructed east-west underground light rail line was opened, completing the underground service in the city centre and replacing the last trams on the surface.
Historic buildings like Altes Stadthaus or the Krügerpassage rub shoulders with post-war architecture like Gesundheitshaus and concrete constructions with Romanesque churches like the Reinoldikirche and the Marienkirche.
Today the historical Kaiserbrunnen and the entrance sign for Kaiserstraße are important starting points for a tour to the popular shopping district.
The LWL-Industriemuseum was founded in 1969, and the city subsequently became a regional centre for hi-tech industry.
This long-lasting process of annexation has led to a strong identification of the population with "their" boroughs or districts and to a rare peculiarity: The borough of Hörde, located in the south of Dortmund and independent until 1928, has its own coat of arms.
According to ''Der Spiegel'', it is the most congested motorway in Germany.
This developed into the youngest population of Dortmund is living and created a district with art house cinemas to ethnic stores, from exotic restaurants to student pubs.
Dortmund Airport is a medium-sized, but fast growing airport  east of the city centre at the city limit to Holzwickede.
Over 100 buildings remain protected as historic monuments, like the Kreuzkirche at Kreuzstraße and the first Concrete Church in Germany St.-Nicolai.
Dortmund also serves as a major European and German crossroads for the Autobahnsystem.
DIE RECHTE 1NPD 1FBI 1
The Borsigplatz is probably one of the best known squares in the Nordstadt.
The region has adapted since the collapse of its century long steel and coal industries and shifted to high technology biomedical technology, micro systems technology  and also services.
The Jewish community has a history dating back to Medieval times and has always ranked among the largest in Westphalia.
The trains that run on the line are in fact lightrails as many lines travel along a track in the middle of the street instead of underground further from the city centre.
Right next to the Kampstraße is the Kleppingstraße, an expensive shopping street with prestigious shops.
As a profoundly international city, Dortmund hosts diplomatic missions (consulates and consulates-general) of Italy, Greece, Bangladesh, Ghana, South Africa and the Czech Republic.
''Visions' is a German music magazine with a circulation of approximately 35,000.
He has had to work with changing majorities in the local council.
File:RWE -Tower Dortmund.jpg|RWE Tower
All of the residents live in a densely populated 300 hectare area (the most densely populated residential area in the state of North Rhine-Westphalia with steelworks, port and railway lines acting as physical barriers cutting off the area from the city centre and other residential districts).
The first time Dortmund was mentioned in official documents was around 882 as '''Throtmanni'''.
The city is the site of several other universities, colleges and academies, which attract about 45,000 students.
File:Union-Brauerei Dortmund.jpg|U-Tower
The Sparkassen Chess-Meeting has been hosted in Dortmund since 1982.
In summer the people like to eat a Dortmunder Salzkuchen (Bread buns with caraway fruits, salt, meat and onions).
The Westdeutscher Rundfunk (WDR, West German Broadcasting Cologne has a big studio in Dortmund, which is responsible for the east Ruhr area.
File:Dortmund Ellipson.jpg|Ellipson
In 2009, Dortmund was classified as a ''Node city'' in the ''Innovation Cities Index'' published by 2thinknow.
The university’s most noticeable landmark is the H-Bahn, a monorail train which connects the north and south campuses.
The Church of holy apostle (gre.
The city has a long tradition of music and theatre.
Borussia Dortmund play at Westfalenstadion, currently known as Signal Iduna Park.
*Daimler AG: EvoBus
1904 marks the year when Dortmund saw a population of more than 100,000 for the first time in its history.
Within the Prussian Province of Westphalia, Dortmund was a district seat within Regierungsbezirk Arnsberg until 1875, when it became an urban district within the region.
Companies with operations in or around Dortmund include:
Dortmund Harbour (''Hafen'') is the largest canal harbour in Europe and the 11th fluvial harbour in Germany.
Besides Dortmund owns an all-weather racecourse called "Galopprennbahn Dortmund".
Dortmund is an independent city located in the east of the Ruhr area, one of the largest urban areas in Europe (see also: megalopolis), comprising eleven independent cities and four districts with some 5.3 million inhabitants.
* WDR 2, featuring adult-oriented popular music, focuses strongly on national and regional news, current affairs, and sport.
85 percent of the shops are retail chains such as H&M, Saturn, Esprit, Zara or NewYorker.
Historically speaking, Dortmund is a part of Westphalia which is situated in the Bundesland North Rhine-Westphalia.
Companies like Boehringer Ingelheim and Verizon Communications seat there.
All of that should attract families to settle in, but low prices of apartments and a variety of renting offers speak for the contrary.
Dortmund is home to the sports club Borussia Dortmund, one of the most successful clubs in German football history.
In the second World War, relatively few buildings were destroyed in comparison to other areas of the city.
It was part of Grand Duchy of Berg between 1806 and 1813 before passing to Prussian rule.
Its population of 581,612 (2015) makes it the 8th largest city in Germany.
Dortmund is home to the National Association of Jewish Communities of Westfalen-Lippe.
It was built for the 1974 FIFA World Cup and also hosted some matches of 2006 FIFA World Cup.
Thus, the city today is characterized by simple and modest post-war buildings, with a few interspersed pre-war buildings which were reconstructed due to their historical importance.
Within the VRR region, tickets are valid on lines of all members as well as DB's railway lines (except the high-speed InterCity and Intercity-Express networks) and can be bought at ticket machines and service centres of DSW21, all other members of VRR, and DB.
Contrary to those projections, population figures have been on the up in the recent years due to net migration gains.
The Nordstadt is an industrial urban area that was mainly developed in the 19th Century to serve the Westfalenhütte steelworks, port and rail freight depot.
During the industrialisation of Prussia, Dortmund became a major centre for coal and steel.
Not taking the fluctuation of war years into account, the population figures rose constantly to 657,804 in 1965.
After the war, buildings such as the main churches Reinoldikirche and Marienkirche were restored or rebuilt, and extensive parks and gardens were laid out.
Most of the boroughs were originally independent municipalities but were gradually annexed from 1905 to 1975.
* Zollern II/IV Colliery, now part of the Westphalian Industrial Museum and an Anchor Point of the European Route of Industrial Heritage (ERIH)
Founded around 882, Dortmund became an Imperial Free City.
* ''IT-Center Dortmund'': Private college founded in 2000.
There are frequent ICE trains to other German cities, including Frankfurt am Main, Berlin and other cities in the Rhein-Ruhr Region.
Agíon Apostólon Dortmund) is one of the oldest in Germany.
Dortmund calls itself ''Sportstadt'' (City of Sports).
The following cities border Dortmund (clockwise starting from north-east): Bochum, Castrop-Rauxel, Waltrop, Lünen, Kamen, Unna, Holzwickede, Schwerte, Hagen, Herdecke and Witten.
The area has been badly affected by the deindustrialisation of these heavy industries, with the target area developing a role as the home for growing numbers of immigrants and socially disadvantaged groups partly because of the availability of cheaper (although poor quality) accommodation.
Dortmund's population grew rapidly in the time of the 19th century industrialisation when coal mining and steel processing in the city began.
Several magazines also originate from Dortmund.
Dortmund features characteristics of densely populated areas as for example the occurrence of urban heat islands is typical.
Dortmund is the Olympic centre for Westphalia.
Other tall buildings are the churches around the city centre.
* Harenberg City-Center (86 metre-high skyscraper)
Ballspielverein Borussia Dortmund was founded nearby, north-east of the main railway station.
Dortmund is often called the ''Herzkammer der SPD'' (roughly translated as "heartland of the Social democrats"), which is the politically dominant party in the city.
The Westenhellweg has one of the highest rents for retail and office space in North Rhine-Westphalia.
Today, Kreuzviertel forms a nearly homogeneous historic building area.
The Kreuzviertel is characterised by old buildings, the majority of which come from the turn of the 20th century (1884 to 1908).
Other radio broadcasters include Radio NRW and eldoradio*.
The lowest point can be found in the northern borough of Brechten at 48,9m, the highest point in the borough of Syburg at 254,3 m.
DIE LINKE & PIRATEN
The Moltkestreet also known as the Cherry Blossom Avenue, became famous after photographers started posting pictures of blooming trees.
* Sparkassen-Hochhaus (70 metre-high skyscraper)
Furthermore, in Dortmund the Greek Orthodox Church, the Serbian Orthodox Church and the Macedonian Orthodox Church are represented.
The SPD reached 38,2 % (36 seats), CDU 27,2 % (26 seats), die Grünen 15,4 % (15 seats), Die Linke 6,8 % (6 seats), the AfD 3,4 % (3 seats), the FDP 2,4 % (2 seats), Piraten 2,3 % (2 seats), Die Rechte 1,0 % (1 seat), the Bürgerliste für Dortmund 1,0 % (1 seat), the NPD 0,9 % (1 seat) und the Freie Bürger-Initiative 0,7 % (1 seats).
* RWE Tower (100 metre-high skyscraper)
It is in the middle part of the state and is considered to be the administrative, commercial and cultural centre of the eastern Ruhr area.
* ''FOM Hochschule für Oekonomie & Management, Standort Dortmund'': Academy for management, founded in 1993.
The city annually organises several world-renowned sporting events.
The Allied ground advance into Germany reached Dortmund in April 1945.
The first opera house was built in 1904, destroyed in World War II and opened again in 1966 as Opernhaus Dortmund.
* Hansa Coking Plant
Some examples are the Ruhrmarathon and the Sparkassen Chess-Meeting.
It became an Imperial Free City.
The US 95th Infantry Division, attacked the city on 12 April 1945 against a spirited German defense.
German authorities safely defused the bomb.
Winters are comparatively mild, summers rather cool.
Bombing targets of the Oil Campaign of World War II in Dortmund included Hoesch-Westfalenhütte AG, the "Hoesch-Benzin GmbH" synthetic oil plant, and the ''Zeche Hansa'';, and the bombings destroyed about 66% of Dortmund homes and about 98% of the inner city area.
Data of the EU-wide 2011 census revealed massive inaccuracies with regard to German population figures.
Night buses replace U-Bahn and tram services between 1:30 am and 3:30 am.
Throughout the 13th to 14th centuries, it was the "chief city" of the Rhine, Westphalia, the Netherlands Circle of the Hanseatic League.
The WR is published by Germany's third largest newspaper and magazine publisher ''Funke Mediengruppe'.'
The "Rue de Pommes Frites", which is what the Dortmund citizens have called the Brückstraße for a long time, has turned into a modern, young shopping promenade.
The conservative ''Ruhr Nachrichten'', also known as ''RN'', was founded in 1949.
Dortmund tallest structure is the Florianturm telecommunication tower at .
Due to the growing immigration of people from Muslim countries beginning in the 1960s.
During the 19th century the area around Dortmund called Ruhr attracted up to 500,000 ethnic Poles, Masurians and Silesians from East Prussia and Silesia in a migration known as ''Ostflucht'' (flight from the east).
The synagogues operate there in City center, Hörde and Dorstfeld.
Connections to more distant parts of Germany are maintained by Autobahn routes A1 and A2, which traverse the north and east city limits and meet at the Kamener Kreuz interchange north-east of Dortmund.
In close proximity to the Dortmund concert hall lies the  '''Brückstraßenviertel ''' quarter - a hub especially for young people.
'''Current composition of the local council (July 2014):'''
It has about 30,000 students and a wide range of subjects in of physics, electrical engineering, chemistry, spatial planning and economics.
Some buildings of the "Wiederaufbauzeit" (era of reconstruction), for example the opera house are nowadays regarded as classics of modern architecture.
Nevertheless, two parks – Fredenbaumpark and Hoeschpark – are situated there.
This stands in a stark contrast with nearly a hundred years of extensive coal mining and steel milling within the city limits.
The  '''Westenhellweg''' is a popular shopping destination and with nearly 13,000 visitors per hour it was Germany's most frequented shopping street in 2013.
For public transportation, the city has an extensive Stadtbahn and bus system.
In this district numerous magnificent buildings from the 1900s and new buildings from the 1950s are located next to the heritage-protected State Mining Office Dortmund, several Courts, Consulate and the East Cemetery.
The 1661 earthquake made the Reinoldikirche collapse.
Radical workers formed a Red Army who fought the freikorps units involved in the coup.
File:IMG 7667Hafen-Dortmund-.jpg|Port Authority
The division, assisted by close air support, advanced through the ruins in urban combat and completed its capture on 13 April 1945.
The other important newspaper, the ''Westfälische Rundschau'', was first published in 1945 and has a daily circulation of over 181,000.
After it was destroyed by a fire, the Holy Roman Emperor Frederick I (Barbarossa) had the town rebuilt in 1152 and resided there (among other places) for two years.
A selection of the tallest office buildings in Dortmund is listed below.
Each ''Stadtbezirk'' is assigned a Roman numeral and has a local governing body of nineteen members with limited authority.
As the largest homogeneous old building area in Ruhr the Nordstadt is a melting pot of different people of different countries and habits just a few steps from the city center.
In 1920, Dortmund was one of the centres for resistance to the Kapp Putsch - a right military coup launched against the Social Democratic-led government.
Since the 2012 local election, there have been 8 parties and electors' groups in the town council (86 seats; 2009: 96 seats): Ullrich Sierau (SPD) has been the mayor of Dortmund since May 2010.
The city limits of Dortmund itself are  long and border twelve cities, two independent and ten ''kreisangehörig'' (i.e., belonging to a district), with a total population of approximately 2.4 million.
Dortmund is home to many cultural and educational institutions, including the Technical University of Dortmund and Dortmund University of Applied Sciences and Arts, International School of Management and other educational, cultural and administrative facilities with over 49,000 students, many museums, such as Museum Ostwall, Museum für Kunst und Kulturgeschichte, German Football Museum, as well as theatres and music venues like the Konzerthaus or the opera house of Dortmund.
The Ruhrschnellweg follows old Hanseatic trade routes to connect the city with the other metropolises of the Ruhr Area.
Two big Radio Channels of Westdeutscher Rundfunk are sending from Dortmund.
DIE LINKE 6PIRATEN 2
This made it the first European Cup Winner in Germany.
'''Dortmund''' (;  ; Latin: ''Tremonia'') is an independent city in North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany.
, Dortmund had a population of 571,403 of whom about 177,000 (roughly 30%) were of non-German origin.
Its focus is on tuneful music – in particular, oldies and classic hits: popular music of the 1960s to the 1980s or later – with more specialized programming (operetta, country, folk) in the evenings.
Some of the most reputed shops, department stores, and labels have their stores here.
Nowadays the Kreuzviertel is a trendy district with pubs, restaurants, cafés, galleries and little shops.
Two important daily newspapers are published in and around Dortmund.
The region has shifted to high technology, robotics, biomedical technology, micro systems technology, engineering, tourism, finance, education and also services.
Dortmund has a large Muslim community with more than 30 Mosques.
A number of bus lines complete the Dortmund public transport system.
File:Hochofenwerk Phoenix-West Sommer.jpg|Phoenix-West coking plant
Borussia Dortmund also has a women's handball team playing in the first Bundesliga, while Borussia's table tennis team and the SVD 49 Dortmund basketball team play in their respective second national divisions.
After 1320, the city appeared in writing as "Dorpmunde".
* U-Tower, former Dortmunder Union brewery, now a museum
There is also much equipment for children to spend their free time.
The code word ''Dortmund'' was radioed to initiate the 1941 Operation Barbarossa campaign against the Soviet Union.
A nearly identical monorail system transfers passengers at Düsseldorf Airport.
Today with a population of 595,624 (2015) the City of Dortmund is the eight largest city in Germany after Berlin, Hamburg, Munich, Cologne, Frankfurt, Stuttgart and Düsseldorf.
Sat.1 have a regional studio in Dortmund
It is operated by Theater Dortmund together with other locations, including (since 2002) the Konzerthaus Dortmund.
Under Nazi Germany, the Old synagogue was destroyed in 1938.
Consequently, respective figures have been corrected, which resulted in a statistical "loss" of 9,000 inhabitants in Dortmund.
Throughout the 13th to 14th centuries, it was the "chief city" of the Rhine, Westphalia, the Netherlands Circle of the Hanseatic League.
* IWO-Hochhaus(70 metre-high skyscraper)
The bomb was found after analysing old aerial photographs while searching for unexploded bombs dropped by Allied aircraft over Germany's industrial Ruhr region.
the largest Christian denominations were Protestantism (29.9%) and Roman Catholicism (27.4% of the population).
The area around the U-Tower called "Union Viertel" is part of the Creative.Quarters Ruhr and are rooted in the European Capital of Culture RUHR.2010.
Over 80% of all housing in this area was constructed before 1948, with the oldest building the Dortmund University of Applied Sciences and Arts still standing being from 1896.
Every spring, usually in April, the street in the Kaiserstraßen district is booming with pink blossoms and attracts tourists.
Dortmund is also home to a number of medium-sized information technology companies, many linked to the local university TU Dortmund at the first technology center in Germany named "Technologiepark Dortmund"  opened in the 1980s.
For a long time the Kampstraße had a shadowy existence as parallel street to the Westenhellweg and Ostenhellweg - but it has now become a grand boulevard which contains specialist stores.
The City of Dortmund
Also, the Aplerbeck Hospital in Dortmund transferred mentally and/or physically disabled patients for euthanasia at the Hadamar mental hospital as part of the Action T4 (an additional 229 children were killed in the "Children's Specialist Department", which was transferred from Marburg in 1941).
Most of the new inhabitants came from Eastern Europe, but immigrants also came from France, Ireland, and the United Kingdom.
Since the end of the war, the SPD has held a relative majority in the town council - except from 1999 to 2004.
The district is characterize by the employee of the Amtsgericht, Landgericht (the first and second instances of ordinary jurisdiction) and the Prison.
The near-complete destruction of Dortmund's city centre during World War&nbsp;II (98%) has resulted in a varied architectural landscape.
The trail links tourist attractions related to the industrial heritage in the whole Ruhr area in Germany.
Dortmund has a railway service with Deutsche Bahn InterCity and ICE-trains stopping at ''Dortmund Hauptbahnhof'' (Dortmund Main Station).
The city works closely with research institutes, private universities, and companies to collaborate on the commercialisation of science initiatives.
Dortmund has seen a moderate influx of younger people (18 to 25 years of age) mainly because of its universities.
The Dortmund U-Tower, which was once a brewery, is now European centre for creative economy and the Museum am Ostwall.
ICE and TGV Thalys high-speed trains link Dortmund with Amsterdam, Brussels (in 2h 30) and Paris (in 3h 50).
The H-Bahn at Dortmund University of Technology is a hanging monorail built specifically to shuttle passengers between the university's two campuses, which are now also flanked by research laboratories and other high-tech corporations and startups.
* Westfalentower (88 metre-high skyscraper)
Borussia Dortmund was winner of the UEFA Champions League and the Intercontinental Cup in 1997, as well as the UEFA Cup Winners' Cup in 1966.
Dortmund's city centre offers a picture full of contrasts.
Also a special meal in the winter is Reibekuchen (fried potato pancake served with apple sauce).
Some of its most prominent companies of these sector include Wilo, Amprion, RWE-Westnetz, Rhenus Logistics, KHS GmbH, Elmos Semiconductor, Signal Iduna and ABP Induction Systems – all of whom have their headquarters here.
It is Germany's largest football stadium with a maximum capacity of 81,359 spectators.
