1931) who developed a new bass method that divided the entire fingerboard into six positions.
Some regions may not have enough work in music to provide a living, even if a bassist plays several styles and does recordings and teaching.
Paul Hindemith wrote a rhythmically challenging Double Bass Sonata in 1949.
Some popular bands decided to anchor their sound with an upright bass instead of an electric bass, such as the Barenaked Ladies.
Classical players perform both bowed and pizz notes using vibrato, an effect created by rocking or quivering the left hand finger that is contacting the string, which then transfers an undulation in pitch to the tone.
The pedagogy and training for the double bass varies widely by genre and country.
Another option is to utilize both a low C (or B) extension and a high C string.
Bowed bass parts with a mute can have a nasal tone.
Many cobla bands in Catalonia still have players using traditional three-string double basses tuned A–D–G.
Reinhold Glière wrote an Intermezzo and Tarantella for double bass and piano, Op.
There are not degrees in blues bass performance, or conservatories offering multiple-year diplomas in rockabilly bass.
2, Einojuhani Rautavaara's ''Angel Of Dusk'' (1980), Gian Carlo Menotti's Concerto (1983), Christopher Rouse's Concerto (1985), Henry Brant's Ghost Nets (1988) and Frank Proto's "Carmen Fantasy for Double Bass and Orchestra" (1991) and "Four Scenes after Picasso" Concerto No.3 (1997).
5, 7 and 9; Strauss's ''Ein Heldenleben'' and ''Don Juan''; Mozart's Symphony No.
Unlike the rest of the violin family, the double bass still reflects influence, and can be considered partly derived, from the viol family of instruments, in particular the violone, the bass member of the viol family.
The double bass is the only modern bowed string instrument that is tuned in fourths (like a viol), rather than fifths (see Tuning below).
As well, the low "E" strings used during the 19th century were thick cords made of gut, which were difficult to tune and play.
Larger ensemble works include Galina Ustvolskaya's Composition No.
Professor Larry Hurst argues that had "it not been for the appearance of the overwound gut string in the 1650s, the double bass would surely have become extinct."
With an amplifier and equalization devices, a bass player can boost the low frequencies, which changes the frequency response.
Notably, Charles Mingus was a highly regarded composer as well as a bassist noted for his technical virtuosity and powerful sound.
The ''Solo For Contrabass'' is one of the parts of John Cage's ''Concert For Piano And Orchestra'' and can be played as a solo, or with any of the other parts both orchestral and/or piano.
In some cases, blues or rockabilly bassists may have obtained some initial training through the classical or jazz pedagogy systems (e.g., youth orchestra or high school big band).
However, "The cello dropped out of sight in folk music, and became associated with the orchestra."
Bassists who stand and bow sometimes set the endpin by aligning the first finger in either first or half position with eye level, although there is little standardization in this regard.
In jazz, blues, rockabilly and other genres outside of classical music, this instrument is commonly called the '''upright bass''', '''standup bass''' or '''acoustic bass''' to distinguish it from the electric bass guitar.
There is an increasing number of published compositions and arrangements for double bass ensembles, and the International Society of Bassists regularly features double bass ensembles (both smaller ensembles as well as very large "mass bass" ensembles) at its conferences, and sponsors the biennial David Walter Composition Competition, which includes a division for double bass ensemble works.
The experimental post 1960s era, and free jazz and jazz-rock fusion, produced several influential bassists.
Composers writing divisi parts for bass often write perfect intervals, such as octaves and fifths, but in some cases use thirds and sixths.
The most complicated mechanical aid for use with extensions is the mechanical lever system nicknamed the ''machine''.
While the upright bass is still occasionally used in country music, the electric bass has largely replaced its bigger cousin in country music, especially in the more pop-infused country styles of the 1990s and 2000s, such as new country.
In addition, the double bass sections of some orchestras perform as an ensemble, such as the Chicago Symphony Orchestra's Lower Wacker Consort.
Franz Anton Hoffmeister wrote four String Quartets for Solo Double Bass, Violin, Viola, and Cello in D Major.
Machine tuners are always fitted, in contrast to the rest of the violin family, where traditional wooden friction pegs are still the primary means of tuning.
The double bass stands around 180&nbsp;cm (six feet) from scroll to endpin.
A less expensive alternative to gut strings is nylon strings; the higher strings are pure nylon, and the lower strings are nylon wrapped in wire, to add more mass to the string, slowing the vibration, and thus facilitating lower pitches.
Both natural harmonics and artificial harmonics, where the thumb stops the note and the octave or other harmonic is activated by lightly touching the string at the relative node point, extend the instrument's range considerably.
1933) bass solo, which calls for notes as high as D3 and E3).
During Rossini's stay in London in the summer of 1824, he composed his Duetto for cello and double bass for Dragonetti and the cellist David Salomons.
The electric bass was easily amplified with its built-in pickups, easily portable (less than a foot longer than an electric guitar), and easier to play in tune, thanks to the metal frets.
This lever system, which superficially resembles the keying mechanism of reed instruments such as the bassoon, mounts levers beside the regular fingerboard (near the nut, on the "E" string side), which remotely activate metal "fingers" on the extension fingerboard.
5; Ginastera's ''Variaciones Concertante''; Tchaikovsky's Symphony No.
Synthetic hair does not have the tiny "barbs" that real horsehair has, so it does not "grip" the string well or take rosin well.
This transposition applies even when bass players are reading the tenor and treble clef (which are used in solo playing and some orchestral parts).
David A. Jaffe's "Who's on First?," commissioned by the Russian National Orchestra is scored for five double basses.
When playing in the instrument's upper range (above the G below middle C), the player shifts the hand from behind the neck and flattens it out, using the side of the thumb to press down the string.
For example, in jazz, aspiring bassists have to learn how to perform a wide range of pizzicato tones, including using the sides of the fingers to create a full, deep sound for ballads, using the tips of the fingers for fast walking basslines or solos, and performing a variety of percussive ''ghost notes'' by raking muted or partially muted strings.
On the 2008 album ''In Ear Park'' by the indie/pop band Department of Eagles, a bowed upright bass is featured quite prominently on the songs "Teenagers" and "In Ear Park".
Like other violin and viol-family string instruments, the double bass is played either with a bow (arco) or by plucking the strings (pizzicato).
About the closest that a bass player can come to this is in the case of classical bass players who win an audition at a professional orchestra or the tiny number of top session pros that are hired by recording studios.
In 2015, the least expensive entry-level new, fully carved basses range from $2,750  to $4,200 USD, although a higher-end new carved instrument may cost from $9,000 to $24,000 USD.
In general, very loud, low-register passages are played with little or no vibrato, as the main goal with low pitches is to provide a clear fundamental bass for the string section.
While amplification is rarely used in classical music, in some cases where a bass soloist performs a concerto with a full orchestra, subtle amplification called acoustic enhancement may be used.
In 1951, Leo Fender independently released his Precision Bass, the first commercially successful electric bass guitar.
The suite "Seven Screen Shots" for double bass and piano (2005) by Ukrainian composer Alexander Shchetynsky has a solo bass part that includes many unconventional methods of playing.
Bowed harmonics are used in contemporary music for their "glassy" sound.
As such, in some regions, bassists may have to supplement musical work with income from another field.
In jazz, blues, and rockabilly, pizzicato is the norm.
Due to the multiple octaves between the oboist's tuning A and the open A string on the bass (for example, in an orchestra that tunes to 440&nbsp;Hz, the oboist plays an A at 440&nbsp;Hz and the open A of the bass is 55&nbsp;Hz) it is can be difficult to tune the bass by ear during the short period that the oboist plays the tuning note.
An important distinction between the double bass and other members of the violin family is the construction of the pegbox.
Frank Proto has written a Trio for Violin, Viola and Double Bass (1974), 2 Duos for Violin and Double Bass (1967 and 2005), and ''The Games of October'' for Oboe/English Horn and Double Bass (1991).
1 for double bass solo in 1971.
Fully laminated basses are resistant to changes in heat and humidity and accidental droppage or impacts, which can cause cracks in carved wood tops and bodies (a crack is most serious on the top).
The metal tuning machines are attached to the sides of the pegbox with metal screws.
In jazz, blues, and related genres, the bass is typically amplified with an amplifier and speaker.
However, with modern steel strings, bassists can play with clear tone in higher positions on the low E and A strings, particularly when they use modern lighter-gauge, lower-tension steel strings.
Classical bass students learn all of the different bow articulations used by other string section players (e.g., violin and cello), such as détaché,  legato, staccato, sforzato, martelé ("hammered"-style), sul ponticello, sul tasto, tremolo, spiccato and sautillé.
Gut strings provide the dark, "thumpy" sound heard on 1940s and 1950s recordings.
Sergei Prokofiev's ''Lieutenant Kijé Suite'' features a difficult and very high double bass solo in the "Romance" movement.
The '''double bass''' or simply the '''bass''' (and numerous other names) is the largest and lowest-pitched bowed string instrument in the modern symphony orchestra.
The late 1970s rockabilly-punk genre of psychobilly continued and expanded upon the rockabilly tradition of slap bass.
Mid- and higher-register melodies are typically played with more vibrato.
Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart's concert aria, ''Per Questa Bella Mano'', K.612 for bass, double bass obbligato, and orchestra contains impressive writing for solo double bass of that period.
However, the bass guitar has a different musical sound.
In the 1960s and 1970s bands were playing at louder volumes and performing in larger venues.
The double bass features many parts that are similar to members of the violin family, including a bridge, f-holes, a tailpiece, a scroll, and a sound post.
Simandl and Hrabe were also pedagogues whose method books and studies remain in use.
There are two main exceptions to this rule.
The design of the bow and the manner of holding it descend from the older viol instrument family.
A third less common design, called the ''busetto'' shape, can also be found, as can the even more rare ''guitar'' or ''pear'' shape.
The classic 19th century Franz Simandl method does not use the low E string in higher positions because older gut strings, set up high over the fingerboard, could not produce clear tone in these higher positions.
As well, bluegrass bassists who play slap-style on live shows often slap less on records.
Richard Strauss assigned the double bass daring parts, and his symphonic poems and operas stretch the instrument to its limits.
An unamplified acoustic bass's tone is limited by the frequency responsiveness of the instrument's hollow body, which means that the very low pitches may not be as loud as the higher pitches.
With the mute on, the tone of the bass is quieter, darker, and more somber.
fis2\p( g4 a) | a4( g fis e) | d2( e4 fis) | fis4.
The player may tune the low E string down to the lowest note required in the piece: D or C. Four string basses may be fitted with a "low-C extension" (see below).
Classical training methods vary by country: many of the major European countries are associated with specific methods (e.g., the Edouard Nanny method in France or the Franz Simandl method in Germany).
At the base of the double bass is a metal rod with a spiked or rubberized end called the endpin, which rests on the floor.
A person auditioning for a role as a bassist in some styles of pop or rock music may be expected to demonstrate the ability to perform harmony vocals as a backup singer.
Other brands, such as Carlsson or Nyman Harts double bass rosin, are harder and less prone to melting.
The scherzo and trio from Beethoven's Fifth Symphony are famous orchestral excerpts, as is the recitative at the beginning of the fourth movement of Beethoven's Ninth Symphony.
Jacob Druckman wrote a piece for solo double bass entitled ''Valentine''.
The simplest type of mechanical aid is the use of wooden "fingers" or "gates" that can be closed to press the string down and fret the C, D, E, or E notes.
For information on the strings used in regular and solo tuning and with different types of basses, see the section below on tuning.
Lack of standardization in design means that one double bass can sound and look very different from another.
However, other sizes are available, such as a 1/2 or 3/4, which serve to accommodate a player's height and hand size.
Because these do not have wider fingerboards, some players find them more difficult to finger and bow.
Some of the earliest basses extant are violones, (including C-shaped sound holes) that have been fitted with modern trappings."
In jazz and jump blues, bassists are required to play extremely rapid pizzicato walking basslines for extended periods.
Usually, bass performance students perform several recitals of solo double bass music, such as concertos, sonatas, and Baroque suites.
However, upright bass players using their instruments in these contexts faced inherent problems.
Natural and artificial harmonics are used a great deal in virtuoso concertos for the double bass.
Photos of Miroslav Vitous showing the sides of the double bass:
As well, the upright bass is large and awkward to transport, which also created transportation problems for touring bands.
Throughout the early history of jazz, double bass players either learned the instrument informally, or from getting classical training early on, as in the case of Ron Carter and Charles Mingus.
Bassist Johann Hindle (1792–1862), who composed a concerto for the double bass, pioneered tuning the bass in fourths, which marked a turning point for the double bass and its role in solo works.
Slightly larger sextets written for piano, string quartet, and double bass have been written by Felix Mendelssohn, Mikhail Glinka, Richard Wernick, and Charles Ives.
Bassists may apply more rosin in works for large orchestra (e.g., Brahms symphonies) than for delicate chamber works.
He wrote Parable XVII for Double Bass, Op.
Due to the limited number of full-time orchestral jobs, many classical bassists are similarly not able to find full-time work with a single orchestra.
in double bass performance consist of private lessons, ensemble experience, coaching in playing orchestral double bass parts, and graduate courses in music history and music theory, along with one or two solo recitals.
In 2013, an article in ''Mother Jones'' about the role of women in music stated that double bass sections are mostly male.
"Slap style" may have influenced electric bass guitar players  who, from the mid-sixties (particularly Larry Graham of Sly and the Family Stone), developed a technique called ''slap and pop'' that used the thumb of the plucking hand to hit the string, making a slapping sound but still letting the note ring, and the index or middle finger of the plucking hand to pull the string back so it hits the fretboard, achieving the pop sound described above.
Other works for this instrumentation written from roughly the same period include those by Johann Nepomuk Hummel, George Onslow, Jan Ladislav Dussek, Louise Farrenc, Ferdinand Ries, Franz Limmer, Johann Baptist Cramer, and Hermann Goetz.
Five-string instruments have an additional string, typically tuned to a low B below the E string.
German bassist Didi Beck plays rapid triplet slaps, as demonstrated in this video.
Another option is the hybrid body bass, which has a laminated back and a carved or solid wood top.
He says that "most likely its first general shape was that of a violone, the largest member of the viol family.
The index finger meets the bow at the point where the frog meets the stick.
The leading figure of the double bass in the early 20th century was Serge Koussevitzky, best known as conductor of the Boston Symphony Orchestra, who popularized the double bass in modern times as a solo instrument.
2 in B; Berlioz's ''Symphonie Fantastique'', Mendelssohn's Symphony No.
such as Swing, Bebop, and fusion.
The use of amplification allows the player to have more control over the tone of the instrument, because amplifiers have equalization controls that allow the bassist to accentuate certain frequencies (often the bass frequencies) while de-accentuating some frequencies (often the high frequencies, so that there is less finger noise).
Thus, when double bass players and cellists are playing from a combined bass-cello part, as used in many Mozart and Haydn symphonies, they will play in octaves, with the basses one octave below the cellos.
Classical bass players do play pizzicato parts in orchestra, but these parts generally require simple notes (quarter notes, half notes, whole notes), rather than rapid passages.
Other colourful nicknames are found in other languages; in Hungarian, the double bass is sometimes called ''nagy bőgő'', which roughly translates as "big crier," referring to its large voice.
Well-known rockabilly bassists include Bill Black, Marshall Lytle (with Bill Haley & His Comets) and Lee Rocker (with 1980s-era rockabilly revivalists the Stray Cats).
Part of the regular maintenance of a bow is having the bow "rehaired" by a luthier with fresh horsehair and having the leather and wire wrapping replaced.
Double bass rosin is generally softer and stickier than violin rosin to allow the hair to grab the thicker strings better, but players use a wide variety of rosins that vary from quite hard (like violin rosin) to quite soft, depending on the weather, the humidity, and the preference of the player.
He states that, while the exterior of the double bass may resemble the viola da gamba, the internal construction of the double bass is nearly identical to instruments in the violin family, and very different from the internal structure of viols.
The hair is usually horsehair.
2 and a Praeludium and Scherzo for double bass and piano, Op.
When the clarinetist Ferdinand Troyer commissioned a work from Franz Schubert for similar forces, he added one more violin for his Octet in F major, D.803.
Prior to the mid-20th century, double bass strings were usually made of gut, but, since that time, steel has largely replaced it, because steel strings hold their pitch better and yield more volume when played with the bow.
The main notes are either played normally or by pulling the string away from the fingerboard and releasing it so that it bounces off the fingerboard, producing a distinctive percussive attack in addition to the expected pitch.
The Amarillo Bass Base of Amarillo, Texas once featured 52 double bassists, and The London Double Bass Sound, who have released a CD on Cala Records, have 10 players.
The upright bass began making a modest comeback in popular music in the mid-1980s, in part due to a renewed interest in earlier forms of rock and country music.
Players also may use a small cart and end pin-attached wheels to move the bass.
It is hard for bass players to find full-time, full-year work at a single job.
The classical bassist Edgar Meyer has frequently branched out into newgrass, old-time, jazz, and other genres.
Hard flight cases have cushioned interiors and tough exteriors of carbon fiber, graphite, fiberglass, or Kevlar.
The earliest known existing concertos are by Karl Ditters von Dittersdorf, who composed two concertos for the double bass and a Sinfonia Concertante for viola and double bass.
Double bassists either stand or sit to play the instrument.
Because an unamplified upright bass is generally the quietest instrument in a jazz band, many players of the 1920s and 1930s used the ''slap style'', slapping and pulling the strings to produce a rhythmic "slap" sound against the fingerboard.
Bows have a leather wrapping on the wooden part of the bow near the frog.
In some cases, the low E and A are wound in silver, to give them added mass.
This style is more similar to the traditional bows of the smaller string family instruments.
It is uncertain whether the instrument is a descendant of the viola da gamba or of the violin, but it is traditionally aligned with the violin family.
4; Mahler's Symphony No.
Famous double bass makers come from around the world and often represent varied national characteristics.
The instrument height is set by adjusting the endpin such that the player can reach the desired playing zones of the strings with bow or plucking hand.
Steel strings can be set up closer to the fingerboard and, additionally, strings can be played in higher positions on the lower strings and still produce clear tone.
In the realm of even larger works, Mozart included the double bass in addition to 12 wind instruments for his "Gran Partita" Serenade, K.361 and Martinů used the double bass in his nonet for wind quintet, violin, viola, cello and double bass.
The double bass also differs from members of the violin family in that the shoulders are typically sloped, the back is often angled (both to allow easier access to the instrument, particularly in the upper range).
The Engelhardt-Link (formerly Kay) brands of plywood laminate basses have long been popular choices for bluegrass bassists.
Since piezoelectric pickups are not good at reproducing the sounds of strings being slapped against the fingerboard, bassists in these genres often use both piezoelectric pickups (for the low bass tone) and a miniature condenser mic (to pick up the percussive slapping sounds).
The German composer Claus Kühnl wrote ''Offene Weite / Open Expanse'' (1998) and ''Nachtschwarzes Meer, ringsum…'' (2005) for double bass and piano.
Notes below low E appear regularly in the double bass parts found in later arrangements and interpretations of Baroque music.
When choosing a bass with a fifth string, the player may decide between adding a higher or lower-tuned string.
The thumb rests on the shaft of the bow, next to the frog while the other fingers drape on the other side of the bow.
The cost of good hard cases and the high airline fees for shipping them tend to limit their use to touring professionals.
One criticism of these devices is that they may lead to unwanted metallic clicking noises.
During the same time, a prominent school of bass players in the Czech region arose, which included Franz Simandl, Theodore Albin Findeisen, Josef Hrabe, Ludwig Manoly, and Adolf Mišek.
In the 19th century, the opera conductor, composer, and bassist Giovanni Bottesini was considered the "Paganini of the double bass" of his time.
Many contemporary composers specify highly specialized scordatura.
The rabeca is descended from the medieval rebec.
New hybrid basses start at $3,200 USD.
Bach suite for solo cello or a movement from a bass concerto and a variety of excerpts from the orchestral literature.
It is sometimes confusingly called the '''violone''', '''bass violin''' or '''bass viol'''.
Some players perform with the sides of one, two, or three fingers, especially for walking basslines and slow tempo ballads, because this is purported to create a stronger and more solid tone.
In his ''A New History of the Double Bass'', Paul Brun asserts, with many references, that the double bass has origins as the true bass of the violin family.
In 1996, the Sorbonne-trained Lebanese composer Karim Haddad composed ''Ce qui dort dans l'ombre sacrée'' ("He who sleeps in the sacred shadows") for Radio France's Presence Festival.
Many bass players find extra work by substituting ("subbing") for bassists who are double-booked or ill.
Smaller orchestras may have four double basses, and in exceptional cases, bass sections may have as many as ten members.
Terry Plumeri is noted for his horn-like arco fluency and vocal-sounding tone.
Plywood laminate basses, which are widely used in music schools, youth orchestras, and in popular and folk music settings (including rockabilly, psychobilly, blues, etc.
He also plays bass on numerous Chuck Berry's rock and roll hits.
They are also expected to know the rhythmic patterns that are appropriate for different styles (e.g., Afro-Cuban).
Students in jazz diploma or Bachelor of Music programs take individual bass lessons, get experience in small jazz combos with coaching from an experienced player, and play in jazz big bands.
Similarly, his solo contrabass parts for the orchestral work ''Atlas Eclipticalis'' can also be performed as solos.
The rabeca (or rabeca chuleira) is a type of fiddle from northeastern Brazil and northern Portugal used in Brazilian forró music.
Six-stringed instruments are generally regarded as impractical.
Performing on bass can be physically demanding, because the strings are large and thick.
Bluegrass and jazz players typically use less amplification than blues, psychobilly, or jam band players.
For a longer list, see the List of jazz bassists, which includes both double bass and electric bass players.
He notes that "Even in traditional bluegrass slap bass only appears sporadically and most of what I've done has been on the more contemporary side of that (Tony Rice, Tim O'Brien)."
Many musicians feel the slower attack and percussive, woody tone of the upright bass gives it a more "earthy" or "natural" sound than an electric bass, particularly when gut strings are used.
Traditionally, the double bass is a transposing instrument.
Different placements of the cylinder along the string influence or eliminate the frequency at which the wolf tone occurs.
In 2015, bassists in top professional orchestras may have antique carved instruments valued at hundreds of thousands of dollars.
The tenor clef is also used by composers for cello and low brass parts.
Peter Maxwell Davies' lyrical Strathclyde Concerto no.
To accommodate the additional string, the fingerboard is usually slightly wider, and the top slightly thicker to handle the increased tension.
The bow is loosened at the end of a practice session or performance.
Basic bridges are carved from a single piece of wood, which is customized to match the shape of the top of the instrument.
An upright bass was the standard bass instrument in traditional country western music.
The principal bass also leads entrances for the bass section, typically by lifting the bow or plucking hand before the entrance, to ensure the section plays together.
Four-string instruments may feature the C extension extending the range of the E string downwards to C (sometimes B).
The excerpts are typically the most technically challenging parts of bass parts and bass solos from the orchestral literature.
In contrast, in genres that mainly or exclusively use pizzicato (plucking), such as jazz and blues, a great deal of time and effort is focused on learning the varieties of different pizzicato styles used for music of different styles of tempi.
