Research suggests that the severity is likely a result of a weakened immune system.
Some proposed treatments may also be harmful.
Amniocentesis and chorionic villus sampling are more reliable tests, but they increase the risk of miscarriage between 0.5 and 1%.
In 2013, Down syndrome was present in 8.5 million individuals and resulted in 36,000 deaths down from 43,000 deaths in 1990.
Down syndrome is associated with an increased risk of many chronic diseases that are typically associated with older age such as Alzheimer's disease.
In the United States, the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act of 1975 requires public schools generally to allow attendance by students with Down's.
When results from testing become available, it is also considered unethical not to give the results to the person in question.
Some of those against screening refer to it as a form of "eugenics".
Senile plaques and neurofibrillary tangles are present in nearly all by 35&nbsp;years of age, though dementia may not be present.
Without assisted reproductive technologies, around half of the children of someone with Down syndrome will also have the syndrome.
Problems of the thyroid gland occur in 20–50% of individuals with Down syndrome.
Brushfield spots (small white or grayish/brown spots on the outer part of the iris) are present in 38 to 85% of individuals.
Keratoconus (a thin, cone-shaped cornea) and glaucoma (increased eye pressure) are also more common, as are refractive errors requiring glasses or contacts.
Of a group of 40 mothers in the United States who have had one child with Down syndrome, half agreed to screening in the next pregnancy.
In the 1950s, in the United States, it occurred in 2 per 1000 live births with the decrease since then due to prenatal screening and abortions.
The different screening techniques in use are able to pick up 90 to 95% of cases with a false-positive rate of 2 to 5%.
Week of pregnancy when performed
Down syndrome is caused by having three copies of the genes on chromosome 21, rather than the usual two.
Some graduate from high school; however, most do not.
As they age, people with Down syndrome typically perform less well than their same-age peers.
Trisomy 21 (also known by the karyotype 47,XX,+21 for females and 47,XY,+21 for males) is caused by a failure of the 21st chromosome to separate during egg or sperm development.
Type 1 diabetes mellitus is also more common.
Less common manifestations include cleft lip and palate, enamel hypocalcification (20% prevalence).
Evidence to support this in adults, however, is not very good.
People with Down syndrome experience a wide range of emotions.
Additionally, it is important to rule out hearing loss as a factor in social and cognitive deterioration.
Menopause typically occurs at an earlier age.
English physician John Langdon Down first characterized Down syndrome as a separate form of mental disability in 1862, and in a more widely published report in 1866.
Those with mosaic Down syndrome typically have IQ scores 10–30 points higher.
Between 10 and 45% have either a stutter or rapid and irregular speech, making it difficult to understand them.
Life expectancy is around 50 to 60&nbsp;years in the developed world with proper health care.
When nonpregnant people are asked if they would have a termination if their fetus tested positive, 23–33% said yes, when high-risk pregnant women were asked, 46–86% said yes, and when women who screened positive are asked, 89–97% say yes.
The father's older age is also a risk factor in women older than 35, but not in women younger than 35, and may partly explain the increase in risk as women age.
Efforts to prevent respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infection with human monoclonal antibodies should be considered, especially in those with heart problems.
More children are born with Down syndrome in countries where abortion is not allowed and in countries where pregnancy more commonly occurs at a later age.
Measures the maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein, unconjugated estriol, hCG, and inhibin-A
Individuals with Down syndrome tend to be more susceptible to gingivitis as well as early, severe periodontal disease, necrotising ulcerative gingivitis, and early tooth loss, especially in the lower front teeth.
Due to his perception that children with Down syndrome shared facial similarities with those of Blumenbach's Mongolian race, John Langdon Down used the term 'mongoloid'.
In those who reach 60&nbsp;years of age, 50–70% have the disease.
'''Down syndrome''' ('''DS''' or '''DNS'''), also known as '''trisomy 21''', is a genetic disorder caused by the presence of all, or part of a third copy of chromosome 21.
The parents of the affected individual are typically genetically normal.
This syndrome causes about a third of cases of intellectual disability.
These contain additional material from chromosome 21 and occur in about 2.5% of cases.
This overexpression has been estimated at around 50%.
If Down syndrome occurs in one in 500 pregnancies and the test used has a 5% false-positive rate, this means, of 26 women who test positive on screening, only one will have Down syndrome confirmed.
The average IQ of a young adult with Down syndrome is 50, equivalent to the mental age of an 8- or 9-year-old child, but this can vary widely.
Instability of the atlantoaxial joint occurs in about 20% and may lead to spinal cord injury in 1–2%.
Low thyroid is the most common form, occurring in almost half of all individuals.
Édouard Séguin described it as separate from cretinism in 1944.
Currently between 4 and 12% die in the first year of life.
Transient myeloproliferative disease, a disorder of blood cell production that does not occur outside of Down syndrome, affects 3–10% of infants.
Within the US, some Protestants denominations see abortion as acceptable when a fetus has Down syndrome, while Orthodox Christians and Roman Catholics often do not.
Constipation occurs in nearly half of people with Down syndrome and may result in changes in behavior.
The most common cause (about 92–95% of cases) is a complete extra copy of chromosome 21, resulting in trisomy 21.
Is a combination of the quad screen, PAPP-A, and NT
Due to the elevated risk of testicular cancer, some recommend checking the person's testicles yearly.
Increased fetal nuchal translucency (NT) indicates an increased risk of Down syndrome picking up 75–80% of cases and being falsely positive in 6%.
However, Lejeune's claim to the discovery has been disputed, and in 2014, the Scientific Council of the French Federation of Human Genetics unanimously awarded its Grand Prize to his colleague Marthe Gautier for this discovery.
There is no cure for Down syndrome.
As those with Down's typically have good hand-eye coordination, learning sign language may be possible.
In this situation, the long arm of chromosome 21 is attached to another chromosome, often chromosome 14.
Plastic surgery on children with Down syndrome is uncommon, and continues to be controversial.
Thyroid problems can be due to a poorly or nonfunctioning thyroid at birth (known as congenital hypothyroidism) which occurs in 1% or can develop later due to an attack on the thyroid by the immune system resulting in Graves' disease or autoimmune hypothyroidism.
Before this individuals with Down syndrom were often placed in mental hospitals or asylums.
People with Down syndrome have a lower risk of hardening of the arteries.
A number of tests are used, with varying levels of accuracy.
About 92% of pregnancies in Europe with a diagnosis of Down syndrome are terminated.
Other methods being studied include the use of antioxidants, gamma secretase inhibition, adrenergic agonists, and memantine.
Between 5 and 15% of children with Down syndrome in Europe attend regular school.
A number of historical pieces of art are believed to portray Down syndrome, including pottery from AD 500 from South America and the 16th-century painting ''The Adoration of the Christ Child''.
In those with congenital heart problems 60% survive to 10&nbsp;years and 50% survive to 30&nbsp;years of age.
One criticism of this reasoning is it often values those with disabilities less.
Some Islamic countries allow abortion, while others do not.
Children and adults with Down syndrome are at increased risk of epileptic seizures which occur in 5–10% of children and up to 50% of adults.
In 1.0 to 2.5% of cases, some of the cells in the body are normal and others have trisomy 21, known as mosaic Down syndrome.
At birth, all children should get an electrocardiogram and ultrasound of the heart.
They are typically used in combination to increase the detection rate.
Support in financial and legal matters is often needed.
In 1959, Jérôme Lejeune reported the discovery that Down syndrome resulted from an extra chromosome.
Hearing problems are found in 50–90% of children with Down syndrome.
It occurs in about one per 1000 babies born each year.
In Europe, however, less than 1% have regular jobs.
At age 20, the chance is one in 1441; at age 30, it is one in 959; at age 40, it is one in 84; and at age 50 it is one in 44.
In ancient times, many infants with disabilities were either killed or abandoned.
Behavior problems are not generally as great an issue as in other syndromes associated with intellectual disability.
Heart valve problems may occur in young adults, and further ultrasound evaluation may be needed in adolescents and in early adulthood.
Screening in both the first and second trimesters is better than just screening in the first trimester.
In this case it is sometimes known as familial Down syndrome.
With the rise of the eugenics movement, 33 of the then 48 U.S. states and several countries began programs of forced sterilization of individuals with Down syndrome and comparable degrees of disability.
The disorder is typically not serious but occasionally can be.
Males with Down syndrome usually do not father children, while females have lower rates of fertility relative to those who are unaffected.
The extra chromosome occurs by random chance.
Some deem it reasonable for parents to select a child who would have the highest well-being.
One potential cause is Hirschsprung's disease, occurring in 2–15%, which is due to a lack of nerve cells controlling the colon.
Guidelines recommend screening for Down syndrome to be offered to all pregnant women, regardless of age.
Of those with heart disease, about 80% have an atrioventricular septal defect or ventricular septal defect with the former being more common.
Growth in height is slower, resulting in adults who tend to have short stature—the average height for men is 154&nbsp;cm (5&nbsp;ft 1&nbsp;in) and for women is 142&nbsp;cm (4&nbsp;ft 8&nbsp;in).
This is often the result of otitis media with effusion which occurs in 50–70% and chronic ear infections which occur in 40 to 60%.
Surgical repair of heart problems may be required as early as three months of age.
Mitral valve problems become common as people age, even in those without heart problems at birth.
Education programs before reaching school age may be useful.
An analysis of the child's chromosomes is needed to confirm the diagnosis, and to determine if a translocation is present, as this may help determine the risk of the child's parents having further children with Down syndrome.
It is the cause of 8% of all congenital disorders.
Other problems that may occur include tetralogy of Fallot and patent ductus arteriosus.
Behavioral issues and mental illness are typically managed with counseling or medications.
Evidence, however, does not support a meaningful difference in either of these outcomes.
Other common oral manifestations of Down syndrome include enlarged hypotonic tongue, crusted and hypotonic lips, mouth breathing, narrow palate with crowded teeth, class III malocclusion with an underdeveloped maxilla and posterior crossbite, delayed exfoliation of baby teeth and delayed eruption of adult teeth, shorter roots on teeth, and often missing and malformed (usually smaller) teeth.
The probability of this type of Down syndrome is not related to the mother's age.
Hip dislocations may occur without trauma in up to a third of people with Down syndrome.
The International Society for Prenatal Diagnosis considers it a reasonable screening option for those women whose pregnancies are at a high risk for trisomy 21.
When screening tests predict a high risk of Down syndrome, a more invasive diagnostic test (amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling) is needed to confirm the diagnosis.
As a result, a sperm or egg cell is produced with an extra copy of chromosome 21; this cell thus has 24 chromosomes.
Surgery, however, does not always address the sleep apnea and a continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) machine may be useful.
The National Down Syndrome Society have developed information regarding the positive aspects of life with Down Syndrome.
Advocacy groups for individuals with Down syndrome began to be form after the Second World War.
It was recognized by the United Nations General Assembly in 2011.
About 1.4 per 1000 live births in the United States and 1.1 per 1000 live births in Norway are affected.
About 10% live to 70 years of age.
The number of pregnancies with Down syndrome is more than two times greater with many spontaneously aborting.
Following improved medical care, particularly for heart and gastrointestinal problems, the life expectancy has increased.
The disability rights movement does not have a position on screening, although some members consider testing and abortion discriminatory.
In 1975, the United States National Institutes of Health (NIH) convened a conference to standardize the naming and recommended eliminating the possessive form, Down's syndrome, although both the possessive and nonpossessive forms are used by the general population.
In children with Down syndrome, mental illness occurs in nearly 30% with autism occurring in 5–10%.
The weakened immune system also contributes to increased incidence of yeast infections in the mouth (from Candida albicans).
In a male affected with Down syndrome, it results in a karyotype of 46XY,t(14q21q).
Raising a child with Down syndrome is more work for parents than raising an unaffected child.
Cell-free fetal DNA
Others argue that Down syndrome shouldn't be prevented or cured and that eliminating Down syndrome amounts to genocide.
In 1961, 19 scientists suggested that "mongolism" had "misleading connotations" and had become "an embarrassing term".
In adulthood about 20% in the United States do paid work in some capacity.
The day and month were chosen to correspond with 21 and trisomy, respectively.
Parents generally wish to know the possible diagnosis once it is suspected and do not wish pity.
Vision problems occur in 38 to 80%.
Augmentative and alternative communication methods, such as pointing, body language, objects, or pictures, are often used to help with communication.
One hope is to use stem cells.
This may be a new mutation or previously present in one of the parents.
Research is often carried out on an animal model, the Ts65Dn mouse.
Those with DS also lack a normal number of lymphocytes and produce less antibodies which contributes to their increased risk of infection.
The rate of congenital heart disease in newborns with Down syndrome is around 40%.
It has also been proposed as a way to improve speech.
Globally, as of 2010, Down syndrome occurs in about 1 per 1000 births and results in about 17,000 deaths.
Education and proper care have been shown to improve quality of life.
People with Down syndrome may have some or all of these physical characteristics: a small chin, slanted eyes, poor muscle tone, a flat nasal bridge, a single crease of the palm, and a protruding tongue due to a small mouth and relatively large tongue.
This is most often from heart problems or infections.
As of 2006, three instances of males with Down syndrome fathering children and 26 cases of females having children have been reported.
Other research, however, has not confirmed these findings.
Higher rates of tooth wear and bruxism are also common.
Accuracy has been reported at 98.6% in the first trimester of pregnancy.
Although the probability increases with maternal age, 70% of children with Down syndrome are born to women 35 years of age and younger, because younger people have more children.
Down syndrome can be identified during pregnancy by prenatal screening followed by diagnostic testing, or after birth by direct observation and genetic testing.
Action T4 in Nazi Germany made public policy of a program of systematic involuntary euthanization.
As it is a medically reasonable procedure, per informed consent, people should at least be given information about it.
Education and proper care can improve quality of life.
The presence or absence of many markers is more accurate.
The dementia which occurs in Down syndrome is due to an excess of amyloid beta peptide produced in the brain and is similar to Alzheimer's disease.
Individuals with Down syndrome have a higher risk of early death than the general population.
The diagnosis can often be suspected based on the child's physical appearance at birth.
While the term mongoloid (also mongolism, Mongolian imbecility or idiocy) continued to be used until the early 1970s, it is now considered unacceptable and is no longer in common use.
The risk of limb problems is increased in the offspring due to the procedure.
Organizations included the Royal Society for Handicapped Children and Adults founded in the UK in 1946 by Judy Fryd, Kobato Kai founded in Japan in 1964, the National Down Syndrome Congress founded in the United States in 1973 by Kathryn McGee and others, and the National Down Syndrome Society founded in 1979 in the United States.
A blood sample is taken from the mother by venipuncture and is sent for DNA analysis.
Individuals with Down syndrome are at increased risk for obesity as they age.
Some after 30&nbsp;years of age may lose their ability to speak.
In the 20th century, many individuals with Down syndrome were institutionalized, few of the associated medical problems were treated, and most died in infancy or early adult life.
Fertility is estimated to be present in 30–50% of females.
+ First- and second-trimester screening
Efforts are underway to determine how the extra chromosome 21 material causes Down syndrome, as currently this is unknown, and to develop treatments to improve intelligence in those with the syndrome.
The accelerated aging suggest that trisomy 21 increases the biological age of tissues, but molecular evidence for this hypothesis is sparse.
Excessive ear wax can also cause hearing loss due to obstruction of the outer ear canal.
The term "trisomy 21" is also used frequently.
Testing in both trimesters is sometimes recommended and test results are often combined with ultrasound results.
In the United States, termination rates are around 67%, but this rate varied from 61% to 93% among different populations evaluated.
With the discovery of karyotype techniques in the 1950s, it became possible to identify abnormalities of chromosomal number or shape.
The poor fertility in males is thought to be due to problems with sperm development; however, it may also be related to not being sexually active.
Many are able to live semi-independently, but they often require help with financial, medical, and legal matters.
Physical therapy and participation in physical education may improve motor skills.
Cataracts (cloudiness of the lens of the eye) occur in 15%, and may be present at birth.
Age-related hearing loss of the sensorineural type occurs at a much earlier age and affects 10–70% of people with Down syndrome.
Other common features include: a flat and wide face, a short neck, excessive joint flexibility, extra space between big toe and second toe, abnormal patterns on the fingertips and short fingers.
The parents of the affected individual are typically genetically normal.
Findings that indicate increased risk when seen at 14 to 24 weeks of gestation include a small or no nasal bone, large ventricles, nuchal fold thickness, and an abnormal right subclavian artery, among others.
If the screening test has a 2% false-positive rate, this means one of eleven who test positive on screening have a fetus with DS.
This results in a 15% chance of having a child with Down syndrome when the mother is affected and a less than 5% probability if the father is affected.
Tonsillectomy is also often done to help with sleep apnea and throat infections.
Even a mild degree of hearing loss can have negative consequences for speech, language understanding, and academics.
Ultrasound imaging can be used to screen for Down syndrome.
Between 20 and 50% have strabismus, in which the two eyes do not move together.
Some individuals with Down syndrome graduate from high school and a few attend post-secondary education.
Cancers of the blood are 10 to 15 times more common in children with Down syndrome.
Many learn to read and write and some are able to do paid work.
Growth charts have been developed specifically for children with Down syndrome.
Hearing aids or other amplification devices can be useful for language learning in those with hearing loss.
Many alternative medical techniques are used in Down syndrome; however, they are poorly supported by evidence.
About 88% of cases of trisomy 21 result from nonseparation of the chromosomes in the mother, 8% from nonseparation in the father, and 3% after the egg and sperm have merged.
Testing of the mother's blood for fetal DNA is being studied and appears promising in the first trimester.
Efforts such as early childhood intervention, screening for common problems, medical treatment where indicated, a good family environment, and work-related training can improve the development of children with Down syndrome.
Celiac disease affects about 7–20% and gastroesophageal reflux disease is also more common.
In those who develop dementia there is no evidence for memantine, donepezil, rivastigmine, or galantamine.
When combined with a normal cell from the other parent, the baby has 47 chromosomes, with three copies of chromosome 21.
Of those with intellectual disability in the United States who attended high school about 40% graduated.
