Geisel's wife Helen Palmer Geisel had a long struggle with illnesses, including cancer and emotional pain over her husband's affair with Audrey Stone Dimond.
In the years after his death in 1991, two additional books were published based on his sketches and notes: ''Hooray for Diffendoofer Day!''
For books that Geisel wrote and others illustrated, he used the pen name "Theo LeSieg", starting with ''I Wish That I Had Duck Feet'' published in 1965.
His early political cartoons show a passionate opposition to fascism, and he urged action against it both before and after the United States entered World War II.
During World War II, he worked in an animation department of the United States Army where he produced several short films, including ''Design for Death'', which later won the 1947 Academy Award for Documentary Feature.
In 1948, after living and working in Hollywood for years, Geisel moved to La Jolla, California, a predominantly Republican town.
The second, ''The Wubbulous World of Dr. Seuss'', was a mix of live-action and puppetry by Jim Henson Television, the producers of The Muppets.
* An editorial cartoon from July 16, 1941 depicts a whale resting on the top of a mountain as a parody of American isolationists, especially Charles Lindbergh.
Jones directed an adaptation of ''Horton Hears a Who!''
Some of these were later collected (in volumes such as ''The Sneetches and Other Stories'') or reworked into independent books (''If I Ran the Zoo'').
A mock ship deck called ''SS Essomarine'' provided the scene where photos of "Admirals" were taken.
Seuss Goes to War'', denounced Hitler and Mussolini and were highly critical of non-interventionists ("isolationists"), most notably Charles Lindbergh, who opposed US entry into the war.
He would say when asked about this, "You have 'em; I'll entertain 'em."
(1955), ''If I Ran the Circus'' (1956), ''The Cat in the Hat'' (1957), ''How the Grinch Stole Christmas!''
Geisel's most famous pen name is regularly pronounced , an anglicized pronunciation inconsistent with his German surname (the standard German pronunciation is ).
The series was called the "Dr. Seuss Zoo" and included Gowdy the Dowdy Grackle, Norval the Bashful Blinket, Tingo the Noodle Topped Stroodle, and Roscoe the Many Footed Lion.
His last book was ''Oh, the Places You'll Go!
Dr. Seuss's honors include two Academy awards, two Emmy awards, a Peabody award, the Laura Ingalls Wilder Medal, and the Pulitzer Prize.
This motion is done by Ish in ''One Fish Two Fish'' when he creates fish (who perform the gesture themselves with their fins), in the introduction of the various acts of ''If I Ran the Circus'', and in the introduction of the "Little Cats" in ''The Cat in the Hat Comes Back''.
* The connected beards in ''Did I Ever Tell You How Lucky You Are?''
From 1972 to 1983, Geisel wrote six animated specials which were produced by DePatie-Freleng: ''The Lorax'' (1972); ''Dr.
His cartoons portrayed the fear of communism as overstated, finding greater threats in the House Un-American Activities Committee and those who threatened to cut the US "life line" to Stalin and the USSR, whom he once depicted as a porter carrying "our war load".
The movie was a critical and financial failure, and Geisel never attempted another feature film.
It retained the drawing style, verse rhythms, and all the imaginative power of Geisel's earlier works but, because of its simplified vocabulary, it could be read by beginning readers.
This single $25 sale encouraged Geisel to move from Springfield to New York City.
(1954) as an allegory for the Hiroshima bombing and the American post-war occupation of Japan, as well as dedicating the book to a Japanese friend.
Their names have been linked together posthumously: the personal papers of Hans Suess are housed in the Geisel Library.
This was later rendered (with no apparent political content) as the Wumbus of ''On Beyond Zebra'' (1955).
On May 28, 2008, California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger and First Lady Maria Shriver announced that Geisel would be inducted into the California Hall of Fame located at The California Museum for History, Women and the Arts.
In early 1928, one of Geisel's cartoons for ''Judge'' mentioned Flit, a common bug spray at the time manufactured by Standard Oil of New Jersey.
'', which published the year before his death and became a popular gift for graduating students.
'''Theodor Seuss Geisel''' ( ; March 2, 1904&nbsp;– September 24, 1991) was an American writer and illustrator best known for authoring popular children's books under the pen name '''Dr.
* Little cats A B and C (as well as the rest of the alphabet) who spring from each other's hats appeared in a Ford ad.
On March 2, 2009, the web search engine Google temporarily changed its logo to commemorate Geisel's birthday (a practice that it often follows for various holidays and events).
On the issue of the Japanese, he is quoted as saying:
Seuss's Sleep Book'', or the "most peculiar machine" of Sylvester McMonkey McBean in ''The Sneetches''.
On December 1, 1995, four years after his death, University of California, San Diego's University Library Building was renamed Geisel Library in honor of Geisel and Audrey for the generous contributions that they made to the library and their devotion to improving literacy.
" from ''Horton Hears a Who!''
He won the Lewis Carroll Shelf Award in 1958 for ''Horton Hatches the Egg'' and again in 1961 for ''And to Think That I Saw It on Mulberry Street''.
It is often broadcast as an annual Christmas television special.
Here are some examples:
It uses both live-action versions and animated versions of the characters and stories featured; however, the animated portions were merely edited versions of previous animated television specials and, in some cases, re-dubbed as well.
''The Grinch'' has had limited engagement runs on Broadway during the Christmas season, after premiering in 1998 (under the title ''How the Grinch Stole Christmas'') at the Old Globe Theatre in San Diego, where it has become a Christmas tradition.
The fourth, ''The Cat in the Hat Knows a Lot About That!
Geisel also felt that the traveling helped his creativity.
The cartoon was narrated by Boris Karloff, who also provided the voice of the Grinch.
Dr. Seuss has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at the 6500 block of Hollywood Boulevard.
In 2009, ''Green Eggs and Ham'' sold 540,366 copies, ''The Cat in the Hat'' sold 452,258 copies, and ''One Fish Two Fish Red Fish Blue Fish'' (1960) sold 409,068 copies—outselling the majority of newly published children's books.
Four television series have been adapted from Geisel's work.
Dr Seuss also wrote the musical and fantasy film ''The 5,000 Fingers of Dr. T'', which was released in 1953.
Geisel died of oral cancer on September 24, 1991 at his home in La Jolla at the age of 87.
''Our Job in Japan'' became the basis for the commercially released film ''Design for Death'' (1947), a study of Japanese culture that won the Academy Award for Documentary Feature.
Geisel received the Laura Ingalls Wilder Medal from the professional children's librarians in 1980, recognizing his "substantial and lasting contributions to children's literature".
For example, ''If I Ran the Circus'' shows a droopy hoisting crane and a droopy steam calliope.
This included ''The 500 Hats of Bartholomew Cubbins'' in 1938, as well as ''The King's Stilts'' and ''The Seven Lady Godivas'' in 1939, all of which were in prose, atypically for him.
This is true, for instance, of the faces of the Grinch and the Cat in the Hat.
During the 1950s, he also published a number of illustrated short stories, mostly in ''Redbook'' Magazine.
and ''Daisy-Head Mayzie''.
This was followed by ''Horton Hatches the Egg'' in 1940, in which Geisel returned to the use of poetry.
Geisel's illustrations often convey motion vividly.
As a result of this infraction, Dean Craven Laycock insisted that Geisel resign from all extracurricular activities, including the college humor magazine.
Geisel was raised a Lutheran.
The induction ceremony took place December 15 and Geisel's widow Audrey accepted the honor in his place.
In 1934, Geisel produced a 30-page booklet entitled ''Secrets of the Deep'' which was available by mail after June.
* Another editorial cartoon from 1941 shows a long cow with many legs and udders representing the conquered nations of Europe being milked by Adolf Hitler.
Geisel's political cartoons, later published in ''Dr.
For 1939, exhibitors made available the Nuzzlepuss ashtray and illustrated tide-table calendars.
(1937) and ''Horton Hatches the Egg'' (1940), the ears became more stylized, somewhat like angel wings and thus appropriate to the saintly Horton.
As World War II began, Geisel turned to political cartoons, drawing over 400 in two years as editorial cartoonist for the left-leaning New York City daily newspaper, ''PM''.
After the war, Geisel focused on children's books, writing classics such as ''If I Ran the Zoo'' (1950), ''Horton Hears a Who!''
was published in major newspapers through the column of his friend Art Buchwald.
In 1956, Dartmouth awarded Geisel with an honorary doctorate, finally justifying the "Dr." in his pen name.
(1955),  ''If I Ran the Circus'' (1956), ''The Cat in the Hat'' (1957), ''How the Grinch Stole Christmas!''
Horton and similar elephants appear frequently in the postwar children's books.
While in the Army, he was awarded the Legion of Merit.
(1954), about anti-isolationism and internationalism.
The campaign's catchphrase "Quick, Henry, the Flit!"
A number have never been reprinted since their original appearances.
This later became the Umbus of ''On Beyond Zebra''.
After the war, Geisel and his wife moved to La Jolla, California where he returned to writing children's books.
Frith and Geisel chose the name in honor of Geisel's second wife Audrey, whose maiden name was Stone.
While at Dartmouth, he was caught drinking gin with nine friends in his room.
In 1942, Geisel turned his energies to direct support of the U.S. war effort.
All of his grandparents were German immigrants.
At the time, the possession and consumption of alcohol was illegal under Prohibition laws, which remained in place between 1920 and 1933.
Geisel converted a copy of one of his famous children's books into a polemic shortly before the end of the 1972–74 Watergate scandal, in which United States president Richard Nixon resigned, by replacing the name of the main character everywhere that it occurred.
His work includes several of the most popular children's books of all time, selling over 600 million copies and being translated into more than 20 languages by the time of his death.
This theme also appeared in a ''Judge'' cartoon as one letter of a hieroglyphic message, and in Geisel's short-lived comic strip ''Hejji''.
Geisel also follows the cartoon tradition of showing motion with lines, like in the sweeping lines that accompany Sneelock's final dive in ''If I Ran the Circus''.
At the January boat show for 1935, visitors filled out order cards to receive ''Secrets''.
Geisel supported the Japanese American internment during World War II.
The film will be written by Keith Bunin, produced by Depp's Infinitum Nihil production company alongside Illumination Entertainment and distributed by Universal Pictures.
It was very faithful to the original book, and is considered a classic to this day by many.
In 2002, the Dr. Seuss National Memorial Sculpture Garden opened in his birthplace of Springfield, Massachusetts, featuring sculptures of Geisel and of many of his characters.
Later that year, Geisel accepted a job as writer and illustrator at the humor magazine ''Judge'', and he felt financially stable enough to marry Helen.
and is less than a mile southwest of his boyhood home on Fairfield Street.
On October 23, 1967, she committed suicide.
His cartoons were strongly supportive of President Roosevelt's handling of the war, combining the usual exhortations to ration and contribute to the war effort with frequent attacks on Congress (especially the Republican Party), parts of the press (such as the ''New York Daily News'', ''Chicago Tribune'', and ''Washington Times-Herald''), and others for criticism of Roosevelt, criticism of aid to the Soviet Union, investigation of suspected Communists, and other offences that he depicted as leading to disunity and helping the Nazis, intentionally or inadvertently.
These insects were later rendered in an editorial cartoon as a swarm of Allied aircraft (1942), and again as the Sneedle of ''On Beyond Zebra'', and yet again as the Skritz in ''I Had Trouble in Getting to Solla Sollew''.
However, an animated CGI feature film adaptation of ''Horton Hears a Who!''
"LeSieg" is "Geisel" spelled backward.
He asked Geisel to cut the list to 250 words and to write a book using only those words.
* There are many examples of creatures who arrange themselves in repeating patterns, such as the "Two and fro walkers, who march in five layers", and the Through-Horns Jumping Deer in ''If I Ran the Circus'', and the arrangement of birds which the protagonist of ''Oh, the Places You'll Go!''
Geisel's style was unique – his figures are often "rounded" and somewhat droopy.
Geisel's first work signed "Dr. Seuss" was published in ''Judge'' about six months after he started working there.
That summer, Geisel released a second volume of ''Secrets''.
One cartoon depicted all Japanese Americans as latent traitors or fifth-columnists, while other cartoons simultaneously deplored the racism at home against Jews and blacks that harmed the war effort.
It should "demonstrate creativity and imagination to engage children in reading" during years pre-K to grade two.
First, he worked drawing posters for the Treasury Department and the War Production Board.
At that year's boat show, Geisel provided the Navigamarama exhibit and the ''Sea Lawyers Gazette''.
Often, the expressive use to which Geisel put an image later on was quite different from the original.
Seussian whales (cheerful and balloon-shaped, with long eyelashes) also occur in ''McElligot's Pool'', ''If I Ran the Circus'', and other books.
* While drawing advertisements for Flit, Geisel became adept at drawing insects with huge stingers, shaped like a gentle S-curve and with a sharp end that included a rearward-pointing barb on its lower side.
It is traditional for students returning from the trips to stay overnight at Dartmouth's Moosilauke Ravine Lodge, where they are served green eggs and ham for breakfast in honor of Dr. Seuss.
Geisel also published one book under the name Rosetta Stone, 1975's ''Because a Little Bug Went Ka-Choo
In 1959, Geisel authorized Revell, the well-known plastic model-making company, to make a series of "animals" that snapped together rather than being glued together, and could be assembled, disassembled, and re-assembled "in thousands" of ways.
He added the “Dr.” to his pen name because his father had always wanted him to practice medicine.
Geisel adopted his "Dr. Seuss" pen name during his university studies at Dartmouth College and the University of Oxford.
He also worked as an illustrator for advertising campaigns, most notably for Flit and Standard Oil, and as a political cartoonist for the New York newspaper ''PM''.
'', a collaboration with Michael K. Frith.
Geisel wrote four more books before the US entered World War II.
Geisel went on to write many other children's books, both in his new simplified-vocabulary manner (sold as Beginner Books) and in his older, more elaborate style.
was approved, and was eventually released on March 14, 2008, to critical acclaim.
Geisel's first Flit ad appeared on May 31, 1928, and the campaign continued sporadically until 1941.
The line "a person's a person, no matter ''how'' small
"Richard M. Nixon, Will You Please Go Now!"
Mulberry Street in Springfield was made famous in Dr. Seuss' first children's book ''And to Think That I Saw It on Mulberry Street!''
In 1966, Geisel authorized eminent cartoon artist Chuck Jones – his friend and former colleague from the war – to make a cartoon version of ''How the Grinch Stole Christmas!''.
(written in 1986 when Geisel was 82), which chronicles an old man's journey through a clinic.
''Gerald McBoing-Boing'' (1950) was based on an original story by Seuss and won the Academy Award for Animated Short Film.
''The Cat in the Hat'' and subsequent books written for young children achieved significant international success and they remain very popular today.
In September 2011, seven stories originally published in magazines during the 1950s were released in a collection entitled ''The Bippolo Seed and Other Lost Stories''.
in 1970 and produced an adaptation of ''The Cat in the Hat'' in 1971.
* The tower of turtles in a 1942 editorial cartoon prefigures a similar tower in ''Yertle the Turtle''.
His books have topped many bestseller lists, sold over 600 million copies, and been translated into more than 20 languages.
has been used widely as a slogan by the pro-life movement in the U.S., despite the objections of Geisel's widow.
According to Geisel, he was walking home to burn the manuscript when a chance encounter with an old Dartmouth classmate led to its publication by Vanguard Press.
According to Geisel's sister, "He plans the whole show with scenery and action and then, standing in a realistic bridge, reels off a speech which combines advertising with humor."
He published over 60 books during his career, which have spawned numerous adaptations, including 11 television specials, four feature films, a Broadway musical, and four television series.
He published his first children's book ''And to Think That I Saw It on Mulberry Street'' in 1937.
His first cartoon for ''Judge'' appeared on October 22, 1927, and the Geisels were married on November 29.
While Geisel was living in La Jolla, the United States Postal Service and others frequently confused him with fellow La Jolla resident Dr. Hans Suess.
Geisel was a liberal Democrat and a supporter of President Franklin D. Roosevelt and the New Deal.
On April 4, 2012, the Dartmouth Medical School renamed itself the Audrey and Theodor Geisel School of Medicine in honor of their many years of generosity to the college.
Geisel married Dimond on June 21, 1968.
Geisel also drew complex imaginary machines, such as the ''Audio-Telly-O-Tally-O-Count'', from ''Dr.
At the time, it was awarded every five years.
Several of the specials won multiple Emmy Awards.
In May 1954, ''Life'' magazine published a report on illiteracy among school children which concluded that children were not learning to read because their books were boring.
In 2000, ''Publishers Weekly'' compiled a list of the best-selling children's books of all time; of the top 100 hardcover books, 16 were written by Geisel, including ''Green Eggs and Ham'', at number 4, ''The Cat in the Hat'', at number 9, and ''One Fish Two Fish Red Fish Blue Fish'', at number 13.
He was fond of a sort of "voilà" gesture in which the hand flips outward and the fingers spread slightly backward with the thumb up.
Their facial expressions depict gleeful malevolence.
Geisel evidently enjoyed drawing architecturally elaborate objects.
Making use of his time in Europe, he pitched a series of cartoons called ''Eminent Europeans'' to ''Life'' magazine, but the magazine passed on it.
Nine months later, Geisel completed ''The Cat in the Hat'', using 236 of the words given to him.
In 2004, U.S. children's librarians established the annual Theodor Seuss Geisel Award to recognize "the most distinguished American book for beginning readers published in English in the United States during the preceding year".
Based on Geisel's varied accounts, the book was rejected by between 20 and 43 publishers.
(1957), criticizing the materialism and consumerism of the Christmas season; and ''Horton Hears a Who!''
As Geisel gained notoriety for the Flit campaign, his work was sought after and began to appear regularly in magazines such as ''Life'', ''Liberty'', and ''Vanity Fair''.
A television film titled ''In Search of Dr. Seuss'' was released in 1994 which adapted many of Seuss's stories.
On April 28, 1958, Geisel appeared on an episode of the panel game show ''To Tell the Truth''.
Geisel had no children of his own, though he devoted most of his life to writing children's books.
According to Geisel, the wife of an advertising executive in charge of advertising Flit saw Geisel's cartoon at a hairdresser's and urged her husband to sign him.
A CGI-animated feature film adaptation of ''The Lorax'' was released by Universal on March 2, 2012 (on what would have been the 108th birthday of Seuss).
Geisel left Oxford without earning a degree and returned to the United States in February 1927, where he immediately began submitting writings and drawings to magazines, book publishers, and advertising agencies.
'', produced by Portfolio Entertainment Inc., began on August 7, 2010, in Canada and September 6, 2010, in the United States and is currently still showing.
It aired for one season on Nickelodeon in the United States, from 1996 to 1997.
They did not have children, neither kept regular office hours, and they had ample money.
He was encouraged in his writing by professor of rhetoric W. Benfield Pressey, whom he described as his "big inspiration for writing" at Dartmouth.
They also traveled extensively: by 1936, Geisel and his wife had visited 30 countries together.
Theodor Seuss Geisel was born in Springfield, Massachusetts, to Theodor Robert and Henrietta (née Seuss) Geisel.
The basic body parts were the same and all were interchangeable, and so it was possible for children to combine parts from various characters in essentially unlimited ways in creating their own animal characters (Revell encouraged this by selling Gowdy, Norval, and Tingo together in a "Gift Set" as well as individually).
''My Many Colored Days'' was originally written in 1973 but was posthumously published in 1996.
Geisel wrote more than 60 books over the course of his long career.
His endlessly varied but never rectilinear palaces, ramps, platforms, and free-standing stairways are among his most evocative creations.
Geisel's birthday, March 2, has been adopted as the annual date for National Read Across America Day, an initiative on reading created by the National Education Association.
Upon graduating from Dartmouth, he entered Lincoln College, Oxford intending to earn a PhD in English literature.
Many of Geisel's books express his views on a remarkable variety of social and political issues: ''The Lorax'' (1971), about environmentalism and anti-consumerism; "The Sneetches" (1961), about racial equality; ''The Butter Battle Book'' (1984), about the arms race; ''Yertle the Turtle'' (1958), about Hitler and anti-authoritarianism; ''How the Grinch Stole Christmas!''
At Geisel's alma mater of Dartmouth, more than 90 percent of incoming first-year students participate in pre-registration Dartmouth Outing Club trips into the New Hampshire wilderness.
walks through, as the narrator admonishes him to "...&nbsp;always be dexterous and deft, and never mix up your right foot with your left."
They became friends with the wealthy family of banker Frank A. Vanderlip.
The final contribution to the Essomarine project was the mermaid Essie Neptune and her pet whale in 1941.
Geisel supported himself and his wife through the Great Depression by drawing advertising for General Electric, NBC, Standard Oil, Narragansett Brewing Company, and many other companies.
Geisel drew up a Certificate of Commission for visitors in 1936.
They then switch to iambs for the oobleck spell:
At Oxford, he met Helen Palmer, who encouraged him to give up becoming an English teacher in favor of pursuing drawing as a career.
He won a special Pulitzer Prize in 1984 citing his "contribution over nearly half a century to the education and enjoyment of America's children and their parents".
Audrey Geisel has spoken critically of the film, especially the casting of Myers as the Cat in the Hat, and stated that she would not allow any further live-action adaptations of Geisel's books.
(1957), and ''Green Eggs and Ham'' (1960).
After the war, though, Geisel overcame his feelings of animosity, using his book ''Horton Hears a Who!''
The following year featured "Little Dramas of the Deep", a six-act play with ten characters.
It spawned a song and was used as a punch line for comedians such as Fred Allen and Jack Benny.
Most were published under his well-known pseudonym Dr. Seuss, though he also authored more than a dozen books as Theo LeSieg and one as Rosetta Stone.
(1980); and ''The Grinch Grinches the Cat in the Hat'' (1982).
Cartoon lines are also used to illustrate the action of the senses—sight, smell, and hearing—in ''The Big Brag,'' and lines even illustrate "thought", as in the moment when the Grinch conceives his awful plan to ruin Christmas.
He received numerous awards throughout his career, but he won neither the Caldecott Medal nor the Newbery Medal.
Geisel's books and characters are also featured in Seuss Landing, one of many islands at the Islands of Adventure theme park in Orlando, Florida.
Alexander Laing, one of his collaborators on the ''Dartmouth Jack-O-Lantern'', wrote of it:
In 1935, he wrote and drew a short-lived comic strip called ''Hejji''.
His treatment of the Japanese and of Japanese Americans (between whom he often failed to differentiate) has struck many readers as a moral blind spot.
