By contrast, a "summer species" emerges over a period of weeks or months, later in the year.
Outside these areas, encouragement should be given to modify forestry, agricultural, and industrial practices to enhance conservation.
Dragonflies are steadily declining in Africa, and represent a conservation priority.
Some species have dark patches on the wings which can provide shade for the body, and a few use the obelisk posture to avoid overheating.
Some naiads, such as the later stages of ''Antipodophlebia asthenes'', hunt on land.
During mating, the male grasps the female at the back of the head or on the prothorax, and the female curls her abdomen under her body to pick up sperm from the male's secondary genitalia at the front of his abdomen, forming the "heart" or "wheel" posture.
As seen in Hine’s emerald dragonfly (''Somatochlora hineana''), male populations use wetland habitats, while females use dry meadows and marginal breeding habitats, only migrating to the wetlands to lay their eggs or to find mating partners.
These facets provide complete vision in the frontal hemisphere of the dragonfly.
A female must mate with the territory holder before laying her eggs.
Dragonflies are agile fliers, while damselflies have a weaker, fluttery flight.
The abdomen is long and slender and consists of 10 segments and a terminal appendage-bearing segment.
Dragonflies including libellulids and aeshnids are found in desert pools, for example in the Mojave Desert, where they are active in shade temperatures between 18 and 45&nbsp;°C (64.4 to 113&nbsp;°F); these insects were able to survive body temperatures above the thermal death point of insects of the same species found in cooler places.
Among the classical names of Japan are ''Akitsukuni'' (秋津国), ''Akitsushima'' (秋津島), ''Toyo-akitsushima'' (豊秋津島).
Dragonflies are found on every continent except Antarctica.
The sex ratio of male to female dragonflies varies both temporally and spatially.
Adult males vigorously defend territories near water; these areas provide suitable habitat for the larvae to develop, and for females to lay their eggs.
In contrast to the damselflies (Zygoptera), which tend to have restricted distributions, some genera and species are found across continents.
Requirements may be highly specific, as in ''Aeshna viridis'' (green hawker), which lives in swamps with the water-soldier, ''Stratiotes aloides''.
In Indonesia, adults are caught on poles made sticky with birdlime, then fried in oil as a delicacy.
Dragonflies and damselflies are predatory both in the aquatic nymphal and adult stages.
If successful, a rival male uses his penis to compress or scrape out the sperm inserted previously; this activity takes up much of the time that a copulating pair remains in the heart posture.
Dragonfly nymphs may swallow cercariae, or these may tunnel through a nymph's body wall; they then enter the gut and form a cyst or metacercaria, which remains in the nymph for the whole of its development.
The dragonfly's long lifespan and low population density makes it vulnerable to disturbance, such as from collisions with vehicles on roads built near wetlands.
Early in the morning, they may choose to perch in a vertical position with the wings outstretched, while in the middle of the day, a horizontal stance may be chosen.
Dragonflies in temperate areas can be categorized into two groups, an early group and a later one.
These can have a local impact on dragonfly populations; methods of reducing the attractiveness of structures such as solar panels are under experimentation.
About  of Anisoptera are in the world today.
The attacker thus looms larger as he closes on the rival, but does not otherwise appear to move.
Oding is especially popular in Texas, where 225 different species of odonates have been observed.
The first instar is known as a prolarva, a relatively inactive stage from which it quickly moults into the more active nymphal form.
The compound eyes meet at the top of the head (except in the Petaluridae and Gomphidae, as also in the genus ''Epiophlebia'').
Greens often combine a structural blue with a yellow pigment.
The territory may be small or large, depending on its quality, the time of day, and the number of competitors, and may be held for a few minutes or several hours.
At the same time, more research into dragonflies needs to be done, consideration should be given to pollution control and the public should be educated about the importance of biodiversity.
Japanese children catch large dragonflies as a game, using a hair with a small pebble tied to each end, which they throw into the air.
Most odonatologists live in temperate areas and the dragonflies of North America and Europe have been the subject of much research.
The larval stage of dragonflies lasts up to five years in large species, and between two months and three years in smaller species.
An adult dragonfly has three distinct segments, the head, thorax, and abdomen as in all insects.
The green darner (''Anax junius'') is known for its long-distance migrations, and often resorts to wing-whirring before dawn to enable it to make an early start.
Dragonflies and their relatives are an ancient group.
Defending a breeding territory is fairly common among male dragonflies, especially among species that congregate around ponds in large numbers.
They are a common motif in Zuni pottery; stylized as a double-barred cross, they appear in Hopi rock art and on Pueblo necklaces.
In a few species, the eggs are laid on emergent plants above the water, and development is delayed until these have withered and become immersed.
On the cladogram, dashed lines indicate unresolved relationships; English names are given (in parentheses):
Dragonflies are attracted to shiny surfaces that produce polarization which they can mistake for water, and they have been known to aggregate close to polished gravestones, solar panels, automobiles, and other such structures on which they attempt to lay eggs.
Another method of warming up used by some larger dragonflies is wing-whirring, a rapid vibration of the wings that causes heat to be generated in the flight muscles.
Some dragonflies, such as the green darner, ''Anax junius'', have a noniridescent blue which is produced structurally by scatter from arrays of tiny spheres in the endoplasmic reticulum of epidermal cells underneath the cuticle.
In Europe, dragonflies have often been seen as sinister.
The male attempts to prevent rivals from removing his sperm and inserting their own, something made possible by delayed fertilisation and driven by sexual selection.
Adult dragonflies are characterized by large multifaceted eyes, two pairs of strong transparent wings, sometimes with coloured patches and an elongated body.
Dragonflies are affected by three major groups of parasites: water mites, gregarine protozoa, and trematode flatworms (flukes).
However, the greatest reliable flight speed records are for other types of insects.
In the United States, dragonflies and damselflies are sought out as a hobby similar to birding and butterflying, known as oding, from the Latin name of the dragonfly order, Odonata.
Their staple diet is mostly bloodworms and other insect larvae, but they also feed on tadpoles and small fish.
Their bright colours and agile flight are admired in the poetry of Alfred, Lord Tennyson and the prose of H. E. Bates.
The flight muscles need to be kept at a suitable temperature for the dragonfly to be able to fly.
The prothorax is small and is flattened dorsally into a shield-like disc which has two transverse ridges.
A '''dragonfly''' is an insect belonging to the order Odonata, suborder '''Anisoptera''' (from Greek ἄνισος ''anisos'' "uneven" and πτερόν ''pteron'', "wing", because the hindwing is broader than the forewing).
The legs are rarely used for walking, but are used to catch and hold prey, for perching, and for climbing on plants.
They are almost exclusively carnivorous, eating a wide variety of insects ranging from small midges and mosquitoes to butterflies, moths, damselflies, and smaller dragonflies.
It is dominated by the two compound eyes, which cover most of its surface.
Dragonflies as a group occupy a considerable variety of habitats, but many species, and some families, have their own specific environmental requirements.
Water mites, ''Hydracarina'', can kill smaller dragonfly larvae, and may also be seen on adults.
They may be seen on the wing for several months, but this may represent a whole series of individuals, with new adults hatching out as earlier ones complete their short lifespans.
Many adult dragonflies have brilliant iridescent or metallic colours produced by structural coloration, making them conspicuous in flight.
The nymph extends its labium (a toothed mouthpart) to catch animals such as mosquito larvae, tadpoles, and small fish.
They are often associated with snakes, as in the Welsh name ''gwas-y-neidr'', "adder's servant".
Their altitudinal limit is about 3700 m, represented by a species of ''Aeshna'' in the Pamirs.
This labium is folded under the body at rest and struck out at great speed by hydraulic pressure created by the abdominal muscles.
The thorax bears two pairs of wings and three pairs of legs.
The veins carry haemolymph which is pumped in at the time of emergence from the nymphal stage to expand the wings.
Hori Bakusui (1718–1783) similarly wrote "Dyed he is with the / Colour of autumnal days, / O red dragonfly."
''Akitu'' or ''akidu'' are archaic or dialectal Japanese words for dragonfly, so one interpretation of ''Akitsushima'' is "Dragonfly Island".
For example, the Gomphidae (clubtails) live in running water, and the Libellulidae (skimmers) live in still water.
Some defend a territory against others of their own species, some against other species of dragonfly and a few against insects in unrelated groups.
The male-bias ratio has contributed partially to the females using different habitats to avoid male harassment.
An adult dragonfly eye has nearly 24,000 ommatidia.
In high-speed territorial battles between male Australian emperors (''Hemianax papuensis''), the fighting dragonflies adjust their flight paths to appear stationary to their rivals, minimizing the chance of being detected as they approach.
Fossils of very large dragonfly ancestors in the Protodonata are found from 325&nbsp;million years ago (Mya) in Upper Carboniferous rocks; these had wingspans up to about .
The mesothorax and metathorax are fused into a rigid, box-like structure with internal bracing, and provides a robust attachment for the powerful wing muscles inside it.
The thorax consists of three segments as in all insects.
Several years of their lives are spent as nymphs living in fresh water; the adults may be on the wing for just a few days or weeks.
The female in some families has a sharp-edged ovipositor with which she slits open a stem or leaf of a plant on or near the water, so she can push her eggs inside.
Gregarines infect the gut and may cause blockage and secondary infection.
Trematodes are parasites of vertebrates such as frogs, with complex lifecycles often involving a period as a stage called a cercaria in a secondary host, a snail.
The treeline emerald is also found in northern Alaska, within the Arctic Circle, making it the most northerly of all dragonflies.
This style is efficient and generates a large amount of lift; phased-stroking, with the hindwings beating 90° ahead of the forewings, is used for fast flight.
The larvae are voracious predators, eating most living things that are smaller than they are.
Swedish folklore holds that the devil uses dragonflies to weigh people's souls.
In females, the genital opening is on the underside of the eighth segment and is covered by a simple flap or an ovipositor, depending on species and the method of egg-laying.
Habitat degradation has reduced dragonfly populations across the world, for example in Japan.
In flight, the adult dragonfly can propel itself in six directions: upward, downward, forward, back, to left and to right.
They have a uniquely complex mode of reproduction involving indirect insemination, delayed fertilization, and sperm competition.
The novelist H. E. Bates described the rapid, agile flight of dragonflies in his 1937 nonfiction book ''Down the River'':
The damming of rivers for hydroelectric schemes and the drainage of low-lying land has reduced suitable habitat, as has pollution and the introduction of alien species.
The mouthparts are adapted for biting with a toothed jaw; the flap-like labrum, at the front of the mouth, can be shot rapidly forward to catch prey.
When he is ready to mate, he transfers a packet of sperm from his primary genital opening on segment 9, near the end of his abdomen, to his secondary genitalia on segments 2–3, near the base of his abdomen.
Dragonfly nymphs vary in form with species and are loosely classed into claspers, sprawlers, hiders, and burrowers.
Although dragonflies are swift and agile fliers, some predators are fast enough to catch them.
This is attributed to a legend in which Japan's mythical founder, Emperor Jinmu, was bitten by a mosquito, which was then eaten by a dragonfly.
They are symbols of courage, strength, and happiness in Japan, but seen as sinister in European folklore.
Being cold-blooded, they can raise their temperature by basking in the sun.
The wings of dragonflies are generally clear, apart from the dark veins and pterostigmata.
Loss of wetland habitat threatens dragonfly populations around the world.
Some species are found in temporary water pools and are capable of tolerating changes in water level, desiccation, and the resulting variations in temperature, but some genera such as ''Sympetrum'' (darters)  have eggs and larvae that can resist drought and are stimulated to grow rapidly in warm, shallow pools, also often benefiting from the absence of predators there.
Adult dragonflies hunt on the wing using their exceptionally acute eyesight and strong, agile flight.
The head is large with very short antennae.
Lafcadio Hearn wrote in his 1901 book ''A Japanese Miscellany''  that Japanese poets had created dragonfly ''haiku'' "almost as numerous as are the dragonflies themselves in the early autumn."
A particular perch may give a dragonfly a good view over an insect-rich feeding ground, and the blue dasher (''Pachydiplax longipennis'') jostles other dragonflies to maintain the right to alight there.
Most are tropical, with fewer species in temperate regions.
Dragonfly wings behave highly dynamically during flight, flexing and twisting during each beat.
In most large species of dragonflies, the wings of females are shorter and broader than those of males.
Dragonflies generate lift in at least four ways at different times, including classical lift like an aircraft wing; supercritical lift with the wing above the critical angle, generating high lift and using very short strokes to avoid stalling; creating vortices; and vortex shedding.
The greatest cause of decline is forest clearance with the consequent drying up of streams and pools which become clogged with silt.
Curling back upwards, it completes its emergence, swallowing air, which plumps out its body, and pumping haemolymph into its wings, which causes them to expand to their full extent.
These include falcons such as the American kestrel, the merlin, and the hobby; nighthawks, swifts, flycatchers and swallows also take some adults; some species of wasps, too, prey on dragonflies, using them to provision their nests, laying an egg on each captured insect.
The second and third segments are enlarged, and in males, a cleft on the underside of the second segment contains a pair of claspers and the penis.
Some families appear to use special mechanisms, as for example the Libellulidae which take off rapidly, their wings beginning pointed far forward and twisted almost vertically.
It remains stationary with its head out of the water, while its respiration system adapts to breathing air, then climbs up a reed or other emergent plant, and moults (ecdysis).
Among the variables are wing curvature, length and speed of stroke, angle of attack, forward/back position of wing, and phase relative to the other wings.
Water is pumped in and out of the abdomen through an opening at the tip.
Adults capture insect prey in the air, making use of their acute vision and highly controlled flight.
This style creates more thrust, but less lift than counter-stroking; synchronised-stroking, with forewings and hindwings beating together, is used when changing direction rapidly, as it maximises thrust; and gliding, with the wings held out, is used in three situations: free gliding, for a few seconds in between bursts of powered flight; gliding in the updraft at the crest of a hill, effectively hovering by falling at the same speed as the updraft; and in certain dragonflies such as darters, when "in cop" with a male, the female sometimes simply glides while the male pulls the pair along by beating his wings.
First, the male has to attract a female to his territory, continually driving off rival males.
Dragonflies are powerful and agile fliers, capable of migrating across oceans, moving in any direction, and changing direction suddenly.
Images of dragonflies are common in Art Nouveau, especially in jewellery designs.
In other families such as clubtails (Gomphidae), cruisers (Macromiidae), emeralds (Corduliidae), and skimmers (Libellulidae), the female lays eggs by tapping the surface of the water repeatedly with her abdomen, by shaking the eggs out of her abdomen as she flies along, or by placing the eggs on vegetation.
This behaviour involves doing a "handstand", perching with the body raised and the abdomen pointing towards the sun, thus minimising the amount of solar radiation received.
Flying in tandem has the advantage that less effort is needed by the female for flight and more can be expended on egg-laying, and when the female submerges to deposit eggs, the male may help to pull her out of the water.
Adults may require emergent or waterside plants to use as perches; others may need specific submerged or floating plants on which to lay eggs.
Over 60% of Japan's wetlands were lost in the 20th century, so its dragonflies now depend largely on rice fields, ponds, and creeks.
Douglas, a British motorcycle manufacturer based in Bristol, named its innovatively designed postwar 350-cc flat-twin model the Dragonfly.
With the destruction of rainforest habitats, many of these species are in danger of becoming extinct before they have even been named.
With care, and with dry fingers, dragonflies can be handled and released by oders, as can be done with butterflies, though it is not encouraged.
Adult dragonflies have a high male-biased ratio at breeding habitats.
The spermaries open on the 9th segment.
Many dragonflies, particularly males, are territorial.
Some English vernacular names, such as "horse-stinger", "devil's darning needle", and "ear cutter", link them with evil or injury.
In general, large dragonflies like the hawkers have a maximum speed of  with average cruising speed of about .
They have been used in traditional medicine in Japan and China.
The relationships of anisopteran families are not fully resolved as of 2013, but all the families are monophyletic except the Corduliidae; the Gomphidae are a sister taxon to all other Anisoptera, the Austropetaliidae are a sister to the Aeshnoidea, and the Chlorogomphidae are a sister to a clade that includes the Synthemistidae and Libellulidae.
Swarms of feeding adults aggregate to prey on swarming prey such as emerging flying ants or termites.
The territory contains desirable features such as a sunlit stretch of shallow water, a special plant species, or a particular substrate necessary for egg-laying.
The adult dragonfly crawls out of its larval skin, the exuvia, arching backwards when all but the tip of its abdomen is free, to allow its exoskeleton to harden.
In 1997, the International Union for Conservation of Nature set up a status survey and conservation action plan for dragonflies.
When the naiad is ready to metamorphose into an adult, it stops feeding and makes its way to the surface, generally at night.
Here, the wings are discarded and the prey usually ingested head first.
Egg-laying takes two different forms depending on the species.
The head has a system for locking it in place that consists of muscles and small hairs on the back of the head that grip structures on the front of the first thoracic segment.
As a seasonal symbol in Japan, the dragonfly is associated with autumn.
The compound eyes are made up of ommatidia, the numbers being greater in the larger species.
The female then curls her abdomen downwards and forwards under her body to pick up the sperm from the male's secondary genitalia, while the male uses his "tail" claspers to grip the female behind the head: this distinctive posture is called the "heart" or "wheel"; the pair may also be described as being "in cop".
The wings are powered directly, with the flight muscles attached to the wing bases.
They are fast, agile fliers, sometimes migrating across oceans, and are often found near water.
Becoming too hot is another hazard, and a sunny or shady position for perching can be selected according to the ambient temperature.
The dragonfly mistakes the pebbles for prey, gets tangled in the hair, and is dragged to the ground by the weight.
The hindwings are broader than the forewings and the venation is different at the base.
They have four different styles of flight: A number of flying modes are used that include counter-stroking, with forewings beating 180° out of phase with the hindwings, is used for hovering and slow flight.
The general body plan is similar to that of an adult, but the nymph lacks wings and reproductive organs.
However, the majority of species live in tropical areas and have been little studied.
They are used in traditional medicine in Japan and China, and caught for food in Indonesia.
Dragonflies feed on pest insects in rice, acting as a natural pest control.
The springtime darner (''Basiaeschna janata''), for example, is suddenly very common in the spring, but has disappeared a few weeks later and is not seen again until the following year.
The oldest fossils are of the Protodonata from the 325&nbsp;Mya Upper Carboniferous of Europe, a group that included the largest insect that ever lived, ''Meganeuropsis permiana'' from the early Permian, with a wingspan around ; their fossil record ends with the Permian–Triassic extinction event (about 247&nbsp;Mya).
In Kamchatka, only a few species of dragonfly including the treeline emerald ''Somatochlora arctica'' and some aeshnids such as ''Aeshna subarctica'' are found, possibly because of the low temperature of the lakes there.
Also, they have three simple eyes or ocelli.
Most Anisoptera species are tropical, with far fewer species in temperate regions.
Some aeshnids such as the brown hawker (''Aeshna grandis'') have translucent, pale yellow wings.
The mating system of dragonflies is complex and they are among the few insect groups that have a system of indirect sperm transfer along with sperm storage, delayed fertilization, and sperm competition.
Naiads can forcefully expel a jet of water to propel themselves with great rapidity.
They are not native to Iceland, but individuals are occasionally swept in by strong winds, including a ''Hemianax ephippiger'' native to North Africa, and an unidentified darter species.
The common whitetail (''Plathemis lydia'') dashes towards an intruder holding its white abdomen aloft like a flag.
Old and unreliable claims are made that dragonflies such as the southern giant darner can fly up to .
Dragonflies are represented in human culture on artifacts such as pottery, rock paintings, and Art Nouveau jewellery.
The poet Alfred, Lord Tennyson, described a dragonfly splitting its old skin and emerging shining metallic blue like "sapphire mail" in his 1842 poem "The Two Voices", with the lines "An inner impulse rent the veil / Of his old husk: from head to tail / Came out clear plates of sapphire mail."
Some species prefer flowing waters, while others prefer standing water.
A dragonfly may consume as much as a fifth of its body weight in prey per day.
The globe skimmer ''Pantala flavescens'' is probably the most widespread dragonfly species in the world; it is cosmopolitan, occurring on all continents in the warmer regions.
For example, the blue-eyed darner ''Rhionaeschna multicolor'' is found all across North America, and in Central America; emperors ''Anax'' are found throughout the Americas from as far north as Newfoundland to as far south as Bahia Blanca in Argentina, across Europe to central Asia, North Africa, and the Middle East.
Many dragonflies have brilliant iridescent or metallic colours produced by structural coloration, making them conspicuous in flight.
Most of a dragonfly's life is spent as a nymph, beneath the water's surface.
Unwanted mating is energetically costly for females because it affects the amount of time that they are able to spend foraging.
The watercolourist Moses Harris (1731–1785), known for his ''The Aurelian or natural history of English insects'' (1766), published in 1780, the first scientific descriptions of several Odonata including the banded demoiselle, ''Calopteryx splendens''.
The male then grasps the female by the head with the claspers at the end of his abdomen; the structure of the claspers varies between species, and may help to prevent interspecific mating.
Some dragonflies signal ownership with striking colours on the face, abdomen, legs, or wings.
The leading edge of each wing has a node where other veins join the marginal vein, and the wing is able to flex at this point.
The chemistry of the water, including its trophic status (degree of enrichment with nutrients) and pH can also affect its use by dragonflies.
The Norwegian name for dragonflies is ''Øyenstikker'' ("eye-poker"), and in Portugal, they are sometimes called ''tira-olhos'' ("eyes-snatcher").
This arrester system is unique to the Odonata and is activated when feeding and during tandem flight.
Researchers found that six of 15 encounters involved motion camouflage.
Dragonfly nymphs are usually a well-camouflaged blend of dull brown, green, and grey.
More generally, dragonflies are symbols of courage, strength, and happiness, and they often appear in art and literature, especially ''haiku''.
The long leg joints bear rows of spines, and in males, one row of spines on each front leg is modified to form an "eyebrush", for cleaning the surface of the compound eye.
Eggs laid inside plant tissues are usually shaped like grains of rice, while other eggs are the size of a pinhead, ellipsoidal, or nearly spherical.
The forerunners of modern Odonata are included in a clade called the Panodonata, which include the basal Zygoptera (damselflies) and the Anisoptera (true dragonflies) Today there are some 3000 species extant around the world.
The facets facing downward tend to be smaller.
This proposes the establishment of protected areas around the world and the management of these areas to provide suitable habitat for dragonflies.
A clutch may have as many as 1500 eggs, and they take about a week to hatch into aquatic nymphs or naiads which moult between six and 15 times (depending on species) as they grow.
''Aeshna interrupta'' has 22650 ommatidia of two varying sizes, 4500 being large.
Each has two short basal joints, two long joints, and a three-jointed foot, armed with a pair of claws.
