The American s were the first all-big-gun ships completed by one of the United Kingdom's rivals.
Both British and American admirals concluded that they needed to engage the enemy at longer ranges.
The United States Naval Appropriations Act of 1916 authorized the construction of 156 new ships, including ten battleships and six battlecruisers.
The thickest protection was reserved for the central citadel in all battleships.
The Admiralty then demanded, as an absolute minimum, a further eight battleships.
The typical battleship of the 1890s, now known as the "pre-dreadnought", had a main armament of four heavy guns of 12-inch (305&nbsp;mm) calibre, a secondary armament of six to eighteen quick-firing guns of between  and  calibre, and other smaller weapons.
Oil-fired propulsion had many advantages for naval architects and officers at sea alike.
Greece in 1914 purchased two pre-dreadnoughts from the United States Navy, renaming them  and  in Royal Hellenic Navy service.
Dreadnoughts were propelled by two to four screw propellers.
The weaker naval powers engaged in the Great War—France, Austria-Hungary, Italy and Russia—suspended their battleship programmes entirely.
Fewer turrets meant the ship could be shorter, or could devote more space to machinery.
calibre when the British standard was .
In 1904, the Imperial Japanese Navy authorized construction of , originally designed with twelve  guns.
The United Kingdom and Germany continued building battleships and battlecruisers but at a reduced pace.
Dreadnoughts mounted a uniform main battery of heavy-calibre guns; the number, size, and arrangement differed between designs.
In the Royal Navy, the , launched 1910, had ten 13.5-inch guns, all on the centreline; the , launched 1913, had eight  guns.
The class had a 25-knot (46-km/h) design speed, and they were considered the first fast battleships.
Withdrawing from the Mediterranean would mean a huge loss of influence, weakening British diplomacy in the Mediterranean and shaking the stability of the British Empire.
The British resolve demonstrated by their construction programme led the Germans to seek a negotiated end to the arms race.
The two Austrian dreadnoughts lost in 1918 were the casualties of Italian torpedo boats and frogmen.
With the conclusion of the Entente Cordiale between the United Kingdom and France in April 1904, it became increasingly clear that the United Kingdom's principal naval enemy would be Germany, which was building up a large, modern fleet under the 'Tirpitz' laws.
This greatly offended Turkey.
The planning for the type had begun before ''Dreadnought'' was launched.
War-game studies begun in July 1903 "showed that a battleship armed with twelve 11-inch or 12-inch guns hexagonally arranged would be equal to three or more of the conventional type."
One, , was later repurchased by Chile.
This viewpoint is controversial, as fire control in 1905 was not advanced enough to use the salvo-firing technique where this confusion might be important, and confusion of shell-splashes does not seem to have been a concern of those working on all-big-gun designs.
These more powerful vessels were known as "super-dreadnoughts."
H. C. Poundstone submitted a paper to President Roosevelt in December 1902 arguing the case for larger battleships.
This layout meant the entire main battery could fire on the broadside, though fewer could fire end-on.
Nevertheless, this layout made the best of the firepower available from a fixed number of guns, and was eventually adopted generally.
Fisher's mania for speed culminated in his suggestion for , a mammoth, lightly armoured battlecruiser.
One advantage of coal was that it is quite inert (in lump form) and thus could be used as part of the ship's protection scheme.
The subsequent  were suspended (and later cancelled) on the outbreak of World War I.
Uniform heavy-gun armament offered many other advantages.
''Dreadnought'' carried 12-pounder guns; each of her twenty-two 12-pounders could fire at least 15 rounds a minute at any torpedo boat making an attack.
For instance, in 1903, the US Navy ordered a design of torpedo effective to .
In spite of receiving 26 heavy hits, her armoured raft remained untouched and she remained both afloat and operational at the end of action.
The smaller number of guns simplified their distribution, and centreline turrets became the norm.
The ''Satsuma''s were designed before ''Dreadnought'', but financial shortages resulting from the Russo-Japanese War delayed completion and resulted in their carrying a mixed armament, so they were known as 'semi-dreadnought's.
At the start of World War I, the two completed ships were seized by Britain for the Royal Navy.
Most of the original dreadnoughts were scrapped after the end of World War I under the terms of the Washington Naval Treaty, but many of the newer super-dreadnoughts continued to be used throughout World War II.
The battleships, which became the , were to carry ten 16-inch guns.
These benefits meant that, as early as 1901, Fisher was pressing the advantages of oil fuel.
The design of the dreadnought changed to meet new challenges.
The ships which survived the treaty, including the most modern super-dreadnoughts of all three navies, formed the bulk of international capital ship strength through the 1920s and 1930s and, with some modernisation, into World War II.
In spite of these important strategic consequences, the 1912 Naval Law had little bearing on the battleship force ratios.
In such an encounter, shells would fly on a relatively flat trajectory, and a shell would have to hit at or just about the waterline to damage the vitals of the ship.
Its navy severely limited by the Treaty of Versailles, Germany did not participate in this three-way naval building competition.
The calibre and weight of secondary armament tended to increase, as the range of torpedoes and the staying power of the destroyers expected to carry them also increased.
This design was proven in battle at the 1942 Naval Battle of Guadalcanal, when an ill-timed turn by  silhouetted her to Japanese guns.
The dreadnought race stepped up in 1910 and 1911, with Germany laying down four capital ships each year and the United Kingdom five.
In addition, coal was very bulky and had comparatively low thermal efficiency.
This was particularly favoured by the US Navy, which used it for all dreadnoughts from late 1915–1922.
In this context, the light guns tended to be mounted in unarmoured positions high on the ship to minimize weight and maximize field of fire.
Most of the German dreadnought fleet was scuttled at Scapa Flow by its crews in 1919; the remainder were handed over as war prizes.
These heavier guns tended to be mounted in armoured barbettes or casemates on the main deck.
The boilers became clogged with ash.
The US Navy adopted this feature with their first dreadnoughts in 1906, but others were slower to do so.
The June 1902 issue of ''Proceedings of the US Naval Institute'' contained comments by the US Navy's leading gunnery expert Prof. P.R Alger proposing a main battery of eight   guns in twin turrets.
The specification for the new ship was a 12-inch main battery and anti-torpedo-boat guns but no intermediate calibres, and a speed of  which was two or three knots faster than existing battleships.
Heavier shells have the advantage of being slowed less by air resistance, retaining more penetrating power at longer ranges.
In all navies, fewer guns of larger calibre came to be used.
In October 1903, the Italian naval architect Vittorio Cuniberti published a paper in ''Jane's Fighting Ships'' entitled "An Ideal Battleship for the British Navy", which called for a 17,000 ton ship carrying a main armament of twelve 12-inch guns, protected by armour 12&nbsp;inches thick, and having a speed of 24 knots (28&nbsp;mph/44&nbsp;km/h).
Rather than try to fit more guns onto a ship, it was possible to increase the power of each gun.
In the Black Sea, Russian and Turkish battleships skirmished, but nothing more.
Work began on her construction in May 1905.
The advantages of this method were its low cost, the opportunity for very close underwater compartmentalization, and good astern performance.
Some designs had an intermediate battery of  guns.
Airborne coal dust and related vapors were highly explosive, possibly evidenced by the explosion of .
As with other layouts there were drawbacks.
The sides of the citadel were the "armoured belt" of the ship, which started on the hull just in front of the forward turret and ran to just behind the aft turret.
Modern battleships were the crucial element of naval power in spite of their price.
For this reason, the early dreadnoughts' armour was concentrated in a thick belt around the waterline; this was  thick in ''Dreadnought''.
Taking lessons from Tsushima, and influenced by Cuniberti, they ended up more closely resembling slower versions of Fisher's battlecruisers than ''Dreadnought'', and they proved badly flawed due to their smaller guns and thinner armour when compared with contemporary dreadnoughts.
Turbines also had disadvantages.
If all turrets were on the centreline of the vessel, stresses on the ship's frames were relatively low.
The United Kingdom planned to revert to mixed firing with the subsequent , at the cost of some speed—but Fisher, who returned to office in 1914, insisted that all the boilers should be oil-fired.
This arrangement gave some armour to a larger part of the ship; for the very first dreadnoughts, when high-explosive shellfire was still considered a significant threat, this was useful.
On 10 August 1904 the Imperial Russian Navy engaged the Imperial Japanese Navy in one of the longest-range gunnery duels to date - over  - during the Battle of the Yellow Sea.
It was hoped that a medium-calibre shell might be able to score a hit on an enemy dreadnought's sensitive fire control systems.
It reduced smoke, making ships less visible.
Greece had ordered a dreadnought from Germany, but work stopped on the outbreak of war.
The compartments in between were either left empty, or filled with coal, water or fuel oil.
In the other naval theatres, there were no decisive pitched battles.
The US Navy used superfiring on the , and the layout was adopted in the Royal Navy with the  of 1910.
The decision to use a 10-gun 20,500&nbsp;ton ship over a 12-gun 24,000&nbsp;ton in this class was criticized, because the secondary battery was 'wet' (suffering from spray) and the bow was low in the water.
In Japan, two  super-dreadnoughts were laid down in 1912, followed by the two s in 1914, with both classes carrying twelve 14-inch (356&nbsp;mm) guns.
In 1895, a 12-inch gun might have fired one round every four minutes; by 1902, two rounds per minute was usual.
Ships designed in this way have been described as 'all-big-gun mixed-calibre' or later 'semi-dreadnoughts'.
The US Navy continued to expand its battlefleet, laying down two ships in most subsequent years until 1920.
The battlecruisers, the , also carried ten 16-inch guns and were designed to be capable of 30 knots, capable of beating both the British Admiral- and the US&nbsp;Navy's ''Lexington''-class battlecruisers.
The Japanese s in 1917 carried  guns, which was quickly matched by the US Navy's .
The casemate mountings of heavier guns proved problematic; being low in the hull, they proved liable to flooding, and on several classes some were removed and plated over.
Several later designs used quadruple turrets, including the British  and French .
The "floor" of the box was the bottom of the ship's hull, and was unarmoured,  although it was in fact a "triple bottom".
The United Kingdom responded by laying down ten new super-dreadnoughts in its 1912 and 1913 budgets—ships of the  and  classes, which introduced a further step change in armament, speed and protection—while Germany laid down only five, concentrating resources on the Army.
The armour of their design was considered too thin, demanding a substantial redesign.
The Committee also gave ''Dreadnought'' steam turbine propulsion, which was unprecedented in a large warship.
Dreadnoughts frequently carried torpedo tubes themselves.
In Germany, two units of the pre-war  were gradually completed, but the other two laid down were still unfinished by the end of the War.
Later British super-dreadnoughts, principally the , dispensed with the midships turret, so weight and volume were freed for larger, oil-fired boilers.
The US Navy experimented with turbine engines from 1908 in the , but was not fully committed to turbines until the ''Pennsylvania'' class in 1916.
The French would assume responsibility for checking Italy and Austria-Hungary in the Mediterranean, while the British would protect the north coast of France.
The risk of the blast waves from each gun barrel interfering with others in the same turret reduced the rate of fire from the guns somewhat.
Most pre-dreadnought battleships were scrapped or hulked after World War I, so the term 'dreadnought' became less necessary.
The only acceptable option, and the one recommended by First Lord of the Admiralty Winston Churchill, was to break with the policies of the past and make an arrangement with France.
Both methods offered advantages and disadvantages, though in general greater muzzle velocity meant increased barrel wear.
Both sides were aware, because of the greater number of British dreadnoughts, that a full fleet engagement would most likely result in a British victory.
The British seizure and German gift were important factors in Turkey joining the Central Powers.
A constitutional crisis in 1909–10 meant no construction could be approved.
These ships, the  would displace 43,000 tons; the next design, the , would have carried  guns.
Since the risk from destroyers was very serious, it was considered that one shell from a battleship's secondary armament should sink (rather than merely damage) any attacking destroyer.
For the first time, the United States Navy was threatening the British global lead.
Part of the rationale for the decision to retain mixed-calibre guns was the need to begin the building of the ships quickly because of the tense situation produced by the Russo-Japanese War.
No ships had been begun since the Admiral class, and of those only  had been completed.
As a result, dreadnought races sprang up around the world, including in South America, during the lead up to the beginning of World War I. Successive designs increased rapidly in size and made use of improvements in armament, armour, and propulsion throughout the dreadnought era.
The Royal Navy began the design of HMS ''Dreadnought'' in January 1905, and she was laid down in October of the same year.
This has led to criticism that the British, by launching HMS ''Dreadnought'', threw away a strategic advantage.
The third ship, ''Rio de Janeiro'', was nearly complete when rubber prices collapsed and Brazil could not afford her.
The Treaty laid out a list of ships, including most of the older dreadnoughts and almost all the newer ships under construction, which were to be scrapped or otherwise put out of use.
The hallmark of dreadnought battleships was an "all-big-gun" armament, but they also had heavy armour concentrated mainly in a thick belt at the waterline and in one or more armoured decks.
This proposed a fleet of 33 German battleships and battlecruisers, outnumbering the Royal Navy in home waters.
This allowed three turrets to fire ahead and four on the broadside.
The German H-43 and H-44 designs proposed  guns, and there is evidence Hitler wanted calibres as high as ; the Japanese 'Super ''Yamato''' design also called for 508&nbsp;mm guns.
The secondary battery served several other roles.
In Japan, the two battleships of the 1903–04 programme were the first in the world to be laid down as all-big-gun ships, with eight  guns.
From this point on, the term 'dreadnought' became less widely used.
It meant the hull would be longer, which posed some challenges for the designers; a longer ship needed to devote more weight to armour to get equivalent protection, and the magazines which served each turret interfered with the distribution of boilers and engines.
The earliest dreadnoughts were intended to take part in a pitched battle against other battleships at ranges of up to .
The disadvantages were that the machinery was heavy and vulnerable to battle damage, particularly the effects of flooding on the electrics.
With their victory in the Russo-Japanese War of 1904–05, the Japanese became concerned about the potential for conflict with the US.
All-big-gun designs commenced almost simultaneously in three navies.
(''Fatih Sultan Mehmed'' was scrapped.)
The greater power and lighter weight of turbines meant the 21-knot (24&nbsp;mph/39&nbsp;km/h) design speed could be achieved in a smaller and less costly ship than if reciprocating engines had been used.
As a result, the ''South Carolina'' class were built to much tighter limits than ''Dreadnought''.
The 1903–04 design retained traditional triple-expansion steam engines, unlike ''Dreadnought''.
These two ships were laid down in 1909 and completed in 1912.
This, combined with a government moratorium on battleship building, meant a renewed focus on the battlecruiser.
Other theatres showed the role of small craft in damaging or destroying dreadnoughts.
There were still several instances where flooding spread between underwater compartments.
At times, this became problematic; the US Navy seriously considered stopping practice firing of heavy guns in 1910 because of the wear on the barrels.
After a full evaluation of reports of the action at Tsushima compiled by an official observer, Captain Pakenham, the Committee settled on a main battery of ten 12-inch guns, along with twenty-two 12 pounders as secondary armament.
This could be done by increasing either the calibre of the weapon and hence the weight of shell, or by lengthening the barrel to increase muzzle velocity.
four 12-inch and twelve 9.2-inch guns."
The outbreak of World War I largely halted the dreadnought arms race as funds and technical resources were diverted to more pressing priorities.
''Reshadiye'' and ''Sultan Osman I'' became  and  respectively.
The US Congress authorized the Navy to build two battleships, but of only 16,000&nbsp;tons or lower displacement.
The ends of the citadel were two armoured bulkheads, fore and aft, which stretched between the ends of the armour belt.
This meant an inner bulkhead along the side of the hull, which was generally lightly armoured to capture splinters, separated from the outer hull by one or more compartments.
The bulk of a dreadnought's armour was concentrated around the "armoured citadel".
Important features of the standard battleships were 'all or nothing' armour and 'raft' construction—based on a design philosophy which held that only those parts of the ship worth giving the thickest possible protection were worth armouring at all, and that the resulting armoured "raft" should contain enough reserve buoyancy to keep afloat the entire ship in the event the unarmoured bow and stern were thoroughly punctured and flooded.
The battleship race soon accelerated once more, placing a great burden on the finances of the governments which engaged in it.
Matters took a further turn for the worse in 1919 when Woodrow Wilson proposed a further expansion of the United States Navy, asking for funds for an additional ten battleships and six battlecruisers in addition to the completion of the 1916 programme (the  not yet started).
Compared to the other major naval powers, France was slow to start building dreadnoughts, instead finishing the planned ''Danton'' class of pre-dreadnoughts, laying down five in 1907 and 1908.
The Italian navy had received proposals for an all-big-gun battleship from Cuniberti well before ''Dreadnought'' was launched, but it took until 1909 for Italy to lay down one of its own.
Different navies approached the issue of calibre in different ways.
For these reasons, , which carried a record fourteen 12-inch guns in seven centreline turrets, was not considered a success.
The course of the war illustrated the vulnerability of battleships to cheaper weapons.
A uniform calibre of gun also helped streamline fire control.
12-inch guns had been standard for most navies in the pre-dreadnought era and this continued in the first generation of dreadnought battleships.
This was a box, with four armoured walls and an armoured roof, around the most important parts of the ship.
By 1905, new designs of reciprocating engine were available which were cleaner and more reliable than previous models.
These fragments were dangerous, but could be stopped by much thinner armour than what would be necessary to stop an unexploded armour-piercing shell.
In 1917, the  was ordered, the first dreadnoughts to mount  guns, making them arguably the most powerful warships in the world.
The inevitable consequence of demands for ever greater speed, striking power, and endurance meant that displacement, and hence cost, of dreadnoughts tended to increase.
Restrictions on length and beam meant the midships 9.2-inch turrets became single instead of twin, thus giving an armament of four 12-inch, ten 9.2-inch and no 6-inch.
In an engagement of this sort, there was also a lesser threat of indirect damage to the vital parts of the ship.
For example, armour schemes were changed to reflect the greater risk of plunging shells from long-range gunfire, and the increasing threat from armour-piercing bombs dropped by aircraft.
The United Kingdom was not far behind, deciding in 1912 to use oil on its own in the ; shorter British design and building times meant that ''Queen Elizabeth'' was commissioned before either of the ''Nevada''-class vessels.
Burning coal as fuel also produced thick black smoke which gave away the position of a fleet and interfered with visibility, signaling, and fire control.
Turbines were never replaced in battleship design.
Building was slow; specifications for bidders were issued on 21 March 1906, the contracts awarded on 21 July 1906 and the two ships were laid down in December 1906, after the completion of the ''Dreadnought''.
The first super-dreadnoughts are generally considered to be the British .
Mines continued to prove a threat when a month later the recently commissioned British super-dreadnought  struck one and sank in 1914.
Japan's first priorities were to refit the pre-dreadnoughts captured from Russia and to complete  and .
Semi-dreadnoughts classes included the British  and ; Russian ; Japanese , , and ; American  and ; French ; Italian ; and Austro-Hungarian .
The Netherlands intended by 1912 to replace its fleet of pre-dreadnought armoured ships with a modern fleet composed of dreadnoughts.
This solution required technical precision in the gears and hence was difficult to implement.
The , authorized in 1916, carried eight 16-inch guns like their American counterparts.
The first dreadnoughts tended to have a very light secondary armament intended to protect them from torpedo boats.
To make the best use of the weight available for armament, all eight  guns were mounted along the centreline, in superfiring pairs fore and aft.
The alternative was an "all or nothing" protection scheme, developed by the US Navy.
On the other hand, it meant that in the event of an enemy shell destroying one turret, a higher proportion of the main armament would be out of action.
The Naval War College and Bureau of Construction and Repair developed these ideas in studies between 1903 and 1905.
To protect the innards of the ship from fragments of shells which detonated on the superstructure, much thinner steel armour was applied to the decks of the ship.
In France, the ''Courbet''s were followed by three super-dreadnoughts of the , carrying 340&nbsp;mm (13.4&nbsp;in) guns; another five s were canceled on the outbreak of World War I.
The Admiralty decided to build three more s (with a mixture of 12-inch, 9.2-inch and ) in the 1903–04 naval construction programme instead.
The increased rate of fire laid the foundations for future advances in fire control.
Some navies extended a thinner armoured belt and armoured deck to cover the ends of the ship, or extended a thinner armoured belt up the outside of the hull.
The first German response to ''Dreadnought'' came with the , laid down in 1907.
They were built in Spain, with assistance; construction on the third ship, , took nine years from its laying down date to completion because of non-delivery of critical material, especially armament, from the United Kingdom.
These were followed by a modified ''Aki''-type:  and .
In June 1909, the Imperial Russian Navy began construction of four  dreadnoughts for the Baltic Fleet, and in October 1911, three more  dreadnoughts for the Black Sea were laid down.
The first US dreadnoughts were the two  ships.
In May 1916, a further attempt to draw British ships into battle on favourable terms resulted in a clash of the battlefleets on 31 May to 1 June in the indecisive Battle of Jutland.
It was labor-intensive to pack coal into the ship's bunkers and then feed it into the boilers.
This, along with a guarantee on the new machinery from the inventor, Charles Parsons, persuaded the Royal Navy to use turbines in ''Dreadnought''.
It could be fed into boilers automatically, rather than needing a complement of stokers to do it by hand.
At these ranges, lighter guns had good accuracy, and their high rate of fire delivered high volumes of ordnance on the target, known as the "hail of fire".
There is some speculation the US Navy design was influenced by informal contacts with sympathetic Royal Navy officials, but the American ship was very different.
