Bundesliga after some seasons in the Bundesliga and 3rd Liga.
It is home to the Landtag of Saxony and the ministries of the Saxon Government.
This was largely because the river returned to its former route; it had been diverted so that a railway could run along the river bed.
File:Flood dresden april2006 004.jpg|Elbe Flood in April 2006
The Opernhaus am Zwinger presented opera from 1719 to 1756, when the Seven Years' War began.
Dresden has a large tramway network operated by Dresdner Verkehrsbetriebe, the municipal transport company.
The Hofkirche was the church of the royal household.
Historicist buildings made their presence felt on the cityscape until the 1920s sampled by public buildings such as the Staatskanzlei or the City Hall.
Also some Art Nouveau living quarters and two bigger quarters typical for communist architecture&nbsp;– but much renovated&nbsp;– can be found.
After being placed on the list of endangered World Heritage Sites in 2006, the city lost the title in June 2009, due to the construction of the ''Waldschlößchenbrücke'', making it only the second ever World Heritage Site to be removed from the register.
Dresden has a broadcasting centre belonging to the Mitteldeutscher Rundfunk.
Dresden's urban parts are subdivided in rather a lot of city quarters, up to around 100, among them relatively many larger villa quarters dominated by historic multiple dwelling units, especially, but not only along the river, most known are Blasewitz, Loschwitz, Pillnitz and Weißer Hirsch.
Opponents of the sale were concerned about Dresden's loss of control over the subsidized housing market.
Other royal buildings and ensembles:
Its districts differ in their structure and appearance.
Dresden has been divided into ten districts called "Ortsamtsbereich" and nine former boroughs ("Ortschaften") which have been incorporated.
* Skopje, Macedonia, since 1967
The high explosive bombs damaged buildings and exposed their wooden structures, while the incendiaries ignited them, denying their use by retreating German troops and refugees.
Two additional trenches, about 50 metres wide, have been built to keep the inner city free of water from the Elbe, by dissipating the water downstream through the inner city's gorge portion.
about 51.3% of the population was female.
Their first opera house was the Opernhaus am Taschenberg, opened in 1667.
* Rotterdam, South Holland, Netherlands, since 1988
* Brazzaville, Congo, since 1975
The protected gardens, parkways, parks and old graveyards host 110 natural monuments in the city.
The completion of the reconstructed Dresden Frauenkirche in 2005 marked the first step in rebuilding the Neumarkt area.
Dresden has a third football team SC Borea Dresden.
The wells serve only a decorative function, since there is a fresh water system in Dresden.
Growing outside the city walls, the historic outskirts were built in the 18th century.
Compared to West Germany, the majority of historic buildings were saved.
A commuter train system (Dresden S-Bahn) operates on three lines alongside the long-distance routes.
Since 1890, horse races have taken place and the Dresdener Rennverein 1890 e.V.
The Saxon State Opera descends from the opera company of the former electors and Kings of Saxony.
The areas around the square have been divided into 8 "Quarters", with each being rebuilt as a separate project, the majority of buildings to be rebuilt either to the original structure or at least with a façade similar to the original.
Architecture and the design of public places is a controversial subject.
The city still bears many wounds from the bombing raids of 1945, but it has undergone significant reconstruction in recent decades.
Thanks to the presence of public administration centres, a high density of semi-public research institutes and an extension of publicly funded high technology sectors, the proportion of highly qualified workers Dresden is again among the highest in Germany and by European criteria.
In 2006 Dresden sold its publicly subsidized housing organization, WOBA Dresden GmbH, to the US-based private investment company Fortress Investment Group.
The main departments of the municipality are managed by seven burgomasters.
It is said to be the greatest cupola building in Central and Northern Europe.
Dresden was attacked seven times between 1944 and 1945, and was occupied by the Red Army after the German capitulation.
The Dresden State Theatre runs a number of smaller theatres.
It thereby became the first location ever in Europe to lose this status, and the second ever in the world.
Between 1990 and 2010 the unemployment rate fluctuated between 13% and 15% and is still relatively high, with a low of 8.9% in May 2012.
The media in Dresden include two major newspapers of regional record: the ''Sächsische Zeitung'' (''Saxon Newspaper'', circulation around 228,000) and the ''Dresdner Neueste Nachrichten'' (''Dresden's Latest News'', circulation around 50,000).
However, some of the bombed-out ruins of churches, royal buildings and palaces, such as the Gothic Sophienkirche, the Alberttheater and the Wackerbarth-Palais were razed by the Soviet and East German authorities in the 1950s and 1960s instead of being repaired.
The tourism industry enjoys high revenue and supports many employees.
The city received  euro and paid off its remaining loans, making it the first large city in Germany to become debt-free.
Many of the new low-floor vehicles are up to 45 metres long and produced by Bombardier Transportation in Bautzen.
Between 1918 and 1934, Dresden was capital of the first Free State of Saxony.
* Hangzhou, China, since 2009
Dresden is the capital of a German ''Land'' (federal state).
It focuses on nuclear medicine and physics.
Its name etymologically derives from Old Sorbian ''Drežďany'', meaning ''people of the forest''.
The urban renewal process, which includes the reconstruction of the area around the Neumarkt square on which the Frauenkirche is situated, will continue for many decades, but public and government interest remains high, and there are numerous large projects underway—both historic reconstructions and modern plans—that will continue the city's recent architectural renaissance.
Most of the Saxon state authorities are located in Dresden.
The gold cross on the top of the church was funded officially by "the British people and the House of Windsor".
* Saint Petersburg, Russia, since 1961
The ''Dresdner Druck- und Verlagshaus'' (Dresden printing plant and publishing house) produces part of Spiegel's print run, amongst other newspapers and magazines.
* Coventry, West Midlands, England, United Kingdom, since 1959
Since German reunification, demographic development has been very unsteady.
Dresden is one of the greenest cities in all of Europe, with 63% of the city being green areas and forests.
Dresden regularly ranks among the best ten bigger cities in Germany to live in.
A report from the British Bomber Command stated the military target was the railway marshaling yard Dresden-Friedrichstadt.
A number of districts become waterlogged if the Elbe overflows across some of its former floodplains.
In 1730, it was relocated to Warsaw.
From 1985 to 1990, the KGB stationed Vladimir Putin, the future President of Russia, in Dresden.
Augustus the Strong, who desired to be King of Poland, converted to Catholicism, as Polish kings had to be Catholic.
Dresden has an oceanic climate (Cfb), influenced by its inland location, with warm summers and slightly colder winters as compared to the German average.
Dresden Airport is the city's international airport, located at the north-western outskirts of the town.
The ''Militärhistorisches Museum der Bundeswehr'' (Military History Museum) is placed in the former garrison in the Albertstadt.
Around the late 12th century, a Slavic settlement called ''Drežďany'' had developed on the southern bank.
The church is the cathedral "Sanctissimae Trinitatis" since 1980.
Other characteristic kinds of urban areas are the historic outskirts of the city, and the former suburbs with scattered housing.
the population of the city of Dresden was 523,058, the population of the Dresden agglomeration was 780,561 , and  the population of the Dresden region, which includes the neighbouring districts of Meißen, Sächsische Schweiz-Osterzgebirge and the western part of the district of Bautzen was 1,143,197.
From the 19th century the city grew by incorporating other districts.
The nearest German cities are Chemnitz  to the southwest, Leipzig  to the northwest and Berlin  to the north.
Like many cities in Germany, Dresden is also home to a local court, has a trade corporation and a Chamber of Industry and Trade and many subsidiaries of federal agencies (such as the Federal Labour Office or the Federal Agency for Technical Relief).
This percentage is almost the same as in 2006 with 4%.
The CarGoTram is a tram that supplies Volkswagen's Transparent Factory, crossing the city.
Dietrich, Margrave of Meissen, chose Dresden as his interim residence in 1206, as documented in a record calling the place "Civitas Dresdene".
During the 19th century, the city became a major centre of economy, including motor car production, food processing, banking and the manufacture of medical equipment.
Other famous artists, such as Ernst Ludwig Kirchner, Otto Dix, Oskar Kokoschka, Richard Strauss, Gottfried Semper and Gret Palucca, were also active in the city.
Its gate by the moat, surmounted by a golden crown, is famous.
The city's historic Kreuzkirche was reconsecrated in 1388.
Another traditional pharmaceuticals producer is Arzneimittelwerke Dresden (Pharmaceutical Works, Dresden).
Nowadays, the Bundeswehr operates the Military History Museum of the Federal Republic of Germany in the former Albertstadt garrison.
This military complex, named after Saxon King Albert, was not specifically targeted in the bombing of Dresden, though it was within the expected area of destruction and was extensively damaged.
The Fraunhofer Society hosts institutes of applied research that also offer mission-oriented research to enterprises.
The Kraszewski-Museum is a museum dedicated to the most prolific Polish writer Józef Ignacy Kraszewski, who lived in Dresden from 1863 to 1883.
Dresden as a major urban centre has developed much faster and more consistently than most other regions in the former German Democratic Republic, but it still faces many social and economic problems stemming from the collapse of the former system, including high unemployment levels.
there were 43,707 people with a migration background (8.7% of the city's population), and about half, 25,224 or about 4.7% of all Dresden citizens were foreigners.
One of the youngest buildings of that era is the Hygiene Museum, which is designed in an impressively monumental style, but employs plain façades and simple structures.
File:Elbe-Hochwasser-Dresden-Juni2013-18.jpg|Dresden under water in June 2013
are active and one of the big sporting events in Dresden.
UNESCO stated in 2006 that the bridge would destroy the cultural landscape.
Dresden's founding and early growth is associated with the eastward expansion of Germanic peoples, mining in the nearby Ore Mountains, and the establishment of the Margraviate of Meissen.
The Dresden University of Technology is one of the 10 largest universities in Germany and part of the German Universities Excellence Initiative.
The additional Special Conservation Areas cover 18&nbsp;km2.
Also located in the ''Großer Garten'' is the Dresden Zoo.
The Dresden Elbe Valley is a former world heritage site which is focused on the conservation of the cultural landscape in Dresden.
Discussions about the Waldschlößchenbrücke, a bridge under construction across the Elbe, received international attention because of its position across the Dresden Elbe Valley World Heritage Site.
Libeskind changed the whole structure of the Bundeswehr Military History Museum Museum by placing a wedge through the historical arsenal building.
The controlling Constitutional Court of Saxony is in Leipzig.
The Zwinger Palace is across the road from the castle.
Their factories attract many suppliers of material and cleanroom technology enterprises to Dresden.
* The ''Staatliche Naturhistorische Sammlungen Dresden'' (State Collection of Natural History)
The ''Botanischer Garten Dresden'' is a botanical garden in the ''Großer Garten'' that is maintained by the Dresden University of Technology.
Dresden in the 20th century was a major communications hub and manufacturing centre with 127 factories and major workshops and was designated by the German Military as a defensive strongpoint, with which to hinder the Soviet advance.
The Dresden Heath (''Dresdner Heide'') to the north is a forest 50&nbsp;km2 in size.
The domains of most importance are micro- and nanoelectronics, transport and infrastructure systems, material and photonic technology, and bio-engineering.
File:Weisseritz in Löbtau zur Jahrhundertflut 2002.jpg|Floods in 2002
The driest months are February, March and April, with precipitation of around .
The Albertstadt garrison became the headquarters of the Soviet 1st Guards Tank Army in the Group of Soviet Forces in Germany after the war.
Dresden is also home to several important art collections, world-famous musical ensembles, and significant buildings from various architectural periods, many of which were rebuilt after the destruction of the Second World War.
The book museum of the Saxon State Library presents the famous Dresden Codex.
It was taken by the Margraviate of Brandenburg in 1316 and was restored to the Wettin dynasty after the death of Valdemar the Great in 1319.
* Brühl's Terrace was a gift to Heinrich, count von Brühl, and became an ensemble of buildings above the river Elbe.
Helmholtz-Zentrum Dresden-Rossendorf is the largest complex of research facilities in Dresden, a short distance outside the urban areas.
After 1990 and German reunification, new styles emerged.
The microclimate in the Elbe valley differs from that on the slopes and in the higher areas, where the Dresden district Klotzsche, at 227 metres above sea level, hosts the Dresden weather station.
Dresden hosts many research institutes, some of which have gained an international standing.
In the early 20th century, Dresden was particularly well known for its camera works and its cigarette factories.
Apart from the German army officers' school (''Offizierschule des Heeres''), there have been no more military units in Dresden since the army merger during German reunification, and the withdrawal of Soviet forces in 1992.
Silicon Saxony Saxony's semiconductor industry was built up in 1969.
The population peaked at 649,252 in 1933, and dropped to 450,000 in 1946 because of World War II, during which large residential areas of the city were destroyed.
After 1990 a completely new legal system and currency system was introduced and infrastructure was largely rebuilt with funds from the Federal Republic of Germany.
Due to this integration of styles, the castle is made up of elements of the Renaissance, Baroque and Classicist styles.
The cities became twins after World War II in an act of reconciliation, as they had suffered incisive destructions from bombings.
Several Bundesstraße roads crossing or running through Dresden.
Carl Maria von Weber and Richard Wagner had a number of their works performed for the first time in Dresden.
Widely quoted Nazi propaganda reports claimed 200,000 deaths however the German Dresden Historians' Commission made up of 13 prominent German historians, in an official 2010 report published after five years of research concluded that casualties numbered between 18,000 and a maximum of 25,000, while some groups continue to claim that up to 500,000 people died.
The "Sächsisches Landesgymnasium für Musik" with a focus on music is supported by the State of Saxony, rather than by the city.
During the German Democratic Republic, many apartment blocks were built.
Each year on 13 February, the anniversary of the British and American fire-bombing raid that destroyed most of the city, tens of thousands of demonstrators gather to commemorate the event.
The Dresden State Operetta is the only independent operetta in Germany.
Dresden has had a triangular partnership with Saint Petersburg and Hamburg since 1987.
Several researchers have argued that the February attacks were disproportionate.
The districts of Loschwitz and Weisser Hirsch are connected by the Dresden Funicular Railway, which was opened on 26 October 1895.
There are also other churches in Dresden, for example a Russian Orthodox Church in the Südvorstadt district.
* The ''Deutsche Hygiene-Museum'', founded for mass education in hygiene, health, human biology and medicine
During the Napoleonic Wars the French emperor made it a base of operations, winning there the famous Battle of Dresden on 27 August 1813.
The controversial American and British bombing of Dresden in World War II towards the end of the war killed approximately 25,000, many of whom were civilians, and destroyed the entire city centre.
Dresden is home to Dynamo Dresden, which had a tradition in UEFA club competitions up to the early 1990s.
They were planned and constructed on the orders of the Saxon monarchs, which is why the outskirts are often named after sovereigns.
Dresden has some 13&nbsp;000 listed cultural monuments and eight districts under general preservation orders.
Beginning in 1999, white nationalists have organised Neo-Nazi demonstrations in Dresden that have been among the largest in the post-war history of Germany.
The population of Dresden grew to 100,000 inhabitants in 1852, making it one of the first German cities after Hamburg and Berlin to reach that number.
ESC Dresdner Eislöwen is an ice hockey club playing in the 2nd Bundesliga again.
It is often attributed, wrongly, to the Bauhaus school.
Dresden hosted some international summits such as the Petersburg Dialogue between Russia and Germany, the European Union's Minister of the Interior conference and the G8 labour ministers conference in recent years.
Dresden is one of the few German Cities which has more inhabitants than ever since World War II.
It is a boys' choir drawn from pupils of the Kreuzschule, and was founded in the 13th century.
Each year around the anniversary of the city's destruction, members of the far-right convened in the memory of those who died in the fire-bombing.
After reunification enterprises and production sites broke down almost completely as they entered the social market economy, facing competition from the Federal Republic of Germany.
Along with Munich and Potsdam, Dresden is one of the ten fastest-growing cities in Germany, while the population of the surrounding new federal states is still shrinking.
The garrison saw only limited use between 1918 and 1934, but was then reactivated in preparation for the Second World War.
The average temperature in January is  and in July .
The Supreme Burgomaster is directly elected by the citizens for a term of seven years.
In the early 20th century, the city was represented by Dresdner SC, who were one of Germany's most successful clubs in football.
There are about 300 fountains and springs, many of them in parks or squares.
Because the geological bedrock does not allow the building of underground railways, the tramway is an important form of public transport.
Dresden has experienced dramatic changes since the reunification of Germany in the early 1990s.
The opera's reconstruction was completed exactly 40 years later, on 13 February 1985.
The Dresden Elbe Valley was an internationally recognised site of cultural significance by the UNESCO World Heritage Committee for five years.
From 1485, it was the seat of the dukes of Saxony, and from 1547 the electors as well.
The art collections consist of twelve museums, of which the ''Gemäldegalerie Alte Meister'' (Old Masters Gallery) and the ''Grünes Gewölbe'' (Green Vault) and the ''Japanese Palace'' (Japanisches Palais) are the most famous.
Currently, the club is a member of the 2.
The Dresden Castle was the seat of the royal household from 1485.
It shows August at the beginning of the Hauptstraße (Main street) on his way to Warsaw, where he was King of Poland in personal union.
Daniel Libeskind and Norman Foster both modified existing buildings.
The Dresden Philharmonic Orchestra is the orchestra of the city of Dresden.
He/She is the executive head of the municipality, and also the ceremonial representative of the city.
Another settlement existed on the northern bank, but its Slavic name is unclear (probably from a name of bird Thrush (bird) ).
The destruction of Dresden allowed Hildebrand Gurlitt, a major Nazi museum director and art dealer, to hide a large collection of artwork worth over a billion dollars that had been stolen during the Nazi era, as he claimed it had been destroyed along with his house which was located in Dresden.
As the number of demonstrators increased to 17,500 on December 22, so has the international media coverage of it.
There are several choirs in Dresden, the best-known of which is the Dresdner Kreuzchor (Choir of The Holy Cross).
Dresden later evolved into the capital of Saxony.
Dresden has a long history as the capital and royal residence for the Electors and Kings of Saxony, who for centuries furnished the city with cultural and artistic splendour.
Augustus the Strong ordered the building of the Hofkirche, the Roman Catholic Cathedral, to establish a sign of Roman Catholic religious importance in Dresden.
The United Nations' cultural organization UNESCO declared the Dresden Elbe Valley to be a World Heritage Site in 2004.
Although Dresden is a relatively recent city of Germanic origin followed by settlement of Slavic peoples, the area had been settled in the Neolithic era by Linear Pottery culture tribes ca.
It was built on the old stronghold of the city and was converted to a centre for the royal art collections and a place to hold festivals.
File:Semperoper-flood-2005-03-22.jpg|Semperoper during 2005 floods
During the reign of Kings Augustus II the Strong and Augustus III of Poland the Zwinger Royal Palace, the Hofkirche and the Frauenkirche were built.
After the war restoration work has helped to reconstruct parts of the historic inner city, including the Katholische Hofkirche, the Semper Oper and the Dresdner Frauenkirche as well as the suburbs.
Its infrastructure has been improved with new terminals and a motorway access route.
In 2002, torrential rains caused the Elbe to flood  above its normal height, i.e., even higher than the old record height from 1845, damaging many landmarks (See 2002 European flood).
Before and since German reunification in 1990, Dresden was and is a cultural, educational, political, and economic centre of Germany and Europe.
The Allies described the operation as the legitimate bombing of a military and industrial target.
Today the Hellerau reform architecture is recognized as exemplary.
In contrast to the Hofkirche, the Lutheran Frauenkirche was built almost contemporaneously by the citizens of Dresden.
A big event each year in June is the Bunte Republik Neustadt, a culture festival lasting 3 days in the city district of Dresden-Neustadt.
Helmholtz-Zentrum Dresden-Rossendorf was member of the Leibniz Community until the end of 2010.
The A13 and the A17 are on the European route E55.
The Fraunhofer Society has become an important factor in location decisions and is seen as a useful part of the "knowledge infrastructure".
Similar symbolism occurred in 1988, when Dresden twinned with the Dutch city of Rotterdam.
Dresden remains a major cultural centre of historical memory, owing to the city's destruction in World War II.
Local affairs in Dresden often centre around the urban development of the city and its spaces.
Dresden is a spacious city.
During the 1990s the population increased to 480,000 because of several incorporations, and decreased to 452,827 in 1998.
