Image:drill brace.jpg|A 19&nbsp;mm (3/4 inch) center bit, made sometime before 1950
Because of the flat bottom to the hole, they are useful for drilling through veneer already glued to add an inlay.
Harder materials require a larger point angle, and softer materials require a sharper angle.
This style of bit requires a starter hole, but does not bind or suffer premature wear so long as a suitable feed rate is used.
A more aggressive angle, such as 90 degrees, is suited for very soft plastics and other materials; it would wear rapidly in hard materials.
The diameter of auger bits for hand braces is commonly expressed by a single number, indicating the size in 16ths of an inch.
A fast spiral (high twist rate or "compact flute") drill bit is used in high feed rate applications under low spindle speeds, where removal of a large volume of chips is required.
When boring into solid wood, the bit should be started in the vertical position; after a "dish" has been created and the bit has begun to "bite" into the wood, the angle of boring can be changed by tilting the brace a bit out of the vertical.
They remove material only from the edge of the hole, cutting out an intact disc of material, unlike many drills which remove all material in the interior of the hole.
The spoon bit may be honed by using a slipstone on the inside of the cutting edge; the outside edge should never be touched.
They have advantages over Forstner bits when boring into end grain.
Image:drill auger.jpg| auger bit for wood
While the shape of the cutting edges is different, and one uses screw threads and the other a twist bit for the pilot, the method of adjusting them remains the same.
The gimlet bit cuts the side of the hole.
Diamond drill bits can also be used to cut holes in glass, and last much longer.
Installer bits, also known as '''bell-hanger''' bits or '''fishing''' bits, are a type of twist drill bit for use with a hand-portable power tool.
Instead, gun drill bits are preferred for deep hole drilling.
A '''unibit''' (often called a step drill bit) is a roughly conical bit with a stairstep profile.
Other options sometimes used are diamond or diamond-coated bits.
A radial cutting edge planes the wood from the base of the hole.
Center bits do not cut well in the end grain of wood.
Image:drill gimlet.jpg|Gimlet bit for wood, made sometime before 1950.
A shallower angle, such as 150 degrees, is suited for drilling steels and other tougher materials.
Hole saws take the form of a short open cylinder with saw-teeth on the open edge, used for making relatively large holes in thin material.
The original method of manufacture was to cut two grooves in opposite sides of a round bar, then to twist the bar (giving the tool its name) to produce the helical flutes.
However, they are not the best tool for routinely drilling deep holes, as they require frequent withdrawal to clear the flutes of swarf and to prevent breakage of the bit.
Manufacturers can produce special versions of the twist drill bit, varying the geometry and the materials used, to suit particular machinery and particular materials to be cut.
For larger diameters, core bits are used.
Other designs may have more.
Resharpened and easily available PCB drills have historically been used in many prototyping and home PCB labs, using a high-speed rotary tool for small-diameter bits (such as a Moto-Tool by Dremel) in a stiff drill-press jig.
When the cutting edge is centered on the bit, the hole drilled will be small, and when the cutting edge is slid outwards, a larger hole is drilled.
The most common twist drill bit (sold in general hardware stores) has a point angle of 118 degrees, acceptable for use in wood, metal, plastic, and most other materials, although it does not perform as well as using the optimum angle for each material.
The unibit was invented by Harry C. Oakes and patented in 1973.
They are numbered from 00 to 10 (smallest to largest).
These bits usually come with a set of special tools to aim and flex the bit to reach the desired location and angle, although the problem of seeing where the operator is drilling still remains.
Glass bits have a spade-shaped carbide point.
Unibits are commonly used on sheet metal and in general construction.
A great number of holes with small diameters of about 1&nbsp;mm or less must be drilled in printed circuit boards (PCBs) used by electronic equipment with through-hole components.
The masonry bit shown here is a variation of the twist drill bit.
In most materials it does not tend to wander or dig in.
To pull the bit from the hole, either the female thread in the wood workpiece must be stripped, or the rotation of the bit must be reversed.
PCB bits, of narrow diameter, typically mount in a collet rather than a chuck, and come with standard-size shanks, often with pre-installed stops to set them at an exact depth every time when being automatically chucked by the equipment.
This flexible installer bit is used in the USA, but does not appear to be routinely available in Europe.
The bit must be periodically withdrawn to clear the chips.
The other flute continues full-length up the shank for waste removal.
The high speed, small diameter, and the brittleness of the material, make the bits very subject to breaking, particularly if the angle of the bit to the workpiece changes at all, or the bit contacts any object.
To solve this problem, solid tungsten carbide twist bits, which drill quickly through the board while providing a moderately long life,  are almost always used.
Sinclair Smith of Brooklyn, New York was issued  for this invention on January 25, 1898.
Image:drill tip gimlet.jpg|Gimlet bit tip detail
Drill bits with no point angle are used in situations where a blind, flat-bottomed hole is required.
The following table lists geometries recommended for some commonly drilled materials.
Forstner bits have radial cutting edges to plane off the material at the bottom of the hole.
A very acute point angle has more web surface area presented to the work at any one time, requiring an aggressive lip angle, where a flat bit is extremely sensitive to small changes in lip angle due to the small surface area supporting the cutting edges.
This is a very common and relatively successful construction method.
*The '''point angle''', or the angle formed at the tip of the bit, is determined by the material the bit will be operating in.
The more common type is like a gouge bit that ends in a slight point.
Due to its design, a single bit can be used for drilling a wide range of hole sizes.
General-purpose drill bits can be used in wood, metal, plastic, and most other materials.
Their key advantage over regular brace bits and power drill bits is that the angle of the hole can be adjusted.
Image:Box of 02in pcb bits.jpg|A box of #76 () PCB drill bits.
Such a bit is generally self-starting and can cut very quickly.
The diamond masonry mortar bit is a hybrid drill bit, designed to work as a combination router and drill bit.
Similar auger bits are made with diameters from 6&nbsp;mm (3/16&nbsp;in) to 30&nbsp;mm (1 3/16&nbsp;in).
It consists of a steel shell, with the diamonds embedded in metal segments attached to the cutting edge.
That is, they provide a location for a (live, dead, or driven) center to locate the part about an axis.
Hammer drill bits often use special shank shapes such as the SDS type, which allows the bit to slide within the chuck when hammering, without the whole heavy chuck executing the hammering motion.
They can be used on very thin sheet metal, but metals tend to cause premature bit wear and dulling.
File:Installer_bit_overview.jpg|A  installer bit
Drilling by hand is not practicable, and many general-purpose drilling machines designed for larger bits rotate too slowly and wobble too much to use carbide bits effectively.
This is especially helpful where the wall has a large cavity, where threading a fish tape could be difficult.
These bits are used by chair-makers for boring or reaming holes in the seats and arms of chairs.
Nevertheless, because of the frequent lumping together of both the terminology and the tool use, suppliers may call center drill bits ''combined-drill-and-countersinks'' in order to make it unambiguously clear what product is being ordered.
This style of bit was invented in 1884, and the rights sold to Charles Irwin who patented and marketed this pattern the following year.
It was sold only by the Unibit Corporation in the 1980s until the patent expired, and was later sold by other companies.
A Forstner bit could bore the mounting hole for the hinge, but particle board and MDF are very abrasive materials, and steel cutting edges soon wear.
Sawtooth bits are also available, which include many more cutting edges to the cylinder.
A '''''', similar in appearance and function to a hole punch or chisel, is used as a hand powered drill in conjunction with a hammer to drill into stone and masonry.
The best geometry to use depends upon the properties of the material being drilled.
Image:drill spade tiny.jpg|Tiny spade bit
They can be used to make large holes in wood, sheet metal and other materials.
They should never be used with a power drill of any kind.
Twist drill bits are available in the widest choice of tooling materials.
A special tool grinder is available for sharpening or reshaping cutting surfaces on twist drill bits in order to optimize the bit for a particular material.
For heavy duty drilling in industry, bits with tapered shanks are sometimes used.
The central screw tends to pull out, or to split the wood along the grain, and the radial edges have trouble cutting through the long wood fibers.
Many hard materials, such as carbides, are much more brittle than steel, and are far more subject to breaking, particularly if the drill is not held at a very constant angle to the workpiece; e.g., when hand-held.
A '''step drill bit''' is a drill bit that has the tip ground down to a different diameter.
It has cutting edges of tungsten carbide brazed to a steel body; a center spur keeps the bit from wandering.
The drill will grasp the upper end of a bit called the ''shank'' in the chuck.
This is ideal for a bit for a hand tool.
In either use, the name seems appropriate, as the bit is either establishing the ''center'' of a hole or making a conical hole for a lathe ''center''.
Twist drill bits are available in standard lengths, referred to as Stub-length or Screw-Machine-length (short), the extremely common Jobber-length (medium), and Taper-length or Long-Series (long).
Another advantage is that they do not have a lead screw, so they can be drilled successfully in a chair leg without having the lead screw peek out the other side.
Both styles of auger bits were manufactured by several companies throughout the early- and mid-20th century, and are still available new from select sources today.
A workpiece machined ''between centers'' can be safely removed from one process (perhaps turning in a lathe) and set up in a later process (perhaps a grinding operation) with a negligible loss in the co-axiality of features (usually TIR
If used for other materials these tiny bits must be evaluated for equivalent cutting speed vs material resistance to the cut (hardness), as the bit's rake angle and expected feed per revolution are optimised for high-speed automated use on fiberglass PCB substrate.
Image:Spade bits.JPG|Spade bits
A ruler or vernier scale is usually provided to allow precise adjustment of the bit size.
Unibits are ideal for use in electrical work where thin steel, aluminum or plastic boxes and chassis are encountered.
The Irwin bit may afford greater space for waste removal, greater strength (because the design allows for a center shank of increased size within the flutes, as compared to the Jenning bits), or smaller manufacturing costs.
For example, #4 is 4/16 or 1/4&nbsp;in (6&nbsp;mm), #6 is 6/16 or 3/8&nbsp;in (9&nbsp;mm), #9 is 9/16&nbsp;in (14&nbsp;mm), and #16 is 16/16 or 1&nbsp;in (25&nbsp;mm).
These cut faster, but produce a more ragged hole.
An additional use of unibits is deburring holes left by other bits, as the sharp increase to the next step size allows the cutting edge to scrape burrs off the entry surface of the workpiece.
Some installer bits have a transverse hole drilled at the shank end as well.
''Center drill bits'', occasionally known as Slocombe drill bits, are used in metalworking to provide a starting hole for a larger-sized drill bit or to make a conical indentation in the end of a workpiece in which to mount a lathe center.
However, the straight flute is poor at chip ejection, and can cause a burr to be formed on the exit side of the hole, more so than a spiral twist drill bit turning at high speed.
Unlike most other types of drill bits, they are not practical to use as hand tools.
It is the usual style of bit for use in a brace for holes below about  diameter.
Spoon bits have even been found in Viking excavations.
There is no need for any force to push the bit into the workpiece, only the torque to turn the bit.
The short length of the unibit and ability to vary the diameter of the finished hole is an advantage in chassis or front panel work.
The twist drill bit was invented by Steven A. Morse of East Bridgewater, Massachusetts in 1861.
Some bits come to a point and are thus self-starting.
Very high rotational speeds—30,000 to 100,000 RPM or even higher—are used; this translates to a reasonably fast linear speed of the cutting tip in these very small diameters.
'''Drill bits''' are cutting tools used to remove material to create holes, almost always of circular cross-section.
The bit shown in the picture is a modern design for use in portable power tools, made in the UK in about 1995.
), but the higher the ratio, the greater the technical challenge of producing good work.
The proper amount of lip clearance is determined by the point angle.
A tungsten carbide cutter is needed, but the complex shape of a forstner bit is difficult to manufacture in carbide, so this special drill bit with a simpler shape is commonly used.
In this version, there is minimal or no spiral to remove chips from the hole.
Nowadays, the drill bit is usually made by rotating the bar while moving it past a grinding wheel to cut the flutes in the same manner as cutting helical gears.
Parallel spoon bits are used primarily for boring holes in the seat of a Windsor chair to take the back spindles, or similar round-tenon work when assembling furniture frames in green woodworking work.
Both conditions can cause binding, wear, and eventual catastrophic failure of the tool.
This allows the bit to be curved inside walls, for example to drill through studs from a light switch box without needing to remove any material from the wall.
A specialist hinge has been developed which uses the walls of a  diameter hole, bored in the particle board, for support.
Many European kitchen cabinets are made from particle board or medium-density fiberboard (MDF) with a laminated melamine resin veneer.
One drill bit can drill the entire range of holes necessary on a countertop, speeding up installation of fixtures.
While longer bits can drill deeper holes, they are more flexible meaning that the holes they drill may have an inaccurate location or wander from the intended axis.
The center of the bit is a tapered screw thread.
When reaming a pre-bored straight-sided hole, the spoon bit is inserted into the hole and rotated in a clockwise direction with a carpenters' brace until the desired taper is achieved.
Small bits that become blunt are often discarded because sharpening them correctly is difficult and they are cheap to replace.
Augers up to  long are available, where the chip-clearing capability is especially valuable for drilling deep holes.
They are most commonly used on softer materials, such as plywood, particle board, drywall, acrylic, and laminate.
Masonry bits of the style shown are commonly available in diameters from 3&nbsp;mm to 40&nbsp;mm.
Spoon bits consist of a grooved shank with a point shaped somewhat like the bowl of a spoon, with the cutting edge on the end.
The hinge sinker bit is an example of a custom drill bit design for a specific application.
The tool in the image has a total of two cutting edges in this cylinder.
This bit has a double flute starting from the cutting edges, and extending several inches up the shank of the bit, for waste removal.
Image:Hilti TE-CX Carbide Drill Bid.jpg|Rebar resistant bit with four carbide cutters
*The '''lip angle''' determines the amount of support provided to the cutting edge.
Some are simply the most appropriate for the chuck used; in other cases particular combinations of shank and chuck give performance advantages, such as allowing higher torque, greater centering accuracy, or efficient hammering action.
The finished hole can often be made quite smooth and burr-free, especially in plastic.
The diameter-to-length ratio of the drill bit is usually between 1:1 and 1:10.
The cylindrical cutter around the perimeter shears the wood fibers at the edge of the bore, and also helps guide the bit into the material more precisely.
Most PCBs are made of highly abrasive fiberglass, which quickly wears steel bits, especially given the hundreds or thousands of holes on most circuit boards.
*The '''length''' of a bit determines how deep a hole can be drilled, and also determines the stiffness of the bit and accuracy of the resultant hole.
These bits are made for cement, block and brick they are not for drilling into wood.
Center bits are made of relatively soft steel, and can be sharpened with a file.
The larger-size bits have blunt tips and are used for hole enlarging.
Carbide PCB bits are estimated to outlast high speed steel bits by a factor of ten or more.
Center drill bits are meant to create a conical hole for "between centers" manufacturing processes (typically lathe or cylindrical-grinder work).
Since about 1850, gimlets have had a variety of cutter designs, but some are still produced with the original version.
Many different materials are used for or on drill bits, depending on the required application.
Modern spoon bits are made of hand-forged carbon steel, carefully heat-treated and then hand ground to a fine edge.
The edge of the bit has a sharpened spur to cut the fibers of the wood, as in the lip and spur drill bit.
The bit is the same style as that used in the gimlet, a self-contained tool for boring small holes in wood by hand.
This screws into the wood as the bit is turned, and pulls the bit into the wood.
Once the bit has penetrated a wall, a wire can be threaded through the hole and the bit pulled back out, pulling the wire with it.
The cutting action occurs at the side of the broadest part of the cutter.
Masonry bits typically are used with a hammer drill, which hammers the bit into the material being drilled as it rotates; the hammering breaks up the masonry at the drill bit tip, and the rotating flutes carry away the dust.
The radial cutting edges remove a slice of wood of thickness equal to the pitch of the central screw for each rotation of the bit.
This is helpful for starting the hole, as it has a center that will not wander or walk.
These bits are available both in a version similar to an auger bit or brace bit, designed for low speed, high torque use with a brace or other hand drill (pictured to the right), or as a high speed, low torque bit meant for a power drill.
Most of these bits are custom-made for each application, which makes them more expensive.
Holes can be drilled precisely, cleanly and quickly in any wood, at any angle of incidence, with total control of direction and the ability to change that direction at will.
Image:drill twist morse.jpg|Twist drill bit with Morse taper shank
Much higher ratios are possible (e.g., "aircraft-length" twist bits, pressured-oil gun drill bits, etc.
A greater lip angle will cause the bit to cut more aggressively under the same amount of point pressure as a bit with a smaller lip angle.
Drill bits come in standard sizes, described in the drill bit sizes article.
Different shapes of shank are used.
An adjustable wood bit, also known as an expansive wood bit, has a small center pilot bit with an adjustable, sliding cutting edge mounted above it, usually containing a single sharp point at the outside, with a set screw to lock the cutter in position.
The bit includes a center point which guides it throughout the cut (and incidentally spoils the otherwise flat bottom of the hole).
File:Installer_bit_closeup_2.jpg|Closeup of installer bit
However, even for industrial users, most holes are drilled with standard high speed steel bits.
This is very important in chairmaking, because all the angles are usually eyeballed.
Bits are commonly available in sizes from  diameter.
Rotating the bit also brings the cutting edges onto a fresh portion of the hole bottom with every hammer blow.
Installer bits are available in various materials and styles for drilling wood, masonry and metal.
A star drill bit's cutting edge consists of several blades joined at the center to form a star pattern.
They require great force to push them into the material, so are normally used in drill presses or lathes rather than in portable drills.
These bits are very sensitive to changes in lip angle, and even a slight change can result in an inappropriately fast cutting drill bit that will suffer premature wear.
It has a single spur, a single radial cutting edge and a single flute.
Some versions have two spurs.
There are also certain specialized drill bits that can create holes with a non-circular cross-section.
Spoon bits are the traditional boring tools used with a brace.
The bit in the image has two radial edges.
The gimlet bit is a very old design.
Most drill bits cut the base of the hole.
Image:drill tip brace.jpg|Center bit tip detail
Forstner bits have no mechanism to clear chips from the hole, and therefore must be pulled out periodically.
Those types of pressed wood boards are not very strong, and the screws of butt hinges tend to pull out.
The geometry and sharpening of the cutting edges is crucial to the performance of the bit.
This allows a single drill bit to drill a wide variety of holes, and can take the place of a large, heavy set of different size bits, as well as providing uncommon bit sizes.
They generate high temperatures and have a very short life.
Once a hole has been drilled, the wire can be threaded through the shank end, the bit released from the chuck, and all pulled forward through the drilled hole.
Originally the Forstner bit was very successful with gunsmiths because of its ability to drill an exceedingly smooth-sided hole.
The wire can then be used to pull a cable or pipe back through the wall.
Image:Two pcb bits.jpg|Two PCB drill bits.
Image:drill masonry.jpg|25×500&nbsp;mm SDS-plus masonry bit
A comprehensive drill bit and tap size chart lists metric and imperial sized drill bits alongside the required screw tap sizes.
