The heart weighs around ; it has two ventricles with the tip curving to the left.
The dromedary has not occurred in the wild for nearly 2,000 years.
Riding camels of Arabia, Egypt and the Sahara are locally known as the Dilool, the Hageen and the Mehara respectively; several local breeds are included within these groups.
The dromedary is primarily a browser; forbs and shrubs comprise 70% of its diet in summer and 90% of its diet in winter.
In another study, pregnancy in females could be recognized as early as 40 to 45 days of gestation by the swelling of the left uterine horn, where 99.5% of pregnancies were located.
Illnesses that can affect dromedary productivity are pyogenic diseases and wound infections caused by ''Corynebacterium'' and ''Streptococcus'', pulmonary disorders caused by ''Pasteurella'' such as hemorrhagic septicemia and ''Rickettsia'' species, camelpox, anthrax, and cutaneous necrosis caused by ''Streptothrix'' and deficiency of salt in the diet.
They have sharp vision and a good sense of smell.
The dental formula for permanent dentition is , and  for milk dentition.
Leese estimated a lactating female would yield  besides the amount ingested by the calf.
A 1980 study showed androgen levels in males influences their behaviour.
They use their lips to grasp the food and chew each bite 40 to 50 times.
Each kidney has a capacity of , and can produce urine with high chloride concentrations.
The dromedary has been used in warfare since the 2nd century BC, and it remains popular for racing, particularly in the Arab world.
The skin is black; the epidermis is  thick and the dermis is  thick.
For about a thousand years, Bactrian camels and dromedaries have been successfully bred in regions where they are sympatric to form hybrids with either a long, slightly lopsided hump or two humps – one small and one large.
The dromedary typically thrives in areas with a long dry season and a short wet season.
Another study in Saudi Arabia showed the presence of MERS-CoV in 90% of the evaluated dromedaries and suggested that camels could be the animal source of MERS-CoV.
Among external parasites, ''Sarcoptes'' species cause sarcoptic mange.
Herds may congregate to form associations of hundreds of camels during migrations at the time of natural disasters.
The penis is covered by a triangular penile sheath that opens backwards; it is about  long.
Groups of camels avoid excess heat from the environment by pressing against each other.
A seven-to-eight-year-old camel can produce a carcass of .
Attempts o introduce dromedaries into the Caribbean, Colombia, Peru, Bolivia and Brazil were made between the 17th and 19th centuries; some were imported to the western United States in the 1850s and some to Namibia in the early 1900s, but presently they exist in small numbers or are absent in these areas.
The Cowper's gland is white, almond-shaped and lacks seminal vesicles; the prostate gland is dark yellow, disc-shaped and divided into two lobes.
In Asia, nearly 70% of the population occurs in India and Pakistan.
The triangular, four-chambered liver weighs ; its dimensions are: .
The dromedary has not occurred naturally in the wild for nearly 2,000 years.
The dromedary is specially adapted to its desert habitat; these adaptations are aimed at conserving water and regulating body temperature.
The dromedary's karyotype is similar to that of the Bactrian camel.
A single calf is born after a gestation period of 15 months.
A dehydrated camel has a lower breathing rate.
The carcasses of well-fed camels were found to be covered with a thin layer of good quality fat.
In 2001, the ability of dromedary milk to form curd was studied; coagulation did not show curd formation, and had a pH of 4.4.
Its range included hot, arid regions of northern Africa, Ethiopia, the Near East and western and central Asia.
During the reproductive season, males splash their urine on their tails and nether regions.
In the hump, palmitic acid was dominant (34.4%), followed by oleic acid (28.2%), myristic acid (10.3%) and stearic acid (10%).
The animal is stunned, seated in a crouching position with the head in a caudal position and slaughtered.
bactrianus'') and the wild Bactrian camel (''C.
Jog is the most common speed, nearly  on level ground.
Where the ranges of the species overlap, such as in northern Punjab, Persia and Afghanistan, the phenotypic differences between them tend to decrease as a result of extensive crossbreeding.
They are sensitive to cold and humidity, though some breeds can thrive in humid conditions.
By the Pleistocene, ancestors of the dromedary occurred in the Middle East and northern Africa.
The hump is at least  high.
The dromedary is the only mammal with oval red blood corpuscles.
A jawbone of a dromedary that dated from 8,200 BC was found in Saudi Arabia on the southern coast of the Red Sea.
A dromedary can produce  wool per year, whereas a Bactrian camel has an annual yield of nearly .
Although the role of the camel is diminishing with the advent of technology and modern means of transport, it is still an efficient mode of communication in remote and less-developed areas.
The dromedary was given its current binomial name ''Camelus dromedarius'' by Swedish zoologist Carl Linnaeus in his 1758 publication ''Systema Naturae''.
In the early 21st century, the domesticated dromedary is found in the semi-arid to arid regions of the Old World.
In a 2000 study in Jordan, 83% of the 32 camels studied tested positive for sarcoptic mange.
Its long eyelashes, eyebrows, lockable nostrils, caudal opening of the prepuce and a relatively small vulva help the camel avoid injuries, especially while feeding.
The full genome sequence of MERS-CoV from dromedaries in this study showed a 99.9% match to the genomes of human clade B MERS-CoV.
The hump,  tall or more, is made of fat bound together by fibrous tissue.
In case of starvation, they can even eat fish and bones, and drink brackish and salty water.
This camel has a quick rate of rehydration and can drink at  per minute.
Calves move freely by the end of their first day.
The dromedary belongs to the family Camelidae.
In a study in Egypt, a species of ''Hyalomma'' was dominant in dromedaries, comprising 95.6% of the adult ticks isolated from the camels.
These camels were well-suited to long desert journeys and could carry a great deal of cargo, allowing substantial trans-Saharan trade for the first time.
The first is the typical speed of walking, around .
They are generally non-aggressive, with the exception of rutting males.
Camel hybridisation began in the first millennium BC.
Temperature fluctuations occur throughout the day in a healthy dromedary – the temperature falls to its minimum at dawn, rises until sunset and falls during the night.
All teeth are in use by 8 years.
At the peak of lactation, a healthy female would typically provide  milk per day.
The male has a soft palate (''dulaa'' in Arabic) nearly  long, which it inflates to produce a deep pink sac.
The age of sexual maturity varies geographically and depends on the individual, as does the reproductive period.
These glands can produce milk with up to 90% water content even if the mother is at risk of dehydration.
The hair is long and concentrated on the throat, shoulders and the hump.
The dromedary shares the genus ''Camelus'' with the Bactrian camel (''C.
The dromedary was introduced into Egypt from south-western Asia (Arabia and Persia).
The Horn of Africa has nearly 35% of the world's dromedaries, most of the region's stock is in Somalia, followed by Sudan and Ethiopia (as of the early 2000s).
The scrotum is located high in the perineum with the testicles in separate sacs.
The night is mainly spent resting.
The vulva is  deep and has a small clitoris.
India has a dromedary population of less than one million, with most (0.67 million) in the state of Rajasthan.
The right testicle is often smaller than the left.
In colder regions one clipping can yield as much as .
Speciation began first in Lamini as the alpaca came into existence 10 million years ago (late Pleistocene).
The camel is not easily exhausted unless diseased or undernourished, and has remarkable endurance and hardiness.
He said this substitution could have taken place because of the heavy dependence on the milk, meat and wool of the dromedary by Syrian and Arabian nomads, while the Asiatic people domesticated the Bactrian camel but did not have to depend upon its products.
A 2013–14 study of dromedaries in Saudi Arabia concluded the unusual genetic stability of MERS-CoV coupled with its high seroprevalence in the dromedary makes this camel a highly probable host for the virus.
Riding camels should not be struck on their necks, rather they should be struck behind the right leg of the rider.
Populations in Africa increased by 16% from 1994 to 2005.
Normally, three to four ejaculations occur.
The fertility of their hybrid has given rise to speculation that the dromedary and the Bactrian camel should be merged into a single species with two varieties.
Hybrids from other combinations tend to be bad-tempered or runts.
The domesticated dromedary is generally found in the semi-arid to arid regions of the Old World, mainly in Africa, and a significant feral population occurs in Australia, and were also recently introduced to Namibia, Bulgaria and North America, more specifically, Nevada, Arizona, New Mexico and Texas in the United States.
Dromedaries are mainly active during daylight hours.
Feral dromedaries in Australia prefer ''Trichodesma zeylanicum'' and ''Euphorbia tannensis''.
The chest should be deep and the hump should be well-developed with sufficient space behind it to accommodate the saddle.
The coat is generally brown but can range from black to nearly white.
Most of the dromedaries occur in Western Australia, with smaller populations in the Northern Territory, Western Queensland and northern South Australia.
There are no glands on the face; males have glands that appear to be modified apocrine sweat glands that secrete pungent, coffee-coloured fluid during the rut, located on either side of the neck midline.
The males of the herd prevent female members from interacting with bachelor males by standing or walking between them and sometimes driving the bachelor males away.
The typical mass of either testicle is less than ; during the rut the mass increases from .
These include ''Aristida pungens'', ''Acacia tortilis'', ''Panicum turgidum'', ''Launaea arborescens'' and ''Balanites aegyptiaca''.
The palate, which is often mistaken for the tongue, dangles from one side of the mouth and is used to attract females during the mating season.
They appear to remember their homes; females in particular remember the places they first gave birth or suckled their offspring.
Mating occurs annually and peaks in the rainy season; females bear a single calf after a gestation of 15 months.
According to Leese, the dromedary walks with four speeds or gaits: walk, jog, fast run and canter.
mungo'', ''Cyamopsis tetragonolaba'', ''Melilotus parviflora'', ''Eruca sativa'', ''Trifolium'' species and ''Brassica campestris''.
Since camels have a slow growth rate; they reach sexual maturity only in advanced years.
The pH of the blood varies from 7.1 to 7.6 (slightly alkaline).
Western Africa followed with 2.14 million, while northern Africa had nearly 0.76 million.
The '''dromedary''' ( or ), also called the '''Arabian camel''' (''Camelus dromedarius''), is a large, even-toed ungulate with one hump on its back.
In an observational study, the seroprevalence of this disease was generally low (2 to 5%) in nomadic or moderately free dromedaries, but it was higher (8 to 15%) in denser populations.
The dromedary is prone to trypanosomiasis, a disease caused by a parasite transmitted by the tsetse fly.
The carcass, weighing  for a five-year-old dromedary, is composed of nearly 57% muscle, 26% bone and 17% fat.
glama'') and the vicuña (''V.
Oestrus may be cued by the nutritional status of the camel and the daylength.
Products of the dromedary, including its meat and milk, support several north Arabian tribes; it is also commonly used for riding and as a beast of burden.
Most of the Australian feral camels are dromedaries, with only a few Bactrian camels.
The main attraction of the dromedary for nomadic desert-dwellers is the wide variety of resources they provide, which are crucial for their survival.
Camels were exported to the Canary Islands in 1405 during the European colonisation of the area, and are still extant there, especially in Lanzarote and to the south of Fuerteventura.
The individual's state of hydration and sex, and the time of year can influence blood values.
In a 2005 study, the mean volume of adipose tissues (in the external part of the hump that have cells to store lipids) is related to the dromedary's unique mechanism of food and water storage.
In 1840, about six camels were shipped from Tenerife to Adelaide, but only one survived the journey to arrive on 12 October that year.
It lacks the second and fifth digits.
They graze for 8–12 hours per day and ruminate for an equal amount of time.
The species' distinctive features include its long, curved neck, narrow chest, a single hump (compared with two on the Bactrian camel), and long hairs on the throat, shoulders and hump.
Males threaten each other for dominance over the female by trying to stand taller than the other, making low noises and a series of head movements including lowering, lifting and bending their necks backwards.
According to the Yearbook of the Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) for 1984, eastern Africa had about 10 million dromedaries, the largest population of Africa.
A special factory has been set up in Nouakchott to pasteurise and make cheese from camel milk.
The dromedary has long, powerful legs with two toes on each foot.
The neck should be medium to long so the head is held high.
To attract females they extrude their soft palate – a trait unique to the dromedary.
Dromedary slaughter is more difficult than the slaughter of other domestic livestock such as cattle, because of the size of the animal and the significant manual work involved.
They are enclosed in a conical bursa and have the dimensions   during anestrus.
The semen of a Bikaneri dromedary is white and viscous, with a pH of around 7.8.
The ideal riding camel is strong, slender and long-legged with thin, supple skin.
The dromedary can tolerate greater than 30% water loss, which is generally impossible for other mammals.
Females may also lead in turns.
Brucellosis is caused by different biotypes of ''Brucella abortus'' and ''B.
The autosomes consist of five pairs of small to medium-sized metacentrics and submetacentrics.
Dromedaries were also shipped from south-western Asia to Spain, Italy, Turkey, France, Canary Islands, the Americas and Australia.
Some males either form bachelor groups or roam alone.
The dromedary has four teats instead of the two in the ''Lama'' species.
Though less affected by mishandling than other livestock, the pre-slaughter handling of the dromedary plays a crucial role in determining the quality of meat obtained; mishandling can often disfigure the hump.
The baggage camel should be robust and heavy.
The first recorded use in English of the name "dromedary" occurred in the 14th century.
Camel hair is light, and has low thermal conductivity and durability, and is thus suitable for manufacturing warm clothes, blankets, tents and rugs.
The bushy eyebrows and the double row of eyelashes prevent sand and dust from entering the eyes during strong windstorms,= and shield them from the sun's glare.
Dromedaries keep their mouths open while chewing thorny food.
Hair of highest quality is typically obtained from juvenile or wild camels.
The dressing percentage&nbsp;&ndash;&#32;the percentage of the mass of the animal that forms the carcass&nbsp;&ndash;&#32;is 55–70%, more than the 45–50% of cattle.
These originated from the Greek word ''dromas'', δρομάς (ο, η) (GEN (γενική) ''dromados'', δρομάδος), meaning "running" or "runner", used in Greek in the combination  (''dromas kamelos''), literally "running camel", to refer to the dromedary.
Feral dromedary populations occur in Australia, where it was introduced in 1840.
Copulation takes from 7 to 35 minutes, averaging 11 to 15 minutes.
The dromedary's diet consists mostly of foliage, dry grasses and desert vegetation&nbsp;&ndash;&#32;mostly thorny plants.
The next stage involves training it to respond to reins.
Males become aggressive in the mating season, and sometimes wrestle.
Camels in hot climates generally do not develop long coats.
The cycles were about 28 days long; follicles matured in six days, maintained their size for 13 days, and returned to their original size in eight days.
The Persian invasion of Egypt under Cambyses in 525 BC introduced domesticated camels to the area.
He named two species in his ''History of Animals''; the one-humped Arabian camel and the two-humped Bactrian camel.
The vagina is  long and has well-developed Bartholin's glands.
The dromedary generally suffers from fewer diseases than  other domestic livestock such as goats and cattle.
Fleas and ticks are common causes of physical irritation.
Little information about camel hides has been collected but they are usually of inferior quality and are less preferred for manufacturing leather.
He gave no speed range to describe the "canter", but implied it was a type of gallop that if induced could exhaust the camel and the rider.
The meat of a five-year-old dromedary has a typical composition of 76% water, 22% protein, 1% fat, and 1% ash.
Other internal parasites include ''Fasciola gigantica'' (trematode), two types of  cestode (tapeworm) and various nematodes (roundworms).
The dromedary is able to close its nostrils voluntarily; this assists in water conservation.
The common name "dromedary" comes from the Old French ''dromedaire'' or the Late Latin ''dromedarius''.
This period marked the successful radiation of the ''Camelus'' species, which migrated over the Bering Strait and dispersed widely into Asia, eastern Europe and Africa.
Males typically weigh between ; females range between .
A study found bovine calf rennet could be used to coagulate dromedary milk.
The combined population of the dromedary and the Bactrian camel decreased by around 21% between 1994 and 2004.
The methods of training the baggage camels are similar to those for riding camels.
The largest quantity of  milk is produced during the early period of lactation.
The dromedary is sympatric with the Bactrian camel in Afghanistan, Pakistan, and central and southwestern Asia.
The Pakistani dromedary, which is considered a better milker and bigger, can yield  when well-fed.
Africa has more than 80% of the world's total dromedary population; it occurs in almost every desert zone in the northern part of the continent.
Males tries to defeat other males by biting the opponent's  legs and taking the head between his jaws.
While the invasion was accomplished largely on horseback, new links to the Middle East allowed camels to be imported ''en masse''.
The acidity of dromedary milk stored at  increases at a slower rate than that of cow milk.
A study said the typical diet of the dromedary is dwarf shrubs (47.5%), trees (29.9%), grasses (11.2%), other herbs (0.2%) and vines (11%).
The Persian camels were not well-suited to trading or travel over the Sahara; journeys across the desert were made on chariots pulled by horses.
The ''hawia'' is a typical baggage saddle from Sudan.
These hybrids are larger and stronger than their parents – they can bear greater loads.
In a study of the fatty acid composition of raw meat taken from the hind legs of seven one-to-three years old males, 51.5% of the fatty acids were saturated, 29.9% mono-unsaturated, and 18.6% polyunsaturated.
Nearly 99% of the populations are feral, and have annual growth rate of 10%.
A cross between a first generation female hybrid and a male Bactrian camel can also produce a hybrid.
Between January and April when these levels are high during the rut, they become difficult to manage, blow out the palate from the mouth, vocalise and throw urine over their backs.
The dromedary is the largest camel after the Bactrian camel.
Draught camel are used for several purposes including ploughing, processing in oil mills and pulling carts.
The modern dromedary probably evolved in the hotter, arid regions of western Asia from the Bactrian camel, which in turn was closely related to the earliest Old World camels.
There is no clear description for the ideal draught camel, though its strength, its ability to survive without water and the flatness of its feet could be indicators.
The molar percentages of the fatty acids in milk fat were 26.7% for palmitic acid, 25.5% oleic acid, 11.4% myristic acid and 11% palmitoleic acid.
Compared with the Bactrian camel, the dromedary has a lighter build, longer limbs, shorter hairs, a harder palate and an insignificant or absent ethmoidal fissure.
In Libya, dromedaries were used for transport and their milk and meat constituted the local diet.
The dromedary may also graze on or suck in tall, young, succulent grasses.
In the ninth or tenth century BC, the dromedary became popular in the Near East.
It was much different from curd produced from cow milk, and had a fragile, heterogeneous composition probably composed of casein flakes.
In the Sahara, 332 plant species have been recorded as food plants of the dromedary.
It has the taste and texture of beef.
In the wild, the dromedary inhabited arid regions, including the Sahara Desert.
Lactational yield can vary with species, breed, individual, region, diet, management conditions and lactating stage.
The pulse rate is 50 beats per minute.
