Arabic food is very popular and is available everywhere in the city, from the small ''shawarma'' diners in Deira and Al Karama to the restaurants in Dubai's hotels.
In 2009 taxi trips exceeded 70&nbsp;million trips serving around 140.45&nbsp;million passengers.
Traditionally, dhows from East Asia, China, Sri Lanka, and India would discharge their cargo and the goods would be bargained over in the souks adjacent to the docks.
Large increases in oil prices after the Gulf War encouraged Dubai to continue to focus on free trade and tourism.
Originally intended to be a four-berth port, it was extended to sixteen berths as construction was ongoing.
JAFZA (Jebel Ali Free Zone) was built around the port in 1985 to provide foreign companies unrestricted import of labour and export capital.
Dubai's geographical proximity to Iran made it an important trade location.
The highest recorded temperature in the UAE is , reached in July 2002.
Thirteen such services were launched by October 2001, while several other services were expected to be operational in the future.
Cricket is followed by Dubai's large community of Indians and Pakistanis alongside the residents from other cricket playing nations (Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, England, Australia, South Africa and Nepal).
The first field was named 'Fateh' or 'good fortune'.
A ''City Mayors'' survey ranked Dubai 44th among the world's best financial cities in 2007, while another report by ''City Mayors'' indicated that Dubai was the world's 27th richest city in 2012, in terms of purchasing power parity (PPP).
Five main routes – E 11 (Sheikh Zayed Road), E 311 (Sheikh Mohammed Bin Zayed Road), E 44 (Dubai-Hatta Highway), E 77 (Dubai-Al Habab Road) and E 66 (Oud Metha Road) – run through Dubai, connecting the city to other towns and emirates.
The eastern and western sections of the city are connected by Al Maktoum Bridge, Al Garhoud Bridge, Al Shindagha Tunnel, Business Bay Crossing and Floating Bridge.
Moreover, the Expo 2020 also created various social enlistment projects and monetary boons to the city targeting the year 2020.
Latest addition to the water transport system is the Water Taxi.
Hollywood and Indian movies are popular in Dubai (UAE).
Arbitration by the British and the creation of a buffer frontier running south eastwards from the coast at Ras Hasian resulted in a temporary cessation of hostilities.
Two catastrophes struck the town during the 1800s.
Burj Khalifa is an  high skyscraper in Dubai, and the tallest man-made building in the world.
More than 15 schools offer an international education using the one or more of the four International Baccalaureate Programmes for students aged 3–19.
Dubai Municipality is also in charge of the city's sanitation and sewage infrastructure.
Dubai also hosts the traditional rugby union tournament Dubai Sevens, part of the Sevens World Series  Event pictures of Rugby 7 Dubai 2015.
Several schools have introduced the new IB Career-related Programme that can be combined with a vocational qualification such as a BTEC.
The remnants of an ancient mangrove swamp, dated at 7000&nbsp;BC, were discovered during the construction of sewer lines near Dubai Internet City.
The large-scale real estate development projects have led to the construction of some of the tallest skyscrapers and largest projects in the world such as the Emirates Towers, the Burj Khalifa, the Palm Islands and the most expensive hotel, the Burj Al Arab.
In 2014, Dubai's hotel rooms were rated as the second most expensive in the world, after Geneva.
Water bus is a fully air conditioned boat service across selected destinations across the creek.
A Jumeirah Group spokesperson is quoted as saying: "There's not a lot we can do to stop it.
Dubai has emerged as a global city and business hub of the Middle East.
Dubai Taxi Corporation, a division of the RTA, is the largest operator and has taxis with red roofs.
The emirate's share in the UAE's total gas revenues is about 2%.
Dubai is also an international financial centre and has been ranked 37th within the top 50 global financial cities as surveyed by the MasterCard Worldwide Centres of Commerce Index (2007), and 1st within the Middle East.
The tower was inspired by the structure of the desert flower named as Hymenocallis.
Dubai has a free trade in gold and, until the 1990s, was the hub of a "brisk smuggling trade" of gold ingots to India, where gold import was restricted.
In 1973, Dubai joined the other emirates to adopt a uniform currency: the UAE dirham.
The principle of union was first agreed between the ruler of Abu Dhabi, Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan, and Sheikh Rashid of Dubai on 18 February 1968 meeting in an encampment at Argoub Al Sedirah, near Al Semeih, a desert stop between the two emirates.
On February 14, 2013, the Dubai Miracle Garden, a  flower garden, opened in Dubailand.
Glitter Dust: Finding Art in Dubai,
By the 1960s, Dubai's economy was based on revenues from trade and, to a smaller extent, oil exploration concessions, but oil was not discovered until 1966.
Men wear the "Kandurah" also referred to as "dishdasha" or even "thawb" (long white robe) and the headscarf (Ghotrah).
Popular films set in Dubai include:
This has had a major impact on property investors in the region, some of whom were unable to release funds from investments made in property developments.
The festival was designed to showcase the variety of flavours and cuisines on offer in Dubai featuring the cuisines of over 200 nationalities at the festival.
The government's decision to diversify from a trade-based, oil-reliant economy to one that is service- and tourism-oriented made property more valuable, resulting in the property appreciation from 2004 to 2006.
Catholics have no proper jurisdiction in the UAE, but are served pastorally by the Apostolic Vicariate of Southern Arabia.
The emirate's judicial courts comprise the Court of First Instance, the Court of Appeal, and the Court of Cassation.
Football and cricket are the most popular sports in Dubai.
The town of Dubai was an important port of call for foreign tradesmen, chiefly those from Iran, many of whom eventually settled in the town.
The AED 4 billion first phase of the project will be complete by January 2015.
Emirates Media and Internet (a division of Etisalat) notes that as of 2002, 76% of Internet users are male.
The earliest recorded mention of Dubai is in 1095 in the ''Book of Geography'' by the Andalusian-Arab geographer Abu Abdullah al-Bakri.
Later in the 1990s, many foreign trading communities—first from Kuwait, during the Gulf War, and later from Bahrain, during the Shia unrest—moved their businesses to Dubai.
Dubai was known for its pearl exports until the 1930s; the pearl trade was damaged irreparably by the Great Depression in the 1930s and the innovation of cultured pearls.
Of the overall trade volumes, imports had the biggest share with a value of $230 billion while exports and re-exports to the emirate stood at $31 billion and $101 billion respectively.
Dubai is thought to have been established as a fishing village in the early 18th century and was, by 1822, a town of some 7–800 members of the Baniyas tribe and subject to the rule of Sheikh Tahnoon of Abu Dhabi.
It was constructed by more than 30 contracting companies around the world with 100 nationalities of workers.
Art Dubai, the growing and reputable art fair of the region is as well a major contributor of the contemporary art scene's development.
Dubai's lure for tourists is based mainly on shopping, but also on its possession of other ancient and modern attractions.
The government subsidises almost 95% of mosques and employs all Imams; approximately 5% of mosques are entirely private, and several large mosques have large private endowments.
Although a number of core elements of Dubai's trading infrastructure were built on the back of the oil industry, revenues from oil and natural gas account for less than 5% of the emirate's revenues.
Biryani is also a popular cuisine across Dubai with being the most popular among Indians and Pakistanis present in Dubai.
An Arabic proverb says "''Daba Dubai''" (), meaning "They came with a lot of money."
Kylie Minogue was reportedly paid $3.5 million to perform at the opening of the Atlantis resort on 20 November 2008.
The medium of instruction in public schools is Arabic with emphasis on English as a second language, while most of the private schools use English as their medium of instruction.
The Dubai Municipality (DM) was established by the then-ruler of Dubai, Rashid bin Saeed Al Maktoum, in 1954 for purposes of city planning, citizen services and upkeep of local facilities.
Balram vs. Tharadas,
The Persian Gulf borders the western coast of the emirate.
Several indigenous trees such as the date palm and neem as well as imported trees such as the eucalypts grow in Dubai's natural parks.
In 2001, Dubai Municipality embarked on an e-Government project with the intention of providing 40 of its city services through its web portal,  dubai.ae.
In 2013 Synergy University Dubai Campus opened its campus in Jumeirah Lakes Towers being a first University in Dubai to be located outside of Educational Zones (Knowledge Village or Academic City).
The nine-state union was never to recover from the October 1969 meeting where heavy-handed British intervention resulted in a walk-out by Qatar and Ras Al Khaimah.
In the early days since its inception, Dubai was constantly at odds with Abu Dhabi.
Many ancient towns in the area were trading centres between the Eastern and Western worlds.
Excavations by the Dubai Museum in the region of ''Al-Jumayra'' (Jumeirah) found several artefacts from the Umayyad period.
Two tram systems are expected to be built in Dubai by 2011.
At the Top, Burj Khalifa, the world’s highest observatory deck with an outdoor terrace is one of Dubai’s most popular tourist attractions, with over 1.87 million visitors in 2013.
In 2006, the Transport authority announced the construction of 500 air-conditioned (A/C ) Passenger Bus Shelters, and planned for 1,000 more across the emirates in a move to encourage the use of public buses.
According to ''Vision'' magazine, the event was aimed at enhancing and celebrating Dubai’s position as the gastronomic capital of the region.
The delegation from the Bureau International des Expositions, which visited Dubai in February 2013 to examine the Emirate’s readiness for the largest exposition, was impressed by the infrastructure and the level of national support.
The ruler, Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum, is also the Vice President and Prime Minister of the United Arab Emirates and member of the Supreme Council of the Union (SCU).
Precipitation, however, has been increasing in the last few decades, with accumulated rain reaching  per year.
Dubai's oil revenue helped accelerate the early development of the city, but its reserves are limited and production levels are low: today, less than 5% of the emirate's revenue comes from oil.
The influence of Islamic and Arab culture on its architecture, music, attire, cuisine and lifestyle are very prominent as well.
Dubai real estate and UAE property experts believe that by avoiding the mistakes of the past, Dubai's realty market can achieve stability in the future.
In 2009, according to Dubai Municipality statistics, there were an estimated 1,021,880 cars in Dubai.
By early 2009, the situation had worsened with the Great Recession taking a heavy toll on property values, construction and employment.
The Downtown Burj Khalifa Tram System is a  tram service that is planned to service the area around the Burj Khalifa, and the second tram will run  along Al Sufouh Road from Dubai Marina to the Burj Al Arab and the Mall of the Emirates.
Dubai International Airport (IATA: DXB), the hub for Emirates Airlines and flydubai, serves the city of Dubai and other emirates in the country.
However, the town's geographical location continued to attract traders and merchants from around the region.
In 2012, the Global City Competitiveness Index by the Economist Intelligence Unit ranked Dubai at No.
It consists of two lines (Red line and Green line) which run through the financial and residential areas of the city.
, only about 15% of the population of the emirate was made up of UAE nationals, with the rest comprising expatriates, many of whom either have been in the country for generations or were born in the UAE.
Desert hyacinths grow in the ''sabkha'' plains east of the city, while acacia and ghaf trees grow in the flat plains within the proximity of the Western Al Hajar mountains.
Critically, one of the first major projects Sheikh Rashid embarked upon when oil revenue started to flow was the construction of Port Rashid, a deep water free port constructed by British company Halcrow.
One can also avail oneself of the tourist water bus facility in Dubai.
Non-Muslim religious groups are permitted to advertise group functions openly and distribute various religious literature; however, outright proselytising is strictly prohibited under penalty of criminal prosecution, imprisonment and deportation for engaging in behaviour offensive to Islam.
Public hospitals in Dubai were first built in the late 1950s and continued to grow with public health initiatives.
These include Dubai Fashion 2020, and Dubai Design District, expected to become a home to leading local and international designers.
Most days are sunny throughout the year.
By the end of 2012, there were also a total of 1,348 medical clinics, 97% of which are operated privately.
Five teams (Al Wasl FC, Al-Ahli Dubai, Al Nasr SC, Al Shabab Al Arabi Club and Dubai Club) represent Dubai in UAE Pro-League.
The Court of Cassation is the supreme court of the emirate and hears disputes on matters of law only.
Dubai and Ras al Khaimah are the only emirates that do not conform to the federal judicial system of the United Arab Emirates.
Over the next two years, negotiations and meetings of the rulers followed -often stormy- as a form of union was thrashed out.
In May 2013, Dubai Expo 2020 Master Plan was revealed.
Internet was introduced into the UAE (and therefore Dubai) in 1995.
The seventh emirate, Ras Al Khaimah, joined the UAE on 10 February 1972, following giant non-Arab neighbour Iran's annexation of the RAK-owned Tunbs islands.
The Jebel Ali port was established in 1979.
The network has an Internet bandwidth of 7.5 Gbit/s with capacity of 49 STM1 links.
We're not encouraging the use of the term.
Dubai has recently attracted world attention through many innovative large construction projects and sports events.
Most of the new city's banking and financial centres were headquartered in the port area.
The metro comprises the Green Line, which has 20 stations (8 underground, 12 elevated) and runs from the Etisalat Station to the Creek Station and the Red Line, the major back bone line, which has 29 stations (4 underground, 24 elevated and 1 at ground level) and runs from Rashidiya Station to UAE Xchange Station Jebel Ali.
After the spread of Islam in the region, the Umayyad Caliph of the eastern Islamic world invaded south-east Arabia and drove out the Sassanians.
The first phase of the airport, featuring one A380 capable runway, 64 remote stands, one cargo terminal with annual capacity for 250,000 tonnes of cargo and a passenger terminal building designed to accommodate five million passengers per year, has been opened.
The emir of Dubai was keen to attract foreign traders and lowered trade tax brackets, which lured traders away from Sharjah and Bandar Lengeh, the region's main trade hubs at the time.
Dubai Creek runs northeast-southwest through the city.
Dubai has no natural river bodies or oases; however, Dubai does have a natural inlet, Dubai Creek, which has been dredged to make it deep enough for large vessels to pass through.
Musicians Amr Diab, Diana Haddad, Aerosmith, Santana, Mark Knopfler, Rick Ross, Elton John, Pink, Shakira, Celine Dion, Coldplay, Lady Gaga, Jennifer Lopez, Justin Bieber, Selena Gomez and Roxette have performed in the city.
The other Dubai-based stock exchange is NASDAQ Dubai, which is the international stock exchange in the Middle East.
There are more than 3000 taxis operating within the emirate making an average of 192,000 trips every day, carrying about 385,000 persons.
The poet and scholar Ahmad Mohammad Obaid traces it to the same word, but to its alternative meaning of "baby locust" () due to the abundant nature of locusts in the area before settlement.
It is a building icon.
Dubai alone has more than 70 shopping centres, including the world's largest shopping centre, Dubai Mall.
Dubai signed the treaty of 'Perpetual Maritime Truce' of 1853 along with other Trucial States and also – like its neighbours on the Trucial Coast – entered into an exclusivity agreement in which the United Kingdom took responsibility for the emirate's security in 1892.
Such as initiating the world’s largest solar project, the real estate upsurge, to focus on the GDP growth and to make Dubai a “Happy Dubai” for the people of the city.
One of the more traditional methods of getting across Bur Dubai to Deira is by ''abras'', small boats that ferry passengers across the Dubai Creek, between abra stations in Bastakiya and Baniyas Road.
The city's cultural imprint as a small, ethnically homogenous pearling community was changed with the arrival of other ethnic groups and nationals—first by the Iranians in the early 1900s, and later by Indians and Pakistanis in the 1960s.
The Dubai World Cup, a thoroughbred horse race, is held annually at the Meydan Racecourse.
Dubai's property market experienced a major deterioration in 2008–09 following the financial crisis of 2007–08, but the emirate's economy has made a return to growth, with a projected 2015 budget surplus.
Silver Bears (film),
The main site of Dubai Expo 2020 will be a 438-hectare area (1,083 acres), part of the new ''Dubai Trade Centre Jebel Ali'' urban development, located midway between Dubai and Abu Dhabi.
Censorship is common in Dubai and used by the government to control content that it believes violates the cultural and political sensitivities of Emirates.
Dubai Creek Park in Dubai Creek also plays a vital role in Dubai tourism as it showcase some of the most famous tourist attractions in Dubai such as Dolphinarium, Cable Car, Camel Ride, Horse Carriage and Exotic Birds Shows.
By 2014, China had emerged as Dubai's largest international trading partner, with a total of $47.7 billion in trade flows, up 29% from 2013.
Dubai is to host World Expo 2020.
Cycling became one of the biggest sports in the UAE  and Fun Ride Sports focus on cycling events and to be at all the races to provide world class events.
Human rights organisations have heavily criticised violations of human rights in Dubai.
There are five private operators: Metro Taxis (orange roofs); Network Taxis (yellow roofs); Cars Taxis (blue roofs); Arabia Taxis (green roofs); and City Taxis (purple roof).
Dubai enacted an Electronic Transactions and Commerce Law in 2002 which deals with digital signatures and electronic registers.
40 with a total score of 55.9.
The houbara bustard, striped hyena, caracal, desert fox, falcon and Arabian oryx are common in Dubai's desert.
Summers in Dubai are extremely hot, windy, and humid, with an average high around  and overnight lows around  in the hottest month, August.
Each Emirate is able to dictate healthcare standards according to their internal laws, although the standards and regulations rarely have extreme differences.
The asphalt runway was constructed in 1965, opening Dubai to both regional and long haul traffic.
A quarter of the population (local and foreign) reportedly traces their origins to Iran.
As part of the infrastructure for pumping and transporting oil from the Fateh field, located offshore of the Jebel Ali area of Dubai, a number of 50,000 gallon storage tanks were built, known locally as 'Kazzans', by welding them together on the beach and then digging them out and floating them to drop onto the seabed at the Fateh field.
In 2014, there were estimated to be 15.54 births and 1.99 deaths per 1,000 people.
Port Rashid was the first of a swathe of projects designed to create a modern trading infrastructure, including roads, bridges, schools and hospitals.
Groups that do not have their own buildings must use the facilities of other religious organisations or worship in private homes.
Happy New Year (2014 film),
Dubai’s non-oil foreign trade stood at $362 billion in 2014.
The city has hosted several Pakistan matches and two new grass grounds are being developed in Dubai Sports City.
This was to change with PM Harold Wilson's announcement, on 16 January 1968, that all British troops were to be withdrawn from 'East of Aden'.
In 1970 a new terminal building was constructed which included Dubai's first duty-free shops.
The first section, a 10.6-kilometer (6.6&nbsp;mi) long tram line which serves 11 stations, was opened on 11 November 2014, by H.H.
The garden has a total of 45 million flowers with re-use of waste water through drip irrigation.
This was followed by the Ambassador and Carlton Hotel in 1968.
The development of Al Maktoum International Airport (IATA: DWC) was announced in 2004.
Dubai's property market experienced a major downturn in 2008 and 2009 as a result of the slowing economic climate.
As of February 2009, Dubai's foreign debt was estimated at approximately $80&nbsp;billion, although this is a tiny fraction of the sovereign debt worldwide.
Dubai was rated as one of the best places to live in the Middle East by U.S. global consulting firm Mercer.
Pre-Islamic ceramics have been found from the 3rd and 4th centuries.
Persian merchants naturally looked across to the Arab shore of the Persian Gulf finally making their homes in Dubai.
Many theories have been proposed as to the origin of the word "Dubai".
Dubai's oil reserves have diminished significantly and are expected to be exhausted in 20 years.
The Indian High School, DPS are some examples.
Non-Muslims do not appear before the Sharia Court.
Internet content is regulated in Dubai.
In 1962 the British Political Agent noted that "Many new houses and blocks of offices and flats are being built... the Ruler is determined, against advice from the British to press on with the construction of a jet airport... More and more European and Arab firms are opening up and the future looks bright."
Dubai has been called the "shopping capital of the Middle East".
There are over 100,000 British expatriates in Dubai, by far the largest group of Western expatriates in the city.
India was second among Dubai’s key trading partners with a trade of $29.7 billion, followed by the United States at $22.62 billion.
The line opened on 30 April 2009.
In January 2010, the number of Dubai residents who use public transport stood at 6%.
The above dress code is not compulsory and many people wear western or other eastern clothing without any problems; but prohibitions on wearing "indecent clothing" or revealing too much skin are aspects of the UAE to which Dubai's visitors are expected to conform, and are encoded in Dubai's criminal law.
The public transport network has in the past faced congestion and reliability issues which a large investment programme has addressed, including over AED 70&nbsp;billion of improvements planned for completion by 2020, when the population of the city is projected to exceed 3.5&nbsp;million.
Al-Wasl have the second-most number of championships in the UAE League, after Al Ain.
According to the census conducted by the Statistics Centre of Dubai, the population of the emirate was 1,771,000 , which included 1,370,000 males and 401,000 females.
Then, in 1894, fire swept through Deira, burning down most homes.
All mosques in Dubai are managed by the Government of Dubai and all Imams are also appointed by the Government.
Arabic is the national and official language of the United Arab Emirates.
However, the topography of Dubai is significantly different from that of the southern portion of the UAE in that much of Dubai's landscape is highlighted by sandy desert patterns, while gravel deserts dominate much of the southern region of the country.
Additionally, several important intra-city routes, such as D 89 (Al Maktoum Road/Airport Road), D 85 (Baniyas Road), D 75 (Sheikh Rashid Road), D 73 (Al Dhiyafa Road now named as 2 December street), D 94 (Jumeirah Road) and D 92 (Al Khaleej/Al Wasl Road) connect the various localities in the city.
It is located on the southeast coast of the Persian Gulf and is the capital of the Emirate of Dubai, one of the seven emirates that make up the country.
By the beginning of the 20th century, it was an important port.
Dubai is positioned at  and covers an area of , which represents a significant expansion beyond its initial  designation due to land reclamation from the sea.
Dubai then won the right to host Expo 2020 on 27 November 2013.
A liquor permit is required to purchase alcohol; however, alcohol is available in bars and restaurants within hotels.
Body of Lies (film),
Deewane Huye Paagal,
The typical marine life off the Dubai coast includes tropical fish, jellyfish, coral, dugong, dolphins, whales and sharks.
Bahrain and Qatar were to drop out of talks, leaving only six emirates to agree on union on 18 July 1971.
All the trains run without a driver and are based on automatic navigation.
It enables a range of companies, including UAE and regional small and medium-sized enterprises, to trade on an exchange with an international brand name, with access by both regional and international investors.
Five times every day, Muslims are called to prayer from the minarets of mosques which are scattered around the country.
English is used as a second language.
The city has become iconic for its skyscrapers and high-rise buildings, in particular the world's tallest building, the Burj Khalifa.
The UAE has enforced anti-indecency prohibitions in all public places (aside from waterparks, beaches, clubs, and bars).
