The Institute of European Affairs is also in Dublin.
Around this time, the county of the City of Dublin was established along with certain liberties adjacent to the city proper.
The same area is also home to many smaller museums such as Number 29 on Fitzwilliam Street and the Little Museum of Dublin on St. Stephen's Green.
During the redevelopment of Lansdowne Road it played host to the Irish Rugby Union Team and Republic of Ireland national football team as well as hosting the Heineken Cup rugby 2008–09 semi-final between Munster and Leinster which set a world record attendance for a club rugby match.
The First Dáil originally met in the Mansion House in 1919.
'''Creative Quarter'''
Temple Bar and Grafton Street are two of the few remaining areas that were not affected by the wave of Georgian reconstruction and maintained their medieval character.
Dublin is situated at the mouth of the River Liffey and encompasses a land area of approximately 44 sq mi, or 115&nbsp;km2, in east-central Ireland.
In addition public art galleries are found across the city, including the Irish Museum of Modern Art, the National Gallery, the Hugh Lane Municipal Gallery, the Douglas Hyde Gallery, the Project Arts Centre and the Royal Hibernian Academy.
There were also social divisions evident between the coastal suburbs in the east of the city, including those on the Northside, and the newer developments further to the west.
Construction of a 6&nbsp;km extension to the Green Line, bringing it to the north of the city, commenced in June 2013.
These winds can affect Dublin, but due to its easterly location it is least affected compared to other parts of the country.
Ireland had no significant sources of coal, the fuel of the time, and Dublin was not a centre of ship manufacturing, the other main driver of industrial development in Britain and Ireland.
Those without knowledge of Irish omitted the dot, spelling the name as ''Dublin''.
The Economic and Social Research Institute, a social science research institute, is based on Sir John Rogerson's Quay, Dublin 2.
Rainfall is evenly distributed throughout the year.
Outside of the city, the towns of Tallaght in South Dublin and Dún Laoghaire in Dún Laoghaire–Rathdown have regional colleges:
During the day it maintains its steel look, but at dusk the monument appears to merge into the sky.
It has been the home of the Irish parliament since the creation of the Irish Free State in 1922.
It was designed by Thomas Manley Dean and Sir Aston Webb as the Royal College of Science.
There are other towns of the same name, such as ''Àth Cliath'' in East Ayrshire, Scotland, which is Anglicised as Hurlford.
The city has an urban area population of 1,345,402.
The City of Dublin is the area administered by Dublin City Council, but the term "Dublin" normally refers to the contiguous urban area which includes parts of the adjacent local authority areas of Dún Laoghaire–Rathdown, Fingal and South Dublin.
The Chester Beatty Library houses the famous collection of manuscripts, miniature paintings, prints, drawings, rare books and decorative arts assembled by American mining millionaire (and honorary Irish citizen) Sir Alfred Chester Beatty (1875–1968).
For much of the time since its foundation, the brewery was Dublin's largest employer.
There are 10,469 students in the Dublin region attending the 31 gaelscoileanna (Irish-language primary schools) and 8 gaelcholáistí (Irish-language secondary schools).
Alternative and special-interest cinema can be found in the Irish Film Institute in Temple Bar, in the Screen Cinema on D'Olier Street and in the Lighthouse Cinema in Smithfield.
Dublin was shortlisted to be World Design Capital 2014.
The areas around Leeson Street, Harcourt Street, South William Street and Camden/George's Street are popular nightlife spots for locals.
It includes large areas of grassland and tree-lined avenues, and since the 17th century has been home to a herd of wild Fallow deer.
The first phase of a proposed eastern bypass for the city is the Dublin Port Tunnel, which officially opened in 2006 to mainly cater for heavy vehicles.
The Dublin Horse Show takes place at the RDS, which hosted the Show Jumping World Championships in 1982.
This lake was covered during the early 18th century as the city grew.
is a place name referring to a fording point of the River Liffey near Father Mathew Bridge. ''''
Increased secularization in Ireland has prompted a drop in regular Catholic church attendance in Dublin from over 90 percent in the mid-1970s down to 14 percent according to a 2011 survey.
From 1842, the boundaries of the city were comprehended by the baronies of Dublin City and the Barony of Dublin.
, approximately 800,000 people were employed in the Greater Dublin Area, of whom around 600,000 were employed in the services sector and 200,000 in the industrial sector.
The National Basketball Arena is located in Tallaght, is the home of the Irish basketball team, is the venue for the basketball league finals and has also hosted boxing and wrestling events.
It is composed of the President of Ireland, Seanad Éireann as the upper house, and Dáil Éireann as the lower house.
Founded as a Viking settlement, the Kingdom of Dublin became Ireland's principal city following the Norman invasion.
In recent years Dublin has become host to a thriving contemporary art scene.
The inner orbital route runs approximately around the heart of the Georgian city and the outer orbital route runs primarily along the natural circle formed by Dublin's two canals, the Grand Canal and the Royal Canal, as well as the North and South Circular Roads.
Two further water bodies&nbsp;– the Grand Canal on the southside and the Royal Canal on the northside&nbsp;– ring the inner city on their way from the west and the River Shannon.
The M50 motorway, a semi-ring road which runs around the south, west and north of the city, connects important national primary routes to the rest of the country.
There may be also up to another 10,000 Gaeltacht speakers living in Dublin.
In 1930, the boundaries were extended by the Local Government (Dublin) Act.
There are several different levels of fares, which apply on most services.
The Institute of Technology, Tallaght has full and part-time courses in a wide range of technical subjects and the Dún Laoghaire Institute of Art, Design and Technology (IADT) supports training and research in art, design, business, psychology and media technology.
Operated by Iarnród Éireann, the Dublin Suburban Rail network consists of five railway lines serving the Greater Dublin Area and commuter towns such as Drogheda and Dundalk in County Louth.
Ireland is well known for its love of baroque music, which is highly acclaimed at Trinity College.
Historically, scribes using the Gaelic script wrote ''bh'' with a dot over the ''b'', rendering Duḃlinn or Duiḃlinn.
The party or coalition of parties, with the majority of seats adjudicates committee members, introduces policies, and appoints the Lord Mayor.
/d̪uw/, alt /d̪u:/ meaning "black, dark", and ''lind'' /lʲiɲd̪ʲ "pool", referring to a dark tidal pool where the River Poddle entered the Liffey on the site of the castle gardens at the rear of Dublin Castle.
Since the late 1990s, Dublin has experienced a significant level of net immigration, with the greatest numbers coming from the European Union, especially the United Kingdom, Poland and Lithuania.
Beginning in the 9th and 10th century, there were two settlements where the modern city stands.
Arguably, he was the primitive undebated full king of Ireland and also the only Gaelic one.
Variations on the name are also found in traditionally Gaelic-speaking areas (the Gàidhealtachd, cognate with Irish Gaeltacht) of Scotland, such as ''An Linne Dhubh'' ("the black pool"), which is part of Loch Linnhe.
It is now thought that the Viking settlement was preceded by a Christian ecclesiastical settlement known as ''Duibhlinn'', from which ''Dyflin'' took its name.
According to ''Mercer's 2011 Worldwide Cost of Living Survey'', Dublin is the 13th most expensive city in the European Union (down from 10th in 2010) and the 58th most expensive place to live in the world (down from 42nd in 2010).
As the capital city, Dublin is the seat of the national parliament of Ireland, the Oireachtas.
Many other radio stations in the city broadcast at least an hour of Irish language programming per week.
Sixty percent of Ireland's Asian population lives in Dublin.
Live music is popularly played on streets and at venues throughout Dublin, and the city has produced several musicians and groups of international success, including The Dubliners, Thin Lizzy, The Boomtown Rats, U2, The Script, Sinéad O'Connor, Boyzone, Kodaline, Westlife and Jedward.
Dublin has a world-famous literary history, having produced many prominent literary figures, including Nobel laureates William Butler Yeats, George Bernard Shaw and Samuel Beckett.
The park, the second largest municipal park in Dublin, is part of a former  estate assembled by members of the Guinness family, beginning with Benjamin Lee Guinness in 1835 (the largest municipal park is nearby (North) Bull Island, also shared between Clontarf and Raheny).
The Phoenix Park is about  west of the city centre, north of the River Liffey.
The National University of Ireland (NUI) has its seat in Dublin, which is also the location of the associated ''constituent university'' of University College Dublin (UCD), has over 30,000 students.
The 3Arena venue in the Dublin Docklands has played host to many world-renowned performers.
The subsequent Scandinavian settlement centred on the River Poddle, a tributary of the Liffey in an area now known as Wood Quay.
Each of these is further divided by two lesser rivers&nbsp;– the River Tolka running southeast into Dubin Bay, and the River Dodder running northeast to the mouth of the Liffey.
The Luas is a light rail system, run by Veolia Transport, has been operating since 2004 and now carries over 30 million passengers annually.
The park is also home to Dublin Zoo, the official residence of the United States Ambassador and Ashtown Castle.
Construction of a second terminal began in 2007 and was officially opened on 19 November 2010.
The old Irish Houses of Parliament of the Kingdom of Ireland are located in College Green.
'''Dublin''' (,  ) is the capital and largest city of Ireland.
The spire was designed by Ian Ritchie Architects, who sought an "Elegant and dynamic simplicity bridging art and technology".
Dublin is in the province of Leinster on Ireland's east coast, at the mouth of the River Liffey.
The city is also in talks to twin with Rio de Janeiro, and Mexican city Guadalajara.
Dublin also has many acclaimed dramatic, musical and operatic companies, including Festival Productions, Lyric Opera Productions, the Pioneers' Musical & Dramatic Society, the Glasnevin Musical Society, Second Age Theatre Company, Opera Theatre Company and Opera Ireland.
The Dublin City Manager is responsible for implementing City Council decisions.
It boasts  some of the world's finest Georgian buildings.
The national boxing arena is located in The National Stadium on the South Circular Road.
Determined to make Dublin a Protestant city, Queen Elizabeth I of England established Trinity College in 1592 as a solely Protestant university and ordered that the Catholic St. Patrick's and Christ Church cathedrals be converted to Protestant.
Dublin is the centre of both media and communications in Ireland, with many newspapers, radio stations, television stations and telephone companies based there.
With a continuous history dating back to 1887, Dublin's principal, and Ireland's largest, institution for technological education and research, Dublin Institute of Technology (DIT) with over 23,000 students.
It is arguably most famous as the location of the greatest works of James Joyce, including ''Ulysses'', which is set in Dublin and full of topical detail.
Companies such as Microsoft, Google, Amazon, eBay, PayPal, Yahoo!, Facebook, Twitter, Accenture and Pfizer now have European headquarters and/or operational bases in the city.
Dublin is served by an extensive network of nearly 200 bus routes which serve all areas of the city and suburbs.
Bohemian F.C play at Dalymount Park which is the oldest football stadium in the country, having played host to the Ireland football team from 1904 to 1990.
It is a historical and contemporary centre for education, the arts, administration, economy and industry.
Croke Park is the largest sport stadium in Ireland.
Dublin has two ODI Cricket grounds in Castle Avenue, Clontarf and Malahide Cricket Club and College Park has Test status and played host to Ireland's only Test cricket match to date, a women's match against Pakistan in 2000.
Dublin is home to a greater proportion of new arrivals than any other part of the country.
However, the Provisional IRA drew a lot of support from the Republic, specifically Dublin.
The Northside was generally seen as working class, while the Southside was seen as middle to upper-middle class.
The road network in Ireland is primarily focused on Dublin.
The tunnel connects Dublin Port and the M1 motorway close to Dublin Airport.
'''', meaning "town of the hurdled ford", is the common name for the city in modern Irish. ''''
The vast majority of Dublin's most notable architecture dates from this period, such as the Four Courts and the Custom House.
The 2011 Census revealed that 5.9 percent of commuters in Dublin cycled.
Sited to the south-east of Norman Dublin, the castle formed one corner of the outer perimeter of the city, using the River Poddle as a natural means of defence.
The Dublin Marathon has been run since 1980 on the last Monday in October.
The two best known cinemas in the city centre are the Savoy Cinema and the Cineworld Cinema, both north of the Liffey.
The Dublin region is the economic centre of Ireland, and was at the forefront of the country's rapid economic expansion during the Celtic Tiger period.
Belfast developed faster than Dublin during this period on a mixture of international trade, factory-based linen cloth production and shipbuilding.
It is the headquarters of Ireland's flag carrier Aer Lingus, low-cost carrier Ryanair, and regional airlines Stobart Air and CityJet.
The National University of Ireland, Maynooth, another constituent of the NUI, is in neighbouring Co. Kildare, about  north-west of the city centre.
Dublin is now ranked 6th in Europe as a hub for transatlantic passengers, with 158 flights a week to the US, ahead of much bigger airports such as Istanbul and Rome.
The Irish public administration and management training centre has its base in Dublin, the Institute of Public Administration provides a range of undergraduate and post graduate awards via the National University of Ireland and in some instances, Queen's University Belfast.
In July 2010, Dublin was named as a UNESCO City of Literature, joining Edinburgh, Melbourne and Iowa City with the permanent title.
However, in winter, easterly winds render the city colder and more prone to snow showers.
Electronically displayed signs relay information about the time of the next bus' arrival based on its GPS determined position.
The Easter Rising of 1916, the Irish War of Independence, and the subsequent Irish Civil War resulted in a significant amount of physical destruction in central Dublin.
It is presided over by the Lord Mayor, who is elected for a yearly term and resides in Mansion House.
Amongst several historic locations, Moore Street remains one of the city's oldest trading districts.
The Wide Streets Commission was established in 1757 at the request of Dublin Corporation to govern architectural standards on the layout of streets, bridges and buildings.
''Táin Bó Cuailgne'' ("The Cattle Raid of Cooley") refers to ''Dublind rissa ratter Áth Cliath'', meaning "Dublin, which is called Ath Cliath".
''The Guardian'' noted that Dublin's independent and underground arts flourished during the economic recession of 2010.
As well as being home to RTÉ Radio, Dublin also hosts the national radio networks Today FM and Newstalk, and numerous local stations.
The western suburb of Blanchardstown offers childcare and sports management courses along with languages and technical subjects at the Institute of Technology, Blanchardstown.
The best known area for nightlife is Temple Bar, south of the River Liffey.
The capital attracts the largest proportion of non-Catholic migrants from other countries.
This continued down to 1840 when the barony of Dublin City was separated from the barony of Dublin.
It was once derelict but was then revitalised in the 1990s.
It remained a relatively small walled medieval town during the 14th century and was under constant threat from the surrounding native clans.
The name ''Dublin'' comes from the Gaelic word ''Dublind'', early Classical Irish ''Dubhlind''/''Duibhlind'', ''dubh'' /d̪uβ/, alt.
It consists of a main building (completed 1911) with two wings (completed 1921).
In Modern Irish the name is ''Duibhlinn'', and Irish rhymes from Dublin County show that in Dublin Leinster Irish it was pronounced ''Duílinn'' /d̪ˠi:lʲiɲ/.
Proposed multibillion-euro projects such as the Dublin Metro and the DART Underground will also be considered.
Hail is more common than snow.
Dublin Business School (DBS) is Ireland's largest private third level institution with over 9,000 students located on Aungier Street.
Many international firms have established major headquarters in the city, such as Citibank and Commerzbank.
The most notable of atrocities carried out by loyalists during this time was the Dublin and Monaghan bombings in which 34 people died, mainly in Dublin itself.
Dublin City Council is a unicameral assembly of 63 members elected every five years from Local Election Areas.
The Tudor conquest of Ireland in the 16th century spelt a new era for
The best known theatres include the Gaiety, Abbey, Olympia, Gate, and Grand Canal.
In 2007, Dublin Food Co-op relocated to a larger warehouse in The Liberties area, where it is home to many market and community events.
The main precipitation in winter is rain; however snow showers do occur between November and March.
The majority of these are controlled by Dublin Bus, but a number of smaller companies also operate.
It is the fourth largest stadium in Europe after Nou Camp in Barcelona, Wembley Stadium in London and Santiago Bernabéu Stadium in Madrid.
In 2008, the West-Link toll bridge was replaced by the eFlow barrier-free tolling system, with a three-tiered charge system based on electronic tags and car pre-registration.
Beginning in the 9th and 10th century, there were two settlements where the modern city stands.
The area's population is expanding rapidly, and it is estimated by the Central Statistics Office that it will reach 2.1&nbsp;million by 2020.
'''Docklands Quarter'''
The Dublin GAA team plays most of their home league hurling games at Parnell Park.
Conradh na Gaeilge offers language classes, has a book shop and is a regular meeting place for different groups.
There are also Gaelic Handball, hockey and athletics stadia, most notably Morton Stadium in Santry, which held the athletics events of the 2003 Special Olympics.
The network consists of two tram lines; the Red Line links the Docklands and city centre with the south-western suburbs, while the Green Line connects the city centre with suburbs to the south of the city and together comprise a total 54 stations and  of track.
It covers the area from South William Street to George's Street, and from Lower Stephen's Street to Exchequer Street.
Dublinbikes now has over 58,000 subscribers and there are plans to dramatically expand the service across the city and its suburbs to provide for up to 5,000 bicycles and approximately 300 terminals.
The Dublin area has several race courses including Shelbourne Park and Leopardstown.
The city expanded rapidly from the 17th century and was briefly the second largest city in the British Empire before the Acts of Union in 1800.
Some of the leading private galleries include Green on Red Gallery, Kerlin Gallery, Kevin Kavangh Gallery and Mother's Tankstation, each of which focuses on facilitating innovative, challenging and engaging contemporary visual art practice.
Fianna Fáil lost all but one of its sitting TDs in the region.
Dublin is administered by a City Council.
'''Cultural Quarter'''
The Dubhlinn lay where the Castle Garden is now located, opposite the Chester Beatty Library in Dublin Castle.
A north-south division did traditionally exist, with the River Liffey as the divider.
Taoiseach Enda Kenny was quoted to say that Dublin "would be an ideal candidate to host the World Design Capital in 2014".
One of these lines is the electrified Dublin Area Rapid Transit (DART) line, which runs primarily along the coast of Dublin, comprising a total of 31 stations, from Malahide and Howth southwards as far as Greystones in County Wicklow.
The closest Gaeltacht to Dublin is the County Meath Gaeltacht of Ráth Cairn and Baile Ghib which is  away.
Many of Dublin's traditional industries, such as food processing, textile manufacturing, brewing, and distilling have gradually declined, although Guinness has been brewed at the St. James's Gate Brewery since 1759.
Dublin's sheltered location on the east coast makes it the driest place in Ireland, receiving only about half the rainfall of the west coast.
The Poolbeg Towers are also iconic features of Dublin and are visible in many spots around the city.
Dublinbikes is a self-service bicycle rental scheme which has been in operation in Dublin since 2009.
The airport offers an extensive short and medium haul network, as well as domestic services to many regional airports in Ireland.
A 2013 report by Dublin City Council on traffic flows crossing the canals in and out of the city found that just under 10% of all traffic was made up of cyclists, representing an increase of 14.1% over 2012 and a 87.2% increase over 2006 levels and is attributed to measures, such as, the Dublinbikes bike rental scheme, the provision of cycle lanes, public awareness campaigns to promote cycling and the introduction of the 30kph city centre speed limit.
Dublin is home to the National College of Art and Design, which dates from 1746, and Dublin Institute of Design, founded in 1991.
Other localities in Ireland also bear the name ''Duibhlinn'', variously anglicized as Devlin, Divlin and Difflin.
The toll is currently €2.10 for vehicles with a pre-paid tag, €2.60 for vehicles whose number plates have been registered with eFlow, and €3.10 for unregistered vehicles.
Since 1997, the landscape of Dublin has changed immensely.
These colleges will be fully incorporated into DCU at the beginning of the 2016/17 academic year.
The first 30 minutes of use is free, but after that a service charge depending on the extra length of use applies.
Its  perimeter wall encloses , making it one of the largest walled city parks in Europe.
was an early Christian monastery, believed to have been in the area of Aungier Street, currently occupied by Whitefriar Street Carmelite Church.
Ringsend in the south of the city records the lowest rainfall in the country, with an average annual precipitation of , with the average annual precipitation in the city centre being .
Dublin Connolly to Dublin Port can be reached by walking beside the tram lines around the corner from Amiens Street, Dublin into Store Street or by Luas one stop to Busáras where Dublin Bus operates a service to the Ferry Terminal, or Dublin Bus route 53 or to take a taxi.
The average maximum January temperature is , while the average maximum July temperature is .
Two Irish language radio stations Raidió Na Life and RTÉ Raidió na Gaeltachta have studios in the city, and the online and DAB station Raidió Rí-Rá broadcasts from studios in the city.
More than 500 operations are approved to trade in under the IFSC programme.
Financial services have also become important to the city since the establishment of Dublin's International Financial Services Centre in 1987, which is globally recognised as a leading location for a range of internationally traded financial services.
Other influential writers and playwrights include Oscar Wilde, Jonathan Swift and the creator of Dracula, Bram Stoker.
Dublin Institute of Technology specialises in engineering, architecture, sciences, health, journalism, digital media, hospitality and business but also offers many art, design, music and humanities programmes.
A joint venture between the Irish Rugby Football Union, the FAI and the Government, saw it redeveloped into a new state-of-the-art 50,000 seat Aviva Stadium, which opened in May 2010.
Merrion Square, St Stephen's Green and Fitzwilliam Square are examples of this style of architecture.
''Dubliners'' is a collection of short stories by Joyce about incidents and typical characters of the city during the early 20th century.
A "Real Time Passenger Information" system was introduced at Dublin Bus bus stops in 2012.
In the 2011 general election the Dublin Region elected 18 Labour Party, 17 Fine Gael, 4 Sinn Féin, 2 Socialist Party, 2 People Before Profit Alliance and 3 Independent TDs.
It is the newest district, created in 2012.
Dublin is a popular shopping destination for both locals and tourists.
Since the beginning of Norman rule in the 12th century, the city has functioned as the capital in varying geopolitical entities: Lordship of Ireland (1171–1541), Kingdom of Ireland (1541–1800), island as part of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland (1801–1922), and the Irish Republic (1919–1922).
There is also a considerable number of immigrants from outside Europe, particularly from India, Pakistan, China and Nigeria.
There are also extensive Long Haul services to the United States, Canada and the Middle East.
The Abbey was founded in 1904 by a group that included Yeats with the aim of promoting indigenous literary talent.
The population of the Greater Dublin Area, , was 1,904,806 people.
The economic boom led to a sharp increase in construction, with large redevelopment projects in the Dublin Docklands and Spencer Dock.
The Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland (RCSI) is a medical school which is a recognised college of the NUI, it is situated at St. Stephen's Green in the city centre.
It is bordered by a low mountain range to the south and surrounded by flat farmland to the north and west.
Together, the four areas form the traditional County Dublin.
Dublin grew even more dramatically during the 18th century, with the construction of many famous districts and buildings, such as Merrion Square, Parliament House and the Royal Exchange.
