The Roman Catholic Church was critical of dueling throughout medieval history, frowning both on the traditions of judicial combat and on the duel on points of honor among the nobility.
While outdated in the north since the early-19th century, dueling in the US was not uncommon in the south and west, even after 1859, when 18 states outlawed it, but it became a thing of the past in the United States by the start of the 20th century.
In one ancient form of duelling, two warriors wielded a knife in the right hand while their left hands were tied together.
Dueling was once again prohibited in 1992.
As author Bertram Wyatt-Brown states, "with social distinctions often difficult to measure," most men could not escape on such grounds without the appearance of cowardice.
In most cases the challenged party had the choice of weapons with swords being favored in many parts of continental Europe and pistols in the United States and Great Britain.
For a pistol duel, the two would typically start at a pre-agreed length of ground, which would be measured out by the seconds and marked, often with swords stuck in the ground (referred to as "points").
It was the job of the seconds to make all of the arrangements in advance, including how long the fight would last and what conditions would end the duel.
Irish political leader Daniel O'Connell killed John D'Esterre in a duel in February 1815.
Once a challenge was accepted, if not done already, both parties known as "principals," would appoint trusted representatives to act as their seconds with no further direct communication between the principals being allowed until the dispute was settled.
Practices varied, however, but unless the challenger was of a higher social standing, such as a baron or prince challenging a knight, the person being challenged was allowed to decide the time and weapons used in the duel.
The initial conflicts are resolved and the four men become companions-in-arms.
Heads were taken as trophies, as was custom among the headhunters of northeast India.
The duel was based on a code of honor.
In the past, choice of weapons was not limited.
The poet was mortally wounded in a controversial duel with Georges d'Anthès, a French officer rumoured to be his wife's lover.
These type of duels soon evolved into the more chivalric ''pas d'armes,'' or "passage of arms," which was a type of chivalric hastilude that evolved in the late 14th century and remained popular through the 15th century.
In 1990 another editor was challenged to a duel by an assistant police chief.
The traditional situation that led to a duel often happened after the offense.
Firstly, unlike their counterparts in many continental nations, English duelists enthusiastically adopted the pistol, and sword duels dwindled.
Perhaps most notable is the career of Max Ophüls, who employs duels to resolve passionate conflicts in a number of his films.
The method of dueling in early medieval Poland was described in detail in the "Book of Elbing" containing the oldest record of the Polish common law (13th–14th century).
Duels were to challenge someone over a woman or to defend one's honor.
In Argentina, during the 18th and 19th century, it was common for ''gauchos''—cowboys—to resolve their disputes in a fight using working knives called ''facones''.
Bismarck reportedly declined.
The last known fatal duel in Ontario was in Perth, in 1833, saw Robert Lyon challenge John Wilson to a pistol duel after a quarrel over remarks made about a local school teacher, whom Wilson married after Lyon was killed in the duel.
Gunfighters Jim Levy and Tom Carberry became infamous for participating in at least two quick draw duels in their lifetimes.
The second would also act as a witness.
At a given signal, often the dropping of a handkerchief, the principals could advance and fire at will.
For instance, an infantry captain could not challenge a major but could easily pick on a Titular Counsellor.
On May 30, 1806, he killed prominent duellist Charles Dickinson, suffering himself from a chest wound which caused him a lifetime of pain.
However, in 1855, Barthélemy was hanged after shooting and killing his employer and another man.
Dueling began an irreversible decline in the aftermath of the Civil War.
Duels or ''niyuddha'' were held in ancient India (including modern-day Pakistan and Bangladesh) for various reasons.
In the event that the seconds failed to persuade their principals to avoid a fight they then attempted to agree on terms for the duel that would limit the chance of a fatal outcome, consistent with the generally accepted guidelines for affairs of honour.
Duels to the death were legal in some periods, and punishable by execution in others.
* ''Hamlet'' (1996), rapiers
In cartoons, a duel appeared in Chuck Jones's ''Mississippi Hare'', when a riverboat gambler challenges Bugs Bunny to a pistol duel.
He also issued an edict against duelling in 1614 and is believed to have supported production of an anti-duelling tract by the Earl of Northampton.
A duel reported internationally occurred on 14 April 1920 by Prescott Journal Miner which was known as "The First Bolo Duel in Manila since the American Occupation".
However, the last fatal duel to occur in England was between two French political refugees, Frederic Cournet and Emmanuel Barthélemy near Old Windsor in 1852; the former was killed.
The traditional form of dueling among the Bugis-Makassar community was called ''sitobo lalang lipa'' in which the duellists fight in a sarong.
Although Western formal duels resembled traditional European pistol duels, like quick draw duels they were fought with speed more than with arranged time and seconds.
By the reign of James I duelling was well entrenched within a militarised peerage&nbsp;– one of the most important duels being that between Edward Bruce, 2nd Lord Kinloss and Edward Sackville (later the 4th Earl of Dorset) in 1613, during which Bruce was killed.
Public opinion, not legislation, caused the change.
Musashi is said to have fought over 60 duels and was never defeated.
During the 17th and 18th centuries (and earlier), duels were mostly fought with swords (the rapier, and later the smallsword).
* ''The Man with the Golden Gun'' (1974), between James Bond and Francisco Scaramanga, each armed with his favorite pistol
On April 14, 1612 the famous Japanese swordsman Miyamoto Musashi dueled his rival Sasaki Kojiro on the island of Funajima.
* ''The Big Country'' (1958), with dueling pistols
Pistol dueling was an associate (non-medal) event at the 1908 Summer Olympics in London.
Dueling declined in the Eastern United States in the 19th century and by the time the American Civil War broke out, dueling had begun an irreversible decline, even in the South.
In books and films challenges are often delivered by throwing down a glove or slapping someone with one.
Duels with the bolo knife were prominent in North and Central Philippines, common in farmlands where the machete-like bolo is commonly used as a domestic tool.
Trelane accepts, but then delopes, frivolously granting Kirk a free shot.
Many historical duels were prevented by the difficulty of arranging the ''"methodus pugnandi"''.
One could signal this demand with an inescapably insulting gesture, such as throwing his glove before him.
Fatal duels were also fought to uphold personal honor in the rural American frontier, that were partly influenced by the code duello brought by Southern emigrants.
Weapons were standardized and must be of the same caliber.
Among the gauchos, many continued to wear the knife, though mostly as a tool.
From the waist down they wore cotton cloth tightly round with many folds.
The tradition of dueling and the word ''duel'' itself were brought to Russia in the 17th century by adventurers in Russian service.
Duels were fought not so much to kill the opponent as to gain "satisfaction", that is, to restore one's honor by demonstrating a willingness to risk one's life for it, and as such the tradition of dueling was originally reserved for the male members of nobility; however, in the modern era it extended to those of the upper classes generally.
However, D'Esterre's wife consented to accept an allowance for her daughter, which O'Connell regularly paid for more than thirty years until his death.
Pope Leo XIII in the encyclica ''Pastoralis officii'' (1891) asked the bishops of Germany and Austria-Hungary to impose penalties on duellists.
Many of those killed or wounded were midshipmen or junior officers.
* ''Roots'' (2016), pistols and swords
However, the practice actually gained in popularity in the first half of the nineteenth century especially in the South and on the lawless Western Frontier.
They consisted of fencing with the épée mostly in a fixed distance with the aim of drawing blood from the opponent's arm.
Dueling culture survived in France, Italy and Latin America  well into the 20th century.
The winner would often spit on his opponent and dip his neckerchief in the blood of the loser, or wipe the blood off his knife with it.
It involved a knight or group of knights (''tenans'' or "holders") who would stake out a traveled spot, such as a bridge or city gate, and let it be known that any other knight who wished to pass (''venans'' or "comers") must first fight, or be disgraced.
Dueling largely fell out of favor in England by the mid-19th century and in Continental Europe by the turn of the 20th century.
Punishments for participation in duels were rather mild&nbsp;– up to a year's imprisonment if the outcome of the duel was death or grievous bodily harm.
Nevertheless, duelling survived and increased markedly with the Restoration.
The older generation of Filipino martial artists still tell of duels which occurred during their youth.
Kirk uses his shot to destroy Trelane's power source.
In both cases, the winners of the duels, Hawkey  and Bartholemy, were tried for murder.
To this day, anyone sworn in to any statewide or county office or judgeship in Kentucky must declare under oath that he has not participated in, acted as a second or otherwise assisted in a duel.
Jackson also engaged in a frontier brawl (not a duel) with Thomas Hart Benton in 1813.
The manuals sometimes show the combatants carrying the lantern in the left hand wrapped behind the back, which is still one of the traditional positions for the off hand in modern fencing.
The ''Manusmṛti'' tells that if a warrior's topknot comes loose during a duel, the opponent must give him time to bind his hair before continuing.
By about 1770, the duel underwent a number of important changes in England.
Duellists would wear no armour and were bare from the waist up.
The offender would have the choice whether to accept or decline the challenge.
Bolo fights are still seen today, albeit rarely, and have become part of Filipino rural culture.
Geronimo Álvarez and Jesús Guerrero were drinking and at the height of their arguing Álvarez allegedly pulled out his bolo and hacked Guerrero.
Later, Polish dueling codes were formed based on Italian, French and German codes.
* ''Flesh and the Devil'' (1926), with dueling pistols
For some time before the mid-18th century, swordsmen dueling at dawn often carried lanterns to see each other.
In 1777, at the Summer assizes in the town of Clonmel, County Tipperary, a code of practice was drawn up for the regulation of duels.
In pistol duels the number of shots to be permitted and the range were set out.
Jackson also reportedly engaged in a bloodless duel with a lawyer and in 1803 came very near dueling with John Sevier.
However, it was occasionally still used to settle arguments "of honour".
The first article of the code stated:
On rare occasions, duels with pistols or swords were fought between women; these were sometimes known as ''petticoat duels''.
Duelling however, continued to spread out from the court, notably into the army.
In these situations two adversaries would attack with slashing attacks to the face, stopping when one could no longer see clearly through the blood.
The feat of arms were done to settle hostilities between two large parties and supervised by a judge.
Germany (the various states of the Holy Roman Empire) has a history of laws against dueling going back to the late medieval period, with a large amount of legislation (''Duellmandate'') dating from the period after the Thirty Years' War.
Alexander Pushkin was a real-life practitioner, fighting in no fewer than 29 instances and dying at the hands of an army officer in his last.
In this way he chooses his own time and manner of death and is assured that he will die fighting.
Grounds for refusing the challenge could include that it was frivolous, or that the challenger was not generally recognized as a "gentleman" since dueling was limited to persons of equal social station.
Research shows that much the largest group of later duellists were military officers, followed by the young sons of the metropolitan elite (see Banks, ''A Polite Exchange of Bullets'').
Between 1798 and the Civil War, the US Navy lost two-thirds as many officers to dueling as it did in combat at sea, including naval hero Stephen Decatur.
In the Visayas, there is a tradition of dueling where the offended party would first ''hagit'' or challenge the offender.
By the 1780s, the values of the duel had spread into the broader and emerging society of gentlemen.
Also in the 1953 Popeye cartoon titled ''Ancient Fistory'', an anachronistic pistol duel comically occurs in a medieval setting.
Duels to death were known as ''huego-todo'' (without bounds).
The protagonist d'Artagnan, in his youthful exuberance, accidentally insults three men on the same morning and schedules the duels that afternoon, one after the other.
Usually challenges were delivered in writing by one or more close friends who acted as "seconds".
Military establishments in most countries frowned on dueling because officers were the main contestants.
In Madura, dueling is known as ''carok'' and was typically practiced with the sickle or celurit.
Uruguay decriminalized dueling in 1920, and in that year José Batlle y Ordóñez, a former President of Uruguay, killed Washington Beltran, editor of the newspaper ''El País'', in a formal duel fought with pistols.
Prussia outlawed dueling in 1851, and the law was inherited by the ''Reichsstrafgesetzbuch'' of the German Empire after 1871.
The Russian poet Alexander Pushkin prophetically described a number of duels in his works, notably Onegin's duel with Lensky in ''Eugene Onegin''.
No evidence exists that this is indeed true, and the notion has been outright denied by members Paraguayan government.
Weapons and rules for dueling in the Indonesian archipelago vary from one culture to another.
In Western society, the formal concept of a duel developed out of the medieval judicial duel and older pre-Christian practices such as the Viking Age holmgang.
The German dueling tradition originates in the Late Middle Ages, within the German school of fencing.
With the end of the duel, the dress sword also lost its position as an indispensable part of a gentleman's wardrobe, a development described as an "archaeological terminus" by Ewart Oakeshott, concluding the long period during which the sword had been a visible attribute of the free man, beginning as early as three millennia ago with the Bronze Age sword.
The weapons used for dueling were swords, shields and daggers which the king would appoint them of equal length.
By the outbreak of World War I, dueling had not only been made illegal almost everywhere in the Western world, but was also widely seen as an anachronism.
This practice occurred despite being expressly banned by the Code Duello of 1777.
Such inferiority had to be immediately obvious, however.
Duels traditionally took place at dawn, when the poor light would make the participants less likely to be seen, and to force an interval for reconsideration or sobering-up.
This happened so regularly that fencing manuals integrated lanterns into their lessons.
At this time duels were already forbidden in Poland, but the "Polish Honorary Code" was quite widely in use.
Islands in rivers dividing two jurisdictions were popular dueling sites; the cliffs below Weehawken on the Hudson River where the Hamilton-Burr duel occurred were a popular field of honour for New York duellists because of the uncertainty whether New York or New Jersey jurisdiction applied.
The exact rules or etiquette for dueling varied by time and locale but were usually referred to as the code duello.
Victoria, BC was known to have been the centre of at least two duels near the time of the gold rush.
1600, and as ''Duell'' from the 1640s.
Duels were either first-blood, submission, or to the last man standing.
The Fourth Council of the Lateran (1215) outlawed duels, and civil legislation in the Holy Roman Empire against dueling was passed in the wake of the Thirty Years' War.
Unlike the more typical kris duel of Javanese and Malay culture, the Bugis-Makassar community instead wield badik, the local single-edge knife.
Duels in France in this period, while still taken seriously as a matter of honour, were not fought to the death.
The last duel in England was fought in 1852.
Special sets of dueling pistols were crafted for the wealthiest of noblemen for this purpose.
* ''Barry Lyndon'' (1975), pistols and swords
James I encouraged Francis Bacon as Solicitor-General to prosecute would-be duellists in the Court of Star Chamber, leading to about two hundred prosecutions between 1603 and 1625.
Under the latter conditions, one or both parties could intentionally miss in order to fulfill the conditions of the duel, without loss of either life or honour.
According to this practice when a warrior felt he did not have much time to live, he would go along with a few attendants and ask another king for a duel or a small scale battle.
After the turn of the 19th century, when repeating handguns became more widely available, use of the facón as a close-combat weapon declined.
When both men are inside, an agreement to fight til death and thereafter shall be no hereditary grudge nor will any party be allowed to question the duel, shall be made.
But most often, bolos, rattan canes, and knives were the preferred weapons.
If a lady passed unescorted, she would leave behind a glove or scarf, to be rescued and returned to her by a future knight who passed that way.
In the 1860s, Otto von Bismarck was reported to have challenged Rudolf Virchow to a duel.
Whether real or imagined, one party would demand satisfaction from the offender.
The duel lasted until the other party was too weak to fight back.
Duelling was further propagated by the arrival of Italian fencing masters such as Rocco Bonetti and Vincento Saviolo.
Because avoiding injury is near-impossible even for the victor, this type of duel was considered a sign of extraordinary bravery, masculinity and the warrior mentality.
Duelling was also popular for a time among doctors and, in particular, in the legal professions.
Care was taken by the seconds to ensure the ground chosen gave no unfair advantage to either party.
Fencing and pistol duels continued to co-exist throughout the 19th century.
Either before the duel or before the beheading, the fighters would share the meals and wine prepared by their wives.
A doctor or surgeon was usually arranged to be on hand.
* William Pitt the Younger fought a duel with George Tierney (1798)
The duel itself was not necessarily to the death, and usually ended once first blood has been drawn.
Duel by pistols, Sloane was fatally injured and Liverpool shortly returned to the US.
A senator, and future President of Chile, Salvador Allende, was challenged to a duel by his colleague Raúl Rettig (who later headed a commission investigating human rights violations committed during the 1973–1990 military rule in Chile) in 1952.
In some duels, the seconds would take the place of the primary dueller if the primary was not able to finish the duel.
If a traveling ''venans'' did not have weapons or horse to meet the challenge, one might be provided, and if the ''venans'' chose not to fight, he would leave his spurs behind as a sign of humiliation.
Despite these efforts, dueling continued unabated, and it is estimated that between 1685 and 1716, French officers fought 10,000 duels, leading to over 400 deaths.
Dueling was the subject of an unsuccessful amendment to the United States Constitution in 1838.
The growing middle class maintained their reputation with recourse to either bringing charges of libel, or to the fast-growing print media of the early nineteenth century, where they could defend their honour and resolve conflicts through correspondence in newspapers.
The term ''Kampf'' is replaced by the modern German ''Duell'' during the same period, attested in the Latin form ''duellum'' from ca.
The chief criteria for choosing the field of honour were isolation, to avoid discovery and interruption by the authorities; and jurisdictional ambiguity, to avoid legal consequences.
Dueling also began to be criticized in America in the late 18th century; Benjamin Franklin denounced the practice as uselessly violent, and George Washington encouraged his officers to refuse challenges during the American Revolutionary War because he believed that the death by dueling of officers would have threatened the success of the war effort.
Duels were common in much of South America during the 20th century, although generally illegal.
In the mid-seventeenth century it was for a time checked by the activities of the Parliamentarians whose Articles of War specified the death penalty for would-be duellists.
One involved a British arrival by the name of George Sloane, and an American, John Liverpool, both arriving via San Fransico in 1858.
The 1943 film ''The Life and Death of Colonel Blimp'' shows two main characters becoming friends after fighting a duel, the preparations for which are shown in great detail.
Officers were often trained at military academies at government's expense; when officers killed one another it imposed an unnecessary financial and leadership strain on a military organization, making dueling unpopular with high-ranking officers.
Settlements such as Tombstone and Dodge City, prevented these duels by prohibiting civilians from carrying firearms by local ordinance.
Legislation against dueling goes back to the medieval period.
first apology, because he gave the first offence, and then, (after one
Participants wore heavy, protective clothing and a metal helmet with a glass eye-screen.
Secondly, the office of 'second' developed into 'seconds' or 'friends' being chosen by the aggrieved parties to conduct their honour dispute.
It was agreed by delegates from Tipperary, Galway, Mayo, Sligo and Roscommon, and intended for general adoption throughout Ireland.
In the US, dueling was used to deal with political differences and disputes, particularly during the Civil War.
On September 22, 1842, future President Abraham Lincoln, at the time an Illinois state legislator, met to duel with state auditor James Shields, but their seconds intervened and persuaded them against it.
An example of this is using the lantern to parry blows and blind the opponent.
This attitude lingered on &ndash; Queen Victoria even expressed a hope that Lord Cardigan, prosecuted for wounding another in a duel, "would get off easily".
His successor Mikhail Lermontov was killed four years later by fellow Army officer Nikolai Martynov.
The last fatal duel in England took place on Priest Hill, between Englefield Green and Old Windsor, on 19 October 1852, between two French refugees, Cournet and Barthelemy, the former being killed.
The last fatal duel between Englishmen in England occurred in 1845, when James Alexander Seton had an altercation with Henry Hawkey over the affections of his wife, leading to a duel at Southsea.
If both fighters agree, they then engage each other within the confined space of a single sarong.
The story could be apocryphal, however.
The 19th-century statesman Daniel O'Connell took part in a duel in 1815.
Influential new intellectual trends at the turn of the nineteenth century bolstered the anti-dueling campaign; the utilitarian philosophy of Jeremy Bentham stressed that praiseworthy actions were exclusively restricted to those that maximize human welfare and happiness, and the Evangelical notion of the "Christian conscience" began to actively promote social activism.
The Anglican Church was generally hostile to dueling, but non-conformist sects in particular began to actively campaign against it.
Historian Bertram Wyatt-Brown said of dueling in the United States:
Duels in Manipur were first recorded in the ''Chainarol-Puya'' which details the ethics of dueling.
Rule 1.—The first offence requires the apology, although the retort
* ''Highlander'' (1986), swords
Besides quick draw duels, more formal duels were also fought in the Old West, such as those participated by former cowboys Hugh Anderson and Burton C. Mossman.
Various taboos existed such as not killing an opponent who runs, begs or cries out of fear, or anyone who pleads for protection.
In early cases, the defeated party was then subsequently executed.
Quantifying the number of duels in Britain is difficult, but there are about 1,000 attested between 1785 and 1845 with fatality rates running at at least 15% and probably somewhat higher.
When a fighter was challenged, the day for the bout would be fixed to allow for time to prepare the weapons.
