Their memory allows them to return to specific points after long travels.
The time between births is unclear, with estimates ranging from 2.4 to 7 years.
Sewage, detergents, heavy metal, hypersaline water, herbicides, and other waste products all negatively affect seagrass meadows.
Dugongs are semi-nomadic, often travelling long distances in search of food, but staying within a certain range their entire life.
The way that females know how a male has reached sexual maturity is by the eruption of tusks in the male since tusks erupt in males when testosterone levels reach a high enough level.
The female's tusks continue to grow without emerging during puberty, sometimes erupting later in life after reaching the base of the premaxilla.
During the Renaissance and the Baroque eras, dugongs were often exhibited in wunderkammers.
This greatly increases the chances of conception.
It was later revealed that the government of Japan was hiding evidence of the negative effects of ship lanes and human activities on dugongs observed during surveys carried out off Henoko reef.
The recovery of seagrass meadows and the spread of seagrass into new areas, or areas where it has been destroyed, can take over a decade.
The '''dugong''' (, ; ''Dugong dugon'') is a medium-sized marine mammal.
Others postulate that the populations formed part of a super-population where migration between Ryukyu, Taiwan, and the Philippines was common.
30% of dugong deaths in Queensland since 1996 are thought to be because of disease.
At higher latitudes dugongs make seasonal travels to reach warmer water during the winter.
In the Gulf states, dugongs served not only as a source of food, but their tusks were used as sword handles.
Dugong movements mostly occur within a localised area of seagrass beds, and animals in the same region show individualistic patterns of movement.
This population may belong to different group than that distributed among the inner isles.
The Steller's sea cow became extinct in the 18th century.
Dugongs are found in warm coastal waters from the western Pacific Ocean to the eastern coast of Africa, along an estimated  of coastline between 26° and 27° degrees to the north and south of the equator.
The chemical structure and composition of the seagrass is important, and the grass species most often eaten are low in fibre, high in nitrogen, and easily digestible.
In Vietnam, an illegal network targeting dugongs had been detected and was shut down in 2012.
Dugongs are protected throughout Australia, although the rules vary by state; in some areas indigenous hunting is allowed.
One animal was seen as far south as Sydney.
A highly isolated breeding population exists in the Marine National Park, Gulf of Kutch, the only population remaining in western India.
In the Seychelles, dugongs had been regarded as extinct until a small number of dugongs was discovered around the Aldabra Atoll.
The calf nurses for 14–18 months, although it begins to eat seagrasses soon after birth.
In Thailand, the present distribution of dugongs is restricted to 6 provinces along the Andaman Sea, and very few dugongs are present in the Gulf of Thailand.
The colour of a dugong can change due to the growth of algae on the skin.
Even in the best conditions a population is unlikely to increase more than 5% a year, leaving dugongs vulnerable to over-exploitation.
The population around the Andaman and Nicobar Islands are known only from a few records, and although the population was large during British rule, it is now believed to be small and scattered.
Although they are marine creatures, dugongs have been known to travel up creeks, and in one case a dugong was caught  up a creek near Cooktown.
Plans exist to build a military base close to the Henoko reef, and military activity also adds the threats of noise pollution, chemical pollution, soil erosion, and exposure to depleted uranium.
This leaves furrows in the sand in their path.
The IUCN Red List lists the dugong as vulnerable, and the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora regulates and in some areas has banned international trade.
These flukes are raised up and down in long strokes to move the animal forward, and can be twisted to turn.
In the 1980s, it was estimated there could be as many as 4,000 dugongs in the Red Sea.
A small population exists today along the southern coast of China, where efforts are being made to protect it, including the establishment of a seagrass sanctuary for dugong and other endangered marine fauna ranging in Guanxi.
Dugong habitat in the Oura bay area of Henoko, Okinawa, Japan, is currently under threat from land reclamation conducted by Japanese Government in order to build a US Marine base in the area.
With very small eyes, dugongs have limited vision, but acute hearing within narrow sound thresholds.
Most issues with industrial fishing occur in deeper waters where dugong populations are low, with local fishing being the main risk in shallower waters.
Mozambique has had legislation to protect dugongs since 1955, but this has not been effectively enforced.
Large numbers often move together from one area to another.
This muscular upper lip aids the dugong in foraging.
The use of shark nets has historically caused large numbers of deaths, and they have been eliminated in most areas and replaced with baited hooks.
Once born, they stay close to their mothers, possibly to make swimming easier.
Because they are shy, and do not approach humans, little is known about dugong behaviour.
One of the lineages stretches all the way from Moreton Bay to Western Australia, while the other only stretches from Moreton Bay to the Northern Territory.
Different sounds have been observed with different amplitudes and frequencies, implying different purposes.
The dugong's tail flukes and flippers are similar to those of dolphins.
They can dive to a maximum depth of ; they spend most of their lives no deeper than .
In other areas many males will attempt to mate with the same female, sometimes inflicting injuries to the female or each other.
Feeding trails have been observed as deep as , and dugongs have been seen feeding as deep as .
Special habitats are used for different activities.
Only certain seagrass meadows are suitable for dugong consumption, due to the dugong's highly specialised diet.
The dugong is the only sirenian in its range, which spans the waters of some 40 countries and territories throughout the Indo-West Pacific.
They are usually located at a depth of around , although in areas where the continental shelf remains shallow dugongs have been known to travel more than  from the shore, descending to as far as , where deepwater seagrasses such as ''Halophila spinulosa'' are found.
Increasing boat traffic has increased danger, especially in shallow waters.
The effects are unknown.
The Great Barrier Reef provides important feeding areas for the species; this reef area houses a stable population of around 10,000, although the population concentration has shifted over time.
Females give birth after a 13–15 month gestation, usually to just one calf.
This was discovered by Lieutenant R.L Rawlings in 1959 while on a routine patrol.
In Vietnam, dugongs have been restricted mostly to the provinces of Kiên Giang and Bà Rịa–Vũng Tàu, including Phu Quoc Island and Con Dao Island, which hosted large populations in the past.
When eating they ingest the whole plant, including the roots, although when this is impossible they will feed on just the leaves.
Gatherings of hundreds of dugongs sometimes happen, but they last only for a short time.
No fossils exist of other members of the Dugongidae.
They have disappeared from the waters of Hong Kong, Mauritius, and Taiwan, as well as parts of Cambodia, Japan, the Philippines and Vietnam.
There is a 5,000-year-old wall painting of a dugong, apparently drawn by neolithic peoples, in Tambun Cave, Ipoh, Malaysia.
The last major worldwide study, made in 2002, concluded that the dugong was declining and possibly extinct in a third of its range, with unknown status in another half.
The Gulf of Thailand was historically home to large number of the animals, but none have been sighted in the west of the gulf in recent years, and the remaining population in the east is thought to be very small and possibly declining.
Females tend to be larger than males.
A large number of infections and parasitic diseases affect dugongs.
As dugongs cannot stay underwater for a very long period, they are highly prone to deaths due to entanglement.
Food shortages can be caused by many factors, such as a loss of habitat, death and decline in quality of seagrass, and a disturbance of feeding caused by human activity.
Occasionally individual dugongs make long-distance travels over many days, and can travel over deep ocean waters.
In areas such as northern Australia, hunting remains the greatest impact on the dugong population.
All the islands of the Philippines are believed to have once provided habitats for dugongs, which were common until the 1970s.
Daily movement is affected by the tides.
Despite being legally protected in many countries, the main causes of population decline remain anthropogenic and include hunting, habitat degradation, and fishing-related fatalities.
Vessel strikes have proved a problem for manatees, but the relevance of this to dugongs is unknown.
The flexible and muscular upper lip is used to dig out the plants.
Its snout is sharply downturned, an adaptation for feeding in benthic seagrass communities.
Some aborigines regard dugongs as part of their Aboriginality.
A wide variety of seagrass has been found in dugong stomach contents, and evidence exists they will eat algae when seagrass is scarce.
One of the dugong's preferred species of seagrass, ''Halophila ovalis'', declines rapidly due to lack of light, dying completely after 30 days.
An individual this long is expected to weigh around .
In Mozambique, most of local populations remaining are rather very small where the largest (about 120 individuals) occur at Bazaruto Island, but they have become rare in historical habitats such as in Maputo Bay and on Inhaca Island.
Kenya has passed legislation banning the hunting of dugongs and restricting trawling, but the dugong is not yet listed under Kenya's Wildlife Act for endangered species.
Historically, the Yaeyama Islands held a large concentration of dugongs, with more than 300 individuals.
The waters around Borneo support a small population, with more scattered throughout the Malay archipelago.
The spine has between 57 and 60 vertebrae.
The northern waters of Australia between Shark Bay and Moreton Bay are believed to be the dugong's contemporary stronghold.
Worldwide, only four dugongs are held in captivity.
In Moreton Bay, dugongs often travel between foraging grounds inside the bay and warmer oceanic waters.
Dugong meat and oil have traditionally been some of the most valuable foods of Australian aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders.
The dugong is a national animal of Papua New Guinea, which bans all except traditional hunting.
Con Dao is now the only site in Vietnam where dugong are regularly seen, protected within the Côn Đảo National Park.
Additional factors such as protein concentration and regenerative ability also affect the value of a seagrass bed.
Dugongs are relatively slow moving, swimming at around .
Large bays facing north on the Queensland coast provide significant habitats for dugong, with the southernmost of these being Hervey Bay and Moreton Bay.
Dugongs, along with other sirenians, are referred to as "sea cows" because their diet consists mainly of sea-grass.
Entanglement in fishing nets has caused many deaths, although there are no precise statistics.
Palau has legislated to protect dugongs, although this is not well enforced and poaching persists.
In the Philippines dugongs are thought to bring bad luck, and parts of them are used to ward against evil spirits.
Molecular studies have been made on dugong populations using mitochondrial DNA.
In the Great Barrier Reef, dugongs feed on low-fibre high-nitrogen seagrass such as ''Halophila'' and ''Halodule'', so as to maximize nutrient intake instead of bulk eating.
In the late 1960s, herds of up to 500 dugongs were observed off the coast of East Africa and nearby islands.
Extreme weather such as cyclones and floods can destroy hundreds of square kilometres of seagrass meadows, as well as washing dugongs ashore.
Most dugongs do not feed from lush areas, but where the seagrass is more sparse.
They have few natural predators, although animals such as crocodiles, killer whales, and sharks pose a threat to the young, and a dugong has also been recorded to have died from trauma after being impaled by a stingray barb.
A female from the Philippines lives at Toba Aquarium in Toba, Mie, Japan.
The military base plans have been fought in US courts by some Okinawans, whose concerns include the impact on the local environment and dugong habitats.
It has thick, smooth skin that is a pale cream colour at birth, but darkens dorsally and laterally to brownish-to-dark-grey with age.
Dugongs have historically provided easy targets for hunters, who killed them for their meat, oil, skin, and bones.
With its long lifespan of 70 years or more, and slow rate of reproduction, the dugong is especially vulnerable to extinction.
For a population to remain stable, 95 per cent of adults must survive the span of one year.
The estimated percentage of females humans can kill without depleting the population is 1–2%.
A population of over 25,000 exists in the Torres Strait such as off Thursday Island, although there is significant migration between the strait and the waters of New Guinea.
It is unknown how much mixing there was between these populations historically.
There are few differences between sexes; the body structures are almost the same.
The full dental formula of dugongs is , meaning they have two incisors, three premolars, and three molars on each side of their upper jaw, and three incisors, one canine, three premolars, and three molars on each side of their lower jaw.
A male also lived there until he died on 10 February 2011.
The UAE has additionally banned drift net fishing.
Dugong populations in Madagascar are poorly studied, but due to widespread exploitation it is thought they may have severely declined, with few surviving individuals.
It has been observed that shallow waters are used as sites for calving, minimising the risk of predation.
They also have a strong tactile sense, and feel their surroundings with their long sensitive bristles.
Smaller populations exist up the coast, including one in Ashmore reef.
Most measures for protection involve restricting activities such as trawling in areas containing seagrass meadows, with little to no action on pollutants originating from land.
The IUCN lists the dugong as a species vulnerable to extinction, while the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species limits or bans the trade of derived products.
The results have suggested that the population of Southeast Asia is distinct from the others.
This does not apply to dugongs in tropical areas, in which faecal evidence indicates that invertebrates are not eaten.
Today populations of dugongs are found in the waters of 37 countries and territories.
The construction is expected to seriously damage the dugong population's habitat, possibly leading to local extinction.
Despite being legally protected in many countries, the main causes of population decline remain anthropogenic and include fishing-related fatalities, habitat degradation and hunting.
Dugongs are also found in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands and is the state animal of this territory.
They will dig up an entire plant and then shake it to remove the sand before eating it.
Dugongs are believed to exist in the Straits of Johor in very small numbers.
Modern farming practise and increased land clearing have also had an impact, and much of the coastline of dugong habitats is undergoing industrialisation, with increasing human populations.
They were also presented as Fiji mermaids in sideshows.
Mothers and calves are in almost constant physical contact, and calves have been known to reach out and touch their mothers with their flippers for reassurance.
This is the most significant negative factor affecting seagrass.
In some areas water salinity is increased due to wastewater, and it is unknown how much salinity seagrass can withstand.
In many countries, legislation does not exist to protect dugongs, and if it does it is not enforced.
Dugongs in Moreton Bay, Australia, are omnivorous, feeding on invertebrates such as polychaetes or marine algae when the supply of their choice grasses decreases.
It is listed as an endangered species on the southern coast of Pakistan.
Dugongs have also played a role in legends in Kenya, and the animal is known there as the "Queen of the Sea".
Dugongs have two teats, one located behind each flipper.
During this the female will have copulated with multiple males, who will have fought to mount her from below.
The first marine mammal to be protected in the Philippines was the dugong, although monitoring this is difficult.
Some theorise that populations existed independently, for example that the Okinawan population were isolated members derived from the migration of a Philippine subspecies.
Once distributed throughout the coastal belt in Sri Lanka, the dugong number declined in last two decades due to heavy hunting by the fishermen.
Although they are social animals, they are usually solitary or found in pairs due to the inability of seagrass beds to support large populations.
Regional cooperation is important due to the widespread distribution of the animal, and in 1998 there was strong support for Southeast Asian cooperation to protect dugongs.
Australia is home to the largest population, stretching from Shark Bay in Western Australia to Moreton Bay in Queensland.
A population exists in the Gulf of Mannar Marine National Park and the Palk Strait between India and Sri Lanka, but it is seriously depleted.
It is one of four living species of the order Sirenia, which also includes three species of manatees.
An adult's length rarely exceeds .
As soon as the young is born the mother pushes it to the surface to take a breath.
Vanuatu and New Caledonia ban hunting of dugongs.
Dugongs' or sea cows' hides have been thought to have been used as coverings in the building of the Old Testament portable worship tent known as the Tabernacle.
When moving along the seabed to feed they walk on their pectoral fins.
In some areas it remains an animal of great significance, and a growing ecotourism industry around dugongs has had economic benefit in some countries.
Detected pathogens include helminths, cryptosporidium, different types of bacterial infections, and other unidentified parasites.
An endangered population of 50 or fewer dugongs, possibly as few as only three individuals, survives around Okinawa.
A dugong's brain weighs a maximum of , about 0.1% of the animal's body weight.
Despite these efforts, numbers continue to decrease, and in 2007 it was reported that no more dugong could be found on the west coast of the island of Hainan.
The United Arab Emirates has banned all hunting of dugongs within its waters, as has Bahrain.
Most currently live in established marine parks, where boats must travel at a restricted speed and mesh net fishing is restricted.
In areas where there is a large tidal range, dugongs travel with the tide in order to access shallower feeding areas.
There is not yet sufficient genetic data to make clear boundaries between distinct groups.
The dugong is largely dependent on seagrass communities for subsistence and is thus restricted to the coastal habitats which support seagrass meadows, with the largest dugong concentrations typically occurring in wide, shallow, protected areas such as bays, mangrove channels,  the waters of large inshore islands and inter-reefal waters.
Only one orphaned calf has ever been successfully kept in captivity.
Dugongs and other sirenians are not closely related to other marine mammals, being more related to elephants.
They can go six minutes without breathing (though about two and a half minutes is more typical), and have been known to rest on their tail to breathe with their heads above water.
It is the only living representative of the once-diverse family Dugongidae; its closest modern relative, Steller's sea cow (''Hydrodamalis gigas''), was hunted to extinction in the 18th century.
Oil spills are a danger to dugongs in some areas, as is land reclamation.
In Southern China dugongs were traditionally regarded as a "miraculous fish", and it was bad luck to catch them.
Limited genetic mixing has taken place between those in Southeast Asia and those in Australia, mostly around Timor.
The nostrils are located on top of the head and can be closed using valves.
Nonetheless, they can tolerate the brackish waters found in coastal wetlands, and large numbers are also found in wide and shallow mangrove channels and around leeward sides of large inshore islands, where seagrass beds are common.
Current populations in this area are extremely small, numbering 50 and below, and it is thought likely they will become extinct.
It has been seen to cause issues in areas such as Hainan due to environmental degradation.
The number of growth layer groups in a tusk indicates the age of a dugong, and the cheekteeth move forward with age.
Birth occurs in very shallow water, with occasions known where the mothers were almost on the shore.
The forelimbs are paddle-like flippers which aid in turning and slowing.
India and Sri Lanka ban the hunting and selling of dugongs and their products.
In these areas a male will try to impress the females while defending the area from other males, a practice known as lekking.
These hairs are most developed around the mouth, which has a large horseshoe shaped upper lip forming a highly mobile muzzle.
Historically, dugongs were also present in the southern parts of the Yellow Sea.
Hunting has historically been a problem too, although in most areas they are no longer hunted, with the exception of certain indigenous communities.
Traditional hunting still has great cultural significance in several countries in its modern range, particularly northern Australia and the Pacific Islands.
The dugong is the only strictly marine herbivorous mammal.
The skull is enlarged with sharply down-turned premaxilla, which are stronger in males.
As the anthropologist A. Asbjørn Jøn has noted, they are often considered as the inspiration for mermaids, and people around the world developed cultures around dugong hunting.
In Okinawa the small dugong population is threatened by United States military activity.
There is evidence that dugongs actively alter seagrass species compositions at local levels.
Some of the last reported sightings were made in Kenting National Park in 1950s and 60s.
In areas of Thailand it is believed that the dugong's tears form a powerful love potion, while in parts of Indonesia they are considered reincarnations of women.
In Papua New Guinea they are seen as a symbol of strength.
Dugongs accumulate heavy metal ions in their tissues throughout their lives, more so than other marine mammals.
A single individual was recorded in Amami Oshima, at the northernmost edge of the dugong's historic range, more than 40 years after the last previous recorded sighting.
