Ellington's childhood friends noticed that his casual, offhand manner, his easy grace, and his dapper dress gave him the bearing of a young nobleman, and began calling him "Duke."
He wrote "The three greatest composers who ever lived are Bach, Delius and Duke Ellington.
He was interred in the Woodlawn Cemetery, the Bronx, New York City.
Much of the music on the vinyl LP was, in effect, simulated, with only about 40% actually from the concert itself.
While Count Basie was forced to disband his whole ensemble and work as an octet for a time, Ellington was able to tour most of Western Europe between April 6 and June 30, 1950, with the orchestra playing 74 dates over 77 days.
Billy Strayhorn, originally hired as a lyricist, began his association with Ellington in 1939.
When the war ended, the focus of popular music shifted towards crooners such as Frank Sinatra and Jo Stafford, so Ellington's wordless vocal feature "Transblucency" (1946) with Kay Davis was not going to have a similar reach.
Both his parents were pianists.
The band included childhood friend Otto Hardwick, who began playing the string bass, then moved to C-melody sax and finally settled on alto saxophone; Arthur Whetsol on trumpet; Elmer Snowden on banjo; and Sonny Greer on drums.
At first, he played in other ensembles, and in late 1917 formed his first group, "The Duke's Serenaders" ("Colored Syncopators", his telephone directory advertising proclaimed).
A genius has passed."
Ben Webster, the Orchestra's first regular tenor saxophonist, whose main tenure with Ellington spanned 1939 to 1943, started a rivalry with Johnny Hodges as the Orchestra's foremost voice in the sax section.
Titled ''Time Runs'' in Paris and ''An Evening With Orson Welles'' in Frankfurt, the variety show also featured a newly discovered Eartha Kitt, who performed Ellington's original song "Hungry Little Trouble" as Helen of Troy.
Some members stayed with the orchestra for several decades.
James Ellington made blueprints for the United States Navy.
However, by 1955, after three years of recording for Capitol, Ellington lacked a regular recording affiliation.
The young band met stride pianist Willie "The Lion" Smith, who introduced them to the scene and gave them some money.
A large memorial to Ellington, created by sculptor Robert Graham, was dedicated in 1997 in New York's Central Park, near Fifth Avenue and 110th Street, an intersection named Duke Ellington Circle.
A statue of Ellington at a piano is featured at the entrance to UCLA's Schoenberg Hall.
As a bandleader, Ellington was not a strict disciplinarian; he maintained control of his orchestra with a combination of charm, humor, flattery, and astute psychology.
Nance was also an occasional vocalist, although Herb Jeffries was the main male vocalist in this era (until 1943) while Al Hibbler (who replaced Jeffries in 1943) continued until 1951.
I think too strongly in terms of altering my music to fit the performer to be impressed by accidental music.
An alcoholic, Miley had to leave the band before they gained wider fame.
The feature "Diminuendo and Crescendo in Blue" comprised two tunes that had been in the band's book since 1937 but largely forgotten until Ellington, who had abruptly ended the band's scheduled set because of the late arrival of four key players, called the two tunes as the time was approaching midnight.
Swing dancing became a youth phenomenon, particularly with white college audiences, and danceability drove record sales and bookings.
According to Avakian, Ellington was dissatisfied with aspects of the performance and felt the musicians had been under rehearsed.
He gained his first job selling peanuts at Washington Senators baseball games.
Ellington and his associates wrote for an orchestra of distinctive voices who displayed tremendous creativity.
According to her obituary in ''Jet'' magazine, she was "homesick for Washington" and returned.
The band thrived, performing for both African-American and white audiences, a rarity in the segregated society of the day.
Gunther Schuller wrote in 1989Ellington composed incessantly to the very last days of his life.
After a few months, the young musicians returned to Washington, D.C., feeling discouraged.
The 1930s ended with a very successful European tour just as World War II loomed in Europe.
One side in particular, "Creole Love Call", became a worldwide sensation and gave both Ellington and Hall their first hit record.
Ellington credited his chum Edgar McEntree for the nickname.
Ellington went to Armstrong Technical High School in Washington, D.C.
''Digital Duke'', credited to The Duke Ellington Orchestra, won the 1988 Grammy Award for Best Large Jazz Ensemble Album.
Ellington objected in the interval, and compared Jeffries to Al Jolson.
Strayhorn's "Take the "A" Train" a hit in 1941, became the band's theme, replacing "East St. Louis Toodle-Oo".
His hope that television would provide a significant new outlet for his type of jazz was not fulfilled.
While some jazz musicians had played at Carnegie Hall before, none had performed anything as elaborate as Ellington's work.
So he called me Duke."
The Ellington and Count Basie orchestras recorded together.
African Americans in D.C. worked to protect their children from the era's Jim Crow laws.
His income as a songwriter ultimately subsidized it.
It introduced Billie Holiday, and won an Academy Award as the best musical short subject.
As an adult, son Mercer Ellington (d. 1996) played trumpet and piano, and led his own band.
Ellington recorded for most American record companies of his era, performed in several films, scoring several, and composed stage musicals.
According to UCLA Magazine:
In the summer of 1914, while working as a soda jerk at the Poodle Dog Café, Ellington wrote his first composition, "Soda Fountain Rag" (also known as the "Poodle Dog Rag").
In 1957, CBS (Columbia Records' parent corporation) aired a live television production of ''A Drum Is a Woman'', an allegorical suite which received mixed reviews.
Ellington's band could certainly swing, but their strengths were mood, nuance, and richness of composition, hence his statement "jazz is music, swing is business".
In 1951, Ellington suffered a significant loss of personnel: Sonny Greer, Lawrence Brown, and most importantly Johnny Hodges left to pursue other ventures, although only Greer was a permanent departee.
Then 66 years old, he said: "Fate is being kind to me.
Mary Lou Williams, working as a staff arranger, would briefly join Ellington a few years later.
A second Broadway musical interpolating Ellington's music, ''Play On!
At his funeral, attended by over 12,000 people at the Cathedral of St. John the Divine, Ella Fitzgerald summed up the occasion, "It's a very sad day.
His reputation continued to rise after he died, and he was awarded a special Pulitzer Prize for music in 1999.
Down Beat Jazz Hall of Fame inductee
There are hundreds of albums dedicated to the music of Duke Ellington and Billy Strayhorn by artists famous and obscure.
In jazz he was a giant among giants.
*Dave Brubeck dedicated "The Duke" (1954) to Ellington and it became a standard covered by others, both during Ellington's lifetime (such as by Miles Davis on ''Miles Ahead'', 1957) and posthumously (such as George Shearing on ''I Hear a Rhapsody: Live at the Blue Note'', 1992).
In 2002, scholar Molefi Kete Asante listed Duke Ellington on his list of 100 Greatest African Americans.
In the summer of that year, his father died, and due to many expenses, Ellington's finances were tight, although his situation improved the following year.
I was established as having my own repertoire."
Radio exposure helped maintain Ellington's public profile as his orchestra began to tour.
"The writing and playing of music is a matter of intent.... You can't just throw a paint brush against the wall and call whatever happens art.
He had composed and recorded Creole Rhapsody as early as 1931 (issued as both sides of a 12" record for Victor and both sides of a 10" record for Brunswick), and a tribute to his mother, "Reminiscing in Tempo", took four 10" record sides to record in 1935 after her death in that year.
He created the piece by ear, as he had not yet learned to read and write music.
And since his death in 1974, it has become not at all uncommon to see him named, along with Charles Ives, as the greatest composer we have produced, regardless of category."
These generated controversy in what was already a tumultuous time in the United States.
On the band's tour through the segregated South in 1934, they avoided some of the traveling difficulties of African-Americans by touring in private railcars.
In 1999 he was posthumously awarded a special Pulitzer Prize (not the Music prize), "commemorating the centennial year of his birth, in recognition of his musical genius, which evoked aesthetically the principles of democracy through the medium of jazz and thus made an indelible contribution to art and culture."
He was now performing all over the world; a significant part of each year was spent on overseas tours.
Ivie Anderson left in 1942 after eleven years: the longest term of any of Ellington's vocalists.
''Detroit Free Press'' music critic Mark Stryker concludes that the work of Billy Strayhorn and Ellington in ''Anatomy of a Murder'' a trial court drama film directed by Otto Preminger, is "indispensable, although .
He died in 1932 at the age of 29, but he was an important influence on Cootie Williams, who replaced him.
Those longer pieces had already begun to appear.
In 1937, Ellington returned to the Cotton Club which had relocated to the mid-town Theater District.
Ellington had to increase from a six to eleven-piece group to meet the requirements of the Cotton Club's management for the audition, and the engagement finally began on December 4.
In June 1923, a gig in Atlantic City, New Jersey, led to a play date at the prestigious Exclusive Club in Harlem.
Strayhorn, with his training in classical music, not only contributed his original lyrics and music, but also arranged and polished many of Ellington's works, becoming a second Ellington or "Duke's doppelganger".
In his 1946 biography, ''Duke Ellington'', Barry Ulanov wrote:
In the early 1960s, Ellington embraced recording with artists who had been friendly rivals in the past, or were younger musicians who focused on later styles.
"Cotton Tail", "Main Stem", "Harlem Airshaft", "Jack the Bear", and dozens of others date from this period.
The musical numbers were composed by Jimmy McHugh and the lyrics by Dorothy Fields (later Harold Arlen and Ted Koehler), with some Ellington originals mixed in.
These provided easy accommodations, dining, and storage for equipment while avoiding the indignities of segregated facilities.
Ellington supported both women for the rest of his life.
'', debuted in 1997.
Ellington made eight records in 1924, receiving composing credit on three including "Choo Choo".
Ellington at this time (with Strayhorn) began to work directly on scoring for film soundtracks, in particular ''Anatomy of a Murder'' (1959), with James Stewart, in which Ellington appeared fronting a roadhouse combo, and ''Paris Blues'' (1961), which featured Paul Newman and Sidney Poitier as jazz musicians.
Mills had an eye for new talent and published compositions by Hoagy Carmichael, Dorothy Fields, and Harold Arlen early in their careers.
Ellington was also inspired by his first encounters with stride pianists James P. Johnson and Luckey Roberts.
*Joe Jackson interpreted Ellington's work on ''The Duke'' (2012) in new arrangements and with collaborations from Iggy Pop, Sharon Jones and Steve Vai.
When Ellington was a child, his family showed racial pride and support in their home, as did many other families.
After recording a handful of acoustic titles during 1924–26, Ellington's signing with Mills allowed him to record prolifically, although sometimes he recorded different versions of the same tune.
Hollywood luminaries such as actors John Garfield and Mickey Rooney invested in the production, and Charlie Chaplin and Orson Welles offered to direct.
He signed to Frank Sinatra's new Reprise label, but the association with the label was short-lived.
Well known sides continued to be recorded, "Caravan" in 1937, and "I Let a Song Go Out of My Heart" the following year.
"President Roosevelt (Teddy) would come by on his horse sometimes, and stop and watch us play", he recalled.
The Steinway piano upon which the Sacred Concerts were composed is part of the collection of the Smithsonian's National Museum of American History.
Ellington lived for years in a townhouse on the corner of Manhattan's Riverside Drive and West 106th Street.
Ellington showed great fondness for Strayhorn and never failed to speak glowingly of the man and their collaborative working relationship, "my right arm, my left arm, all the eyes in the back of my head, my brain waves in his head, and his in mine".
The Essentially Ellington High School Jazz Band Competition and Festival is a nationally renowned annual competition for prestigious high school bands.
Although it had sold-out performances, and received positive reviews, it ran for only 122 performances until September 29, 1941, with a brief revival in November of that year.
In 1919 he met drummer Sonny Greer from New Jersey, who encouraged Ellington's ambition to become a professional musician.
Many saw the Sacred Music suites as an attempt to reinforce commercial support for organized religion, though Ellington simply said it was "the most important thing I've done".
It was not uncommon for Strayhorn to fill in for Duke, whether in conducting or rehearsing the band, playing the piano, on stage, and in the recording studio.
*Stevie Wonder wrote the song "Sir Duke" as a tribute to Ellington in 1976.
Some of the musicians who were members of Ellington's orchestra, such as saxophonist Johnny Hodges, are considered to be among the best players in jazz.
After a fire, the club was re-opened as the Club Kentucky (often referred to as the Kentucky Club).
Its subject matter did not make it appealing to Broadway; Ellington had unfulfilled plans to take it there.
On OKeh, his records were usually issued as The Harlem Footwarmers, while the Brunswick's were usually issued as The Jungle Band.
The album ''The Real Ambassadors'' has a vocal version of this piece, "You Swing Baby (The Duke)", with lyrics by Iola Brubeck, Dave Brubeck's wife.
In September 1927, King Oliver turned down a regular booking for his group as the house band at Harlem's Cotton Club; the offer passed to Ellington after Jimmy McHugh suggested him and Mills arranged an audition.
Although he made two more stage appearances before his death, Ellington performed what is considered his final full concert in a ballroom at Northern Illinois University on March 20, 1974.
The score avoided the cultural stereotypes which previously characterized jazz scores and rejected a strict adherence to visuals in ways that presaged the New Wave cinema of the '60s".
World War II brought about a swift end to the big band era as musicians went off to serve in the military and travel restrictions made touring difficult.
Daisy surrounded her son with dignified women to reinforce his manners and teach him to live elegantly.
When his drummer Sonny Greer was invited to join the Wilber Sweatman Orchestra in New York City, Ellington made the fateful decision to leave behind his successful career in Washington, D.C., and move to Harlem, ultimately becoming part of the Harlem Renaissance.
Ellington built his music business through his day job: when a customer asked him to make a sign for a dance or party, he would ask if they had musical entertainment; if not, Ellington would offer to play for the occasion.
Ellington's long-term aim though was to extend the jazz form from that three-minute limit, of which he was an acknowledged master.
While the band's United States audience remained mainly African-American in this period, the Ellington orchestra had a significant following overseas, exemplified by the success of their trip to England and Scotland in 1933 and their 1934 visit to the European mainland.
Whoopee Makers and the Ten Black Berries were other pseudonyms.
Ellington appears on the reverse (tails) side of the District of Columbia quarter.
Martin Williams said: "Duke Ellington lived long enough to hear himself named among our best composers.
Mills though continued to record Ellington.
Ellington signed exclusively to Brunswick in 1932 and stayed with them through late 1936 (albeit with a short-lived 1933–34 switch to Victor when Irving Mills temporarily moved him and his other acts from Brunswick).
Like Haydn and Mozart, Ellington conducted his orchestra from the piano – he always played the keyboard parts when the Sacred Concerts were performed.
With the additional guidance of Washington pianist and band leader Oliver "Doc" Perry, Ellington learned to read sheet music, project a professional style, and improve his technique.
They lived with his maternal grandparents at 2129 Ida Place (now Ward Place), NW, in the West End neighborhood of Washington, D.C. Duke's father was born in Lincolnton, North Carolina, on April 15, 1879, and moved to Washington, D.C. in 1886 with his parents.
With inflation setting in after 1945, the cost of hiring big bands went up and club owners preferred smaller jazz groups who played in new styles such as bebop.
At one performance though, Garfield insisted Herb Jeffries, who was light-skinned, should wear make-up.
The settlement of the first recording ban of 1942–43, leading to an increase in royalties paid to musicians, had a serious effect on the financial viability of the big bands, including Ellington's Orchestra.
Ellington was a Pulitzer Prize for Music nominee in 1965 but another nominee was selected.
Ellington also recorded songs written by his bandsmen, for example Juan Tizol's "Caravan", and "Perdido", which brought a Spanish tinge to big band jazz.
In this, he was helped by Strayhorn, who had enjoyed a more thorough training in the forms associated with classical music than Ellington.
Their relationship, though stormy, continued after Ellington met and formed a relationship with Fernanda de Castro Monte in the early 1960s.
Terminal illness forced him to leave by late 1941 after only about two years.
Tenor player Paul Gonsalves had joined in December 1950 after periods with Count Basie and Dizzy Gillespie and stayed for the rest of his life, while Clark Terry joined in November 1951.
Also during his time in Europe, Ellington would compose the music for a stage production by Orson Welles.
With a weekly radio broadcast, the Cotton Club's exclusively white and wealthy clientele poured in nightly to see them.
Jukeboxes proliferated nationwide, spreading the gospel of swing.
Edward Kennedy Ellington was born on April 29, 1899, to James Edward Ellington and Daisy (Kennedy) Ellington in Washington, D.C.
Ellington debuted ''Black, Brown and Beige'' in Carnegie Hall on January 23, 1943, beginning an annual series of concerts there over the next four years.
The band assembled the next day to re-record several of the numbers with the addition of artificial crowd noise, none of which was disclosed to purchasers of the album.
Nicknamed "Swee' Pea" for his mild manner, Strayhorn soon became a vital member of the Ellington organization.
But Duke merely lifts his finger, three horns make a sound, and I don’t know what it is!"
Ruth's second husband was the bass-baritone McHenry Boatwright, whom she met when he sang at her brother's funeral.
The late 1950s also saw Ella Fitzgerald record her ''Duke Ellington Songbook'' (Verve) with Ellington and his orchestra—a recognition that Ellington's songs had now become part of the cultural canon known as the 'Great American Songbook'.
Duke Ellington and his Kentucky Club Orchestra grew to a group of ten players; they developed their own sound by displaying the non-traditional expression of Ellington's arrangements, the street rhythms of Harlem, and the exotic-sounding trombone growls and wah-wahs, high-squealing trumpets, and sultry saxophone blues licks of the band members.
Three months before graduating he dropped out of Armstrong Manual Training School, where he was studying commercial art.
The change was reverted, and the singer later commented that the audience must have thought he was an entirely different character in the second half of the show.
Hearing the poolroom pianists play ignited Ellington's love for the instrument, and he began to take his piano studies seriously.
The concert made international headlines, led to one of only five ''Time'' magazine cover stories dedicated to a jazz musician, and resulted in an album produced by George Avakian that would become the best-selling LP of Ellington's career.
Ellington's film work began with ''Black and Tan'' (1929), a nineteen-minute all-African-American RKO short in which he played the hero "Duke".
He also had a messenger job with the U.S. Navy and State departments, where he made a wide range of contacts.
After 1941, Ellington collaborated with composer-arranger-pianist Billy Strayhorn, whom he called his writing and arranging companion.
It is also dedicated to Duke Ellington.
In his autobiography, ''Music is my Mistress'' (1973), Ellington wrote that he missed more lessons than he attended, feeling at the time that playing the piano was not his talent.
Working as a freelance sign-painter from 1917, Ellington began assembling groups to play for dances.
Will Vodery, Ziegfeld's musical supervisor, recommended Ellington for the show, and, according to John Hasse's ''Beyond Category: The Life and Genius of Duke Ellington'', "Perhaps during the run of Show Girl, Ellington received what he later termed ' valuable lessons in orchestration from Will Vodery.'
During the early 1950s, Ellington's career was at a low point with his style being generally seen as outmoded, but his reputation did not suffer as badly as some artists.
With Strayhorn, he composed many extended compositions, or suites, as well as additional short pieces.
It was during this time that he recorded his only album with Frank Sinatra, entitled ''Francis A.
In the opinion of Bob Blumenthal of ''The Boston Globe'' in 1999: "in the century since his birth, there has been no greater composer, American or otherwise, than Edward Kennedy Ellington."
In October 1926, Ellington made an agreement with agent-publisher Irving Mills, giving Mills a 45% interest in Ellington's future.
She is the vocalist on "It Don't Mean a Thing (If It Ain't Got That Swing)" (1932) among other recordings.
Due to his inventive use of the orchestra, or big band, and thanks to his eloquence and charisma, Ellington is generally considered to have elevated the perception of jazz to an art form on a par with other more traditional musical genres.
The British visit saw Ellington win praise from members of the serious music community, including composer Constant Lambert, which gave a boost to Ellington's interest in composing longer works.
Ellington's appearance at the Newport Jazz Festival on July 7, 1956 returned him to wider prominence and introduced him to a new generation of fans.
Film historians have recognized the soundtrack "as a landmark – the first significant Hollywood film music by African Americans comprising non-diegetic music, that is, music whose source is not visible or implied by action in the film, like an on-screen band."
Ellington and Strayhorn, always looking for new musical territory, produced suites for John Steinbeck's novel ''Sweet Thursday'', Tchaikovsky's ''Nutcracker Suite'' and Edvard Grieg's ''Peer Gynt''.
On February 24, 2009, the United States Mint launched a new coin featuring Duke Ellington, making him the first African American to appear by himself on a circulating U.S. coin.
A master at writing miniatures for the three-minute 78 rpm recording format, Ellington often composed specifically to feature the style and skills of his individual musicians.
Drummer Louie Bellson replaced Greer, and his "Skin Deep" was a hit for Ellington.
For a short time soprano saxophonist Sidney Bechet played with them, imparting his propulsive swing and superior musicianship to the young band members.
"I would play the 'Soda Fountain Rag' as a one-step, two-step, waltz, tango, and fox trot", Ellington recalled.
After his death, West 106th Street was officially renamed Duke Ellington Boulevard.
Not until 1999 was the concert recording properly released for the first time.
The last three shows Ellington and his orchestra performed were one on March 21, 1973 at Purdue University's Hall of Music and two on March 22, 1973 at the Sturges-Young Auditorium in Sturgis, Michigan.
Ellington and his Orchestra also appeared in the features ''Murder at the Vanities'' and ''Belle of the Nineties'' (both 1934).
A partial exception was ''Jump for Joy'', a full-length musical based on themes of African-American identity, debuted on July 10, 1941, at the Mayan Theater in Los Angeles.
The other records of this era include: "Mood Indigo" (1930), "Sophisticated Lady" (1933), "Solitude" (1934), and "In a Sentimental Mood" (1935)
This was followed in September 1923 by a move to the Hollywood Club – 49th and Broadway – and a four-year engagement, which gave Ellington a solid artistic base.
And in twentieth century music, he may yet one day be recognized as one of the half-dozen greatest masters of our time.
From the beginning of their relationship, Mills arranged recording sessions on nearly every label including Brunswick, Victor, Columbia, OKeh, Pathê (and its Perfect label), the ARC/Plaza group of labels (Oriole, Domino, Jewel, Banner) and their dime-store labels (Cameo, Lincoln, Romeo), Hit of the Week, and Columbia's cheaper labels (Harmony, Diva, Velvet Tone, Clarion) labels which gave Ellington popular recognition.
Ellington wrote an original score for director Michael Langham's production of Shakespeare's ''Timon of Athens'' at the Stratford Festival in Ontario, Canada which opened on July 29, 1963.
Festival appearances at the new Monterey Jazz Festival and elsewhere provided venues for live exposure, and a European tour in 1958 was well received.
In the 1930s, his orchestra toured in Europe.
He also worked as his father's business manager, eventually taking full control of the band after Duke's death.
Later in New York he took advice from Will Marion Cook, Fats Waller, and Sidney Bechet.
Some of the musicians who joined Ellington at this time created a sensation in their own right.
Recordings exist of Nance's first concert date on November 7, 1940, at Fargo, North Dakota.
During the tour, according to Sonny Greer, the newer works were not performed, though Ellington's extended composition, ''Harlem'' (1950) was in the process of being completed at this time.
They hustled pool by day and played whatever gigs they could find.
André Previn said in 1952: "You know, Stan Kenton can stand in front of a thousand fiddles and a thousand brass and make a dramatic gesture and every studio arranger can nod his head and say, ''Oh, yes, that's done like this.''
While his compositions are now the staple of the repertoire of music conservatories, they have been revisited by artists and musicians around the world both as a source of inspiration and a bedrock of their own performing careers.
After only a year, his Master and Variety labels, the small groups had recorded for the latter, collapsed in late 1937, Mills placed Ellington back on Brunswick and those small group units on Vocalion through to 1940.
Like the Count Basie Orchestra, this group continued to release albums long after Duke Ellington's death.
