Overall, Duke has produced  45 Rhodes Scholars through 2015, including 24 between 1990 and 2015.
Among academic achievements at Duke, three students were named Rhodes Scholars in both 2002 and 2006, a number surpassed only by Harvard in 2002 and the United States Military Academy in 2006.
In 2006, three men's lacrosse team members were falsely accused of rape, which garnered significant media attention.
News & World Report'' and the University Ranking by Academic Performance published by Middle East Technical University.
From February 2001 to November 2005, Duke spent $835 million on 34 major construction projects as part of a five-year strategic plan, "Building on Excellence."
The University's graduate and professional schools include the Graduate School, the Pratt School of Engineering, the Nicholas School of the Environment, the School of Medicine, the Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, the School of Nursing, the Fuqua School of Business, the School of Law, the Divinity School, and the Sanford School of Public Policy.
In 2016, ''The Wall Street Journal'' ranked Duke 7th overall out of 1,061 universities.
A number of alumni have made significant contributions in the fields of government, law, science, academia, business, arts, journalism, and athletics, among others.
By 1904, fifty-four women were enrolled in the college.
Duke's endowment had a market value of $7.0 billion in the fiscal year that ended June 30, 2014.
The University's special academic facilities include an art museum, several language labs, the Duke Forest, the Duke Herbarium, a lemur center, a phytotron, a free electron laser, a nuclear magnetic resonance machine, a nuclear lab, and a marine lab.
Examples include a weeklong camp for children of cancer patients (Camp Kesem) and a group that promotes awareness about sexual health, rape prevention, alcohol and drug use, and eating disorders (Healthy Devils).
Men's sports include baseball, basketball, cross country, fencing, football, golf, lacrosse, soccer, swimming & diving, tennis, track & field and wrestling; while women's sports include basketball, cross country, fencing, field hockey, golf, lacrosse, rowing, soccer, swimming & diving, tennis, track & field and volleyball.
At the same time, Washington Duke gave the school $85,000 for an initial endowment and construction costs—later augmenting his generosity with three separate $100,000 contributions in 1896, 1899, and 1900—with the stipulation that the college "open its doors to women, placing them on an equal footing with men."
The average need-based grant for the 2013–14 academic year was nearly $39,275.
Duke's men's basketball team is one of the nation's most successful basketball programs.
The yield rate (the percentage of accepted students who choose to attend the university) is approximately 50%.
Duke then played Texas A&M in the Chick-fil-A Bowl, losing 52–48 to the Aggies, who were led by Heisman Trophy winner Johnny Manziel.
On the Atlantic coast in Beaufort, Duke owns  as part of its marine lab.
Tenting involves setting up and inhabiting a tent on the grass near Cameron Indoor Stadium, an area known as Krzyzewskiville, or K-ville for short.
Also, the first working demonstration of an invisibility cloak was unveiled by Duke researchers in October 2006.
Basketball analysts and commentators include Jay Bilas, Mike Gminski, Jim Spanarkel, and Jay Williams.
Another alumna, Melinda Gates, is the co-founder of the $31.9 billion Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, the nation's wealthiest charitable foundation.
According to a poll of recruiters conducted by ''The Wall Street Journal'', Duke ranks 2nd in terms of producing the best graduates who have received either a marketing or liberal arts degree.
News & World Report''.
For those accepted to the Pratt School of Engineering, the middle 50% range for the SAT is 700–780 for verbal/critical reading, 760–800 for math, and 720–800 for writing, while the ACT Composite range is 33–35.
In 2014, Thomson Reuters named 32 of Duke's professors to its list of Highly Cited Researchers, making it fourth globally in terms of primary affiliations.
The East Campus dorms are Alspaugh, Basset, Bell Tower, Blackwell, Brown, East House (formerly known as Aycock), Epworth, Gilbert-Addoms, Giles, Jarvis, Pegram, Randolph, Southgate, and Wilson.
Project BUILD is a freshman volunteering group that dedicates 3,300 hours of service to a variety of projects such as schools, Habitat for Humanity, food banks, substance rehabilitation centers, homeless shelters.
Since the 1995–96 academic year, all freshmen—and only freshmen, except for upperclassmen serving as Resident Assistants—have lived on East Campus, an effort to build class unity.
The ranking was based on journal article publication counts and citation frequencies in over 11,000 academic journals from around the world.
The rivalry has led the fanbases to identify the two differing shades of blue in relation to their respective university—calling the lighter powder blue "Carolina blue" and the darker blue "Duke blue".
Carr donated land in 1892 for the original Durham campus, which is now known as East Campus.
In August 2005, Duke established a partnership with the National University of Singapore to develop a joint medical program, which had its first entering class in 2007.
The Blue Devils won the ACC Coastal Division in 2013, but lost to No.
In 1892, Trinity College moved to Durham, largely due to generosity from Julian S. Carr and Washington Duke, powerful and respected Methodists who had grown wealthy through the tobacco and electrical industries.
In 2013, Duke Law ranked 6th in ''Forbes'' magazine's ranking of law schools whose graduates earn the highest starting salaries.
Starting in 2012, the nine Panhellenic Association sorority chapters decided to live in houses (clusters of apartments) on Central Campus.
In 2015, Paul Modrich shared the Nobel Prize in Chemistry.
Mike MacIntyre, the defensive coordinator, was named 2009 Assistant Coach of the Year by the American Football Coaches Association (AFCA).
As of 2012, Duke graduates have received 25 Churchill Scholarships to the University of Cambridge.
Ten Nobel laureates and three Turing Award winners are affiliated with the university.
It ensures that students are exposed to a variety of "areas of knowledge" and "modes of inquiry."
Pratt's curriculum is narrower in scope, but still accommodates double majors in a variety of disciplines.
The residential quads on West Campus are Craven Quad, Crowell Quad, Edens Quad, Few Quad, Keohane Quad, Kilgo Quad, and Wannamaker Quad.
The MEM (Masters in Engineering Management) program has been ranked 3rd in the world by Eduniversal In 2013, ''Forbes'' ranked Duke 4th in the nation in terms of return on investment (ROI).
Programs such as dance, drama, education, film, and the University Writing Program reside on East.
The first-year-populated East Campus contains Georgian-style architecture, while the main Gothic-style West Campus  away is adjacent to the Medical Center.
In 1930, the Woman's College was established as a coordinate to the men's undergraduate college, which had been established and named Trinity College in 1924.
As of summer 2013, more than 2,400 Duke students had volunteered through DukeEngage in 75 nations on six continents.
Duke University Medical Center, bordering Duke's West Campus northern boundary, combines one of the top-rated hospitals and one of the top-ranked medical schools in the U.S.
Similarly, students in FOCUS, a first-year program that features courses clustered around a specific theme, live together in the same residence hall as other students in their cluster.
News & World Report'' has placed Duke as high as 3rd and as low as 10th.
Money from the endowment allowed the University to grow quickly.
In 1924, tobacco and electric power industrialist James Buchanan Duke established The Duke Endowment, at which time the institution changed its name to honor his deceased father, Washington Duke.
Magazine editors include Rik Kirkland of ''Fortune'' and Clay Felker, founder of ''New York Magazine.''
The self-sufficient East Campus contains the freshman residence halls, a dining hall, coffee shop, post office, Lilly Library, Baldwin Auditorium, a theater, Brodie Gym, tennis courts, several disc golf baskets, and a walking track as well as several academic buildings.
Duke has won 126 ACC Championships since claiming football, men's lacrosse and men's golf in the league's first year in 1953–54, including the Blue Devils ACC Championships in football and volleyball in 2013–14.
Duke has 37  sports clubs, and several intramural teams that are officially recognized.
Income from the fund was to be distributed to hospitals, orphanages, the Methodist Church, and four colleges (including Trinity College).
The team's success has been particularly outstanding over the past 30 years under coach Mike Krzyzewski (often simply called "Coach K"), who also has coached the USA men's national basketball team since 2006 and led the team to Olympic golds in 2008, 2012, and 2016.
The intent is to assist students in acquiring perspective on current and historical events, conducting research and solving problems, and developing tenacity and a capacity for hard and sustained work.
In May 2014, the newly built Orrin H. Pilkey Marine Research Laboratory was dedicated.
In the same year, Forbes magazine ranked Fuqua 8th in the country based on return on investment.
Engineering, which had been taught since 1903, became a separate school in 1939.
''Time Magazine'' ranked Duke third on its list of the "Best 50 Colleges for African Americans".
Thus, 85% of undergraduates live on campus.
The Duke University mock trial team won the national championship in 2012.
Other scholarships are geared toward students in North Carolina, African-American students, and high-achieving students requiring financial aid.
Many of them also revolve around a particular interest such as entrepreneurship, civic engagement or African-American or Asian culture.
The biology department combines two historically strong programs in botany and zoology, while one of the divinity school's leading theologians is Stanley Hauerwas, whom ''Time'' named "America's Best Theologian" in 2001.
Most of the campus eateries and sports facilities—including the historic basketball stadium, Cameron Indoor Stadium—are on West Campus.
A survey by the ''Journal of Blacks in Higher Education'' in 2002 ranked Duke as the #1 university in the country in regard to the integration of African American students and faculty.
Founded in 1966, the Duke Lemur Center spans  and contains nearly 300 animals of 25 different species of lemurs, galagos and lorises.
Duke's students have been recognized as some of the most creative and original fans in all of collegiate athletics.
In early 2014, the Nicholas School of the Environment opened a new home, Environmental Hall, a five-story, glass-and-concrete building that incorporates the highest sustainable features and technologies, and meets or exceeds the criteria for LEED platinum certification.
Duke plans to add softball as its 27th varsity sport in spring 2018.
Another community project, "Scholarship with a Civic Mission," is a joint program between the Hart Leadership Program and the Kenan Institute for Ethics.
Duke is consistently included among the best universities in the world by numerous university rankings, and among the most innovative universities in the world.
In athletics, Duke hosted and competed in the only Rose Bowl ever played outside California in Wallace Wade Stadium in 1942.
Throughout the school's history, Duke researchers have made breakthroughs, including the biomedical engineering department's development of the world's first real-time, three-dimensional ultrasound diagnostic system and the first engineered blood vessels and stents.
The museum was designed by Rafael Viñoly and is named for Duke alumnus and art collector Raymond Nasher.
A new facility, the Morris Williams Track and Field Stadium, opened in 2015.
Based on statistics compiled by PayScale in 2011, Duke alumni rank seventh in mid-career median salary among all U.S. colleges and universities.
More than 75 percent of Duke students pursue service-learning opportunities in Durham and around the world through DukeEngage and other programs that advance the university's mission of "knowledge in service to society."
One of the major public attractions on the main campus is the  Sarah P. Duke Gardens, established in the 1930s.
Performance groups such as Hoof 'n' Horn, the country's second-oldest student-run musical theater organization, a cappella groups, student bands, and theater organizations are also prominent on campus.
The Duke University Student Dining Advisory Committee provides guidance to the administration on issues regarding student dining, life, and restaurant choices.
West Campus contains six quadrangles—the four along "Main" West were built in 1930s, while two newer ones have since been added.
In a ''New York Times'' corporate study, Duke's graduates were shown to be among the most sought-after and valued in the world, and ''Forbes'' magazine ranked Duke seventh in the world on its list of 'power factories' in 2012.
In 2012, Robert Lefkowitz along with Brian Kobilka, who is also a former affiliate, shared the Nobel Prize in chemistry for their work on cell surface receptors.
DKU blends liberal education with Chinese tradition in a new approach to elite higher education in China.
Duke's mascot origin is considered to be military and patriotic rather than anti-religious.
The men's basketball coach, Mike Krzyzewski, occasionally buys pizza for the inhabitants of the tent village.
The Duke-Durham Neighborhood Partnership, started by the Office of Community Affairs in 1996, attempts to address major concerns of local residents and schools by leveraging university resources.
In 2016/17, Duke was ranked 24th in the world by the ''QS World University Rankings'' and 18th in the world by the ''Times Higher Education World University Rankings''.
At first, James B. Duke thought the name change would come off as self-serving, but eventually he accepted Few's proposal as a memorial to his father.
Constructed from 1930 to 1935, the chapel seats 1,600 people and, at  is one of the tallest buildings in Durham County.
Another program includes Project CHILD, a tutoring program involving 80 first-year volunteers; and an after-school program for at-risk students in Durham that was started with $2.25 million grant from the Kellogg Foundation in 2002.
Duke is the seventh-wealthiest private university in America with $11.4 billion in cash and investments in fiscal year 2014.
In the mechanical engineering department, Adrian Bejan developed the constructal theory, which explains the shapes that arise in nature.
The school emphasizes undergraduate research—opportunities for hands-on experiences arise through internships, fellowship programs, and the structured curriculum.
Duke is a leading participant in the National Lambda Rail Network and runs a program for gifted children known as the Talent Identification Program.
The campus is divided into four main areas: West, East, and Central campuses and the Medical Center, which are all connected via a free bus service.
In summer 2014, Duke Kunshan University (DKU) opened in Kunshan, China.
Sophomores, juniors and seniors can choose to reside on either West or Central campuses, although the majority of undergraduate seniors choose to live off campus.
APR scores for football and men's basketball were the highest among ACC schools in conference-sponsored sports.
SLGs are residential groups similar to fraternities or sororities, except they are generally co-ed and unaffiliated with any national organization.
Central Campus, consisting of  between East and West campuses, houses around 1,000 sophomores, juniors, and seniors, as well as around 200 professional students in double or quadruple apartments.
The average SAT score is 2240.
The forest environs surrounding parts of the campus belie the University's proximity to downtown Durham.
There are 26 specific houses, accommodating 22 selective living groups (sororities and fraternities), 3 independent houses and 1 administrative house.
The Public Policy, Statistics, Chemistry, Environmental Science, Medicine and Molecular Genetics departments (among others) all ranked in the top five.
Launched in 2007, DukeEngage provides full funding for select Duke undergraduates who wish to pursue an immersive summer of service in partnership with a U.S. or international community.
According to a ''Forbes'' study, Duke is ranked 11th among universities that have produced billionaires.
The main campus—designed largely by architect Julian Abele—incorporates Gothic architecture with the  Duke Chapel at the campus' center and highest point of elevation.
Duke has pioneered studies involving nonlinear dynamics, chaos, and complex systems in physics.
The resident faculty represent the disciplines of oceanography, marine biology, marine biomedicine, marine biotechnology, and coastal marine policy and management.
In March 2006, the university purchased 15 houses in the Trinity Park area that Duke students had typically rented and subsequently sold them to individual families in an effort to encourage renovations to the properties and to reduce off-campus partying in the midst of residential neighborhoods.
About 125,000 square feet was updated at Gross Hall, including new lighting and windows and a skylight.
The University practices need-blind admissions and meets 100% of admitted students' demonstrated need.
The DKU will conduct research projects on climate change, health-care policy and tuberculosis prevention and control.
Students pursue a major, and can pursue a combination of a total of up to three including minors, certificates, and/or a second major.
Admission to Duke is defined by ''U.S.
The total number of participating tents is capped at 100 (each tent can have up to 12 occupants), though interest is such that it could exceed that number if space permitted.
Students, often referred to as Cameron Crazies, show their support of the men's basketball team by "tenting" for home games against key Atlantic Coast Conference rivals, especially University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill (UNC).
Since 1999–2000, Duke has captured 52 league crowns, second most in the ACC, and has won at least one ACC Championship each season since 1979–80 and at least two every season since 1990–91.
For Division I in 2013, Duke finished ninth overall and fifth in the ACC.
This requirement is justified by the administration as an effort to help students connect more closely with one another and sustain a sense of belonging within the Duke community.
A 2012 study conducted by academic analytics ranks Duke fourth in the nation (behind only Harvard, Stanford, and MIT) in terms of faculty productivity.
The middle 50% range of SAT scores for the prospective students accepted to Trinity College of Arts and Sciences in fall 2014 is 680–790 for verbal/critical reading, 700–800 for math, and 700–790 for writing, while the ACT Composite range is 31–35.
House residents create their house identities.
A number of construction projects were in progress during 2015, including renovations to Duke Chapel, Wallace Wade Stadium (football) and Cameron Indoor Stadium (basketball).
The freshmen campus (East Campus) is composed of buildings in the Georgian architecture style.
In 2003 Norm Ogilvie was promoted to Director of Track and Field, and has led athletes to over 60 individual ACC championships, and 81 All-America selections, along with most of the track and field records being broken during his tenure.
Baldwin's upgrades include a larger stage, more efficient air conditioning for performers and audience and enhanced acoustics that will allow for the space to be "tuned" to each individual performance.
Duke placed 13th in the world and 9th in the country.
Its editors are responsible for selecting the term "Blue Devil".
Twenty-four certificate programs also are available.
In 2013, Duke's Fuqua School of Business was ranked 6th in terms of graduate starting salaries by ''U.S.
Eighty-five percent of undergraduates enroll in the Trinity College of Arts and Sciences, while the rest are in the Pratt School of Engineering.
Prominent journalists include talk show host Charlie Rose, ''The Washington Post'' sports writer John Feinstein, Chief Washington Correspondent for CNBC and ''The Wall Street Journal'' writer John Harwood, CBS News President Sean McManus, chief legal correspondent for ''Good Morning America'' Dan Abrams, and CNN anchor and senior correspondent for ''The NewsHour with Jim Lehrer'' Judy Woodruff.
The Art History, History, Cultural Anthropology, Literature, Music, Philosophy, and Women's Studies Departments are housed on East.
The most famous Duke football season came in 1938, when Wallace Wade coached the "Iron Dukes" that shut out all regular season opponents; only three teams in history can claim such a feat.
Reports of Duke researchers' involvement in new AIDS vaccine research surfaced in June 2006.
The University Ranking by Academic Performance uses citation data obtained from Thomson Reuters' Web of Science to rank universities based on research output.
The project is part of the final phase of renovations to Duke's West Campus libraries that will transform one of the university's oldest and most recognizable buildings into a state-of-the-art research facility.
The ranking used alumni giving as a criteria to determine which private colleges offer the best returns.
Duke University Hospital was finished in 1980 and the student union building was fully constructed two years later.
The marine lab is situated on Pivers Island on the Outer Banks of North Carolina,  across the channel from Beaufort.
The season culminated in a Coastal Division Championship and a narrow loss to Texas A&M in the Chick-Fil-A Bowl.
The Duke Lemur Center, located inside the Duke Forest, is the world's largest sanctuary for rare and endangered strepsirrhine primates.
According to a study by ''Forbes'', Duke ranks 11th among universities that have produced billionaires and 1st among universities in the South.
In 2013, construction projects included transforming buildings like Gross Hall and Baldwin Auditorium, plus new construction such as the Events Pavilion.
There are different categories of tenting based on the length of time and number of people who must be in the tent.
Construction projects have updated both the freshmen-populated Georgian-style East Campus and the main Gothic-style West Campus, as well as the adjacent Medical Center over the past five years.
The Blue Devils have produced 11 College Football Hall of Famers, which is tied for the 2nd most in the ACC.
In the late 1990s, a new keg policy was put into effect that requires all student groups to purchase kegs through Duke Dining Services.
Main West Campus, with Duke Chapel at its center, contains the majority of residential quads to the south, while the main academic quad, library, and Medical Center are to the north.
Wade's Blue Devils lost another Rose Bowl to Oregon State in 1942, this one held at Duke's home stadium due to the attack on Pearl Harbor, which resulted in the fear that a large gathering on the West Coast might be in range of Japanese aircraft carriers.
'''Duke University''' is a private research university located in Durham, North Carolina, United States.
In the past twenty years, ''U.S.
Duke students have created more than 30 service organizations in Durham and the surrounding area.
For the class of 2015, 90% of enrolled students ranked in the top 10% of their high school classes; 97% ranked in the top quarter.
While the football team has struggled at times on the field, the graduation rate of its players is consistently among the highest among Division I FBS schools.
1-ranked Florida State in the conference championship game.
In 2013, the team posted a school record 10 wins including wins over #14 Virginia Tech and #23 Miami.
On the business front, the current or recent President, CEO, or Chairman of each of the following Fortune 500 companies is a Duke alumnus: Apple (Tim Cook), BB&T (John A. Allison IV), Boston Scientific Corporation (Peter Nicholas), Chesapeake Energy (Aubrey McClendon), Cisco Systems (John Chambers), General Motors (Rick Wagoner), JPMorgan Chase (Steven Black), Medtronic (William A. Hawkins), Morgan Stanley (John J. Mack), Norfolk Southern (David R. Goode), Northwest Airlines (Gary L. Wilson), PepsiCo (Karl von der Heyden), Procter & Gamble (David S. Taylor), Pfizer (Edmund T. Pratt, Jr.), The Bank of New York Mellon (Gerald Hassell), and Wachovia (Robert K. Steel).
Freshmen can elect to participate in the FOCUS Program, which allows students to engage in an interdisciplinary exploration of a specific topic in a small group setting.
The graduate program for the Pratt School of Engineering was ranked 30th in the U.S. by ''U.S.
Senator and Secretary of Transportation Elizabeth Dole, 33rd President of Chile Ricardo Lagos, former U.S. Secretary of Commerce Juanita M. Kreps, congressman and three-time presidential candidate Ron Paul, U.S. Secretary of Veterans Affairs and former Chief of Staff of the United States Army Eric Shinseki, and the first United States Chief Performance Officer Jeffrey Zients and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Martin Dempsey are among the most notable alumni with involvement in politics and government.
Their successes include becoming the only team to win five national championships since the NCAA Tournament field was expanded to 64 teams in 1985, 11 Final Fours in the past 25 years, and eight of nine ACC tournament championships from 1999 to 2006.
The patient care facility consolidates nearly all of Duke's outpatient clinical care services.
Central Campus has several recreation and social facilities such as basketball courts, a sand volleyball court, a turf field, barbecue grills and picnic shelters, a general gathering building called "Devil's Den", a restaurant known as "Devil's Bistro", a convenience store called Uncle Harry's, and the Mill Village.
Blomquist Garden of Native Plants, devoted to flora of the Southeastern United States; the W.L.
News & World Report'' as "most selective"; Duke received over 28,000 applications for the Class of 2020, and admitted 10.4% of applicants.
There are five miles (8&nbsp;km) of allées and paths throughout the gardens.
Duke's research expenditures in the 2014 fiscal year were $1.037 billion, the seventh largest in the nation.
Duke's teams have won 16 NCAA team national championships—the women's golf team has won six (1999, 2002, 2005, 2006, 2007 and 2014), the men's basketball team has won five (1991, 1992, 2001, 2010, and 2015), the men's lacrosse team has won three (2010, 2013, and 2014), and the men's soccer (1986) and women's tennis (2009) teams have won one each.
There are 75 Duke clubs in the U.S. and 38 such international clubs.
Eight National Pan-Hellenic Council (historically African American) fraternities and sororities also hold chapters at Duke.
Interdisciplinary work was emphasized, as was recruiting minority faculty and students.
His teams also won World Championship gold in 2010 and 2014.
Duke has also won 18 total conference championships (7 ACC, 9 Southern Conference, and 1 Big Five Conference).
In 2016, Forbes ranked Duke sixth on its list of "Expensive Schools Worth Every Penny".
News & World Report''s "America's Best Graduate Schools 2017," Duke's medical school ranked tied for 8th in research and 8th in primary care.
Project CHANGE is a free weeklong program co-sponsored by the Kenan Institute for Ethics and the Duke Women's Center with the focus on ethical leadership and social change in the Durham community; students are challenged in a variety of ways and work closely with local non-profits.
Fraternity chapters and SLGs frequently host social events in their residential sections, which are often open to non-members.
Historically, Duke's major rival has been the Tar Heels of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, especially in basketball.
As a result, off-campus parties at rented houses became more frequent in subsequent years as a way to avoid Duke policies.
Duke also has Selective Living Groups, or SLGs, on campus for students seeking informal residential communities often built around themes.
About 50 percent of all Duke students receive some form of financial aid, which includes need-based aid, athletic aid, and merit aid.
In 1986 the men's soccer team captured Duke's first National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) championship, and the men's basketball team followed shortly thereafter with championships in 1991 and 1992, then again in 2001, 2010, and 2015.
Completed projects since 2002 include major additions to the business, law, nursing, and divinity schools, a new library, the Nasher Museum of Art, a football training facility, two residential buildings, an engineering complex, a public policy building, an eye institute, two genetic research buildings, a student plaza, the French Family Science Center, and two new medical-research buildings.
Duke's graduate level specialties that are ranked among the top ten in the nation include areas in the following departments: biological sciences, medicine, nursing, engineering, law, business, English, history, physics, statistics, public affairs, physician assistant (ranked #1), clinical psychology, political science, and sociology.
In 2015, NPR ranked Duke first on its list of "schools that make financial sense".
Duke started in 1838 as Brown's Schoolhouse, a private subscription school founded in Randolph County in the present-day town of Trinity.
In a corporate study carried out by ''The New York Times'', Duke's graduates were shown to be among the most valued in the world, and ''Forbes'' magazine ranked Duke 7th in the world on its list of 'power factories' in 2012.
The program's home facility is historic Cameron Indoor Stadium, considered one of the top venues in the nation.
The academy was renamed Normal College in 1851 and then Trinity College in 1859 because of support from the Methodist Church.
