Other ''palt'' variants are ''leverpalt'', with minced liver added to the dough, and ''njurpalt'', with diced kidney mixed into the bacon filling.
Extended family members may gather together to make dumplings, and it is also eaten for farewell to family members or friends.
Particularly, in Northern China, people generally eat dumpling on the Winter Solstice (22 December of each year), a custom signifying a warm winter.
Other types of dumplings would be soup dumplings, commonly referred to as xiaolongbao (小籠包/小笼包).
Kathmandu Valley, a popular destination for momos, has with time developed its own essence for this food that differentiates it from its Tibetan counterpart.
Momo soup is a dish that has steamed momos immersed in a meat broth.
Manti are cooked in a multi-level steamer (''mantovarka'') and served topped with butter, yogurt, sour cream, or onion sauce.
When sweetened with dried fruit and spices, dumplings can be boiled in water to make a dessert.
They are a steamed sweet dumpling, sometimes made with plain flour and sometimes with the addition of dried fruits or other flavors.
Unfilled flour dumplings for use in soup are called ''klimp'' if the flour is wheat, but ''mjölpalt'' if the flour is barley or rye.
They are served hot and sprinkled with cinnamon sugar.
A variant of ''palt'' is ''blodpalt'', where pig, beef or reindeer blood is mixed into the dough.
Meal is completed on plate with grated quark, melted butter and powder sugar.
A similar dish exists in Belarus that is called ''klyocki'' (клёцкi).
Manti, samsa, chiburekki, and belyashi are all popular imported dumplings.
Fufu may be described as a dumpling although in actual sense, it is not.
They are usually made with an unleavened dough, but are often encountered leavened.
Chuchvara is a very small boiled dumpling typical of Uzbek and Tajik cuisine.
Momos can also be prepared by directly deep frying without steaming first.
These are small lumps cut from a thick flour and egg batter and dropped into boiling water, similar to the German Spätzle, Knöpfle, or Knödel.
Momos are usually served with a dipping sauce normally consisting of tomatoes and chillies as the base ingredient, from which numerous variations can be made.
Rolled dumplings are rolled thin and cut into small pieces for cooking, while dropped dumplings are formed into small balls.
The dough is flavoured with spice, cinnamon and nutmeg.
''Dushbara'' (Azerbaijan: Düşbərə) is an Azeri soup with tiny lamb-filled dumplings.
Names include ''potetball'', ''klubb'', ''kløbb'', ''raspeball'', ''komle'', ''kumle'', ''kompe'', ''kumpe'', ''kodla'', ''kudle'', ''klot'', ''kams'', ''ball'', ''baill'', ''komperdøse'', ''kumperdøse'', ''kompadøs'', ''ruter'', ''ruta'', ''raskekako'', ''risk'', ''klotremat'', ''krumme'' and ''kromme''.
In Brazil, there are pastéis, ''coxinhas'', and ''bolinhas de carne'' which are fried dumplings filled with chicken, pork or beef mixed with olives, onions and spices.
The only '''potato dumpling museum''' in the world, the Thüringer Kloßmuseum, is located in Germany, in the municipality of Heichelheim near Weimar.
The dough may be flavoured with herbs, or it may have cheese pressed into its centre.
In Czech cuisine dumplings have two main forms:
Three to four dango are often served on a skewer.
Fried dumplings can be made with or without sugar.
The ''wonton'' (雲呑/餛飩) is another kind of dumpling.
It is traditionally served warm with melted butter and lingonberry jam, although in some parts of southern Sweden the melted butter is replaced by half cream (a mix of milk and cream) or a warm milk sauce, and in parts of northern Sweden the butter is replaced by a warm milk sauce spiced with messmör.
Also, the fillings in pelmeni are usually raw, while the fillings of ''vareniki'' and ''pierogi'' are typically precooked.
When found in Stew food, the dumplings are steamed along with ground provision, salted meat, plantain and other ingredients which is served with gravy.
The size does not affect the taste but the thickness does.
As an alternative to simply baking them, these dumplings are surrounded by a sweet sauce in the baking dish, and may be basted during cooking.
These are mostly common outside Africa where they originate.
Popular meat fillings include ground meat (usually pork, but can instead be beef or chicken), shrimp, and even fish.
In Puerto Rico, dumplings are made of grated tubers such as yuca and malanga with added calabaza, unripe  bananas and plantains mixed with flour.
One of the varieties is called ''Šaltanosiai'', "Cold nosed ones", and is made with blueberry filling.
The traditional filling is meat, but the kind of meat and how it is processed varies.
The stuffed potatoes are usually accompanied by onion sauce consisting of sliced onions, lime juice, olive oil, salt, pepper and slices of fresh peppers.
All are made with flour, white or wheat, and the white-floured dumplings are often mixed with a bit of cornmeal.
The baked dumpling is popular in American cuisine.
Another type of Chinese dumpling is made with glutinous rice.
Boraki are served garnished with yogurt and chopped garlic.
''Khinkali'' () are Georgian dumplings usually filled with spiced meat.
Olive oil and annatto are usually added and help the mix from turning brown.
Also available are their related stuffed version called pirohy, usually filled with bryndza (''bryndzové pirohy''), quark cheese, potatoes, onions, cabbage, mushrooms, or meat.
Jiaozi, wonton and potstickers are all wrapped differently.
Tangyuan are eaten on the 15th day of Chinese New Year, or the Lantern Festival.
''Blodpalt'' also existed across the country originally, and has been found in iron age graves in Halland.
Gnocchi (, widely adopted in Argentina, , ) is a different kind of Italian dumpling.
In Norway, dumplings have a vast variety of names, as the dialects differ substantially.
Pasteles are popular in the Dominican Republic, Hawaii, Trinidad and lately seen in Cuban cuisine.
It is typically boiled in a light broth or soup and made with a meatier filling.
Halušky are a traditional variety of dumplings cooked in the Central and Eastern European cuisines (Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Serbia, Slovakia, and Ukraine).
and often taste better when refried.
Lithuanian dough dumplings are called koldūnai and virtiniai.
If dumplings are laid flatly on a pan, first steamed with a lid on and with a thin layer of water, then fried in oil after the water has been evaporated, they are called ''guotie'' (鍋貼/锅贴, sometimes called "potstickers"), as the Maillard reaction occurring on the bottom of the dumplings makes the skin crispy and brown.
Chuchvara can be served in a clear soup or on their own, with vinegar or sauce based on finely chopped greens, tomatoes and hot peppers.
These dumplings are a traditional part in Puerto Rican style pigeon pea soup.
Usually they are filled with meat or curd.
In Dalarna, where the dish is known as ''klabbe'', it is still made without potatoes and is never filled.
Another popular way of serving chuchvara is topped with suzma (strained qatiq) or with smetana (sour cream), Russian-style.
The flour clings to the milk and forms dumplings, which are then boiled in a mixture of milk and butter.
Dumplings can be made with eggs, milk, baking powder or even yeast, or just from flour and water.
A pot of boiling chicken or turkey broth is used to cook this dough.
The main distinction of ''boraki'' is that the minced meat is pre-fried, the boraki are formed as small cylinders with an open top, the cylinders are lightly boiled in broth and then fried.
Steamed dumplings are found throughout the region.
''Dango'' (団子) is a sweet dumpling made from rice flour, similar to mochi.
Chinese cuisine includes sweet dumplings.
It is common to eat these on the beach or after work with fruit smoothies, beer, or fruity alcoholic drinks known as batidas.
''Jiaozi'' are usually boiled, steamed or fried and continue to be a traditional dish eaten on Chinese New Year's Eve, the evening before Chinese New Year, and special family reunions.
The same dumplings are called ''jiaozi'' if they are just steamed.
These foods are often served with a variety of dishes like ackee and saltfish, kidneys, liver salt mackerel, etc.
When the potato is mixed with wheat flour, which is more common in southern Sweden, it is called ''kroppkaka''.
The ''jiaozi'' () is a common Chinese dumpling which generally consists of minced meat and finely chopped vegetables wrapped into a piece of dough skin.
Filling mixtures vary depending on personal tastes and region.
These sweet dumplings are made by wrapping fruit, frequently a whole tart apple, in pastry, then baking until the pastry is browned and the filling is tender.
Pierogi of Poland and varenyky of Ukraine, Russia and Belarus are ravioli-like crescent-shaped dumplings filled with savoury or sweet filling.
In some local recipes the potatoes are dehydrated, while in others there is a mixture of raw and boiled potatoes.
Thüringer Klöße are made from raw or boiled potatoes, or a mixture of both, and are often filled with croutons.
whereas in Northern China, jiaozi are more popular.
Several types of dumplings are popular in the United States.
In Nepal, steamed dumplings known as momos (or momo-cha) are a popular snack, often eaten as a full meal as well.
Pierogi are often fried after boiling.
Meat dumplings (called Klopse or Klöpse in North-Eastern Germany, Knöpfle and Nocken in Southern Germany) contain meat or liver.
In Barbados, dumplings differ from those in other Caribbean islands in that they are slightly sweetened.
Fufu is made by pounding boiled cassava (common in Ghana) or yam (common in Nigeria) in a wooden mortar with a wooden pestle.
Similar to Indonesia, the Chinese have brought dumplings to the Philippines since Pre-colonial times.
It can be either  ''houskový'' (bread) or ''bramborový'' (potato) knödel.
Momos are one of the most items on the menus of Nepalese restaurants not only in Nepal but also around the world with significant Nepali populations like India, USA, UK, Australia and some Middle Eastern and European countries.
Balls of this dough are dropped into a bubbling pot of stew or soup, or into a casserole.
However, sometimes fried bacon is served on the side of unfilled ''palt'' or ''kams'', which then is known as ''flatpalt'' or ''flatkams'', as the lack of filling makes it flatter.
It is also called Siomai which is made from ground pork, beef, shrimp, among others, combined with extenders like green peas, carrots and the like which is then wrapped in wonton wrappers.
Momos can be both fried and steamed.
These dumplings are boiled in loaf shape and then cut in slices and are part of many Czech national dishes such as Vepřo knedlo zelo or Svíčková na smetaně.
They typically consist of a spiced meat mixture, usually lamb or ground beef, with greens and onions, put in a dough wrapper, either boiled or steamed.
Similar in appearance to Italian ravioli, Maultaschen are usually larger, however, each Maultasche being about 8–12&nbsp;cm (3-5&nbsp;inches) across.
Tangyuan are smaller dumplings made with glutinous rice flour and filled with sweet sesame, peanut, red bean paste.
Žlikrofi are made by a traditional recipe from the 19th century, but the source of the recipe is unknown due to lack of historical sources.
Tangyuan may also be served without a filling.
"Little ears", variously called ''uszka'' in Poland, ''ushki'' (ушки) in Russia, ''vushka'' (вушка) in Ukraine, and ''vushki'' (вушкі) in Belarus, are folded ring-shaped dumplings similar in shape to Italian tortellini or Jewish kreplach.
Banku and kenkey fit the definition of a dumpling in that they are starchy balls of dough that are steamed.
The dish may be served as a starter or a side dish to meat based dishes.
South Africa has another kind of dumpling known as melkkos.
They are often served with a syrup flavored with cinnamon or a custard sauce.
The thickness and the size of the dumplings is at the cook's discretion.
Once the dumplings are crispy on the outside, they are then boiled with added ingredients.
An important difference between pelmeni, varenyky, and pierogi is the thickness of the dough shell—in pelmeni this is as thin as possible, and the proportion of filling to dough is usually higher.
Tortilla dumplings are made by adding tortillas and fillings to a boiling pot of stock.
The dough can be based on bread, flour, or potatoes, and may be filled with fish, meat, sweets, or vegetables.
The dumplings may either be of the flour or cornmeal variety.
The masa is then mixed with milk and annatto oil, and they are stuffed with stewed pork, chick peas, olives, capers and raisins.
It is made by steaming cassava and plantain/cocoyam flour into thick starchy balls.
In Blekinge and parts of the island of Öland, it is traditionally made from grated raw potato, which makes it greyish in colour, while on Gotland and in Småland it is predominantly made from mashed boiled potato, and is thus whiter in colour.
In Romania, the dumplings are with plums inside and are called galusca cu prune, while in in Hungary, they are called ''nokedli''.
When mixed with sugar, cornmeal and baking powder and fried, this variation is called festival.
''Boraki'' () are a kind of Armenian fried dumplings.
This delicious variation goes well when served with fried fish, or any other traditional Jamaican home food.
Made of unleavened dough squares filled with meat, it is similar to the Russian pelmeni and the Chinese wonton, but in observance of the Islamic dietary rules, the meat filling is without pork.
These dumplings are popular throughout Central Asia, including Afghanistan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, Xinjiang region of China and India.
The ''kroppkaka'' is usually filled with diced, smoked bacon and chopped, raw onion, and is often spiced with allspice.
The word ''pelmeni'' is derived from ''pel'n'an''' (пельнянь) – literally "ear bread" in the native Finno-Ugric Komi, Udmurt, and Mansi languages.
One theory suggests pelmeni, or stuffed boiled dumplings in general, originated in Siberia, possibly a simplified adaptation of the Chinese Wonton (in some dialect is called Bāomiàn "包面").
The most well-known ''palt'' variant is the Pitepalt from Piteå.
''Palt'' and ''kams'' is usually filled with diced, unsmoked bacon.
Russian pelmeni are smaller than varenyky and made only of minced meat with addition of onions and spices.
A purely fried white flour dumpling (also known as a "Johnny Cake") is golden brown and looks a lot like buñuelos, often substituting the boiled dumpling, but it is mostly consumed as part of breakfast.
Mushrooms, potatoes, or cheese may be used in place of meat.
The towns of Dusheti, Pasanauri and Mtskheta are particularly famous for their khinkali.
It contains a mixture of ground lamb (or beef) spiced with black pepper, enclosed in a dough wrapper.
Mushrooms, potatoes, or cheese may be used in place of meat.
Wontons are more popular in Southern China (Shanghai, Guangdong, Hong Kong etc.)
In some countries, yuca purée is used as the starch component of these Latin American dumplings.
Pelmeni are never served with a sweet filling, which distinguishes them from varenyky and pierogi, which sometimes are.
It is either steamed or fried and is usually dipped in soy sauce with calamansi juice.
''Bryndzové halušky'', considered the Slovak national dish, are small potato dumplings without a filling, served with salty sheep's cheese on top.
Many different fillings, both meat based and vegetarian are common.
They are formed from fermented cornmeal dough.
The khinkali is typically consumed first by sucking the juices while taking the first bite, in order to prevent the dumpling from bursting.
Dumplings are often added with Bajan soup where they are boiled.
Glutinous rice dumplings are traditionally eaten during the Duanwu Festival.
''Mataz'' are dumplings in Circassian and some other Caucasian cuisines, closely related to manti.
Žlikrofi were the first Slovenian food to be classified as a Traditional speciality guaranteed dish.
For Jamaican dumplings, however, sugar and butter is optional as there are various ways to make it in Jamaica.
They are then placed on a banana leaf, tied and then boiled.
It is unclear when pelmeni entered the cuisines of the indigenous Siberian people and when they first appeared in Russian cuisine.
They are often served with plenty of sour cream.
Plantain or cocoyam may be added.
Popular flavours for apple dumplings include brown sugar, caramel, or cinnamon sauces.
''Gyōza'' (ギョーザ/餃子) is the Japanese version of the Chinese ''jiaozi''.
The dumplings are formed into small balls and are first cooked in olive oil before boiling.
After stuffing a ball is formed, rolled over flour and deep fried in hot oil.
The dish is native to Tibet and was brought to Nepal by the Newar traders of Kathmandu who were trading goods with Tibet before the 1930s.
Shlishkes or "Krumplinudli" are small boiled potato dumplings made from the same potato dough as the sweet plum dumplings, also rolled in hot buttered bread crumbs.
Spoonfuls or bite-sized, hand-torn pieces of dough are cooked in boiling chicken broth along with a variety of vegetables to make the dish chicken and dumplings, which is served as a thick soup or stew.
They may be cooked by boiling, frying, simmering, or steaming.
Originally, ''palt'' was eaten all over Sweden and was made from barley or rye flour alone, but during the 19th century, when potato was added and wheat became more common and inexpensive, the northern recipes retained the original name, while ''kroppkaka'', which had always been the name used on Öland for the flour dumpling, became the name for the variant in southern Sweden.
The word ''gnocchi'' literally means "lumps", and they are rolled and shaped from a mixture of egg with potato, semolina, flour, or ricotta cheese (with or without spinach).
They are stuffed with meat or mushrooms and traditionally served in borshch or clear soup.
In Sweden, potato dumplings of originally German origin have several regional names, mainly depending on the type of flour used.
Dumplings come in three forms in Jamaica, fried, boiled, and roasted.
They are made from dough with potato filling and have a characteristic form of a hat.
Chicken and dumplings is a popular comfort food in the Midwestern and Southern U.S., where dumplings are often used as part of the regionally popular Burgoo stew.
'''Dumpling''' is a broad classification for a dish that consists of small pieces of dough (made from a variety of starch sources), often wrapped around a filling (as in ravioli or wontons).
Dumplings may be savoury or sweet and can be eaten by themselves, with gravy or sauce, or in soups or stews.
The same dumplings are also used to create a similar dish, ''strapačky''.
These are flour dumplings, the most common dumplings, thin or thick, made with eggs and semolina flour, boiled in water.
The stuffing usually consists of sautéed meat (could be beef, pork or chicken), onions and garlic.
Manti (also ''manty'' or ''mantu'') is a steamed dumpling in Central Asian and Chinese Islamic cuisine.
herbs (usually coriander), onions, and garlic.
Dumplings are either pan fried using a simple recipe including all-purpose flour, water, and salt made into a thick dough before frying on a pan until golden brown, or boiled in a soup.
They are similar to the Chinese jiaozi or the Central Asian manti.
The dumplings can also be used to make a soup called mandu guk (soup)(만둣국).
The lumps are boiled in water and served with melted butter, grated cheese, or other pasta sauces.
The filled ''kroppkaka'', ''palt'' or ''kams'' ball - as well as the flatter, unfilled ''flatpalt'', ''flatkams'' and ''klabbe'' - is dropped into boiling salted water and cooked until it floats.
The main difference between pelmeni and momos is their size—a typical pelmeni is about  in diameter, whereas momos are often at least twice that size.
* Knödel is called in Czech ''knedlík'' and in Slovakia ''knedlička''.
Korean dumplings are called "mandu" (만두).
They are unrelated to the pasta with which they are sometimes compared as it is a savoury main dish.
Popular mixtures include pork with Chinese cabbage, pork with garlic chives, pork and shrimp with vegetables, pork with spring onion, garlic chives with scrambled eggs.
Cotswold dumplings call for the addition of breadcrumbs and cheese, and the balls of dough may be rolled in breadcrumbs and fried, rather than cooked in a soup or stew.
There are several other versions of fufu in Africa and the Caribbean.
See also: dim sum (點心) for descriptions of several other kinds of dumplings such as har gow, fun guo, siew mai, Cha siu bao, lo mai gai and crystal dumplings.
Boiled dumplings are made from flour to form a dough.
Depending on local tradition, dumplings can be sided with syrup, swede and often meat if the dumplings does not have meat filling.
The fried version is usually served with breakfast codfish as a side.
The origin of pasteles leads back to Natives on the island of Borikén.
A refried dumpling is an already boiled dumpling left over from previous cooking that is fried, which gives it a slightly crispy outer layer and a tender middle.
"Papas Rellenas" or stuffed potatoes consist of a handful of mashed potatoes (without the milk and butter) flattened in the palm of the hand and stuffed with a savoury combination of ingredients.
Mandu can be steamed, fried, or boiled.
''Savoury'' dumplings made from balls of dough are part of traditional British and Irish cuisine.
''Klabbe'' is instead served with diced bacon on the side.
Pelmeni should be juicy inside.
Traditionally dumplings are made from twice the weight of self raising flour to suet, bound together by cold water to form a dough and seasoned with salt and pepper.
The skin wrapping for wontons is different—thinner and less elastic—than that used for jiaozi .
Dango is eaten year-round, but the different varieties are traditionally eaten in given seasons.
