In-season durians can be found in mainstream Japanese supermarkets, while in the West they are sold mainly by Asian markets.
The edible flesh emits a distinctive odour that is strong and penetrating even when the husk is intact.
The flesh can be consumed at various stages of ripeness, and it is used to flavour a wide variety of savoury and sweet edibles in Southeast Asian cuisines.
Novelist Anthony Burgess writes that eating durian is "like eating sweet raspberry blancmange in the lavatory".
Pregnant women or people with high blood pressure are traditionally advised not to consume durian.
It instructs the reader to boil the roots of ''Hibiscus rosa-sinensis'' with the roots of ''Durio zibethinus'', ''Nephelium longan'', ''Nephelium mutabile'' and ''Artocarpus integrifolia'', and drink the decoction or use it as a poultice.
According to research conducted in Malaysia in the 1970s, durians were pollinated almost exclusively by cave fruit bats (''Eonycteris spelaea''); however, a 1996 study indicated two species, ''D.
Among the varieties of ''D.
Sometimes the ash of the burned rind is added to special cakes.
In 100 grams, raw or fresh frozen durian provides 33% of the Daily Value (DV) of thiamin and moderate content of other B vitamins, vitamin C and the dietary mineral, manganese (15–24% DV, table).
However, the ideal stage of ripeness to be enjoyed varies from region to region in Southeast Asia and by species.
There are more than 100 registered cultivars since 1920's in Malaysia and up to 193 cultivar by 1992, and many superior cultivars have been identified through competitions held at the annual Malaysian Agriculture, Horticulture, and Agrotourism Show.
''Ikan brengkes tempoyak'' is fish cooked in a durian-based sauce, traditional in Sumatra.
dulcis'') has a deep caramel flavour with a turpentine odour while red-fleshed durian (''D.
The durian is somewhat similar in appearance to the jackfruit, an unrelated species.
Uncooked durian seeds are toxic due to cyclopropene fatty acids and should not be ingested.
File:Es Durian.jpg|A street side durian ice cream in Bogor
zibethinus'' are nearly always cut from the tree and allowed to ripen while waiting to be sold.
Regarded by many people in southeast Asia as the "king of fruits", the durian is distinctive for its large size, strong odour, and formidable thorn-covered husk.
In 1741, ''Herbarium Amboinense'' by the German botanist Georg Eberhard Rumphius was published, providing the most detailed and accurate account of durians for over a century.
Most cultivars have a common name and a code number starting with "D".
The edible portion of the fruit, known as the aril and usually referred to as the "flesh" or "pulp", only accounts for about 15–30% of the mass of the entire fruit.
While Wallace cautions that "the smell of the ripe fruit is certainly at first disagreeable", later descriptions by Westerners are more graphic.
File:Durianlog.JPG|Durian-flavoured Yule log
grandiflorus'' and ''D.
In its native southeastern Asia, the durian is an everyday food and portrayed in the local media in accordance with the cultural perception it has in the region.
''Pulut Durian'' or ''ketan durian'' is glutinous rice steamed with coconut milk and served with ripened durian.
Durian flowers are large and feathery with copious nectar, and give off a heavy, sour, and buttery odour.
The name "durian" is derived from the Malay-Indonesian languages word for duri or "spike", a reference to the numerous spike protuberances of the fruit, together with the noun-building suffix -an.
zibethinus'' was introduced into Ceylon by the Portuguese in the 16th century and was reintroduced many times later.
A recently popular variety is, Cat Mountain King or Musang King.
In Indonesia, Ir Sumeru Ashari, head of Durian Research Centre, Universitas Brawijaya reported spineless durian from Kasembon, Malang.
File:Keripik Durian Medan.JPG|''Keripik durian'' (durian chips)
They used to be grown with mixed results from seeds of trees bearing superior quality fruit, but now are propagated by layering, marcotting, or more commonly, by grafting, including bud, veneer, wedge, whip or U-grafting onto seedlings of randomly selected rootstocks.
zibethinus'' and six ''Durio'' species have been subsequently introduced into Australia.
graveolens'') emits a fragrance of roasted almonds.
Malaysia and Indonesia follow, both producing about 265,000 tonnes each.
dulcis'', represent rich genetic diversity.
Dried durian flesh can be made into kripik durian (durian chips).
In Thailand, durian is often eaten fresh with sweet sticky rice, and blocks of durian paste are sold in the markets, though much of the paste is adulterated with pumpkin.
Chef Andrew Zimmern compares the taste to "completely rotten, mushy onions".
The flowers are produced in three to thirty clusters together on large branches and directly on the trunk with each flower having a calyx (sepals) and five (rarely four or six) petals.
Some species grow so tall that they can only be collected once they have fallen to the ground, whereas most cultivars of ''D.
These three genera together form a clade that is characterized by highly modified (mono- and polythecate, as opposed to bithecate) anthers.
For example, in Singapore, the strong demand for high quality cultivars such as the D24(''Sultan''), and Musang King (''Mao Shan Wang'') has resulted in typical retail prices of between S$8 to S$15 (US$5 to US$10) per kilogram of whole fruit.
The centre of ecological diversity for durians is the island of Borneo, where the fruit of the edible species of ''Durio'' including ''D.
''Es durian'' (durian ice cream) is a popular dessert in Indonesia, sold at street side stall in Indonesian cities, especially in Java.
The durian symbolised the subjective nature of ugliness and beauty in Hong Kong director Fruit Chan's 2000 film ''Durian Durian'' (榴槤飄飄, ''lau lin piu piu''), and was a nickname for the reckless but lovable protagonist of the eponymous Singaporean TV comedy ''Durian King'' played by Adrian Pang.
There are 30 recognised ''Durio'' species, at least nine of which produce edible fruit, and over 300 named varieties in Thailand.
Prices of durians are relatively high as compared with other fruits.
Developmental or genetic differences in olfactory perception and mapping within the brain (for e.g.
The leaves are evergreen, elliptic to oblong and 10–18 centimetres (4–7&nbsp;in) long.
The name ''durian'' comes from the Malay word ''duri'' (thorn) together with the suffix -''an'' (for building a noun in Malay).
In Malaysia, a decoction of the leaves and roots used to be prescribed as an antipyretic.
''Durio sensu lato'' has 30 recognised species.
In the Philippines, the centre of durian production is the Davao Region.
In the species name, ''zibethinus'' refers to the Indian civet, ''Viverra zibetha''.
Red-fleshed durian is traditionally added to ''sayur'', an Indonesian soup made from freshwater fish.
Anthony Bourdain, a lover of durian, relates his encounter with the fruit thus: "Its taste can only be described as...indescribable, something you will either love or despise.
The usual advice for a durian consumer choosing a whole fruit in the market is to examine the quality of the stem or stalk which loses moisture as it ages: a big, solid stem is a sign of freshness.
Over thirty clones of ''D.
Each cultivar has a distinct taste and odour.
An alternative method is to eat the durian in accompaniment with mangosteen, which is considered to have cooling properties.
Kan Yao is somewhat less common, but prized for its longer window of time when it is both sweet and odorless at the same time.
Mon thong is the most commercially sought after for its thick, full-bodied creamy and mild sweet tasting flesh with relatively moderate smell emitted and smaller seeds, while Chanee is the best in terms of its resistance to infection by ''Phytophthora palmivora''.
According to ''Larousse Gastronomique'', the durian fruit is ready to eat when its husk begins to crack.
dulcis'') exemplifying the primitive fruit of flowering plants.
Animals such as Sumatran elephants and tigers are known to consume durians.
Malaysians make both sugared and salted preserves from durian.
Likewise, the oddly shaped Esplanade building in Singapore is often called "The Durian" by locals, and "The Big Durian" is the nickname of Jakarta, Indonesia.
''Durio zibethinus'' is the only species available in the international market: other species are sold only in their local regions.
zibethinus'', Thai varieties are sweeter in flavour and less odorous than Malay ones.
He cited one traveller from 1599: "it is of such an excellent taste that it surpasses in flavour all other fruits of the world, according to those who have tasted it."
testudinarum'' is sold in local markets.
Unripe durians may be cooked as a vegetable, except in the Philippines, where all uses are sweet rather than savoury.
testudinarum'' and ''D.
By 2007, Songpol Somsri, a Thai government scientist, had crossbred more than ninety varieties of durian to create Chantaburi No.&nbsp;1, a cultivar without the characteristic odour.
A typical durian tree can bear fruit after four or five years.
He cites another writer: "To those not used to it, it seems at first to smell like rotten onions, but immediately after they have tasted it they prefer it to all other food.
Durian trees are large, growing to 25–50 metres (80–164&nbsp;ft) in height depending on the species.
Tempoyak can be eaten either cooked or uncooked, is normally eaten with rice, and can also be used for making curry.
The durian is native to Brunei, Indonesia and Malaysia.
Among all the cultivars in Thailand, five are currently in large-scale commercial cultivation: Chanee, Mon Thong, Kan Yao, Ruang, and Kradum.
The fruit can grow as large as  long and  in diameter, and it typically weighs one to three&nbsp;kilograms (2 to 7&nbsp;lb).
Despite having tried many foods that are arguably more eccentric, Andrew Zimmern, host of Bizarre Foods, was unable to finish a durian upon sampling it, due to his intolerance of its strong taste.
The authors of these studies hypothesize that monothecate anthers have most likely evolved convergently in Durioneae and in the Malvatheca clade (comprising Malvaceae s.l.
In Java, the seeds are sliced thin and cooked with sugar as a confection.
Wearing a hardhat is recommended when collecting the fruit.
The various preferences regarding ripeness among consumers make it hard to issue general statements about choosing a "good" durian.
One of the names Thailand contributed to the list of storm names for Western North Pacific tropical cyclones was 'Durian', which was retired after the second storm of this name in 2006.
There is some debate as to whether the durian is native to the Philippines, particularly the Davao region in the island of Mindanao, or was introduced.
oxleyanus'', and ''D.
A durian falling on a person's head can cause serious injuries because it is heavy, armed with sharp thorns, and can fall from a significant height.
The fruit can grow up to  long and  in diameter, and typically weighs one to three kilograms (2 to 7&nbsp;lb).
''Durio sensu stricto'' comprises 24 of these species.
The earliest known European reference to the durian is the record of Niccolò Da Conti, who travelled to southeastern Asia in the 15th century.
In Vietnam, the same process has been achieved through competitions held by the Southern Fruit Research Institute.
File:Tempoyak Ikan Patin 3.JPG|''Tempoyak ikan patin'', catfish in tempoyak curry, Palembang
On 22 May 2012, two other cultivars from Thailand that also lack the usual odour, Long Laplae and Lin Laplae, were presented to the public by Yothin Samutkhiri, governor of Uttaradit province from where these cultivars were developed locally, while he announced the dates for the yearly durian fair of Laplae District, and the name giver to both cultivars.
The durian, native to Southeast Asia,  has been known to the Western world for about 600 years.
The persistence of its odour, which may linger for several days, has led to the fruit's banishment from certain hotels and public transportation in Southeast Asia.
''Durio s.s.'' and ''Boschia'' have indistinguishable vegetative characteristics and many shared floral characteristics.
A saying in Indonesian, ''ketiban durian runtuh'', which translates to "getting a durian avalanche", is the equivalent of the English phrase "windfall gain".
File:Durian Keju Bollen Opened.JPG|''Durian Keju Bollen'', a pastry filled with cheese and durian cream
The leaf juice is applied on the head of a fever patient.
Among the thirty known species of ''Durio'', nine of them have been identified as producing edible fruits: ''D.
Alfred Russel Wallace writes that death rarely ensues from it, because the copious effusion of blood prevents the inflammation which might otherwise take place.
In Malaysia and Singapore, most consumers prefer the fruit to be as ripe and pungent in aroma as possible and may even risk allowing the fruit to continue ripening after its husk has already cracked open.
File:Durian_cake.jpg|Durian cake made of durian-flavoured ''dodol''
With an average weight of about , a durian fruit would therefore cost about S$12 to S$22 (US$8 to US$15).
Some people regard the durian as having a pleasantly sweet fragrance; others find the aroma overpowering and revolting.
The durian seeds, which are the size of chestnuts, can be eaten whether they are boiled, roasted or fried in coconut oil, with a texture that is similar to taro or yam, but stickier.
Other comparisons have been made with the civet, sewage, stale vomit, skunk spray and used surgical swabs.
Different cultivars may be distinguished to some extent by variations in the fruit shape, such as the shape of the spines.
Being a fruit much loved by a variety of wild beasts, the durian sometimes signifies the long-forgotten animalistic aspect of humans, as in the legend of Orang Mawas, the Malaysian version of Bigfoot, and Orang Pendek, its Sumatran version, both of which have been claimed to feast on durians.
Inside there are five things like elongated oranges, and resembling thick butter, with a combination of flavours."
The nectar and pollen of the durian flower that honeybees collect is an important honey source, but the characteristics of the honey are unknown.
Travel and food writer Richard Sterling says:
Although the durian is not native to Thailand, the country is currently one of the major exporters of durians, growing 781,000 tonnes of the world's total harvest of 1,400,000 tonnes in 1999, 111,000 tonnes of which it exported to Taiwan, Hong Kong, Malaysia, Singapore and Canada.
The '''durian''' () is the fruit of several tree species belonging to the genus '''''Durio'''''.
During the early stages of its taxonomical study, there was some confusion between durian and the soursop (''Annona muricata''), for both of these species had thorny green fruit.
The warnings against the supposed lecherous quality of this fruit soon spread to the West – the Swedenborgian philosopher Herman Vetterling commented on so-called "erotic properties" of the durian in the early 20th century.
Strong nylon or woven rope nettings are often strung between durian trees in orchards, serving a threefold purpose: the nets aid in the collection of the mature fruits, deter ground-level scavengers, and most importantly, prevent the durians from falling onto people.
Of this, Malaysia exported 35,000 tonnes in 1999.
Some people in southern Thailand prefer their durians relatively young when the clusters of fruit within the shell are still crisp in texture and mild in flavour.
anterior piriform cortex to the orbitofrontal cortex) could possibly explain why some individuals are unable to differentiate these smells and find this fruit noxious whereas others find it extremely pleasant and appealing.
These features are typical of flowers pollinated by certain species of bats that eat nectar and pollen.
The durian is commonly known as the "King of the Fruits", a label that can be attributed to its formidable look and overpowering odour.
There is disagreement regarding whether this name, bestowed by Linnaeus, refers to civets being so fond of the durian that the fruit was used as bait to entrap them, or to the durian smelling like the civet.
Durian consumers express preferences for specific cultivars, which fetch higher prices in the market.
Durio is often included in Bombacaceae because of the presence of monothecate anthers, as opposed to the bithecate anthers common to the rest of the mallows (and angiosperms, in general).
There are hundreds of durian cultivars; many consumers express preferences for specific cultivars, which fetch higher prices in the market.
These species are commonly distributed in Brunei, and together with other species like ''D.
While some of these animals eat the fruit and dispose of the seed under the parent plant, others swallow the seed with the fruit and then transport it some distance before excreting, with the seed being dispersed as a result.
A saying in Indonesian, ''durian jatuh sarung naik'', meaning "the durian falls and the sarong comes up", refers to this belief.
kutejensis'', was pollinated by giant honey bees and birds as well as bats.
A common saying is that a durian has eyes and can see where it is falling because the fruit allegedly never falls during daylight hours when people may be hurt.
In ''My Tropic Isle'', Australian author and naturalist Edmund James Banfield tells how, in the early 20th century, a friend in Singapore sent him a durian seed, which he planted and cared for on his tropical island off the north coast of Queensland.
It has been planted in the Americas but confined to botanical gardens.
Likewise, fellow chef Jamie Oliver has also expressed admiration for the fruit on his first sampling.
Durians from different species or clones can have significantly different aromas; for example, red durian (''D.
The Javanese believe durian to have aphrodisiac qualities, and impose a set of rules on what may or may not be consumed with it or shortly thereafter.
File:Tempoyak.jpg|''Tempoyak'', made from fermented durian
Over the centuries, numerous durian cultivars, propagated by vegetative clones, have arisen in southeast Asia.
Popular cultivars in Malaysia and Singapore (Singapore imports most of its durians from Malaysia hence the varieties are similar although there may be slight variation in the names) include "D24" which is a popular variety known for its bitter sweet taste; "XO" which has a pale color, thick flesh with a tinge of alcoholic fermentation; "Chook Kiok" (Cantonese meaning: bamboo leg) which has a distinctive yellowish core in the inner stem and "Musang King" (Musang is the Malay word for civet cat) which is usually the priciest of all cultivars.
China is the major importer, purchasing 65,000 tonnes in 1999, followed by Singapore with 40,000 tonnes and Taiwan with 5,000 tonnes.
His theory was that endozoochory (the enticement of animals to transport seeds in their stomach) arose before any other method of seed dispersal, and that primitive ancestors of ''Durio'' species were the earliest practitioners of that dispersal method, in particular red durian (''D.
Reportedly, unscrupulous merchants wrap, paint, or remove the stalks altogether.
The 6 species included in ''Durio s.l.''
kutejensis'' and ''D.
Young leaves and shoots of the durian are occasionally cooked as greens.
Today Bollen durian is also available, it is pastry filled with durian.
A naturally spineless variety of durian growing wild in Davao, Philippines, was discovered in the 1960s; fruits borne from these seeds also lacked spines.
In the 18th century, Johann Anton Weinmann considered the durian to belong to Castaneae as its fruit was similar to the horse chestnut.
Translated from the Latin in which Poggio Bracciolini recorded Da Conti's travels: "They people of Sumatra have a green fruit which they call durian, as big as a watermelon.
Chantaburi in Thailand each year holds the World Durian Festival in early May.
Wallace described himself as being at first reluctant to try it because of the aroma, "but in Borneo I found a ripe fruit on the ground, and, eating it out of doors, I at once became a confirmed Durian eater."
Durian fruit is used to flavour a wide variety of sweet edibles such as traditional Malay candy, ''ice kacang'', ''dodol'', ''lempuk'', rose biscuits, ice cream, milkshakes, mooncakes, Yule logs, and cappuccino.
In this state, the flesh becomes richly creamy, slightly alcoholic, the aroma pronounced and the flavour highly complex.
Another hybrid, Chantaburi No.
In Malaysia, a spinesless durian clone D172 is registered by Agriculture Department on 17 June 1989.
File:Durian Pancake.jpg|Durian pancake
Raw durian is composed of 65% water, 27% carbohydrates including 4% dietary fiber, 5% fat and 1% protein (table).
File:Tart durian Pontianak.JPG|Durian cakes from Pontianak, West Kalimantan, Indonesia
The genus ''Durio'' has a complex taxonomy that has seen the subtraction and addition of many species since it was created by Rumphius.
The most complete description of the medicinal use of the durian as remedies for fevers is a Malay prescription, collected by Burkill and Haniff in 1930.
There are many species for which the fruit has never been collected or properly examined, however, so other species with edible fruit may exist.
Southeast Asian traditional beliefs, as well as traditional Chinese medicine, consider the durian fruit to have warming properties liable to cause excessive sweating.
The first seedlings were sent from the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, to Auguste Saint-Arroman of Dominica in 1884.
A common local belief is that the durian is harmful when eaten with coffee or alcoholic beverages.
The natives give it honourable titles, exalt it, and make verses on it."
People in South East Asia with frequent exposures to durian are able to easily distinguish its sweet-like ketones and esters scent from rotten or putrescine odours which are from volatile amines and fatty acids.
are now considered by some to comprise their own genus, ''Boschia.''
grandiflorus'', ''D.
The petals of durian flowers are eaten in the North Sumatra province of Indonesia, while in the Moluccas islands the husk of the durian fruit is used as fuel to smoke fish.
...Your breath will smell as if you'd been French-kissing your dead grandmother."
The durian fruit can hang from any branch and matures roughly three months after pollination.
In 1981, J. R. Croft wrote in his ''Bombacaceae: In Handbooks of the Flora of Papua New Guinea'' that "a feeling of morbidity" often follows the consumption of alcohol too soon after eating durian.
The traditional method to counteract this is to pour water into the empty shell of the fruit after the pulp has been consumed and drink it.
The Kadayawan Festival is an annual celebration featuring the durian in Davao City.
Since the early 1990s, the domestic and international demand for durian in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) region has increased significantly, partly due to the increasing affluence of Asia.
However, in more recent circumscriptions of Durioneae, the tribe into which ''Durio'' and its sister taxa fall, fleshy arils and spiny fruits are derived within the clade.
The latter belief can be traced back at least to the 18th century when Rumphius stated that one should not drink alcohol after eating durians as it will cause indigestion and bad breath.
The most recent molecular evidence (on which the most recent, well-supported circumscription of Durioneae is based) therefore refutes Corner's Durian Theory.
In the same year, the United States imported 2,000 tonnes, mostly frozen, and the European Community imported 500 tonnes.
When durian is minced with salt, onions and vinegar, it is called ''boder''.
zibethinus'' exist in Thailand.
The nineteenth-century British naturalist Alfred Russel Wallace described its flesh as "a rich custard highly flavoured with almonds".
Since the bases of the scales develop into spines as the fruit matures, sometimes spineless durians are produced artificially by scraping scales off immature fruits.
The Portuguese physician Garcia de Orta described durians in ''Colóquios dos simples e drogas da India'' published in 1563.
File:Durian Gelato.JPG|Durian gelato in Singapore
Another cultivar is from Lombok, Nusa Tenggara Barat, Indonesia.
Some scientists have hypothesized that the development of monothecate anthers and larger flowers (compared to those of the remaining genera in Durioneae) in the clade consisting of ''Durio, Boschia'', and ''Cullenia'' was in conjunction with a transition from beetle pollination to vertebrate pollination.
It is also interesting to note the Malay name for the soursop is ''durian Belanda'', meaning ''Dutch durian''.
In southeastern Asia, the durian has been cultivated for centuries at the village level, probably since the late 18th century, and commercially since the mid-20th century.
In Palembang, ''Pangasius'' catfish can be either cooked as ''tempoyak ikan patin'' (fish in tempoyak curry) or as ''brengkes (pepes) tempoyak'', which is a steamed fermented durian paste in banana leaf container,
Another frequent piece of advice is to shake the fruit and listen for the sound of the seeds moving within, indicating the durian is very ripe and the pulp has dried out a bit.
However, the first studies to examine mallow phylogeny using molecular data found that the tribe Durioneae should actually be placed in the subfamily Helicteroideae of an expanded Malvaceae.
In 1929, J. D. Gimlette wrote in his ''Malay Poisons and Charm Cures'' that the durian fruit must not be eaten with brandy.
This particular variety should be consumed last since it tends to make other durians taste bland in comparison.
