A total of 112 fictional films are known to have been produced in the Dutch East Indies between 1926 and the colony's dissolution in 1949.
The majority of Dutchmen that repatriated to the Netherlands after and during the Indonesian revolution are Indo (Eurasian), native to the islands of the Dutch East Indies.
The original name ''Dutch Indies'' () was translated by the English as the ''Dutch East Indies'', to keep it distinct from the ''Dutch West Indies''.
Some of higher education institutions were also established.
This indirect rule did not disturb the peasantry and was cost-effective for the Dutch; in 1900, only 250 European and 1,500 indigenous civil servants, and 16,000 Dutch officers and men and 26,000 hired native troops, were required to rule 35 million colonial subjects.
A four and a half-year struggle followed as the Dutch tried to re-establish their colony; although Dutch forces re-occupied most of Indonesia's territory a guerilla struggle ensued, and the majority of Indonesians, and ultimately international opinion, favoured Indonesian independence.
Cakes and cookies also can trace their origin to Dutch influences; such as kue bolu (tart), pandan cake, lapis legit (spekkoek), spiku (lapis Surabaya), klappertaart (coconut tart), and kaasstengels (cheese cookies).
Komodo dragon was first described by Peter Ouwens in 1912, after an aeroplane crash accident in 1911 and rumours about living dinosaurs in Komodo Island in 1910.
Motivations included: the protection of areas already held; the intervention of Dutch officials ambitious for glory or promotion; and to establish Dutch claims throughout the archipelago to prevent intervention from other Western powers during the European push for colonial possessions.
Moreover, since the 18th century Dutch literature has a large number of established authors, such as Louis Couperus, the writer of "The Hidden Force", taking the colonial era as an important source of inspiration.
Dutch was not made the official language of the colony and was not widely used by the indigenous Indonesian population.
Separate prisons were built for juveniles (West Java) and for women.
In response to the communist uprising of 1926 the prison camp ''Boven-Digoel'' was established in New Guinea.
The traditions of the KNIL are maintained by the Regiment Van Heutsz of the modern Royal Netherlands Army and the dedicated ''Bronbeek Museum'', a former home for retired KNIL soldiers, exists in Arnhem to this day.
Leiden University has produced academics such as Colonial adviser Christiaan Snouck Hurgronje who specialised in native oriental (Indonesian) affairs, and it still has academics who specialise in Indonesian languages and cultures.
More an extravagant banquet than a dish, the Dutch colonials introduced the rice table not only so they could enjoy a wide array of dishes at a single setting but also to impress visitors with the exotic abundance of their colony.
The colonial social order was based on rigid racial and social structures with a Dutch elite living separate from but linked to their native subjects.
The resulting borders between British and Dutch possessions remain between Malaysia and Indonesia.
Some notable scientists that conducted most of their important research in the East Indies archipelago are Teijsmann, Junghuhn, Eijkman, Dubois and Wallace.
Universities such as the Royal Leiden University founded in the 16th century have developed into leading knowledge centres about Southeast Asian and Indonesian studies.
In 1901 the Dutch adopted what they called the Ethical Policy, under which the colonial government had a duty to further the welfare of the Indonesian people in health and education.
Other foreign orientals
The Koninklijke Paketvaart-Maatschappij shipping line supported the unification of the colonial economy and brought inter-island shipping through to Batavia, rather than through Singapore, thus focussing more economic activity on Java.
The early films were silent, with ''Karnadi Anemer Bangkong'' (''Karnadi the Frog Contractor''; 1930) generally considered the first talkie; later films would be in Dutch, Malay, or an indigenous language.
Despite two successful military campaigns in 1947 and 1948, Dutch efforts to re-establish their colony failed and the Netherlands recognised Indonesian sovereignty in December 1949.
The Dutch East Indies had two legal classes of citizens; European and indigenous.
The Cultivation System, however, brought much economic hardship to Javanese peasants, who suffered famine and epidemics in the 1840s.
During the Dutch East Indies era the Governor-General functioned as chief executive president of colonial government and served as commander-in-chief of the colonial (KNIL) army.
The Dutch East Indies produced most of the world's supply of quinine and pepper, over a third of its rubber, a quarter of its coconut products, and a fifth of its tea, sugar, coffee, and oil.
On 10 January 1942, during the Dutch East Indies Campaign, Japanese forces invaded the Dutch East Indies as part of the Pacific War.
The Dutch colonial families through their domestic servants and cooks were exposed to Indonesian cuisine, as the result they developed a taste for native tropical spices and dishes.
The ''Meester Cornelis'' prison in Batavia incarcerated the most unruly inmates.
This training was held in high esteem and helped re-socialise women once they were outside the correctional facility.
In ''Sawah Loento'' prison on Sumatra prisoners had to perform manual labour in the coal mines.
By 1930, there were more than 240,000 people with European legal status in the colony, making up less than 0.5% of the total population.
Dutch companies were also producing documentary films about the Indies to be shown in the Netherlands.
Although the top positions were held by the Japanese, the internment of all Dutch citizens meant that Indonesians filled many leadership and administrative positions.
Centuries before Europeans arrived, the Indonesian archipelago supported various states, including commercially oriented coastal trading states and inland agrarian states.
Fuelled by the Japanese ''Light of Asia'' war propaganda and the Indonesian National Awakening, a vast majority of the indigenous Dutch East Indies population first welcomed the Japanese as liberators from the colonial Dutch empire, but this sentiment quickly changed as the occupation turned out to be far more oppressive and ruinous than the Dutch colonial government.
Commodity prices recovered from the recession, leading to increased investment in the colony.
However, the island of Lombok came under Dutch control in 1894, and Batak resistance in northern Sumatra was quashed in 1895.
As the Dutch secured the islands they eliminated slavery, widow burning, head-hunting, cannibalism, piracy, and internecine wars.
Most Dutch literature was written by Dutch and Indo-European authors, however, in the first half of the 20th century under the Ethical Policy, indigenous Indonesian authors and intellectuals came to the Netherlands to study and work.
There were numerous wars and disturbances across the archipelago as various indigenous groups resisted efforts to establish a Dutch hegemony, which weakened Dutch control and tied up its military forces.
Political reform increased the autonomy of the local colonial administration, moving away from central control from the Netherlands, whilst power was also diverged from the central Batavia government to more localised governing units.
Until 1848 the Governor-General was directly appointed by the Dutch monarch, and in later years via the Crown and on advice of the Dutch metropolitan cabinet.
The largest stock of colonial era buildings are in the large cities of Java, such as Bandung, Jakarta, Semarang, and Surabaya.
In contrast to Dutch repression of Indonesian nationalism, the Japanese allowed indigenous leaders to forge links amongst the masses, and they trained and armed the younger generations.
Journalists and civil servants observed that the majority of the Indies population were no better off than under the previous regulated Cultivation System economy and tens of thousands starved.
The indigenous population was subject to their respective adat law and to indigenous regents and district courts, unless cases were escalated before Dutch judges.
The Netherlands formally recognised Indonesian sovereignty at the 1949 Dutch–Indonesian Round Table Conference with the exception of the Netherlands New Guinea (Western New Guinea), which was ceded to Indonesia in 1963 under the provisions of the New York Agreement.
The Council comprised 30 indigenous members, 25 European and 5 from Chinese and other populations, and was reconstituted every four years.
By 1950 Dutch engineers had built and upgraded a road network with 12,000&nbsp;km of asphalted surface, 41,000&nbsp;km of metalled road area and 16,000&nbsp;km of gravel surfaces.
Dutch commercial interests expanded off Java to the outer islands with increasingly more territory coming under direct Dutch control or dominance in the latter half of the 19th century.
The Dutch subjugated the Minangkabau of Sumatra in the Padri War (1821–38) and the Java War (1825–30) ended significant Javanese resistance.
The Gouvernement van Groote Oost was a gouvernement of the Dutch East Indies created in 1938.
The KNIL was a separate branch of the Royal Netherlands Army, commanded by the Governor-General and funded by the colonial budget.
Across the archipelago, hundreds of native languages are used, and Malay or Portuguese Creole, the existing languages of trade were adopted.
The rubber plantations and oil fields of the Dutch East Indies were considered crucial for the Japanese war effort.
Colonial homes were almost always the preserve of the wealthy Dutch, Indonesian and Chinese elites, however the styles were often rich and creative combinations of two cultures, so much so that the homes remain sought after into the 21st century.
A capital was established in Batavia (now Jakarta), which became the centre of the VOC's Asian trading network.
The KNIL hastily and inadequately attempted to transform into a modern military force able to protect the Dutch East Indies from Imperial Japanese invasion.
The Dutch introduced coffee, tea, cacao, tobacco and rubber and large expanses of Java became plantations cultivated by Javanese peasants, collected by Chinese intermediaries, and sold on overseas markets by European merchants.
Almost 75% of these Europeans were in fact native Eurasians known as Indo-Europeans.
The American visual anthropologist Karl G. Heider writes that all films from before 1950 are lost.
Until 1815 the Governor-General had the absolute right to ban, censor or restrict any publication in the colony.
Southwestern Sulawesi was occupied in 1905–06, the island of Bali was subjugated with military conquests in 1906 and 1908, as were the remaining independent kingdoms in Maluku, Sumatra, Kalimantan, and Nusa Tenggara.
For example, the ''Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen'', (Royal Batavian Society of Arts and Sciences), the predecessor of the National Museum of Indonesia, was established in 1778 with the aim to promote research and publish findings in the field of arts and sciences, especially history, archaeology, ethnography and physics.
Although Indonesian rebellions broke out, direct colonial rule was extended throughout the rest of the archipelago from 1901 to 1910 and control taken from the remaining independent local rulers.
Following the Japanese surrender in August 1945, Indonesian nationalists declared independence which they fought to secure during the subsequent Indonesian National Revolution.
The first half of 20th century saw large-scale immigration of Dutch and other Europeans to the colony, where they worked in either the government or private sectors.
Notable architects and planners include Albert Aalbers, Thomas Karsten, Henri Maclaine Pont, J. Gerber and C.P.W.
Petitions by Indonesian nationalists to establish military service for indigenous people were rejected.
Other new measures under the policy included irrigation programs, transmigration, communications, flood mitigation, industrialisation, and protection of native industry.
In 2008, the Dutch Census Bureau for Statistics (CBS) registered 387,000 first and second generation Indos living in the Netherlands.
Some of the notable ''Mooi Indie'' painters are European artists: F.J. du Chattel, Manus Bauer, Nieuwkamp, Isaac Israel, PAJ Moojen, Carel Dake and Romualdo Locatelli; East Indies-born Dutch painters: Henry van Velthuijzen, Charles Sayers, Ernest Dezentje, Leonard Eland and Jan Frank; Native painters: Raden Saleh, Mas Pirngadi, Abdullah Surisubroto, Wakidi, Basuki Abdullah, Mas Soeryo Soebanto and Henk Ngantunk; and also Chinese painters: Lee Man Fong, Oei Tiang Oen and Biau Tik Kwie.
Including their 2nd generation descendants, they are currently the largest foreign born group in the Netherlands.
Naval forces of the Royal Netherlands Navy were based in Surabaya, but were never part of the KNIL.
While they lost real control, their wealth and splendour under the Dutch grew.
Theatre plays by playwrights such as Victor Ido (1869–1948) were performed at the ''Schouwburg Weltevreden'', now known as Gedung Kesenian Jakarta.
Disturbances continued to break out on both Java and Sumatra during the remainder of the 19th century.
Many important art, culture and science institutions were established in Dutch East Indies.
In the female ''Boeloe'' prison in Semarang inmates had the opportunity to learn a profession during their detention, such as sewing, weaving and making batik.
Many surviving colonial families and their descendants who moved back to the Netherlands after Independence tended to look back on the colonial era with a sense of the power and prestige they had in the colony, with such items as the 1970s book ''Tempo Doeloe'' (Old times) by author Rob Nieuwenhuys, and other books and materials that became quite common in the 1970s and 1980s.
In Dutch they are referred to as 'Indische Nederlanders' (Indies Dutchmen) or Indo (short for Indo-European).
They lived together with the "natives", but at the top of a rigid social and racial caste system.
The Dutch East Indies fell into Japan's sphere.
One of ''Technische Hogeschool'' graduate is Sukarno whom later would lead the Indonesian National Revolution.
Other rulers including the Sultans of Tidore in Maluku, Pontianak (Kalimantan), and Palembang in Sumatra, requested Dutch protection from independent neighbours thereby avoiding Dutch military conquest and were able to negotiate better conditions under colonial rule.
Generally films produced in the Indies dealt with traditional stories or were adapted from existing works.
Dutch control was restored in 1816.
Despite increasing returns from the Dutch system of land tax, Dutch finances had been severely affected by the cost of the Java War and the Padri War, and the Dutch loss of Belgium in 1830 brought the Netherlands to the brink of bankruptcy.
During two periods (1815–1835 and 1854–1925) the Governor-General ruled jointly with an advisory board called the ''Raad van Indie'' (Indies Council).
By 1900, foreign-held assets in the Netherlands Indies totalled about 750 million guilders ($300 million), mostly in Java.
A third class, Foreign Easterners, was added in 1920.
It comprised all the islands to the east of Borneo and Java.
From 1910, the Dutch created the most centralised state power in Southeast Asia.
After 1900 upgrading the infrastructure of ports and roads was a high priority for the Dutch, with the goal of modernising the economy, facilitating commerce, and speeding up military movements.
Dutch people and Eurasians
A period termed the Indonesian National Revival, the first half of the 20th century saw the nationalist movement develop strongly, but also face Dutch oppression.
In the early 20th century, Indonesia's independence leaders adopted a form of Malay from Riau, and called it Indonesian.
Britain was a protector of Aceh and it gave the Netherlands permission to eradicate the pirates.
The term ''Indonesia'' came into use for the geographical location after 1880.
This relatively large Eurasian population had developed over a period of 400 years and were classified by colonial law as belonging to the European legal community.
They built row houses which were poorly ventilated with small windows, which was thought as protection against tropical diseases coming from tropical air.
''De Technische Hoogeschool te Bandung'' established in 1920 by the Dutch colonial administration to meet the needs of technical resources at its colony.
In the late 19th century economic growth was based on heavy world demand for tea, coffee, and cinchona.
While most officers were Europeans, the majority of soldiers were indigenous Indonesians, the largest contingent of which were Javanese and Sundanese.
Traditional rulers who survived displacement by the Dutch conquests were installed as regents and indigenous aristocracy became an indigenous civil service.
Changes were not limited to Java, or agriculture; oil from Sumatra and Kalimantan became a valuable resource for industrialising Europe.
The earliest motion pictures, imported from abroad, were shown in late 1900, and by the early 1920s imported serials and fictional films were being shown, often with localised names.
Practical responses to the environment carried over from the earlier Indies Style, included overhanging eaves, larger windows and ventilation in the walls, which gave birth to the New Indies Style.
This colony was one of the most valuable European colonies under the Dutch Empire's rule, and contributed to Dutch global prominence in spice and cash crop trade in the 19th to early 20th century.
Kue cubit commonly found in front of schools and marketplaces are believed to be derived from poffertjes.
Examples include the Javanese prince and poet Noto Soeroto, a writer and journalist, and the Dutch language writings of Soewarsih Djojopoespito, Chairil Anwar, Kartini, Sutan Sjahrir and Sukarno.
Immigration within the archipelago—particularly by ethnic Chinese, Bataks, Javanese, and Bugis—increased dramatically.
The GHS occupied the same main building and used the same teaching hospital as the current Faculty of Medicine of University of Indonesia.
The KNIL was disbanded by 26 July 1950 with its indigenous personnel being given the option of demobilising or joining the Indonesian military.
This proliferation of schools was further boosted by new Muslim schools in the Western mould that also offered secular subjects.
Many STOVIA graduates later played important roles in Indonesia's national movement toward independence as well in developing medical education in Indonesia, such as Dr. Wahidin Soedirohoesodo, who established the Budi Utomo political society.
Finally in the early 20th century, imperial dominance was extended across what was to become the territory of modern-day Indonesia.
Practically each town in the Netherlands will have a 'Toko' (Dutch Indonesian Shop) or Indonesian restaurant and many 'Pasar Malam' (Night market in Malay/Indonesian) fairs are organised throughout the year.
Many Indonesian dishes and foodstuffs have become commonplace in the Netherlands.
The most prolonged military expedition was the Aceh War in which a Dutch invasion in 1873 was met with indigenous guerrilla resistance and ended with an Acehnese surrender in 1912.
Foreign investment, especially by the British, were encouraged.
Much of the postcolonial discourse in Dutch Indies literature has been written by Indo-European authors led by the "avant garde visionary" Tjalie Robinson, who is the best read Dutch author in contemporary Indonesia and second generation Indo-European immigrants like Marion Bloem.
The Billiton Company's tin mines off the eastern Sumatra coast was financed by a syndicate of Dutch entrepreneurs, including the younger brother of King William III.
A lack of development in the Great Depression, the turmoil of the Second World War and the Indonesia's independence struggle of the 1940s, and economic stagnation during the politically turbulent 1950s and 60s, meant that much colonial architecture has been preserved through to recent decades.
In addition the Dutch built,  of railways, bridges, irrigation systems covering 1.4 million hectares (5,400 sq mi) of rice fields, several harbours, and 140 public drinking water systems.
The name ''Dutch Indies'' is recorded in the Dutch East India Company's documents of the early 1620s.
In the early 20th century, local intellectuals began developing the concept of Indonesia as a nation state, and set the stage for an independence movement.
These words generally had no alternative in Malay and were adopted into the Indonesian vocabulary giving a linguistic insight into which concepts are part of the Dutch colonial heritage.
In the 17th and 18th centuries, Batavia was a fortified brick and masonry city.
Chinese and Arabs, officially termed "foreign orientals", could not enrol in either the vocational schools or primary schools.
In December 1949, the Netherlands formally recognised Indonesian sovereignty with the exception of the Netherlands New Guinea (Western New Guinea).
For almost two centuries, the colonialists did little to adapt their European architectural habits to the tropical climate.
The Dutch government adapted the Dutch codes of law in its colony.
In 1924, the colonial government again decided to open a new tertiary-level educational facility, the ''Rechts Hogeschool'' (RHS), to train civilian officers and servants.
The first Europeans to arrive were the Portuguese in the late 15th century.
The term became famous in 1939 after S. Sudjojono used it to mock the painters that merely depict all pretty things about Indies.
The Dutch East Indies was divided into three Gouvernementen, Groot Oost, Borneo and Sumatra, and three provincies in Java.
Politically, the highly centralised power structure, including the exorbitant powers of exile and censorship, established by the Dutch administration was carried over into the new Indonesian republic.
The Land Councils ''(Landraden)'' dealt with civil matters and less serious offences like estate divorces, and matrimonial disputes.
A notable Dutch East Indies colonial dish is rijsttafel, the rice table that consists of 7 to 40 popular dishes from across the colony.
The nature of the KNIL changed in 1917 when the colonial government introduced obligatory military service for all male conscripts in the European legal class and in 1922 a supplemental legal enactment introduced the creation of a ‘Home guard’ (Dutch: Landstorm) for European conscripts older than 32.
In the first three decades of the 20th century, the Department of Public Works funded major public buildings and introduced a town planning program under which the main towns and cities in Java and Sumatra were rebuilt and extended.
Through colonialism the Dutch introduced European dishes such as bread, cheese, barbecued steak and pancake.
The colonial exploitation of Indonesia's wealth contributed to the industrialisation of the Netherlands, while simultaneously laying the foundation for the industrialisation of Indonesia.
The company was formally dissolved in 1800 and its colonial possessions in the Indonesian archipelago (including much of Java, parts of Sumatra, much of Maluku, and the hinterlands of ports such as Makasar, Manado, and Kupang) were nationalised under the Dutch Republic as the Dutch East Indies.
Following Indonesian independence, the Dutch legal system was adopted and gradually a national legal system based on Indonesian precepts of law and justice was established.
Smuggling, the ongoing expense of war, corruption, and mismanagement led to bankruptcy by the end of the 18th century.
From 1815 to 1848 the Ministry was under direct authority of the Dutch King.
The remainder were either demobilised or transferred to the Netherlands Army.
Hendrik Maier of the University of California says that about a fifth of contemporary Indonesian language can be traced to Dutch.
The highest court of law, the Supreme Court in Batavia, dealt with appeals and monitored judges and courts throughout the colony.
Graduates of Dutch schools opened their own schools modelled on the Dutch school system, as did Christian missionaries, Theosophical Societies, and Indonesian cultural associations.
Indigenous islanders (Pribumi)
At the time of disbandment the KNIL numbered 65,000, of whom 26,000 were incorporated into the new Indonesian Army.
Railways, steamships, postal and telegraph services, and various government agencies all served to introduce a degree of new uniformity across the colony.
Much of Java became a Dutch plantation and revenue rose continually through the 19th century which were reinvested into the Netherlands to save it from bankruptcy.
Dutch language literature has been inspired by both colonial and post-colonial Indies from the Dutch Golden Age to the present day.
In 1811, British forces occupied several Dutch East Indies ports including Java and Thomas Stamford Raffles became Lieutenant Governor.
Recognising the potential of the East Indies trade, the Dutch government amalgamated the competing companies into the United East India Company (''Vereenigde Oost-Indische Compagnie'' or VOC).
Following the Proclamation of Indonesian Independence in 1945 and during the ensuing revolution several films were made, by both pro-Dutch and pro-Indonesian backers.
Modernistic buildings, including train stations, business hotels, factories and office blocks, hospitals and education institutions, were influenced by international styles.
A number of Dutch loan words are used in present-day Indonesian, particularly technical terms (see List of Dutch loan words in Indonesian).
Dutch policy before the 1870s was to take full charge of strategic points and work out treaties with the local leaders elsewhere so they would remain in control and co-operate.
Some of the native upperclass ''ningrat'' (nobles) and a few educated native were exposed to European cuisine, and it was held with high esteem as the cuisine of upperclass elite of Dutch East Indies society.
The royal family fled to exile in Britain.
The rate of production declined again after the Japanese occupation beginning in early 1942, closing all but one film studio.
As exploitation of Indonesian resources expanded off Java, most of the outer islands came under direct Dutch government control or influence.
The Royal Dutch East Indies Army (KNIL) and the Royal Netherlands East Indies Army Air Force (ML-KNIL) were established in 1830 and 1915 respectively.
''Mooi Indie'' later would identified as the genre of painting that occurred during the colonial East Indies that capture the romantic depictions of the Indies as the main themes; mostly natural scenes of mountains, volcanos, rice paddies, river valleys, villages, with scenes of native servants, nobles, and sometimes bare-chested native women.
Years later the Dutch learnt to adapt their architectural styles with local building features (long eaves, verandahs, porticos, large windows and ventilation openings), and the 18th century ''Dutch Indies country houses'' was one of the first colonial buildings to incorporate Indonesian architectural elements and adapt to the climate, the known as Indies Style.
From the end of the 19th century, significant improvements to technology, communications and transportation brought new wealth to Java.
Critical public opinion in the Netherlands led to much of the Cultivation System's excesses being eliminated under the agrarian reforms of the "Liberal Period".
After failed expeditions to conquer Bali in 1846 and 1848, an 1849 intervention brought northern Bali under Dutch control.
Between 1830 and 1870, 1 billion guilders were taken from Indonesia, on average making 25 per cent of the annual Dutch Government budget.
In the 20th century the colony gradually developed as a state distinct from the Dutch metropole with treasury separated in 1903, public loans being contracted by the colony from 1913, and quasi diplomatic ties were established with Arabia to manage the Haji pilgrimage from the Dutch East Indies.
A People's Council called the ''Volksraad'' for the Dutch East Indies commenced in 1918.
The VOC was granted a charter to wage war, build fortresses, and make treaties across Asia.
The Banjarmasin War (1859–1863) in southeast Kalimantan resulted in the defeat of the Sultan.
On September 27, 1940, Germany, Hungary, Italy, and Japan signed a treaty lining out "spheres of influence".
The Bogor Botanical Gardens with ''Herbarium Bogoriense'' and ''Museum Zoologicum Bogoriense'' was a major centre for botanical research established in 1817, with the aim to study the flora and fauna of the archipelago.
The majority of films produced during the occupation were Japanese propaganda shorts.
In 1898 the Dutch East Indies government established a school to train medical doctors, named ''School tot Opleiding van Inlandsche Artsen'' (STOVIA).
Military leaders and Dutch politicians believed they had a moral duty to free the native Indonesian peoples from indigenous rulers who were considered oppressive, backward, or disrespectful of international law.
By 1920 the Dutch had established 350 prisons throughout the colony.
Since the establishment of the VOC in the 17th century, the expansion of Dutch territory had been a business matter.
The Japanese occupation during World War II brought about the fall of the colonial state in Indonesia, as the Japanese removed as much of the Dutch government structure as they could, replacing it with their own regime.
Some dishes which were created during the colonial era are Dutch influenced: they include selat solo (solo salad), bistik jawa (Javanese beef steak), semur (from Dutch ''smoor''), sayur kacang merah (brenebon) and sop buntut.
The ''Volksraad'' was limited to an advisory role and only a small portion of the indigenous population were able to vote for its members.
When a guerrilla war did take place the Dutch used either a slow, violent occupation or a campaign of destruction.
Although Java was dominated by the Dutch, many areas remained independent throughout much of this time, including Aceh, Bali, Lombok and Borneo.
In July 1941 the ''Volksraad'' passed law creating a native militia of 18,000 by a majority of 43 to 4, with only the moderate Great Indonesia Party objecting.
The colonial government sought to standardise Malay based on the version from Riau and Malacca, and dictionaries were commissioned for governmental communication and schools for indigenous peoples.
Mining began in 1860.
This led to the adoption and fusion of European cuisine into Indonesian cuisine.
The term ''Mooi Indie'' (Dutch for "Beautiful Indies") was originally coined as the title of 11 reproductions of Du Chattel's watercolor paintings which depicted the scene of East Indies published in Amsterdam in 1930.
They wrote Dutch language literary works and published literature in literary reviews such as ''Het Getij'', ''De Gemeenschap'', ''Links Richten'' and ''Forum''.
