Of these dialects, Brabantic and East Flemish are spoken exclusively by the Southern Dutch, whereas Hollandic and Dutch Saxon are solely spoken by Northerners.
This was followed by a series of marriages, wars, and inheritances among the other Dutch fiefs and around 1450 the most important fiefs were under Burgundian rule, while complete control was achieved after the end of the Guelderian Wars in 1543, thereby unifying the fiefs of the Low Countries under one ruler.
Although Portuguese explorers made contact with the Cape of Good Hope as early as 1488, much of present-day South Africa was ignored by Europeans until the Dutch East India Company established its first outpost at Cape Town, in 1652.
Standard Dutch has a sound inventory of 13 vowels, 6 diphthongs and 23 consonants, of which the voiceless velar fricative (''hard ch'') is considered a well known sound, perceived as typical for the language.
Most of the time Dutch soldiers intermarried with local women and settled down in the colonies.
One theory, proposed by A.J.
By taking the total of all people with full Dutch ancestry, according to the current CBS definition, resulting in an estimated 16,000,000 Dutch people, or by the sum of all people with both full and partial Dutch ancestry, which would result in a number around 25,000,000.
Since Company employees proved inept farmers, tracts of land were granted to Dutch and German peasants under the understanding that they would develop their farms as vassals.
During the last 50 years or so there was a large increase of non-religious individuals in the Netherlands.
Wichers in 1965, sees differences in mentality between the southeastern, or 'higher', and northwestern, or 'lower' regions within the Netherlands, and seeks to explain these by referring to the different degrees to which these areas were feudalised during the Middle Ages.
This self-perceived split between Flemings and Dutch, despite the common language, may be compared to how Austrians do not consider themselves to be Germans, despite the similarities they share with southern Germans such as Bavarians.
Gradually its meaning shifted to the Germanic people they had most contact with, both because of their geographical proximity, but also because of the rivalry in trade and overseas territories: the people from the Republic of the Netherlands, the Dutch.
For Dutch colonial history, see the article on the Dutch Empire.
Some settlers left for Siberia in search for fertile land.
During the Republic the first series of large scale Dutch migrations outside of Europe took place.
The dominant religion of the Dutch is Christianity (both Catholic and Protestant), although in modern times the majority is no longer religious.
The subsequently issued Great Privilege met many of these demands, which included that Dutch, not French, should be the administrative language in the Dutch-speaking provinces and that the States-General had the right to hold meetings without the monarch's permission or presence.
Naaktgeboren (''born naked'').
It differs from Standard Dutch by several pronunciations borrowed from Malay, German, or English, the loss of case and gender distinctions, and in the extreme simplification of grammar (e.g.
They share a common culture and speak the Dutch language.
Linguistically Old Frankish or Low Franconian gradually evolved into Old Dutch, which was first attested in the 6th century, whereas religiously the Franks (beginning with the upper class) converted to Christianity from around 500 to 700.
Between 1602 and 1796, the VOC sent almost a million Europeans to work in the Asia.
the Dutch, the Frisians and the -various- Germans).
The largest patterns of human genetic variation within the Netherlands show strong correlations with geography and distinguish between: (1) North and South; (2) East and West; and (3) the middle-band and the rest of the country.
The Southern Dutch, including Dutch Brabant and Limburg, remained Catholic or returned to Catholicism.
Apart from a brief reunification from 1815 until 1830, within the United Kingdom of the Netherlands (which included the Francophones/Walloons) the Dutch have been separated from the Flemings to this day.
The Anglo-Frisian nasal spirant law and Anglo-Frisian brightening resulted in certain early Germanic languages evolving into what are now English and Frisian, while the Second Germanic sound shift resulted in what would become German.
However, the population make-up of the Frankish Empire, or even early Frankish kingdoms such as Neustria and Austrasia, was not dominated by Franks.
This process marked a new episode in the development of the Dutch ethnic group, as now political unity started to emerge, consolidating the strengthened cultural and linguistic unity.
Eventually, the Franks in Northern France were assimilated by the general Gallo-Roman population, and took over their dialects (which became French), whereas the Franks in the Low Countries retained their language, which would evolve into Dutch.
Following the end of the migration period in the West around 500, with large federations (such as the Franks, Vandals, Alamanni and Saxons) settling the decaying Roman Empire, a series of monumental changes took place within these Germanic societies.
For example; De Leeuw (''The Lion''), Vogels (''Birds''), Koekkoek (''Cuckoo'')  and Devalck (''The Falcon''); to a desired social status; e.g., Prins (''Prince''), De Koninck/Koning (''King''), De Keyzer/keizer (''Emperor''); color; e.g.
In both cases, the Catholic Austrians and Flemish do not see themselves as sharing the fundamentally Protestant-based identities of their northern counterparts.
West-Flemish/Zealandic  and Limburgish are cross border dialects in this respect.
Since World War II, Dutch Emigrants mainly went to the United States, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and (until the 1970s) to South Africa.
Among the most important of these are their conversion from Germanic paganism to Christianity, the emergence of a new political system, centered on kings, and a continuing process of emerging mutual unintelligibility of their various dialects.
Afrikaans, which developed from Middle Dutch, has been influenced by English, Malay-Portuguese creole, and various African tongues.
William of Orange).
Dutch immigrants also exported the Dutch language.
The largest genetic differences within the Netherlands are observed between the North and the South (with the three major rivers - Rijn, Waal, Maas - as a border), with the Randstad showing a mixture of these two ancestral backgrounds.
and to a lesser extent, historical economic development of both regions are also important elements in any dissimilarity.
While interrupted by World War I, this migration returned in the 1920s, but again halted during the Great Depression and World War II.
The Northern provinces were free, but during the 1580s the South was recaptured by Spain, and, despite various attempts, the armies of the Republic were unable to expel them.
For the first time in their history, the Dutch established their independence from foreign rule.
The total number of Dutch can be defined in roughly two ways.
These names rarely feature ''tussenvoegsels''.
Statistics show that Indos are in fact the largest minority group in the Netherlands and number close to half a million (excluding the third generation).
On a political level, the Frankish warlords abandoned tribalism and founded a number of kingdoms, eventually culminating in the Frankish Empire of Charlemagne.
As the number of Europeans - particularly females - in the Cape swelled, South African whites closed ranks as a community to protect their privileged status, eventually marginalising Coloureds as a separate and inferior racial group.
Although their language (Afrikaans) and religion remain undeniably linked to that of the Netherlands, Afrikaner culture has been strongly shaped by three centuries in South Africa.
It is also around this time, that ethnonyms such as ''Diets'' and ''Nederlands'' emerge.
They were offered land along the Volga River.
The ideologies associated with (Romantic) Nationalism of the 19th and 20th centuries never really caught on in the Netherlands, and this, together with being a relatively mono-ethnic society up until the late 1950s, has led to a relatively obscure use of the terms ''nation'' and ''ethnicity'' as both were largely overlapping in practice.
There are many Dutch associations and a Dutch-language newspaper continues to be published.
In the case of Belgium, there is the added influence of nationalism as the Dutch language and culture were oppressed by the francophone government.
Historically Dutch also lived directly on the eastern side of the German border, most have since been assimilated (apart from ~40,000 recent border migrants), especially since the establishment of Germany itself in 1872.
During the entire Nazi occupation, the Germans denied any assistance to Greater Dutch ethnic nationalism, and, by decree of Hitler himself, actively opposed it.
In South Africa, Afrikaans is spoken, a daughter language of Dutch, which itself was an official language of South Africa until 1983.
Historically this has been by far the most dominant form.
During the German eastward expansion (mainly taking place between the 10th and 13th century), a number of Dutchmen moved as well.
The 1970s marked the beginning of formal cultural and linguistic cooperation between Belgium (Flanders) and the Netherlands on an international scale.
On the continent ''*theudo'' evolved into two meanings: ''Diets'' (meaning "Dutch (people)" (archaic) and ''Deutsch'' (German, meaning "German (people)").
''Nederlanders'' derives from the Dutch word "''Neder''", a cognate of English "''Nether''" both meaning "''low''", and "''near the sea''" (same meaning in both English and Dutch), a reference to the geographical texture of the Dutch homeland; the western portion of the North European Plain.
In the early-to-mid-16th century, Mennonites began to move from the Low Countries (especially Friesland and Flanders) to the Vistula delta region in Royal Prussia, seeking religious freedom and exemption from military service.
Following civil registry, the form at time of registry became permanent.
This is partly caused by the popular stereotypes in the Netherlands as well as Flanders, which are mostly based on the "cultural extremes" of both Northern and Southern culture, including in religious identity.
Under the Habsburgs, the Netherlands were organised into a single administrative unit, and in the 16th and 17th centuries the Northern Netherlands gained independence from Spain as the Dutch Republic.
Though written differently, pronunciation remains identical.
For example "De Lange" (the tall one), "De Groot" (the big one), "De Dappere" (the brave one).
Many West Germanic dialects underwent a series of sound shifts.
Further centralized policies of the Habsburgs (like their Burgundian predecessors) again met with resistance, but, peaking with the formation of the collateral councils of 1531 and the Pragmatic Sanction of 1549, were still implemented.
By the eighteenth century there had emerged a new people in Africa who identified as "Afrikaners", rather than Dutchmen, after the land they had permanently adopted.
After the partition of Poland, the Prussian government took over and its government eliminated exemption from military service on religious grounds.
The surname ''Baks'', for example is also recorded as ''Backs'', ''Bacxs'', ''Bax'', ''Bakx'',  ''Baxs'', ''Bacx'', ''Backx'', ''Bakxs'' and ''Baxcs''.
Rood (''red'') Blauw (''blue'') de Wit (''the white'').
Because of centuries of cohabitation and active participation in Dutch society, as well as being bilingual, the Frisians are not treated as a separate group in Dutch official statistics.
Interaction between the Dutch and native population mainly took place in  Sri Lanka and the modern Indonesian Islands.
*Occupational surnames; the name is based on the occupation of the bearer.
The most common Y-DNA haplogroup in the Netherlands is R1b, and the largest subclade is U106, where it comprises roughly 35% of the male population.
In sociological studies and governmental reports, ethnicity is often referred to with the terms ''autochtoon'' and ''allochtoon''.
Though these stereotypes tend to ignore the transitional area formed by the Southern provinces of the Netherlands and most Northern reaches of Belgium, resulting in overgeneralizations.
This does not necessarily mean that these events (north-ward migration and evolutionary selection pressures) took place within the borders of the Netherlands; it could also be that Southern Europeans have migrated more to the South of the Netherlands, and/or Northern Europeans more to the Northern parts.
As they became increasingly powerful, they used their economical strength to influence the politics of their nobility.
The origins of the word ''Dutch'' go back to Proto-Germanic, the ancestor of all Germanic languages, ''*theudo'' (meaning "national/popular"); akin to Old Dutch ''dietsc'', Old High German ''diutsch'', Old English ''þeodisc'' and Gothic ''þiuda'' all meaning "(of) the common (Germanic) people".
They were later replaced by Anglo-Saxon missionaries, who eventually succeeded in converting most of the inhabitants by the 8th century.
The rule of Philip II of Spain sought even further centralist reforms, which, accompanied by religious dictates and excessive taxation, resulted in the Dutch Revolt.
For example, the first language of American president Martin Van Buren was Dutch.
''voël'' becomes ''vogel'', and ''reën'' becomes ''regen'').
The Dutch provinces, though fighting alone now, for the first time in their history found themselves fighting a common enemy.
Prior to the arrival of Christianity, the ancestors of the Dutch adhered to a form of Germanic paganism augmented with various Celtic elements.
The expulsion of Dutchmen following the Indonesian Revolt, means that currently the majority of this group lives in the Netherlands.
Arguably the most famous of which was Anna Mons, the mistress of Peter the Great.
Despite the small size of the Netherlands, the Dutch left behind a legacy in excess of their mere numbers.
Some trekboers eventually turned to cattle ranching, creating their own distinct sub-culture centered around a semi-nomadic lifestyle and isolated patriarchal communities.
Following excessive taxation together with attempts at diminishing the traditional autonomy of the cities and estates in the Low Countries, followed by the religious oppression after being transferred to Habsburg Spain, the Dutch revolted, in what would become the Eighty Years' War.
After the war a large number of Dutch immigrants moved to Canada, including a number of war brides of the Canadian soldiers who liberated the Low Countries.
Their spouses are more likely to come from a different genetic background than those of religious individuals, causing non-religious individuals to show lower levels of genome-wide homozygosity than Catholics or Protestants.
Among U106, the subclade Z30 is very prevalent, as it clusters around the North Sea coast more generally.
Most of the Dutch immigrants of the 20th century quickly began to speak the language of their new country.
Dutch is currently an official language of the Netherlands, Belgium, Suriname, Aruba, Sint Maarten, Curaçao, the European Union and the Union of South American Nations (due to Suriname being a member).
Since then, Christianity has been the dominant religion in the region.
From the 13th to the 15th centuries, Prussia invited several waves of Dutch and Frisians to settle throughout the country (mainly along the Baltic Sea coast)
On a smaller scale cultural pluriformity can also be found; be it in local architecture or (perceived) character.
The European North-South cline correlates highly with this Dutch North-South cline and shows several other similarities, such as a correlation with height (with the North being taller on average), blue/brown eye colour (with the North having more blue eyes), and genome-wide homozygosity (with the North having lower homozygosity levels).
The effects of Dutch migration to Australia can still be felt.
These dialects are usually grouped into six main categories; Hollandic, West-Flemish/Zealandic, East Flemish, Brabantic, Limburgish and Dutch Saxon.
Upon the revocation of the Edict of Nantes in 1685, they were joined by French Huguenots fleeing religious persecution at home, who interspersed among the original freemen.
The general situation described above is applicable to most if not all modern European ethnic groups with origins among the Germanic tribes, such as the Frisians, Germans, English and the North-Germanic (Scandinavian) peoples.
Some of the earliest mulatto communities in the country were subsequently formed through unions between colonists, their slaves, and various Hottentot tribes.
Linguistic (dialectal) differences (positioned along the Rhine/Meuse rivers sic.)
The correlation with genome-wide homozygosity likely reflects the serial founder effect that was initiated with the ancient successive out-of-Africa migrations.
The medieval cities of the Low Countries, which experienced major growth during the 11th and 12th century, were instrumental in breaking down the already relatively loose local form of feudalism.
The various city guilds as well as the necessity of ''water boards'' (in charge of dikes, canals, etc.)
Following Mary's marriage to Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor, the Netherlands were now part of the Habsburg lands.
This subject has historically received attention from historians, notably Pieter Geyl (1887–1966) and Carel Gerretson (1884–1958).
In addition to this, many Dutchmen will object to being called ''Hollanders'' as a national denominator on much the same grounds as many Welshmen or Scots would object to being called ''English'' instead of British.
In 1477, the year of Charles' sudden death at Nancy, the Low Countries rebelled against their new liege, Mary of Burgundy and presented her with a set of demands.
For example, of the inhabitants of New Zealand, 0.7% say their home language is Dutch, despite the percentage of Dutch heritage being considerably higher.
*Other surnames may relate to animals.
During Charles the Bold's many wars, which were a major economic burden for the Burgundian Netherlands, tensions slowly increased.
This is evidence that by this time a sense of common interest was emerging among the provinces of the Netherlands.
This practice is similar to English surnames (the example names translate perfectly to Miller, Fisher and Smith).
However, the centralist policies of Burgundy in the 14th and 15th centuries, at first violently opposed by the cities of the Low Countries, had a profound impact and changed this.
As with all ethnic groups the ethnogenesis of the Dutch (and their predecessors) has been a lengthy and complex process.
However, in Dutch ''van'' often reflects the original place of origin (Van Der Bilt - He who comes from De Bilt); rather than denote any aristocratic status.
''Kleef'') traditional dialect is Dutch, rather than surrounding (High/Low) German.
In several former Dutch colonies and trading settlements, there are isolated ethnic groups of full or partial Dutch ancestry.
Traditional religion within the Netherlands and Flanders:
Many immigrants removed the spacing, leading to derived names for well known people like Cornelius Vanderbilt.
One cultural division within Dutch culture is that between the Protestant North and the Catholic South, which encompasses various cultural differences between the Northern Dutch on one side and the Southern Dutch on the other.
This was followed by a nationalist backlash during the late 19th and early 20th centuries that saw little help from the Dutch government (which for a long time following the Belgian Revolution had a reticent and contentious relationship with the newly formed Belgium and a largely indifferent attitude towards its Dutch-speaking inhabitants) and, hence, focused on pitting "Flemish" culture against French culture, resulting in the forming of the Flemish nation within Belgium, a consciousness of which can be very marked among some Dutch-speaking Belgians.
In total, about 310,000 people of Dutch ancestry live in Australia whereas New Zealand has some 100,000 Dutch descendants.
In this debate 'typically Dutch traditions' have been put to the foreground.
After the Peace of Westphalia in 1648, Protestantism did not spread South, resulting in a difference in religious situations that lasts to this day.
The traditional art and culture of the Dutch encompasses various forms of traditional music, dances, architectural styles and clothing, some of which are globally recognizable.
The second largest haplogroup is I1, most common in Scandinavia, with several other haplogroups at frequencies under 10%.
The text below hence focuses on the history of the Dutch ethnic group; for ''Dutch national history'', please see the history-articles of the Netherlands.
Dutch is the main language spoken by most Dutch people.
Dutch people and their descendants are found in migrant communities worldwide, notably in Aruba, Suriname, Guyana, Curaçao, Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Australia, South Africa, New Zealand, and the United States.
Since the 16th century, there has been a Dutch presence in South East Asia, Taiwan and Japan.
The Dutch, Flemish and Surinamese governments coordinate their language activities in the ''Nederlandse Taalunie'' (Dutch Language Union), an institution also responsible for governing the Dutch Standard language, for example in matters of orthography.
The distribution of gene variants for eye colour, metabolism, brain processes, body height and immune system show differences between these regions that reflect evolutionary selection pressures.
In the Netherlands, an oft-used adage used for indicating this cultural boundary is the phrase ''boven/onder de rivieren'' (Dutch: above/below the rivers), in which 'the rivers' refer to the river Rhine and Meuse.
The dialects are no longer considered quite mutually intelligible.
By the middle of the 16th century an overarching, 'national' (rather than 'ethnic') identity seemed in development in the Habsburg Netherlands, when inhabitants began to refer to it as their 'fatherland' and were beginning to be seen as a collective entity abroad; however, the persistence of language barriers, traditional strife between towns, and provincial particularism continued to form an impediment to more thorough unification.
Well known examples include Molenaar, Visser and Smit.
In the early 16th century, the Protestant Reformation began to form and soon spread in the Westhoek and the County of Flanders, where secret open-air sermons were held, called ''hagenpreken'' ("hedgerow orations") in Dutch.
The Mennonites emigrated to Russia.
During the early Middle Ages up until the Dutch Revolt, the Southern regions were more powerful, as well as more culturally and economically developed.
General consensus among linguists is that the Dutch language has 28 main dialects.
However, the (re)definition of Dutch cultural identity has become a subject of public debate in recent years following the increasing influence of the European Union and the influx of non-Western immigrants in the post-World War II period.
The ruler of the Dutch regions, Philip II of Spain, felt it was his duty to fight Protestantism and, after the wave of iconoclasm, sent troops to crush the rebellion and make the Low Countries a Catholic region once more.
Other relatively well known features of the Dutch language and usage are the frequent use of digraphs like Oo, Ee, Uu and Aa, the ability to form long compounds and the use of diseases as profanity.
In 1648, the Peace of Münster, ending the Eighty Years' War, acknowledged the independence of the Dutch Republic, but maintained Spanish control of the Southern Netherlands.
Poor economic prospects for many Dutchmen as well as increasing demographic pressures, in the post-war Netherlands were a powerful incentive to emigrate.
In Dutch, the cultural division between North and South is also referred to by the colloquialism "''below/above the great rivers''" as the rivers Rhine and Meuse roughly form a natural boundary between the Northern Dutch (those Dutch living North of these rivers), and the Southern Dutch (those living South of them).
In Dutch this form of surname nearly always includes one or several ''tussenvoegsels'', mainly ''van'', ''van de'' and variants.
Dutch underwent none of these sound changes and can thus be said to occupy a central position within the West Germanic languages.
In Canada 923,310 Canadians claim full or partial Dutch ancestry.
The '''Dutch''' (Dutch: ), occasionally referred to as '''Netherlanders'''—a term that is cognate to the Dutch word for Dutch people, "Nederlanders"—are a Germanic ethnic group native to the Netherlands.
Lastly, the dialectal situation is characterised by the major distinction between 'Hard G' and 'Soft G' speaking areas (see also Dutch phonology).
This led to the development of a major South African ethnic group, Cape Coloureds, who adopted the Dutch language and culture.
Afrikaners are dominated by two main groups, the Cape Dutch and Boers, which are partly defined by different traditions of society, law, and historical economic bases.
During World War II, when both Belgium and the Netherlands fell to German occupation, fascist elements (such as the NSB and Verdinaso) tried to convince the Nazis into combining the Netherlands and Flanders.
As the tribes among the Germanic peoples began to differentiate its meaning began to change.
However, during the war it became apparent that the goal of liberating all the provinces and cities that had signed the Union of Utrecht, which roughly corresponded to the Dutch-speaking part of the Spanish Netherlands, was unreachable.
At the start of the 6th century, the first (Hiberno-Scottish) missionaries arrived.
As a West Germanic language, Dutch is related to other languages in that group such as Frisian, English and German.
The Union of South Africa granted Dutch official status upon its inception, but in 1925 Parliament openly recognised Afrikaans as a separate language.
Today Dutch immigrants can be found in most developed countries.
Dutch was spoken by some settlers in the United States as a native language from the arrival of the first permanent Dutch settlers in 1615, surviving in isolated ethnic pockets until about 1900, when it ceased to be spoken except by first generation Dutch immigrants.
The first Dutch people to come to Canada were Dutch Americans among the United Empire Loyalists.
Most of the Dutch Protestants were now concentrated in the free Dutch provinces north of the river Rhine, while the Catholic Dutch were situated in the Spanish-occupied or -dominated South.
More to the South, cities historically housing many Dutch traders have retained Dutch exonyms for example Aachen (''Aken'') and Cologne/Köln (''Keulen'') to this day.
Internationally, Dutch painters such as Rembrandt, Vermeer and Van Gogh are held in high regard.
Another, more recent cultural divide is that between the ''Randstad'', the urban agglomeration in the West of the country, and the other provinces of the Netherlands.
The Anglo-Saxons of England for example gradually stopped referring to themselves as ''þeodisc'' and instead started to use ''Englisc'', after their tribe.
Hence today many Dutch people are named after ancestors living in the early 19th century when civil registry was introduced to the Low Countries.
In many cases the Dutch were the first Europeans the natives would encounter.
*Cognominal surnames; based on nicknames relating to physical appearance/other features, on the appearance or character of the bearer (at least at the time of registration).
Today, despite other ethnicities making up 19.6% of the Netherlands' population, this obscurity continues in colloquial use, in which ''Nederlander'' sometimes refers to the ethnic Dutch, sometimes to anyone possessing Dutch citizenship.
Southern Dutch culture has been influenced more by French culture, opposed to the Northern Dutch culture area.
West Frisians in general do not feel or see themselves as part of a larger group of Frisians, and, according to a 1970 inquiry, identify themselves more with the Dutch than with East or North Frisians.
The historical pluriformity of the Dutch cultural landscape has given rise to several theories aimed at both identifying and explaining cultural divergences between different regions.
One of its most active proponents was the historian Pieter Geyl, who wrote ''De Geschiedenis van de Nederlandsche stam'' (Dutch: ''The History of the Dutch tribe/people'') as well as numerous essays on the subject.
While the cities were of great political importance, they also formed catalysts for medieval Dutch culture.
While "van" denotes "of", Dutch surnames are sometimes associated with the upper class of society or aristocracy (cf.
The majority died of disease or made their way back to Europe, but some of them made the Indies their new home.
During this period significant numbers also settled in major cities like Toronto.
Significant percentages of the Dutch are adherents of humanism, agnosticism, atheism or individual spirituality.
in the Dutch delta and coastal regions resulted in an exceptionally high degree of communal organization.
The document itself clearly distinguishes between the Dutch speaking and French speaking parts of the Seventeen Provinces.
Though the Frankish leaders controlled most of Western Europe, the Franks themselves were confined to the Northwestern part (i.e.
The language was first attested around 500, in a Frankish legal text, the Lex Salica, and has a written record of more than 1500 years, although the material before around 1200 is fragmentary and discontinuous.
Cultural marks can still be found though.
The division is partially caused by (traditional) religious differences, with the North predominantly Protestant and the South having a majority of Catholics.
In the area around Cleves (Ger.
This, together with the growing number of Dutch intelligentsia and the Dutch Golden Age in which Dutch culture, as a whole, gained international prestige, consolidated the Dutch as an ethnic group.
Dutch was taught to South African students as late as 1914 and a few upper-class Afrikaners used it in polite society, but the first Afrikaans literature had already appeared in 1861.
These type of names fluctuated in form as the surname was not constant.
