He reclassified German prisoners of war (POWs) in U.S. custody as Disarmed Enemy Forces (DEFs), who were no longer subject to the Geneva Convention.
During that year Eisenhower's memoir, ''Crusade in Europe'', was published.
He requested and secured from Congress their "Formosa Resolution" in January 1955, which gave Eisenhower unprecedented power in advance to use military force at any level of his choosing in defense of Formosa and the Pescadores.
Eisenhower was the last president born in the 19th century, and at age 62, was the oldest man elected President since James Buchanan in 1856 (President Truman stood at 64 in 1948 as the incumbent president, having succeeded to the Presidency in 1945 upon the death of Franklin Roosevelt).
Although he sought to slow or contain the New Deal and other federal programs, he did not attempt to repeal them outright, and in doing so was popular among the liberal wing of the Republican Party.
His mother originally named him David Dwight but reversed the two names after his birth to avoid the confusion of having two Davids in the family.
His subsequent experience with encountering German autobahn limited-access road systems during the concluding stages of World War II convinced him of the benefits of an Interstate Highway System.
If any blame or fault attaches to the attempt, it is mine alone.
In the first year of his presidency, he threatened the use of nuclear weapons in an effort to conclude the Korean War; his New Look policy of nuclear deterrence prioritized inexpensive nuclear weapons while reducing funding for conventional military forces.
His new expertise in tank warfare was strengthened by a close collaboration with George S. Patton, Sereno E. Brett, and other senior tank leaders.
He served with the infantry, initially in logistics, until 1918 at various camps in Texas and Georgia.
He thought it essential to have every possible option available to him as the crisis unfolded.
He then was assigned to the Army War College and graduated in 1928.
Upon completion of his Presidential term, his commission was reactivated by Congress and Eisenhower again was commissioned a five-star general in the United States Army.
His scheduled meeting with Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru was postponed so he could recover from surgery at his farm in Gettysburg, Pennsylvania.
He believed that if the communists were allowed to prevail in Vietnam, this would cause a succession of countries to fall to communism, from Laos through Malaysia and Indonesia ultimately to India.
She married David on September 23, 1885, in Lecompton, Kansas, on the campus of their alma mater, Lane University.
In response to the devastation in Germany, including food shortages and an influx of refugees, he arranged distribution of American food and medical equipment.
Although Diem was publicly praised, in private Secretary of State John Foster Dulles conceded that Diem had been selected because there were no better alternatives.
Eisenhower told Kennedy he considered Laos "the cork in the bottle" with regard to the regional threat.
Dwight developed a keen and enduring interest in exploring outdoors, hunting/fishing, cooking and card playing from an illiterate named Bob Davis who camped on the Smoky Hill River.
4496 (renumbered 60008) ''Golden Shuttle'' was renamed ''Dwight D. Eisenhower'' in 1946.
In June 1943 a visiting politician had suggested to Eisenhower that he might become President of the United States after the war.
Early in 1953, the French asked Eisenhower for help in French Indochina against the Communists, supplied from China, who were fighting the First Indochina War.
As the Cold War deepened, Dulles sought to isolate the Soviet Union by building regional alliances of nations against it.
He also was initially indecisive in his removal of Lloyd Fredendall, commanding U.S. II Corps.
However, due to Eisenhower's persistence, the pivotal supply port at Antwerp was successfully, albeit belatedly, opened in late 1944, and victory became a more distinct probability.
John and Barbara had four children: David, Barbara Ann, Susan Elaine and Mary Jean.
After graduation in 1915, Lieutenant (2nd) Eisenhower put in for assignment in the Philippines, which was denied.
In the immediate years after Eisenhower left office, his reputation declined.
Eisenhower recorded West Point classmates' poker losses for payment after graduation, and later stopped playing because his opponents resented having to pay him.
He was clear on this point to the trustees involved in the search committee.
He justified the project through the Federal Aid Highway Act of 1956 as essential to American security during the Cold War.
Nevertheless, he refused.
The development of the appreciation medals was initiated by the White House and executed by the Bureau of the Mint through the U.S. Mint in Philadelphia.
1 among DoD courses, is named in his honor.
The last three years of Eisenhower's second term in office were ones of relatively good health.
Eisenhower did provide France with bombers and non-combat personnel.
Chores were regularly assigned and rotated among all the children, and misbehavior was met with unequivocal discipline, usually from David.
Coincidentally, John graduated from West Point on D-Day, June 6, 1944.
In 1951, he became the first Supreme Commander of NATO.
After the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, Eisenhower was assigned to the General Staff in Washington, where he served until June 1942 with responsibility for creating the major war plans to defeat Japan and Germany.
Indeed, the convoy averaged only 5&nbsp;mph from Washington, D.C., to San Francisco; later the improvement of highways became a signature issue for Eisenhower as President.
Otherwise, his performance was average, though he thoroughly enjoyed the typical emphasis of engineering on science and mathematics.
It was inspired in part by Eisenhower's own Army experiences in World War II, where he recognized the advantages of the autobahn systems in Germany, Austria and Switzerland.
Eisenhower Park on Washington Square in Newport, Rhode Island, dedicated by President Eisenhower in 1960.
The deployment came in response to the urgent request of Lebanese president Camille Chamoun after sectarian violence had erupted in the country.
As a child, he was involved in an accident that cost his younger brother an eye; he later referred to this as an experience teaching him the need to be protective of those under him.
The armistice, concluded despite opposition from Secretary Dulles, South Korean President Syngman Rhee, and also within Eisenhower's party, has been described by biographer Ambrose as the greatest achievement of the administration.
Hans's great-great-grandson, David Jacob Eisenhower (1863–1942), was Eisenhower's father and was a college-educated engineer, despite his own father Jacob's urging to stay on the family farm.
The medals worn were: the Army Distinguished Service Medal with three oak leaf clusters, the Navy Distinguished Service Medal, and the Legion of Merit.
He personally favored Robert B. Anderson, a Democrat, who rejected his offer; Eisenhower then resolved to leave the matter in the hands of the party.
During a visit to Augusta National, Eisenhower returned from a walk through the woods on the eastern part of the grounds, and informed Clifford Roberts that he had found a perfect place to build a dam if the club would like a fish pond.
Eisenhower retired to the place where he and Mamie had spent much of their post-war time, a working farm adjacent to the battlefield at Gettysburg, Pennsylvania, 70 miles from his ancestral home in Elizabethville, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
He was returned to active duty when he left office eight years later.
He and brother Edgar both wanted to attend college, though they lacked the funds.
Once in office, when the Chinese began a buildup in the Kaesong sanctuary, he threatened to use nuclear force if an armistice was not concluded.
In the election he also brought with him a Republican majority in the House (by eight votes) and in the Senate (actually a tie, with Nixon providing the majority vote).
Recent surveys of historians since the 1980s often rank Eisenhower in the top 10 of all U.S. presidents.
He has a national name for integrity, uprightness, and courage that, again, I believe we need on the Court".
He became more adroit in such matters in later campaigns.
Henry Cabot Lodge, who served as his campaign manager, and others succeeded in convincing him, and in June 1952 he resigned his command at NATO to campaign full-time.
His body arrived on April 2, and was interred that day in a small chapel on the grounds of the Eisenhower Presidential Library.
One involved a report that Nixon had improperly received funds from a secret trust.
While speaking of himself in 1948, Eisenhower said he was "one of the most deeply religious men I know" though unattached to any "sect or organization".
The memorial will stand near the National Mall on Maryland Avenue, SW across the street from the National Air and Space Museum.
He informed them that his main purpose was "to promote the basic concepts of education in a democracy."
Since the 19th century, many if not all presidents were assisted by a central figure or "gatekeeper", sometimes described as the president's private secretary, sometimes with no official title at all.
Those omissions were held against him during the liberal climate of the 1960s and 1970s.
As President, Eisenhower also initiated the "up or out" policy in the U.S. military, whereby officers who are passed over for promotion ''twice'' are usually honorably discharged to make way for younger, more able officers.
Accounts vary as to how and when the German name Eisenhauer was anglicized to Eisenhower.
He rescued the Republican Party from isolationism and McCarthyism.
Our landings in the Cherbourg-Havre area have failed to gain a satisfactory foothold and I have withdrawn the troops.
Therefore, Khrushchev would not take part in the summit.
Some men are considered great because they lead great armies or they lead powerful nations.
He was a strong player, though not an expert by modern standards.
He was also a regular violator of the more detailed regulations, and finished school with a less than stellar discipline rating.
He was treated by Dr. Paul Dudley White, a cardiologist with a national reputation, who regularly informed the press of the President's progress.
Just two weeks prior to the election, Eisenhower vowed to go to Korea and end the war there.
In his January 17, 1961 farewell address to the nation, Eisenhower expressed his concerns about the dangers of massive military spending, particularly deficit spending and government contracts to private military manufacturers, and coined the term "military–industrial complex".
He implemented integration in the Armed Services in two years, which had not been completed under Truman.
He therefore authorized the Central Intelligence Agency to overthrow Prime Minister Mohammad Mosaddegh.
Major Dwight D. Eisenhower graduated from the Army Industrial College (Washington, DC) in 1933 and later served on the faculty (it was later expanded to become the Industrial College of the Armed Services and is now known as the Dwight D. Eisenhower School for National Security and Resource Strategy).
Eisenhower, who was the oldest president in history at that time (then 70), was succeeded by the youngest elected president, as Kennedy was 43.
A loblolly pine, known as the "Eisenhower Pine", was located on Augusta's 17th hole, approximately 210 yards (192&nbsp;m) from the Masters tee.
He stabilized, and did not escalate, the Soviet-American rivalry.
Upon discovery of the Nazi concentration camps, he ordered camera crews to document evidence of the atrocities in them for use in the Nuremberg Trials.
The 22nd Amendment to the U.S. Constitution was ratified in 1951, and it set term limits to the presidency of two terms.
In talks located in London that year, they expressed a willingness to discuss inspections; the tables were then turned on Eisenhower, when he responded with an unwillingness on the part of the U.S. to permit inspections.
The Resolution bolstered the morale of the Chinese nationalists, and signaled to Beijing that the U.S. was committed to holding the line.
The effort was a long struggle; Eisenhower had to be convinced that political circumstances had created a genuine duty for him to offer himself as a candidate, and that there was a mandate from the populace for him to be their President.
He elaborated, "we recognize the imperative need for this development&nbsp;... the potential for the disastrous rise of misplaced power exists and will persist&nbsp;... Only an alert and knowledgeable citizenry can compel the proper meshing of the huge industrial and military machinery of defense with our peaceful methods and goals, so that security and liberty may prosper together."
Invited by Bolesław Bierut and decorated with the highest military decoration, he was shocked by the scale of destruction in the city.
He was promoted to lieutenant general on July 7.
Although conservatism in politics was strong during the 1950s and Eisenhower generally espoused conservative sentiments, his administration concerned itself mostly with foreign affairs (an area in which the career-military president had more knowledge) and pursued a hands-off domestic policy.
He was appointed Deputy Chief in charge of Pacific Defenses under the Chief of War Plans Division (WPD), General Leonard T. Gerow, and then succeeded Gerow as Chief of the War Plans Division.
On May 7, 2002, the Old Executive Office Building was officially renamed the Eisenhower Executive Office Building.
On March 31, Eisenhower's body was returned to the National Cathedral, where he was given an Episcopal Church funeral service.
In 1969, four major record companies&nbsp;– ABC Records, MGM Records, Buddha Records and Caedmon Audio&nbsp;– released tribute albums in Eisenhower's honor.
Through his involvement in the Council on Foreign Relations, he also gained exposure to economic analysis, which would become the bedrock of his understanding in economic policy.
The 18th hole at Cherry Hills Country Club, near Denver, is named in his honor.
The failure of negotiations over arms until 1955 was due mainly to the refusal of the Russians to permit any sort of inspections.
From 1920, Eisenhower served under a succession of talented generals&nbsp;– Fox Conner, John J. Pershing, Douglas MacArthur and George Marshall.
This allowed Eisenhower to accomplish all of his objectives—the end of this communist encroachment, the retention of the Islands by the Chinese nationalists and continued peace.
Academically, Eisenhower's best subject by far was English.
It speculated that the pilot might have fallen unconscious while the autopilot was still engaged, and falsely claimed that "the pilot reported over the emergency frequency that he was experiencing oxygen difficulties."
He also upgraded the role of the National Security Council in planning all phases of the Cold War.
His parents set aside specific times at breakfast and at dinner for daily family Bible reading.
Speaker Martin concluded that Eisenhower worked too much through subordinates in dealing with Congress, with results, "often the reverse of what he has desired" because Members of Congress, "resent having some young fellow who was picked up by the White House without ever having been elected to office himself coming around and telling them 'The Chief wants this'.
Eisenhower followed the orders laid down by the Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS) in directive JCS 1067, but softened them by bringing in 400,000 tons of food for civilians and allowing more fraternization.
In July 1953, an armistice took effect with Korea divided along approximately the same boundary as in 1950.
The Eisenhauer (German for "iron hewer/miner") family migrated from Karlsbrunn, Germany, to North America, first settling in York, Pennsylvania, in 1741, and in the 1880s moving to Kansas.
The Sino-American Mutual Defense Treaty with Taiwan was signed in December 1954.
Eisenhower removed him from the agency and revoked his security clearance, though he knew this would create fertile ground for McCarthy.
It was at this time that Eisenhower voiced his disagreements with the Democratic party and declared himself and his family to be Republicans.
Conservative critics of his administration found that he did not do enough to advance the goals of the right; according to Hans Morgenthau, "Eisenhower's victories were but accidents without consequence in the history of the Republican party."
In December 1943, President Roosevelt decided that Eisenhower&nbsp;– not Marshall&nbsp;– would be Supreme Allied Commander in Europe.
Eisenhower entered the 1952 presidential race as a Republican to counter the non-interventionism of Senator Robert A. Taft, campaigning against "communism, Korea and corruption."
After the capitulation of Axis forces in North Africa, Eisenhower oversaw the highly successful invasion of Sicily.
He graduated in the middle of the class of 1915, which became known as "the class the stars fell on", because 59 members eventually became general officers.
While stationed in the Philippines, he played regularly with President Manuel Quezon, and was dubbed "The bridge wizard of Manila".
Russian leader Nikita Khrushchev dismissed the proposal out of hand.
''Angels in the Outfield'' was Eisenhower's favorite movie.
Prior to his inauguration, Eisenhower led a meeting of advisors at Pearl Harbor addressing foremost issues; agreed objectives were to balance the budget during his term, to bring the Korean War to an end, to defend vital interests at lower cost through nuclear deterrent, and to end price and wage controls.
Eisenhower also attracted criticism for his handling of the 1960 U-2 incident and the associated international embarrassment, for the Soviet Union's perceived leadership in the nuclear arms race and the Space Race, and for his failure to publicly oppose McCarthyism.
In their first 35 years of marriage, they moved many times.
Eisenhower suffered seven heart attacks in total from 1955 until his death.
Eisenhower gave major aid to help France in Vietnam.
In defeating Taft for the nomination, it became necessary for Eisenhower to appease the right wing Old Guard of the Republican Party; his selection of Richard M. Nixon as the Vice-President on the ticket was designed in part for that purpose.
Once again his spirits were raised when the unit under his command received orders overseas to France.
His wife Mamie was buried next to him after her death in 1979.
It has been called one of the great speeches of history:
Eisenhower was severely criticized for the move.
Initially, Gerald Ford and Jimmy Carter tried to operate without a chief of staff, but each eventually appointed one.
Initially Eisenhower planned on serving only one term, but as with other decisions, he maintained a position of maximum flexibility in case leading Republicans wanted him to run again.
Wichita Dwight D. Eisenhower National Airport in Wichita, Kansas.
After he had been elected to his second presidential term in 1956, Eisenhower became the first U.S. president constitutionally prevented from running for re-election to the office, having served the maximum two terms.
The mission proved a success and the Marines departed three months later.
This position drew criticism from a number of corners.
Eisenhower's cabinet, consisting of several corporate executives and one labor leader, was dubbed by one journalist, "Eight millionaires and a plumber."
The word "expeditionary" was dropped soon after his appointment for security reasons.
Eisenhower then articulated his position as a moderate, progressive Republican: "I have just one purpose&nbsp;... and that is to build up a strong progressive Republican Party in this country.
The Royal Yugoslav Commemorative War Cross (Yugoslavia)
The major was assigned in 1919 to a transcontinental Army convoy to test vehicles and dramatize the need for improved roads in the nation.
This was an unprecedented step by Eisenhower to protect communication beyond the confines of a cabinet meeting, and soon became a tradition known as executive privilege.
Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev announced that a "spy-plane" had been shot down but intentionally made no reference to the pilot.
The family used an $80 standard soldier's casket, and dressed his body in his famous short green jacket.
Eisenhower valued the brief respites and the amenities of an office which he endowed with an arduous daily schedule.
Eisenhower looked to moderation and cooperation as a means of governance.
When Robert B. Anderson, Eisenhower's first Secretary of the Navy, argued that the U.S. Navy must recognize the "customs and usages prevailing in certain geographic areas of our country which the Navy had no part in creating," Eisenhower overruled him: "We have not taken and we shall not take a single backward step.
More dramatically, in July 1958, he sent 15,000 Marines and soldiers to Lebanon as part of Operation Blue Bat, a non-combat peace-keeping mission to stabilize the pro-Western government and to prevent a radical revolution from sweeping over that country.
As a result, he was "almost incessantly" devoted to the idea of the American Assembly, a concept he developed into an institution by the end of 1950.
The Eisenhowers then lived in Texas from 1889 until 1892, and later returned to Kansas, with $24 to their name at the time.
The Eisenhower Medical Center in Rancho Mirage, California was named after him in 1971.
He addressed the 1964 Republican National Convention, in San Francisco, and appeared with party nominee Barry Goldwater in a campaign commercial from his Gettysburg retreat.
In Russia, Captain Powers made a forced confession and apology.
When the U.S. entered World War I he immediately requested an overseas assignment but was again denied and then assigned to Ft. Leavenworth, Kansas.
Following the German unconditional surrender, Eisenhower was appointed Military Governor of the U.S.
Likewise, the fall of Guatemala would end with the fall of neighboring Mexico.
On the whole, Eisenhower's support of the nation's fledgling space program was officially modest until the Soviet launch of Sputnik in 1957, gaining the Cold War enemy enormous prestige around the world.
He then launched a national campaign that funded not just space exploration but a major strengthening of science and higher education.
In 1956, Eisenhower faced Adlai Stevenson again and won by an even larger landslide, with 457 of 531 electoral votes and 57.6% of the popular vote.
After World War II, Eisenhower served as Army Chief of Staff under President Harry S. Truman and then accepted the post of President at Columbia University.
The affair was an embarrassment for United States prestige.
German defenses continued to deteriorate on both the eastern front with the Soviets and the western front with the Allies.
Eisenhower presented the medal as an expression of his appreciation and the medal is a keepsake reminder for the recipient.
When the Soviet Union successfully tested a hydrogen bomb in late November 1955, Eisenhower, against the advice of Dulles, decided to initiate a disarmament proposal to the Soviets.
Eisenhower was a longtime member of the club, which operated one of his favorite courses.
In 1954, Eisenhower articulated the domino theory in his outlook towards communism in Southeast Asia and also in Central America.
Edgar asked for a second year, Dwight consented and worked for a second year.
Eisenhower later resented the space program and its gargantuan price tag—he was quoted as saying, "Anyone who would spend $40 billion in a race to the moon for national prestige is nuts."
Bridge expert Oswald Jacoby frequently participated in the White House games, and said, "The President plays better bridge than golf.
A total of twenty designs are cataloged with a total mintage of 9,858.
Eisenhower was also the first outgoing President to come under the protection of the Former Presidents Act; two living former Presidents, Herbert Hoover and Harry S. Truman, left office before the Act was passed.
That year the loss of North Vietnam to the communists and the rejection of his proposed European Defence Community (EDC) were serious defeats, but he remained optimistic in his opposition to the spread of communism, saying "Long faces don't win wars".
Senator, Joseph L. Bristow.
The design also incorporates location, date, and/or significant event.
His earlier military reputation in Europe was effective with the Chinese.
French cooperation was deemed necessary to the campaign, and Eisenhower encountered a "preposterous situation" with the multiple rival factions in France.
Ike's Pond was built and named, and the dam is located just where Eisenhower said it should be.
In recognition of his senior position in the Allied command, on December 20, 1944, he was promoted to General of the Army, equivalent to the rank of Field Marshal in most European armies.
It was essential to his success that Eisenhower express opposition to Roosevelt's policy at Yalta and against Truman's policies in Korea and China—matters in which he had once participated.
Eisenhower also conducted the first pre-inaugural cabinet meeting in history in late 1952; he used this meeting to articulate his anti-communist Russia policy.
Eisenhower later emphasized that too much had been made of the disagreements with MacArthur, and that a positive relationship endured.
Critics regarded it as one of the finest U.S. military memoirs, and it was a major financial success as well.
A "Draft Eisenhower" movement in the Republican Party persuaded him to declare his candidacy in the 1952 presidential election to counter the candidacy of non-interventionist Senator Robert A. Taft.
The British backed down, but then wanted Eisenhower to move into Czechoslovakia for political reasons.
Biographer Stephen Ambrose opined that this was the best speech of Eisenhower's presidency.
In 1953, the Republican Party's Old Guard presented Eisenhower with a dilemma by insisting he disavow the Yalta Agreements as beyond the constitutional authority of the Executive Branch; however, the death of Joseph Stalin in March 1953 made the matter a moot point.
In 1954 Eisenhower wanted to increase surveillance inside the Soviet Union.
At West Point he played football.
In February 1955, Eisenhower dispatched the first American soldiers to Vietnam as military advisors to Diem's army.
He expanded its programs and rolled them into a new cabinet-level agency, the Department of Health, Education and Welfare, while extending benefits to an additional ten million workers.
Collins' instructions were to support the leader Ngo Dinh Diem in subverting communism, by helping him to build an army and wage a military campaign.
In his farewell speech, Eisenhower raised the issue of the Cold War and role of the U.S. armed forces.
Completely missing out on the warfront left him depressed and bitter for a time, despite being given the Distinguished Service Medal for his work at home.
Despite his unprecedented use of Army troops to enforce a federal desegregation order at Central High School in Little Rock, Eisenhower was criticized for his reluctance to support the civil rights movement to the degree that activists wanted.
Martin Luther King Jr. wrote to Eisenhower to thank him for his actions, writing "The overwhelming majority of southerners, Negro and white, stand firmly behind your resolute action to restore law and order in Little Rock".
He flew to San Antonio, where he had been stationed years earlier, to support John W. Goode, the unsuccessful Republican candidate against the Democrat Henry B. Gonzalez for Texas' 20th congressional district seat.
In June 1941, he was appointed Chief of Staff to General Walter Krueger, Commander of the 3rd Army, at Fort Sam Houston in San Antonio, Texas.
