Constantine FitzGibbon, Thomas's first in-depth biographer, wrote "No major English poet has ever been as Welsh as Dylan".
When phoned at the Chelsea that morning, he said he was feeling ill and postponed the engagement.
Our one and only true love was drink", she wrote and "The bar was our altar".
Despite Cleverdon's urges, the script slipped from Thomas's priorities and in early 1951 he took a trip to Iran to work on a film for the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company.
Thomas was an accomplished writer of prose poetry, with collections such as ''Portrait of the Artist as a Young Dog'' (1940) and ''Quite Early One Morning'' (1954) showing he was capable of writing moving short stories.
There Thomas collaborated with Davenport on the satire ''The Death of the King's Canary'', though due to fears of libel the work was not published until 1976.
Thomas favoured the Anglicised pronunciation and gave instructions that it should be Dillan .
Elder Olson, in his 1954 critical study of Thomas's poetry, wrote "...&nbsp;a further characteristic which distinguished Thomas's work from that of other poets.
Strand produced films for the MOI; Thomas scripted at least five films in 1942, ''This Is Colour'' (a history of the British dyeing industry) and ''New Towns For Old'' (on post-war reconstruction).
I should say I wanted to write poetry in the beginning because I had fallen in love with words.
When Seamus Heaney gave an Oxford lecture on the poet he opened by addressing the assembly, "Dylan Thomas is now as much a case history as a chapter in the history of poetry", querying how 'Thomas the Poet' is one of his forgotten attributes.
Poet and critic Walter J. Turner commented in ''The Spectator'', "This book alone, in my opinion, ranks him as a major poet".
Their first child, Llewelyn Edouard, was born on 30 January 1939.
They went sight-seeing, but Thomas was unwell and retired to his bed for the rest of the afternoon.
He described his experience there in ''Quite Early One Morning'':
The children spoke only English though their parents were bilingual in English and Welsh, and David Thomas gave Welsh lessons at home.
His childhood was spent in Swansea, with summer trips to Carmarthenshire to visit Fernhill, a dairy farm owned by his maternal aunt, Ann Jones, the memory of which is used for the 1945 lyrical poem "Fern Hill".
Thomas's refusal to align with any literary group or movement has made him and his work difficult to categorize.
In 2009, over 18,000 votes were cast in a BBC poll to find the UK's favourite poet; Thomas was placed 10th.
Thomas arrived in New York on 20 October 1953 to undertake another tour of poetry reading and talks, organised by Brinnin.
''These Are The Men'' (1943) was a more ambitious piece in which Thomas's verse accompanies Leni Riefenstahl's  footage of an early Nuremberg Rally.
Thomas walked through the bombed-out shell of the town centre with his friend Bert Trick.
They then went to the White Horse Tavern in Greenwich Village, before returning to the Chelsea Hotel.
He went out in the evening to keep two drink appointments.
Thomas' formal education began at Mrs Hole's dame school a private school on Mirador Crescent, a few streets away from his home.
He handed responsibility to his assistant, Liz Reitell, who was keen to see Thomas for the first time since their three-week romance early in the year.
Thomas had bronchitis and asthma in childhood and struggled with these throughout his life.
In 1936, his next collection ''Twenty-five Poems'', published by J. M. Dent, also received much critical praise.
On returning to Britain Thomas began work on two further poems, "In the white giant's thigh", which he read on the ''Third Programme'' in September 1950, and the incomplete "In country heaven".
Later, there was speculation about drugs and diabetes.
He is a dazzling obscure writer who can be enjoyed without understanding."
In December 1935 Thomas contributed the poem "The Hand That Signed the Paper" to Issue 18 of the bi-monthly ''New Verse''.
In 2014, to celebrate the centenary of Thomas's birth, the British Council Wales undertook a year long programme of cultural and educational works.
During his final school years he began writing poetry in notebooks, the first poem dated 27 April (1930), is entitled "Osiris, come to Isis".
Those that have championed his work have found the criticism baffling.
Korg surmises that Thomas approached his prose writing as an alternate poetic form, which allowed him to produce complex, involuted narratives that do not allow the reader to rest.
"And death shall have no dominion" appeared in the ''New English Weekly'' in May 1933.
The trip also resulted in Thomas recording his first poetry to vinyl, which Caedmon Records released in America later that year.
After being rebuffed he found work with Strand Films providing him with his first regular income since the ''Daily Post''.
It was there that his father died and the funeral was held.
When he broadcast on Welsh BBC, early in his career, he was introduced using this pronunciation.
He died in New York before the BBC could record "Under Milk Wood".
Would he be offensive, violent, obscene?"
Jacob Korg believes that Thomas's fiction work can be classified into two main bodies, vigorous fantasies in a poetic style and, after 1939, more straightforward narratives.
What the words stood for was of a very secondary importance&nbsp;...
Other poets from whom critics believe Thomas drew influence include James Joyce, Arthur Rimbaud and D. H. Lawrence.
He later stated that he believed they were "intellectual muckpots leaning on a theory".
1950 is also believed to be the year that he began work on 'Under Milk Wood', under the working title 'The Town That Was Mad'.
In those days, Thomas used to frequent the cinema on Mondays with Tom Warner who, like Watkins, had recently suffered a nervous breakdown.
In December 1944 he recorded ''Quite Early One Morning'' (produced by Aneirin Talfan Davies, again for the Welsh BBC) but when Davies offered it for national broadcast BBC London turned it down.
Thomas flew to the States on 19 October 1953 for what would be his final tour.
''Conquest of a Germ'' (1944) explored the use of early antibiotics in the fight against pneumonia and tuberculosis.
''18 Poems'' was noted for its visionary qualities which led to critic Desmond Hawkins writing that the work was "the sort of bomb that bursts no more than once in three years".
The next day he took part in ''Poetry And The Film'', a recorded symposium at Cinema 16, with panellists Amos Vogel, Arthur Miller, Maya Deren, Parker Tyler, and Willard Maas.
Saddened to see his friends going on active service, he continued drinking and struggled to support his family.
The Kardomah Café reopened on Portland Street after the war.
Thomas was born in Swansea, Wales, in 1914.
In 1954 the play won the Prix Italia for literary or dramatic programmes.
Brinnin, who was director of the Poetry Centre, did not travel to New York but remained in Boston to write.
The procession to the church was filmed and the wake took place at Brown's Hotel.
He was an undistinguished pupil who shied away from school, preferring reading.
Olson continued that in a postmodern age that continually attempted to demand that poetry have social reference, none could be found in Thomas's work, and that his work was so obscure that critics could not explicate it.
His middle name, Marlais, was given in honour of his great-uncle, William Thomas, a Unitarian minister and poet whose bardic name was Gwilym Marles.
The play was first broadcast on 15 June 1947.
When he wrote to Stephen Spender in 1952, thanking him for a review of his ''Collected Poems'', he added "Oh, & I forgot.
Thomas acquired a garage a hundred yards from the house on a cliff ledge which he turned into his writing shed, and where he wrote several of his most acclaimed poems.
Soon after the bombing raids, Thomas wrote a radio play, ''Return Journey Home'', which described the café as being "razed to the snow".
The barman, and the owner of the pub who served him, later commented that Thomas could not have imbibed more than half that amount.
Although Taylor disliked him intensely, he stayed for a month, drinking "on a monumental scale", up to 15 or 20 pints of beer a day.
After drinking at the White Horse, a pub he had found through Scottish poet Ruthven Todd, Thomas returned to the Hotel Chelsea, declaring, "I've had 18 straight whiskies.
He began augmenting his income with reading tours and radio broadcasts.
I think that's the record!"
Air pollution in New York had risen significantly and exacerbated chest illnesses, such as Thomas had.
The volume was critically acclaimed and won a contest run by the ''Sunday Referee'', netting him new admirers from the London poetry world, including Edith Sitwell and Edwin Muir.
Thomas's work and stature as a poet have been much debated by critics and biographers since his death.
His first appearance was planned to be at a rehearsal of ''Under Milk Wood'' at the Poetry Centre.
He suggested she get male assistance, so she called upon the painter Jack Heliker, who arrived before 11&nbsp;pm.
Despite Reitell's previous misgivings about their relationship, they spent the rest of the day and night together.
Hounded by creditors, Thomas and his family left Laugharne in July 1940 and moved to the home of critic John Davenport in Marshfield, Gloucestershire.
He performed a "work in progress" version of ''Under Milk Wood'', solo, for the first time at Harvard University on 3 May.
In February 1941, Swansea was bombed by the Luftwaffe in a "three nights' blitz".
An ambulance was summoned.
During this time Thomas fractured his arm falling down a flight of stairs when drunk.
He was ill, complaining of chest trouble and gout while still in Britain, though there is no record he received medical treatment for either condition.
On one occasion, when she served him a boiled egg, she had to cut its top off for him, as Thomas did not know how to do this.
At midnight on 5 November, Thomas's breathing became more difficult and his face turned blue.
Feltenstein's role and actions have been criticised by many sources, especially his incorrect diagnosis of delirium tremens and the high dose of morphine he administered.
His father had a first-class honours degree in English from University College, Aberystwyth, and ambitions to rise above his position teaching English literature at the local grammar school.
Many critics have argued that Thomas's work is too narrow and that he suffers from verbal extravagance.
On the evening of 27 October, Thomas attended his 39th birthday party but felt unwell and returned to his hotel after an hour.
Coughing sometimes confined him to bed and he had a history of bringing up blood and mucus.
Reviewing the volume, critic Philip Toynbee declared that "Thomas is the greatest living poet in the English language".
Thomas's home in Laugharne, the Boathouse, is a museum run by Carmarthenshire County Council.
At the post-mortem, the pathologist found three causes of death&nbsp;– pneumonia, brain swelling and a fatty liver.
He wrote begging letters to random literary figures asking for support, a plan he hoped would provide a long-term regular income.
During the tour Thomas was invited to many parties and functions and on several occasions became drunk - going out of his way to shock people - and was a difficult guest.
Ferris in his 1989 biography includes Thomas's heavy drinking, but is more critical of those around him in his final days and does not draw the conclusion that he drank himself to death.
Ten stories in his next book, ''Portrait of the Artist as a Young Dog'' (1940), were based less on lavish fantasy than ''The Map of Love'' and more on real-life romances featuring himself in Wales.
Thomas remained a popular guest on radio talk shows for the BBC who regarded him as "useful should a younger generation poet be needed".
Another monument to Thomas stands in Cwmdonkin Park, one of his favourite childhood haunts, close to his birthplace.
It was the time that Thomas's reputation for heavy drinking developed.
Thomas was a teenager when many of the poems for which he became famous were published: "And death shall have no dominion", "Before I Knocked" and "The Force That Through the Green Fuse Drives the Flower".
His images were carefully ordered in a patterned sequence, and his major theme was the unity of all life, the continuing process of life and death and new life that linked the generations.
The affairs either ran out of steam or were halted after Caitlin discovered his infidelity.
Feltenstein administered injections and Thomas made it through the two performances, but collapsed immediately afterwards.
In the second half of 1945, Thomas began reading for the BBC Radio programme, ''Book of Verse'', broadcast weekly to the Far East providing Thomas with a regular income and bringing him into contact with Louis MacNeice, a congenial drinking companion whose advice Thomas cherished.
In May 1949 Thomas and his family moved to his final home, the Boat House at Laugharne purchased for him at a cost of £2,500 in April 1949 by Margaret Taylor.
The Royal Patron of The Dylan Thomas 100 Festival was Charles, Prince of Wales, who made a recording of ''Fern Hill'' for the event.
The film was never made, with Thomas returning to Wales in February, though his time there allowed him to provide a few minutes of material for a BBC documentary entitled 'Persian Oil'.
:::Oh as I was young and easy in the mercy of his means
Robert Lowell wrote in 1947, "Nothing could be more wrongheaded than the English disputes about Dylan Thomas's greatness&nbsp;...
A similar arrangement was used by other new authors including Philip Larkin.
During his fourth trip to New York in 1953, Thomas became gravely ill and fell into a coma, from which he never recovered.
Although not expressed as strongly, Glyn Jones believed that he and Thomas's friendship cooled in the later years as he had not 'rejected enough' of the elements that Thomas disliked&nbsp;– "Welsh nationalism and a sort of hill farm morality".
Critics have explored the connection between the creation of Thomas's mythological pasts into his works such as "The Orchards", which Ann Elizabeth Mayer believes reflects the Welsh myths of the ''Mabinogion''.
A post mortem gave the primary cause of death as pneumonia, with pressure on the brain and a fatty liver as contributing factors.
Though Thomas wrote exclusively in the English language, he has been acknowledged as one of the most important Welsh poets of the 20th century.
Thomas continued to work as a freelance journalist for several years during which time he remained at Cwmdonkin Drive where he continued to add to his notebooks, amassing 200 poems in four books between 1930 and 1934.
Thomas saw biology as a magical transformation producing unity out of diversity, and in his poetry sought a poetic ritual to celebrate this unity.
I can't read Welsh."
Never was there such a dame school as ours, so firm and kind and smelling of galoshes, with the sweet and fumbled music of the piano lessons drifting down from upstairs to the lonely schoolroom, where only the sometimes tearful wicked sat over undone sums, or to repent a little crime&nbsp;— the pulling of a girl's hair during geography, the sly shin kick under the table during English literature.
By the end of the month, over 200 New Yorkers had died from the smog.
Many of his works appeared in print while he was still a teenager; however, it was the publication of "Light breaks where no sun shines," in 1934, that caught the attention of the literary world.
Goodby believes that Thomas has been mainly snubbed since the 1970s and has become "...&nbsp;an embarrassment to twentieth-century poetry criticism" his work failing to fit standard narratives and is thus ignored rather than studied.
The publication of ''Deaths and Entrances'' in 1946 was a turning point for Thomas.
Thomas died at noon on 9 November, still in a coma.
The prize, administered by the Dylan Thomas Centre, is awarded at the annual Swansea Bay Film Festival.
In early 1938 they moved to Wales, renting a cottage in the village of Laugharne, Carmarthenshire.
After initially seeking employment in a reserved occupation, he managed to be classified Grade III, which meant that he would be among the last to be called up for service.
Reitell later said that Feltenstein was "rather a wild doctor who thought injections would cure anything".
claims that Brinnin, along with Reitell and Feltenstein, were culpable.
Caitlin gave birth to their third child, a boy named Colm Garan Hart, on 25 July 1949.
Highlights included a touring replica of Thomas's work shed, Sir Peter Blake's exhibition of illustrations based on Under Milk Wood and a 36-hour marathon of readings which saw the likes of Michael Sheen and Sir Ian McKellen performing Thomas's work.
Thomas died intestate with assets to the value of £100.
At this time he borrowed heavily from friends and acquaintances.
The second tour was the most intensive of the four, taking in 46 engagements.
Thomas was admitted to the emergency ward at St Vincent's Hospital at 1:58&nbsp;am.
In all, he wrote half his poems while living at Cwmdonkin Drive before moving to London.
Critical studies have been clouded by Thomas's personality and mythology, especially his drunken persona and death in New York.
After returning to the hotel, he went out again for a drink at 2&nbsp;am.
Of the 90 poems he published, half were written during these years.
At the outset of the Second World War, Thomas was worried about conscription and referred to his ailment as "an unreliable lung".
Thomas hoped to find employment in the film industry and wrote to the director of the films division of the Ministry of Information (MOI).
Thomas spent the last nine or ten days of his third tour in New York mostly in the company of Reitell, with whom he had an affair.
In his free time, he joined the amateur dramatic group at the Little Theatre in Mumbles, visited the cinema in Uplands, took walks along Swansea Bay, and frequented Swansea's pubs, especially the Antelope and the Mermaid Hotels in Mumbles.
When Thomas travelled in America, he recited Hardy's work in his readings.
Richard Burton starred in the first broadcast in 1954, and was joined by Elizabeth Taylor in a subsequent film.
The BBC Radio programme, Desert Island Discs, in which guests usually choose their favourite songs, has heard 50 participants select a Dylan Thomas recording.
Despite this, many of the group, including Henry Treece, modelled their work on Thomas.
In 2005, the Dylan Thomas Screenplay Award was established.
Margaret Taylor let them take up residence in the garden summerhouse.
The Poetry Archive notes that "Dylan Thomas's detractors accuse him of being drunk on language as well as whiskey, but whilst there's no doubt that the sound of language is central to his style, he was also a disciplined writer who re-drafted obsessively".
'''Dylan Marlais Thomas''' (27 October 1914&nbsp;– 9 November 1953) was a Welsh poet and writer whose works include the poems "Do not go gentle into that good night" and "And death shall have no dominion"; the 'play for voices' ''Under Milk Wood''; and stories and radio broadcasts such as ''A Child's Christmas in Wales'' and ''Portrait of the Artist as a Young Dog''.
I fell in love, that is the only expression I can think of, at once, and am still at the mercy of words, though sometimes now, knowing a little of their behaviour very well, I think I can influence them slightly and have even learned to beat them now and then, which they appear to enjoy.
Thomas supplemented his income by writing scripts for the BBC, which not only gave him additional earnings but also provided evidence that he was producing essential war work.
Laying his head in her lap, a drunken Thomas proposed.
Thomas's coffin was carried by six friends from the village.
On 31 August 1945 the BBC Home Service broadcast ''Quite Early One Morning'', and in the three years beginning October 1945, Thomas made over a hundred broadcasts for the corporation.
And, when I began to read the nursery rhymes for myself, and, later, to read other verses and ballads, I knew that I had discovered the most important things, to me, that could be ever.
Instead he believes his work, especially his earlier more autobiographical poems, are rooted in a changing country which echoes the Welshness of the past and the Anglicisation of the new industrial nation: "rural and urban, chapel-going and profane, Welsh and English, Unforgiving and deeply compassionate."
Years later, his wife Caitlin would still have to prepare his eggs for him.
Thomas's father chose the name Dylan, which could be translated as "son of the sea", after Dylan ail Don, a character in ''The Mabinogion''.
In 1944, with the threat of German flying bombs on London, Thomas moved to the family cottage in Blaen Cwm near Llangain, where Thomas resumed writing poetry, completing "Holy Spring" and "Vision and Prayer".
William York Tindall, in his 1962 study, ''A Reader's Guide to Dylan Thomas'', finds comparison between Thomas's and Joyce's wordplay, while he notes the themes of rebirth and nature are common to the works of Lawrence and Thomas.
By the late 1930s, Thomas was embraced as the "poetic herald" for a group of English poets, the New Apocalyptics.
''Our Country'' (1945) was a romantic tour of Britain set to Thomas's poetry.
Thomas's position as one of the great modern poets has been much discussed, and he remains popular with the public.
Thomas had one sibling, Nancy (Nancy Marles 1906–1953), who was nine years older.
In April 1953 Thomas returned alone for a third tour of America.
One of his works recorded during this time, ''A Child's Christmas in Wales'',  became his most popular prose work in America.
The next day Reitell invited him to her apartment but he declined.
Despite this his work was rooted in the geography of Wales.
His visit to say goodbye to BBC producer Philip Burton, a few days before he left for New York, was interrupted by a blackout.
Fellow poet and critic Glyn Jones believed that any traces of ''cynghanedd'' in Thomas's work was accidental, although he felt Thomas consciously employed one element of Welsh metrics; that of counting syllables per line instead of feet.
John Brinnin invited Thomas to New York, where in 1950 they embarked on a lucrative three-month tour of arts centres and campuses.
He appeared in the play ''Comus'' for Third Programme, the day after the network launched, and his rich, sonorous voice led to character parts, including the lead in Aeschylus' ''Agamemnon'' and Satan in an adaptation of ''Paradise Lost''.
Of the poetry written at this time, of note is "Fern Hill", believed to have been started while living in New Quay, but completed at Blaen Cwm in mid-1945.
Despite criticism by sections of academia, Thomas's work has been embraced by readers more so than many of his contemporaries, and is one of the few modern poets whose name is recognised by the general public.
Would some dismaying scene take place at the faculty party?
In October 1925, Thomas enrolled at Swansea Grammar School for boys, in Mount Pleasant, where his father taught English.
When she became uncontrollable, she was put in a straitjacket and committed, by Feltenstein, to the River Crest private psychiatric detox clinic on Long Island.
Thomas derived his closely woven, sometimes self-contradictory images from the Bible, Welsh folklore, preaching, and Sigmund Freud.
Rumours circulated of a brain haemorrhage, followed by competing reports that he had been mugged and even that he had drunk himself to death.
Thomas visited the home of historian A. J. P. Taylor in Disley.
This was because his mother had done it for him all this life, an example of her coddling him.
On 3 November, Thomas spent most of the day in bed drinking.
While living in London, Thomas met Caitlin Macnamara, whom he married in 1937.
Thomas introduced Watkins, working at Lloyds Bank at the time, to his friends, now known as The Kardomah Gang.
Thomas's funeral, which Brinnin did not attend, took place at St Martin's Church in Laugharne on 24 November.
In 1982 a plaque was unveiled in Poets' Corner, Westminster Abbey.
Two days later, on 23 October, Herb Hannum, a friend from an earlier trip, noticed how sick Thomas looked and suggested an appointment with Feltenstein before the performances of ''Under Milk Wood'' that evening.
He died on 9 November 1953.
Thomas drank before some of his readings, though it is argued he may have pretended to be more affected by it than he actually was.
Kenneth Rexroth said, on reading ''Eighteen Poems'', "The reeling excitement of a poetry-intoxicated schoolboy smote the Philistine as hard a blow with one small book as Swinburne had with ''Poems and Ballads''."
Thomas told her he had had a terrible week, had missed her terribly and wanted to go to bed with her.
Reitell became increasingly concerned and telephoned Feltenstein for advice.
Thomas would describe the flat as his "London house of horror" and did not return there after his 1952 tour of America.
In March 1943 Caitlin gave birth to a daughter, Aeronwy, in London.
Thomas's writing shed is also preserved.
Thomas's poetry is notable for its musicality, most clear in "Fern Hill", "In Country Sleep", "Ballad of the Long-legged Bait" and "In the White Giant's Thigh" from ''Under Milk Wood''.
