Due to rotation, the Earth is flattened along the geographic axis and bulging around the equator.
+ Geologic layers of Earth
71% of Earth's surface is covered with water.
The elevation of the land surface varies from the low point of −418&nbsp;m at the Dead Sea, to a maximum altitude of 8,848&nbsp;m at the top of Mount Everest.
The crust and the cold, rigid, top of the upper mantle are collectively known as the lithosphere, and it is of the lithosphere that the tectonic plates are composed.
High-latitude regions have since undergone repeated cycles of glaciation and thaw, repeating about every 40,000–.
A crust formed when the molten outer layer of Earth cooled to form a solid as the accumulated water vapor began to act in the atmosphere.
After another billion years all surface water will have disappeared and the mean global temperature will reach  ().
Continents formed by plate tectonics, a process ultimately driven by the continuous loss of heat from Earth's interior.
When the Northern hemisphere is turned towards the sunlight even the increased distance to it does not hinder temperatures to be  warmer than at perihelion—when the marine southern hemisphere is turned towards the Sun.
Hence the ability of hydrogen to escape from the atmosphere may have influenced the nature of life that developed on Earth.
The diameter of the Earth at the equator to be  larger than the pole-to-pole diameter.
Earth provides liquid water—an environment where complex organic molecules can assemble and interact, and sufficient energy to sustain metabolism.
By , Earth's magnetic field was established, which helped prevent the atmosphere from being stripped away by the solar wind.
The distance of Earth from the Sun, as well as its orbital eccentricity, rate of rotation, axial tilt, geological history, sustaining atmosphere and protective magnetic field all contribute to the current climatic conditions at the surface.
&nbsp;&nbsp;35–2890
These deposits are used by humans both for energy production and as feedstock for chemical production.
Other atmospheric functions important to life include transporting water vapor, providing useful gases, causing small meteors to burn up before they strike the surface, and moderating temperature.
These bodies form concentrated sources for many metals and other useful elements.
Roughly  (million years ago), one of the earliest known supercontinents, Rodinia, began to break apart.
The angle of Earth's axial tilt is relatively stable over long periods of time.
The final major mode of heat loss is through conduction through the lithosphere, the majority of which occurs under the oceans because the crust there is much thinner than that of the continents.
Earth's surface can be subdivided into specific latitudinal belts of approximately homogeneous climate.
As the tectonic plates migrate, oceanic crust is subducted under the leading edges of the plates at convergent boundaries.
Earth's fate is less clear.
Most of this salt was released from volcanic activity or extracted from cool igneous rocks.
Each layer has a different lapse rate, defining the rate of change in temperature with height.
According to nebular theory, planetesimals formed by accretion, with the primordial Earth taking 10– to form.
The length of the mean solar day in SI seconds is available from the IERS for the periods 1623–2005 and 1962–2005.
It almost always appears in lowercase in colloquial expressions such as "what on earth are you doing?"
99.22% of all rocks are composed of 11 oxides (see the table at right), with the other constituents occurring in minute quantities.
Because the southern hemisphere is tilted toward the Sun at about the same time that Earth reaches the closest approach to the Sun, the southern hemisphere receives slightly more energy from the Sun than does the northern over the course of a year.
Earth, along with the Solar System, is situated in the Milky Way and orbits about 28,000&nbsp;light-years from its center.
This effect is much less significant than the total energy change due to the axial tilt, and most of the excess energy is absorbed by the higher proportion of water in the southern hemisphere.
This lowest layer is called the troposphere.
By astronomical convention, the four seasons can be determined by the solstices—the points in the orbit of maximum axial tilt toward or away from the Sun—and the equinoxes, when the direction of the tilt and the direction to the Sun are perpendicular.
Earth's axis of rotation is tilted 23.4° away from the perpendicular of its orbital plane, producing seasonal variations on the planet's surface within a period of one tropical year (365.24 solar days).
Between approximately 4.1 and , numerous asteroid impacts during the Late Heavy Bombardment caused significant changes to the greater surface environment of the Moon, and by inference, to that of Earth.
The Earth's increasing surface temperature will accelerate the inorganic CO2 cycle, reducing its concentration to levels lethally low for plants ( for C4 photosynthesis) in approximately 500–.
The United Nations is a worldwide intergovernmental organization that was created with the goal of intervening in the disputes between nations, thereby avoiding armed conflict.
Beneath the mantle, an extremely low viscosity liquid outer core lies above a solid inner core.
A half billion years later, the last common ancestor of all life arose.
The mass of the oceans is approximately 1.35&nbsp;metric tons, or about 1/4400 of Earth's total mass.
It is estimated that one-eighth of Earth's surface is suitable for humans to live on&nbsp;– three-quarters of Earth's surface is covered by oceans, leaving one quarter as land.
Due to their tidal interaction, the Moon recedes from Earth at the rate of approximately 38&nbsp;mm/yr.
Due to Earth's axial tilt, the amount of sunlight reaching any given point on the surface varies over the course of the year.
Of this, 70.8%, or  (139.43 million sq mi), is below sea level and covered by ocean water.
The height of the troposphere varies with latitude, ranging between 8&nbsp;km at the poles to 17&nbsp;km at the equator, with some variation resulting from weather and seasonal factors.
The Moon is a relatively large, terrestrial, planet-like natural satellite, with a diameter about one-quarter of Earth's.
This allows total and annular solar eclipses to occur on Earth.
Since then, the combination of Earth's distance from the Sun, physical properties, and geological history have allowed life to evolve and thrive.
The two models that explain land mass propose either a steady growth to the present-day forms or, more likely, a rapid growth early in Earth history followed by a long-term steady continental area.
On time scales lasting hundreds of millions of years, the supercontinents have assembled and broken apart.
During the Devonian period, for example, (approximately ) there were 400 days in a year, with each day lasting 21.8 hours.
A 2008 simulation indicates that Earth's orbit will eventually decay due to tidal effects and drag, causing it to enter the Sun's atmosphere and be vaporized.
Ocean currents are also important factors in determining climate, particularly the thermohaline circulation that distributes thermal energy from the equatorial oceans to the polar regions.
The leakage of hydrogen into space contributes to the shifting of Earth's atmosphere and surface from an initially reducing state to its current oxidizing one.
Most, if not all, remaining life will be destroyed by the Sun's increased luminosity (peaking at about 5,000 times its present level).
The Australian Plate fused with the Indian Plate between 50 and .
About 97.5% of the water is saline; the remaining 2.5% is fresh water.
The outer layer is a chemically distinct silicate solid crust, which is underlain by a highly viscous solid mantle.
Earth's interior, like that of the other terrestrial planets, is divided into layers by their chemical or physical (rheological) properties.
According to radiometric dating and other sources of evidence, Earth formed about 4.54 billion years ago.
These plates are rigid segments that move in relation to one another at one of three types of plate boundaries: convergent boundaries, at which two plates come together, divergent boundaries, at which two plates are pulled apart, and transform boundaries, in which two plates slide past one another laterally.
Earth's long-term future is closely tied to that of the Sun.
It is the largest moon in the Solar System relative to the size of its planet, although Charon is larger relative to the dwarf planet Pluto.
Close to 40% of Earth's land surface is used for cropland and pasture, or an estimated 1.3&nbsp;km2 of cropland and 3.4&nbsp;km2 of pastureland.
The Earth's inner core might rotate at a slightly higher angular velocity than the remainder of the planet, advancing by 0.1–0.5° per year.
Human cultures have developed many views of the planet.
This hypothesis has been termed "Snowball Earth", and it is of particular interest because it preceded the Cambrian explosion, when multicellular life forms significantly increased in complexity.
The remaining 29.2% (, or 57.51 million sq mi) not covered by water has terrain that varies greatly from place to place and consists of mountains, deserts, plains, plateaus, and other landforms.
A nebula contains gas, ice grains, and dust (including primordial nuclides).
The Sun rises south of true east in the summer for the southern temperate zone, and sets south of true west.
The pedosphere is the outermost layer of Earth's continental surface and is composed of soil and subject to soil formation processes.
The U.N. serves primarily as a forum for international diplomacy and international law.
The most widely accepted theory of the Moon's origin, the giant impact theory, states that it formed from the collision of a Mars-size protoplanet called Theia with the early Earth.
Aided by the absorption of harmful ultraviolet radiation by the ozone layer, life colonized Earth's surface.
In total, about 487 people have visited outer space and reached orbit , and, of these, twelve have walked on the Moon.
In the current, oxygen-rich atmosphere most hydrogen is converted into water before it has an opportunity to escape.
The mean heat loss from Earth is , for a global heat loss of .
In the southern hemisphere the situation is exactly reversed, with the South Pole oriented opposite the direction of the North Pole.
Three-quarters of the atmosphere's mass is contained within the first 11&nbsp;km of the surface.
In winter, the climate becomes generally cooler and the days shorter.
The remaining 29% is land mass—consisting of continents and islands—that together has many lakes, rivers, and other sources of water that contribute to the hydrosphere.
Energy from the Sun heats this layer, and the surface below, causing expansion of the air.
The lowest air temperature ever directly measured on Earth was  at Vostok Station in 1983, but satellites have used remote sensing to measure temperatures as low as  in East Antarctica.
Within the stratosphere is the ozone layer, a component that partially shields the surface from ultraviolet light and thus is important for life on Earth.
Earth is sometimes personified as a deity.
At the center, the temperature may be up to , and the pressure could reach 360&nbsp;GPa.
The major heat-producing isotopes within Earth are potassium-40, uranium-238, uranium-235, and thorium-232.
At the equator of the magnetic field, the magnetic-field strength at the surface is , with global magnetic dipole moment of .
The principal oxides are silica, alumina, iron oxides, lime, magnesia, potash and soda.
When combined with the Earth–Moon system's common orbit around the Sun, the period of the synodic month, from new moon to new moon, is 29.53&nbsp;days.
Most of the growth is expected to take place in developing nations.
As a red giant, the Sun will lose roughly 30% of its mass, so, without tidal effects, Earth will move to an orbit 1.7 AU from the Sun when the star reaches its maximum radius.
The thickness of the crust varies from about  (kilometers) under the oceans to 30–50&nbsp;km for the continents.
Its axial tilt does undergo nutation; a slight, irregular motion with a main period of 18.6&nbsp;years.
, there were 1,305 operational, human-made satellites orbiting Earth.
The continental crust consists of lower density material such as the igneous rocks granite and andesite.
The most recent reversal occurred approximately 700,000 years ago.
The most abundant silicate minerals on Earth's surface include quartz, feldspars, amphibole, mica, pyroxene and olivine.
(82°28′N) The southernmost is the Amundsen–Scott South Pole Station, in Antarctica, almost exactly at the South Pole.
The oceans cover an area of  with a mean depth of , resulting in an estimated volume of .
The angular size (or solid angle) of these two bodies match because, although the Sun's diameter is about 400 times as large as the Moon's, it is also 400 times more distant.
Nearly 75% of the continental surfaces are covered by sedimentary rocks, although they form about 5% of the crust.
The commonly used Köppen climate classification system (as modified by Wladimir Köppen's student Rudolph Geiger) has five broad groups (humid tropics, arid, humid middle latitudes, continental and cold polar), which are further divided into more specific subtypes.
Atmospheric circulation, topographic features and temperature differences determine the average precipitation that falls in each region.
Originally, ''earth'' was written in lowercase, and from early Middle English, its definite sense as "the globe" was expressed as ''the earth''.
Humans also live on the land by using building materials to construct shelters.
As with Terra and Gaia, Earth was a personified goddess in Germanic paganism: the Angles were listed by Tacitus as among the devotees of Nerthus, and later Norse mythology included Jörð, a giantess often given as the mother of Thor.
The third form of rock material found on Earth is metamorphic rock, which is created from the transformation of pre-existing rock types through high pressures, high temperatures, or both.
The most common rock constituents of the crust are nearly all oxides: chlorine, sulfur and fluorine are the important exceptions to this and their total amount in any rock is usually much less than 1%.
Sea water has an important influence on the world's climate, with the oceans acting as a large heat reservoir.
Both of these motions are caused by the varying attraction of the Sun and the Moon on Earth's equatorial bulge.
Climate can also be classified based on the temperature and precipitation, with the climate regions characterized by fairly uniform air masses.
This causes seasonal change in climate, with summer in the northern hemisphere occurring when the Tropic of Cancer is facing the Sun, and winter taking place when the Tropic of Capricorn in the southern hemisphere faces the Sun.
The Hill sphere, or gravitational sphere of influence, of Earth is about  in radius.
The radius of the inner core is about one fifth of that of Earth.
This causes secular variation of the main field and field reversals at irregular intervals averaging a few times every million years.
Less common is basalt, a denser volcanic rock that is the primary constituent of the ocean floors.
Earth's interior remains active with a solid iron inner core, a liquid outer core that generates the Earth's magnetic field, and a convecting mantle that drives plate tectonics.
For bodies near the celestial equator, this is equivalent to an apparent diameter of the Sun or the Moon every two minutes; from Earth's surface, the apparent sizes of the Sun and the Moon are approximately the same.
The mechanically rigid outer layer of Earth, the lithosphere, is divided into pieces called tectonic plates.
If all of Earth's crustal surface was at the same elevation as a smooth sphere, the depth of the resulting world ocean would be 2.7 to 2.8&nbsp;km.
Water vapor, carbon dioxide, methane and ozone are the primary greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.
Half of that land area is desert (14%), high mountains (27%), or other unsuitable terrain.
The seven major plates are the Pacific, North American, Eurasian, African, Antarctic, Indo-Australian, and South American.
In theory, a solar nebula partitions a volume out of a molecular cloud by gravitational collapse, which begins to spin and flatten into a circumstellar disk, and then the planets grow out of that disk along with the Sun.
This lower-density air then rises, and is replaced by cooler, higher-density air.
Earth's atmosphere and oceans were formed by volcanic activity and outgassing that included water vapor.
By 2020, 60% of the world's population is expected to be living in urban, rather than rural, areas.
In 1980, 5,053&nbsp;Mha (50.53 million km2) of Earth's land surface consisted of forest and woodlands, 6,788&nbsp;Mha (67.88 million km2) was grasslands and pasture, and 1,501&nbsp;Mha (15.01 million km2) was cultivated as croplands.
The Moon may have dramatically affected the development of life by moderating the planet's climate.
In modern times, Earth's perihelion occurs around 3 January, and its aphelion around 4 July.
Most fresh water, about 68.7%, is present as ice in ice caps and glaciers.
Earth's mass is approximately  (5,970 Yg).
House styles now vary: Oxford spelling recognizes the lowercase form as the most common, with the capitalized form an acceptable variant.
Without this tilt, there would be an eclipse every two weeks, alternating between lunar eclipses and solar eclipses.
Due to this recycling, most of the ocean floor is less than  old in age.
Another convention capitalizes "Earth" when appearing as a name (e.g.
A working hypothesis is that it formed by accretion from material loosed from Earth after a Mars-sized object, named Theia, impacted Earth.
Many localized areas are subject to human-made pollution of the air and water, acid rain and toxic substances, loss of vegetation (overgrazing, deforestation, desertification), loss of wildlife, species extinction, soil degradation, soil depletion and erosion.
The station's crew, made up of six people, is usually replaced every six months.
The result is atmospheric circulation that drives the weather and climate through redistribution of thermal energy.
The tectonic plates ride on top of the asthenosphere, the solid but less-viscous part of the upper mantle that can flow and move along with the plates.
The biosphere is divided into a number of biomes, inhabited by broadly similar plants and animals.
The formation and evolution of the Solar System bodies occurred along with those of the Sun.
From that point, the Earth is expected to be habitable for another , possibly up to  if nitrogen is removed from the atmosphere.
More of the heat in Earth is lost through plate tectonics, by mantle upwelling associated with mid-ocean ridges.
Due to this motion, on average it takes 24&nbsp;hours—a solar day—for Earth to complete a full rotation about its axis so that the Sun returns to the meridian.
Earth cutaway from core to exosphere.
The oceans are also a reservoir of dissolved atmospheric gases, which are essential for the survival of many aquatic life forms.
Earth's biosphere is thought to have begun evolving about .
In the southern hemisphere, the situation is reversed, with the summer and winter solstices exchanged and the spring and autumnal equinox dates swapped.
Over the next , solar luminosity will increase by 10%, and over the next  by 40%.
Lord Kelvin used thermodynamics to estimate the age of Earth to be between 20 million and 400 million years in 1864, sparking a vigorous debate on the subject; it was only when radioactivity and radioactive dating were discovered in the late 19th and early 20th centuries that a reliable mechanism for determining Earth's age was established, proving the planet to be billions of years old.
The total arable land is 10.9% of the land surface, with 1.3% being permanent cropland.
Water vapor generated through surface evaporation is transported by circulatory patterns in the atmosphere.
At the other extreme, the slowest-moving plate is the Eurasian Plate, progressing at a typical rate of 21&nbsp;mm/year.
The last continental glaciation ended 10,000&nbsp;years ago.
The orbital and axial planes are not precisely aligned: Earth's axis is tilted some 23.44&nbsp;degrees from the perpendicular to the Earth–Sun plane (the ecliptic), and the Earth–Moon plane is tilted up to ±5.1&nbsp;degrees against the Earth–Sun plane.
The average diameter of the reference spheroid is .
The present pattern of ice ages began about  and then intensified during the Pleistocene about .
Over 7.3 billion humans live on Earth and depend on its biosphere and minerals for their survival.
Climate on Earth has latitudinal anomalies, namely the habitability of the Scandinavian peninsula very far north in sharp contrast to the polar climates of northern Canada as well as the cool summers expected at low latitudes in the Southern Hemisphere (for example on the west coast of South America).
Apart from meteors within the atmosphere and low-orbiting satellites, the main apparent motion of celestial bodies in Earth's sky is to the west at a rate of 15°/h = 15'/min.
A little more than 47% of Earth's crust consists of oxygen.
The crust is separated from the mantle by the Mohorovičić discontinuity.
Some theorists think that without this stabilization against the torques applied by the Sun and planets to Earth's equatorial bulge, the rotational axis might be chaotically unstable, exhibiting chaotic changes over millions of years, as appears to be the case for Mars.
The Moon and Earth orbit a common barycenter every 27.32&nbsp;days relative to the background stars.
Over 99% of all species of life that ever lived on Earth are extinct.
Large areas of Earth's surface are subject to extreme weather such as tropical cyclones, hurricanes, or typhoons that dominate life in those areas.
It is composed mostly of iron (32.1%), oxygen (30.1%), silicon (15.1%), magnesium (13.9%), sulfur (2.9%), nickel (1.8%), calcium (1.5%), and aluminium (1.4%), with the remaining 1.2% consisting of trace amounts of other elements.
Charged particles are contained within the magnetosphere; the plasmasphere is defined by low-energy particles that essentially follow magnetic field lines as Earth rotates; the ring current is defined by medium-energy particles that drift relative to the geomagnetic field, but with paths that are still dominated by the magnetic field, and the Van Allen radiation belt are formed by high-energy particles whose motion is essentially random, but otherwise contained by the magnetosphere.
This facilitated tool use and encouraged communication that provided the nutrition and stimulation needed for a larger brain, which allowed the evolution of humans.
Sedimentary rock is formed from the accumulation of sediment that becomes buried and compacted together.
Scientific investigation has resulted in several culturally transformative shifts in our view of the planet.
There are also inoperative satellites, including Vanguard 1, the oldest satellite currently in orbit, and over 300,000 pieces of space debris.
In the West, belief in a flat Earth was displaced by the idea of spherical Earth, credited to Pythagoras in the 6th century BC.
Viewed from the celestial north pole, the motion of Earth, the Moon, and their axial rotations are all counterclockwise.
The development of agriculture, and then civilization, led to humans having an influence on Earth and the nature and quantity of other life forms that continues today.
Ions and electrons of the solar wind are deflected by the magnetosphere; solar wind pressure compresses the dayside of the magnetosphere, to about 10 Earth radii, and extends the nightside magnetosphere into a long tail.
Other notable plates include the Arabian Plate, the Caribbean Plate, the Nazca Plate off the west coast of South America and the Scotia Plate in the southern Atlantic Ocean.
Following the Cambrian explosion, , there have been five major mass extinctions.
The Sun will evolve to become a red giant in about .
The natural satellites of other planets are also referred to as "moons", after Earth's.
In this model, atmospheric "greenhouse gases" kept the oceans from freezing when the newly forming Sun had only 70% of its current luminosity.
Thus the point on the surface farthest from Earth's center of mass is the summit of the equatorial Chimborazo volcano in Ecuador.
The lack of vegetation will result in the loss of oxygen in the atmosphere, so animal life will become extinct within several million more years.
Mean mantle concentration
The total surface area of the Earth is about  (197 million sq mi).
Projections indicate that the world's human population will reach 9.2&nbsp;billion in 2050.
A subject of on-going research is the formation of the Moon, some 4.53 billion years ago.
During one orbit around the Sun, Earth rotates about its own axis 366.26 times, creating 365.26 solar days or one sidereal year.
By early Modern English, many nouns were capitalized, and ''the earth'' became (and often remained) ''the Earth'', particularly when referenced along with other heavenly bodies.
The same effect on the Moon has led to its tidal locking: its rotation period is the same as the time it takes to orbit Earth.
At high latitudes, the western sides of continents tend to be milder than the eastern sides—for example seen in North America and Western Europe where rough continental climates appear on the east coast on parallels with mild climates on the other side of the ocean.
It has cognates in every Germanic language, and their proto-Germanic root has been reconstructed as *''erþō''.
It has a composition of 78% nitrogen and 21% oxygen, with trace amounts of water vapor, carbon dioxide and other gaseous molecules.
This change enabled the proliferation of aerobic organisms and, indirectly, the formation of the ozone layer due to the subsequent conversion of atmospheric O2 into O3.
