The dance performance done by a single boy is known as Gotipua dance.
IT parks are also developing in and around the city.
West Bengal's capital Kolkata is also the cultural capital of India.
In the period 2005–2007, Sunfeast Open, a tier-III tournament on the Women's Tennis Association circuit, was held in the Netaji Indoor Stadium; it has since been discontinued.
The Royal Calcutta Turf Club hosts horse racing and polo matches.
Odisha has a culinary tradition spanning centuries if not millennia.
The West Bengal Secretariat, General Post Office, Reserve Bank of India, High Court, Lalbazar Police Headquarters, and several other government and private offices are located there.
The children's verses are known as "Chhiollai", "Humobauli" and "Dauligit".
There were many ancient cities established in eastern India.
Durgapur is by far the most industrialised city in eastern India and the second planned city in India.
The first part of the TCS centre is ready and has a capacity to accommodate nearly 1,200 professionals but the software major has only 250 employees at present.
The Government has fostered growth in this sphere by the development of IT Parks such as Infocity 1 and the new Infocity 2.
There are several folk dance forms that can keep one enthralled, such as dhobi nach, jhumarnach, manjhi, gondnach, jitiyanach, more morni, dom-domin, bhuiababa, rah baba, kathghorwa nach, jat jatin, launda nach, bamar nach, jharni, jhijhia, natua nach, bidapad nach, sohrai nach, and gond nach.
The mighty Nalanda University existed at Nalanda which was destroyed by Bakhtiar Khilji during the 12th century and also defeated Sena Dynasty.
With the economic liberalisation policy adopted by the Government of India in the '90s, Bhubaneswar received large investments in the fields of telecommunications, IT and higher education, particularly in science and engineering.
City is also developing excellent road infrastructure to boom its economy.
Bhajan, Janan, Oriya songs based on ragas, Rangila Chaupadi etc.
The Muslims constitute a very large minority in Bengal with 25% of the population and 17% in Bihar.
The Info City was conceived as a five star park, under the Export Promotion Industrial Parks (EPIP) Scheme to create high quality infrastructure facilities for setting up Information Technology related industries.
Among tribals of the region Hinduism is the dominant religion.
Thereafter it was the task of local leaders such as Ananda Gopal Mukherjee and bureaucrats such as K.K.
The Cricket Association of Bengal promotes and develops Cricket by conducting various League Tournaments, tournaments for the age group Under-13, Under-16, and Under-19 and Under-21 categories.
Islamic invasions in the 13th century resulted in the collapse of Hindu kings and most Buddhists, especially in East Bengal, converted to Islam.
Chandrakanti.jpg|Chandrakanti Indian sweet origin from Odisha
Other places are Sultanganj in Bhagalpur and Vaidyanath Jyotirlinga in Deoghar, Jharkhand.
By the 11th century CE folk music of Odisha existing in the form of Triswari, Chatuhswari, and Panchaswari was modified into the classical style.
Chenapoda.jpg|Chhena Poda an Indian sweet origin from Odisha
The popularity of Hockey in Odisha is also very high.
Sen to get Durgapur going.
The Calcutta Cricket and Football Club is the second-oldest cricket club in the world.
It is the oldest surviving dance form of India on the basis of archaeological evidences.
Patna Metro rail corporations is also going to start soon by 2021.It would be the second metro railway in eastern India after Kolkata and the third in North India after Delhi and Lucknow.
The Cricket Association of Bengal (CAB) is the governing body for cricket in West Bengal.
They are distributed over 62 tribal communities.
West Bengal's capital Kolkata is the largest city of this region.
The adolescent poems are "Sajani", "Chhata", "Daika", "Bhekani".
Jharkhand, on the Chhota Nagpur plateau, is a hilly and a heavily forested state rich in mineral wealth.
Bodh Gaya is the city sacred to Buddhism.
Dance with Rabindra Sangeet - Kolkata 2011-11-05 6669.JPG|Dance accompanied by Rabindra Sangeet
Of these, Udramagadhi exists in the form of Odissi music.
The Devadasis in Odisha were known as 'Maharis' and the dance performed by them came to be known as Mahari Dance.
The Calcutta Rowing Club hosts rowing heats and training events.
It is one of the three non-Z category cities in West Bengal apart from Kolkata, which belong to the X category making it a tier-II city.5
Characterised by 19th-century architecture and narrow alleyways, it includes areas such as Shyambazar, Shobhabazar, Chitpur, Cossipore, Sinthee, and Dum Dum.
British war propaganda asserted there were atrocities by the mutinous soldiers in the Black Hole of Calcutta.
The Indian Rebellion of 1857 started in Bengal.
Chinese travellers visited Buddhist and Hindu temples and libraries in the universities of Magadha Empire.
Bhubaneswar is considered to be the "City of Temples".Konark houses an old sun temple.
These sub-forms of the traditional Odissi music, can be categorised under the classical music of Odisha.
In medieval India, it was incorporated into the Mughal, Maratha and then the British empire.
The Eastern India particularly Odisha and Jharkhand have rich mineral resources which resulted in Economic boom in these two states.
It is a composite team of five first-class Indian teams from eastern India competing in the Ranji Trophy, containing notably the Bengal, Jharkhand, and Odisha from East India amongst the bunch.
Archaeological evidence shows cave paintings from the pre-historic period discovered by Gudahandi of Kalahandi and Yogi Matha of Nuapada district that represent the Ghumura and Damru, among other instruments.
The city also straddles the rivers Sone, Gandak and Punpun.
Oriyas are very fond of sweets and no Oriya repast is considered complete without some dessert at the end.
Durga & Kali are patron deities of Bengal and Mithila whereas Jagannath or Vishnu is patron god among Odia people.
Odisha is the treasure house of Folk Songs which are sung on different festivals and specific occasions in their own enjoyment.
Despite the fact, the traditional music form could be saved and maintained in its pristine form.
Despite this rapid growth, an ample number of the populace live in slums.
Bihar and Odisha struggled with economic issues during the British rule and in the beginning of post independent India.
Devadasis were dancing girls who were dedicated to the temples of Odisha.
Bengali dance forms draw from folk traditions, especially those of the tribal groups, as well as from the broader Indian dance tradition.
Baleswari khaja pheni Oriya cuisine.jpg|Khaja Indian sweet origin from Odisha
The European traders established their trade centres in the famous ports of Balasore, Pipili, Palur in the Odisha Coast during the rule of the last independent Hindu king Gajapati Prataprudra Dev.
Ancient Patna, known as Pataliputra, was the capital of the Magadha Empire under the Haryanka, Nanda, Mauryan, Shunga, Gupta and Pala.
The oldest is at the Royal Calcutta Golf Club, and was the first golf club to be built outside the United Kingdom.
Folk music in general is the expression of the ethos and mores of the folk communities.
Fish and other seafood such as crab and shrimp are very popular.
Odissi (Odissi) is a classical dance in eastern India.
It is home to the Bengal cricket team and the Kolkata Knight Riders.
Bengali food has inherited a large number of influences, both foreign and pan-Indian, arising from a historical and strong trade links with many parts of the world.
Eden Gardens, which has a capacity of 90,000 as of 2011, hosted the final match of the 1987 Cricket World Cup.
It is connected to the Seven Sister States of Northeast India by the narrow Siliguri Corridor in the north east of West Bengal.
Odisha remained a powerful Hindu dynasty under the rule of Soma/Keshari Dynasty, Eastern Ganga Dynasty, Surya Dynasty till the end of the 16th century.
The famous auditors Price water house Coopers Pvt.
Bikalkar rasagola.gif|Rasagola an Indian Traditional Sweet origin from Odisha
The famous university of Nalanda was in East India.
The economic boom since 2005 started to spread new malls, highways, airports and IT office complexes, but not evenly across the region.
The city is a centre of football activity in India and is home to top national clubs such as Mohun Bagan A.C., Kingfisher East Bengal F.C., Prayag United S.C., and the Mohammedan Sporting Club.
The Calcutta South Club is a venue for national and international tennis tournaments; it held the first grass-court national championship in 1946.
In Bihar Village Harinagar Bajrang Bali temple is very famous for Hindu people.
The oil base used is mostly mustard oil, but in festivals ghee is used.
East India including Bihar and West Bengal was part of the Mughal Empire in the 16th and 17th centuries.
Only 6% of the population of Odisha is vegetarian, and this is reflected in its cuisine.
Among the other parks are Central Park in Bidhannagar and Millennium Park on Strand Road, along the Hooghly River.
The other two are located at the Tollygunge Club and at Fort William.
West Bengal is the hub of industry and economic activisties in Eastern India and it is also the home to the tallest skylines located in this region and are also among one of the tallest buildings in the country.
Bengali is the dominant language of West Bengal as well as the whole of East India, spoken by well over 90 million people.
Santals are the largest tribal group from the region.
Mohun Bagan A.C., one of the oldest football clubs in Asia, is the only organisation to be dubbed a "National Club of India".
Odissi music has a rich legacy dating back to the 2nd century BCE, when king Kharvela, the ruler of Odisha (Kalinga) patronised this music and dance.
The national anthem of India and national anthem of Bangladesh are Rabindra Sangeets.
Seraikella Chau was developed in Seraikella, the administrative head of the Seraikela Kharsawan district of Jharkhand; Purulia Chau in Purulia district of West Bengal; and Mayurbhanj Chau in Mayurbhanj district of Odisha.
A world class museum is also on its way to completion.
Major representatives of this group include the Munda, Santal, Oraon and Ho peoples.
Bihar Sharif is an important pilgrimage centre for Muslims all over Bihar.
The rich minerals resources of Odisha have been the backbone of the economy dominated by Government.
Central Kolkata hosts the central business district.
''' Ghumura Dance'''
It started with the first prime minister of independent India, Jawaharlal Nehru.
The word ''Panchali'' probably originates from ''panchal'' or ''panchalika'', meaning ''puppet''.
Great poets of the stature of Rabindranath Tagore championed the movement for self-rule.
Odissi music is a classical music in India originated from the eastern state of Odisha.
The Indo-Aryan languages spoken in this region descend from the Magadhi Prakrit, which was spoken in the ancient kingdom of Magadha.
Suburban areas in the Kolkata metropolitan area incorporate parts of the following districts: North 24 Parganas, South 24 Parganas, Howrah, Hooghly, and Nadia.
Some prominent institutions of higher learning located in the states of eastern India are listed below.
It is the administrative, industrial and educational centre of the state.
and 42nd in the world in its list of 100 fastest-growing cities.4 As per the recommendations of the Sixth Central Pay Commission, Asansol has been listed as a Y-category city for calculation of HRA (House Rent Allowance) for public servants.
Generally, Odissi is one of the classical dances of India performed with Odissi music.
It is also the main centre of commerce or the commercial capital of Eastern and north eastern India.
in 1944, it gained an absolute majority in the Bengal Assembly, and Hussein Suhrawardy became the Chief Minister.
The modern state of Odisha was known as Kalinga, and Utkala in ancient times.
Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) and private organisations like Jindal, Vedanta and TATAS.
''Panchali'' is a form of narrative folk songs of the Indian state of West Bengal.
Like other aspects of her culture, music of the sacred land (Odisha) is charming, colourful, variegated encompassing various types.
One can find restaurants serving food without onion and garlic in major places like Puri and other coastal area, which is run by Brahmin owners.
Many believe that Ghumura dance originated from this river valley and gradually spread into the areas between Indravati and Mahanadi, indicating this dance form belongs to the 10th century CE.
Odia is the only language in east India accorded the status of a Classical Language of India.
The Calcutta Polo Club is considered the oldest extant polo club in the world.
It also has the only traditionally developed multi-course tradition from the Indian subcontinent that is analogous in structure to the modern ''service à la russe'' style of French cuisine, with food served course-wise rather than all at once.
The Emperor of Kalinga Mahameghavahana Aira Kharavela was one of the most powerful monarchs of ancient India.
However, Odissi songs were written even before the Odia language developed.
Its current head count stands at around 5000.
Historically, Bhubaneswar has been known by different names such as Toshali, Kalinga Nagari, Nagar Kalinga, Ekamra Kanan, Ekamra Kshetra and Mandira Malini Nagari (city of temples) or the temple city of India.
There are many folk dances in east India, with the best-known being Ghumura Dance, Sambalpuri and Chhau dance.
Indentured Indian labourers from Bihar, sailed to new homes in Fiji, Mauritius, Guyana, Surinam and South Africa.
Its capital Calcutta grew into one of the world's greatest ports.
'''East India''' is a region of India consisting of the Indian states of Bihar, Jharkhand, Odisha, West Bengal, and also the union territory Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
Most East Bengal Hindus fled to India.
The music movement of Odisha, however, took a different turn after independence.
The Beighton Cup, an event organised by the Bengal Hockey Association and first played in 1895, is India's oldest field hockey tournament; it is usually held on the Mohun Bagan Ground of the Maidan.
In Oriya colloquial language Gotipua means single boy.
It originates from the state of Odisha, in eastern India.
These were cut short with the conflict in neighbouring East Pakistan and by the Communist movement at home.
But in recent years, these two states have shown impressive growth record and developed steadily.
Like Hindustani and Carnatic systems, Odissi music is a separate system of Indian classical music and is having all the essential as well as potential ingredients of Indian Classical form.
Today, they continue to face problems of overpopulation, environmental degradation and pervasive corruption despite significant economic and social progress.
Kolkata, considered the leading centre of rugby union in India, gives its name to the oldest international tournament in rugby union, the Calcutta Cup.
DLF Limited is developing an Infopark spread over an area of  in the city.
Several mineral based industries have been established in many cities of Odisha and Jharkhand namely Kalinganagar, Angul, Paradeep, Talcher, Rourkela, Damanjodi, Joda, Barbil, Choudwar, Jamshedpur, Bokaro, Dhanbad and Ranchi.
It was ruled by mighty indigenous rulers of Mahameghavahana dynasty, Eastern Ganga dynasty and Gajapati Dynasty.
''Panch phutana'', a mix of cumin, mustard, fennel, fenugreek and kalonji (nigella) is widely used for tempering vegetables and dals, while ''garam masala'' (curry powder) and ''haladi'' (turmeric) are commonly used for non-vegetarian curries.
The interior states have a drier climate and slightly more extreme climate, especially during the winters and summers, but the whole region receives heavy, sustained rainfall during the monsoon months.
With an emphasis on fish, vegetables and lentils served with rice as a staple diet, Bengali cuisine is known for its subtle (yet sometimes fiery) flavours, and its huge spread of confectioneries and desserts.
The eternal youth composes "Rasarkeli", "Jaiphul", "Maila Jada", "Bayamana", "Gunchikuta" and "Dalkhai".
Hindus form 94% of total population of Odisha.
Other Important Cities are Cuttack, Brahmapur, Rourkela and Sambalpur.The Capital city has a long history of over 2000 years starting with Chedi dynasty (around the 2nd century BCE) who had Sisupalgarh near present-day Bhubaneswar as their capital.
Of the bewildering variety of folk music of Odisha, mention may be made of Geeta, Balipuja Geeta, Kela Keluni Geeta, Dalkhai Geeta, Kendra Geeta, Jaiphula Geeta, Ghumura Geeta, Ghoda Nacha and Danda Nacha Geeta, Gopal Ugala and Osa-Parva-Geeta etc.
Foods from this area are rich and varied, while relying heavily on local ingredients.
The Partition also had its roots in undivided Eastern India.
The states of Odisha and West Bengal share some cultural and linguistic characteristics with Bangladesh.
Bihar, Odisha and Jharkhand rank 14th, 16th and 18th in the List of Indian states by GDP.
Ltd. also has a center in Bhubaneswar.
Bengali is the most spoken language of this region and it is also the second most spoken language in India after Hindi.
Kolkata, which is under the jurisdiction of the Kolkata Municipal Corporation ( KMC), has an area of .
After widespread communal violence during the Direct Action Day protests in Calcutta, leading to further communal violence across British India, the creation of Pakistan became inevitable.
Writing in Bengali, he created a library of over 2,000 songs now known by Bengalis as ''rabindra sangeet'' whose form is primarily influenced by Hindustani classical, sub-classicals, Karnatic, western, bauls, bhatiyali and different folk songs of India.
Also, Santhali and Magahi are the dominant language of Jharkhand, however 34% people of Jharkhand are tribals (2001 Census) and speak their own tribal languages and use Hindi as second language.
Rabindra Sangeet, also known as Tagore Songs, are songs written and composed by Rabindranath Tagore.
Lazarus Barla, Prabodh Tirkey, Dilip Tirkey, Ignace Tirkey, Jyoti Sunita Kullu, Subhadra Pradhan, Birendra Lakra and Anupa Barla are the few names who brought the fame to Indian hockey in International level.
The region was the historical centre of the Nanda, Mahameghavahana dynasty Maurya, Kharavela, Shunga, Kalinga, Eastern Ganga dynasty, Shishunaga dynasty, Gupta and Pala empires that ruled much of the Indian sub-continent at their prime.
Another business hub is the area south of Park Street, which comprises thoroughfares such as Jawaharlal Nehru Road, Camac Street, Wood Street, Loudon Street, Shakespeare Sarani, and A. J. C. Bose Road.
The feudal land system, established through the Permanent Settlement of Bengal, was unpopular among the peasant cultivators and the numerous agricultural labourers found all over Bihar and Bengal (Khetmazdoors).
Bengali and Odia emerged as distinct languages from Magadhi Prakrit and Maithili around the 9th century CE.
Kolkata is very fast transforming itself to become city equipped with every facilities for IT and ITES and also financial outsourcing hub and its satellites Salt Lake City, Kolkata and Rajarhat are taken the burdens of India's IT and financial boom.
It is the second largest city in West Bengal after Kolkata2 and the 35th largest urban agglomeration in India.3 According to a 2010 report prepared by the International Institute for Environment and Development, a UK-based policy research non-governmental think tank, Asansol is ranked 11th among Indian cities.
Nalanda, Puphagiri and Vikramshila universities were the famed institutions of higher learning in ancient India located in Eastern India.
This is because during the Bengal Renaissance, Brahmin cooks from Odisha, especially from Puri, were employed in the Bengal–Odisha border.
The most popular sports in Kolkata are football and cricket.
Tagore wrote some 2,230 songs.
After the Kalinga War the Maurya king Ashoka sent emissaries to spread Buddhism across Asia.
The old museum of the city will be replaced by one of the biggest mall in east India.
Odissi music got shaped during the time of famous Oriya poet, Jayadeva, who composed lyrics meant to be sung.
It is the second largest city of Eastern India.
There are also other cities sacred to Jains in Bihar and Jharkhand.
The origin of Ghumura goes back to ancient times.
Kalighat Kali temple in Kolkata is the most important of all Shakti Peethas in India.
The Kolkata Metropolitan Area is the country's third largest.
Festivals and fasts witness a cuisine without onion and garlic, whereas other days witness an aroma of garlic and onion paste in curries.
Education in the eastern part of India has seen rapid transformation.
Together with Bangladesh, West Bengal formed the ethno-linguistic region of Bengal before partition in 1947.
Bengali cuisine is a culinary style originating in Bengal which is now divided between the Indian state of West Bengal and today's Bangladesh.
It organises different types of cricket tournaments in West Bengal.Cricket Association of Bengal is affiliated to the Board of control for cricket in India is the parent body or governing the game of Cricket in Bengal, and involved in conducting the game of cricket in Bengal.
The flavours are usually subtle and delicately spiced, quite unlike the fiery curries typically associated with Indian cuisine.
The kitchen of the famous Jagannath temple in Puri is reputed to be the largest in the world, with a thousand cooks, working around 752 wood-burning clay hearths called ''chulas'', to feed over 10,000 people everyday.
Some tribals also follow their indigenous religions (Sarana).
It is affiliated to the Board of Control for Cricket in India.
Macher Jhol.JPG|A traditional Bengali fish meal&nbsp;– Rice with Macher Jhol (Literally translated to "Fish's gravy")
There is a beautiful waterfall in the river valley of Indravati which was initially recognised by Chindak Naagas of Chakrakot.
The multi-use Salt Lake Stadium, also known as Yuva Bharati Krirangan, is the world's second-largest football facility by seating capacity as of 2010.
OCA manages the famous Barabati Stadium and has got infrastructures and facilities like Odisha cricket academy, newly built Sachin Tendulkar Indoor cricket hall and many grounds like DRIEMS cricket stadium, Ravenshaw university ground, SCB medical ground, Nimpur ground, Basundhara (Bidanasi) ground, Sunshine Ground etc.
Bengal fell under the sway of various Turkic rulers from the early thirteenth century onwards, and was then governed by the British for two centuries (1757–1947).
During Gandhi's independence movement, the Bihari village of Champaran was an important supporter of non-violent resistance.
HIndi along with Urdu, Maithili, Magahi and Bhojpuri is the dominant language of Bihar and Jharkhand.
The East Zone cricket team is a first-class cricket team that represents eastern India in the Duleep Trophy and Deodhar Trophy.
But it has not come to limelight due to apathy from the time of British rule in Odisha, want of its proper study, revival, propagation, etc.
Ganga expressway and elevated corridors are under some of the ongoing projects in the city.
The north–south distance is greater, and its axis is used to section the city into North, Central, and South Kolkata.
'''Chhau dance (or Chau dance)''' is a form of tribal martial dance originating in Mayurbhanj, the princely state of Odisha.
Odia is the dominant language of the state of Odisha.
