Both countries were admitted into the United Nations on 18 September 1973.
In response, the GDR closed the Inner German Border, and on the night of 12 August 1961, East German soldiers began erecting the Berlin Wall.
The economy was centrally planned, and increasingly state-owned.
By 1989, membership in the Christian churches dropped significantly.
During the early postwar years, tensions were high.
Soviet leader Joseph Stalin, a Communist proponent of reunification, died in early March 1953.
In the early 1980s, West Germany adopted the line of "two German states in one German nation".
With videos such as ''Beat Street'' and ''Wild Style'', young East Germans were able to develop a hip hop culture of their own.
Apart from the Protestant state churches () united in the EKD/BEK and the Roman Catholic Church there was a number of smaller Protestant bodies, including Protestant Free Churches () united in the Federation of the Free Protestant Churches in the German Democratic Republic and the Federation of the Free Protestant Churches in Germany, as well as the Free Lutheran Church, the Old Lutheran Church and Federation of the Reformed Churches in the German Democratic Republic.
The East German state promoted an anti-imperialist line that was reflected in all its media and all the schools.
Negotiations (2+4 Talks) were held involving the two German states and the former Allied Powers which led to agreement on the conditions for German unification.
The ruling Communist party, known as the Socialist Unity Party of Germany (SED), was formed in April 1946 from the merger between the Communist Party of Germany (KPD) and the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD) by mandate of Joseph Stalin.
West German television and radio could be received in many parts of the East.
From the beginning, the newly formed GDR tried to establish its own separate identity.
In Leipzig, the Bach archive contains his compositions and correspondence and recordings of his music.
He became an honorary Sioux chief when he visited the United States in the 1990s, and the television crew accompanying him showed the tribe one of his movies.
Stolpe remained in the Brandenburg government until he joined the federal government in 2002.
Consumer goods also were available, by post, from the Danish Jauerfood, and Genex companies.
The Allies countered the Soviets with the Berlin Airlift (1948–49) of food, fuel, and supplies to West Berlin.
At the production level, artificial prices made for a system of semi-barter and resource hoarding.
East Germany's culture was strongly influenced by communist thought and was marked by an attempt to define itself in opposition to the west, particularly West Germany and the United States.
Kurt Masur, the conductor of the Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra, led local negotiations with the government and held town meetings in the concert hall.
''Deutscher Fernsehfunk'' (DFF), from 1972–1990 known as ''Fernsehen der DDR'' or DDR-FS, was the state television broadcaster from 1952.
Over time, however, the abbreviation ''DDR'' was also increasingly used colloquially by West Germans and West German media.
However, from the 1960s onward, East Germany began recognizing itself as a separate country from West Germany, and shared the legacy of the united German state of 1871–1945.
by Wolfgang Becker , ''Das Leben der Anderen'' (The Lives of Others) by Florian Henckel von Donnersmarck (won the Academy Award for best Film in a Foreign Language) in 2006,  and ''Alles auf Zucker!''
For the consumer, it led to the substitution of GDR money with time, barter, and hard currencies.
Although area codes were assigned to all major towns and cities, they were only used for switching international calls.
The three sectors occupied by the Western nations were sealed off from the rest of the GDR by the Berlin Wall from its construction in 1961 until it was breached in 1989.
It was considered one of the most professional and best prepared military forces in the world.
In 1969 he helped found the ''Bund der Evangelischen Kirchen in der DDR'' (BEK), where he negotiated with the government while at the same time working within the institutions of this Protestant body.
*Christa Luding-Rothenburger, speed skater and track cyclist
Soviet occupation authorities began transferring administrative responsibility to German communist leaders in 1948, and the GDR  began to function as a state on 7 October 1949.
Disagreements over the policies to be followed in the occupied zones quickly led to a breakdown in cooperation between the four powers, and the Soviets administered their zone without regard to the policies implemented in the other zones.
In 1973, it was separated from the NVA, but it remained under the same ministry.
Between 1956 and 1971 the leadership of the East German Lutheran churches gradually changed its relations with the state from hostility to cooperation.
Dissidents, particularly professionals, sometimes fled to West Germany, which was relatively easy before the construction of the Berlin Wall in 1961.
It was controlled by the Ministry of the Interior.
The Soviet army initiated the blockade by halting all Allied rail, road, and water traffic to and from West Berlin.
Some western commentators claim that the depressed eastern economy is a natural aftereffect of a demonstrably inefficient socialist economy.
After the NVA was separated from the Volkspolizei in 1956, the Ministry of the Interior maintained its own public order barracked reserve, known as the Volkspolizei-Bereitschaften (VPB).
The Catholic Church as a whole (and particularly the bishops) resisted both the East German state and Marxist ideology.
The unification of the two parties was symbolic of the new friendship of German socialists in defeating their common enemy; however, Communists, who held a majority, had virtually total control over policy.
Like most mainstream acts, they appeared in popular youth magazines such as ''Neues Leben'' and ''Magazin''.
# Navy ''(Volksmarine''&nbsp;–  People's Navy)
As the goal of socialism is the elimination of capitalist economics, the GDR strove to reduce wealth disparity between individuals through the elimination of private property, businesses and stores.
Socialist leader Otto Grotewohl (1894–1964) became prime minister until his death.
From the founding of the GDR in 1949, the Socialist Unity Party sought to weaken the influence of the church on the rising generation.
Other popular rock bands were Wir, Dean Reed, City, Silly and Pankow.
They were the only part of the feared Stasi that was visible to the public, and so were very unpopular within the population.
The ''Kampfgruppen der Arbeiterklasse'' (combat groups of the working class) numbered around 400,000 for much of their existence, and were organised around factories and neighbourhoods.
Following the remilitarisation of East Germany in 1956, the Deutsche Grenzpolizei was transformed into a military force in 1961, modeled after the Soviet Border Troops, and transferred to the Ministry of National Defense, as part of the National People's Army.
The ruling political party in East Germany was the ''Sozialistische Einheitspartei Deutschlands'' (Socialist Unity Party of Germany, SED).
The SED party platform claimed to support democratic elections and the protection of individual liberties in building up socialism.
At first the promotion of atheism received little official attention.
The border troops of the Eastern sector were originally organised as a police force, the Deutsche Grenzpolizei, similar to the Bundesgrenzschutz in West Germany.
*Maxi Gnauck, gymnast
The East and the West also competed via sport; GDR athletes dominated several Olympic sports.
The two former parties were notorious rivals when they were active before the Nazis consolidated all power and criminalised their agitation.
Club football teams such as Dynamo Dresden, 1.
Many others demonstrated against the ruling party, especially in the city of Leipzig.
The NVA consisted of the following branches:
* ''Demokratische Bauernpartei Deutschlands'' (Democratic Farmers' Party of Germany, DBD).
The following year open elections were held, and international negotiations led to the signing of the Final Settlement treaty on the status and borders of Germany.
The SED destroyed a number of symbolic relics of the former Prussian aristocracy: the Junker manor houses were torn down, the Berliner Stadtschloß was razed, and the equestrian statue of Frederick the Great was removed from East Berlin.
Before World War II, ''Ostdeutschland (''eastern Germany) was used to describe all the territories east of the Elbe (East Elbia), as reflected in the works of sociologist Max Weber and political theorist Carl Schmitt.
The changes made by the communists were most apparent in ending capitalism and transforming industry and agriculture, and in the thrust of the educational system and the media.
The creation of the two states made the 1945 division of Germany permanent.
Benno Besson once said, "In contrast to artists in the west, they took us seriously, we had a bearing."
While enforcement of this ideal led to a more economically even society, it prompted many with economic ambition or those who did not agree with its enforcement to escape—typically those with higher education: doctors, scientists, engineers, and skilled workers.
:"In this state, each person had a place.
Another society of note was the Society for German-Soviet Friendship.
East Berlin was made the country’s 15th ''Bezirk'' in 1961 but retained special legal status until 1968, when the residents approved the new (draft) constitution.
Around 1956 this began to develop into a more neutral stance accommodating conditional loyalty.
Both of these networks were run by the Deutsche Post der DDR (East German Post Office).
*Heike Drechsler, athlete
Later, a French zone was carved out of the American and British zones.
Another factor for success was the furtherance system for young people in GDR.
Many people attempting to emigrate were killed by border guards or booby traps, such as landmines.
All other lands east of the Oder–Neisse line were put under Polish administration, with the exception of historic northern East Prussia, which went to the USSR.
But many East German critics contend that the shock-therapy style of privatization, the artificially high rate of exchange offered for the Ostmark, and the speed with which the entire process was implemented did not leave room for East German enterprises to adapt.
At the Yalta Conference during World War II, the Allies (the U.S., the UK and the Soviet Union) agreed on dividing a defeated Nazi Germany into occupation zones, and on dividing Berlin, the German capital, among the Allied powers as well.
Beginning in 1963 with a series of secret international agreements, East Germany recruited workers from Poland, Hungary, Cuba, Albania, Mozambique, Angola and Vietnam.
Manfred Stolpe became a lawyer for the Brandenburg Protestant Church in 1959 before taking up a position at church headquarters in Berlin.
*Katarina Witt, figure skater
A few of these bands were Die Skeptiker, Die Art and Feeling B. Additionally, hip hop culture reached the ears of the East German youth.
These units were, like the Kasernierte Volkspolizei, equipped as motorised infantry, and they numbered between 12,000 and 15,000 men.
Gojko Mitić was well known in these roles, often playing the righteous, kindhearted and charming chief (''Die Söhne der großen Bärin'' directed by Josef Mach).
Protestants constituted 25% of the population, Roman Catholics 5%.
According to Margarete Feinstein, East Berlin's status as the capital was largely unrecognized by the West and most Third World countries.
East Germany was assigned telephone country code +37; in 1991, several months after reunification, East German telephone exchanges were incorporated into country code +49.
However, Pence and Betts argue, the majority of East Germans over time increasingly regarded the state's ideals to be hollow, though there was also a substantial number of East Germans who regarded their culture as having a healthier, more authentic mentality than that of West Germany.
Western economic opportunities induced a brain drain.
East Germany considered East Berlin to be its capital, and the Soviet Union and the rest of the Eastern Bloc diplomatically recognized East Berlin as the capital.
There was a sense of solidarity.
Because of the imperial and military legacy of Prussia, the SED repudiated continuity between Prussia and the GDR.
Critics of the East German state have claimed that the state's commitment to communism was a hollow and cynical tool, Machiavellian in nature, but this assertion has been challenged by studies that have found that the East German leadership was genuinely committed to the advance of scientific knowledge, economic development, and social progress.
*Olaf Ludwig, road cyclist
The Puhdys and Karat were some of the most popular mainstream bands in East Germany.
They held close ties with the USSR, which maintained military forces in East Germany until its collapse in 1991 (The Russian Federation maintained forces in what was East Germany until 1994), with the stated purpose of countering NATO bases in West Germany.
University chairs and departments devoted to the study of scientific atheism were founded and much literature (scholarly and popular) on the subject was produced.
The estimated 1984 per capita income was $9,800 ($22,600 in 2015 dollars).
These included: 1949–61, which saw the building of socialism; 1961–1970 after the Berlin Wall closed off escape was a period of stability and consolidation; 1971–85 was termed the Honecker Era, and saw closer ties with West Germany; and 1985–89 saw the decline and extinction of East Germany.
Fearing anti-communist counter-revolution on 18 June 1953, the government of the GDR enlisted the Soviet Occupation Forces to aid the police in ending the riot; some fifty people were killed and 10,000 were jailed.
This compares starkly with Poland, which increased during that time from 24 million in 1950 (a little more than East Germany) to 38 million (more than twice East Germany's population).
An unusual feature of the telephone network was that, in most cases, direct distance dialing for long-distance calls was not possible.
It also bordered the three sectors occupied by the United States, United Kingdom and France known collectively as West Berlin.
(Compare Irreligion by country.)
From its creation, it was controlled by the Ministry of National Defence (East Germany).
*Karin Kania, speed skater
But on matters where the state demanded something which the churches felt was not in accordance with the will of God, the churches reserved their right to say no.
Most of these artists recorded on the state-owned AMIGA label.
The centre of political power in East Berlin was referred to as ''Pankow''.
There were approximately 3.6 million telephones in usage (21.8 for every 100 inhabitants), and 16,476 Telex stations.
Many East German players such as Matthias Sammer and Ulf Kirsten became integral parts of the reunified national football team.
For example, the major leagues for ice hockey and basketball just included each 2 teams.
However, the parties did have representation in the Volkskammer and received some posts in the government.
East Germans, meanwhile, came to see their soft currency as worthless relative to the Deutsche Mark (DM).
The share of people who considered themselves irreligious rose from 5% in 1950 to 70% in 1989.
The member parties were almost completely subservient to the SED, and had to accept its "leading role" as a condition of their existence.
Especially after the Ninth Party Congress in 1976, East Germany upheld historical reformers such as Karl Freiherr vom Stein, Karl August von Hardenberg, Wilhelm von Humboldt, and Gerhard von Scharnhorst as examples and role models.
The East German population declined by three million people throughout its forty-one year history, from 19 million in 1948 to 16 million in 1990; of the 1948 population, some 4 million were deported from the lands east of the Oder-Neisse line.
At its peak, it numbered approximately 47,000 men.
The SED set a primary goal of ridding Germany of all traces of the fascist regime.
The policies of the state, communist propaganda, the oppression of churches by the state and the general rise in religious scepticism, all encouraged people to leave their respective churches.
It claimed that West Germany was an illegally constituted NATO puppet state.
FC Magdeburg, FC Carl Zeiss Jena, 1.
However, leadership of West Germany saw reunification as a rather abstract goal.
Emigration to the West was a significant problem—as many of the emigrants were well-educated young  people, it further weakened the state economically.
Yet, seven years after the Allies’ Potsdam Agreement to a unified Germany, the USSR via the Stalin Note (10 March 1952) proposed German reunification and superpower disengagement from Central Europe, which the three Western Allies (the United States, France, the United Kingdom) rejected.
*Jens Weißflog, ski jumper
It was estimated that altogether 2000 – 4000 DDR military and security experts were dispatched to Africa.
The Soviets withdrew from the ACC in 1948; subsequently as the other three zones were increasingly unified and granted self-government, the Soviet administration instituted a separate socialist government in its zone.
Important non-parliamentary mass organisations in East German society included the German Gymnastics and Sports Association (''Deutscher Turn- und Sportbund'' or ''DTSB''), and People's Solidarity (''Volkssolidarität''), an organisation for the elderly.
:"Conceptualizing the GDR as a dictatorship has become widely accepted, while the meaning of the concept dictatorship varies.
The KdA was the political-military instrument of the SED; it was essentially a "party Army".
In a major speech to an SED party conference on 28 March 1956, Grotewohl condemned abuses in the legal system.
*Waldemar Cierpinski, athlete
*Frank-Peter Roetsch, biathlete
Nonetheless it did not match the economic growth of West Germany.
By the early 1950s, the reparations were paid in agricultural and industrial products; and Lower Silesia, with its coal mines and Szczecin, an important natural port, were given to Poland by the decision of Stalin.
The demonstrations eventually led Erich Honecker to resign in October, and he was replaced by a slightly more moderate communist, Egon Krenz.
The socialist centrally planned economy of the German Democratic Republic was like that of the USSR.
Sports clubs were highly subsidized, especially sports in which it was possible to get international fame.
Western powers declined the proposal, believing that Germany should be able to join NATO and that such a negotiation with the Soviet Union would be seen as a capitulation.
Until 1989, the GDR was governed by the Socialist Unity Party (SED), though other parties nominally participated in its alliance organisation, the National Front of Democratic Germany.
*Jürgen Sparwasser, footballer
*Henry Maske, boxer
On a more fundamental level, unification and subsequent federal policies led to serious economic hardships for many East Germans that had not existed before the Wende.
This activity subsided in the late 1960s amid perceptions that it had started to become counterproductive.
Through this time, the West German view was that East Germany was a ''de facto'' government within a single German nation; whereas West Germany was, within its own boundaries, both a ''de facto'' government and ''de jure'' legitimately representated the German nation.
Yugoslavians were often cast as the Native Americans because of the small number of Native Americans in Europe.
However, the SED quickly transformed into a full-fledged Communist party as the more independent-minded Social Democrats were pushed out.
Equality for women was not just on paper.
The Moravian Church also had its presence as the ''Herrnhuter Brüdergemeine''.
East Germans find "Wessis" arrogant and pushy, West Germans think the "Ossis" are lazy good-for-nothings."
The German Democratic Republic was established in the Soviet Zone, while the Federal Republic was established in the three western zones.
Unemployment and homelessness, which simply did not exist during the socialist era, quickly became widespread; this, as well as the closures of countless factories and other workplaces in the east, fostered a growing sense that East Germans were being ignored or neglected by the federal government.
It argued that the GDR was a Soviet puppet state, and frequently referred to it as the "Soviet occupation zone".
It was an all volunteer force until an eighteen-month conscription period was introduced in 1962.
This was formalized in 1974, when the reunification clause was removed from the revised East German constitution.
East Germany was recognized primarily by Communist countries and the Arab bloc, along with some "scattered sympathizers".
This policy was also used for talented pupils with regard to music or mathematics.
Explaining the internal impact of the GDR government from the perspective of German history in the long term, historian Gerhard A. Ritter (2002) has argued that the East German state was defined by two dominant forces&nbsp;– Soviet communism on the one hand, and German traditions filtered through the interwar experiences of German communists on the other.
Afterwards, there have been several debates about whether a real chance for reunification had been missed in 1952.
The organization was based in the ''Funkhaus Nalepastraße'' in East Berlin.
In the Yalta and Potsdam conferences, the Allies established their joint military occupation and administration of Germany via the Allied Control Council (ACC), a four-power (US, UK, USSR, France) military government effective until the restoration of German sovereignty.
They received their training from the Volkspolizei and the Ministry of the Interior.
This was primarily a result of emigration—about one quarter of East Germans left the country before the Berlin Wall was completed in 1961, and after that time, East Germany had very low birth rates, except for a recovery in the 1980s when the birth rate in East Germany was considerably higher than in West Germany.
Similarly, Lavrenty Beria, the First Deputy Prime Minister of the USSR, pursued German reunification, but he was removed from power that same year before he could act on the matter.
The government of the GDR was invested in both promoting the tradition of German classical music, and in supporting composers to write new works in that tradition.
Soviet forces, however, remained in the country throughout the Cold War.
The birthplace of Johann Sebastian Bach (1685–1750), Eisenach, was rendered as a museum about him, featuring more than three hundred instruments, which, in 1980, received some 70,000 visitors.
The five original East German states that had been abolished in the 1952 redistricting were recreated.
Governmental support of classical music maintained some fifty symphony orchestras, such as Gewandhausorchester and Thomanerchor in Leipzig; Sächsische Staatskapelle in Dresden; and Berliner Sinfonie Orchester and Staatsoper Unter den Linden in Berlin.
The state allowed the bishops to lodge protests, which they did on issues such as abortion.
Although there were some limited attempts to create a permanent democratic East Germany, this did not come to pass.
Nevertheless, every political party in the GDR was forced to join the National Front of Democratic Germany, a broad coalition of parties and mass political organisations, including:
On 1 July a currency union preceded the political union: the "Ostmark" was abolished, and the Western German "Deutsche Mark" became common currency.
Football was the most popular sport.
Initially, East Germany claimed an exclusive mandate for all of Germany, a claim supported by most of the Communist bloc.
The new bishops became less politically oriented and more involved in pastoral care and attention to spiritual concerns.
Reception of Western broadcasts was widespread.
This resulted in states (''Bundesländer'') of the former East Germany remaining particularly irreligious.
However, after 1950, political power in East Germany was held by the First Secretary of the SED, Walter Ulbricht.
The Soviet zone surrounded West Berlin, but did not include it; as a result, West Berlin remained outside the jurisdiction of the GDR.
Instead, each location had its own list of dialing codes with shorter codes for local calls and longer codes for long-distance calls.
On 10 March 1952, (in what would become known as the "Stalin Note") Stalin put forth a proposal to reunify Germany with a policy of neutrality, with no conditions on economic policies and with guarantees for "the rights of man and basic freedoms, including freedom of speech, press, religious persuasion, political conviction, and assembly" and free activity of democratic parties and organizations.
Native Americans in these films often took the role of displaced people who fight for their rights, in contrast to the American westerns of the time, where Native Americans were often either not mentioned at all or are portrayed as the villains.
For instance, it did not treat East Germans as foreigners.
The Nationale Volksarmee (NVA) was the largest military organisation in East Germany.
In practice, the ACC’s authority was rendered moot by the Cold War, and East Berlin's status as occupied territory largely became a legal fiction, and the former Soviet sector became fully integrated into the GDR.
However, the Western Allies disputed this recognition, considering the entire city of Berlin to be occupied territory governed by the Allied Control Council.
Comedies enjoyed great popularity, such as the Danish ''Olsen Gang'' or movies with the French comedian Louis de Funès.
In 1949 the Soviets turned control of East Germany over to the Socialist Unity Party, headed by Wilhelm Pieck (1876–1960), who became president of the GDR and held the office until his death, while most executive authority was assumed by SED General Secretary Walter Ulbricht.
While it respected East Germany's independence, it formally maintained that the GDR was merely a ''de facto'' government within a single German nation of which the FRG was the sole representative.
The GDR was dissolved and Germany was unified on 3 October 1990.
The SED was the ruling party for the entire duration of the East German state.
East Germans accepted hip hop as more than just a music form.
On the other hand, there was relatively little change made in the historically independent domains of the sciences, the engineering professions, the Protestant churches, and in many bourgeois life styles.
