By 1614, the yard having become too small, an alternative site was acquired at Blackwall: the new yard was fully operational by 1617.
A cholera pandemic began in Bengal, then spread across India by 1820.
Image:Henry Every.gif|An 18th-century depiction of Henry Every, with the ''Fancy'' shown engaging its prey in the background
Robert Clive led company forces against Siraj Ud Daulah, the last independent Nawab of Bengal, Bihar, and Midnapore district in Odisha to victory at the Battle of Plassey in 1757, resulting in the conquest of Bengal.
This was the background to the Charter Act of 1813 which, among other things:
The Company's charter was renewed for a further 20 years by the Charter Act of 1793.
The Mughal convoy included the treasure-laden ''Ganj-i-Sawai'', reported to be the greatest in the Mughal fleet and the largest ship operational in the Indian Ocean, and its escort, the ''Fateh Muhammed''.
Despite stiff resistance from the East India lobby in parliament and from the Company's shareholders, the Act passed.
In an act aimed at strengthening the power of the EIC, King Charles II granted the EIC (in a series of five acts around 1670) the rights to autonomous territorial acquisitions, to mint money, to command fortresses and troops and form alliances, to make war and peace, and to exercise both civil and criminal jurisdiction over the acquired areas.
Famines, such as the Great Bengal famine of 1770 and subsequent famines during the 18th and 19th centuries, became more widespread, chiefly because of exploitative agriculture promulgated by the policies of the East India company and the forced cultivation of opium in place of grain.
The company eventually came to rule large areas of India with its own private armies, exercising military power and assuming administrative functions.
The East India Company introduced a system of merit-based appointments that provided a model for the British and Indian civil service.
As stated by Professor Sri Ram Sharma, "The President of the Board of Control now became Minister for Indian Affairs."
In 1742, fearing the monetary consequences of a war, the British government agreed to extend the deadline for the licensed exclusive trade by the company in India until 1783, in return for a further loan of £1&nbsp;million.
The hundred years from the Battle of Plassey in 1757 to the Indian Rebellion of 1857 were a period of consolidation for the company, which began to function more as an administrator and less as a trading concern.
The company took this respite to seize Manila in 1762.
* renewed for another twenty years the Company's political and administrative authority
This Act clearly demarcated borders between the Crown and the Company.
The Act of 1786 (26 Geo.
The Company was forced to petition Parliament for assistance.
Image:Every engaging the Great Mogul's Ship.jpg|British pirates that fought during the Child's War engaging the Ganj-i-Sawai
When the news arrived in England it caused an outcry.
Several well-known British scholars and literary men had Company writerships, such as Henry Thomas Colebrooke in India and Charles Lamb in England.
The East India Company was the first company to record the Chinese usage of orange-flavoured tea, which led to the development of Earl Grey tea.
As it increased in size the Army was broken into the Presidency Armies of Bengal, Madras and Bombay each recruiting their own integral Infantry, Cavalry, Artillery and Horse Artillery units.
In 1612, James I instructed Sir Thomas Roe to visit the Mughal Emperor Nuruddin Salim Jahangir (r.&nbsp;1605–1627) to arrange for a commercial treaty that would give the company exclusive rights to reside and establish factories in Surat and other areas.
During this time ships belonging to the company arriving in India docked at Surat, which was established as a trade transit point in 1608.
Although the price of tea had dropped because of the Act, it also validated the Townshend Acts, setting the precedent for the king to impose additional taxes in the future.
In contrast with the legislative proposals of the previous two decades, the 1793 Act was not a particularly controversial measure, and made only minimal changes to the system of government in India and to British oversight of the Company's activities.
One of them, ''Edward Bonventure'', then sailed around Cape Comorin to the Malay Peninsula and returned to England in 1594.
Although dissolved following the rebellion of 1857, it stimulated the growth of the British Empire.
Between 1760 and 1834 only some 10% of the East India Company's officers survived to take the final voyage home.
Wealthy merchants and aristocrats owned the Company's shares.
They, in turn, reported to the Court of Proprietors, which appointed them.
The licence was prolonged until 1766 by yet another act in 1730.
It was completely rebuilt and enlarged in 1726–9; and further significantly remodelled and expanded in 1796–1800.
In 1712, another act renewed the status of the company, though the debts were repaid.
The opinion asserted that, while the Crown of Great Britain enjoyed sovereignty over both, only the property of the former was vested in the Crown.
Three years later, on 22 September 1599, another group of merchants met and stated their intention "to venture in the pretended voyage to the East Indies (the which it may please the Lord to prosper), and the sums that they will adventure", committing £30,133.
The company established trading posts in Surat (1619), Madras (1639), Bombay (1668), and Calcutta (1690).
* initiated a machinery for the codification of laws
This allowed any English firm to trade with India, unless specifically prohibited by act of parliament, thereby annulling the charter that had been in force for almost 100 years.
Within the Army, British officers who initially trained at the company's own academy at the Addiscombe Military Seminary, always outranked Indians, no matter how long their service.
* removed the Company's remaining trade monopolies and divested it of all its commercial functions
On this occasion the Indiamen also succeeded in bluffing their way to safety, and without any shots even being fired.
The three independent armies of the company's Presidencies, with some locally raised irregular forces, expanded to a total of 280,000 men by 1857.
The company was allowed to maintain its virtual monopoly over trade in exchange for the biennial sum and was obligated to export a minimum quantity of goods yearly to Britain.
Having temporarily achieved a state of truce with the Crown, the Company continued to expand its influence to nearby territories through threats and coercive actions.
The shield had as a crest: "A sphere without a frame, bounded with the Zodiac in bend Or, between two pennants flottant Argent, each charged with a cross Gules, over the sphere the words DEUS INDICAT" (Latin: God Indicates).
The factory in Bantam was closed in 1683.
10,000 British troops and countless Indians died during this pandemic.
The high profits reported by the company after landing in India initially prompted King James I to grant subsidiary licences to other trading companies in England.
It introduced substantial governmental control and allowed British India to be formally under the control of the Crown, but leased back to the Company at £40,000 for two years.
By an act that was passed in 1698, a new "parallel" East India Company (officially titled the ''English Company Trading to the East Indies'') was floated under a state-backed indemnity of £2&nbsp;million.
English traders frequently engaged in hostilities with their Dutch and Portuguese counterparts in the Indian Ocean.
The members of the Board were the Chancellor of the Exchequer, the Secretary of State, and four Privy Councillors, nominated by the King.
The supporters were two sea lions (lions with fishes' tails) and the motto was ''DEO DUCENTE NIL NOCET'' (Latin: Where God Leads, Nothing Hurts).
* opened India to missionaries
These tensions erupted at the Indian Rebellion of 1857 and the company ceased to exist when the company dissolved through the East India Stock Dividend Redemption Act 1873.
The three members nominated by Parliament and representing the Government's interest could, and invariably would, outvote the two Company members.
It was based in Addiscombe Place, an early 18th-century mansion.
The docks were taken over by the Port of London Authority in 1909, and closed in 1967.
* carried further the ongoing process of administrative centralisation through investing the Governor-General in Council with, full power and authority to superintend and, control the Presidency Governments in all civil and military matters
As home to the revolution, Britain experienced higher standards of living.
Under this arrangement, the merged company lent to the Treasury a sum of £3,200,000, in return for exclusive privileges for the next three years, after which the situation was to be reviewed.
It also added six additional members to the governor general's executive committee.
During the period of the Napoleonic Wars, the East India Company arranged for letters of marque for its vessels such as the ''Lord Nelson''.
The company became the single largest player in the British global market.
East India Company (EIC)'s ships were well built, with the result that the Royal Navy bought several Company ships to convert to warships and transports.
By the middle of the 19th century, the Company's rule extended across most of India, Burma, Malaya, Singapore, and British Hong Kong, and a fifth of the world's population was under its trading influence.
The East India Company Military Seminary was founded in 1809 at Addiscombe, near Croydon, Surrey, to train young officers for service in the Company's armies in India.
In the next two years, the company established its first factory in south India in the town of Machilipatnam on the Coromandel Coast of the Bay of Bengal.
Despite frequent government intervention, the company had recurring problems with its finances.
The restoration of monarchy in England further enhanced the EIC's status.
The Dutch were aggressive competitors and had meanwhile expanded their monopoly of the spice trade in the Malaccan straits by ousting the Portuguese in 1640–41.
The supporters were: "Two lions rampant guardant Or, each supporting a banner erect Argent, charged with a cross Gules."
* vested the Island of St Helena in the Crown
This increased competition for the Chinese market led to India reducing its opium output and diversifying its exports.
The major factories became the walled forts of Fort William in Bengal, Fort St George in Madras, and Bombay Castle.
* invested the Board of Control with full power and authority over the Company.
In a letter sent to the Privy Council by Sir John Gayer, then governor of Bombay and head of the East India Company, Gayer claims that "it is certain the Pirates ... did do very barbarously by the People of the Ganj-i-Sawai and Abdul Ghaffar's ship, to make them confess where their money was."
Historian Charles Fawcett argued that the East India Company Flag inspired the Stars and Stripes.
On the&nbsp;1 March 1801, the debts of the East India Company to £5,393,989 their effects to £15,404,736 and their sales increased since February 1793, from £4,988,300 to £7,602,041.
Company rule in India effectively began in 1757 after the Battle of Plassey and lasted until 1858 when, following the Indian Rebellion of 1857, the Government of India Act 1858 led to the British Crown assuming direct control of India in the form of the new British Raj.
File:Captain Every (Works of Daniel Defoe).png|Depiction of Captain Every's encounter with the Mughal Emperor's granddaughter after his September 1695 capture of the Mughal trader Ganj-i-Sawai
The powerful stockholders of the old company quickly subscribed a sum of £315,000 in the new concern, and dominated the new body.
''The Times'' commented on 8 April 1873:
With the gradual weakening of the Marathas in the aftermath of the three Anglo-Maratha wars, the British also secured the Ganges-Jumna Doab, the Delhi-Agra region, parts of Bundelkhand, Broach, some districts of Gujarat, the fort of Ahmmadnagar, province of Cuttack (which included Mughalbandi/the coastal part of Odisha, Garjat/the princely states of Odisha, Balasore Port, parts of Midnapore district of West Bengal), Bombay (Mumbai) and the surrounding areas, leading to a formal end of the Maratha empire and firm establishment of the British East India Company in India.
The arrival of tax-exempt Company tea, undercutting the local merchants, triggered the Boston Tea Party in the Province of Massachusetts Bay, one of the major events leading up to the American Revolution.
The East India College was founded in 1806 as a training establishment for "writers" (i.e.
It was sold in 1656, although for some years East India Company ships continued to be built and repaired there under the new owners.
It was initially located in Hertford Castle, but moved in 1809 to purpose-built premises at Hertford Heath, Hertfordshire.
The Club still exists today as a private gentlemen's club with its club house situated at 16 St. James's Square, London.
The site is now occupied by the Lloyd's building.
The company was dissolved in 1874 as a result of the East India Stock Dividend Redemption Act passed one year earlier, as the Government of India Act had by then rendered it vestigial, powerless, and obsolete.
The plunder of Aurangzeb's treasure ship had serious consequences for the English East India Company.
To accomplish this, the Act created a Board of Commissioners for the Affairs of India, usually referred to as the Board of Control.
After occupying premises in Philpot Lane from 1600 to 1621; in Crosby House, Bishopsgate, from 1621 to 1638; and in Leadenhall Street from 1638 to 1648, the Company moved into Craven House, an Elizabethan mansion in Leadenhall Street.
Soon after the defeat of the Spanish Armada in 1588, London merchants presented a petition to Queen Elizabeth I for permission to sail to the Indian Ocean.
Pitt's Act was deemed a failure because it quickly became apparent that the boundaries between government control and the company's powers were nebulous and highly subjective.
But the expense of wars leading to the total control of India strained the Company's finances.
Anybody who traded in breach of the charter without a licence from the Company was liable to forfeiture of their ships and cargo (half of which went to the Crown and the other half to the Company), as well as imprisonment at the "royal pleasure".
The highest rank to which an Indian soldier could aspire was Subadar-Major (or Rissaldar-Major in cavalry units), effectively a senior subaltern equivalent.
Mysore finally fell to the company forces in 1799, with the death of Tipu Sultan.
First recruited from mercenaries and low-caste volunteers, the Bengal Army especially eventually became composed largely of high-caste Hindus and landowning Muslims.
The company developed a lobby in the English parliament.
The war took place on Indian soil, between the company troops and the French forces.
One governor of the company was even reported as saying in 1864 that he would rather have the saltpetre made than the tax on salt.
c. 95) provided that British India would remain under the administration of the Company in trust for the Crown until Parliament should decide otherwise.
Widespread corruption and looting of Bengal resources and treasures during its rule resulted in poverty.
Edmund Burke, a former East India Company shareholder and diplomat, was moved to address the situation and introduced a new Regulating Bill in 1783.
The Company remained in existence in vestigial form, continuing to manage the tea trade on behalf of the British Government (and the supply of Saint Helena) until the East India Stock Dividend Redemption Act 1873 came into effect, on 1 January 1874.
Although these small outposts remained French possessions for the next two hundred years, French ambitions on Indian territories were effectively laid to rest, thus eliminating a major source of economic competition for the company.
This mission was highly successful as Jahangir sent a letter to James through Sir Thomas Roe:
* Relationship to the British government: the bill differentiated the East India Company's political functions from its commercial activities.
Ten committees reported to the Court of Directors.
Unlike all other British Government records, the records from the East India Company (and its successor the India Office) are not in The National Archives at Kew, London, but are held by the British Library in London as part of the Asia, Pacific and Africa Collections.
In the following decades there was a constant battle between the company lobby and the Parliament.
But in 1609 he renewed the charter given to the company for an indefinite period, including a clause that specified that the charter would cease to be in force if the trade turned unprofitable for three consecutive years.
Its spiralling cycle of prosperity, demand and production had a profound influence on overseas trade.
Legalisation stimulated domestic Chinese opium production and increased the importation of opium from Turkey and Persia.
The amalgamated company became the ''United Company of Merchants of England Trading to the East Indies''.
In addition, the company had its own navy, the Bombay Marine, equipped with warships such as ''Grappler''.
The crest was: "A lion rampant guardant Or holding between the forepaws a regal crown proper."
Regarding the field of the flag, there has been much debate and discussion regarding the number and order of the stripes.
Under the act, for the first time the legislative and executive powers of the governor general's council were separated.
At this time, Britain and France became bitter rivals.
The company received a Royal Charter from Queen Elizabeth I on 31December 1600, making it the oldest among several similarly formed European East India Companies.
The companies merged in 1708, by a tripartite indenture involving both companies and the state.
* Internal Administration of British India: the bill laid the foundation for the centralised and bureaucratic British administration of India which would reach its peak at the beginning of the 20th century during the governor-generalship of George Nathaniel Curzon, 1st Baron Curzon.
In 1838 with the amount of smuggled opium entering China approaching 1,400 tons a year, the Chinese imposed a death penalty for opium smuggling and sent a Special Imperial Commissioner, Lin Zexu, to curb smuggling.
After this point, the Company functioned as a regularised subsidiary of the Crown, with greater accountability for its actions and reached a stable stage of expansion and consolidation.
The company's mainstay businesses were by then cotton, silk, indigo dye, saltpetre, and tea.
Hastings was entrusted with the power of peace and war.
Historical documents and paintings show many variations from 9 to 13 stripes, with some images showing the top stripe being red and others showing the top stripe being white.
* provided that no Indian subject of the Company would be debarred from holding any office under the Company by reason of his religion, place of birth, descent or colour
Lastly, on 15 June 1795, the ''General Goddard'' played a large role in the capture of seven Dutch East Indiamen off St Helena.
British judges and magistrates would also be sent to India to administer the legal system.
It was finally vacated in 1860 and demolished in 1861–62.
The loot from the ''Ganj-i-Sawai'' had a total value between £325,000 and £600,000, including 500,000 gold and silver pieces, and has become known as the richest ship ever taken by pirates.
Other examples include:
They received no training in administration or leadership to make them independent of their British officers.
The prosperity that the officers of the company enjoyed allowed them to return to Britain and establish sprawling estates and businesses, and to obtain political power.
It had solved its critical lack of cash needed to buy tea by exporting Indian-grown opium to China.
Many of the East India Company records are freely available online under an agreement that the Families in British India Society has with the British Library.
This time they succeeded, and on 31 December 1600, the Queen granted a Royal Charter to "George, Earl of Cumberland, and 215 Knights, Aldermen, and Burgesses" under the name, ''Governor and Company of Merchants of London trading with the East Indies''.
These vessels often accompanied vessels of the Royal Navy on expeditions, such as the Invasion of Java (1811).
The great expansion came after 1750, when it had 3000 regular troops.
In 1803, an Act of Parliament, promoted by the East India Company, established the East India Dock Company, with the aim of establishing a new set of docks (the East India Docks) primarily for the use of ships trading with India.
The Council was headed by Warren Hastings, the incumbent Governor, who became the first Governor-General of Bengal, with an ill-defined authority over the Bombay and Madras Presidencies.
The existing Brunswick Dock, part of the Blackwall Yard site, became the Export Dock; while a new Import Dock was built to the north.
* asserted the sovereignty of the British Crown over the Indian territories held by the Company;
After a year of resistance the EIC surrendered in 1690, and the company sent envoys to Aurangzeb's camp to plead for a pardon.
The company, which benefited from the imperial patronage, soon expanded its commercial trading operations, eclipsing the Portuguese Estado da Índia, which had established bases in Goa, Chittagong, and Bombay, which Portugal later ceded to England as part of the dowry of Catherine de Braganza.
The growth of tensions between the EIC and the local religious and cultural groups grew in the 19th century as the Protestant revival grew in Great Britain.
By 1720, 15% of British imports were from India, almost all passing through the company, which reasserted the influence of the company lobby.
Initially, the Council consisted of Lt. General Sir John Clavering, The Honourable Sir George Monson, Sir Richard Barwell, and Sir Philip Francis.
In return, the company offered to provide the Emperor with goods and rarities from the European market.
The Company employed many junior clerks, known as "writers", to record the details of accounting, managerial decisions, and activities related to the Company, such as minutes of meetings, copies of Company orders and contracts, and filings of reports and copies of ship's logs.
This Act provided for the formal dissolution of the company on 1 June 1874, after a final dividend payment and the commutation or redemption of its stock.
In 1596, three more ships sailed east; however, these were all lost at sea.
During the wars against the French and their allies in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, the East India Company's armies were used to seize the colonial possessions of other European nations, including the islands of Réunion and Mauritius.
This Act (16 & 17 Vict.
With the advent of the Industrial Revolution, Britain surged ahead of its European rivals.
The East India Company also launched a joint attack with the Dutch United East India Company on Portuguese and Spanish ships off the coast of China, which helped secure their ports in China.
The governance of the company was in the hands of one governor and 24 directors or "committees", who made up the Court of Directors.
The company's envoys had to prostrate themselves before the emperor, pay a large indemnity, and promise better behaviour in the future.
In 1607, the Company decided to build its own ships and leased a yard on the River Thames at Deptford.
In 1838 the East India Dock Company merged with the West India Dock Company.
Permission was granted, and despite the defeat of the English Armada in 1589, on 10April 1591 three ships sailed from Torbay around the Cape of Good Hope to the Arabian Sea on one of the earliest English overseas Indian expeditions.
Although their first attempt had not been completely successful, they nonetheless sought the Queen's unofficial approval to continue, bought ships for their venture and increased their capital to £68,373.
Similarly, the ''Earl of Mornington'', an East India Company packet ship of only six guns, also sailed under a letter of marque.
The two companies wrestled with each other for some time, both in England and in India, for a dominant share of the trade.
Two days later, on 24September, "the Adventurers" reconvened and resolved to apply to the Queen for support of the project.
The motto was ''AUSPICIO REGIS ET SENATUS ANGLIÆ'' (Latin: By right of the King and the Senate of England).
The emperor withdrew his troops and the company subsequently reestablished itself in Bombay and set up a new base in Calcutta.
** deprived the company of its Indian trade monopoly except for trade in tea and the trade with China
In 1689 a Mughal fleet commanded by Sidi Yaqub attacked Bombay.
In its first century and half, the EIC used a few hundred soldiers as guards.
In addition, Penang, one of the states in Malaya, became the fourth most important settlement, a presidency, of the Company's Indian territories.
The aggressive policies of Lord Wellesley and the Marquis of Hastings led to the Company gaining control of all India (except for the Punjab and Sindh), and some part of the then kingdom of Nepal under the Sugauli Treaty.
By the Treaty of Paris (1763), France regained the five establishments captured by the British during the war (Pondichéry, Mahe, Karikal, Yanam and Chandernagar) but was prevented from erecting fortifications and keeping troops in Bengal (art.
The Indian Princes had become vassals of the Company.
* renewed the charter of the company for a further twenty years, but
They were spotted passing the straits en route to Surat.
The Company's headquarters in London, from which much of India was governed, was East India House in Leadenhall Street.
The Governor General and the council would have complete legislative powers.
William Henry Pyne notes in his book ''The Microcosm of London'' (1808) that:
However, the company's governor in London, Sir Josiah Child, interfered with Hedges's mission, causing Mughal Emperor Aurangzeb to break off the negotiations.
Under the Act's most important provision, a governing Council composed of five members was created in Calcutta.
The East India Company's arms, granted in 1698, were: "Argent a cross Gules; in the dexter chief quarter an escutcheon of the arms of France and England quarterly, the shield ornamentally and regally crowned Or."
It continued to experience resistance from local rulers during its expansion.
3 c. 16) enacted the demand of Earl Cornwallis that the powers of the Governor-General be enlarged to empower him, in special cases, to override the majority of his Council and act on his own special responsibility.
The English Education Act by the Council of India in 1835 reallocated funds from the East India Company to spend on education and literature in India.
However, unable to obtain Japanese raw silk for import to China and with their trading area reduced to Hirado and Nagasaki from 1616 onwards, in 1623 the Company closed their factory.
The Industrial Revolution in Britain, the consequent search for markets, and the rise of ''laissez-faire'' economic ideology form the background to the Government of India Act 1833 (3 & 4 Will.
Its armies were to become the armies of British India after 1857, and it played a key role in introducing English as an official language in India.
His nomination, made by the Court of Directors, would in future be subject to the approval of a Council of Four appointed by the Crown.
The government took it over in 1858, and renamed it the Royal Indian Military College.
This resulted in the First Opium War (1839–42).
