Silicone was invented 1899 by Prof Frederick Kipping at University College, Nottingham.
Hammonds, the furniture company, is in Hinckley.
George Boole, pioneer of Boolean logic (upon which all digital electronics - and computers - depend), was born in Lincoln in 1815.
Its LZR Racer suit helped Michael Phelps win eight golds at the 2008 Olympics.
There are currently plans to bring a new high-speed rail line through the East Midlands as part of the High Speed 2 project.
Cooper Bussmann (former Hawker Fusegear) makes electrical fuses in Burton on the Wolds off the B676.
Much of Britain's lingerie and hosiery is made in the region.
Sealed Air UK on the Telford Way Ind Estate near Kettering General Hospital makes Bubble Wrap, which its parent USA company invented in 1960.
A land speed record for trains was broken in the region.
Eibach Federn UK (shock absorbers) is off the B581 in Broughton Astley.
Both sites are part of the region's only World Heritage Site, the Derwent Valley Mills.
Don Grierson at the University of Nottingham was the first to invent a GM tomato, which was the first GM food on sale in the UK, and the USA.
After Norfolk, Lincolnshire is the second biggest potato producer in the country, and grows 30% of the country's vegetables.
Versalift UK (van-mounted access platforms) are at Burton Latimer.
This has been explained by academic statisticians, who claim the area straddles the north-south divide.
Most of the region was protected by a solitary RAF station, RAF Digby near Sleaford, part of No.
The unitary authorities of Derby, Leicester and Nottingham have each written a joint LTP in collaboration with their respective local county councils.
At A-level, Nottinghamshire, Lincolnshire and Derbyshire regularly generate results greater than the national average.
There are four cities, Derby, Leicester, Lincoln and Nottingham; other major towns include Boston, Chesterfield, Corby, Grantham, Hinckley, Kettering, Loughborough, Mansfield, Northampton and Wellingborough.
The Mallard record was not broken by any BR train until 6 June 1973 when an HST between Northallerton and Thirsk reached 131&nbsp;mph; Mallard in 1938 had 6 carriages and a dynamometer car.
Michael Creeth of Northampton discovered the hydrogen-bonding mechanism between DNA bases, allowing the structure of DNA to be discovered.
Duresta Upholstery is in Long Eaton, with a factory of DFS opposite.
CARE Fertility, the UK's largest independent IVF company, and a pioneer in the field, is next to EMAS on Woodhouse Way Business Park; Simon Fishel developed the world's first IVF degree course at the University of Nottingham.
British Rail Research Division in Derby invented the APT and Maglev.
Hewitt Sportsturf, just south of Whetstone next to the M1 in Cosby, supplied the turf (360 rolls) for the Olympic Stadium in March 2011, although it was grown near Scunthorpe.
Aggregate Industries (now part of LafargeHolcim since July 2015, when Paris-based Lafarge merged with Swiss-based Holcim) is based at Bardon Hall in Bardon, next to the 912-foot (278 m) Bardon Hill, Leicestershire's highest point.
Scott Nichol make traditional socks in Hinckley.
The world's first (horse-powered) cotton mill was built in central Nottingham in 1768.
At the A6019/A453 south of the tax office in Nottingham is Thomas & Betts UK (former W & J Furse, and bought by ABB in 2012), a world leader in lightning and earthing protection.
DSF Refractories & Minerals are the UK's last main refractory company at Friden at the A515/A5012 (Via Gellia) junction.
Triumph Motorcycles and Ultima Sports (sports cars) are in Hinckley.
The British Olympic athletics team trained at the university as part of their preparations for the 2012 Summer Olympics.
Leicester is the largest city in the region, whilst the Nottingham Urban Area is its largest urban conurbation.
Amphenol Jaybeam off the A509 in the west of Wellingborough makes cellular telephone base station antennas.
Sapa are at Tibshelf on the B6014, on the Saw Pit Lane Ind Est with Storetec, the UK base of Wanzl shopping trolleys.
Two of the United Kingdom's mainline railways serve the region - the Midland Main Line and the East Coast Main Line, providing services terminating at London St Pancras railway station and London Kings Cross railway station respectively.
Timsons make printers in Kettering.
Tricker's shoes in Northampton have a royal warrant.
Boole's grandson, the physicist G. I. Taylor, made significant experimental contributions to quantum mechanics.
Nearby at Castle Donington is the home of the (separate) headquarters of BMI (in Donington Hall) and bmibaby.
The Alumasc Group is in Burton Latimer.
Lincoln was the site of the first tank (first built on 8 September 1915, Little Willie was the first tank, and is the oldest surviving tank in the world, originally called the No.1 Lincoln Machine), and Grantham the first diesel engine (in 1892).
It stretches from the western outskirts of Leicester in the east to Burton upon Trent in the west, and is planned to link the ancient forests of Needwood and Charnwood.
PTS (part of BSS) at Crick claims to be the main provider of supplies to UK plumbers.
Smaller airports include Retford Gamston Airport, Nottingham Airport, Leicester Airport, Hucknall Airfield, Sywell Aerodrome, and Bruntingthorpe Aerodrome.
Traffic in the region is growing at two percent per year - the highest growth rate of all regions in the United Kingdom.
Lincolnshire, Northamptonshire, Nottinghamshire and Rutland U.A.
Yeomans Outdoor Leisure is south of Staveley, off the A6192 near Poolsbrook Country Park.
Off the B1192 near the A52 junction in Kirton Holme south of Hubberts Bridge, Albert Bartlett produces the Vivaldi potato, much sold in Sainsbury's, and invented in Lincolnshire.
The popular 35mm Eyemo film camera came with Cooke lenses.
During the Second World War, all of R-R's engineering staff had been transferred to Belper.
However, since the Conservative-Lib-Dem coalition Government began spending cuts after their success in the 2010 General Election, regional bodies such as those held by the Regional Development Agencies have been devolved to smaller groups now on a County level.
Boots was the biggest chemist chain in the world; now A.S. Watson Group is the world's biggest health retail company.
However, the airport has a Derby phone number and postcode, and is in Leicestershire, but is officially assigned to Nottingham by IATA.
Booker Group, the Cash & Carry, (Happy Shopper and 2,700 Premier Stores, and famous for the Booker Prize) is on B571 in Wellingborough.
Rivalry between the region’s three biggest cities has led to a long-running discussion about the identity of both the airport, and region, with The East Midlands rarely found on any non-political map of the UK.
Three of the world's four main international air-freight companies (integrators) have their UK operations at EMA: DHL, UPS and TNT (TNT bought by UPS); Fedex have theirs at Stansted.
; Bishop Grosseteste University : The newest university in the East Midlands, formerly a university college.
RML Group (Ray Mallock) BTCC and WTCC motorsport team is in Wellingborough, next to the UK HQ of Vredestein tyres (Dutch).
Miflex, off the B582 in Lubbesthorpe between Enderby and Kirby Muxloe, make air hoses for diving regulators.
Kerry Ingredients make Homepride flour in Gainsborough.
In April 1936 the first Ordnance Survey trig point was sited at Cold Ashby in Northamptonshire.
Jayplas, the UK's biggest plastic recycling company is based in Egleton in Rutland.
On a District Council level, Rushcliffe in Nottinghamshire tends to attain some of the region's best GCSE results.
; Loughborough University : In addition to its more traditional academic work, Loughborough University is well-regarded for its sporting heritage.
Horace W. Lee invented the inverted telephoto lens (known as the Angénieux retrofocus) in 1931, lengthening the back focal length of the camera for the 1930s Technicolor Process and for vignetting.
An opportunist employee of the Derbyshire textile factories, Samuel Slater of Belper saw his chance and (illegally) eloped in 1789 to Rhode Island in the USA after memorising the layout of the textile machinery while working at Jedediah Strutt's Milford Mill.
George at Asda, based at Lutterworth, in 2009 overtook M&S to become Britain's leading fashion retailer.
Greene, Tweed UK (elastomers) is in Ruddington next to Experian.
The crisp company Walkers (owned by PepsiCo and the UK's biggest grocery brand) makes 10 million bags of crisps a day, using 280,000 tonnes of potatoes a year, at the biggest crisp factory in the world at Beaumont Leys; next door Bradgate Bakery makes sandwiches, and nearby Walker & Sons make pies (Samworth Bros) at their Charnwood Bakery.
Barwell in Leicestershire had Britain's largest meteorite (7&nbsp;kg) on 24 December 1965.
Belkin UK (and Linksys) UK is along the A45 in Rushden, Misco is in Wellingborough, and RS Components is in Corby.
The region has an area of 15,627&nbsp;km² (6,033 sq mi), and was home to over 4.5 million people in 2011.
Long Clawson Dairy are the largest producers of Stilton cheese in the UK; the cheese, with Shropshire Blue, is also made in Cropwell Bishop and Colston Bassett.
Mettler Toledo UK (industrial weighing) is in the west of Beaumont Leys.
The LSC has been replaced by the Young People's Learning Agency, and the Skills Funding Agency.
BPB plc (British Plasterboard), the world's largest manufacturer of plasterboard (calcium sulphate) who own British Gypsum, is based in East Leake, Nottinghamshire.
The north part of Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire used to have many coal mines, and there are two pits still producing in Nottinghamshire near Market Warsop and Ollerton; UK Coal is based in Harworth.
As a result of the dispute the name was soon changed back, to now include all city names.
Opposite the crisp factory at Beaumont Leys, Beaumont Park is PepsiCo's main research centre in the UK.
Radcliffe Road (A6011) in West Bridgford in 1902 was the first tarmac road (five miles long) in the world.
The borough of Boston has the highest TFR for district councils.
The first jet aircraft flew from RAF Cranwell in May 1941.
Porterbrook, one the UK's three rolling stock operating companies is in Derby.
Charles Frederick Worth, born in Lincolnshire in 1825, is considered to be the founder of Parisian ''haute couture'', and thought be world's first true fashion designer.
Rutland (amongst the highest-performing areas in the region where GCSE standards are concerned) has one of the highest percentages of pupils reaching the threshold of five grade A–C GCSEs (including Maths and English) in England.
The East Midlands is a five-member constituency for the European Parliament.
For top-tier authorities, Rutland has the lowest rate, and the lowest rate for any district in England.
Boden (clothing) is on the Meridian estate in Leicester.
; University of Lincoln : An English university founded in 1992, with origins tracing back to the foundation and association with the Hull School of Art 1861.
Marvel's Mill in Northampton was the first cotton mill to be powered by water.
For teenage pregnancy rates in the region, of top-tier authorities, Nottingham has the highest rate.
Of the aggregates that are produced in the region, twenty five per cent is from Derbyshire and forty per cent is from Leicestershire.
In March 2011, the average unemployment claimant count for the region was 3.6%.
Jacobs is on the Meridian Business Park in Braunstone, next to the M1.
Their biggest rivals are Leicester Tigers.
Butcher's Pet Care dog food (mostly own label) is off the A428 at Crick (M1 junction 18).
The first 1978 BDO World Darts Championship was held in Nottingham, in February 1978, being largely the idea of Nick Hunter, a BBC sports producer, and the event first introduced Sid Waddell.
In Lenton, are the head offices of Games Workshop, the producers of Warhammer miniatures.
The East Midlands' largest settlements are Leicester, Nottingham, Derby, Northampton, Chesterfield, Lincoln, Mansfield, Loughborough  and Kettering.
Only 25% of the region's students undertaking a first degree are native to the region.
The University of Leicester is also the only university ever to have won a Times Higher Education award in seven consecutive years.
Coordinated Universal Time (UTC), in Paris, takes the average of 300 atomic clocks around the world.
Chemring Defence UK (military pyrotechnics) is at Draycott and Church Wilne west of the M1.
NHS East Midlands is at Sandiacre next to junction 25 of the M1.
The region has the second lowest overall population density in England (after South West England) - largely due to the low population density of Lincolnshire and Rutland.
The council district with the lowest rate is South Northamptonshire, although it has a rate greater than that of Rutland.
The adidas Jabulani football, the official football for the 2010 World Cup, was designed in the university's Sports Technology Institute.
Swarfega was invented and is made by Deb in Belper.
Next were Corby and Lincoln with 4.9%.
Air freight has grown at EMA from 1994-2004 from around 10,000 tonnes to over 250,000 tonnes; previously it did not have much air freight; the main hours of cargo flying are from 8pm to 5am; domestic cargo flies into the airport in the evening, then from 23.30 to 1.30 cargo flies to European capitals, then from 03.00 to 05.00 cargo flies from Europe to EMA.
He was also suggested to be "the first professional painter to express the spirit of the Industrial Revolution".
It houses Europe's biggest academic centre for space research, in which space probes have been built, most notably the Mars Lander Beagle 2, which was built in collaboration with the Open University.
The large Sunningdale site on Braunstone Frith was the British Shoe Corporation.
There is a shopping centre named in his honour in Grantham.
Near Leicester, Noble are in Barwell and Fenix Automotive in Braunstone.
; De Montfort University : The region's third largest university.
Boots UK is based in Lenton in Nottingham, with 2,500 UK stores, where Stewart Adams developed Ibuprofen in the 1960s on Rutland Road in West Bridgford, and Vision Express are nearby, next to the A52.
Krohne UK at Wellingborough make Coriolis mass flowmeters.
Many footwear companies such as Shoe Zone (which bought out Stead and Simpson), are based in Leicester.
Peavey Electronics UK (loudspeakers), are off the A6003, in the south-west of Corby.
It is the only Russell Group university in the East Midlands.
Nottingham and Leicester were the highest with 5.8% each.
Worksop, Mansfield, Lincoln, Matlock, Melton Mowbray, Skegness, Boston, Spalding and Oakham are served by regional services.
Since 1997 Capital One, the Virginia-based credit card company, has had its European HQ at Trent House in Nottingham's city centre in a former Boots UK printing works next to the railway station, and Nottingham City Council since 2009 have taken over the company's Loxley House next door as their HQ.
The lingerie companies Gossard, Aristoc, Pretty Polly, and Berlei (formerly owned by Courtaulds, now CUK Clothing) are based in Daybrook; most of their hosiery is now made at West Mill in Belper.
Gala Bingo is based in Nottingham; Coral have over 1,800 UK shops.
They were formed in 1880; their colours are green, burgundy and white.
Swizzels Matlow makes children's confectionery in New Mills.
It is also the location of East Midlands Airport in north Leicestershire.
W&G Sissons on the Chesterfield Est, now owned by Franke, has been the UK's largest manufacturer of stainless steel sinks since the 1950s.
Caunton Engineering, steel constructors, on the site of Moorgreen Colliery in Eastwood built the Olympics Water Polo Arena.
The team play their home games at Franklin's Gardens, which has a capacity of 15,500.
Nottinghamshire, Leicestershire, Derbyshire and Northamptonshire are in the Cricket T20 North group; Northamptonshire was formerly in the previous Midlands group.
It was later a site for manufacturing monolithic microwave integrated circuits in the 1990s by Marconi Materials Technology.
The region 'imports' more young people into the region at the university stage than it 'exports' into other regions' universities.
; University of Leicester : The university has established itself as a leading research-led university and has been named University of the Year of 2008 by the Times Higher Education.
The division of seats is less equally spread, with 32 Conservative and 14 Labour, and the geographic spread is even more weighted towards the Conservatives, with Labour's 14 seats being in Derby (1), Leicester (3), Nottingham (4) and the East Midlands coalfield (6) - most of these, except Leicester, are in the area defined as the economic North of England, and are in geographically smaller seats.
EMAS is based in Bilborough on the A6002 near junction 26 of the M1.
Laser Performance makes the Laser sailing boat in Long Buckby next to Maclaren at Long Buckby railway station.
The University is most famous for the invention of genetic fingerprinting DNA, the discovery of the remains of King Richard III and Space research.
Three out of the four main UK opticians are sited in Nottingham.
Rutland has the highest Total Fertility Rate for British counties (top-tier authorities).
Mountsorrel has the largest granite quarry in Europe, owned by the French company, Lafarge (owned by Redland plc until 1997).
Speedo International Limited is on the ng2 business park on ''Queens Drive'' (near Experian - formerly in Bobbers Mill on the A610 near Basford before 2010).
His accomplishments include Calculus, Newton's laws of motion, and Newton's law of universal gravitation among many other.
Areas of north Leicestershire, south Derbyshire and southeast Staffordshire, covering around , are being planted, in an attempt to blend ancient woodland with new plantings to create a new national forest.
Center Parcs UK is based at the Sherwood Energy Village in New Ollerton.
Equip Outdoor Technologies are west of the B600 in Somercotes, who own Lowe Alpine, Rab and Outdoor Designs (gloves).
The name was at one point changed to Nottingham East Midlands Airport so as to include the name of the city that is supposedly most internationally recognisable, mainly due to the Robin Hood legend.
The 72&nbsp;ft Nunn's Bridge across Hobhole Drain at Fishtoft, designed by LG Mouchel, was the first pre-stressed concrete bridge built in-situ in the UK, in 1948, built for the Witham Fourth District IDB.
Evidence of the Danelaw can be seen in place-name endings of the region's villages, particularly towards the east.
To the west, next to the railway is  Weetabix, the UK's leading cereal brand.
Carlsberg has been brewed in Northampton since 1974, with twelve UK depots, and also brews Holsten Pils, and has brewed Tetley since 2011.
United Biscuits has a main factory in Ashby-de-la-Zouch where it makes its KP Snacks; Hula Hoops, Skips and Nik Naks.
Vaillant UK (former Hepworth Heating before 2002, with headquarters in Remscheid) make Glow-worm boilers on the A609 near Belper School.
Infoterra Ltd (Astrium Services GEO-Information) are on Braunstone Frith, who have exclusive access to the TerraSAR-X and SPOT satellites.
Monarch Knitting Machinery UK is in Beaumont Leys.
Fairline Boats are based on the Nene in Oundle off the A605 bypass.
near RS Components and a frozen-food depot of Morrisons off the A6116 near Weldon.
D. H. Lawrence is perhaps the region's best known author, although only gained full recognition in the late twentieth century.
Interflora has its UK HQ in Sleaford; Lincolnshire is the world's leading producer of daffodils (narcissus family); 40% of the flowers bought in the UK are grown there; Butters Group supply many bulbs (Amaryllis) from Low Fulney.
In the 2009 European elections, 30% voted Conservative, 17% Labour, 16% UKIP, and 12% Liberal Democrat.
ThyssenKrupp Elevator UK is in Lenton, off the A52, and further north is ZF Services UK (wind turbine and automotive gears).
British Seed Houses at Swinderby, sells a lot of ryegrass and clover.
Leicester Tigers are one of the most successful Rugby Union teams in Europe (if not globally) and the most successful English club since the introduction of league rugby in 1987, having won the European cup twice, the first tier of English rugby ten times, and the Anglo-Welsh cup seven times.
Government funding decisions moved from Melton Mowbray (the East Midlands Regional Assembly) to Nottingham (the East Midlands Development Agency) in April 2010.
Nottingham and Leicester are a popular night time destination (often for people outside of the East Midlands).
Entalysis, a business performance management software company, is located in Burton upon Trent town centre.
The YHA is based in Matlock.
Princes (former Premier Foods) have a large operation in Little Sutton near to Long Sutton canning vegetables with Fray Bentos meat, and Batchelors peas.
Edgar Purnell Hooley, a Nottinghamshire surveyor, in 1901 was in Denby and found a stretch of road surface that was smooth
TW Kempton are a main manufacturer of uniforms for the armed and police services opposite the National Space Centre on the A6 in north Leicester; they also own the Fortis body armour brand and make PASGT nylon fibre helmets for troops.
It is famous for its academic reputation, consistently ranking highly in university league tables.
At the A563 roundabout BAE Systems Land & Armaments had a tank factory, which closed in May 2011 when it lost the FRES contract, given to General Dynamics; the site, owned by Thales, initially made naval radar systems.
The region can claim the world's first factory, Sir Richard Arkwright's Cromford Mill.
Machine Mart is based on the A60 near BioCity in Nottingham.
Queen's Medical Centre (QMC) is one of the largest teaching hospitals in Europe, and the largest hospital in the UK.
Global Brands (maker of Vodka Kick and Corky's) is based in Clay Cross; VK have sponsored the M-Sport World Rally Team.
East of the Walkers plant in Beaumont Leys is Office Depot UK (and Viking Direct UK) on the Bursom Ind Est.
Lincolnshire is the only maritime county of the six, with a true North Sea coastline of about  due to the protection afforded by Spurn Head and the North Norfolk foreshore.
National Grid plc has its main Eakring Training Centre in Nottinghmshire, where trainees learn how to build electricity pylons, including the new T pylon.
The Danes under Canute recaptured the area from around 1016 to 1035.
Torksey railway viaduct, built across the Trent in 1849, is considered to be the first box girder bridge, designed by Sir John Fowler, 1st Baronet.
Whitworths, the food company, is in Irthlingborough; they also have Victoria Mills flour site on the A509 in Irchester next to the A45 junction.
Serif Europe is in West Bridgford; Serif developed PagePlus in the 1990s which was the first cheap DTP software.
Hako Machines UK, a Schleswig-Holstein supplier of industrial sweepers and road cleaners are in Crick.
The Watchkeeper WK450 UAV is built jointly by Thales and Elbit on ''Scudamore Road'' in west Leicester, towards the M1; it is tested at Aberporth Airport in Wales; 54 are on order, costing £1bn.
Castle Meadow Campus is the name of a large HMRC site in Nottingham, being the national arm of HMRC that looks after the Enterprise Investment Scheme, Corporate Venturing Scheme, Venture Capital Trusts, and Enterprise Management Incentives, HMRC's Pension Schemes Services, and the Residency department, which deals with Double Taxation Treaties and inheritance tax.
Lincolnshire and Nottinghamshire each produce around thirty per cent of the region's sand and gravel output.
Flowserve UK (former Worthington-Simpson, then Ingersoll-Dresser) in Balderton are the largest manufacturer of industrial pumps in the UK.
By measurement of Lower Layer Super Output Areas, the East Midlands has more in common with the South of England (except London) than the North, in that it has more areas in the ''twenty percent least deprived areas'' than the ''twenty percent most deprived areas'', but less so than regions in Southern England.
When the Romans took control of the region, they made Leicester one of their main forts (then named Ratae Corieltauvorum).
Blacks Leisure Group (previous owner of Blacks and Millets before financial failure and takeover by JD Sports) was based in Duston, in the west of Northampton, and is now off the A45 in the east of the town.
At its height, Corby Steelworks were the largest in Britain.
Isaac Newton, born in Grantham in 1642 is perhaps the most prolific scientist ever.
Both operators provide regular high-speed services to London, at up to 125&nbsp;mph, serving Wellingborough, Kettering, Corby, Market Harborough, Leicester, Loughborough, Derby, East Midlands Parkway, Nottingham, Chesterfield, Grantham, Newark and Retford.
Pedigree Dolls & Toys (Sindy) was in Wellingborough, closing in 1982.
Spector Lumenex (part of Tyco) make warning systems off the B684 in Mapperley.
12 Group RAF and controlled from RAF Watnall.
