This, the most important liturgy of the year, begins in total darkness with the blessing of the Easter fire, the lighting of the large Paschal candle (symbolic of the Risen Christ) and the chanting of the Exultet or Easter Proclamation attributed to Saint Ambrose of Milan.
It assumes that text literally translated "the preparation of the passover" in John 19:14 refers to Nisan 14 (Preparation Day for the Passover) and not necessarily to Yom Shishi (Friday, Preparation Day for the Passover week Sabbath) and that the priests' desire to be ritually pure in order to "eat the passover" refers to eating the Passover lamb, not to the public offerings made during the days of Unleavened Bread.
The traditional, liturgical observation of Easter, as practised among Roman Catholics, Lutherans, and some Anglicans begins on the night of Holy Saturday with the Easter Vigil.
the angels in Heaven sing,
In addition, the lunar tables of the Julian calendar are four days (sometimes five days) behind those of the Gregorian calendar.
Instead, in the afternoon "Agápē Vespers" is sung.
According to the church historian Eusebius, the Quartodeciman Polycarp (bishop of Smyrna, by tradition a disciple of John the Apostle) debated the question with Anicetus (bishop of Rome).
: Christ is risen from the dead,
enable us who are on Earth,
The 14th day of the lunar month according to the Gregorian system is figured as the ninth or tenth day according to the Julian.
In Australia, because of its location in the southern hemisphere, Easter takes place in autumn.
In Greece the traditional meal is ''mageiritsa'', a hearty stew of chopped lamb liver and wild greens seasoned with egg-and-lemon sauce.
Traditionally, easter eggs, hard-boiled eggs dyed bright red to symbolize the spilt Blood of Christ and the promise of eternal life, are cracked together to celebrate the opening of the Tomb of Christ.
Although he describes the details of the Easter celebration as deriving from local custom, he insists the feast itself is universally observed.
At this time, the lights are brought up and the church bells are rung, according to local custom.
In predominantly Roman Catholic Philippines, the morning of Easter (known in the national language as "Pasko ng Muling Pagkabuhay" or the Pasch of the Resurrection) is marked with joyous celebration, the first being the dawn "Salubong", wherein large statues of Jesus and Mary are brought together to meet, imagining the first reunion of Jesus and his mother Mary after Jesus' Resurrection.
By Thy Resurrection O Christ our savior,
In most of the non-English speaking world, the feast is known by names derived from Greek and Latin ''Pascha''.
Also, because the Julian "full moon" is always several days after the astronomical full moon, the eastern Easter is often later, relative to the visible moon's phases, than western Easter.
For those who trust in Jesus' death and resurrection, "death is swallowed up in victory."
The Sardica paschal table confirms these complaints, for it indicates that the Jews of some eastern Mediterranean city (possibly Antioch) fixed Nisan 14 on dates well before the spring equinox on multiple occasions.
After Lazarus Saturday comes Palm Sunday, Holy Week, and finally Easter itself, and the fast is broken immediately after the Paschal Divine Liturgy.
Josephus, ''Jewish War'' 6.10.1/423 ("They sacrifice from the ninth to the eleventh hour").
By the later 2nd century, it was widely accepted that the celebration of the holiday was a practice of the disciples and an undisputed tradition.
Groups such as the Restored Church of God reject the celebration of Easter, seeing it as originating in a pagan spring festival taken over by the "Roman" Catholic Church.
: καὶ τοῖς ἐν τοῖς μνήμασι
It has come to be the first Sunday after the ecclesiastical full moon that occurs on or soonest after 21 March, but calculations vary in East and West.
Despite having some support, proposals to reform the date have not been implemented.
During the 17th and 18th centuries, Quakers were persecuted for this non-observance of Holy Days.
Because of the 13-day difference between the calendars between 1900 and 2099, 21 March corresponds, during the 21st century, to 3 April in the Gregorian Calendar.
Typically these services follow the usual order of Sunday services in a congregation, but also typically incorporate more highly festive elements.
This controversy between those who advocated independent computations, and those who wished to continue the custom of relying on the Jewish calendar, was formally resolved by the First Council of Nicaea in 325, which endorsed changing to an independent computation by the Christian community in order to celebrate in common.
Easter eggs are a widely popular symbol of new life in Poland and other Slavic countries' folk traditions.
According to the New Testament, Jesus gave the Passover meal a new meaning, as in the upper room during the Last Supper he prepared himself and his disciples for his death.
Even though Good Friday is an official national holiday, it is not a mandatory day off for commercial companies.
The custom of the Easter egg originated in the early Christian community of Mesopotamia, who stained eggs red in memory of the blood of Christ, shed at his crucifixion.
Pascha is also a name by which Jesus himself is remembered in the Orthodox Church, especially in connection with his resurrection and with the season of its celebration.
In countries where Christianity is a state religion, or where the country has large Christian population, Easter is often a public holiday.
The Afterfeast of Easter lasts 39 days, with its Apodosis (leave-taking) on the day before Ascension.
Preparation for Easter begins with the season of Great Lent.
In Western Christianity, using the Gregorian calendar, Easter always falls on a Sunday between 22 March and 25 April inclusive, within about seven days after the astronomical full moon.
It is not known how long the Nisan 14 practice continued.
One interpretation of the Gospel of John is that Jesus, as the Passover lamb, was crucified at roughly the same time as the Passover lambs were being slain in the temple, on the afternoon of Nisan 14.
The chief complaint was that the Jewish communities sometimes erred in setting Passover to fall before the Northern Hemisphere spring equinox.
Jehovah's Witnesses believe that such verses as Luke 22:19–20 and Cor| 11:26 constitute a commandment to remember the death of Christ though not the resurrection, and they do so on a yearly basis just as Passover is celebrated annually by the Jews.
The Catholic sacrament of Confirmation is also celebrated at the Vigil.
Instead, these events are all seen as necessary but ''preliminary'' to, and illuminated by, the full climax of the Resurrection, in which all that has come before reaches fulfillment and fruition.
Members of the Religious Society of Friends (Quakers), as part of their historic ''testimony against times and seasons'', do not celebrate or observe Easter or any other Christian holidays, believing instead that "every day is the Lord's day", and that elevation of one day above others suggests that it is acceptable to do un-Christian acts on other days.
Through faith in the working of God those who follow Jesus are spiritually resurrected with him so that they may walk in a new way of life and receive eternal salvation.
Philo, ''Special Laws'' 2.27/145 ("Many myriads of victims from noon till eventide are offered by the whole people").
After this service of light, a number of readings from the Old Testament are read.
The First Council of Nicaea (325) established two rules, independence of the Jewish calendar and worldwide uniformity, which were the only rules for Easter explicitly laid down by the council.
The week before Easter is called Holy Week, and it contains the days of the Easter Triduum, including Maundy Thursday, commemorating the Maundy and Last Supper, as well as Good Friday, commemorating the crucifixion and death of Jesus.
Neither Polycarp nor Anicetus persuaded the other, but they did not consider the matter schismatic either, parting in peace and leaving the question unsettled.
Few banks that are normally open on regular Sundays are closed on Easter.
The Easter festival is kept in many different ways among Western Christians.
In the Nordic countries Good Friday, Easter Sunday and Easter Monday are public holidays, and Good Friday and Easter Monday are bank holidays.
Eastertide, or Paschaltide, the season of Easter, begins on Easter Sunday and lasts until the day of Pentecost, seven weeks later.
Victor's attempted excommunication was apparently rescinded, and the two sides reconciled upon the intervention of bishop Irenaeus and others, who reminded Victor of the tolerant precedent of Anicetus.
Whether there are baptisms at this point or not, it is traditional for the congregation to renew the vows of their baptismal faith.
The following day, Easter Monday, is a legal holiday in many countries with predominantly Christian traditions.
Quartodecimanism seems to have lingered into the 4th century, when Socrates of Constantinople recorded that some Quartodecimans were deprived of their churches by John Chrysostom and that some were harassed by Nestorius.
A batik-like decorating process known as pisanka produces intricate, brilliantly-colored eggs.
to supplement a congregation's usual instrumentation is common.
(Col. 2:16–17, NAB)
Maundy Thursday, Good Friday, and Holy Saturday are sometimes referred to as the Easter Triduum (Latin for "Three Days").
Direct evidence for a more fully formed Christian festival of Pascha (Easter) begins to appear in the mid-2nd century.
Easter is the primary act that fulfills the purpose of Christ's ministry on earth—to defeat death by dying and to purify and exalt humanity by voluntarily assuming and overcoming human frailty.
On Easter Monday, the President of the United States holds an annual Easter egg roll on the White House lawn for young children.
However, the legislation has not been implemented, although it remains on the Statute book and could be implemented subject to approval by the various Christian churches.
Some retail stores, shopping malls, and restaurants are closed on Easter Sunday.
The last three days before Easter are Maundy Thursday, Good Friday and Holy Saturday (sometimes referred to as Silent Saturday).
The Gregorian calculation of Easter was based on a method devised by the Calabrian doctor Aloysius Lilius (or Lilio) for adjusting the epacts of the moon, and has been adopted by almost all Western Christians and by Western countries which celebrate national holidays at Easter.
The focus then moves from the lectern to the font.
Another difference is that the astronomical equinox is a natural astronomical phenomenon, which can fall on 19, 20 or 21 March, while the ecclesiastical date is fixed by convention on 21 March.
Their starting point in determining the date of Orthodox Easter is also 21 March but according to the Julian reckoning, which in the current century corresponds to 3 April in the Gregorian calendar.
In the United Kingdom, the Easter Act 1928 set out legislation to allow the date of Easter to be fixed as the first Sunday after the second Saturday in April (or, in other words, the Sunday in the period from 9 to 15 April).
In addition to fasting, almsgiving, and prayer, Orthodox Christians cut down on all entertainment and non-essential worldly activities, gradually eliminating them until Great and Holy Friday, the most austere day of the year.
The outdoor procession during Bright Week takes place either after paschal matins or the paschal divine liturgy.
Easter is the third Sunday in the paschal lunar month, or, in other words, the Sunday after the paschal lunar month's 14th day.
Easter Monday, Easter Tuesday, etc.
Along with the celebration of Christmas and Advent, many Lenten and Easter traditions were altered or even abandoned altogether by various offshoots of the Protestant Reformation, as they were deemed "pagan" or "Popish" (and therefore tainted) by many of the Reformation's Puritan movements.
Evidence for another kind of annual Christian festival, the commemoration of martyrs, begins to appear at about the same time as evidence for the celebration of Easter.
Immediately after the Liturgy it is customary for the congregation to share a meal, essentially an agápē dinner (albeit at 2:00&nbsp;am or later).
This service was repeated the following year by the whole congregation and subsequently spread with the Moravian Missionaries around the world, including Old Salem in Winston-Salem, North Carolina.
Eastern Christianity bases its calculations on the Julian Calendar.
Good Friday and Easter Monday are public holidays across all states and territories.
In applying the ecclesiastical rules, Christian churches use 21 March as the starting point in determining the date of Easter, from which they find the next full moon, etc.
It is a holiday for most workers except some shopping malls which keep open for a half-day.
In some countries Good Friday is a public holiday as well.
However, in Canada Easter Sunday is a public holiday, along with Easter Monday.
An Orthodox congress of Eastern Orthodox bishops, which included representatives mostly from the Patriarch of Constantinople and the Serbian Patriarch, met in Constantinople in 1923, where the bishops agreed to the Revised Julian calendar.
In Lutheran Churches, for example, not only were the days of Holy Week observed, but also Christmas, Easter and Pentecost were observed with three-day festivals (the day itself and the two following).
The Paschal Vigil begins with the Midnight Office, which is the last service of the Lenten Triodion and is timed so that it ends a little before midnight on Holy Saturday night.
Anciently, Easter was considered the ideal time for converts to receive baptism, and this practice continues within Roman Catholicism and the Anglican Communion.
Easter and the holidays that are related to it are ''moveable feasts'' which do not fall on a fixed date in the Gregorian or Julian calendars which follow only the cycle of the sun; rather, its date is determined on a lunisolar calendar similar to the Hebrew calendar.
The Sunday before Easter is Palm Sunday, with the Wednesday before Easter being known as Spy Wednesday.
That the older custom (called "protopaschite" by historians) did not at once die out, but persisted for a time, is indicated by the existence of canons and sermons against it.
As Easter is always a Sunday, many countries in the world also have Easter Monday as a public holiday.
Many churches begin celebrating Easter late in the evening of Holy Saturday at a service called the Easter Vigil.
In the Netherlands both Easter Sunday and Easter Monday are national holidays.
After the dismissal of the liturgy, the priest may bless paschal eggs and baskets brought by the faithful containing those foods which have been forbidden during the Great Fast.
In many languages, the words for "Easter" and "Passover" are identical or very similar.
Additional customs that have become associated with Easter and are observed by both Christians and some non-Christians include egg hunting, the Easter Bunny, and Easter parades.
Like first and second Christmas Day, they are ''both'' considered Sundays, which results in a first and a second Easter Sunday, after which the week continues to a Tuesday.
The Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox Churches continue to use the Julian calendar.
The Puritan rejection of Easter traditions was (and is) based partly upon their interpretation of 2 Corinthians 6:14–16 and partly upon a more general belief that, if a religious practice or celebration is not actually written in the Christian Bible, then that practice/celebration must be a later development and cannot be considered an authentic part of Christian practice or belief—so at best simply unnecessary, at worst actually sinful.
: ζωὴν χαρισάμενος.
However, some of the major Reformation Churches and movements (Lutheran, Methodist and Anglican for example), chose to retain a large proportion of the observances of the established Church Year along with many of its associated traditions.
Easter customs vary across the Christian world, and include sunrise services, exclaiming the Paschal greeting, clipping the church, and decorating Easter eggs (symbols of the empty tomb).
The music of the service, in particular, often displays a highly festive tone; the incorporation of brass instruments (trumpets, etc.)
Early Christians in Britain and Ireland also used an 84-year cycle.
The oldest tradition is to use dyed chicken eggs, but a modern custom is to substitute eggs made from chocolate, or plastic eggs filled with candy such as jellybeans.
In each solar year (1 January to 31 December inclusive), the lunar month beginning with an ecclesiastical new moon falling in the 29-day period from 8 March to 5 April inclusive is designated as the paschal lunar month for that year.
Others, however, believed that the customary practice of consulting Jews should continue, even if the Jewish computations were in error.
", to which the response is: "Truly he is risen!"
Paul states, "Get rid of the old yeast that you may be a new batch without yeast—as you really are.
However, all the Eastern Orthodox countries that subsequently adopted the Revised Julian calendar adopted only that part of the revised calendar that applied to festivals falling on fixed dates in the Julian calendar.
The celebrated House of Fabergé workshops created exquisite jewelled eggs for the Russian Imperial Court.
The Greek island of Syros, whose population is divided almost equally between Catholics and Orthodox, is one of the few places where the two Churches share a common date for Easter, with the Catholics accepting the Orthodox date—a practice helping considerably in maintaining good relations between the two communities.
In Commonwealth nations Easter Day is rarely a public holiday, as is the case for celebrations which fall on a Sunday.
Easter is determined on the basis of lunisolar cycles.
Pentecost Sunday is the fiftieth day from Easter (counted inclusively).
The Vespers which begins Lazarus Saturday officially brings Great Lent to a close, although the fast continues through the following week.
At its completion all light in the church building is extinguished, and all wait in darkness and silence for the stroke of midnight.
The original form of this calendar would have determined Easter using precise astronomical calculations based on the meridian of Jerusalem.
However, it is possible that Bede was only speculating about the origin of the term since there is no firm evidence that such a goddess actually existed.
At a summit in Aleppo, Syria, in 1997, the World Council of Churches (WCC) proposed a reform in the calculation of Easter which would have replaced the present divergent practices of calculating Easter with modern scientific knowledge taking into account actual astronomical instances of the spring equinox and full moon based on the meridian of Jerusalem, while also following the Council of Nicea position of Easter being on the Sunday following the full moon.
After circling around the temple once or three times, the procession halts in front of the closed doors.
He and the people chant the Paschal Troparion, and all of the bells and semantra are sounded.
Polycrates (''circa'' 190), however, wrote to Victor defending the antiquity of Asian Quartodecimanism.
The first recorded "Sunrise Service" took place in 1732 among the Single Brethren in the Moravian congregation at Herrnhut, Saxony, in what is now Germany.
Palm Sunday, Maundy Thursday and Good Friday respectively commemorate Jesus' entry in Jerusalem, the Last Supper and the Crucifixion.
The Easter Vigil concludes with the celebration of the Eucharist (known in some traditions as Holy Communion).
Schools are closed between Palm Sunday and Easter Monday.
Hebrew-Christian, Sacred Name, and Armstrong movement churches (such as the Living Church of God) usually reject Easter in favor of Nisan 14 observance and celebration of the Christian Passover.
The precise date of Easter has at times been a matter of contention.
Many businesses give their employees almost a week off, called Easter break.
This may also be done in many different languages.
The scriptural instructions specify that the lamb is to be slain "between the two evenings", that is, at twilight.
The liturgical season from Easter to the Sunday of All Saints (the Sunday after Pentecost) is known as the Pentecostarion (the "fifty days").
This act is often sealed by the sprinkling of the congregation with holy water from the font.
to glorify thee in purity of heart.
For Christ, our Passover lamb, has been sacrificed"; this refers to the Passover requirement to have no yeast in the house and to the allegory of Jesus as the Paschal lamb.
Easter and the holidays that are related to it are ''moveable feasts'', in that they do not fall on a fixed date in the Gregorian or Julian calendars (both of which follow the cycle of the sun and the seasons).
In Greek and Latin, the Christian celebration was, and still is, called Πάσχα, ''Pascha'', a word derived from Aramaic פסחא, cognate to Hebrew פֶּסַח (''Pesach'').
The ecclesiastical historian Socrates Scholasticus attributes the observance of Easter by the church to the perpetuation of its custom, "just as many other customs have been established", stating that neither Jesus nor his Apostles enjoined the keeping of this or any other festival.
Some churches prefer to keep this vigil very early on the Sunday morning instead of the Saturday night to reflect the gospel account of the women coming to the tomb at dawn on the first day of the week.
However, this does not precisely reflect the ecclesiastical rules.
It then switched to an adaptation by Victorius of the Alexandrian rules.
The services during Bright Week are nearly identical to those on Easter itself, except that they do not take place at midnight, but at their normal times during the day.
Astronomical Easter is the first Sunday after the Astronomical full moon, referred to the meridian of Jerusalem.
From this time, therefore, all discrepancies between Alexandria and Rome as to the correct date for Easter cease, as both churches were using identical tables.
Since the ecclesiastical new moon falls on a date from 8 March to 5 April inclusive, the paschal full moon (the 14th of that lunar month) must fall on a date from 21 March to 18 April inclusive.
Certain variations in the Easter Vigil exist: Some churches read the Old Testament lessons before the procession of the Paschal candle, and then read the gospel immediately after the Exsultet.
: θανάτῳ θάνατον πατήσας,
The day before Easter is properly called Holy Saturday.
Since 1582, when the Catholic Church adopted the Gregorian calendar while the Eastern Orthodox and most Oriental Orthodox Churches retained the Julian calendar, the date on which Easter is celebrated has again differed.
In the Greek practice the priest reads a selection from the Gospel Book.
They passed certain ecclesiastical canons at the council besides, and at the same time decreed in regard to the Passover that there must be one unanimous concord on the celebration of God's holy and supremely excellent day.
In Polish culture, the Rezurekcja (Resurrection Procession) is the joyous Easter morning Mass at daybreak when church bells ring out and explosions resound to commemorate Christ rising from the dead.
The week before Easter, known as Holy Week, is very special in the Christian tradition.
Following an all-night vigil they went before dawn to the town graveyard, God's Acre, on the hill above the town, to celebrate the Resurrection among the graves of the departed.
In Denmark, Iceland and Norway also Maundy Thursday is a public holiday.
From the 5th century onward this cycle set its equinox to 25 March and fixed Easter to the Sunday falling in the 14th to the 20th of the lunar month inclusive.
Every other religious festival in their calendar, including Christmas, is secondary in importance to the celebration of the Resurrection of Jesus Christ.
This was designed to match exactly the Gregorian calculation.
There are also various traditional Easter foods that vary regionally.
While martyrs' days (usually the individual dates of martyrdom) were celebrated on fixed dates in the local solar calendar, the date of Easter was fixed by means of the local Jewish lunisolar calendar.
At the stroke of midnight the Paschal celebration itself begins, consisting of Paschal Matins, Paschal Hours, and Paschal Divine Liturgy.
Placing the Paschal Divine Liturgy at midnight guarantees that no Divine Liturgy will come earlier in the morning, ensuring its place as the pre-eminent "Feast of Feasts" in the liturgical year.
Controversy arose when Victor, bishop of Rome a generation after Anicetus, attempted to excommunicate Polycrates of Ephesus and all other bishops of Asia for their Quartodecimanism.
In any case, in the years following the council, the computational system that was worked out by the church of Alexandria came to be normative.
This 84-year cycle was replaced by the Alexandrian method in the course of the 7th and 8th centuries.
Some Christian groups feel that Easter is something to be regarded with great joy: not marking the day itself, but remembering and rejoicing in the event it commemorates—the miracle of Christ's resurrection.
The reform was proposed for implementation starting in 2001, but it was not ultimately adopted by any member body.
According to Eusebius, a number of synods were convened to deal with the controversy, which he regarded as all ruling in support of Easter on Sunday.
After the Blessed Sacrament is carried around the church and Adoration is complete, the Easter Mass begins.
The week beginning with Easter Sunday is called Easter Week or the Octave of Easter, and each day is prefaced with "Easter", e.g.
In this service, it has become customary during the last few centuries for the priest and members of the congregation to read a portion of the Gospel of John in as many languages as they can manage, to show the universality of the Resurrection.
Additional celebrations are usually offered on Easter Sunday itself.
Passover commences at sunset preceding the date indicated.
Other Protestant groups took a different attitude, with most Anabaptists, Quakers, Congregationalists and Presbyterian Puritans regarding such festivals as an abomination.
The Paschal Homily of St. John Chrysostom is read at matins.
The First Council of Nicaea (325) established two rules, independence of the Jewish calendar and worldwide uniformity, which were the only rules for Easter explicitly laid down by the Council.
The last week of Great Lent (following the fifth Sunday of Great Lent) is called Palm Week, and ends with Lazarus Saturday.
As such, for Christians, the Easter egg is a symbol of the empty tomb.
Even in states where Good Friday is not a holiday, many financial institutions, stock markets, and public schools are closed.
It is commonly referred to by many Witnesses as simply "The Memorial".
On the evening of Great and Holy Saturday, the Midnight Office commences an hour or two before midnight (see paschal vigil).
By the Roman period, however, the sacrifices were performed in the mid-afternoon.
In some countries, Easter lasts two days, with the second called "Easter Monday".
In particular, the Council did not decree that Easter must fall on Sunday.
This effectively required the abandonment of the old custom of consulting the Jewish community in those places where it was still used.
Churches in western continental Europe used a late Roman method until the late 8th century during the reign of Charlemagne, when they finally adopted the Alexandrian method.
In Western Christianity, Easter is preceded by Lent, a period of fasting and penitence in preparation for Easter, which begins on Ash Wednesday and lasts forty days (not counting Sundays).
Hence, Australian Easter is associated with harvest time, rather than with the coming of spring as in the northern hemisphere.
In this spirit, these Christians teach that each day and all Sabbaths should be kept holy, in Christ's teachings.
(interprets primary source references in this section as applying to the Resurrection) The resurrection established Jesus as the powerful Son of God and is cited as proof that God will judge the world in righteousness.
In January 2016, Christian churches again considered the idea of a fixed and unified date of Easter, probably either the second or third Sunday in April.
