Another defensive strategy sometimes adopted by sea cucumbers is to rupture the body wall and discharge the gut and internal organs.
A diminution of the numbers of predators (otters, lobsters and fish) can result in an increase in urchin numbers causing overgrazing of kelp forests with the result that an alga-denuded "urchin barren" forms.
The movement of multiple tube feet, coordinated in waves, moves the animal forward, but progress is slow.
These stems can bend and the arms can roll and unroll and that is about the limit of the sea lily's movement, although a few species can relocate themselves on the seabed by crawling.
The echinoderms are important both biologically and geologically.
The burrowing of sand dollars, sea cucumbers and some starfish stirs up the sediment and depletes the sea floor of nutrients.
Others again are voracious carnivores and able to lasso their waterborne prey with a sudden encirclement by their flexible arms.
These cells are usually larger and granular, and are suggested to be a main line of defense against potential pathogens.
Despite their low nutrition value and the abundance of indigestible calcite, echinoderms are the prey of many organisms, such as crabs, sharks, sea birds and other echinoderms.
In deuterostomes, the mouth develops at a later stage, at the opposite end of the blastula from the blastopore, and a gut forms connecting the two.
The larvae are mostly planktonic but in some species the eggs are retained inside the female and in some, the larvae are also brooded by the female.
The starfish and crinoids still attach themselves to the seabed while changing to their adult form.
In other species, individuals may aggregate during the reproductive season, thereby increasing the likelihood of successful fertilisation.
Later, the left side of the body grows at the expense of the right side, which is eventually absorbed.
Echinoderms have a simple radial nervous system that consists of a modified nerve net consisting of interconnecting neurons with no central brain, although some do possess ganglia.
The majority of crinoids are motile but the sea lilies are sessile and attached to hard substrates by stalks.
Some deep water species are pelagic and can float in the water with webbed papillae forming sails or fins.
Sea cucumbers are mostly detritivores, sorting through the sediment with their buccal tentacles which are modified tube feet.
Echinoderms evolved from animals with bilateral symmetry.
The two halves each regenerate their missing organs over a period of several months but the missing genital organs are often very slow to develop.
Though in most species at least part of the disc is needed for complete regeneration, in a few species of sea stars, a single severed arm can grow into a complete individual over a period of several months.
Sand dollars may perform suspension feeding and feed on phytoplankton, detritus, algal pieces and the bacterial layer surrounding grains of sand.
Sea urchins are herbivores and use their specialised mouthparts to graze, tear and chew algae and sometimes other animal or vegetable material.
Although most echinoderm spines are blunt, those of the crown-of-thorns starfish are long and sharp and can cause a painful puncture wound as the epithelium covering them contains a toxin.
This, however, is an adaptation to their sessile existence.
Skeletal elements are also deployed in some specialized ways, such as the "Aristotle's lantern" mouthparts of sea urchins used for grinding, the supportive stalks of crinoids and the structural "lime ring" of sea cucumbers.
The calcareous tests or shells of echinoderms are used as a source of lime by farmers in areas where limestone is unavailable and some are used in the manufacture of fish meal.
The coelomocytes also secrete Anti-Microbial Peptides (AMPs) against bacteria, and have a set of lectins and complement proteins as part of an innate immune system that is still being characterized.
Regrowth of both the lost disc area and the missing arms occur so that an individual may have arms of varying lengths.
The parts that are autotomised or the buds may develop directly into fully formed larvae or may develop through a gastrula or even a blastula stage.
The characteristics of adult echinoderms are the possession of a water vascular system with external tube feet and a calcareous endoskeleton consisting of ossicles connected by a mesh of collagen fibres.
However, in a few species a single arm can survive and develop into a complete individual and in some species, the arms are intentionally detached for the purpose of asexual reproduction.
In epimorphosis stem cells—either from a reserve pool or those produced by dedifferentiation—form a blastema and generate new tissues.
Sea urchins are used in research, particularly as model organisms in developmental biology and ecotoxicology.
Some sea feathers emerge at night and perch themselves on nearby eminences to better exploit the food-bearing current.
Echinoderms left behind an extensive fossil record.
Some crinoids are pseudo-planktonic, attaching themselves to floating logs and debris, although this behaviour was exercised most extensively in the Paleozoic, before competition from such organisms as barnacles restricted the extent of the behaviour.
This trade is often carried out in conjunction with shellfish farmers, for whom the starfish pose a major threat by eating their cultured stock.
The fossil record includes a large number of other classes which do not appear to fall into any extant crown group.
The larvae of all echinoderms are even now bilaterally symmetrical and all develop radial symmetry at metamorphosis.
The arrangements in crinoids is similar to asteroids but the tube feet lack suckers and are used to pass food particles captured by the arms towards the central mouth.
Coral reefs are also bored into in this way but the rate of accretion of carbonate material is often greater than the erosion produced by the sea urchin.
The planktotrophic larva is considered to be the ancestral larval type for echinoderms but after 500 million years of larval evolution, about 68% of species whose development is known have a lecithotrophic larval type.
A starfish has a 'bipinnaria' larva but this later develops into a multi-armed 'brachiolaria' larva.
In a very small number of species, the eggs are retained in the coelom where they develop viviparously, later emerging through ruptures in the body wall.
Many species routinely autotomize and regenerate arms and viscera.
Starfish and brittle stars prevent the growth of algal mats on coral reefs, which might otherwise obstruct the filter-feeding constituent organisms.
The first echinoderms later gave rise to free-moving groups.
It has been estimated that echinoderms capture and sequester about 0.1 gigatonnes of carbon per year as calcium carbonate, making them important contributors in the global carbon cycle.
''Strongylocentrotus purpuratus''  and ''Arbacia punctulata'' are used for this purpose in embryological studies.
In most cases, a single severed arm cannot grow into a new starfish in the absence of at least part of the disc.
The process of cloning is a cost borne by the larva both in resources as well as in development time.
The arm regeneration potential of brittle stars is being studied in connection with understanding and treating neurodegenerative diseases in humans.
If solid, these would form a heavy skeleton, so they have a sponge-like porous structure known as stereom.
In certain other asterozoans, the adults reproduce asexually for a while before they mature after which time they reproduce sexually.
Ossicles may be fused together, as in the test of sea urchins, or may articulate with each other as in the arms of sea stars, brittle stars and crinoids.
The phylum contains about 7000 living species, making it the second-largest grouping of deuterostomes (a superphylum), after the chordates (which include the vertebrates, such as birds, fishes, mammals, and reptiles).
Sea urchins use their tube feet to move around in a similar way to starfish.
Biologically, there are few other groupings so abundant in the biotic desert of the deep sea, as well as shallower oceans.
The discharged organs and tissues are regenerated over the course of several months.
In other species, whole food items such as molluscs may be ingested.
Although adult echinoderms possess pentaradial, or five-sided, symmetry, echinoderm larvae are ciliated, free-swimming organisms that organize in bilateral symmetry which makes them look like embryonic chordates.
On the Great Barrier Reef, an unexplained increase in the numbers of crown-of-thorns starfish (''Acanthaster planci''), which graze on living coral tissue, has had considerable impact on coral mortality and coral reef biodiversity.
Sea cucumbers are generally sluggish animals.
Geologically, the value of echinoderms is in their ossified skeletons, which are major contributors to many limestone formations, and can provide valuable clues as to the geological environment.
Many species can "walk" across the seabed, raising their body with the help of their arms.
In the asteroids, the same wafting motion is employed to move the animal across the ground.
Echinoderms primarily use their tube feet to move about but some sea urchins also use their spines.
Waves of tube feet contractions and relaxations move along the adherent surface and the animal moves slowly along.
Sea cucumbers often discharge parts of their internal organs if they perceive themselves to be threatened.
Before this happened, the podia probably had a feeding function as they do in the crinoids today.
Their digging activities increases the depth to which oxygen can seep and allows a more complex ecological tier-system to develop.
Crinoids are relatively free from predation.
A sea cucumber larva is an 'auricularia' while a crinoid one is a 'vitellaria'.
It is a disc-like fossil with radial ridges on the rim and a five-pointed central depression marked with radial lines.
Some burrowing sea stars extend their elongated dorsal tube feet to the surface of the sand or mud above and use them to absorb oxygen from the water column.
The coelomic fluid contains the coelomocytes, or immune cells.
The sea cucumbers are boiled for twenty minutes and then dried both naturally and later over a fire which gives them a smoky tang.
They are nearly all gonochoric, though a few species are hermaphroditic.
This tissue enables a starfish to change from moving flexibly around the seabed to becoming rigid while prying open a bivalve mollusc or preventing itself from being extracted from a crevice.
From this, radial canals extend along the arms of asteroids and adjoin the test in the ambulacral areas of echinoids.
Boluses of mucus-trapped food are passed to the mouth which is linked to the anus by a loop consisting of a short oesophagus and longer intestine.
Nerves radiate from central rings around the mouth into each arm or along the body wall; the branches of these nerves coordinate the movements of the organism and the synchronisation of the tube feet.
Other burrowers live anterior-end up and wait for detritus to fall into the entrances of the burrows or rake in debris from the surface nearby with their buccal podia.
As the adductor muscle of the shellfish relaxes, more stomach is inserted and when digestion is complete, the stomach is returned to its usual position in the starfish with its now liquefied bivalve meal inside it.
The madreporite is linked to a slender duct, the stone canal, which extends to a ring canal that encircles the mouth or oesophagus.
A few species creep around on pointed tube feet.
This ancestral stock adopted an attached mode of life and suspension feeding, and developed radial symmetry as this was more advantageous for such an existence.
The evolution of endoskeletal plates with stereom structure and of external ciliary grooves for feeding were early echinoderm developments.
Asexual reproduction by transverse fission has also been observed in adult sea cucumbers.
The exact dietary requirements of crinoids have been little researched but in the laboratory they can be fed with diatoms.
The provision of a yolk-sac means that smaller numbers of eggs are produced, the larvae have a shorter development period, smaller dispersal potential but a greater chance of survival.
In holothuroids, the podia may be reduced or absent and the madreporite opens into the body cavity so that the circulating liquid is coelomic fluid rather than sea water.
The ossicles may be flat plates or bear external projections in the form of spines, granules or warts and they are supported by a tough epidermis (skin).
These consist of the Crinoidea (feather stars and sea lilies, 580 species) and the extinct blastoids and Paracrinoids.
Sea urchins are constantly replacing spines lost through damage.
Even at abyssal depths, where no light penetrates, synchronisation of reproductive activity in echinoderms is surprisingly frequent.
For example, a sea urchin has an 'echinopluteus' larva while a brittle star has an 'ophiopluteus' larva.
Other uses for the starfish they recover include the manufacture of animal feed, composting and drying for the arts and craft trade.
Some starfish species can "swim" away from what may be danger, foregoing the regrowth by not losing limbs.
However, no stereom or internal structure showing a water vascular system is present and the identification is inconclusive.
There are several types of immune cells, which vary among classes and species.
Internal fertilisation has currently been observed in three species of sea star, three brittle stars and a deep water sea cucumber.
Morphallactic regeneration involves the movement and remodelling of existing tissues to replace lost parts.
Both male and female gonads of sea urchins are also consumed particularly in Japan, Peru, Spain and France.
This usually consists of a central ring and five radial vessels.
Haemal and perihaemal systems are derived from the coelom and form an open and reduced circulatory system.
Part of the ampulla can protrude through a pore (or a pair of pores in sea urchins) to the exterior and is known as a podium or tube foot.
In most of these species, asexual reproduction is by transverse fission with the disc splitting in two.
Despite the robustness of the individual skeletal modules complete skeletons of starfish, brittle stars and crinoids are rare in the fossil record.
Two main subdivisions are traditionally recognised: the more familiar motile Eleutherozoa, which encompasses the Asteroidea (starfish, 1,745 recent species), Ophiuroidea (brittle stars, 2,300 species), Echinoidea (sea urchins and sand dollars, 900 species) and Holothuroidea (sea cucumbers, 1,430 species); and the Pelmatozoa, some of which are sessile while others move around.
Gastrulation marks the opening of the "second mouth" that places echinoderms within the deuterostomes, and the mesoderm, which will host the skeleton, migrates inwards.
Brittle stars have a blind gut with no intestine or anus.
The gonads occupy much of the body cavities of sea urchins and sea cucumbers, while the less voluminous crinoids, brittle stars and starfish have two gonads in each arm.
During the period of regrowth, they have a few tiny arms and one large arm, thus often being referred to as "comets".
The reaction can happen quickly — the sea urchin ''Centrostephanus longispinus'' changes from jet black to grey-brown in just fifty minutes when exposed to light.
Because of their catch connective tissue, which can change rapidly from a flaccid to a rigid state, echinoderms are very difficult to dislodge from crevices.
Many can also swim with their arms but most are largely sedentary, seldom moving far from their chosen place of concealment.
Many echinoderms have remarkable powers of regeneration.
In this way they disturb and process large volumes of substrate, often leaving characteristic ridges of sediment on the seabed.
Sea stars and sea lilies readily lose and regenerate their arms.
This collagenous material can change its mechanical properties in a few seconds or minutes through nervous control rather than by muscular means.
One species of seastar, ''Ophidiaster granifer'', reproduces asexually by parthenogenesis.
The development of an echinoderm begins with a bilaterally symmetrical embryo, with a coeloblastula developing first.
This is because they quickly disarticulate (disconnect from each other) once the encompassing skin rots away, and in the absence of tissue there is nothing to hold the plates together.
These are caught by the tube feet on the pinnules, moved into the ambulacral grooves, wrapped in mucus and conveyed to the mouth by the cilia lining the grooves.
The adults are recognizable by their (usually five-point) radial symmetry, and include such well-known animals as sea stars, sea urchins, sand dollars, and sea cucumbers, as well as the sea lilies or "stone lilies".
''Holothuria parvula'' uses this method frequently, an individual splitting into two a little in front of the midpoint.
Each one of these, even the articulating spine of a sea urchin, is composed mineralogically of a crystal of calcite.
All classes possess a type of phagocytic amebocyte, which engulf invading particles and infected cells, aggregate or clot, and may be involved in cytotoxicity.
It is not unusual to find starfish with arms of different sizes in various stages of regrowth.
Defensive strategies employed include the presence of spines, toxins, which can be inherent or delivered through the tube feet, and the discharge of sticky entangling threads by sea cucumbers.
The large size and the transparency of the eggs enables the observation of sperm cells in the process of fertilising ova.
It seems probable that the mouth-upward orientation is the primitive state and that at some stage, all the classes of echinoderms except the crinoids reversed this to become mouth-downward.
These are produced by a variable combination of coloured pigments, such as the dark melanin, red carotinoids, and carotene proteins, which can be blue, green, or violet.
The larvae of echinoderms, especially starfish and sea urchins, are pelagic, and with the aid of ocean currents can be transported for great distances, reinforcing the global distribution of the phylum.
Brittle stars are the most agile of the echinoderms, raising their discs and taking strides when moving.
On fracturing such rock, distinctive cleavage patterns can be seen and sometimes even the intricate internal and external structure of the test.
During development, echinoderm coelom is divided in metacoel, mesocoel and protocoel (also called somatocoel, hydrocoel and axocoel, respectively).
There are a total of about 7,000 extant species of echinoderm as well as about 13,000 extinct species.
In some species of crinoid, the embryos develop in special breeding bags, where the eggs are held until sperm released by a male happens to find them.
Small fish landing on the upper surface may be captured by pedicilaria and dead animal matter may be scavenged but the main prey items are living invertebrates, mostly bivalve molluscs.
At this stage the bilateral symmetry is lost and radial symmetry develops.
Larger starfish prey on smaller ones and the great quantity of eggs and larvae produced form part of the zooplankton, consumed by many marine creatures.
The sea feathers are unattached and usually live in crevices, under corals or inside sponges with their arms the only visible part.
Aside from the water vascular system, echinoderms have a haemal coelom (or haemal system, the "haemal" being a misnomer), a perivisceral coelom, a gonadal coelom and often also a perihaemal coelom (or perihaemal system).
They developed from other members of the Bilateria and exhibit bilateral symmetry in their larval stage.
It is hypothesised that the ancestor of all echinoderms was a simple, motile, bilaterally symmetrical animal with a mouth, gut and anus.
This has long been known to occur among starfish and brittle stars but has been more recently observed in a sea cucumber, a sand dollar and a sea urchin.
Some sea cucumbers use their buccal tentacles to transfer their eggs to their underside or back where they are retained.
Others are scavengers and feeders on detritus.
These may be light-sensitive, and as a result many echinoderms change appearance completely as night falls.
These and other species are colloquially known as ''bêche de mer'' or ''trepang'' in China and Indonesia.
The water vascular system assists with the distribution of nutrients throughout the animal's body and is most obviously expressed in the tube feet which can be extended or contracted by the redistribution of fluid between the foot and the internal sac.
The fossil echinoderms had ambulacral grooves extending down the side of the body, fringed on either side by brachioles, structures very similar to the pinnules of a modern crinoid.
Certain sea cucumbers have a cluster of cuvierian tubules which can be ejected as long sticky threads from their anus and entangle and permanently disable an attacker.
The body cavities of many sea cucumbers and some starfish provide a habitat for parasitic or symbiotic organisms including fish, crabs, worms and snails.
Further, it is held by some scientists that the radiation of echinoderms was responsible for the Mesozoic Marine Revolution.
Sea urchins have no particular sense organs but do have statocysts that assist in gravitational orientation, and they have sensory cells in their epidermis, particularly in the tube feet, spines and pedicellariae.
All echinoderms are marine and nearly all are benthic.
Echinoderms are an exception having both a coelomic circulatory system (i.e., the water vascular system) and a haemal circulatory system (i.e., the haemal and perihaemal systems).
The Paleozoic echinoderms were globular, attached to the substrate and were orientated with their oral surfaces upwards.
It has also been suggested that cloning may occur to make use of the tissues that are normally lost during metamorphosis.
All these larvae are bilaterally symmetrical and have bands of cilia with which they swim and some, usually known as 'pluteus' larvae, have arms.
When fully developed they settle on the seabed to undergo metamorphosis and the larval arms and gut degenerate.
At the present time, some trials of breeding sea uchins in order to try to compensate the overexploitation of this resource have been made.
During periods when they have lost their digestive tracts, sea cucumbers live off stored nutrients and absorb dissolved organic matter directly from the water.
Some sea cucumbers live infaunally in burrows, anterior-end down and anus on the surface, swallowing sediment and passing it through their gut.
Starfish and brittle stars may undergo autotomy when attacked, an arm becoming detached which may distract the predator for long enough for the animal to escape.
Many sea cucumbers are mobile deposit or suspension feeders, using their buccal podia to actively capture food and then stuffing the particles individually into their buccal cavities.
These species belong to four of the major classes of echinoderms except crinozoans (as of 2011).
Some sea urchins can bore into solid rock and this bioerosion can destabilise rock faces and release nutrients into the ocean.
Some also use their articulated spines to push or lever themselves along or lift their oral surfaces off the substrate.
A fracture develops on the lower surface of the arm and the arm pulls itself free from the body which holds onto the substrate during the process.
If a sea urchin is overturned, it can extend its tube feet in one ambulacral area far enough to bring them within reach of the substrate and then successively attach feet from the adjoining area until it is righted.
To feed on one of these, the starfish moves over it, attaches its tube feet and exerts pressure on the valves by arching its back.
Asexual reproduction produces many smaller larvae that escape better from planktivorous fish.
Echinoderms possess a unique water vascular system.
Sand and mud accompanies their food through their simple gut which has a long coiled intestine and a capacious cloaca.
Starfish extend their tube feet in the intended direction of travel and grip the substrate by suction, after which the feet are drawn backwards.
'''Echinoderm''' is the common name given to any member of the phylum '''Echinodermata''' (from Ancient Greek, ἐχῖνος, ''echinos'' – "hedgehog" and δέρμα, ''derma'' – "skin") of marine animals.
Gaseous exchange occurs via dermal branchae or papulae in starfish, genital bursae in brittle stars, peristominal gills in sea urchins and cloacal trees in sea cucumbers.
Starfish have sensory cells in the epithelium and have simple eyespots and touch-sensitive tentacle-like tube feet at the tips of their arms.
In at least some of these species, they actively use this as a method of asexual reproduction.
Some are suspension feeders, securing food particles with mucus strands, spines or tube feet on their raised arms.
The parts that develop into the new larvae vary from the preoral hood (a mound like structure above the mouth), the side body wall, the postero-lateral arms or their rear ends.
This is a network of fluid-filled canals derived from the coelom (body cavity) that function in gas exchange, feeding, sensory reception and locomotion.
Crinoids are suspension feeders and spread their arms wide to catch particles floating past.
Many live in cracks, hollows and burrows and hardly move at all.
Many brittle stars are hermaphrodites.
Echinoderms possess a simple digestive system which varies according to the animal's diet.
The same everted stomach process is used by other starfish to feed on sponges, sea anemones, corals, detritus and algal films.
In China they are used as a basis for gelatinous soups and stews.
This is especially common in cold water species where planktonic larvae might not be able to find sufficient food.
Exchange of gases also takes place through the tube feet.
Echinoderms are also the largest phylum that has no freshwater or terrestrial (land-based) representatives.
Echinoderms are globally distributed in almost all depths, latitudes and environments in the ocean.
In many species, the large cardiac stomach can be everted and digest food outside the body.
Some echinoderms brood their eggs.
They have varying diets and expel food waste through their mouth.
