The ecosystem engineering concept has stimulated a new appreciation for the influence that organisms have on the ecosystem and evolutionary process.
For example, through the early-mid Eocene volcanic outgassing, the oxidation of methane stored in wetlands, and seafloor gases increased atmospheric CO2 (carbon dioxide) concentrations to levels as high as 3500&nbsp;ppm.
He and his student Theophrastus made extensive observations on plant and animal migrations, biogeography, physiology, and on their behaviour, giving an early analogue to the modern concept of an ecological niche.
Food webs are often limited relative to the real world.
This has led some ecologists to "reiterate that the notion that species clearly aggregate into discrete, homogeneous trophic levels is fiction."
Holism has three scientific meanings or uses that identify with ecology: 1) the mechanistic complexity of ecosystems, 2) the practical description of patterns in quantitative reductionist terms where correlations may be identified but nothing is understood about the causal relations without reference to the whole system, which leads to 3) a metaphysical hierarchy whereby the causal relations of larger systems are understood without reference to the smaller parts.
The nature of connections in ecological communities cannot be explained by knowing the details of each species in isolation, because the emergent pattern is neither revealed nor predicted until the ecosystem is studied as an integrated whole.
Food webs exhibit principles of ecological emergence through the nature of trophic relationships: some species have many weak feeding links (e.g., omnivores) while some are more specialized with fewer stronger feeding links (e.g., primary predators).
These processes are sustained by organisms with specific life history traits, and the variety of organisms is called biodiversity.
Differences between hagfish species provide another example of adaptation to deep-sea pressure through specialized protein adaptations.
Species are broadly categorized as autotrophs (or primary producers), heterotrophs (or consumers), and Detritivores (or decomposers).
When soils are flooded, they quickly lose oxygen, becoming hypoxic (an environment with O2 concentration below 2&nbsp;mg/liter) and eventually completely anoxic where anaerobic bacteria thrive among the roots.
Turbulent forces in air and water affect the environment and ecosystem distribution, form and dynamics.
For example, the range and distribution of biodiversity and invasive species responding to climate change is a serious concern and active area of research in the context of global warming.
The ''Journal of Biogeography'' was established in 1974.
Poikilotherms, for example, have a body temperature that is largely regulated and dependent on the temperature of the external environment.
The premise behind the r/K selection model is that natural selection pressures change according to population density.
The many connections that a keystone species holds means that it maintains the organization and structure of entire communities.
Like "ecology", the term "environment" has different conceptual meanings and overlaps with the concept of "nature".
It is the chief organizing centre of most ecosystem functions, and it is of critical importance in agricultural science and ecology.
Social ecological behaviours are notable in the social insects, slime moulds, social spiders, human society, and naked mole-rats where eusocialism has evolved.
Hypotheses posited in behavioural ecology are generally based on adaptive principles of conservation, optimization, or efficiency.
The birds-of-paradise, for example, sing and display elaborate ornaments during courtship.
Ecosystems may be habitats within biomes that form an integrated whole and a dynamically responsive system having both physical and biological complexes.
Hence, there is a relationship between global warming, decomposition and respiration in soils and wetlands producing significant climate feedbacks and globally altered biogeochemical cycles.
Community ecology is the study of the interactions among a collections of species that inhabit the same geographic area.
"New properties emerge because the components interact, not because the basic nature of the components is changed."
"Until recently, however, cognitive scientists have not paid sufficient attention to the fundamental fact that cognitive traits evolved under particular natural settings.
This aerates soils and stimulates heterotrophic growth and production.
Environment "includes the physical world, the social world of human relations and the built world of human creation."
A trophic level (from Greek ''troph'', τροφή, trophē, meaning "food" or "feeding") is "a group of organisms acquiring a considerable majority of its energy from the adjacent level nearer the abiotic source."
This research has led to an understanding that there is global feedback between ecosystems and the physical parameters of this planet, including minerals, soil, pH, ions, water, and atmospheric gases.
Ecological relationships regulate the flux of energy, nutrients, and climate all the way up to the planetary scale.
Plants, algae, and some bacteria absorb light and assimilate the energy through photosynthesis.
Keystone species have lower levels of biomass in the trophic pyramid relative to the importance of their role.
Evolution favours high rates of fecundity in ''r''-selected species.
The Hutchinsonian niche is defined more technically as a "Euclidean hyperspace whose ''dimensions'' are defined as environmental variables and whose ''size'' is a function of the number of values that the environmental values may assume for which an organism has ''positive fitness''."
In the ''r/K''-selection model, the first variable ''r'' is the intrinsic rate of natural increase in population size and the second variable ''K'' is the carrying capacity of a population.
Transformation of the global carbon cycle in the next century is projected to raise planetary temperatures, lead to more extreme fluctuations in weather, alter species distributions, and increase extinction rates.
The term "ecology" () is of a more recent origin and was first coined by the German biologist Ernst Haeckel in his book ''Generelle Morphologie der Organismen'' (1866).
Predator-prey interactions are an introductory concept into food-web studies as well as behavioural ecology.
Autotrophs are organisms that produce their own food (production is greater than respiration) by photosynthesis or chemosynthesis.
Biomes include tropical rainforest, temperate broadleaf and mixed forest, temperate deciduous forest, taiga, tundra, hot desert, and polar desert.
Ecological thought is derivative of established currents in philosophy, particularly from ethics and politics.
Six major elements (hydrogen, carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, sulfur, and phosphorus; H, C, N, O, S, and P) form the constitution of all biological macromolecules and feed into the Earth's geochemical processes.
Sea otters (''Enhydra lutris'') are commonly cited as an example of a keystone species; because, they limit the density of sea urchins that feed on kelp.
Autotrophs — responsible for primary production — assimilate light energy which becomes metabolically stored as potential energy in the form of biochemical enthalpic bonds.
In the Oligocene, from twenty-five to thirty-two million years ago, there was another significant restructuring of the global carbon cycle as grasses evolved a new mechanism of photosynthesis, C4 photosynthesis, and expanded their ranges.
There have been major restructurings in these global carbon budgets during the Earth's history, regulated to a large extent by the ecology of the land.
The term has several interpretations, and there are many ways to index, measure, characterize, and represent its complex organization.
The initial increase in population size is not limited by competition, leaving an abundance of available resources for rapid population growth.
Human ecology is an interdisciplinary investigation into the ecology of our species.
Wind power and the turbulent forces it creates can influence heat, nutrient, and biochemical profiles of ecosystems.
The effect of global warming is already being registered in melting glaciers, melting mountain ice caps, and rising sea levels.
The word "ecology" ("Ökologie") was coined in 1866 by the German scientist Ernst Haeckel (1834–1919).
The rise of molecular technologies and influx of research questions into this new ecological field resulted in the publication ''Molecular Ecology'' in 1992.
Ecosystem processes, such as primary production, pedogenesis, nutrient cycling, and various niche construction activities, regulate the flux of energy and matter through an environment.
Newer technologies opened a wave of genetic analysis into organisms once difficult to study from an ecological or evolutionary standpoint, such as bacteria, fungi, and nematodes.
This perceptual shift placed the focus back onto the life histories of individual organisms and how this relates to the development of community associations.
Ecology is not synonymous with environment, environmentalism, natural history, or environmental science.
Biogeographical patterns and range distributions are explained or predicted through knowledge of a species' traits and niche requirements.
Fire creates a heterogeneous ecosystem age and canopy structure, and the altered soil nutrient supply and cleared canopy structure opens new ecological niches for seedling establishment.
For example, the theory of island biogeography, published by the mathematician Robert MacArthur and ecologist Edward O. Wilson in 1967 is considered one of the fundamentals of ecological theory.
The ecological complexities human beings are facing through the technological transformation of the planetary biome has brought on the Anthropocene.
Indirect mutualisms occur where the organisms live apart.
Ecosystems tie into human societies through the critical and all encompassing life-supporting functions they sustain.
With consideration of the selection pressure on cognition, cognitive ecology can contribute intellectual coherence to the multidisciplinary study of cognition."
Kin selection explains altruism through genetic relationships, whereby an altruistic behaviour leading to death is rewarded by the survival of genetic copies distributed among surviving relatives.
Using these modelling techniques, Malthus' population principle of growth was later transformed into a model known as the logistic equation:
Ancient Greek philosophers such as Hippocrates and Aristotle laid the foundations of ecology in their studies on natural history.
elevation) to the use of a location by the animal."
Hypotheses are evaluated with reference to a null hypothesis which states that random processes create the observed data.
The biology of life operates within a certain range of temperatures.
Genes play an important role in the interplay of development and environmental expression of traits.
The displays are driven by sexual selection as an advertisement of quality of traits among suitors.
Clements' superorganism concept proposed that ecosystems progress through regular and determined stages of seral development that are analogous to the developmental stages of an organism.
Human-driven modifications to the planet's ecosystems (e.g., disturbance, biodiversity loss, agriculture) contributes to rising atmospheric greenhouse gas levels.
Natural capital that supports populations is critical for maintaining ecosystem services and species migration (e.g., riverine fish runs and avian insect control) has been implicated as one mechanism by which those service losses are experienced.
Temperature is largely dependent on the incidence of solar radiation.
Humboldt drew inspiration from Isaac Newton as he developed a form of "terrestrial physics".
Opinions differ on who was the founder of modern ecological theory.
As it cooled and a crust and oceans formed, its atmosphere transformed from being dominated by hydrogen to one composed mostly of methane and ammonia.
The largest scale of ecological organization is the biosphere: the total sum of ecosystems on the planet.
"Complexity in ecology is of at least six distinct types: spatial, temporal, structural, process, behavioral, and geometric."
Biogeography has a long history in the natural sciences concerning the spatial distribution of plants and animals.
Humans and elephants are examples of species exhibiting ''K''-selected characteristics, including longevity and efficiency in the conversion of more resources into fewer offspring.
Groups with predominantly altruistic members beat groups with predominantly selfish members.
The oceanic microbiome plays a significant role in the ecological biogeochemistry of the planet's oceans.
This biocomplexity stems from the interplay among ecological processes that operate and influence patterns at different scales that grade into each other, such as transitional areas or ecotones spanning landscapes.
For example, wind running over the surface of a lake creates turbulence, mixing the water column and influencing the environmental profile to create thermally layered zones, affecting how fish, algae, and other parts of the aquatic ecosystem are structured.
Animal migration is set apart from other kinds of movement; because, it involves the seasonal departure and return of individuals from a habitat.
Sunlight is the primary input of energy into the planet's ecosystems.
In these island models, the rate of population change is described by:
Ethology is the study of observable movement or behaviour in animals.
Biodiversity within ecosystems can be organized into trophic pyramids, in which the vertical dimension represents feeding relations that become further removed from the base of the food chain up toward top predators, and the horizontal dimension represents the abundance or biomass at each level.
In a biogeographical context, the marriage between genetics, ecology, and evolution resulted in a new sub-discipline called phylogeography.
Tree roots, fungi, bacteria, worms, ants, beetles, centipedes, spiders, mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians, and other less familiar creatures all work to create the trophic web of life in soil ecosystems.
The Red Queen Hypothesis, for example, posits that parasites track down and specialize on the locally common genetic defense systems of its host that drives the evolution of sexual reproduction to diversify the genetic constituency of populations responding to the antagonistic pressure.
Ecology is an employed science of restoration, repairing disturbed sites through human intervention, in natural resource management, and in environmental impact assessments.
where ''N'' is the number of individuals measured as biomass density, ''a'' is the maximum per-capita rate of change, and ''K'' is the carrying capacity of the population.
It is estimated that the Earth's oceans hold 40,000 gigatonnes (Gt) of carbon, that vegetation and soil hold 2070 Gt, and that fossil fuel emissions are 6.3 Gt carbon per year.
Within an ecosystem, organisms are linked to the physical and biological components of their environment to which they are adapted.
Step by step lines or relations are drawn until a web of life is illustrated.
Biodiversity fuels the resilience of ecosystems acting as a kind of regenerative insurance.
Many prey species are faced with multiple predators that differ in the degree of danger posed.
Microbiomes were discovered largely through advances in molecular genetics, which have revealed a hidden richness of microbial diversity on the planet.
Heterotrophs can be further sub-divided into different functional groups, including primary consumers (strict herbivores), secondary consumers (carnivorous predators that feed exclusively on herbivores), and tertiary consumers (predators that feed on a mix of herbivores and predators).
Ecology also has developed through contributions from other nations, including Russia's Vladimir Vernadsky and his founding of the biosphere concept in the 1920s and Japan's Kinji Imanishi and his concepts of harmony in nature and habitat segregation in the 1950s.
These migration routes involved an expansion of the range as plant populations expanded from one area to another.
Some mark Haeckel's definition as the beginning; others say it was Eugenius Warming with the writing of Oecology of Plants: An Introduction to the Study of Plant Communities (1895), or Carl Linnaeus' principles on the economy of nature that matured in the early 18th century.
In cases where basic models are insufficient, ecologists may adopt different kinds of statistical methods, such as the Akaike information criterion,  or use models that can become mathematically complex as "several competing hypotheses are simultaneously confronted with the data."
Species have functional traits that are uniquely adapted to the ecological niche.
These disturbances create places of renewal where new directions emerge from the patchwork of natural experimentation and opportunity.
Adaptation is the central unifying concept in behavioural ecology.
Prey species can exhibit different kinds of behavioural adaptations to predators, such as avoid, flee, or defend.
Other traits may be related to structure, such as the spines of a cactus or dorsal spines of a bluegill sunfish, or behaviors such as courtship displays or pair bonding.
To be adapted to their environment and face predatory threats, organisms must balance their energy budgets as they invest in different aspects of their life history, such as growth, feeding, mating, socializing, or modifying their habitat.
Large sections of permafrost are also melting to create a new mosaic of flooded areas having increased rates of soil decomposition activity that raises methane (CH4) emissions.
Organisms are subject to environmental pressures, but they also modify their habitats.
Commonly used types of data include life history, fecundity, and survivorship, and these are analysed using mathematical techniques such as matrix algebra.
Ecosystems relate importantly to human ecology as they are the ultimate base foundation of global economics as every commodity, and the capacity for exchange ultimately stems from the ecosystems on Earth.
On a planetary scale, ecosystems are affected by circulation patterns in the global trade winds.
Molecular investigations revealed previously obscured details in the tiny intricacies of nature and improved resolution into probing questions about behavioural and biogeographical ecology.
It might also include the analysis of predator-prey dynamics, competition among similar plant species, or mutualistic interactions between crabs and corals.
These early phases of population growth experience ''density-independent'' forces of natural selection, which is called ''r''-selection.
The population that lives in an isolated rock outcrop hides in crevasses where its flattened body offers a selective advantage.
Native North Americans were among the first to influence fire regimes by controlling their spread near their homes or by lighting fires to stimulate the production of herbaceous foods and basketry materials.
Water transportation by plants is another important ecophysiological process affected by osmotic pressure gradients.
Different species evolve different life-history strategies spanning a continuum between these two selective forces.
For example, oxygen levels decrease with decreasing pressure and are a limiting factor for life at higher altitudes.
The biogeographic processes that result in the natural splitting of species explains much of the modern distribution of the Earth's biota.
Furthermore, food web theory suggests that keystone species may not be common, so it is unclear how generally the keystone species model can be applied.
When the relative abundance or biomass of each species is sorted into its respective trophic level, they naturally sort into a 'pyramid of numbers'.
Examples of mutualism include fungus-growing ants employing agricultural symbiosis, bacteria living in the guts of insects and other organisms, the fig wasp and yucca moth pollination complex, lichens with fungi and photosynthetic algae, and corals with photosynthetic algae.
Ecological interactions can be classified broadly into a host and an associate relationship.
Ancient Greek philosophers such as Hippocrates and Aristotle were among the first to record observations on natural history.
The history is characterized by periods of significant transformation followed by millions of years of stability.
There are many practical applications of ecology in conservation biology, wetland management, natural resource management (agroecology, agriculture, forestry, agroforestry, fisheries), city planning (urban ecology), community health, economics, basic and applied science, and human social interaction (human ecology).
Palamar (2008) notes an overshadowing by mainstream environmentalism of pioneering women in the early 1900s who fought for urban health ecology (then called euthenics) and brought about changes in environmental legislation.
Evolutionary theory changed the way that researchers approached the ecological sciences.
Feeding relations require extensive investigations into the gut contents of organisms, which can be difficult to decipher, or stable isotopes can be used to trace the flow of nutrient diets and energy through a food web.
Some species (e.g., ''Pinus halepensis'') cannot germinate until after their seeds have lived through a fire or been exposed to certain compounds from smoke.
Heat affects growth rates, activity, behaviour, and primary production.
Radiant energy from the sun generates heat, provides photons of light measured as active energy in the chemical reactions of life, and also acts as a catalyst for genetic mutation.
There are different methods to define the continental boundaries of biomes dominated by different functional types of vegetative communities that are limited in distribution by climate, precipitation, weather and other environmental variables.
It is not treated as separate from humans.
There is a relationship between light, primary production, and ecological energy budgets.
Ecosystem ecology is the science of determining the fluxes of materials (e.g.
Ecological science is used in the methods of sustainable harvesting, disease, and fire outbreak management, in fisheries stock management, for integrating land-use with protected areas and communities, and conservation in complex geo-political landscapes.
Metapopulation models examine patch dynamics over time to answer potential questions about spatial and demographic ecology.
The reason for a thickness increase can be understood through reference to principles of natural selection via predation without need to reference or understand the biomolecular properties of the exterior shells.
Complexity is understood as a large computational effort needed to piece together numerous interacting parts exceeding the iterative memory capacity of the human mind.
The underlying concept of ecosystem can be traced back to 1864 in the published work of George Perkins Marsh ("Man and Nature").
Heat is a form of energy that regulates temperature.
Each of those aphids, in turn, support diverse bacterial communities.
Preventing species extinctions is one way to preserve biodiversity and that goal rests on techniques that preserve genetic diversity, habitat and the ability for species to migrate.
Scientific recognition of contributions to ecology from non-English-speaking cultures is hampered by language and translation barriers.
These gases changed the way that light from the sun hit the Earth's surface and greenhouse effects trapped heat.
Ecosystems, for example, contain abiotic resources and interacting life forms (i.e., individual organisms that aggregate into populations which aggregate into distinct ecological communities).
Population ecology builds upon these introductory models to further understand demographic processes in real study populations.
As plants grow, they accumulate nutrients and are eaten by grazing herbivores, and the energy is transferred through a chain of organisms by consumption.
Habitat shifts provide important evidence of competition in nature where one population changes relative to the habitats that most other individuals of the species occupy.
Elton defined ecological relations using concepts of food chains, food cycles, and food size, and described numerical relations among different functional groups and their relative abundance.
Ecosystems are dynamic, they do not always follow a linear successional path, but they are always changing, sometimes rapidly and sometimes so slowly that it can take thousands of years for ecological processes to bring about certain successional stages of a forest.
Carson used ecological science to link the release of environmental toxins to human and ecosystem health.
In the early 20th century, ecology transitioned from a more descriptive form of natural history to a more analytical form of ''scientific natural history''.
After the effective environmental components are understood through reference to their causes; however, they conceptually link back together as an integrated whole, or ''holocoenotic'' system as it was once called.
Elaborate sexual displays and posturing are encountered in the behavioural ecology of animals.
These displays serve a dual purpose of signalling healthy or well-adapted individuals and desirable genes.
Fire plays a major role in the persistence and resilience of ecosystems.
With an understanding of metabolic and thermodynamic principles, a complete accounting of energy and material flow can be traced through an ecosystem.
The distinction between external and internal environments, however, is an abstraction parsing life and environment into units or facts that are inseparable in reality.
Small scale patterns do not necessarily explain large scale phenomena, otherwise captured in the expression (coined by Aristotle) 'the sum is greater than the parts'.
Metapopulation models simplify the landscape into patches of varying levels of quality, and metapopulations are linked by the migratory behaviours of organisms.
Ecosystem engineers are defined as: "organisms that directly or indirectly modulate the availability of resources to other species, by causing physical state changes in biotic or abiotic materials.
On a large scale, the distribution of gravitational forces on the earth is uneven and influences the shape and movement of tectonic plates as well as influencing geomorphic processes such as orogeny and erosion.
Habitat shifts also occur in the developmental life history of amphibians, and in insects that transition from aquatic to terrestrial habitats.
This relationship is called commensalism; because, many others receive the benefits of clean air at no cost or harm to trees supplying the oxygen.
Other events, such as the evolution of trees and the colonization of land in the Devonian period played a significant role in the early development of ecological trophism in soils.
The habitat plus the niche is called the ecotope, which is defined as the full range of environmental and biological variables affecting an entire species.
There were untapped sources of free energy within the mixture of reducing and oxidizing gasses that set the stage for primitive ecosystems to evolve and, in turn, the atmosphere also evolved.
No single axis of causality can be discerned to segregate the biological from geomorphological systems in soils.
An understanding of biodiversity has practical applications for species and ecosystem-level conservation planners as they make management recommendations to consulting firms, governments, and industry.
Definitions of the niche date back to 1917, but G. Evelyn Hutchinson made conceptual advances in 1957 by introducing a widely adopted definition:  "the set of biotic and abiotic conditions in which a species is able to persist and maintain stable population sizes."
For example, the dynamic history of the planetary atmosphere's CO2 and O2 composition has been affected by the biogenic flux of gases coming from respiration and photosynthesis, with levels fluctuating over time in relation to the ecology and evolution of plants and animals.
For instance, beavers manage water levels by building dams which improves their habitat in a landscape.
The competitive exclusion principle states that two species cannot coexist indefinitely by living off the same limiting resource; one will always out-compete the other.
forage biomass and quality) or indirectly (e.g.
Molecular ecological research became more feasible with the development of rapid and accessible genetic technologies, such as the polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
Food webs are a type of concept map or a heuristic device that is used to illustrate and study pathways of energy and material flows.
Since then, ecologists have worked to bridge their understanding of the degradation of the planet's ecosystems with environmental politics, law, restoration, and natural resources management.
An important focus for ecologists is to improve the understanding of how biodiversity affects ecological function.
Each trophic level contains unrelated species that are grouped together because they share common ecological functions, giving a macroscopic view of the system.
The formula states that the rate of change in population size (''dN/dT'') is equal to growth (''aN'') that is limited by carrying capacity (1&nbsp;–&nbsp;''N''/''K'').
The cardiovascular systems of animals are functionally adapted to overcome pressure and gravitational forces that change according to the features of organisms (e.g., height, size, shape), their behaviour (e.g., diving, running, flying), and the habitat occupied (e.g., water, hot deserts, cold tundra).
Several areas of ecology of evolution that focus on such traits are life history theory, ecophysiology, metabolic theory of ecology, and Ethology.
This framework forms a panarchy and exhibits non-linear behaviors; this means that "effect and cause are disproportionate, so that small changes to critical variables, such as the number of nitrogen fixers, can lead to disproportionate, perhaps irreversible, changes in the system properties."
A population ecology concept is r/K selection theory, one of the first predictive models in ecology used to explain life-history evolution.
It is dynamically interlinked, and contains resources for organisms at any time throughout their life cycle.
There is concern over increases in atmospheric methane in the context of the global carbon cycle, because methane is a greenhouse gas that is 23 times more effective at absorbing long-wave radiation than CO2 on a 100-year time scale.
