A term for this is "constrained utility maximization" (with income and wealth as the constraints on demand).
The Information Content of ECB Wording, IDEAS at the Department of Economics, College of Liberal Arts and Sciences, University of Connecticut&nbsp;&nbsp; • Stephen G. Cecchetti,  Central Bank Policy Rules: Conceptual Issues and Practical Considerations, IDEAS at the Department of Economics, College of Liberal Arts and Sciences, University of Connecticut
&nbsp;&nbsp; • Obstfeld, Maurice (2008).
''The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics'', v. 2, pp.
It dispensed with the labour theory of value inherited from classical economics in favour of a marginal utility theory of value on the demand side and a more general theory of costs on the supply side.
Here, utility refers to the hypothesized relation of each individual consumer for ranking different commodity bundles as more or less preferred.
The PPF is a table or graph (as at the right) showing the different quantity combinations of the two goods producible with a given technology and total factor inputs, which limit feasible total output.
"invisible hand", ''The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics'', 2nd Edition, v. 4, pp.&nbsp;564–66.
Analysis often revolves around causes of such price stickiness and their implications for reaching a hypothesized long-run equilibrium.
It measures what an additional unit of one good costs in units forgone of the other good, an example of a ''real opportunity cost''.
Specialization is considered key to economic efficiency based on theoretical and empirical considerations.
Externalities occur where there are significant social costs or benefits from production or consumption that are not reflected in market prices.
Prices and quantities have been described as the most directly observable attributes of goods produced and exchanged in a market economy.
Economic theory may also specify conditions such that supply and demand through the market is an efficient mechanism for allocating resources.
According to Ronald Coase, people begin to organize their production in firms when the costs of doing business becomes lower than doing it on the market.
Marginalist theory, such as above, describes the consumers as attempting to reach most-preferred positions, subject to income and wealth constraints while producers attempt to maximize profits subject to their own constraints, including demand for goods produced, technology, and the price of inputs.
Economist Julian Lincoln Simon has criticized Malthus's conclusions.
The price in equilibrium is determined by supply and demand.
''Economic Theory in Retrospect'', 5th ed., in ch.
Such factors include capital accumulation, technological change and labour force growth.
For example, air pollution may generate a negative externality, and education may generate a positive externality (less crime, etc.).
In theory, in a free market the aggregates (sum of) of ''quantity demanded'' by buyers and ''quantity supplied'' by sellers will be equal and reach economic equilibrium over time in reaction to price changes; in practice, various issues may prevent equilibrium, and any equilibrium reached may not necessarily be morally equitable.
In microeconomics, principal concepts include supply and demand, marginalism, rational choice theory, opportunity cost, budget constraints, utility, and the theory of the firm.
It also studies effects of monetary policy and fiscal policy.
Among economists more generally, it argues that a particular definition presented may reflect the direction toward which the author believes economics is evolving, or should evolve.
Tax cuts allow consumers to increase their spending, which boosts aggregate demand.
It is, indeed, in some ways an outgrowth of the older field of political economy.
The production–possibility frontier (PPF) is an expository figure for representing scarcity, cost, and efficiency.
A measure of gains from trade is the ''increased income levels'' that trade may facilitate.&nbsp;&nbsp; • Findlay, Ronald (2008).
Being on the curve might still not fully satisfy allocative efficiency (also called Pareto efficiency) if it does not produce a mix of goods that consumers prefer over other points.
This is because war has as the goal winning it (as a sought after '''end'''), generates both cost and benefits; and, '''resources''' (human life and other costs) are used to attain the goal.
Individual agents may include, for example, households, firms, buyers, and sellers.
Neoclassical economics systematized supply and demand as joint determinants of price and quantity in market equilibrium, affecting both the allocation of output and the distribution of income.
Other inputs are relatively ''fixed'', such as plant and equipment and key personnel.
Mercantilism was an economic doctrine that flourished from the 16th to 18th century in a prolific pamphlet literature, whether of merchants or statesmen.
Some of the differences may reflect evolving views of the subject or different views among economists.&nbsp;&nbsp; • _____ (2009).
That is, the higher the price of a product, the less of it people would be prepared to buy (other things unchanged).
It has been described as expressing "the basic relationship between scarcity and choice".
An ''economic system'' of a society is the unit of analysis.
Abstract.&nbsp;&nbsp; • Kaminsky, Graciela Laura.
Other inputs may include intermediate goods used in production of final goods, such as the steel in a new car.
In a perfectly competitive market, supply and demand equate marginal cost and marginal utility at equilibrium.
More recently, the works of Mark Granovetter, Peter Hedstrom and Richard Swedberg have been influential in this field.
18, "Protecting the Environment."
19, "Adam Smith as an Economist, pp.
Deirdre McCloskey has argued that many empirical economic studies are poorly reported, and she and Stephen Ziliak argue that although her critique has been well-received, practice has not improved.
Besides the traditional concern in production, distribution, and consumption in an economy, economic analysis may be applied throughout society, as ''in'' business, finance, health care, and government.
:The science which traces the laws of such of the phenomena of society as arise from the combined operations of mankind for the production of wealth, in so far as those phenomena are not modified by the pursuit of any other object.
''The Origins of Ecological Economics: The Bioeconomics of Georgescu-Roegen''.
The law of demand states that, in general, price and quantity demanded in a given market are inversely related.
He posited that the growth of population and capital, pressing against a fixed supply of land, pushes up rents and holds down wages and profits.
Both tax cuts and spending have multiplier effects where the initial increase in demand from the policy percolates through the economy and generates additional economic activity.
Say's definition has prevailed up to our time, saved by substituting the word "wealth" for "goods and services" meaning that wealth may include non material objects as well.
For Robbins, the insufficiency was solved, and his definition allows us to proclaim, with an easy conscience, education economics, safety and security economics, health economics, war economics, and of course, production, distribution and consumption economics as valid subjects of the economic science.
The Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences (commonly known as the Nobel Prize in Economics) is a prize awarded to economists each year for outstanding intellectual contributions in the field.
Consistent with classical unemployment, frictional unemployment occurs when appropriate job vacancies exist for a worker, but the length of time needed to search for and find the job leads to a period of unemployment.
The item traded may be a tangible product such as apples or a service such as repair services, legal counsel, or entertainment.
''Economic Theory in Retrospect'', pp, 24–29, 82–84.
Elementary demand-and-supply theory predicts equilibrium but not the speed of adjustment for changes of equilibrium due to a shift in demand or supply.
They are the focus of economic analysis.
Use of commonly accepted methods need not produce a final conclusion or even a consensus on a particular question, given different tests, data sets, and prior beliefs.
Within macroeconomics there is, in general order of their appearance in the literature; classical economics, Keynesian economics, the neoclassical synthesis, post-Keynesian economics, monetarism, new classical economics, and supply-side economics.
General-equilibrium theory studies various markets and their behaviour.
Money has a general acceptability, a relative consistency in value, divisibility, durability, portability, elastic in supply and survives with mass public confidence.
Part of the cost of making pretzels is that neither the flour nor the morning are available any longer, for use in some other way.
For example, if the supply of healthcare services is limited by external factors, the equilibrium price may be unaffordable for many who desire it but cannot pay for it.
In between are mixed economies.
Based on George Akerlof's "Market for Lemons" article, the paradigm example is of a dodgy second-hand car market.
The economics of the public sector is one example.
These are represented in theoretical and empirical forms (as in the neoclassical and endogenous growth models) and in growth accounting.&nbsp;&nbsp; • Uzawa, H. (1987).
The "Law of Supply" states that, in general, a rise in price leads to an expansion in supply and a fall in price leads to a contraction in supply.
At a price below equilibrium, there is a shortage of quantity supplied compared to quantity demanded.
He affirmed that previous economists have usually centred their studies on the analysis of wealth: how wealth is created (production), distributed, and consumed; and how wealth can grow.
Large amounts of data are run through computer programs to analyse the impact of certain policies; IMPLAN is one well-known example.
In a competitive labour market for example the quantity of labour employed and the price of labour (the wage rate) depends on the demand for labour (from employers for production) and supply of labour (from potential workers).
This method studies both changes in markets and their interactions leading towards equilibrium.&nbsp;&nbsp; • Varian, Hal R. (1987).
It also concerns the size and distribution of gains from trade.
Another example is the assumption of narrowly selfish preferences versus a model that tests for selfish, altruistic, and cooperative preferences.&nbsp;&nbsp; • Sigmund, Karl, Ernst Fehr, and Martin A. Nowak (2002),"The Economics of Fair Play", ''Scientific American'', 286(1) January,  pp.
Much-studied factors include the rate of investment, population growth, and technological change.
Consistent with this focus, primary textbooks often distinguish between microeconomics and macroeconomics.
Moreover, attempting to reduce one problem, say adverse selection by mandating insurance, may add to another, say moral hazard.
New classical macroeconomics, as distinct from the Keynesian view of the business cycle, posits market clearing with imperfect information.
''Bioeconomics and Sustainability: Essays in Honor of Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen''.
Despite these concerns, mainstream graduate programs have become increasingly technical and mathematical.
Microeconomics examines the behaviour of basic elements in the economy, including individual agents and markets, their interactions, and the outcomes of interactions.
"The dismal science" is a derogatory alternative name for economics devised by the Victorian historian Thomas Carlyle in the 19th century.
The corresponding point on the supply curve measures marginal cost, the increase in total cost to the supplier for the corresponding unit of the good.
Firms combine labour and capital, and can achieve far greater economies of scale (when the average cost per unit declines as more units are produced) than individual market trading.
They argue that such a reshaping should include new advances within feminist economics that take as their starting point the socially responsible, sensible and accountable subject in creating an economy and economic theories that fully acknowledge care for each other as well as the planet.
Then it is less costly for the seller to accept money in exchange, rather than what the buyer produces.
It measures what the consumer would be prepared to pay for that unit.
Like theories, uses of test statistics are themselves open to critical analysis,&nbsp;&nbsp; • McCloskey, Deirdre N. and Stephen T. Ziliak (1996).
"Retrospectives: A Dismal Romantic", ''Journal of Economic Perspectives'', 4(4), pp.
Production is a flow and thus a rate of output per period of time.
In applied economics, input-output models employing linear programming methods are quite common.
Acceptance is dependent upon the falsifiable hypothesis surviving tests.
''The Economic Approach to Human Behavior''.
"The Standard Error of Regressions", ''Journal of Economic Literature'', 34(1), pp.
There are a variety of modern definitions of economics.
Producers, for example business firms, are hypothesized to be ''profit-maximizers'', meaning that they attempt to produce and supply the amount of goods that will bring them the highest profit.
A 2002 International Monetary Fund study looked at "consensus forecasts" (the forecasts of large groups of economists) that were made in advance of 60 different national recessions in the 1990s: in 97% of the cases the economists did not predict the contraction a year in advance.
International finance is a macroeconomic field which examines the flow of capital across international borders, and the effects of these movements on exchange rates.
When aggregate demand falls below the potential output of the economy, there is an output gap where some productive capacity is left unemployed.
That is, the higher the price at which the good can be sold, the more of it producers will supply, as in the figure.
Still, in a market economy, movement along the curve may indicate that the choice of the increased output is anticipated to be worth the cost to the agents.
Issues like central bank independence, central bank policies and rhetoric in central bank governors discourse or the premises of macroeconomic policies (monetary and fiscal policy) of the state, are focus of contention and criticism.&nbsp;&nbsp; • Gabriel Mangano (Centre Walras-Pareto, University of Lausanne BFSH 1, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland, and London School of Economics), Measuring Central Bank Independence: A Tale of Subjectivity and of Its Consequences, Oxford Economic Papers.
In perfectly competitive markets, no participants are large enough to have the market power to set the price of a homogeneous product.
Abstract.&nbsp;&nbsp; • Calomiris, Charles W. "banking crises."
The aforementioned microeconomic concepts play a major part in macroeconomic models&nbsp;– for instance, in monetary theory, the quantity theory of money predicts that increases in the money supply increase inflation, and inflation is assumed to be influenced by rational expectations.
Demand-and-supply analysis is used to explain the behaviour of perfectly competitive markets, but as a standard of comparison it can be extended to any type of market.
If the war is not winnable or if the expected costs outweigh the benefits, the deciding '''actors''' (assuming they are rational) may never go to war (a '''decision''') but rather explore other alternatives.
Under Ricardian equivalence, any boost in demand from fiscal policy will be offset by the increased savings rate intended to pay for future higher taxes.
Both problems may raise insurance costs and reduce efficiency by driving otherwise willing transactors from the market ("incomplete markets").
Smith repeatedly attacks groups of politically aligned individuals who attempt to use their collective influence to manipulate a government into doing their bidding.
Neoclassical economics is occasionally referred as ''orthodox economics'' whether by its critics or sympathizers.
The book focused on determinants of national income in the short run when prices are relatively inflexible.
Smith wrote that the "real price of every thing&nbsp;... is the toil and trouble of acquiring it" as influenced by its scarcity.
''Comparative economic systems'' studies the relative performance and behaviour of different economies or systems.&nbsp;&nbsp; • NA (2007).
Such aggregates include national income and output, the unemployment rate, and price inflation and subaggregates like total consumption and investment spending and their components.
Joseph Schumpeter described Aquinas as "coming nearer than any other group to being the 'founders' of scientific economics" as to monetary, interest, and value theory within a natural-law perspective.
Ricardo was the first to state and prove the principle of comparative advantage, according to which each country should specialize in producing and exporting goods in that it has a lower ''relative'' cost of production, rather relying only on its own production.
The neoclassical synthesis refers to the reconciliation of Keynesian economics with neoclassical economics, stating that Keynesianism is correct in the short run but qualified by neoclassical-like considerations in the intermediate and long run.
Policy options include regulations that reflect cost-benefit analysis or market solutions that change incentives, such as emission fees or redefinition of property rights.&nbsp;&nbsp; • Samuelson, Paul A., and William D. Nordhaus (2004).
An immediate example of this is the consumer theory of individual demand, which isolates how prices (as costs) and income affect quantity demanded.
The controlled experiments common to the physical sciences are difficult and uncommon in economics, and instead broad data is observationally studied; this type of testing is typically regarded as less rigorous than controlled experimentation, and the conclusions typically more tentative.
A widely accepted general standard is Pareto efficiency, which is reached when no further change can make someone better off without making someone else worse off.
Amsterdam: North-Holland.
After discussing it for decades, Robbins' definition became widely accepted by mainstream economists, and it has opened way into current textbooks.
Examples of such assumptions include perfect information, profit maximization and rational choices.&nbsp;&nbsp; • Boland, Lawrence A.
"The Social Sciences: Economics", ''The New Encyclopædia Britannica'', v. 27, p. 347.
2, "Money: The Lubroicant of Exchange" section, ch.
But he said that economics can be used to study other things, such as war, that are outside its usual focus.
One commentary characterizes the remark as making economics an approach rather than a subject matter but with great specificity as to the "choice process and the type of social interaction that such analysis involves."
It considers the structure of such markets and their interactions.
In contrast, the new Keynesian approach retains the rational expectations assumption, however it assumes a variety of market failures.
Milton Friedman effectively took many of the basic principles set forth by Adam Smith and the classical economists and modernized them.
The effects of fiscal policy can be limited by crowding out.
Gary Becker, a contributor to the expansion of economics into new areas, describes the approach he favours as "combining the assumptions of maximizing behaviour, stable preferences, and market equilibrium, used relentlessly and unflinchingly."
Contemporary economics uses mathematics.
Other applications of demand and supply include the distribution of income among the factors of production, including labour and capital, through factor markets.
Recognizing the reality of scarcity and then figuring out how to organize society for the most efficient use of resources has been described as the "essence of economics", where the subject "makes its unique contribution."
Much applied economics in public policy is concerned with determining how the efficiency of an economy can be improved.
"Specialization," ''A Glossary of Political Economy Terms''.&nbsp;&nbsp; • Yang, Xiaokai, and Yew-Kwang Ng (1993).
At the turn of the 21st century, the expanding domain of economics in the social sciences has been described as economic imperialism.&nbsp;&nbsp; • Becker, Gary S. (1976).
Economic writings date from earlier Mesopotamian, Greek, Roman, Indian subcontinent, Chinese, Persian, and Arab civilizations.
"comparative advantage", ''The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics''.
Some market organizations may give rise to inefficiencies associated with uncertainty.
In an argument that includes "one of the most famous passages in all economics," Smith represents every individual as trying to employ any capital they might command for their own advantage, not that of the society, and for the sake of profit, which is necessary at some level for employing capital in domestic industry, and positively related to the value of produce.
Classical models of unemployment occurs when wages are too high for employers to be willing to hire more workers.
For a given quantity of a consumer good, the point on the demand curve indicates the value, or marginal utility, to consumers for that unit.
Value theory was important in classical theory.
This pushes the price down.
In other words, every participant is a "price taker" as no participant influences the price of a product.
In a discussion on oligopoly research, Paul Joskow pointed out in 1975 that in practice, serious students of actual economies tended to use "informal models" based upon qualitative factors specific to particular industries.
It is an economic process that uses inputs to create a commodity or a service for exchange or direct use.
Physiocrats, a group of 18th-century French thinkers and writers, developed the idea of the economy as a circular flow of income and output.
Smith discusses potential benefits of specialization by division of labour, including increased labour productivity and gains from trade, whether between town and country or across countries.
A seminal article by Ronald Coase published in 1961 suggested that well-defined property rights could overcome the problems of externalities.
By construction, each point on the curve shows ''productive efficiency'' in maximizing output for given total inputs.
Over the years, understanding of the business cycle has branched into various research programmes, mostly related to or distinct from Keynesianism.
Labour economics examines the interaction of workers and employers through such markets to explain patterns and changes of wages and other labour income, labour mobility, and (un)employment, productivity through human capital, and related public-policy issues.&nbsp;&nbsp; • Taber, Christopher, and Bruce A. Weinberg (2008).
Governments implement fiscal policy that influence macroeconomic conditions by adjusting spending and taxation policies to alter aggregate demand.
The force of a rapidly growing population against a limited amount of land meant diminishing returns to labour.
Adam Smith (1723–1790) was an early economic theorist.
Similarly, demand-and-supply theory predicts a new price-quantity combination from a shift in demand (as to the figure), or in supply.
It has been described as a social convention, like language, useful to one largely because it is useful to others.
Citing Robbins: "Economics is the science which studies human behavior as a relationship between ends and scarce means which have alternative uses".
Education, for example, requires time, effort, and expenses, plus the foregone income and experience, yet these losses can be weighted against future benefits education may bring to the agent or the economy.
Ben Bernanke, former Chairman of the Federal Reserve, is among the economists today generally accepting Friedman's analysis of the causes of the Great Depression.
It includes Friedman's permanent income hypothesis on consumption and "rational expectations" theory, led by Robert Lucas, and real business cycle theory.
"assumptions controversy", ''The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2nd Edition''  Online abstract.
He argued that formal models were largely not important in the empirical work, either, and that the fundamental factor behind the theory of the firm, behaviour, was neglected.
Post-Keynesian economics also concentrates on macroeconomic rigidities and adjustment processes.
(1987), "invisible hand", ''The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics'', v. 2, pp.&nbsp;997–99.
It provides a mathematical foundation of industrial organization, discussed above, to model different types of firm behaviour, for example in an oligopolistic industry (few sellers), but equally applicable to wage negotiations, bargaining, contract design, and any situation where individual agents are few enough to have perceptible effects on each other.
It draws heavily from quantitative methods such as operations research and programming and from statistical methods such as regression analysis in the absence of certainty and perfect knowledge.
:Economics is a study of man in the ordinary business of life.
Classical economics focused on the tendency of markets to move to long-run equilibrium.
In particular, New Keynesians assume prices and wages are "sticky", which means they do not adjust instantaneously to changes in economic conditions.
''Economic Analysis of Law''.
Within this group researchers tend to share with other economists the emphasis on models employing micro foundations and optimizing behaviour but with a narrower focus on standard Keynesian themes such as price and wage rigidity.
One example of this is his article in the September 1970 issue of The New York Times Magazine, where he claims that the social responsibility of business should be "to use its resources and engage in activities designed to increase its profits&nbsp;... (through) open and free competition without deception or fraud."
These are usually made to be endogenous features of the models, rather than simply assumed as in older Keynesian-style ones.
University of Chicago Press.
Thus, a central conclusion of Keynesian economics is that, in some situations, no strong automatic mechanism moves output and employment towards full employment levels.
Among contemporary systems at different ends of the organizational spectrum are socialist systems and capitalist systems, in which most production occurs in respectively state-run and private enterprises.
The model of supply and demand predicts that for given supply and demand curves, price and quantity will stabilize at the price that makes quantity supplied equal to quantity demanded.
''&nbsp;&nbsp; • Persky, Joseph (1990).
In Smith's day, these were referred to as factions, but are now more commonly called special interests, a term which can comprise international bankers, corporate conglomerations, outright oligopolies, monopolies, trade unions and other groups.
This is posited to bid the price up.
Classic works include Max Weber's ''The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism'' (1905) and Georg Simmel's ''The Philosophy of Money'' (1900).
For the consumer, that point comes where marginal utility of a good, net of price, reaches zero, leaving no net gain from further consumption increases.
Practitioners use such methods to estimate the size, economic significance, and statistical significance ("signal strength") of the hypothesized relation(s) and to adjust for noise from other variables.
Its economic function can be contrasted with barter (non-monetary exchange).
Economic analyses may also be applied ''to'' such diverse subjects as crime, education, the family, law, politics, religion, social institutions, war, science, and the environment.
Keynesian economics has two successors.
Macroeconomics examines the economy as a whole to explain broad aggregates and their interactions "top down", that is, using a simplified form of general-equilibrium theory.
Governments often tax and otherwise restrict the sale of goods that have negative externalities and subsidize or otherwise promote the purchase of goods that have positive externalities in an effort to correct the price distortions caused by these externalities.
&nbsp;&nbsp; • Hoover, Kevin D., and Mark V. Siegler (2008).
For this reason, management of the money supply is a key aspect of monetary policy.&nbsp;&nbsp; • Samuelson, Paul A., and William D. Nordhaus (2004).
