Nature tourism, low impact tourism, green tourism, bio-tourism, ecologically responsible tourism, and others have been used in literature and marketing, although they are not necessary synonymous with ecotourism.
Without knowing the proper utilization of certain resources they are destroyed and floral and faunal species are becoming extinct.
"Certain species have gone from being little known or valued by local people to being highly valued commodities.
The lack of adequate sanitation facilities in many East African parks results in the disposal of campsite sewage in rivers, contaminating the wildlife, livestock, and people who draw drinking water from it.
Like most forms of tourism, ecotourism generally depends on air transportation, which contributes to global climate change.
Without economic incentive, the whole premise of self-interest through environmental protection is quashed; instead, ecotourism companies will minimize environment related expenses and maximize tourism demand.
The Great Barrier Reef Park in Australia reported over half of a billion dollars of indirect income in the area and added thousands of indirect jobs between 2004 and 2005.
Local and national governments took advantage of the Maasai’s ignorance on the situation and robbed them of huge chunks of grazing land, putting to risk their only socio-economic livelihood.
But there is a tension in this relationship because ecotourism often causes conflict and changes in land-use rights, fails to deliver promises of community-level benefits, damages environments, and has plenty of other social impacts.
Ecotourism activities are, in and of themselves, issues in environmental impact because they may disturb fauna and flora.
A recently formed alliance, the South-East Asian Tourism Organisation (SEATO), is bringing together these diverse players to allay resource management concerns.
Several university programs use this description as the working definition of ecotourism.
The tragedy of the commons offers another model for economic unsustainability from environmental protection, in ecotourism sites utilized by many companies.
Costa Rica, for example, runs the Certification of Sustainable Tourism (CST) program, which is intended to balance the effect that business has on the local environment.
Where the ecotourism activity involves wildlife viewing, it can scare away animals, disrupt their feeding and nesting sites, or acclimate them to the presence of people.
In Southeast Asia government and nongovernmental organizations are working together with academics and industry operators to spread the economic benefits of tourism into the kampungs and villages of the region.
The problems associated with defining ecotourism have often led to confusion among tourists and academics .
Definitional problems are also subject of considerable public controversy and concern because of green washing, a trend towards the commercialization of tourism schemes disguised as sustainable, nature based, and environmentally friendly ecotourism.
Because the ecotourism experience is marketed to a different lifestyle from large scale ecotourism, the development of facilities and infrastructure does not need to conform to corporate Western tourism standards, and can be much simpler and less expensive.
Government regulatory agencies, as political bodies, are susceptible to making decisions that spend budget on politically beneficial but environmentally unproductive projects.
The commodification of plants may erase their social value and lead to overproduction within protected areas.
At the local level, ecotourism has become a source of conflict over control of land, resources, and tourism profits.
With the confidence of ecotourists and intimate knowledge of the environment, they can actively discuss conservation issues.
The increased contributions of communities to locally managed ecotourism create viable economic opportunities, including high level management positions, and reduce environmental issues associated with poverty and unemployment.
In reality, the latter activities often consist of placing a hotel in a splendid landscape, to the detriment of the ecosystem.
A company that protects its ecotourism sites is able to charge a premium for the novel experience and pristine environment.
While the term ecotourism may sound relatively benign, one of its most serious impacts is its consumption of virgin territories.
While governments are typically entrusted with the administration and enforcement of environmental protection, they often lack the commitment or capability to manage ecotourism sites effectively.
The term 'ecotourism', like 'sustainable tourism', is considered by many to be an oxymoron.
In the same way, a company recognizes that there is no incentive to actively protect the environment; they bear all the costs, while the benefits are shared by all other companies.
South Africa is one of the countries that are reaping significant economic benefits from ecotourism, but negative effects—including forcing people to leave their homes, gross violations of fundamental rights, and environmental hazards—far outweigh the medium-term economic benefits (Miller, 2007).
The presence of affluent ecotourists encourage the development of destructive markets in wildlife souvenirs, such as the sale of coral trinkets on tropical islands and animal products in Asia, contributing to illegal harvesting and poaching from the environment.
Ecotourism typically involves travel to destinations where flora, fauna, and cultural heritage are the primary attractions.
For this reason, environmentalists, special interest groups, and governments define ecotourism differently.
Indeed, many argue repeatedly that ecotourism is neither ecologically nor socially beneficial, yet it persists as a strategy for conservation and development.
There are several places throughout the world where the amount of natural resources are abundant.
These should be implemented to prohibit the promotion of unsustainable ecotourism projects and materials which project false images of destinations, demeaning local and indigenous culture.
An overwhelming majority of profits are put into the pockets of investors instead of reinvestment into the local economy or environmental protection.
Instead ecotourism exploits and depletes, particularly in African Maasai tribes.
Finally, influential groups can pressure and sway the interests of the government to their favor.
Through the lens of these simplified images, officials direct policies and projects towards the local people and the local people are blamed if the projects fail" (West, 2006).
A tour guide training program in Costa Rica's Tortuguero National Park has helped mitigate negative environmental impacts by providing information and regulating tourists on the parks' beaches used by nesting endangered sea turtles.
This sum would go to the road builders, who would hire more workers and distribute the money as wages and profits.
Ecotourism is intended to offer tourists insight into the impact of human beings on the environment, and to foster a greater appreciation of our natural habitats.
In Suriname, sea turtle reserves use a very large portion of their budget to guard against these destructive activities.
"Eco-tourism works to create simplistic images of local people and their uses and understandings of their surroundings.
For these reasons, ecotourism often appeals to advocates of environmental and social responsibility.
For travelers who want to be mindful of the environment and the impact of tourism, it is recommended to utilize an operator that is endorsed by a reputable ecotourism organization.
A tremendous amount of money is being spent and human resources continue to be used for ecotourism despite unsuccessful outcomes, and even more money is put into public relation campaigns to dilute the effects of criticism.
In Kenya the Maasai also have not gained any economic benefits.
Nor do ecotourists recognize the great consumption of non-renewable energy required to arrive at their destination, which is typically more remote than conventional tourism destinations.
As a highly publicized case, the Maasai nomads in Kenya killed wildlife in national parks but are now helping the national park to save the wildlife to show aversion to unfair compensation terms and displacement from traditional lands.
The local people struggle for cultural survival and freedom of cultural expression while being "observed" by tourists.
Researcher from Jadavpur University presently are working in this area for the development of ecotourism which can be utilized as a tool for natural resource management.
Its purpose may be to educate the traveler, to provide funds for ecological conservation, to directly benefit the economic development and political empowerment of local communities, or to foster respect for different cultures and for human rights.
However, even this form of tourism may require foreign investment for promotion or start up.
A 2002 summit held in Quebec led to the 2008 Global Sustainable Tourism Criteria, a collaborative effort between the UN Foundation and other advocacy groups.
Ecotourism channels resources away from other projects that could contribute more sustainable and realistic solutions to pressing social and environmental problems.
The purpose of ecotourism is to engage tourists in low impact, non-consumptive and locally oriented environments in order to maintain species and habitats — especially in underdeveloped regions.
When such investments are required, it is crucial for communities for find a company or non-governmental organization that reflects the philosophy of ecotourism; sensitive to their concerns and willing to cooperate at the expense of profit.
Ecotourism often claims that it preserves and "enhances" local cultures.
The government and its regulators can become vested in the benefits of the ecotourism industry which they are supposed to regulate, causing restrictive environmental regulations and enforcement to become more lenient.
CST uses a rating system that categorizes a company based upon how sustainable its operations are.
Ecotourism may provide solutions to the economic hardships suffered from the loss of industry to conservation in the Yunnan in the same way that it may serve to remedy the difficulties faced by the Maasai.
Currently, there are various moves to create national and international ecotourism accreditation programs, although the process is also controversial.
In Zimbabwe and Nepal's Annapurna region, where underdevelopment is taking place, more than 90 percent of ecotourism revenues are expatriated to the parent countries, and less than 5 percent go into local communities.
In the continuum of tourism activities that stretch from conventional tourism to ecotourism proper, there has been a lot of contention to the limit at which biodiversity preservation, local social-economic benefits, and environmental impact can be considered "ecotourism".
Their vehicle tracks cris-cross the entire Masai Mara.
These corporations finance and profit from the development of large scale ecotourism that causes excessive environmental degradation, loss of traditional culture and way of life, and exploitation of local labor.
They are also morally disconcerting because they mislead tourists and manipulate their concerns for the environment.
National ecotourism certification programs have been put in place in countries such as Costa Rica, Australia, Kenya, Estonia, and Sweden.
There is a greater multiplier effect on the economy, because local products, materials, and labor are used.
About 70% of national parks and game reserves in East Africa are on Maasai land.
The development and success of such large scale, energy intensive, and ecologically unsustainable schemes are a testament to the tremendous profits associated with being labeled as ecotourism.
A national or international regulatory board would enforce accreditation procedures, with representation from various groups including governments, hotels, tour operators, travel agents, guides, airlines, local authorities, conservation organizations, and non-governmental organizations.
The underdevelopment theory of tourism describes a new form of imperialism by multinational corporations that control ecotourism resources.
The conversion of natural land to such tourist infrastructure is implicated in deforestation and habitat deterioration of butterflies in Mexico and squirrel monkeys in Costa Rica.
The basic assumption of the multiplier effect is that the economy starts off with unused resources, for example, that many workers are cyclically unemployed and much of industrial capacity is sitting idle or incompletely utilized.
Pushing people onto marginal lands with harsh climates, poor soils, lack of water, and infested with livestock and disease does little to enhance livelihoods even when a proportion of ecotourism profits are directed back into the community.
* Ecotourism in South Africa
Ecotourism is often misinterpreted as any form of tourism that involves nature (see Jungle tourism).
The households receiving these incomes will save part of the money and spend the rest on consumer goods.
Ecotourism focuses on socially responsible travel, personal growth, and environmental sustainability.
The measurement index goes from 0 to 5, with 0 being the worst and 5 being the best.
Ecotourists who consider their choices would be confident of a genuine ecotourism experience when they see the higher star rating.
The establishment of parks can create harsh survival realities and deprive the people of their traditional use of land and natural resources.
Ecotourist is different from a Tourist in the sense that, he or she is mindful of his environment, in most cases contributing to the sustainability of such surroundings.
By increasing demand in the economy it is then possible to boost production.
These areas also have a higher rate of disturbances and invasive species because of all the traffic moving off the beaten path into new undiscovered areas.
To generate revenue you have to have a high number of traffic, tourists, which inevitably means a higher pressure on the environment.
Ecotourism has become one of the fastest-growing sectors of the tourism industry, growing annually by 10–15% worldwide.
The tourist industry and governments, however, focus more on the product aspect, treating ecotourism as equivalent to any sort of tourism based in nature.
These islands were designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1979, then added to UNESCO’s List of World Heritage in Danger in 2007.
CST evaluates the interaction between the company and the surrounding habitat; the management policies and operation systems within the company; how the company encourages its clients to become an active contributor towards sustainable policies; and the interaction between the company and local communities/the overall population.
Prior to logging restrictions imposed by the Chinese Government the industry made up 80 percent of the regions revenue.
In this case, ecotourism has harmed the environment and local people, and has led to conflicts over profit distribution.
The criteria, which are voluntary, involve the following standards: "effective sustainability planning, maximum social and economic benefits for local communities, minimum negative impacts on cultural heritage, and minimum negative impacts on the environment."
Feasibility is evaluated from a scientific basis, and recommendations could be made to optimally plan infrastructure, set tourist capacity, and manage the ecology.
Several plans and proper management programmes can be introduced so that these resources remain untouched.
The lack of economic opportunities for local people also constrains them to degrade the environment as a means of sustenance.
Eastern African communities are not the only of developing regions to experience economic and social harms from conservation efforts.
Though conservation efforts in East Africa are indisputably serving the interests of tourism in the region it is important to make the distinction between conservation acts and the tourism industry.
If the economy was already at full employment, with only structural, frictional, or other supply-side types of unemployment, any attempt to boost demand would only lead to inflation.
But when other companies view the success of this approach, they also enter the market with similar practices, increasing competition and reducing demand.
* Ecotourism in Costa Rica
These expenditures in turn will generate more jobs, wages, and profits, and so on with the income and spending circulating around the economy.
However, evidence shows that with the establishment of protected areas local people have illegally lost their homes, and most often with no compensation.
'''Ecotourism''' is a form of tourism involving visiting fragile, pristine, and relatively undisturbed natural areas, intended as a low-impact and often small scale alternative to standard commercial (mass) tourism.
"The money tourism can generate often ties parks and managements to eco-tourism".
While several studies are being done on ways to improve the ecotourism structure, some argue that these examples provide rationale for stopping it altogether.
Because of prestige and conspicuousness, the construction of an attractive visitor's center at an ecotourism site may take precedence over more pressing environmental concerns like acquiring habitat, protecting endemic species, and removing invasive ones.
Consequently, ecotourism may not generate the very benefits it is intended to provide to these regions and their people, and in some cases leaving economies in a state worse than before.
Natural resource management can be utilized as a specialized tool for the development of ecotourism.
The evidence above shows that a strong case exists for restraining such activities in certain locations.
Ethnic groups are increasingly being seen as a "backdrop" to the scenery and wildlife.
As stated, the ecotourism structure must be improved to direct more money into host communities by reducing leakages for the industry to be successful in alleviating poverty in developing regions, but it provides a promising opportunity.
Ecotourism programmes can be introduced for the conservation of these resources.
IGTOA is a non-profit dedicated to preserving this unique living laboratory against the challenges of invasive species, human impact, and tourism.
Additionally, "the overall effect of sustainable tourism is negative, where, like ecotourism, philanthropic aspirations mask hard-nosed immediate self-interest."
In addition, environmental impact assessments could be used as a form of accreditation.
The CST program focuses on a company's interaction with natural and cultural resources, the improvement of quality of life within local communities, and the economic contribution to other programs of national development.
The number of roads has disrupted the grass cover which has serious effects on plant and animal species.
This form of accreditation is more sensitive to site specific conditions.
Although academics disagree about who can be classified as an ecotourist and there is little statistical data, some estimate that more than five million ecotourists—the majority of the ecotourist population—come from the United States, with many others from Western Europe, Canada and Australia.
The limited numbers of local people who are employed in the economy enter at its lowest level, and are unable to live in tourist areas because of meager wages and a two market system.
The ecotourism system exercises tremendous financial and political influence.
They condemn some operators as greenwashing their operations: using the labels of "green" and "eco-friendly”, while behaving in environmentally irresponsible ways.
A cost-benefit analysis shows that the company bears the cost of environmental protection without receiving the gains.
Responsible ecotourism programs include those that minimize the negative aspects of conventional tourism on the environment and enhance the cultural integrity of local people.
One of the most powerful examples of communities being moved in order to create a park is the story of the Maasai.
The model of monopolistic competition states that distinctiveness will entail profits, but profits will promote imitation.
The regulations for environmental protection may be vaguely defined, costly to implement, hard to enforce, and uncertain in effectiveness.
Ecotourism is now also considered to be playing a role in this depletion.
Furthermore, the investors in this area are not local and have not put profits back into local economy.
In some cases game reserves can be created without informing or consulting local people, who come to find out about the situation when an eviction notice is delivered.
For instance, an exotic journey to a place 10,000 kilometers away consumes about 700 liters of fuel per person.
Aside from environmental degradation with tourist infrastructure, population pressures from ecotourism also leaves behind garbage and pollution associated with the Western lifestyle.
However, theory indicates that this practice is not economically feasible and will fail to manage the environment.
But, with human encroachment and habitats these resources are depleting.
Ecotourists believe that because they are only taking pictures and leaving footprints, they keep ecotourism sites pristine, but even harmless-sounding activities such as nature hikes can be ecologically destructive.
* Ecotourism in the United States
Natural resources of hill areas like Kurseong in West Bengal are plenty in number with various flora and fauna, but tourism for business purpose poised the situation.
However, there are some positive examples, among them the Kavango-Zambezi Transfrontier Conservation Area (KAZA) and the Virunga National Park, as jugded by WWF.
One definition of ecotourism is "the practice of low-impact, educational, ecologically and culturally sensitive travel that benefits local communities and host countries".
The construction of water treatment plants, sanitation facilities, and lodges come with the exploitation of non-renewable energy sources and the utilization of already limited local resources.
Taken together, the mobility of foreign investment and lack of economic incentive for environmental protection means that ecotourism companies are disposed to establishing themselves in new sites once their existing one is sufficiently degraded.
The multiplier effect arises because of the induced increases in consumer spending which occur due to the increased incomes — and because of the feedback into increasing business revenues, jobs, and income again.
Some countries have their own certification programs for ecotourism.
Very few regulations or laws stand in place as boundaries for the investors in ecotourism.
Therefore, in addition to evaluating environmental and cultural factors, an integral part of ecotourism is the promotion of recycling, energy efficiency, water conservation, and creation of economic opportunities for local communities.
Despite the loss of their land, employment favours better educated workers.
It has to be reoriented if it is to be useful to local communities and to become sustainable.
Following a complete ban on commercial logging the indigenous people of the Yunnan region now see little opportunity for economic development.
The lack of sustainability highlights the need for small scale, slow growth, and locally based ecotourism.
Local people and their images can also be turned into commodities".
Eventually, the demand will be reduced until the economic profit is zero.
Even if some of the guidelines are being executed, the local communities are still facing other negative impacts.
Environmental organizations have generally insisted that ecotourism is nature-based, sustainably managed, conservation supporting, and environmentally educated.
Too many lodges have been built, too much firewood is being used and no limits are being placed on tourism vehicles.
Some of the world's most exceptional biodiversity is located in the Galapagos Islands.
The number of motor vehicles crossing the park increases as tour drivers search for rare species.
In other cases, the environment suffers because local communities are unable to meet the infrastructure demands of ecotourism.
Crinion suggests a Green Stars System, based on criteria including a management plan, benefit for the local community, small group interaction, education value and staff training.
According to McLaren, these schemes are environmentally destructive, economically exploitative, and culturally insensitive at its worst.
The industrialization, urbanization, and unsustainable agriculture practices of human society are considered to be having a serious effect on the environment.
As one scientist observes, they "rarely acknowledge how the meals they eat, the toilets they flush, the water they drink, and so on, are all part of broader regional economic and ecological systems they are helping to reconfigure with their very activities."
Based upon these criteria, the company is evaluated for the strength of its sustainability.
As a further complication, many terms are used under the rubric of ecotourism.
By increasing the number of ecotourists, for instance, a company gains all the economic benefit while paying only a part of the environmental cost.
Conservation in the Northwest Yunnan Region of China has similarly brought drastic changes to traditional land use in the region.
Tour guides are an obvious and direct medium to communicate awareness.
Local peoples have a vested interest in the well being of their community, and are therefore more accountable to environmental protection than multinational corporations.
Although ecotourism is intended for small groups, even a modest increase in population, however temporary, puts extra pressure on the local environment and necessitates the development of additional infrastructure and amenities.
Clearly tourism as a trade is not empowering the local people who make it rich and satisfying.
The result, again, is mismanagement.
It is believed that these companies have a self-interest in limited environmental degradation, because tourists will pay more for pristine environments, which translates to higher profit.
This process does not lead to an economic explosion not only because of the supply-side barriers at potential output (full employment) but because at each "round", the increase in consumer spending is less than the increase in consumer incomes.
Inevitably the bush is becoming eroded and degraded".
Kamuaro brings up a relatively obvious contradiction, any commercial venture into unspoiled, pristine land with or without the "eco" prefix as a contradiction in terms.
The lack of control, westernization, adverse impacts to the environment, loss of culture and traditions outweigh the benefits of establishing large scale ecotourism.
Another source of resentment is the manipulation of the local people by their government.
Most forms of ecotourism are owned by foreign investors and corporations that provide few benefits to local communities.
For various laissez-faire schools of economics which embrace Say's Law and deny the possibility of Keynesian inefficiency and under-employment of resources, therefore, the multiplier concept is irrelevant or wrong-headed.
These invasions often include deforestation, disruption of ecological life systems and various forms of pollution, all of which contribute to environmental degradation.
The decisions of the board would be sanctioned by governments, so that non-compliant companies would be legally required to disassociate themselves from the use of the ecotourism brand.
Funding could be used for field studies aimed at finding alternative solutions to tourism and the diverse problems Africa faces in result of urbanization, industrialization, and the over exploitation of agriculture.
In a perfect world more efforts would be made towards educating tourists of the environmental and social effects of their travels.
Several organizations, NGO's, scientists are working on this field.
Profits accrue locally and import leakages are reduced.
Although ecotourists claim to be educationally sophisticated and environmentally concerned, they rarely understand the ecological consequences of their visits and how their day-to-day activities append physical impacts on the environment.
* Ecotourism in Jordan
While some ecotourism projects, including some found in the United States, can support such claims, many projects have failed to address some of the fundamental issues that nations face in the first place.
Ecotourism also has an effect on species through the value placed on them.
Although there is a communal incentive to protect the environment, maximizing the benefits in the long run, a company will conclude that it is in their best interest to utilize the ecotourism site beyond its sustainable level.
Since the 1980s ecotourism has been considered a critical endeavor by environmentalists, so that future generations may experience destinations relatively untouched by human intervention.
In Kenya, wildlife-observer disruption drives cheetahs off their reserves, increasing the risk of inbreeding and further endangering the species.
As an example, consider the government increasing its expenditure on roads by $1 million, without a corresponding increase in taxation.
Local indigenous people also have strong resentment towards the change, "Tourism has been allowed to develop with virtually no controls.
Each increase in spending is thus smaller than that of the previous round, preventing an explosion.
According to them ecotourism must above all sensitize people to the beauty and the fragility of nature.
