On May 29, 2008 an Australian woman, Meera Thangarajah (age 34), who had an ectopic pregnancy in the ovary, gave birth to a healthy full term 6 pound 3 ounce (2.8&nbsp;kg) baby girl, Durga, via Cesarean section.
Those who have previously had an ectopic pregnancy are at much higher risk of having another one.
Pregnancies can grow in the fimabrial end (5% of all ectopic pregnancies), the ampullary section (80%), the isthmus (12%), and the cornual and interstitial part of the tube (2%).
Women exposed to diethylstilbestrol (DES) in utero (also known as "DES daughters") also have an elevated risk of ectopic pregnancy.
She had no problems or complications during the 38‑week pregnancy.
In July 1999, Lori Dalton gave birth by Cesarean section in Ogden, Utah, United States, to a healthy baby girl who had developed outside of the uterus.
Progesterone levels of less than 20 nmol/l have a high predictive value for failing pregnancies, whilst levels over 25 nmol/l are likely to predict viable pregnancies, and levels over 60 nmol/l are strongly so.
Smoking leads to risk factors of damaging and or killing cilia.
The twins in the womb were taken out first.
An ultrasound showing a gestational sac with fetal heart in the fallopian tube has a very high specificity of ectopic pregnancy.
If the organ to which the placenta is attached is removable, such as a section of bowel, then the placenta should be removed together with that organ.
In around 60% of cases, it is an inhomogeneous or a noncystic adnexal mass sometimes known as the "blob sign".
Women with pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) have a high occurrence of ectopic pregnancy.
"Sage Dalton's delivery was slated as a routine Cesarean birth at Ogden Regional Medical Center in Utah.
A persistent ectopic pregnancy refers to the continuation of trophoblastic growth after a surgical intervention to remove an ectopic pregnancy.
Ectopic gestation exists in mammals other than humans.
Risk factors for ectopic pregnancy include: pelvic inflammatory disease, often due to Chlamydia infection, tobacco smoking, prior tubal surgery, a history of infertility, and the use of assisted reproductive technology.
A ''resolved persistent PUL'' is defined as serum hCG reaching a non-pregnant value (generally less than 5 IU/l) after expectant management, or after uterine evacuation without evidence of chorionic villi on histopathological examination.
Any blood or fluid found may have been derived from a ruptured ectopic pregnancy.
In the developed world outcomes have improved while in the developing world they often remain poor.
Less than 50 percent of women have both of these symptoms.
The survival rate of the uterine fetus of an ectopic pregnancy is around 70%.
Surgeons use laparoscopy or laparotomy to gain access to the pelvis and can either incise the affected Fallopian and remove only the pregnancy (salpingostomy) or remove the affected tube with the pregnancy (salpingectomy).
The presence of echogenic fluid is estimated at between 28 and 56% of women with an ectopic pregnancy, and strongly indicates the presence of hemoperitoneum.
The serum hCG ratios and logistic regression models appear to be better than absolute single serum hCG level.
Early treatment of an ectopic pregnancy with methotrexate is a viable alternative to surgical treatment which was developed in the 1980s.
A history of a tubal pregnancy increases the risk of future occurrences to about 10%.
Mathematical models also aim to identify PULs that are ''low risk'', that is, failing PULs and IUPs.
Sage came out doing extremely well because even though she had been implanted outside the womb, a rich blood supply from a uterine fibroid along the outer uterus wall had nourished her with a rich source of blood."
In many cases the symptoms have low specificity, and can be similar to those of other genitourinary and gastrointestinal disorders, such as appendicitis, salpingitis, rupture of a corpus luteum cyst, miscarriage, ovarian torsion or urinary tract infection.
A laparoscopy in very early ectopic pregnancy rarely shows a normal looking fallopian tube.
Prevention is by decreasing risk factors such as chlamydia infections through screening and treatment.
This may require testing on more than one occasion.
Severe bleeding may result in a fast heart rate, fainting, or shock.
Reversal of tubal sterilization (Tubal reversal) carries a risk for ectopic pregnancy.
File:Blob sign of ectopic pregnancy.png|A "blob sign", which consists of the ectopic pregnancy.
This is higher if more destructive methods of tubal ligation (tubal cautery, partial removal of the tubes) have been used than less destructive methods (tubal clipping).
Autotransfusion of a woman's own blood as drained during surgery may be useful in those who have a lot of bleeding into their abdomen.
Specific indications for this procedure include either of the following:
On 19 April 2008 an English woman, Jayne Jones (age 37) who had an ectopic pregnancy attached to the omentum, the fatty covering of her large bowel, gave birth to her son Billy by a laparotomy at 28 weeks gestation.
High-risk cases of PUL require further assessment, either with a TVS within 48 h or additional hCG measurement.
Dilation and curettage is sometimes used to diagnose pregnancy location with the aim of differentiating between an EP and a non-viable IUP in situations where a viable IUP can be ruled out.
An ectopic pregnancy should be considered as the cause of abdominal pain or vaginal bleeding in every woman who has a positive pregnancy test.
While some physicians consider that the threshold where an intrauterine pregnancy should be visible on transvaginal ultrasound is around 1500 IU/ml of β-hCG, a review in the JAMA Rational Clinical Examination Series showed that there is no single threshold for the β-human chorionic gonadotropin that confirms an ectopic pregnancy.
In this test, a needle is inserted into the space at the very top of the vagina, behind the uterus and in front of the rectum.
No signs of intrauterine nor extrauterine pregnancy on transvaginal ultrasonography.
File:Ectopicleftmass.PNG|Ultrasound image showing an ectopic pregnancy where a gestational sac and fetus has been formed.
An empty uterus with levels higher than 1500 IU/ml may be evidence of an ectopic pregnancy, but may also be consistent with an intrauterine pregnancy which is simply too small to be seen on ultrasound.
Later presentations are more common in communities deprived of modern diagnostic ability.
The first known description of an ectopic pregnancy is by Albucasis in the 11th century.
Between 30 and 47% of women with pregnancy of unknown location are ultimately diagnosed with an ongoing intrauterine pregnancy, whereof the majority  (50 –70%) will be found to have failing pregnancies where the location is never confirmed.
Since ectopic pregnancies are normally discovered and removed very early in the pregnancy, an ultrasound may not find the additional pregnancy inside the uterus.
It has also been suggested that pathologic generation of nitric oxide through increased iNOS production may decrease tubal ciliary beats and smooth muscle contractions and thus affect embryo transport, which may consequently result in ectopic pregnancy.
* an abnormal rise in hCG level.
File:Poirtêye foû matrice saetch1.JPG|External view of fetal sac, necrotic distal part.
The visualization of an empty extrauterine gestational sac is sometimes known as the "bagel sign", and is present in around 20% of cases.
This sign has been estimated to have a sensitivity of 84% and specificity of 99% in diagnosing ectopic pregnancy.
A rise of 35% over 48 hours is proposed as the minimal rise consistent with a viable intrauterine pregnancy.
Outcomes are generally good with treatment.
Pain may also spread to the shoulder if bleeding into the abdomen has occurred.
The fetus can be removed by cesarian section.
Intrauterine adhesions (IUA) present in Asherman's syndrome can cause ectopic cervical pregnancy or, if adhesions partially block access to the tubes via the ostia, ectopic tubal pregnancy.
The best method for diagnosing this is to do an early ultrasound.
The diagnostic ultrasonographic finding in ectopic pregnancy is an adnexal mass that moves separately from the ovary.
However, the vast majority of abdominal pregnancies require intervention well before fetal viability because of the risk of bleeding.
Between 93 and 97% of ectopic pregnancies are located in a Fallopian tube.
In such a situation the placenta sits on the intraabdominal organs or the peritoneum and has found sufficient blood supply.
Inhibin A may also be useful for predicting spontaneous resolution of PUL, but is not as good as progesterone for this purpose.
This is generally reserved for women presenting with signs of an acute abdomen and/or hypovolemic shock.
As cilia degenerate the amount of time it takes for the fertilized egg to reach the uterus will increase.
Fallopian cilia are sometimes seen in reduced numbers subsequent to an ectopic pregnancy, leading to a hypothesis that cilia damage in the Fallopian tubes is likely to lead to an ectopic pregnancy.
The most common complication is rupture with internal bleeding which may lead to hypovolemic shock.
Intrauterine gestational sac-like structure.
"True" pregnancy of unknown location
Signs and symptoms of ectopic pregnancy include increased hCG, vaginal bleeding (in varying amounts), sudden lower abdominal pain, pelvic pain, a tender cervix, an adnexal mass, or adnexal tenderness.
Hair-like cilia located on the internal surface of the Fallopian tubes carry the fertilized egg to the uterus.
This is such a rare occurrence that true data are unavailable and reliance must be made on anecdotal reports.
The rationale is that a low β-hCG level may indicate that the pregnancy is intrauterine but yet too small to be visible on ultrasonography.
In another 20% of cases, there is visualization of a gestational sac containing a yolk sac and/or an embryo.
The use of the medication methotrexate works as well as surgery in some cases.
Signs and symptoms classically include abdominal pain and vaginal bleeding.
If however both tubes were completely blocked, so that sperm and egg were physically unable to meet, then fertilization of the egg would naturally be impossible, and neither normal pregnancy nor ectopic pregnancy could occur.
Often the intrauterine pregnancy is discovered later than the ectopic, mainly because of the painful emergency nature of ectopic pregnancies.
Clinical presentation of ectopic pregnancy occurs at a mean of 7.2 weeks after the last normal menstrual period, with a range of 4 to 8 weeks.
Between 6 and 20% of PUL are subsequently diagnosed with actual ectopic pregnancy.
This results from the build-up of scar tissue in the Fallopian tubes, causing damage to cilia.
embryo (with or without cardiac activity).
Such a fetus would have to be delivered by laparotomy.
In women with a pregnancy of unknown location, between 6% and 20% have an ectopic pregnancy.
Fertility following ectopic pregnancy depends upon several factors, the most important of which is a prior history of infertility.
Also, it may lead to the inadvertent termination of an undetected intrauterine pregnancy, or severe abnormality in any surviving pregnancy.
Although rare, heterotopic pregnancies are becoming more common, likely due to increased use of IVF.
The surgery, the first of its kind to be performed in the UK, was successful, and both mother and baby survived.
Vaginal douching is thought by some to increase ectopic pregnancies.
Detection of ectopic pregnancy is typically by blood tests for human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) and ultrasound.
The primary goal of diagnostic procedures in possible ectopic pregnancy is to triage according to risk rather than establishing pregnancy location.
This risk is not reduced by removing the affected tube, even if the other tube appears normal.
In the Catholic church, there are moral debates on certain treatments.
Rupture of an ectopic pregnancy can lead to symptoms such as abdominal distension, tenderness, peritonism and hypovolemic shock.
Specialized early pregnancy departments have estimated that between 8 and 10% of women attending for an ultrasound assessment in early pregnancy will be classified as having a PUL.
The rate of ectopic pregnancy is about 1 and 2% that of live births in developed countries, though it may be as high as 4% among those using assisted reproductive technology.
While some ectopic pregnancies will resolve without treatment, this approach has not been well studied as of 2014.
It is generally spherical, but a more tubular appearance may be seen in case of hematosalpinx.
A ''treated persistent PUL'' is defined as one managed medically (generally with methotrexate) without confirmation of the location of the pregnancy such as by ultrasound, laparoscopy or uterine evacuation.
The pain may be described as sharp, dull, or crampy.
Maternal morbidity and mortality from extrauterine pregnancy are high as attempts to remove the placenta from the organs to which it is attached usually lead to uncontrollable bleeding from the attachment site.
In the developing world, however, especially in Africa, the death rate is very high, and ectopic pregnancies are a major cause of death among women of childbearing age.
Inhomogeneous adnexal mass or extrauterine sac-like structure.
It is the most common cause of death during the first trimester at approximately 10% of the total.
Previous ultrasounds had not discovered the problem.
File:Poirtêye foû matrice saetch3.JPG|Internal view of fetal sac, the necrotic distal part is to the left.
Ultrasound works best when performed from within the vagina.
The presence of an adnexal mass in the absence of an intrauterine pregnancy on transvaginal sonography increases the likelihood of an ectopic pregnancy 100-fold (LR+ 111).
Low-risk cases of PUL that appear to be failing pregnancies may be followed up with a urinary pregnancy test after 2 weeks and get subsequent telephone advice.
Specifically it works well when the beta-HCG is low and the size of the ectopic is small.
With very rare exceptions the fetus is unable to survive.
A common misdiagnosis is of a normal intrauterine pregnancy is where the pregnancy is implanted laterally in an arcuate uterus, potentially being misdiagnosed as an interstitial pregnancy.
Contraindications include liver, kidney, or blood disease, as well as an ectopic embryonic mass > 3.5&nbsp;cm.
Risk factors include: pelvic inflammatory disease, infertility, use of an intrauterine device (IUD), previous exposure to DES, tubal surgery, intrauterine surgery (e.g.
A further marker of serious intra-abdominal bleeding is the presence of fluid in the hepatorenal recess of the subhepatic space.
For this reason hCG levels may have to be monitored after removal of an ectopic pregnancy to assure their decline, also methotrexate can be given at the time of surgery prophylactically.
The majority of cases of ectopic pregnancy will have serial serum hCG levels that increase more slowly than would be expected with an IUP (that is, a ''suboptimal rise''), or decrease more slowly than would be expected with a failing PUL.
The word "ectopic" means "out of place".
If administered early in the pregnancy, methotrexate terminates the growth of the developing embryo; this may cause an abortion, or the developing embryo may then be either resorbed by the woman's body or pass with a menstrual period.
In comparison, the cumulative pregnancy rate of women under 40 years of age in the general population over 2 years is over 90%.
Published reports that a re-implanted embryo survived to birth were debunked as false.
John Dalton (the father) took home video inside the delivery room.
This can be done by measuring the β-hCG level approximately 48 hours later and repeating the ultrasound.
The fertilized egg, if it doesn't reach the uterus in time, will hatch from the non-adhesive zona pellucida and implant itself inside the fallopian tube, thus causing the pregnancy.
countries, though it is as high as 4% in pregnancies involving assisted reproductive technology.
In contrast, a relatively low and unresolving level of serum hCG indicates the possibility of an hCG-secreting tumour.
In September 1999 an English woman, Jane Ingram (age 32) gave birth to triplets: Olivia, Mary and Ronan, with an extrauterine fetus (Ronan) below the womb and twins in the womb.
Surgery is still typically recommended if the tube has ruptured, there is a fetal heartbeat, or the person's vital signs are unstable.
Definite ectopic pregnancy
After a conservative procedure that attempts to preserve the affected fallopian tube such as a salpingotomy, in about 15-20% the major portion of the ectopic growth may have been removed, but some trophoblastic tissue, perhaps deeply embedded, has escaped removal and continues to grow, generating a new rise in hCG levels.
A small amount of anechogenic free fluid in the rectouterine pouch is commonly found in both intrauterine and ectopic pregnancies.
Often if a tubal abortion or tubal rupture has occurred, it is difficult to find the pregnancy tissue.
Other causes of similar symptoms include: miscarriage, ovarian torsion, and acute appendicitis.
A woman with ectopic pregnancy may be excessively mobile with upright posturing, in order to decrease intrapelvic blood flow, which can lead to swelling of the abdominal cavity and cause additional pain.
In the absence of ultrasound or hCG assessment, heavy vaginal bleeding may lead to a misdiagnosis of miscarriage.
In rare cases of ectopic pregnancy, there may be two fertilized eggs, one outside the uterus and the other inside.
There are a number of risk factors for ectopic pregnancies.
Treatment should only be considered when a potentially viable intrauterine pregnancy has been definitively excluded.
This may help in identifying failing PULs that are at low risk and thereby needing less follow-up.
This patient had an intrauterine device (IUD) with progestogen, whose cross-section is visible in the field, leaving an ultrasound shadow distally to it.
Tubal pregnancy is when the egg is implanted in the Fallopian tubes.
A significant number of Catholic moralists consider use of methotrexate and the salpingostomy procedure to be not "morally permissible" because they destroy the embryo; however  situations are considered differently in which the mother's health in endangered, and the whole fallopian tube with the developing embryo inside is removed.
Up to 10% of women with ectopic pregnancy have no symptoms, and one-third have no medical signs.
Asherman's syndrome usually occurs from intrauterine surgery, most commonly after D&C.
In addition, there are various mathematical models, such as logistic regression models and Bayesian networks, for the prediction of PUL outcome based on multiple parameters.
As a rule of thumb, the finding of free fluid is significant if it reaches the fundus or is present in the vesico-uterine pouch.
Transvaginal ultrasonography has a sensitivity of at least 90% for ectopic pregnancy.
However, up to 20% of cases of ectopic pregnancy have serum hCG doubling times similar to that of an IUP, and around 10% of EP cases have hCG patterns similar to a failing PUL.
After weeks this may lead to new clinical symptoms including bleeding.
Because of frequent ambiguity on ultrasonography examinations, the following classification is proposed:
The vast majority of ectopic pregnancies implant in the Fallopian tube.
The combination of a positive pregnancy test and the presence of what appears to be a normal intrauterine pregnancy does not exclude an ectopic pregnancy, since there may be either a heterotopic pregnancy or a "", which is a collection of within the endometrial cavity that may be seen in up to 20% of women.
Nausea, vomiting and diarrhea are more rare symptoms of ectopic pregnancy.
Of these, in turn, 13% are located in the isthmus, 75% are located in the ampulla, and 12% in the fimbriae.
The true nature of the pregnancy can be an ongoing viable intrauterine pregnancy, a failed pregnancy, an ectopic pregnancy or rarely a persisting PUL.
When there are no adnexal abnormalities on transvaginal sonography, the likelihood of an ectopic pregnancy decreases (LR- 0.12).
Endometrial/pelvic/genital tuberculosis, another cause of Asherman's syndrome, can also lead to ectopic pregnancy as infection may lead to tubal adhesions in addition to intrauterine adhesions.
The surgery may be laparoscopic or through a larger incision, known as a laparotomy.
* no visible IUP on transvaginal ultrasonography with a serum hCG of more than 2000 IU/ml
This is generally bowel or mesentery, but other sites, such as the renal (kidney), liver or hepatic (liver) artery or even aorta have been described.
Instead, the best test in a pregnant woman is a high resolution transvaginal ultrasound.
Transvaginal ultrasound examination is usually able to detect a cervical pregnancy.
Ectopic pregnancies where there is visualization of cardiac activity are sometimes termed "viable ectopic".
Ectopic pregnancy is responsible for 6% of maternal deaths during the first trimester of pregnancy making it the leading cause of maternal death during this stage of pregnancy.
The fall in serum hCG over 48 hours may be measured as the hCG ratio, which is calculated as:
While a fetus of ectopic pregnancy is typically not viable, very rarely, a live baby has been delivered from an abdominal pregnancy.
However, in as many as one third to one half no risk factors can be identified.
The treatment choice does not play a major role; A randomized study in 2013 concluded that the rates of intrauterine pregnancy 2 years after treatment of ectopic pregnancy are approximately 64% with radical surgery, 67% with medication, and 70% with conservative surgery.
Tubal ligation can predispose to ectopic pregnancy.
When hCG levels continue to rise after the removal of the ectopic pregnancy, there is the chance that a pregnancy inside the uterus is still viable.
Currently, Doppler ultrasonography is not considered to significantly contribute to the diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy.
Culdocentesis, in which fluid is retrieved from the space separating the vagina and rectum, is a less commonly performed test that may be used to look for internal bleeding.
If the β-hCG falls on repeat examination, this strongly suggests a spontaneous abortion or rupture.
Pregnancy of unknown location - probable intrauterine pregnancy
Women who smoke have a higher chance of an ectopic pregnancy in the fallopian tubes.
File:Poirtêye foû matrice saetch2.JPG|Internal view of fetal sac, before resection of distal necrotic part.
In cases of pregnancy of unknown location and a history of heavy bleeding, is has been estimated that approximately 6% have an underlying ectopic pregnancy.
A persisting PUL is likely either a small ectopic pregnancy that has not been visualized, or a retained trophoblast in the endometrial cavity.
A review published in 2010 supports the hypothesis that tubal ectopic pregnancy is caused by a combination of retention of the embryo within the fallopian tube due to impaired embryo-tubal transport and alterations in the tubal environment allowing early implantation to occur.
Implantation can also occur on the cervix, ovaries, or within the abdomen.
D&C), smoking, previous ectopic pregnancy, endometriosis, and tubal ligation.
All three survived.
An ovarian pregnancy is differentiated from a tubal pregnancy by the Spiegelberg criteria.
Other conditions that cause similar symptoms include: miscarriage, ovarian torsion, and acute appendicitis, ruptured ovarian cyst, kidney stone, and pelvic inflammatory disease, among others.
Most women with a PUL are followed up with serum hCG measurements and repeat TVS examinations until a final diagnosis is confirmed.
Definite intrauterine pregnancy
Pregnancy of unknown location - probable ectopic pregnancy
In the study estimating these values, the blob sign had a positive predictive value of 96% and a negative predictive value of 95%.
Pictures of cesarian section of a euthanized ewe, 5 days after parturition signs.
Low-risk cases of PUL that are likely intrauterine pregnancies may have another TVS in 2 weeks to access viability.
Support to near viability has occasionally been described, but even in third world countries, the diagnosis is most commonly made at 16 to 20 weeks gestation.
is where the hCG level does not spontaneously decline and no intrauterine or ectopic pregnancy is identified on follow-up transvaginal ultrasonography.
File:Poirtêye foû matrice saetch ådfoû pwels.JPG|Resected distal part of fetal sac, with attached placenta.
Two percent of ectopic pregnancies occur in the ovary, cervix, or are intraabdominal.
The risk of death among those in the developed world is between 0.1 and 0.3 percent while in the developing world it is between one and three percent.
