The new constitution of 2008 is the first in the world to recognize legally enforceable Rights of Nature, or ecosystem rights.
Various peoples had settled in the area of the future Ecuador before the arrival of the Incas.
About 300 institutes of higher education offer two to three years of post-secondary vocational or technical training.
The top of Mount Chimborazo (6,268 m, or 20,560&nbsp;ft, above sea level) is considered to be the most distant point of the Earth's surface from the center of the Earth, given the approximately ellipsoid shape of the planet.
A few months later, a part of the Peruvian liberation army of San Martin decided to occupy the independent cities of Tumbez and Jaén with the intention of using these towns as springboards to occupy the independent city of Guayaquil and then to liberate the rest of the Audiencia de Quito (Ecuador).
The Pastaza includes the Agoyan waterfall, which at sixty-one meters (200 feet) is the highest waterfall in Ecuador.
It is one of 17 megadiverse countries in the world.
Ecuador's capital is Quito, which is in the province of Pichincha in the Sierra region.
Being a small country and a consumer of foreign technology, Ecuador has favored research supported by entrepreneurship in information technology.
Ecuador finished in 2nd place in the CONMEBOL qualifiers behind Argentina and above the team that would become World Champions, Brazil.
In the late 19th century, world demand for cocoa tied the economy to commodity exports and led to migrations from the highlands to the agricultural frontier on the coast.
Congress passed a new monetary law on December 5, 1856, adopting the French decimal system, a standard of 0.900 for silver, and the Ecuadorian Franco.
Ecuador has a developing economy that is highly dependent on commodities, namely petroleum and agricultural products.
The Pacific coastal area has a tropical climate with a severe rainy season.
File:Ecuador ingapirca inca ruins.jpg|Ingapirca ruins northeast of Cañar canton, Cañar Province
It supports the "Albert Einstein School", where Jewish history, religion, and Hebrew classes are offered.
A number of bloody battles took place until finally Huáscar was captured.
Peru began occupying the defenseless missionary villages in the Mainas or Maynas region which it began calling Loreto with its capital in Iquitos.
Many civilizations arose in Ecuador, such as the Valdivia Culture and Machalilla Culture on the coast, the Quitus (near present-day Quito), and the Cañari (near present-day Cuenca).
''Arroz con menestra y carne asada'' (rice with beans and grilled beef) is one of the traditional dishes of Guayaquil, as is fried plantain, which is often served with it.
In December 2008, president Correa declared Ecuador's national debt illegitimate, based on the argument that it was odious debt contracted by corrupt and despotic prior regimes.
Mobile (cellular) phone frequencies in Ecuador are 850&nbsp;MHz, 1900&nbsp;MHz, and 1700/2100&nbsp;MHz (LTE).
The executive branch is led by the president, an office currently held by Rafael Correa.
In 2001 it was estimated at 40% of the population, while by 2011 the figure dropped to 17.4% of the total population.
Ecuador currently ranks 20, in most efficient health care countries, compared to 111 back in the year 2000.
This liberal wing retained power until the military "Julian Revolution" of 1925.
The first and most substantial wave of modern immigration to Ecuador consisted of Spanish colonists, following the arrival of Europeans in 1499.
It's originally from northern Ecuador (Otavalo-Imbabura).
Despite this, there is limited export of products produced or processed industrially.
The level of non-revenue water is estimated at 65%, one of the highest in Latin America.
Despite being on the UNESCO list, the Galápagos are endangered by a range of negative environmental effects, threatening the existence of this exotic ecosystem.
The Borja government concluded an accord leading to the disbanding of the small terrorist group, "¡Alfaro Vive, Carajo!"
According to HRW, Correa's government has weakened the freedom of press and independence of the judicial system.
The Ministry of Education states that the mean number of years completed is 6.7.
The mint was shut down temporarily during 1853 while the government considered the options of keeping it open or shutting it down permanently.
At the time of the announcement, the country had $5.65 billion in cash reserves.
One of the points of conflict was the imposition of obtaining foreign degrees to current academicians.
Ecuador now only issues its own centavo coins.
Members of the National Court of Justice are appointed by the National Judicial Council for nine-year terms.
A minor industrial activity is also concentrated in Cuenca.
Drinking water supply and sanitation in Ecuador is characterized by a number of achievements and challenges.
Galápagos, despite being included within Region 5, is also under a special unit.
The Peruvian Navy blocked the port of Guayaquil, almost cutting all supplies to the Ecuadorian troops.
Bolivar countered by sending a message from Guayaquil welcoming San Martin and his troops to Colombian soil.
This region is also where most of Ecuador's rice crop is grown.
Negotiations between the Ecuadorian and Peruvian representatives began in Washington on September 30, 1935.
One exception is "The Ecuadorian Deception," a murder mystery/thriller authored by American Bear Mills.
The Galápagos Islands are well known as a region of distinct fauna, famous as the place of birth of Darwin's Theory of Evolution and a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
New infectious diseases, endemic to the Europeans, caused high fatalities among the Amerindian population during the first decades of Spanish rule, as they had no immunity.
It is the westernmost country that lies on the equator.
The people were very happy about the independence and celebrated, which is now Ecuador's independence day, officially on May 24, 1822.
He remained in power until 1976, when he was removed by another military government.
Current protected areas include 11 national parks, 10 wildlife refuges, 9 ecological reserves, and other areas.
The National Court of Justice is composed of 21 judges elected for a term of nine years.
Private hospitals and clinics are well equipped but still expensive for the majority of the population.
The country has potential for the industry in a variety of sectors, including domestic production of raw materials and manufactured textiles, mining, chemical, petrochemical, and oil refinement.
But, after a mock trial, the Spaniards executed Atahualpa by strangulation.
The population is primarily mixed Amerindian Shuar, Huaorani and Kichua, although there are numerous tribes in the deep jungle which are little-contacted.
This important date was established by the Spaniards on June 24, coincidentally the same date when Amerindian people celebrated their rituals of Inti Raymi.
Contemporary Ecuadorian writers include the novelist Jorge Enrique Adoum; the poet Jorge Carrera Andrade; the essayist Benjamín Carrión; the poets Medardo Angel Silva, Jorge Carrera Andrade, and Luis Alberto Costales; the novelist Enrique Gil Gilbert; the novelist Jorge Icaza (author of the novel ''Huasipungo'', translated to many languages); the short story author Pablo Palacio; and the novelist Alicia Yanez Cossio.
Another perk that draws many expats to Ecuador is its low cost of living.
After Ecuador's separation, the Department of Cauca voluntarily decided to unite itself with Ecuador due to instability in the central government of Bogota.
Elections were held on April 29, 1979, under a new constitution.
Ecuador, as part of the Mercosur, have signed a free trade agreement with Lebanon on December 18, 2014.
Due to the continuous border disputes with Peru, finally settled in the early 2000s, and due to the ongoing problem with the Colombian guerrilla insurgency infiltrating Amazonian provinces, the Ecuadorian Armed Forces has gone through a series of changes.
Encocados (dishes that contain a coconut sauce) are also very popular.
Its political and military power came under the rule of the Duchicela blood-line.
In the small Chota Valley of the province of Imbabura exists a small community of Africans among the province's predominantly mestizo population.
Since 1936, voting is compulsory for all literate persons aged 18–65, optional for all other citizens.
His government was committed to improving human rights protection and carried out some reforms, notably an opening of Ecuador to foreign trade.
It is the country's most fertile and productive land, and is the seat of the large banana exportation plantations of the companies Dole and Chiquita.
So influential was the military in Ecuador in the early republican period that its first decade was under the control of General Juan Jose Flores, first president of Ecuador of Venezuelan origin.
Sanjuanito is a type of dance music played during festivities by the mestizo and Amerindian communities.
A debate to modify this and other reforms, especially the one which granted control of the Higher Education System by the government, was practically passed with consensus by the multi-partisan National Assembly on August 4, 2010, but vetoed by President Rafael Correa, who wanted to keep the law strictly as it was originally redacted by his political party and SENPLADES (National Secretary of Planning and Development).
File:Sphyrna lewini galapagos.jpg|Hammerhead sharks
The border dispute was then submitted to Spain for arbitration from 1880 to 1910, but to no avail.
This community works independently from the "Jewish Community of Ecuador" and is composed of only 30 people.
Rodrigo Borja Cevallos of the Democratic Left (Izquierda Democrática, or ID) party won the presidency in 1988, running in the runoff election against Abdalá Bucaram (brother in law of Jaime Roldos and founder of the Ecuadorian Roldosist Party).
Between 1999 and 2007, GDP doubled, reaching $65,490 million according to BCE.
Some Peruvian generals, without any legal titles backing them up and with Ecuador still federated with the Gran Colombia, had the desire to annex Ecuador to the Republic of Peru at the expense of the Gran Colombia, feeling that Ecuador was once part of the Inca Empire.
Pizarro promised to release Atahualpa if he made good his promise of filling a room full of gold.
In Ecuador's current judicial system, judges are selected in a contest of merits, rather than government appointments.
During the struggle for independence, before Peru or Ecuador became independent nations, a few areas of the former Vice Royalty of New Granada - Guayaquil, Tumbez, and Jaén - declared themselves independent from Spain.
The Ecuadorian Constitution requires that all children attend school until they achieve a "basic level of education", which is estimated at nine school years.
The standard of 903 fineness for silver, however, resulted in a heavy export of the coin.
Community health care centers (Centros de Salud) are found inside metropolitan areas of cities and in rural areas.
However, continuing economic problems undermined the popularity of the ID, and opposition parties gained control of Congress in 1999.
The public healthcare system should not be confused with the Ecuadorian Social Security healthcare service, which is dedicated to individuals with formal employment and who are affiliated obligatorily through their employers.
Peru began its de facto occupation of disputed Amazonian territories, after it signed a secret 1851 peace treaty in favor of Brazil.
Ecuador has won only two medals in the Olympic Games, both gained by 20-km (12&nbsp;mi) racewalker Jefferson Pérez, who took gold in the 1996 games and silver 12 years later.
The Liberal Revolution of 1895 under Eloy Alfaro reduced the power of the clergy and the conservative land owners.
Spanish is spoken as the first language by more than 90% of the population and as a first or second language by more than 98%.
Roldos was immediately succeeded by Vice President Osvaldo Hurtado, who was followed in 1984 by León Febres Cordero from the Social Christian Party.
These areas were included as part of the territory of Gran Colombia by Bolivar in December 17, 1819, during the Congress of Angostura when the Republic of Gran Colombia was created.
Ecuador's principal foreign policy objectives have traditionally included defense of its territory from external aggression and support for the objectives of the United Nations and the OAS.
EPN adopted the polytechnic university model that stresses laboratory instruction in applied science and engineering.
The trade balance with Argentina, Colombia, and Asia is negative.
Ecuador's mainstream culture is defined by its Hispanic ''mestizo'' majority, and, like their ancestry, it is traditionally of Spanish heritage, influenced in different degrees by Amerindian traditions and in some cases by African elements.
That military junta was led by Admiral Alfredo Poveda, who was declared chairman of the Supreme Council.
Contemporary Ecuadorian scientists who have been recognized by international institutions are Eugenia del Pino (born 1945), the first Ecuadorian to be elected to the United States National Academy of Science, and Arturo Villavicencio, who was part of the working group of the IPCC, which shared the 2007 Nobel Peace Prize with Al Gore for their dissemination of the effects of climate change.
The Minister of Public Health is appointed directly by the President of the Republic.
In particular, the final interview is said to be given "excessive weighing."
23% of children under five are chronically malnourished.
The Rio Protocol failed to precisely resolve the border along a little river in the remote ''Cordillera del Cóndor'' region in southern Ecuador.
The Amerindian people of Tigua, Ecuador, are also world-renowned for their traditional paintings.
The largest ethnic group () is the ''Mestizos'', who are the descendants of Spanish colonists that interbred with Amerindian peoples, and constitute about 71% of the population.
Other Amerindian languages spoken in Ecuador include Awapit (spoken by the Awá), A'ingae (spoken by the Cofan), Shuar Chicham (spoken by the Shuar), Achuar-Shiwiar (spoken by the Achuar and the Shiwiar), Cha'palaachi (spoken by the Chachi), Tsa'fiki (spoken by the Tsáchila), Paicoca (spoken by the Siona and Secoya), and Wao Tededeo (spoken by the Waorani).
Also there is a special legal regime for Amerindians.
The Afro-Ecuadorians is a minority population (7%) in Ecuador, that includes the Mulattos and ''zambos'', and are largely based in the Esmeraldas province and to a lesser degree in the predominantly Mestizo provinces of Coastal Ecuador - Guayas and Manabi.
In its upper reaches, the Napo flows rapidly until the confluence with one of its major tributaries, the Coca River, where it slows and levels off.
The highland rivers broaden as they enter the more level areas of the Costa and the Oriente.
Ecuador's Amerindian communities are integrated into the mainstream culture to varying degrees, but some may also practice their own native cultures, particularly the more remote Amerindian communities of the Amazon basin.
The native confederations that gave them the most problems were deported to distant areas of Peru, Bolivia, and north Argentina.
Ecuador is also known for its rich ecology, hosting many endemic plants and animals, such as those of the Galápagos Islands.
On July 28, 1821, Peruvian independence was proclaimed in Lima by the Liberator San Martin and Tumbes and Jaen which were included as part of the revolution of Trujillo by the Peruvian occupying force, had the whole region swear allegiance to the new Peruvian flag and incorporated itself into Peru, even though Peru was not completely liberated from Spain.
While Ecuador had to give up its decades-old territorial claims to the eastern slopes of the Cordillera, as well as to the entire western area of Cenepa headwaters, Peru was compelled to give to Ecuador, in perpetual lease but without sovereignty, 1&nbsp;km2 of its territory, in the area where the Ecuadorian base of Tiwinza – focal point of the war – had been located within Peruvian soil and which the Ecuadorian Army held during the conflict.
The most popular sport in Ecuador, as in most South American countries, is football.
Colombia protested stating that its claims extended south toward the Napo and Amazon Rivers.
Other training academies for different military specialties are found across the country.
They developed different languages while emerging as unique ethnic groups.
Many people believe that he was assassinated by the CIA, given the multiple death threats leveled against him because of his reformist agenda, deaths in automobile crashes of two key witnesses before they could testify during the investigation, and the sometimes contradictory accounts of the incident.
Ecuadorian painters include Eduardo Kingman, Oswaldo Guayasamín, and Camilo Egas from the Indiginist Movement; Manuel Rendon, Jaime Zapata, Enrique Tábara, Aníbal Villacís, Theo Constanté, Luis Molinari, Araceli Gilbert, Judith Gutierrez, Felix Arauz, and Estuardo Maldonado from the Informalist Movement; and Luis Burgos Flor with his abstract, futuristic style.
According to their own estimates, the The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints accounts for about 1.4% of the population, or 211,165 members at the end of 2012.
They were defeated by England in the second round.
Such policies were expansionary fiscal policies, of access to housing finance, stimulus packs, and limiting the amount of money reserves banks could keep abroad.
Ecuador during its long and turbulent history has lost most of its contested territories to each of its more powerful neighbors, such as Colombia in 1832 and 1916, Brazil in 1904 through a series of peaceful treaties, and Peru after a short war in which the Protocol of Rio de Janeiro was signed in 1942.
In 2009, the new administration at the Defense Ministry launched a deep restructuring within the forces, increasing spending budget to $1,691,776,803, an increase of 25%.
This new reorganization, although very ambitious, lacked the proper path to the homologation of diplomas for highly educated professionals graduated in the country or even for the ones graduated in foreign institutions.
Ecuador abolished slavery and freed its black slaves in 1851.
However, starting in 2008 with the bad economic performance of the nations where most Ecuadorian emigrants work, the reduction of poverty has been realized through social spending mainly in education and health.
Vice President Alfredo Palacio took his place and remained in office until the presidential election of 2006, in which Rafael Correa gained the presidency.
During colonial times this was to halt the ever-expanding Portuguese settlements into Spanish domains, which were left vacant and in disorder after the expulsion of Jesuit missionaries from their bases along the Amazon Basin.
Power generation is also a potential sector that is starting to be developed due to Ecuador's high water potential in various sectors of the country; the development of products based on the melting or glass materials, production and agro-processed foods, and pharmaceutical production, among others.
After a few weeks of war and under pressure by the United States and several Latin American nations, all fighting came to a stop.
Currently the most successful football team in Ecuador is LDU Quito, and it is the only Ecuadorian team that has won the ''Copa Libertadores'', the ''Copa Sudamericana'', and the ''Recopa Sudamericana''; they were also runners-up in the 2008 FIFA Club World Cup.
The scientific production in hard sciences has been limited due to lack of funding but focused around physics, statistics, and partial differential equations in mathematics.
Each civilization developed its own distinctive architecture, pottery, and religious interests.
President Juan José Flores with the approval of the Ecuadorian congress annexed the Department of Cauca on December 20, 1830, since the government of Cauca had called for union with the District of the South as far back as April 1830.
Ecuador is a democratic presidential republic.
Popular sentiment in Ecuador became strongly nationalistic against Peru: graffiti could be seen on the walls of Quito referring to Peru as the "''Cain de Latinoamérica''", a reference to the murder of Abel by his brother Cain in the Book of Genesis.
The music of Ecuador has a long history.
The public finance of Ecuador consists of the Central Bank of Ecuador (BCE), the National Development Bank (BNF), the State Bank, the National Finance Corporation, the Ecuadorian Housing Bank (BEV) and the Ecuadorian Educational Loans and Grants.
The northern faction headed by Atahualpa claims that Huayna Capac gave a verbal decree before his death about how the empire should be divided.
Therefore, an MD or PhD in medicine is only to be obtained overseas until the universities adjust themselves to granting schemes and curriculum as in foreign counterparts.
opper (''vellón'') was made legal tender to 5 décimos.
The country's vast resources include large amounts of timber across the country, like eucalyptus and mangroves.
Since African slavery was not the workforce of the Spanish colonies in the Andes Mountains, given the subjugation of the Amerindian people through proselytization and ''encomiendas'', the minority population of African descent is mostly found in the coastal northern province of Esmeraldas.
The Quito Astronomical Observatory, which gives the global community of a Virtual Telescope System that is connected via the Internet and allows the world to watch by streaming, is managed by EPN.
The roads of Ecuador in recent years have undergone important improvement.
The terminal degree in law, previously known as JD Juris Doctor (Doctor en Jurisprudencia) was replaced by the one of ''abogado'' (attorney) with the exception of the modification of the number of credits to equate it to an undergraduate degree.
The "Comunidad de Culto Israelita" reunites the Jews of Guayaquil.
Ecuador protested this secret treaty, since Colombia gave away Ecuadorian claimed land to Peru that Ecuador had given to Colombia in 1916.
Another problem is intermittent water supply, which affects half of the urban areas.
Sucre notes remained exchangeable at Banco Central until March 30, 2001, at 25,000 sucres per dollar.
He is accompanied by the vice-president, currently Jorge Glas, elected for four years (with the ability to be re-elected only once).
The rest of Ecuador gained its independence after Antonio José de Sucre defeated the Spanish Royalist forces at the Battle of Pichincha, near Quito.
This is explained to an extent by emigration and the economic stability achieved after adopting the U.S. dollar as official means of transaction.
During its negotiations with Brazil, Peru stated that based on the royal cedula of 1802, it claimed Amazonian Basin territories up to Caqueta River in the north and toward the Andes Mountain range, depriving Ecuador and Colombia of all their claims to the Amazon Basin.
*'''La Amazonía''', also known as ''El Oriente'', or "the east": The oriente consists of the Amazon jungle provinces&nbsp;– Morona Santiago, Napo, Orellana, Pastaza, Sucumbíos, and Zamora-Chinchipe.
The war ended when a triumphant heavily outnumbered southern Gran Colombian army at Battle of Tarqui dated February 27, 1829, led by Antonio José de Sucre, defeated the Peruvian invasion force led by President La Mar.
He brought Ecuador into the Bolivarian Alliance for the Americas in June 2009.
Spanish is the official language and is spoken by a majority of the population, though 13 Amerindian languages are also recognized, including Quichua and Shuar.
The civil society more and more insistently called for democratic elections.
After nearly 300 years of Spanish rule, Quito was still a small city numbering 10,000 inhabitants.
Thus, the region of highland Ecuador became part of the Inca Empire in 1463 sharing the same language.
Ecuador and Peru signed the Brasilia Presidential Act peace agreement on October 26, 1998, which ended hostilities, and effectively put an end to the Western Hemisphere's longest running territorial dispute.
Quito's nickname, "''Luz de América''" ("Light of America"), is based on its leading role in trying to secure an independent, local government.
In the agricultural sector, Ecuador is a major exporter of bananas (first place worldwide in production and export), flowers, and the seventh largest producer of cocoa.
This is largely owing to the 17th-century shipwreck of a slave-trading galleon off the northern coast of Ecuador.
In the La Sierra region, the streams and rivers are narrow and flow rapidly over precipitous slopes.
The Napo rises near Mount Cotopaxi and is the major river used for transport in the eastern lowlands.
The laws also forbid articles and media messages that could favor or disfavor some political message or candidate.
The Oldest Observatory in South America is the Quito Astronomical Observatory and is located in Quito, Ecuador.
Moreover, the Cauca region throughout its long history had very strong economic and cultural ties with the people of Ecuador.
When the Incas arrived, they found that these confederations were so developed that it took the Incas two generations of rulers - Topa Inca Yupanqui and Huayna Capac - to absorb them into the Inca Empire.
During the course of the Ecuadorian–Peruvian War, Peru gained control over part of the disputed territory and some parts of the province of El Oro, and some parts of the province of Loja, demanding that the Ecuadorian government give up its territorial claims.
Through protocolized meetings between representatives of Peru and Gran Colombia, the border was set as Tumbes river in the west and in the east the Maranon and Amazon rivers were to be followed toward Brazil as the most natural borders between them.
He gave the territories pertaining to present-day Ecuador and northern Peru to his favorite son Atahualpa, who was to rule from Quito; and he gave the rest to Huáscar, who was to rule from Cuzco.
Auxiliary organs are as follows: notaries, court auctioneers, and court receivers.
This plan enabled the new democratically elected president to assume the duties of the executive office.
Ecuador officially began its own monetary unit on June 28, 1835, when the inscription (rev.)
Both sunrise and sunset occur each day at the two six o'clock hours.
The coup d'état was led by General Guillermo Rodríguez and executed by navy commander Jorge Queirolo G. The new president exiled José María Velasco to Argentina.
Amerindians account for 7% of the current population.
He supported his claims with Spanish Royal decrees or ''Real Cedulas,'' that delineated the borders of Spain's former overseas colonies.
The negotiations turned into intense arguments during the next 7 months and finally on September 29, 1937 the Peruvian representatives decided to break off the negotiations without submitting the dispute to arbitration because the direct negotiations were going nowhere.
The indigenous people of the Amazon jungle and coastal Ecuador remained relatively autonomous until the Spanish soldiers and missionaries arrived in force.
The sentences to journalists have been years of imprisonment and millions of dollars of compensation, even though defendants have been pardoned.
This is done in the four basic specialties of pediatric, gynecology, clinic medicine, and surgery.
Its main body is the National Electoral Council, which is based in the city of Quito, and consists of seven members of the political parties most voted, enjoying complete financial and administrative autonomy.
Its best known professional teams include Liga De Quito from Quito; is the most important in the Ecuadorian football.
*'''La Costa''', or "the coast": The coastal region consists of the provinces to the West of the Andean range&nbsp;– Esmeraldas, Guayas, Los Ríos, Manabí, El Oro, Santa Elena.
In 1996, the net primary enrollment rate was 96.9%, and 71.8% of children stayed in school until the fifth grade.
The Ecuadorian constitution recognizes the "pluri-nationality" of those who want to exercise their affiliation with their native ethnic groups.
Rivers may slow and widen as they cross the hoyas yet become rapid again as they flow from the heights of the Andes to the lower elevations of the other regions.
Ecuador protested that it claimed the Amazon Basin between the Caqueta river and the Marañon-Amazon river.
The industry is concentrated mainly in Guayaquil, the largest industrial center, and in Quito, where in recent years the industry has grown considerably.
However, as more and more North Americans are discovering Ecuador's potential, property prices are beginning to rise from where they were a decade ago, particularly in the areas that are popular among expats and tourists.
The territory was colonized by Spain during the 16th century, achieving independence in 1820 as part of Gran Colombia, from which it emerged as its own sovereign state in 1830.
The existence of his literary work came to light many centuries later, when a crew of masons was restoring the walls of a colonial church in Quito and found a hidden manuscript.
