Adelaide was an unconventional wife for the times: she was five years older than her husband, had been previously married, and was outspoken and active.
While he was still conscious but in terrible pain, Rickenbacker was left behind while some ambulances carried away bodies of the dead.
In his comic strip ''Li'l Abner'', Al Capp included an airplane pilot modeled on Rickenbacker: Cap'n Eddie Ricketyback.
Because of an erroneous press story and Rickenbacker's known Swiss heritage, he was suspected of being a spy.
Edward V. Rickenbacker, Colonel, specialist reserve, then first lieutenant, 94th Aero Squadron, Air Service, American Expeditionary Forces.
The crewmen's food supply ran out after three days.
''Wings of War: Famous Aces'' features Rickenbacker's Spad XIII.
While on a voluntary patrol over the lines Lt. Rickenbacker attacked seven enemy planes (five type Fokker protecting two type Halberstadt photographic planes).
for extraordinary heroism in action over Richecourt, France, on May 17, 1918.
Rickenbacker observed some traces of capitalism (for example, people were allowed to grow food and sell their surplus) and predicted that the Soviet Union would eventually become a capitalist nation.
His suggestion was ignored by the military.
In the 2007 movie ''The King of Kong: A Fistful of Quarters'', Billy Mitchell compares Eddie Rickenbacker with the Red Baron to illustrate his own dominance of competitive video game playing, stating "There's a level of difference between some people."
Through the 1920s, he had worked with and for General Motors (GM): first as the California distributor for its new car, the short-lived Sheridan, then later as a marketer for the LaSalle, and finally as vice president of sales for their affiliate, Fokker Aircraft Company.
During World War I, with its anti-German atmosphere, he — like many other German Americans — changed his surname; the "h" in "Rickenbacher" became a "k" in an effort to "take the Hun out of his name."
He then attacked one of the Halberstadts and sent it down also.
Personal recovery depends upon AA unity."
Rickenbacker supported the war effort as a civilian.
After settling upon "V", he selected "Vernon" as a middle name.
They adopted two boys: David Edward in 1925, and William Frost in 1928.
En route and in England, agents closely monitored his actions.
In 1916, Rickenbacker traveled to London, with the aim of developing an English car for American races.
The Distinguished Service Cross is presented to Edward Vernon Rickenbacker, Captain (Air Service), U.S .
Then, on the eighth day, a seagull landed on Rickenbacker's head.
After visiting several air and sea bases in Hawaii, Rickenbacker was provided an older B-17D Flying Fortress (AAF Ser.
The story of Rickenbacker's ordeal has been used as an example for Alcoholics Anonymous when the first of their Twelve Traditions was formulated: "Our common welfare should come first.
He worked with aviation artist and author Clayton Knight, who illustrated the series.
The survivors were rescued after spending the night at the crash site.
Eventually, all vehicles manufactured in the U.S. incorporated four-wheel braking.
That octant reportedly had suffered a severe shock in a pre-takeoff mishap.
Rickenbacker was adamantly opposed to President Franklin Roosevelt's New Deal policies, seeing them as little better than socialism.
Croix de guerre (WWI)w/ 2 bronze palms
British Prime Minister Winston Churchill interviewed Rickenbacker about his mission.
In the U.S., Rickenbacker's information resulted in some diplomatic and military action, but President Roosevelt did not meet with Rickenbacker.
Rickenbacker oversaw many radical changes in the field of commercial aviation.
He learned about Soviet defense strategies and capabilities.
It was later adapted into a film serial and radio program.
He shared his vision for the future of technology and commerce, exhorted Americans to respect the adversary, the Soviet Union during the Cold War, but still uphold American values.
Captain Rickenbacker attacked a group of five enemy planes.
Rickenbacker's mission was successful.
After the  race in 1941, Rickenbacker closed the Speedway due to World War II.
One of these awards was converted in 1930 to the Medal of Honor.
The Rickenbacker came equipped with the first four-wheel brake system.
:You will find therein the source of those principles I used to preach; and if they can help you avoid even a few of the keen disappointments and bitter heartaches that I have lived through, then I will feel well repaid for my efforts.
The Distinguished Service Cross is presented to Edward Vernon Rickenbacker, Captain (Air Service), US Army, for extraordinary heroism in action in the region of Bois-de-Wavrille, France, September 15, 1918.
The pilot of the plane that rescued the survivors, Lieutenant William F. Eadie, USN, was awarded the Navy's Air Medal for his actions during the rescue.
With Stimson's help and by trading favors with the Soviet ambassador, Rickenbacker secured unlikely permission to travel to the Soviet Union.
''To the Men and Women of Eastern Air Lines''
In a dramatic retelling of the incident, Rickenbacker's autobiography relates his astonishing experiences.
During the late 1950s, however, Eastern Air Lines' fortunes declined, and Rickenbacker was forced out of his position as CEO on October 1, 1959.
When Rickenbacker learned of the Armistice, he flew an airplane above the western front to observe the ceasefire and the displays of joy and comradeship, as the formerly warring troops crossed the front lines and joined in the celebrations.
One crewman, Alexander Kaczmarczyk of the USAAF, died and was buried at sea.
Rickenbacker found jobs to help support the family, but driven by an intense admiration for machines, Rickenbacker taught himself as much as he could, including enrolling in a correspondence course in engineering.
For 24 days, Rickenbacker, Army Captain Hans C. Adamson, his friend and business partner, and the rest of the crewmen drifted in life rafts at sea.
Rickenbacker assumed leadership, encouraging and browbeating the others to keep their spirits up.
Continuing over the Hump to China himself, Rickenbacker was impressed by the determination of the Chinese people but disgusted with the corruption of the Kuomintang government.
He is one of a very select few Club members who were granted honorary lifetime membership at Siwanoy.
Eddie was a distant cousin of Adolph Rickenbacker, co-founder of Rickenbacker Guitars.
Probably due to bad publicity from the other car manufacturers, who feared they would be unable to sell their inventory of cars with two-wheel braking, the company had trouble selling its cars and eventually went bankrupt in 1927.
In the Soviet Union, Rickenbacker observed wartime conditions, the extraordinary dedication and patriotism by the populace, and the ruthless denial of food to those deemed unproductive to the war effort.
A memorial service was held at the Key Biscayne Presbyterian Church with the eulogy given by Lt. General Jimmy Doolittle, and then his body was interred in Columbus, Ohio, at the Green Lawn Cemetery.
For a time, Eastern was the most profitable airline in the postwar era.
They lived on sporadic rain water that fell and similar food "miracles".
:From these principles and our labors together emerged one of our country's great airlines and further developed our great heritage of pioneering.
Adamson sustained serious injuries during the ditching.
In the years ahead young, strong hands will carry them into a future which you and I, with all our dreams, can scarcely visualize—that "Parade of Youth" which always was and always will be the true spirit of Eastern Air Lines.
Rickenbacker joined the Maxwell Race Team in 1915 after leaving Peugeot.
Rickenbacker personally collaborated with many of the pioneers of aviation, including Donald W. Douglas, the founder of the Douglas Aircraft Company, and the designer and builder of the large, four-engined airliners, the DC-4, DC-6, DC-7, and DC-8 (its first jet airliner).
Rickenbacker's trip in the spring and summer of 1943 took him along the South Atlantic air route that Eastern Air Lines had helped pioneer in 1941, traveling to Cairo in an AAF C-54 provided him by Gen. Henry H. Arnold, commanding general of the United States Army Air Forces.
In April 1938, after learning that GM was considering selling Eastern to John D. Hertz, Rickenbacker met with GM's Chairman of the Board, Alfred P. Sloan, and bought the company for $3.5 million.
He helped develop and support new aircraft designs.
Rickenbacker also resigned as the Chairman of the Board on December 31, 1963, at the age of 73.
''40-3089'') as transportation to the South Pacific.
Although they spent considerable time in Florida, Texas and Ohio, the Rickenbackers lived chiefly in New York City.
The Distinguished Service Cross is presented to Edward Vernon Rickenbacker, Captain (Air Service), US Army, for extraordinary heroism in action in the region of Villecy, France, September 14, 1918.
He was also a race car driver and automotive designer, a government consultant in military matters and a pioneer in air transportation, particularly as the longtime head of Eastern Air Lines.
It tipped over and almost crushed them.
The United States Postal Service issued a postage stamp in honor of Rickenbacker's accomplishments as an aviation pioneer in 1995.
Eddie Rickenbacker appears in the computer game ''Red Baron'' as one of the Allied aces.
In the 1955 film ''The Court-Martial of Billy Mitchell'', Rickenbacker is played by Tom McKee.
For his service in support of the war effort, Rickenbacker received the Medal for Merit, a decoration for civilians in service to the United States government equivalent to the military Legion of Merit.
Rickenbacker went to work at the Columbus Buggy Company, eventually becoming a salesman, working in both Dallas, Texas, and Tucson, Arizona.
In 1977, at the age of 92, Adelaide Rickenbacker was completely blind, suffering from failing health, and still grieving severely from the loss of her husband.
Captain Rickenbacker attacked three Albatross monoplanes 4,000 meters over St. Mihiel, France.
According to Rickenbacker's autobiography, at age thirteen, his schooling ended in grade seven after the accidental death of his father on August 26, 1904.
Rickenbacker demonstrated that he had a qualified replacement, and the military awarded him a place in one of America's air combat units, the 94th Aero Squadron, informally known as the "Hat-in-the-Ring" Squadron after its insignia.
Medal of Honor citation, awarded November 6, 1930
If no witnesses could be found, a reported kill was not counted.
Captain Rickenbacker attacked three Albatross enemy planes, shooting one down in the vicinity of Richecourt, France, and forcing the others to retreat over their own lines.
For this, he drew criticism and ire from the press and the Roosevelt administration, which ordered NBC Radio not to allow him to broadcast opinions critical of Roosevelt's policies after Rickenbacker had harshly denounced the president's decision to rescind existing mail contracts in 1934 and have U.S. Army Air Corps pilots carry the air mail.
In 1925, Rickenbacker was a defense witness, along with Hap Arnold, Tooey Spaatz, Ira Eaker, and Fiorello H. La Guardia, in the court-martial of General Billy Mitchell.
When a number of inexperienced, undertrained Army pilots were killed in crashes soon afterward, Rickenbacker stated, "That's legalized murder!"
He started the Rickenbacker Motor Company in 1920, selling technologically advanced cars incorporating innovations from automobile racing.
Rickenbacker was also an avid golfer, often playing at the Siwanoy Country Club course near his home.
He chose to go on a Liberty bond tour.
Rickenbacker completed his assignment and delivered his message, which has never been made public, to General MacArthur.
Rickenbacker also scripted a popular comic strip called ''Ace Drummond'' from 1935–1940.
With the help of some friends, Rickenbacker merged Eastern Air Transport and Florida Airways to form Eastern Air Lines, an airline that eventually grew from a company flying a few thousand miles per week into a major airline.
They instructed their assistants to "take care of the live ones."
Captain Rickenbacker encountered six enemy planes, who were in the act of attacking four Spads, which were below them.
After the tour he was released from the army with the rank of Major.
On May 30, he scored his sixth victory.
The military determined ace status by verifying combat claims by a pilot, but confirmation, too, was needed from ground witnesses, affirmations of other pilots, or observation of the wreckage of the opposing enemy aircraft.
Rickenbacker also continued to associate with Reed Chambers, with whom he had served in World War I; they jointly founded an airline.
After World War I ended, Rickenbacker was approached several times about exploiting his fame.
He encouraged the American public to contribute time and resources, and pledged Eastern Air Lines equipment and personnel for use in military activities.
As independent as she was, Adelaide fully supported Rickenbacker's endeavors until his death in 1973.
In the 1960s, Rickenbacker became a well-known speaker.
After a sharp and hot action, he succeeded in shooting one down in flames and dispersing the other three.
She committed suicide by gunshot at their home on Key Biscayne, Florida.
Rickenbacker flew a total of 300 combat hours, reportedly more than any other U.S. pilot in the war.
In ''The Twilight Zone'' episode "The Parallel", it is mentioned that, in the parallel universe, Rickenbacker was never found after the crash of Eastern Air Lines Flight 21 on February 26, 1941.
He was also awarded the Legion of Honor and the Croix de Guerre by France.
Rickenbacker was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross a record eight times.
One of Rickenbacker's most famous near-death experiences occurred in October 1942.
Rickenbacker endorsed many conservative ideas.
He believed his given name "looked a little plain."
Most aces' records are thus 'best estimates', not 'exact counts'.
At the time, Rickenbacker was vice president of one of the companies affected, Eastern Air Transport.
When Rickenbacker arrived at a hospital, his injuries appeared so grotesque that the emergency surgeons and physicians left him for dead for some time.
The story of Eddie Rickenbacker "and his courageous company" appears on page 131 of the TWELVE STEPS AND TWELVE TRADITIONS of Alcoholics Anonymous.
In 1942, with a sweeping letter of authorization from Henry L. Stimson, U.S. Secretary of War, Rickenbacker visited England on an official war mission and made ground-breaking recommendations for better war operations.
On September 24, 1918, now a captain, he was named commander of the squadron, and on the following day, he claimed two more German planes, for which he was belatedly awarded the Medal of Honor in 1931 by President Herbert Hoover.
'''Edward Vernon Rickenbacker''' (October 8, 1890 – July 23, 1973) was an American fighter ace in World War I and Medal of Honor recipient.
In 1942, he toured training bases in the southwestern United States and in England.
Rickenbacker barely survived.
As he was already well known at the time, the change received wide publicity.
Rickenbacker's autobiography reports that he spent ten days at the door of death, which he illustrated as "having an overwhelming sensation of calm and pleasure".
Most men chosen for pilot training had college degrees and Rickenbacker had to struggle to gain permission to fly because of his perceived lack of academic qualifications.
It now shares the airfield with Rickenbacker International Airport.
Among other things, holding the race would have been a waste of valuable gasoline and other fuels.
It was an imperfect system, dependent on the frailties of human observation, as well as vagaries of weather and terrain.
He was offered many movie positions, but did not want all the attention, even though he was the most celebrated aviator in America (soon to be supplanted by Charles Lindbergh after his solo flight across the Atlantic).
After the Maxwell team disbanded that same year, he joined the Prest-O-Lite team as manager and continued to race improved Maxwells for Prest-O-Lite.
(signed) Capt Eddie Rickenbacker
On November 1, 1927, Rickenbacker bought the Indianapolis Motor Speedway, which he operated for nearly a decade and a half, overseeing many improvements to the facility.
All were suffering from hyperthermia, sunburn, dehydration, and near-starvation.
Undeterred by their superior numbers, he unhesitatingly attacked them and succeeded in shooting one down in flames and completely breaking the formation of the others.
In 1945, Rickenbacker sold the racetrack to the businessman Anton Hulman, Jr.
In 1967, when Rickenbacker published his autobiography, a special edition was printed for the employees of Eastern Air Lines, and it contained the following dedication:
Rickenbacker suffered especially grave injuries, being soaked in fuel, immobile, and trapped in the wreckage.
Although his main home was in New York City for many years, Rickenbacker owned a winter home in Coconut Grove, Florida, near Eastern Air Lines' major maintenance and administrative headquarters at Miami International Airport.
Nevertheless, Rickenbacker's 26 victories remained the American record until World War II.
His rank is given as captain in his obituary in the July 24, 1973 edition of the ''New York Times''.)
This unnecessary ditching spurred on the development of improved navigational instruments and also better survival gear for the aircrewmen.
On February 26, 1941, he was a passenger on a Douglas DC-3 airliner that crashed just outside Atlanta, Georgia.
The story was also recounted in Lt. James Whittaker's book ''We Thought We Heard the Angels Sing'', published in 1943.
and Mrs. Rickenbacker traveled extensively for a number of years.
The War Department provided everything Rickenbacker needed, including a highly unusual letter stating that the bearer was authorized to "visit ... any ... areas he may deem necessary for such purposes as he will explain to you in person", signed by the Secretary of War.
Because of his mechanical abilities, Rickenbacker was assigned as engineering officer at the 3rd Aviation Instruction Center at Issoudun, the US Air Service's pursuit training facility, where he practiced flying during his free time.
He negotiated with the U.S. government to acquire air mail routes, a great advantage to companies in need of business.
On April 29, 1918, Rickenbacker shot down his first plane.
The company name was purposely chosen for the association with Eddie Rickenbacker.
Rickenbacker approached Soviet diplomats, and avoided requesting help from President Franklin Roosevelt, due to their prior disagreements.
He signed his name 26 times, with a different middle initial each time.
He shot down Germany's hottest new fighter, the Fokker D.VII, on September 14 and another the next day.
He was played by Peter Frechette.
On a sea voyage back to America, he came up with the idea to recruit his race car driver friends as fighter pilots, on the theory that such men were accustomed to tight spaces and high speeds.
In the 1999 game ''System Shock 2'', a military spaceship is named the UNN ''Rickenbacker''.
Captain Rickenbacker suffered from a stroke while he was in Switzerland seeking special medical treatment for Mrs. Rickenbacker, and he then contracted pneumonia.
The B-17's aircraft commander, former American Airlines pilot Captain William T. Cherry, Jr., was forced to ditch close to Japanese-held islands but the Americans were never spotted by Japanese patrol planes, and were adrift on the ocean for thousands of miles.
Rickenbacker died on July 23, 1973 in Zürich, Switzerland.
The services agreed to do so.
The bomber strayed hundreds of miles off course while on its way to a refueling stop on Canton Island and was forced to ditch in a remote and little-traveled part of the Central Pacific Ocean.
After a violent battle, he shot down one plane and drove the others away.
Once again, the newspapers and radio broadcasts reported that Rickenbacker was dead.
The Distinguished Service Cross is presented to Edward Vernon Rickenbacker, Captain (Air Service), US Army, for extraordinary heroism in action on May 30, 1918, 4,000 meters over Jaulny, France.
Rickenbacker went into massive debt, but was determined to pay back all of the $250,000 he owed, despite personally going bankrupt (and therefore no longer being legally obligated to do so).
For conspicuous gallantry and intrepidity above and beyond the call of duty in action against the enemy near Billy, France, September 25, 1918.
His father quotes from the sleeve of the book.
In spite of his own critical wounds, Rickenbacker encouraged the other passengers, offered what consolation he could to those around him who were injured or dying, and guided the survivors who were still ambulatory to attempt to find help.
In 1974, Lockbourne Air Force Base, a Strategic Air Command (SAC) installation in his home town of Columbus, was renamed Rickenbacker Air Force Base.
He discovered that a commander of Moscow's defense had stayed at Rickenbacker's home in 1937, and personal connections like this and the respect the Soviet military personnel had for him greatly aided his information-gathering.
He aggressively pursued any chance of involvement with automobiles.
On April 1, 1980 it was turned over to the Ohio Air National Guard and renamed Rickenbacker Air National Guard Base.
He lived near a mine, and they decided to ride a cart down the slope.
The Distinguished Service Cross is presented to Edward Vernon Rickenbacker, Captain (Air Service), US Army, for extraordinary heroism in action over St. Mihiel, France, on May 22, 1918.
Rickenbacker bought the new, large, faster airliners for Eastern Air Lines, including the four-engined Lockheed Constellation and Douglas DC-4.
He also appears in the World War I simulation game Rise of Flight as an instructor.
The other crewmen in the B-17 were hurt to varying degrees.
On May 28, he claimed his fifth to become an ace.
GM asked him to manage Eastern, beginning in 1935.
It pertains to when their plane crashed in the Pacific and is used in the closing remarks of Tradition One ("Our common welfare should come first;  personal recovery depends upon A.A.
In the 2004 novel ''The Godfather Returns'', Nick Geraci is reading Eddie Rickenbacker's autobiography.
He persuaded GM to purchase North American Aviation, a conglomerate whose assets included Eastern Air Transport.
Rickenbacker often traveled for business on Eastern Air Lines flights.
Rickenbacker promoted flying to the American public, but, always aware of the possibility of accidents, he wrote in his autobiography, "I have never liked to use the word "safe" in connection with either Eastern Air Lines or the entire transportation field; I prefer the word 'reliable'."
However, according to ''Eddie Rickenbacker: An American Hero in the Twentieth Century'', by W. David Lewis, his father died after an altercation with another man in Columbus.
It would be his last for three and a half months.
He learned to fly well, but because his mechanical skills were so highly valued, Rickenbacker's superiors tried to prevent him from attaining his wings with the other pilots.
Rickenbacker became well known as a race car driver, competing in the Indianapolis 500 four times before World War I, and earning the nickname "Fast Eddie".
(Some sources state his rank was major but there are no sources published in Rickenbacker's lifetime which confirm this nor are there any photos of Rickenbacker wearing the insignia of a major.
In 2009, musician Todd Snider wrote a song called "Money, Compliments, and Publicity," which revolves around a statement Rickenbacker made indicating that the pinnacle of success is when you lose interest in money, compliments, and publicity.
In this book, he also describes the character, exploits, and death of fellow pilot Lt. Quentin Roosevelt, the son of U.S. President Theodore Roosevelt.
He drove them back into German territory, separated one from the group, and shot it down near Flirey.
It took many months in the hospital, followed by a long time at home, for Rickenbacker to heal from this multitude of injuries and to regain his full eyesight.
The Rickenbacker award is the Civil Air Patrol cadet achievement equivalent to an Air Force Technical Sergeant.
:It is with pleasure and pride that I inscribe to you this copy of my life story from the time I was three years of age.
This was just the first time that the press announced his death while he was still alive.
Rickenbacker's left eyeball was also blown out of its socket.
Rickenbacker was awarded the French Croix de Guerre that month for his five victories.
