Merckx was the first-born of the family.
In the succeeding days, the Union Cycliste Internationale removed the suspension put in place.
He became the third rider to win La Flèche Wallonne and Liège–Bastogne–Liège in the same weekend.
Three days later, in La Flèche Wallonne, Merckx was a part of a six-man leading group as the race neared its conclusion.
He followed these successes by entering Paris–Nice where he won the second stage and took the race lead.
He co-owns the tour and also the Tour of Oman, both of which he still organizes.
Merckx had won four of the race's stages and held the race lead going into the sixteenth day of racing.
He dropped out of Omloop Het Volt due to colitis and completed his final race on 19 March, a kermis in Kemzeke.
Merckx attacked on the final lap, but was reeled in by the three riders.
He ended his season in October after racing for most of August.
He launched an attacked with eighty kilometers to go, with only Frans Verbeeck being able to match his acceleration.
Merckx won the stage and gained enough time on the race leader Gimondi to win the race.
He rode over the Col du Soulor and Col d'Aubisque, increasing the gap to eight minutes.
He was criticized by opposing riders for his relentless pursuit of victory that prevented even lesser known riders from collecting a few victories.
This earned him his second rainbow jersey.
Four times between 1970 and 1974, Merckx completed a Grand Tour double.
On the day's final climb to Pla d'Adet, he matched an acceleration by Zoetemelk.
Merckx chose to sign; however, since he was a minor the contract was invalid.
He finished the Tour with eight stage victories and won the mountains and combination classifications.
Van Looy and other teammates mocked Merckx for his various habits such as his eating, or called him names.
Merckx was brought up speaking in Flemish, but was taught French in school.
After the 1967 season, Merckx moved to Faema, and won the Giro d'Italia, his first of eleven Grand Tour victories&nbsp;– a record that still stands today.
The event folded after 2004 due to riders' lack of interest.
During the second stage, a major break with the major race contenders, including Merckx, formed with over a hundred kilometers to go.
Molteni ended their sponsorship at the end of the season.
Merckx won the race's sixth stage through attacking before the leg's final major climb, the Ballon d'Alsace, and then outlasting his competitors who were able to follow him initially.
This injury plagued his performance throughout the spring classic season.
Merckx managed to be a part of a five-man breakaway as the race reached five laps to go.
In January, the department store C&A announced that they would sponsor Merckx after their owner met Merckx at a football game.
Before starting the Tour, Merckx had spent a large amount of his time resting and training, racing only five times.
Thevenet then launched an attack, to which Merckx could not follow and saw him lose over two minutes.
Seven weeks following the Tour, Merckx entered the men's road race at the UCI Road World Championships that were held in Mendrisio, Switzerland.
Merckx saw victory again in mid-April at the Liège–Bastogne–Liège when he attacked with seventy kilometers remaining in the pouring rain.
Merckx didn't win another stage, but managed to expand his lead a little more before the race's conclusion.
After finishing the race, Merckx had a sebaceous cyst removed on 22 June.
On August 1, Merckx finished second in the Belgian national championships, which qualified him for the men's road race at the UCI Road World Championships.
The two riders landed head first onto the track.
In Italy, Merckx was given the title of ''Cavaliere''.
The following day, Merckx caught up with the leading breakaway and wanted to push ahead, but the riders chose not to participate in the pace making, leading Merckx to sit up and get caught.
Merckx won the race after leading from start to finish, a feat only previously done by Alfredo Binda and Costante Girardengo.
The twelfth stage was marred by rainy weather and featured the climbs of the Tre Cime di Lavaredo for the stage finish.
Merckx won his fifth Liège–Bastogne–Liège by attacking several times in the closing portions of the race.
Merckx agreed to ride a light spring season in order to save himself for a chance at a sixth Tour victory.
After attacking ninety kilometers from the finish, Merckx caught the leaders on the road and passed them.
On the stage into Saint-Étienne, Merckx attacked and managed to gain enough time to move into sixth overall; he finished the Tour in same position.
Cycling journalist Sam Dansie believed that the fact that Eddy Merckx Cycles has maintained a presence as an elite bicycle due to its adoption of new methods over time.
After winning the Tour of Belgium again, Merckx headed into the major spring classics.
He won the twelfth and fourteenth stages en route to finishing ninth in the general classification.
Reaching the final climb of the day, Merckx was on his own as his team had been used to set the pace throughout the day.
Merckx lost four minutes over two and a half minutes to Spanish climber José Manuel Fuente after the Giro's fourth stage that contained a summit finish to Blockhaus.
The drug was present in a cough medicine that the Molteni doctor, Dr. Cavalli, prescribed to him.
The following morning's split stage saw Merckx put time on Thevenet by attacking with Francesco Moser, Van Impe, and Zoetemelk.
In summer 1961, Merckx bought his first racing license and competed in his first official race a month after he turned sixteen, coming in sixth place.
On 8 November 1973, it was announced that Merckx had tested positive for norephedrine after winning the Giro di Lombardia a month earlier.
The group of four finished a minute and a half ahead of Merckx, giving Zoetemelk the lead.
The Tour de France began with a team time trial that Merckx's team won, giving him the lead.
An illness prevented Merckx from taking part in the Milan–San Remo at the start of the 1973 calendar.
Merckx would imitate his cycling idol Stan Ockers with his friends when they rode bikes together.
The route featured twenty-one laps of a circuit that contained two climbs.
Merckx has been regarded by many as the greatest and most successful cyclist of all time.
A lesser Belgian rider, Noël van Tyghem, won Paris–Tours in 1972 and said: "Between us, I and Eddy Merckx have won every classic that can be won.
However, Merckx claimed he knew he wanted to be a cyclist at the age of four and that his first memory was a crash on his bike when he was the same age.
During the seventeenth stage, Merckx was riding at the head of the race with several general classification contenders on the Col du Tourmalet.
In Paris–Roubaix, Merckx suffered a flat tire with around eighty kilometers left when a part of a leading group of four.
He won the next time trial into Auch as well.
Dutch cycling great Joop Zoetemelk said "First there was Merckx, and then another classification began behind him."
He returned from travel to train more, but by this point the team sponsor knew he was going to quit.
Merckx's first victory with his new team came in a stage win at the Tour of Sardinia.
Merckx befriended Fiorenzo Magni when he began racing for an Italian team.
He was the first rider to win cycling's Triple Crown which has only been accomplished one other time, by Stephen Roche in 1987.
After initially planning to attempt to break the hour record in August, Merckx decided to make the attempt in October after taking a ten-day hiatus from criterium racing to heal and prepare.
Merckx gained over four minutes on Fuente and became the new race leader.
He followed with a victory in the Catalan Week, but suffered a crash in the final stage when a spectator's bag caught his handlebars, injuring his elbow.
Merckx won the stage, while Simpson secured his overall victory.
His first victory came at Petit-Enghien in October 1961.
Merckx rode solo to catch the leading rider Jacques Anquetil, whom he dropped with a kilometer remaining.
By winning the race he earned the right to wear the rainbow jersey as world champion.
He then rode in the Dauphiné Libéré and was not on par with Thevenet, who won the race.
Merckx retaliated by speeding away on the descent.
In the time following the Tour, Merckx raced twenty-two races in a span of forty days before coming in thirty-third at the UCI Road World Championships's men's road race.
Merckx was leading the 1969 Giro d'Italia upon the conclusion of the sixteenth stage in Savona.
He proceeded to attack and went on to win the stage by forty-seven seconds.
The group finished nine minutes ahead of the peloton as Merckx came around Roger De Vlaeminck during the sprint to win the day.
He grew up in Woluwe-Saint-Pierre where his parents ran a grocery store.
In the Paris–Nice, Merckx broke a vertebra in a crash that occurred as the peloton was in the midst of a bunch sprint.
Merckx officially began dating Claudine Acou in April 1965.
Raymond liked the nickname and then mentioned it to the press.
He took the opening prologue and expanded his advantage over all the other general classification contenders, except Ocaña, by at least three minutes.
He finished the season with 23 victories to his name.
He acquired the nickname "'''The Cannibal'''" after a teammate told his daughter of how Merckx would not let anyone else win, and the daughter referred to him as a cannibal.
Merckx finished the Tour with eight stage wins and his fifth Tour de France victory, equaling the record of Anquetil.
Merckx won the four-man sprint to the finish.
The eighth stage saw a mountain top finish to Puy de Dome.
Merckx was criticized for attacking while Ocaña had a flat, but Merckx responded that the year before Ocaña had done the same thing while the race was in the Alps.
He chose to switch over in order to be in complete control over the team he was racing for.
By the time Merckx had reached the penultimate climb, there was a six-man group at the front of the race with a nine-minute advantage.
His last victory was in a track event, an omnium in Zürich, on 10 February 1978 with Patrick Sercu.
This caused him to be in poor form, forcing him to not participate in the Giro d'Italia.
Faema folded at the end of the 1970 season causing Merckx and several of his teammates to move to another Italian team, Molteni.
Merckx eventually reconnected with the two on the stage's final climb.
Merckx has become an ambassador for the Damien The Leper Society, a foundation named after a Catholic priest, which battles leprosy and other diseases in developing countries.
He decided to race the Vuelta a España and the Giro d'Italia, instead of racing the Tour de France.
Merckx was advised by his manager to hold off on sprinting full-out to the finish line until as late as possible.
Merckx and Poulidor attacked with around seven kilometers to go, after catching the leading breakaway.
Fuente tried attacking throughout the race of the race, but was only able to make time gains on the race's penultimate stage.
At the end of the stage, Merckx told the journalists "I hope I have done enough now for you to consider me a worthy winner."
Wambst wanted to pass everyone to provide a show for the crowd.
He signed with Faema on 2 September for ten years worth 400,000 Belgian francs.
He made a move on the Kapelmuur and was followed by a few riders.
In 1971 he raced 120 times and won 54 of the events, the most races any cyclist has won in a season.
The next weekend, Merckx attempted to race for teammate Joseph Bruyère in the La Flèche Wallonne; however, Bruyère was unable to keep pace with the leading riders, leaving Merckx to take the victory.
The wound was still slightly open when he began the Grand Tour and it bled throughout the race.
He won the opening prologue of the Vuelta to take an early lead.
He got his season's first victories in the Grand Prix d'Aix and Tour Méditerranéen.
Merckx went on to win the race, along with the points classification and mountains classification.
At the 1966 UCI Road World Championships he finished twelfth in the road race after suffering a cramp in the closing kilometers.
He was known for racing style that consisted of attacking constantly, which came to be known as "''la course en tête''".
His first road race came in the Grand Prix de Montauroux on 19 February.
He is widely thought to be the greatest and most successful rider in the history of cycling.
Instead of racing the Giro d'Italia, Merckx elected to enter two shorter stages races in France, the Grand Prix du Midi Libre and the Critérium du Dauphiné, both of which he won.
Merckx coached the Belgian national cycling team for eleven years, stopping in 1996.
He lost time early in the race to Fuente, who managed to the race's first mountainous stage.
Merckx fell again on the descent and took the race lead as Ocaña was forced to retire from the race due to injuries from the crash.
I won Paris–Tours, Merckx won all the rest."
After winning the first intermediate sprint of the first round, Wambst chose to slow their pace and move to the back of the race despite Merckx wanting to stay out in front for fear of an accident.
Race director Vincenzo Torriani delayed the start of the seventeenth stage in an attempt to persuade the president of the Italian Cycling Federation to allow Merckx to begin the stage.
He shares the record for most victories at both the Giro d'Italia and Tour de France, with five wins at each.
Merckx won three of the five stages contested within the next four days, including a summit finish to Mont Ventoux, where upon finishing he was given oxygen.
Four days after the conclusion of the Vuelta, Merckx lined up to start the Giro d'Italia.
Despite a monetary offer from race organizers for Merckx to participate in the Vuelta a España, he chose to take part in the Giro d'Italia.
While climbing the Puy de Dome, Thevenet and Van Impe attacked.
Wambst died of a fractured skull as he was being transported to a hospital.
In late December, FIAT chose to end their sponsorship of Merckx in favor of building a more French centered squad.
He finished the season with 32 wins in the 129 races he entered.
He has completed the most Giro-Tour doubles in history with three.
He arrived in Mexico on the 21st to prepare for his attempt, but two days were lost due to rain.
Three days following his victory at the Giro, Merckx started the Tour de Suisse.
Joop Zoetemelk and Luis Ocaña went with Thévenet and wound up gaining fifteen seconds on Merckx.
During the off-season, Merckx had his displaced pelvis tended to by a doctor.
Eddy was a competitive child and played several sports, including basketball, boxing, football, and table tennis.
Merckx would spend time giving input on the models as they were being produced.
The initial workers that were hired for the factory were trained by Ugo De Rosa, a notable bike maker, before starting.
FIAT became the new sponsor for Merckx's team and Raphaël Géminiani the new manager.
After the incident, several conspiracy theories emerged including: the urine that tested positive wasn't Merckx's, a move to give Italian Felice Gimondi a better chance at victory, and Merckx had been given a water bottle with the stimulant in it.
Merckx also became the third to accomplish the feat of winning the Giro and Tour in the same calendar year.
After losing the lead following the second stage, he won the sixth stage after forming a breakaway with Lucien Van Impe and regained the lead.
He was able to establish a firm advantage, but obeyed orders from his manager to wait for the chasing Simpson.
He began his own bicycle chain, Eddy Merckx Cycles, in 1980 and its bicycles were used by several professional teams in the 1980s and 1990s.
In September 1946, the family moved to Sint-Pieters-Woluwe, in Brussels, Belgium in order to take over a grocery store that had been up for lease.
He also became the first rider to win the Giro and Vuelta in the same calendar year.
His move was marked by Freddy Maertens, Gimondi, and Ocaña.
The stage following the rest day featured five climbs, Merckx felt a pain on the third climb in the area of the punch and had a teammate get him an analgesic.
Mexico was chosen due to the higher altitude as this led to less air resistance.
The 1974 season saw Merckx fail to win a spring classic for the first time in his career, in part due to him suffering from various illnesses during the early months.
He won the stage nine individual time trial by almost two minutes over the second-place finisher, expanding his lead significantly.
He won three more stages before crossing the finish line in Paris as the race's winner, thus completing his second Giro-Tour double in the process.
He won eighth stage that featured a summit finish to Monte Carpegna despite Fuente attacking several times on the ascent.
In addition, Merckx later stated that during his time with Van Looy's team he had not been taught anything.
Merckx entered the Tour de France in July where a battle between him and Ocaña was expected by many.
The next day's racing was split into three parts.
He finished the race in eighth overall while battling a saddle boil throughout the race.
He is one of the three riders to win all five 'Monuments of Cycling' (i.e., Milan–San Remo, Tour of Flanders, Paris–Roubaix, Liège–Bastogne–Liège, and the Giro di Lombardia), the other two being Rik Van Looy and Roger De Vlaeminck.
He helped organize the Grand Prix Eddy Merckx, which started out as an invitation only individual time trial event, later becoming a two-man time trial event.
The general classification favorites were riding together as the race hit the Col d'Aubisque in the seventh leg.
He won two more stages and the general, points, and combination classifications when the race finished in Paris.
On 1 April, Merckx won the Gent–Wevelgem, followed by the Tour of Belgium – where he braved a snowy stage and followed the day up with a victory in the final time trial to secure the title – and the Paris–Roubaix.
During a span of nineteen days, Merckx won four classics including Omloop Het Volk, Liège–Bastogne–Liège, and Paris–Roubaix.
The first major victory for Merckx came in the Giro di Sardegna, which he secured after attacking on his own and riding solo through the rain to win the race's final stage.
The Liège–Bastogne–Liège was held in cold and rain conditions.
Merckx managed the Belgian national team world championships for eleven years, between 1986 and 1996.
Merckx gained time on Fuente in the race's only time trial.
Merckx then contacted then Union Cycliste Internationale president Hein Verbruggen, who checked out Qatar's roads.
After finishing he was carried off and was quoted saying the pain was "very, very, very significant."
The route for the day was rather hilly and consisted of several circuits.
He maintains that his samples were mishandled.
Cycling journalist and commentator Phil Liggett wrote that if Merckx started a race, many riders acknowledged that they likely would be competing for second place.
He finished in second place, the first time he had lost a Tour in his six starts.
On 30 March 1969 Merckx earned his first major victory of the 1969 calendar with his win at the Tour of Flanders.
On 14 June, the cycling governing body, the FICP, overturned the month long suspension and cleared him due to the "benefit of the doubt."
Ocaña chased after the group but crashed into a wall on the descent and went on to lose almost two minutes to Merckx.
In March 1966, Merckx entered his first major stage race as a professional rider, the Paris–Nice.
For his career successes in the Giro d'Italia, Merckx became the first rider inducted into the race's Hall of Fame in 2012.
The course consisted of ten laps of a circuit.
Fuente lost ten minutes to Merckx, who became the race leader.
Merckx was not alone, as several other riders were asked to keep their distance from the event.
During the Tour of Flanders, Merckx's rivals worked against him to prevent him from winning.
Ocaña, who was trailing, crashed into the same bend and Zoetemelk collided with him.
After winning the ensuing time trial, Merckx took back eleven more seconds on Ocaña.
Claudine later gave birth to a son, Axel, who also became a professional cyclist.
When told that he won too much, Merckx stated that "The day when I start a race without intending to win it, I won't be able to look at myself in the mirror."
He managed to finish the stage only to see his lead shrink to twelve seconds over Baronchelli.
After attacking on the second to last stage, Merckx and Gimondi reached the finish, where Merckx managed to win the race by four bike lengths.
Before beginning the Tour, Merckx won the men's road race at the Belgian National Road Race Championships.
Merckx's group finished two minutes in front of the peloton that was led by Ocaña's Bic team.
Five days following the surgery, he was scheduled to begin the Tour de France.
On 20 May, he started the Giro d'Italia, his first Grand Tour.
He won his first race in Vilvoorde, beating Emile Daems.
He stated that the doctors advised him against racing.
In the Paris–Roubaix, Merckx was battling a cold as the race began in heavy rain.
He won the seventh stage of the race, and regained the lead, through attacking in the closing kilometers and holding off the chasing peloton.
