Summer temperatures are normally moderate, rarely exceeding .
The council comprises 58 elected councillors, returned from 17 multi-member electoral wards in the city.
Both based in Edinburgh, they are responsible for governing Scotland while reserved matters such as defence, taxation and foreign affairs remain the responsibility of the Parliament of the United Kingdom in London.
The city's Indian population amounts to 6,470 (1.4% of the total population), while there are some 5,858 Pakistanis (1.2% of the total population).
This provides a varied programme including shows by Callum Innes, Peter Liversidge, Ellsworth Kelly, Richard Forster, and Sean Scully.
Travel in Edinburgh is undertaken predominantly by bus.
To the north lie Princes Street and the New Town.
The city also organises a half-marathon, as well as 10&nbsp;km () and 5&nbsp;km () races, including a  race on 1 January each year.
In 1706, the Parliaments of England and Scotland passed the Acts of Union, uniting the two kingdoms in the Kingdom of Great Britain.
Performances end with a short fireworks display.
This heritage and the city's lively literary life in the present led to it being declared the first UNESCO City of Literature in 2004.
The ''Edinburgh Evening News'' is based in Edinburgh and published every day except Sunday.
Capital Radio Scotland and Eklipse Sports Radio also have transmitters covering Edinburgh.
It thenceforth remained under their jurisdiction.
A referendum of Edinburgh residents in February 2005 rejected a proposal to introduce congestion charging in the city.
Edinburgh is currently represented by three MP's affiliated with the Scottish National Party, one Independent MP in Edinburgh West (elected as SNP) and one Labour MP in Edinburgh South: Scottish Labour's only Westminster constituency.
From 1995 to 1997 they played all their games there, from 1998 to 2000 they split their home matches between Murrayfield and Glasgow's Hampden Park, then moved to Glasgow full-time, with one final Murrayfield appearance in 2002.
There are many small private galleries, including the Ingleby Gallery.
The Edinburgh Waterfront development has transformed old dockland areas from Leith to Granton into residential areas with shopping and leisure facilities and helped rejuvenate the area.
These have now been amalgamated to form Edinburgh College.
Edinburgh has been the birthplace of actors like Alastair Sim and Sir Sean Connery, famed as the first cinematic James Bond, the comedian and actor Ronnie Corbett, best known as one of The Two Ronnies, and the impressionist Rory Bremner.
The Old Town became an increasingly dilapidated, overcrowded slum with high mortality rates.
The Scottish National Portrait Gallery in Queen Street focuses on portraits and photography.
Following parliamentary approval in 2007, construction began in early 2008.
The latter, designed by Robert Adam, influenced the architectural style of the New Town into the early 19th century.
In 2010, Lothian Buses recorded 109 million passenger journeys – a 1.9% rise on the previous year.
The possibility of building a second runway to cope with an increased number of aircraft movements has also been mooted.
On the night of 30 April the Beltane Fire Festival takes place on Calton Hill, involving a procession followed by scenes inspired by pagan old spring fertility celebrations.
Hibs have won the Scottish Cup and the Scottish League Cup three times each.
The national collection is housed in the National Gallery of Scotland, located on the Mound, now linked to the Royal Scottish Academy which holds regular major exhibitions of paintings.
The city's most successful non-professional team are the Edinburgh Wolves who play at Meadowbank Stadium.
During the Jacobite rising of 1745, Edinburgh was briefly occupied by the Jacobite "Highland Army" before its march into England.
Over 7,000 people were born in African countries (1.6% of the total population) and nearly 7,000 in the Americas.
The coastal suburb of Portobello is characterised by Georgian villas, Victorian tenements, a popular beach and promenade and cafes, bars, restaurants and independent shops.
The latest in a long line of science celebrities associated with the city is theoretical physicist and Nobel Prizewinner Professor Emeritus Peter Higgs, born in Newcastle but resident in Edinburgh for most of his academic career, after whom the Higgs boson particle has been named.
Buildings of 11 storeys or more were common, and have been described as forerunners of the modern-day skyscraper.
Other Church of Scotland churches include Greyfriars Kirk, the Canongate Kirk, St Andrew's and St George's West Church and the Barclay Church.
The loss of traditional industries and commerce (the last shipyard closed in 1983) resulted in economic decline.
Vigorous Atlantic depressions, known as European windstorms, can affect the city between October and May.
The area is also well provided with hotel and "bed and breakfast" accommodation for visiting festival-goers.
The most recent official population estimates are 464,990 for the city of Edinburgh and 492,680 for the local authority area.
At the beginning of October each year the Dussehra Hindu Festival is also held on Calton Hill.
Improvements carried out under Lord Provost William Chambers in the 1860s began the transformation of the area into the predominantly Victorian Old Town seen today.
Expansion southwards from the Old Town saw more tenements being built in the 19th century, giving rise to Victorian suburbs such as Newington, Marchmont and Bruntsfield.
Originally centred on Old College the university expanded to premises on The Mound, the Royal Mile and George Square.
Edinburgh contains Scotland's five National Galleries of Art as well as numerous smaller art galleries.
Tourism is also an important element in the city's economy.
The Usher Hall is Edinburgh's premier venue for classical music, as well as occasional popular music concerts.
The historic centre of Edinburgh is divided in two by the broad green swathe of Princes Street Gardens.
Since the 1990s a new "financial district", including a new Edinburgh International Conference Centre, has grown mainly on demolished railway property to the west of the castle, stretching into Fountainbridge, a run-down 19th-century industrial suburb which has undergone radical change since the 1980s with the demise of industrial and brewery premises.
This slightly inland station has a slightly wider temperature span between seasons, is cloudier and somewhat wetter, but differences are minor.
The Edinburgh Buddhist Centre, run by the Triratna Buddhist Community, formerly situated in Melville Terrace, now runs sessions at the Healthy Life Centre, Bread Street.
Edinburgh was also a major centre for the Scottish book trade.
The locale around Princes Street is the main shopping area in the city centre, with souvenir shops, chain stores such as Boots the Chemist, H&M and Jenners.
The city's historical and cultural attractions have made it the United Kingdom's second most popular tourist destination after London, attracting over one million overseas visitors each year.
One such example is the Castle Rock which forced the advancing icesheet to divide, sheltering the softer rock and forming a  tail of material to the east, thus creating a distinctive crag and tail formation.
In 2006, 1867 different shows were staged in 261 venues across the city.
Similarly, Arthur's Seat is the remains of a volcano dating from the Carboniferous period, which was eroded by a glacier moving west to east during the ice age.
The Traverse Theatre presents a more contemporary repertoire.
The city's proximity to the sea mitigates any large variations in temperature or extremes of climate.
The city centre is  southwest of the shoreline of Leith and  inland, as the crow flies, from the east coast of Scotland and the North Sea at Dunbar.
Amateur theatre companies productions are staged at the Bedlam Theatre, Church Hill Theatre and King's Theatre among others.
Edinburgh is the birthplace of former British Prime Minister Tony Blair who attended the city's Fettes College.
Recognised as the capital of Scotland since at least the 15th century, Edinburgh is home to the Scottish Parliament and the seat of the monarchy in Scotland.
Similarly, suburbs such as Juniper Green and Balerno are situated on green belt land.
These include The Gyle Shopping Centre and Hermiston Gait in the west of the city, Cameron Toll Shopping Centre, Straiton Retail Park and Fort Kinnaird in the south and east, and Ocean Terminal in the north on the Leith waterfront.
Edinburgh is home to an active Bahá'í Community, and a Theosophical Society meets in Great King Street.
In American football, the Scottish Claymores played WLAF/NFL Europe games at Murrayfield, including their World Bowl 96 victory.
The Southside is a popular residential part of the city, which includes the districts of St Leonards, Marchmont, Newington, Sciennes, the Grange and Blackford.
Heriot-Watt University and Napier Technical College were established in the 1960s.
One feature of the Edinburgh green belt is the inclusion of parcels of land within the city which are designated green belt, even though they do not connect with the peripheral ring.
In 2010, PRS for Music listed Edinburgh among the UK's top ten 'most musical' cities.
Winter daytime temperatures rarely fall below freezing and are milder than places such as Moscow and Newfoundland which lie at similar latitudes.
In the middle of the 19th century the National Gallery of Scotland and Royal Scottish Academy Building were built on The Mound, and tunnels for the railway line between Haymarket and Waverley stations were driven through it.
In 1638, King Charles I's attempt to introduce Anglican church forms in Scotland encountered stiff Presbyterian opposition culminating in the conflicts of the Wars of the Three Kingdoms.
Occasionally large concerts are staged at Murrayfield and Meadowbank, while mid-sized events take place at smaller venues such as the Corn Exchange, the Liquid Rooms and the Bongo Club.
Each constituency elects one Member of the Scottish Parliament (MSP) by the first past the post system of election, and the region elects seven additional MSPs to produce a result based on a form of proportional representation.
Conservative leader Ruth Davidson currently represents the Edinburgh Central constituency.
Situated in Scotland's Central Belt, Edinburgh lies on the Firth of Forth's southern shore.
Edinburgh is drained by the river named the Water of Leith, which rises at the Colzium Springs in the Pentland Hills and runs for  through the south and west of the city, emptying into the Firth of Forth at Leith.
Both clubs have won the Scottish league championship four times.
Rockstar North, formerly DMA Design, known for creating the Grand Theft Auto series, is based in Edinburgh.
The construction of the New Town from 1767 onwards witnessed the migration of the professional and business classes from the difficult living conditions in the Old Town to the lower density, higher quality surroundings taking shape on land to the north.
There are over 4,500 listed buildings within the city, a higher proportion relative to area than any other city in the United Kingdom.
University building developments which transformed the George Square and Potterrow areas proved highly controversial.
The Monarchs have won the Premier League championship five times in their history, in 2003 and again in 2008, 2010, 2014 and 2015.
Edinburgh became a major intellectual centre, earning it the nickname "Athens of the North" because of its many neo-classical buildings and reputation for learning, recalling ancient Athens.
George Street, north of Princes Street, is the preferred location for some upmarket shops and independent stores.
Erosive action such as plucking and abrasion exposed the rocky crags to the west before leaving a tail of deposited glacial material swept to the east.
James Braidwood, who organised Britain's first municipal fire brigade, was also born in the city and began his career there.
At some point before the 7th century AD, the Gododdin, who were presumably descendants of the Votadini, built the hill fort of ''Din Eidyn'' or ''Etin''.
In the 18th century novel ''The Expedition of Humphry Clinker'' by Tobias Smollett one character describes Edinburgh as a "hotbed of genius".
Despite the destruction caused by an English assault in 1544, the town slowly recovered, and was at the centre of events in the 16th century Scottish Reformation and 17th century Wars of the Covenant.
Its centre is the late 19th century Gothic style St Mary's Cathedral in the West End's Palmerston Place.
The plan was a rigid, ordered grid, which fitted in well with Enlightenment ideas of rationality.
In Edinburgh, the Town Council, keen to emulate London by initiating city improvements and expansion to the north of the castle, reaffirmed its belief in the Union and loyalty to the Hanoverian monarch George III by its choice of names for the streets of the New Town: for example, Rose Street and Thistle Street; and for the royal family, George Street, Queen Street, Hanover Street, Frederick Street and Princes Street (in honour of George's two sons).
The Church of Scotland claims the largest membership of any single religious denomination in Edinburgh.
Princes Street has become Edinburgh's main shopping street and now has few of its original Georgian buildings.
It was the venue for the Eurovision Song Contest 1972.
The Scottish Chamber Orchestra is based in Edinburgh.
Edinburgh is home to The Royal High School, one of the oldest schools in the country and the world.
Along with the UK national radio stations, Radio Scotland and the Gaelic language service BBC Radio nan Gàidheal are also broadcast.
Edinburgh has an active Inter-Faith Association.
The city also plays host to Lowland Football League clubs Edinburgh University and Spartans as well as junior club Edinburgh United and East of Scotland League clubs Civil Service Strollers, Craigroyston, Heriot-Watt University, Leith Athletic, Lothian Thistle Hutchison Vale and Tynecastle.
Numerous vaults below street level were inhabited to accommodate the influx of incomers, particularly Irish immigrants, during the Industrial Revolution.
Shops here include Louis Vuitton, Mulberry and Calvin Klein.
The royal burgh was founded by King David I in the early 12th century on land belonging to the Crown, though the precise date is unknown.
Edinburgh was also home to three other former Scottish Football League clubs: Leith Athletic, Meadowbank Thistle and St Bernard's.
The Scottish national team has very occasionally played at Easter Road and Tynecastle, although its normal home stadium is Hampden Park in Glasgow.
In modern Gaelic, the city is called ''Dùn Èideann'' (often rendered Dunedin by English-speakers).
These districts often feature in works of fiction.
Like most of Scotland, Edinburgh has a temperate, maritime climate which is relatively mild despite its northerly latitude.
As the city expanded to the south and west, detached and semi-detached villas with large gardens replaced tenements as the predominant building style.
There are four universities in Edinburgh (including Queen Margaret University which lies just outwith the city boundary) with students making up around one-fifth of the population.
Within the Asian population, the Chinese are now the largest sub-group, with 8,076 people, amounting to about 1.7% of the city's total population.
There are also commuter lines to South Gyle and Dalmeny, the latter serving South Queensferry by the Forth Bridges, and to Wester Hailes and Curriehill in the south west of the city.
Contemporary collections are shown in the Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art which occupies a split site at Belford.
Its organisers have called it "the fastest marathon in the UK" due to the elevation drop of .
It also has the highest gross value added per employee of any city in the UK outside London, measuring £57,594 in 2010.
Soil excavated while laying the foundations of buildings in the New Town was dumped on the site of the loch to create the slope connecting the Old and New Towns known as The Mound.
Excepting the shoreline of the Firth of Forth, Edinburgh is encircled by a green belt, designated in 1957, which stretches from Dalmeny in the west to Prestongrange in the east.
St Bernard's' New Logie Green was used to host the 1896 Scottish Cup Final, the only time the match has been played outside Glasgow.
Although Edinburgh's traditional industries of printing, brewing and distilling continued to grow in the 19th century, and were joined by new rubber works and engineering works, there was little industrialisation compared with other cities in Britain.
Given Edinburgh's position between the coast and hills, it is renowned as "the windy city", with the prevailing wind direction coming from the south west, which is often associated with warm, unstable air from the North Atlantic Current that can give rise to rainfall – although considerably less than cities to the west, such as Glasgow.
Multi-storey dwellings known as ''lands'' were the norm from the 16th century onwards with ten and eleven storeys being typical and one even reaching fourteen or fifteen storeys.
Other names connected with the city include Max Born, physicist and Nobel laureate; Charles Darwin, the biologist who propounded the theory of natural selection; David Hume, philosopher, economist and historian; James Hutton, regarded as the "Father of Geology"; Joseph Black, the chemist and one of the founders of thermodynamics; pioneering medical researchers Joseph Lister and James Young Simpson; chemist and discoverer of the element nitrogen Daniel Rutherford; Colin Maclaurin, mathematician and developer of the Maclaurin series, and Ian Wilmut, the geneticist involved in the cloning of Dolly the sheep just outside Edinburgh.
The Scottish Agricultural College also has a campus in south Edinburgh.
Notorious criminals from Edinburgh's past include Deacon Brodie, head of a trades guild and Edinburgh city councillor by day but a burglar by night, who is said to have been the inspiration for Robert Louis Stevenson's story, the ''Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde'', and murderers Burke and Hare who delivered fresh corpses for dissection to the famous anatomist Robert Knox.
Like all other local authorities of Scotland, the council has powers over most matters of local administration such as housing, planning, local transport, parks, economic development and regeneration.
To either side of it are two other main streets: Princes Street and Queen Street.
Leith was historically the port of Edinburgh, an arrangement of unknown date that was reconfirmed by the royal charter Robert the Bruce granted to the city in 1329.
Lothian Buses, as the successor company to the Edinburgh Corporation Transport Department, also operates all of the city's branded public tour buses, night bus service and airport bus link.
File:Tynecastle_Stadium_2007.jpg|Tynecastle Stadium
The city centre between Princes Street and George Street became a major commercial and shopping district, a development partly stimulated by the arrival of railways in the 1840s.
Meadowbank Thistle played at Meadowbank Stadium until 1995, when the club moved to Livingston and became Livingston F.C.
The nearest the river gets to the city centre is at Dean Village on the north-western edge of the New Town, where a deep gorge is spanned by Thomas Telford's Dean Bridge, built in 1832 for the road to Queensferry.
By the first half of the 18th century, despite rising prosperity evidenced by its growing importance as a banking centre, Edinburgh was described as one of Europe's most densely populated, overcrowded and unsanitary towns.
The Edinburgh Military Tattoo, one of the centrepieces of the "official" Festival, occupies the Castle Esplanade every night, with massed pipers and military bands drawn from around the world.
The Royal Hospital for Sick Children, popularly referred to as 'the Sick Kids', is a specialist paediatrics hospital.
Some 13,000 people or 2.7% of the city's population are Polish.
The Archbishop of the Archdiocese of St Andrew's and Edinburgh has his official residence in Greenhill, and the diocesan offices are in nearby Marchmont.
BFBS Radio broadcasts from studios on the base at Dreghorn Barracks across the city on 98.5FM as part of its UK Bases network
Historic sites in Edinburgh include Edinburgh Castle, Holyrood Palace, the churches of St. Giles, Greyfriars and the Canongate, and the extensive Georgian New Town, built in the 18th century.
The council-owned City Art Centre in Market Street mounts regular art exhibitions.
The event attracts thousands of people from all over the world.
It was originally planned to continue down Leith Walk to Ocean Terminal and where it would terminate at Newhaven.
Its most prominent church is St Giles on the Royal Mile, first dedicated in 1243 but believed to date from before the 12th century.
The lowest temperature recorded in recent years was  during December 2010 at Gogarbank.
Bute House, the official residence of the First Minister of Scotland, is on the north side of Charlotte Square.
There are rowing and sailing clubs and a restored Victorian swimming pool, including Turkish baths.
The city is divided into Edinburgh North and Leith, Edinburgh East, Edinburgh South, Edinburgh South West, and Edinburgh West, each constituency electing one member by the first past the post system.
The Southside is broadly analogous to the area covered formerly by the Burgh Muir, and grew in popularity as a residential area after the opening of the South Bridge in the 1780s.
Expansion affecting the green belt is strictly controlled but developments such as Edinburgh Airport and the Royal Highland Showground at Ingliston lie within the zone.
According to the foremost historian of this development, "Unity of social feeling was one of the most valuable heritages of old Edinburgh, and its disappearance was widely and properly lamented."
Today, its economy is based mainly on financial services, scientific research, higher education, and tourism.
Edinburgh lies at the heart of the Edinburgh & South East Scotland City region with a population in 2014 of 1,339,380.
Since 1993, it has been officially organised with the focus moved to Princes Street.
Edinburgh City were promoted to the SPFL Scottish League Two in the 2015–16 season after defeating East Stirlingshire, to become the first club to win promotion to the Scottish Professional Football League via the pyramid system.
Edinburgh's Orthodox synagogue, opened in 1932, is in Salisbury Road and can accommodate a congregation of 2000.
File:Edinburgh Capitals vs Belfast Giants.jpg|Murrayfield Ice Rink
STV Edinburgh, a local TV channel for the city, launched on 12 January 2015.
Edinburgh is represented in the Scottish Parliament.
Towns within easy reach of the city boundary include Dalkeith, Bonnyrigg, Loanhead, Newtongrange, Prestonpans, Tranent, Penicuik, Haddington, Livingston, Broxburn and Dunfermline.
Previously Edinburgh was represented by the Murrayfield Racers and the Edinburgh Racers.
The University of Edinburgh, founded in 1582 and now one of four in the city, was placed 17th in the QS World University Rankings in 2013 and 2014.
The three main streets are connected by a series of streets running perpendicular to them.
Other festivals include the Edinburgh Mountain Film Festival which takes place in February, Edinburgh Art Festival, Edinburgh International Film Festival, which takes place in June, the Edinburgh Jazz and Blues Festival, and the Edinburgh International Book Festival.
Right next door to Murrayfield Ice Rink is a 7-sheeter dedicated curling facility where curling is played from October to March each season.
The city hosts several of Scotland's galleries and organisations dedicated to contemporary visual art.
Other major employers include NHS Scotland and local government administration.
The club play their home games at the Murrayfield Ice Rink and have competed in the ten-team professional Elite Ice Hockey League since the 2005–06 season.
Famous authors who have lived in Edinburgh include the economist Adam Smith, born in Kirkcaldy and author of ''The Wealth of Nations'',
There are several independent churches in the city, both Catholic and Protestant, including Charlotte Chapel, Carrubbers Christian Centre, Morningside Baptist Church, Bellevue Chapel and Sacred Heart.
In the 19th century, Edinburgh's economy was known for banking, publishing and brewing.
The main NHS Lothian hospitals serving the Edinburgh area are the Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh, which includes the University of Edinburgh Medical School, and the Western General Hospital, which has a large cancer treatment centre and nurse-led Minor Injuries Clinic.
Across the road, The Fruitmarket Gallery offers world class exhibitions of contemporary art, featuring work by British and international artists with both emerging and established international reputations.
In the second half of the century, the city was at the heart of the Scottish Enlightenment, when thinkers like David Hume, Adam Smith, James Hutton and Joseph Black were familiar figures in its streets.
For the 1970 Games the city built Olympic standard venues and facilities including Meadowbank Stadium and the Royal Commonwealth Pool.
and Ian Rankin's Inspector Rebus lives in Marchmont and works in St Leonards.
From the 1770s onwards, the professional and business classes gradually deserted the Old Town in favour of the more elegant "one-family" residences of the New Town, a migration that changed the city's social character.
They include 'Sandy Bell's' in Forrest Road, 'The Captain's Bar' in South College Street, and 'Whistlebinkies' in Niddry Street.
Many departments of the Scottish Government are in the city.
The stuffed carcass of Dolly the sheep is now on display in the National Museum of Scotland.
The port developed a separate identity from Edinburgh, which to some extent it still retains, and it was a matter of great resentment when the two burghs merged in 1920 into the City of Edinburgh.
The Braid Hills and Blackford Hill are a series of small summits to the city's south west that command expansive views looking northwards over the urban area to the Forth.
The city has two commercial radio stations: Forth 1, a station which broadcasts mainstream chart music, and Forth 2 on medium wave which plays classic hits.
The city had been without a tram system since Edinburgh Corporation Tramways ceased on 16 November 1956.
With an average width of  the principal objectives of the green belt were to contain the outward expansion of the city and to prevent the agglomeration of urban areas.
File:meadowbank-track-and-field.jpg|Meadowbank Stadium
Both are owned by Spire Healthcare.
Edinburgh has a high proportion of young adults, with 19.5% of the population in their 20s (exceeded only by Aberdeen) and 15.2% in their 30s which is the highest in Scotland.
The highest temperature ever recorded in the city was  on 4 August 1975 at Turnhouse Airport.
The Roman Catholic Archdiocese of St Andrews and Edinburgh has 27 parishes across the city.
In 1766 a competition to design a "New Town" was won by James Craig, a 27-year-old architect.
Heriot-Watt began as the world's first Mechanics' Institute, tracing its origins to 1821 when it opened as a school for the technical education of the working classes.
The club adopted its present name in 1999.
As a result, the city's growing population was accommodated by increasing the height of the houses.
After its eventual defeat at Culloden, there followed a period of reprisals and pacification, largely directed at the rebellious clans.
He lies buried under St. Cuthbert's Church.
The Royal Edinburgh Hospital in Morningside specialises in mental health.
