The Edmonton region is represented by 20 MLAs, one for each provincial electoral district.
The magazine ''Vue Weekly'' is published on a weekly basis and focuses on alternative news.
In August, Edmonton is also host to the Edmonton Folk Music Festival, one of the most successful and popular folk music festivals in North America.
Some of the major ones include South Edmonton Common (North America's largest open air retail development), Skyview Power Centre, Terra Losa Centre, Oliver Square, Southpark Centre, The Meadows, Christy's Corner, and Westpoint.
Edmonton has three publicly funded school boards (districts) that provide kindergarten and grades 1–12.
The city has milder winters than either Regina or Winnipeg, both further south of Edmonton in latitude.
The EIA is located within Leduc County, adjacent to the City of Leduc and the Nisku Industrial Business Park.
The highest temperature recorded within the City of Edmonton was , on June 29, 1937.
Since 1960, the Sourdough Raft Races have also been a popular event.
Major employment areas outside of Edmonton but within the CMA include the Nisku Industrial Business Park and the Edmonton International Airport (including a planned inland port logistics support facility in support of the Port Alberta initiative) in Leduc County, the Acheson Industrial Area in Parkland County, Refinery Row in Strathcona County and Alberta's Industrial Heartland within portions of Fort Saskatchewan, Strathcona County and Sturgeon County.
With direct air distances from Edmonton to places such as London in Europe being shorter than to other main airports in western North America, Edmonton Airports is working to establish a major container shipping hub called Port Alberta.
Local amateur teams, among others, include the Edmonton Gold of the Rugby Canada Super League and two flat track roller derby leagues: Oil City Roller Derby and E-Ville Roller Derby.
Larger residential areas within Edmonton's six suburban sectors, each comprising multiple neighbourhoods, include: Heritage Valley, Kaskitayo, Riverbend, Terwillegar Heights and Windermere (southwest sector); The Grange, Lewis Farms and West Jasper Place (west sector); Big Lake (northwest sector); Castle Downs, Lake District and The Palisades (north sector); Casselman-Steele Heights, Clareview, Hermitage and Pilot Sound (northeast sector); and Ellerslie, The Meadows, Mill Woods and Southeast Edmonton (southeast sector).
This core includes the cities of Edmonton, Fort Saskatchewan and St. Albert, the Sherwood Park portion of Strathcona County, and portions of Parkland County and Sturgeon County.
The Edmonton International Street Performer's Festival takes place in mid-July and showcases street performance artists from around the world.
Summer thunderstorms can be frequent and occasionally severe enough to produce large hail, damaging winds, funnel clouds, and occasionally tornadoes.
Edmonton was named cultural capital of Canada in 2007.
Afterwards, the city slowly recovered in population and economy during the 1920s and 1930s and took off again during and after World War II.
The Telephone Historical Centre is a telephone museum also located in the Prince of Wales Armouries Heritage Centre.
Edmonton is represented by a mayor and 12 councillors—one for each of the 12 wards.
There are also a number of smaller weekly and community newspapers.
Just prior to World War I, the boom ended, and the city's population declined from more than 72,000 in 1914 to less than 54,000 only two years later.
Its five-year population change of 12.1 percent was second only to the Calgary CMA between 2006 and 2011.
In 2012, Edmonton Northlands conducted a poll to rename the festival that resulted in changing the name to "K-Days".
The Hindu Community in Edmonton is served by the ''Hindu Society of Alberta'' (North Indian Temple) and the ''Maha Ganapathy Society of Alberta'' (South Indian Temple).
Edmonton is a cultural, governmental and educational centre.
In 1754, Anthony Henday, an explorer for the Hudson's Bay Company (HBC), may have been the first European to enter the Edmonton area.
In 1912, Edmonton amalgamated with the City of Strathcona, south of the North Saskatchewan River; as a result, the city extended south of the North Saskatchewan River for the first time.
Due to mayor McCauley's good relationship with the federal Liberals this helped Edmonton to maintain political prominence over Strathcona, a rival settlement on the south bank of the North Saskatchewan River.
Servus Credit Union Place (St. Albert)
Edmonton is the most northerly city in North America with a metropolitan population of over one million.
Dry spells are not uncommon and may occur at any time of the year.
Canadian Junior Football League
Commonwealth Stadium
The 2016 census captured more detailed demographic information on residents, including age and gender, marital status, employment status, length of residency, prior residence, employment transportation mode, citizenship, school residency, economic diversity, city resource access, highest educational attainment, household language and income, as well as dwellings and properties, including ownership, structure and status.
Edmonton's main summer festival is K-Days, formerly Klondike Days, Capital Ex and originally the Edmonton Exhibition.
A largely gridded system forms most of Edmonton's street and road network.
Four downhill ski slopes are located in the river valley as well, two within the city and two immediately outside.
Spring and autumn are both short and highly variable.
Edmonton's teams have rivalries with Calgary's teams and games between Edmonton and Calgary teams are often referred to as the Battle of Alberta.
A variety of volunteer opportunities exist for citizens to participate in the stewardship of Edmonton's parkland and river valley.
The city is a centre for music instruction; the University of Alberta began its music department in 1945, and MacEwan University opened a jazz and musical theatre program in 1980.
Many buildings were demolished during the oil boom, starting in the 1960s and continuing into the 1980s, to make way for office towers.
Twelve tornadoes had been recorded in Edmonton between 1890 and 1989, and eight since 1990.
Ellerslie Rugby Park
These included ethnicities mostly of English, Scottish, German, Irish, Ukrainian, Polish, and French origin.
Described as one of the most acoustically perfect concert halls in Canada, it is home to the Edmonton Symphony Orchestra and hosts a wide variety of shows every year.
Edmonton is located on the North Saskatchewan River, and sits at an elevation of .
Edmonton has been the birthplace of several companies that have grown to international stature.
In addition, the wood chips absorb much of the odour produced by the compost by providing a biofilter element to trap odour causing gaseous results of the process.
The Canadian Rockies are located about  to the southwest.
From 1943, as CFB Namao (now CFB Edmonton/Edmonton Garrison), it was a major air force base.
The Edmonton Transit System (ETS) is the city's public transit agency, operating the Edmonton Light Rail Transit (LRT) line as well as a fleet of buses.
The northwest, northeast and southeast districts each have smaller industrial areas and neighbourhoods within them.
Downtown Edmonton's Churchill Square host numerous festivals each summer.
Edmonton has a number of professional sports teams, including the Edmonton Eskimos of the Canadian Football League, Edmonton Oilers of the National Hockey League, Edmonton Energy of the International Basketball League, and FC Edmonton of the North American Soccer League.
The Baitul Hadi Mosque is the only Ahmadiyya mosque in the city.
Other past notable sports teams include; the Edmonton Grads, a women's basketball team with 108 local, provincial, national, and international titles and the world champions for 17 years in a row; the Edmonton Trappers, a Triple-A level baseball team with multiple division and league titles in the Pacific Coast League, and; the Edmonton Rush, a box lacrosse team with one league championship.
Edmonton also has a large army reserve element from 41 Canadian Brigade Group (41 CBG), including The Loyal Edmonton Regiment (4th Battalion, Princess Patricia's Canadian Light Infantry); 41 Combat Engineer Regiment; HQ Battery, 20th Field Artillery Regiment; and B Squadron of The South Alberta Light Horse, one of Alberta's oldest army reserve units.
Strathcona was North America's northernmost railway point, but travel to the Klondike was still very difficult for the "Klondikers", and a majority of them took a steamship north to the Yukon from Vancouver.
The Art Gallery of Alberta (AGA) is the city's largest single gallery.
National Hockey League
The City of Edmonton subsequently announced in March 2013 its intent to annex 156 square kilometers of land (including the Edmonton International Airport) from Leduc County.
This "1-in-200 year event" flooded major intersections and underpasses and damaged both residential and commercial properties.
West Edmonton Mall holds several after-hour establishments in addition to its many stores and attractions.
In 1876, Treaty 6, which includes what is now Edmonton, was signed between the Aboriginal peoples in Canada (or First Nations) and Queen Victoria as Queen of Canada, as part of the Numbered Treaties of Canada.
The CRB consists of 24 member municipalities – 22 of which are within the Edmonton CMA and two of which are outside the CMA.
Major roadways include Kingsway, Yellowhead Trail (Highway 16), Whitemud Drive and Anthony Henday Drive, and the city is connected to other communities elsewhere in Alberta, British Columbia, and Saskatchewan via the Yellowhead Highway to the west and east and the Queen Elizabeth II Highway (Alberta Highway 2) to the south.
North as it is, it is south of the geographic centre of Alberta, which is located near the Hamlet of Fort Assiniboine.
Edmonton's river valley constitutes the longest stretch of connected urban parkland in North America, and Edmonton has the highest amount of parkland per capita of any Canadian city; the river valley is 22 times larger than New York City's Central Park.
The cable television providers in Edmonton are Telus (for IPTV) and Shaw Cable.
There are several key areas of nightlife in the city of Edmonton.
The Alberta Railway Museum is located in the rural northeast portion of the city.
In 2008, construction started on the Windermere power centre.
The census also reported that 50.2 percent of the population (407,325) was female while 49.8 percent (404,875) was male.
It contains a variety of locomotives and railroad cars from different periods, and includes a working steam locomotive.
Activities include carnival rides and fairways, music, trade shows, and daily fireworks.
It is commonly referred to as ''Black Friday'' due both to its aberrant characteristics and the emotional shock it generated.
The RAM houses over 10 million objects in its collection and showcases the culture and practices of the diverse aboriginal tribes of the region.
The North Saskatchewan River originates at the Columbia Icefield in Jasper National Park and bisects the city.
In 1996, all fixed-wing aviation units were transferred to CFB Cold Lake.
Several health research institutes, including the Heritage Medical Research Centre, Medical Sciences Building, Katz Group Centre for Pharmacy and Health Research, and Li Ka Shing Centre for Health Research Innovation, are also located at this site.
NAIT has an approximate total of 61,200 students enrolled in more than 200 programs while NorQuest College has approximately 8,500 students enrolled in various full-time, part-time and continuing education programs.
The city also has a vibrant popular music scene, across genres including hip-hop, reggae, R&B, rock, pop, metal, punk, country and electronica.
Bourbon Street has numerous eating establishments; clubs and casinos can also be found within the complex.
In the city's early days, music was performed in churches and community halls.
It empties via the Saskatchewan River, Lake Winnipeg, and the Nelson River into Hudson Bay.
By 2016, the city anticipates that it will divert more than 90 percent of the city's household waste from the landfills.
Notable past and present local musicians include Robert Goulet, Tommy Banks, Tim Feehan, Cadence Weapon, Kreesha Turner, The Smalls, SNFU, Social Code, Stereos, Ten Second Epic, Tupelo Honey, Mac DeMarco, Shout Out Out Out Out, Purity Ring, The Wet Secrets, and numerous others.
The AGA officially opened on January 31, 2010.
Its crime severity index was the fifth-highest among CMAs in Canada behind Regina, Saskatoon, Kelowna and Vancouver.
The Edmonton population centre, the fifth-largest in Canada, had a population of 960,015 in 2011, an 11.3 percent increase over its 2006 population of 862,544.
On July 2, 2013, a record high humidex of 43 was recorded, due to an unusually humid day with a temperature of  and a record high dew point of .
The vast majority of students attend schools in the two large English language boards: Edmonton Public Schools, and the separate Edmonton Catholic School District.
It and the surrounding Boyle Street, Central McDougall, Cloverdale, Garneau, McCauley, Oliver, Queen Mary Park, Riverdale, Rossdale, Strathcona and University of Alberta form Edmonton's Central Core.
This main "Ribbon of Green" is supplemented by numerous neighbourhood parks located throughout the city, to give a total of  of parkland.
Downtown Edmonton has undergone a continual process of renewal and growth since the mid-1990s.
The arrival of the CPR and the C&E Railway helped bring settlers and entrepreneurs from eastern Canada, Europe, U.S. and other parts of the world.
Supply and service industries drive the energy extraction engine, while research develops new technologies and supports expanded value-added processing of Alberta's massive oil, gas, and oil sands reserves.
Typically, summer lasts from late June until early September, and the humidity is seldom uncomfortably high.
It is home to North America's largest mall, West Edmonton Mall (the world's largest mall from 1981 until 2004), and Fort Edmonton Park, Canada's largest living history museum.
Western Major Baseball League
Although several attempts have been made by the City of Edmonton to absorb surrounding municipalities  or annex portions of its neighbours, the city has not absorbed another municipality since the Town of Jasper Place joined Edmonton on August 17, 1964 and the city has not annexed land from any of its neighbours since January 1, 1982.
Dedicated psychiatric care is provided at the Alberta Hospital.
A similar set-up is also evident at the Royal Alexandra Hospital, which is connected to the Lois Hole Hospital for Women and Orthopaedic Surgery Centre.
The mature area sector also contains the five former urban municipalities annexed by the city over its history – Beverly, Jasper Place, North Edmonton, Strathcona and West Edmonton (Calder).
The local retail market has also seen the creation of many successful store concepts, such as The Brick, Katz Group, AutoCanada, Boston Pizza, Pizza 73, Liquor Stores GP (which includes Liquor Depot, Liquor Barn, OK Liquor, and Grapes & Grains), Planet Organic, Shaw Communications, Empire Design, Running Room, Booster Juice, Earl's, Fountain Tire and XS Cargo.
The Edmonton Alberta Temple of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was dedicated on December 11, 1999.
In the current 29th Alberta Legislature all of Edmonton's districts are represented by members from the governing Alberta New Democratic Party.
The move of 1 CMBG and component units from Calgary occurred in 1996 in what was described as a cost-saving measure.
In contrast to suburban centres, Edmonton has many urban retail locations.
Three walnut species – butternut, Manchurian walnut, and black walnut – have survived in Edmonton.
The region is served by five synagogues.
The past decade has seen a strong resurgence in more mainstream venues.
It is at the same latitude as Hamburg (Germany), Dublin (Ireland), Manchester (United Kingdom), and Magnitogorsk (Russia).
Volunteer programs include River Valley Clean-up, Root for Trees, and Partner in Parks.
There are four main hospitals serving Edmonton: University of Alberta Hospital, Royal Alexandra Hospital, Misericordia Community Hospital, and Grey Nuns Community Hospital.
The average age of the city's population was 36.0 years while there was an average 2.5 people per household.
On average Edmonton receives 2,299 hours of bright sunshine per year and is one of Canada's sunniest cities.
The Francis Winspear Centre for Music was opened in 1997 after years of planning and fundraising.
In 1952, the Edmonton Philharmonic and the Edmonton Pops orchestras amalgamated to form the 60-member modern version.
Edmonton is within the Canadian Prairies Ecozone.
However, the turmoil of the late-1980s economy radically changed the situation.
In 2015, the Citadel Theatre also became home to Catalyst Theatre.
This population represents 66 percent of the total 2015 population of 1,363,300 within the Edmonton census metropolitan area (CMA), Canada's fifth-largest CMA by population.
These are reported to be the second-largest in the world, after Saudi Arabia.
There are approximately 280,000 ETS bus riders on average per day.
After years of mounting pressure in the early 21st century, the Province of Alberta formed the Capital Region Board (CRB) on April 15, 2008.
The first mosque established in Canada – the Al-Rashid Mosque, founded by Abdullah Yusuf Ali – is situated in Edmonton.
(CNR) arrived in Edmonton, accelerating growth.
Also in charge of water treatment, in 2002 EPCOR installed the world's largest ultraviolet (UV) water treatment or ultraviolet disinfection system at its E.L. Smith Water Treatment Plant.
The individual economic development interests and costs of service delivery in certain municipalities within the region has led to intermunicipal competition, strained intermunicipal relationships and overall fragmentation of the region.
Edmonton also hosts a Maronite Catholic church, on 76 Avenue/98 Street, with services in English on Saturdays and Arabic on Sundays.
The first mayor was Matthew McCauley, who established the first school board in Edmonton and Board of Trade (later Chamber of Commerce) and a municipal police service.
Canadian Junior Football League
Western Hockey League
It had a population of 1,159,869 in the 2011 Census compared to its 2006 population of 1,034,945.
In the 2011 Census, the City of Edmonton had a population of 812,201 living in 324,756 of its 348,672 total dwellings, an 11.2 percent change from its 2006 population of 730,372.
According to the 2006 census, the City of Edmonton was 71.8 percent White and 5.3 percent Aboriginal, while visible minorities accounted for 22.9 percent of the population.
The city had a population of 899,447 in the 2016 municipal census, is Alberta's second-largest city and Canada's fifth-largest municipality.
Northlands, the operators, renamed the festival to "Edmonton's Capital Ex" or "Capital Ex" in 2006.
The Edmonton census metropolitan area (CMA) had a crime severity index of 84.5 in 2013, which is higher than the national average of 68.7.
A resident of Edmonton is known as an ''Edmontonian''.
Junior sports clubs include the Edmonton Huskies and Edmonton Wildcats of the Canadian Junior Football League and the Edmonton Oil Kings of the Western Hockey League.
The city has established 12 business revitalization zones – 124 Street and Area, Alberta Avenue, Beverly, Downtown, Chinatown and Little Italy, Fort Road and Area, Inglewood, Kingsway, North Edge, Northwest Industrial, Old Strathcona and Stony Plain Road.
At the summer solstice, Edmonton receives seventeen hours and three minutes of daylight, with an hour and forty-six minutes of civil twilight.
Edmonton's streets and parklands also contain one of the largest remaining concentrations of healthy American elm trees in the world, unaffected by Dutch elm disease, which has wiped out vast numbers of such trees in eastern North America.
Edmonton is the capital of the province of Alberta and holds all main provincial areas of government such as the Provincial Legislature of Alberta.
CN Rail's North American operational facility is located in the city, as well as a major intermodal facility that handles all incoming freight from the port of Prince Rupert in British Columbia.
Research partners include the University of Alberta, the Alberta Research Council, the Northern Alberta Institute of Technology, and Olds College.
The original Edmonton line is considered to be the first "modern" light rail line in North America (i.e., built from scratch, rather than being an upgrade of an old system).
The Canadian Airborne Training Centre had been located in the city in the 1980s.
Despite being far from Canada's coasts, Edmonton is also the home of HMCS ''Nonsuch'', a naval reserve division.
The Orchestra performs at the Francis Winspear Centre for Music.
There is an extensive multi-use trail system for bicycles and pedestrians throughout the city; however, most of this is within the river valley parkland system.
Formerly housed in an iconic 1970s Brutalist building designed by Don Bittorf, the AGA collection had over 5,000 pieces of art.
The ''Journal'' no longer publishes a Sunday edition as of July 2012.
'''''Championships'''''
On the University of Alberta grounds is the 2,534-seat Northern Alberta Jubilee Auditorium, which were undertaken over a year of heavy renovations carried out as part of the province's 2005 centennial celebrations.
In around the downtown of Edmonton, there are a small handful of shopping districts, such as previously mentioned Edmonton City Centre mall, Jasper Avenue and 104 Street.
Another TOD, called Century Park, is being constructed at the site of what was once Heritage Mall, at the southern end of the LRT line.
Later in November, Edmonton plays host to the Canadian Finals Rodeo and Farmfair; this is a significant event in Canada's rodeo circuit and second only to the National Finals Rodeo in Las Vegas in prestige.
Edmonton is at the centre of Canada's sixth largest census metropolitan area (CMA), which includes Edmonton and 34 other municipalities in the surrounding area.
On average, it receives  of precipitation, of which  is rain and  is the melt from  of snowfall per annum.
Several golf courses, both public and private, are also located in the river valley; the long summer daylight hours of this northern city provide for extended play from early morning well into the evening.
The Edmonton Symphony Orchestra has existed under various incarnations since 1913.
Edmonton has a history of opera and classical music performance; both genres historically have been supported by a variety of clubs and associations.
Its collection includes both civilian and military aircraft, the largest of which are a Boeing 737 and two CF-101 Voodoos.
In July, the mean precipitation is .
There are many museums in Edmonton of various sizes.
Edmonton's historic growth has been facilitated through the absorption of five adjacent urban municipalities (Strathcona, North Edmonton, West Edmonton, Beverly and Jasper Place) and a series of annexations ending in 1982.
'''''Established'''''
The lowest overall temperature ever recorded in Edmonton was , on January 19 and 21, 1886.
It also has one of only 3 BOMARC missiles in Canada.
The museum is dedicated to preserving the military heritage and the sacrifices made by the people of Edmonton and Alberta in general.
A massive cluster of thunderstorms occurred on July 11, 2004, with large hail and over  of rain reported within the space of an hour in many places.
World War II saw Edmonton become a major base for the construction of the Alaska Highway and the Northwest Staging Route.
The museum features two galleries and several smaller exhibits.
Locally based operations such as Principal Trust and Canadian Commercial Bank would fail, and some regional offices were moved to other cities.
As a result, the mall was forced to undergo an evacuation as a precautionary measure.
Founded in 1879, the Edmonton Exhibition was originally an annual fair and exhibition that eventually adopted a gold rush theme, becoming Klondike Days in the 1960s.
Some private schools exist as well, including Edmonton Academy, Progressive Academy and Tempo School.
Passenger trains stop at the Edmonton railway station three days a week in both directions.
The U of A is also home to the second-largest research library system in Canada.
This area also contains two independent movie theatres: the Garneau and Princess theatres, as well as several live theatre, music, and comedy venues.
Its proximity to the University of Alberta has led to a high number of establishments ranging from restaurants and pubs to trendy clubs while hosting a wide variety of retail and specialty shops during the day.
The largest is the Royal Alberta Museum (RAM), which was formerly known as the Provincial Museum of Alberta until it was renamed in honour of Queen Elizabeth II's 2005 Alberta centennial visit.
Among the innovative uses for the city's waste includes a Christmas tree recycling program.
The power company was bought by the Town of Edmonton in 1902 and remains under municipal ownership today as EPCOR.
The river valley is home to various parks ranging from fully serviced urban parks to campsite-like facilities with few amenities.
A F4 tornado that struck Edmonton on July 31, 1987, killing 27, was unusual in many respects, including severity, duration, damage, and casualties.
The area covered by the treaty represents most of the central area of the current provinces of Saskatchewan and Alberta.
The collection includes historic firearms, uniforms, souvenirs, memorabilia, military accoutrements, as well as a large photographic and archival collection spanning the pre-World War One period to the present.
Edmonton's growing season is from May 9 to September 22; Edmonton averages 135-140 frost free days a year.
Edmonton is also expanding the LRT to Mill Woods (the southeast) by 2020 and to Lewis Farms (the west) thereafter using low floor technology.
The largest of them all, Old Strathcona, includes many independent stores between 99 Street and 109 Street on Whyte Avenue and area.
The train connects Edmonton to multiple stops in British Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, and Ontario.
+'''Amateur and junior clubs'''
Canadian Major Indoor Soccer League
Edmonton also has a high demand for pub crawl tours in the city.
