Multiple specimens of ''Edmontosaurus annectens'' have been found with preserved skin impressions.
annectens'' on display in the Denver Museum of Nature and Science shows evidence of a theropod bite in the tail.
This species is based on USNM&nbsp;2414, a partial skull-roof and skeleton, with a second skull and skeleton, YPM&nbsp;2182, designated the paratype.
Because of the incomplete understanding of hadrosaurids at the time, following Marsh's death in 1897 ''Claosaurus annectens'' was variously classified as a species of ''Claosaurus'', ''Thespesius'' or ''Trachodon''.
This ridge was for the attachment of powerful muscles attached to the hips and tail that pulled the thighs (and thus the hind legs) backward and helped maintain the use of the tail as a balancing organ.
The isotopes of these two elements are determined by various internal and external factors, such as the type of plants being eaten, the physiology of the animal, salinity, and climate.
Hadrosaurids had slim hands with short fingers, making their forelimbs ineffective for propulsion, and the tail was also not useful for propulsion because of the ossified tendons that increased its rigidity, and the poorly developed attachment points for muscles that would have moved the tail from side to side.
annectens'' is often seen as smaller.
Research conducted by computer modeling in 2007 suggests that ''Edmontosaurus'' could run at high speeds, perhaps up to .
Enamel is typically used because the structure of the mineral that forms enamel makes it the most resistant material to chemical change in the skeleton.
annectens'' subadults, and ''Anatotitan copei'' fully mature adults.
Gilmore named the first, ''Thespesius edmontoni'', in 1924.
The skull of a fully grown ''Edmontosaurus'' could be over a metre long.
As a hadrosaurid, ''Edmontosaurus'' was a large terrestrial herbivore.
Kenneth Carpenter has suggested that they may actually represent the gut contents of a starving animal, instead of a typical diet.
regalis'', was named by Lawrence Lambe in 1917, although several other species that are now classified in ''Edmontosaurus'' were named earlier.
''Anatosaurus copei'' and ''E.
The toes had hoof-like tips.
annectens'' specimens.
Tropical araucarian conifers and palm trees dotted the hardwood forests, differentiating the flora from the northern coastal plain.
In contrast to Bell and Snively, Anusuya Chinsamy and colleagues concluded from a study of bone microstructure that polar ''Edmontosaurus'' overwintered.
It was not, instead being designated "of very doubtful validity."
annectens'', pertaining to a  long individual from South Dakota, shows evidence of tooth marks from small theropods on its lower jaws.
annectens'' due to its small size and skull shape, is more likely a subadult specimen of the contemporary ''E.
Although sometimes reported as of exclusively early Maastrichtian age, the Horseshoe Canyon Formation was of somewhat longer duration.
''Edmontosaurus'' has been described in detail from numerous specimens.
Several well-preserved specimens are known that include not only bones, but in some cases extensive skin impressions and possible gut contents.
regalis'' by having a longer, lower, less robust skull.
The discovery of possible gut contents made little impact in English-speaking circles, except for another brief mention of the aquatic-terrestrial dichotomy, until it was brought up by John Ostrom in the course of an article reassessing the old interpretation of hadrosaurids as water-bound.
longiceps'' went to ''Anatotitan'', as either a second species or as a synonym of ''A.
copei'' is the result of ontogenetic change and represents mature ''E.
The time span and geographic range of ''Edmontosaurus'' overlapped with ''Tyrannosaurus'', and an adult specimen of ''E.
annectens'' as "perhaps the most perfectly-known dinosaur to date 1994."
edmontoni'' were assigned to ''Edmontosaurus'' as well, and ''A.
The edmontosaurs also showed enriched carbon isotope values, which for modern mammals would be interpreted as a mixed diet of C3 plants (most plants) and C4 plants (grasses); however, C4 plants were extremely rare in the Late Cretaceous if present at all.
The debate about the proper taxonomy of the ''A.
The conception of ''Edmontosaurus'' that emerged included three valid species: the type ''E.
Also assigned to this genus were ''Thespesius edmontoni'', ''T.
A combination of factors is also possible.
annectens'', was actually a species of ''Edmontosaurus'' and that ''A.
Further simulations using a subadult specimen estimated as weighing  when alive produced a model that could run or hop bipedally, use a trot, pace, or single foot symmetric quadrupedal gait, or move at a gallop.
The beak was toothless, and both the upper and lower beaks were extended by keratinous material.
These motions would account for the observed tooth wear and a more solidly constructed skull than modeled by Weishampel.
This interpretation of the beak has been rejected, as the furrows and ridges are more like those of herbivorous turtle beaks than the flexible structures seen in filter-feeding birds.
annectens'' was thought to be a species of ''Claosaurus'' at the time.
annectens'' were recovered.
The underlying cause of the condition is unknown.
The combination of movements is more complex than had been previously predicted.
As a side note, ''Trachodon selwyni'', described by Lawrence Lambe in 1902 for a lower jaw from what is now known as the Dinosaur Park Formation of Alberta, was erroneously described by Glut (1997) as having been assigned to ''Edmontosaurus regalis'' by Lull and Wright.
The postcrania of the type specimen remains undescribed, still in its plaster jackets.
It is unknown whether such a crest was present on ''E.
For example, the brain of the specimen with the 374&nbsp;millilitre endocast is estimated to have had a volume of .
Its forelimbs, ossified tendons, and skin impressions were briefly described in 1913 and 1914 by Lambe, who at first thought it was an example of a species he had named ''Trachodon marginatus'', but then changed his mind.
Most of the back and tail were lined by ossified tendons arranged in a latticework along the neural spines of the vertebrae.
A 2004 study by Kathryn Thomas and Sandra Carlson used teeth from the upper jaw of three individuals interpreted as a juvenile, a subadult, and an adult, recovered from a bone bed in the Hell Creek Formation of Corson County, South Dakota.
The researchers found to their surprise that the fastest gait was kangaroo-like hopping (maximum simulated speed of ), which they regarded as unlikely based on the size of the animal and lack of hopping footprints in the fossil record, and instead interpreted the result as indicative of an inaccuracy in their simulation.
Not all models have been scrutinized under present techniques.
The Campanian species ''Thespesius edmontoni'', previously considered a synonym of ''E.
Edmontosaurin specimens from the Prince Creek Formation of Alaska formerly assigned to ''Edmontosaurus'' sp.
saskatchewanensis'' representing juveniles, ''E.
The climate was humid and subtropical, with conifers, palmettos, and ferns in the swamps, and conifers, ash, live oak, and shrubs in the forests.
The animal's feeding range would have been from ground level to around  above.
He concluded that the type species of ''Anatosaurus'', ''A.
The first well-supported species of ''Edmontosaurus'' was named in 1892 as ''Claosaurus annectens'' by Othniel Charles Marsh.
It is classified as a genus of saurolophine (or hadrosaurine) hadrosaurid, a member of the group of hadrosaurids which lacked large, hollow crests, instead having smaller solid crests or fleshy combs.
Known column counts for the two species are: 51 to 53&nbsp;columns per maxilla and 48 to 49 per dentary (teeth of the upper jaw being slightly narrower than those in the lower jaw) for ''E.
''Edmontosaurus'' included some of the largest hadrosaurid species, measuring up to  long and weighing around .
The number of vertebrae differs between specimens.
The species formerly known as ''Thespesius edmontoni'' or ''Anatosaurus edmontoni'' represents immature individuals.
''Edmontosaurus regalis'' is known from the lowest of five units within the Horseshoe Canyon Formation, but is absent from at least the second to the top.
In 2007 another "mummy" was announced; nicknamed "Dakota", it was discovered in 1999 by Tyler Lyson, and came from the Hell Creek Formation of North Dakota.
They proposed that joints that had been interpreted as permitting movement in dinosaur skulls were actually cartilaginous growth zones.
The teeth were continually replaced, taking about half a year to form.
Because it is known from several bone beds, ''Edmontosaurus'' is thought to have lived in groups, and may have been migratory as well.
'''''Anatosaurus''''' and '''''Anatotitan''''' are now generally regarded as synonyms of ''Edmontosaurus''.
One edmontosaur bone bed, from claystone and mudstone of the Lance Formation in eastern Wyoming, covers more than a square kilometre, although ''Edmontosaurus'' bones are most concentrated in a  subsection of this site.
While his interpretation of hadrosaurids as terrestrial animals has been generally accepted, the Senckenberg plant fossils remain equivocal.
Because scratches dominate the microwear texture of the teeth, Williams ''et al.''
Two more species that would come to be included with ''Edmontosaurus'' were named from Canadian remains in the 1920s, but both would initially be assigned to ''Thespesius''.
''Anatosaurus edmontoni'' was mistakenly listed as a synonym of ''E.
In at least one case (the Senckenberg specimen), rarely preserved sclerotic rings were preserved in the eye sockets.
regalis'' have been found in rocks of western North America that date from the late Campanian stage of the Cretaceous Period 73 million years ago, while those of ''E.
''Edmontosaurus'' was among the largest hadrosaurids: depending on the species, a fully grown adult could have been  long, and some of the larger specimens reached the range of  to  long.
''Edmontosaurus'' is currently regarded as having two valid species: type species ''E.
The nine fused hip vertebrae provided support for the hip.
In a 2011 study, Campione and Evans recorded data from all known "edmontosaur" skulls from the Campanian and Maastrichtian and used it to plot a ''morphometric'' graph, comparing variable features of the skull with skull size.
At least a dozen individuals are known, including seven skulls with associated postcrania, and five to seven other skulls.
The Lance Formation, as typified by exposures approximately  north of Fort Laramie in eastern Wyoming, has been interpreted as a bayou setting similar to the Louisiana coastal plain.
It probably went on all fours when standing still or moving slowly, and switched to using the hind legs alone when moving more rapidly.
NMC&nbsp;8509 included an almost complete skull, numerous vertebrae, partial shoulder and hip girdles, and partial hind limbs, representing the first substantial dinosaur specimen recovered from Saskatchewan.
Opinions varied greatly; textbooks and encyclopedias drew a distinction between the "''Iguanodon''-like" ''Claosaurus annectens'' and the "duck-billed" ''Hadrosaurus'' (based on remains now known as adult ''Edmontosaurus annectens''), while Hatcher explicitly identified ''C.
In a 2011 study by Nicolás Campione and David Evans, the authors conducted the first ever morphometric analysis to compare the various specimens assigned to ''Edmontosaurus''.
A 2008 review of dinosaur migration studies by Phil R. Bell and Eric Snively proposed that ''E.
Another specimen of ''E.
It was closer to a large delta than the Hell Creek Formation depositional setting to the north and received much more sediment.
He suggested that the edmontosaur was a target because it may have been limping from this earlier injury.
The time span covered by the Horseshoe Canyon Formation and equivalents is also known as Edmontonian, and the time span covered by the younger units is also known as Lancian.
Hatcher's work led to a brief consensus, until after 1910 new material from Canada and Montana showed a greater diversity of hadrosaurids than previously suspected.
Like ''Stegosaurus'', the neural canal was expanded in the hips, but not to the same degree: the endosacral space of ''Stegosaurus'' had 20&nbsp;times the volume of its endocranial cast, whereas the endosacral space of ''Edmontosaurus'' was only 2.59&nbsp;times larger in volume.
Gilmore found that his new species compared closely to what he called ''Thespesius annectens'', but left the two apart because of details of the arms and hands.
Other hadrosaurids are only reported as having 50 to 70&nbsp;tail vertebrae, so this appears to have been an overestimate.
However, the most recent review of Hadrosauridae, by Jack Horner and colleagues (2004), came to a noticeably different result: ''Edmontosaurus'' was nested between ''Gryposaurus'' and the "brachylophosaurs", and distant from ''Saurolophus''.
The type species, ''E.
Freshwater fish, salamanders, turtles, diverse lizards, snakes, shorebirds, and small mammals lived alongside the dinosaurs.
longiceps'', and ''A.
Upon their description in 1922, they were the subject of a debate in the German-language journal ''Paläontologische Zeitschrift''.
His reinstatement of ''Thespesius'' for Lance-age hadrosaurids would have other consequences for the taxonomy of ''Edmontosaurus'' in the following decades.
The specimens of these individuals indicate a length of up to , according to paleontologists.
The diet and physiology of ''Edmontosaurus'' have been probed by using stable isotopes of carbon and oxygen as recorded in tooth enamel.
The teeth of all three individuals appeared to show variation in oxygen isotope ratios that could correspond to warm/dry and cool/wet periods; Thomas and Carlson considered the possibility that the animals were migrating instead, but favored local seasonal variations because migration would have more likely led to ratio homogenization, as many animals migrate to stay within specific temperature ranges or near particular food sources.
annectens'' specimen, almost  long.
The specimen became the first dinosaur skeleton to be mounted for exhibition in a Canadian museum.
The coastal plain ''Triceratops''–''Edmontosaurus'' association, dominated by ''Triceratops'', extended from Colorado to Saskatchewan.
The plant remains in the Senckenberg Museum specimen have been described, but have proven difficult to interpret.
regalis'' ("regal", or, more loosely, "king-sized"), is based on NMC&nbsp;2288, consisting of a skull, articulated vertebrae up to the sixth tail vertebra, ribs, partial hips, an upper arm bone, and most of a hind limb.
The type specimen of ''E.
Robert Bakker reports that it made up one-seventh of the large dinosaur sample, with most of the rest (five-sixths) made up of the horned dinosaur ''Triceratops''.
annectens'' (formerly ''Anatotitan'') measures  long.
From their work, it appears that edmontosaur teeth took less than about 0.65&nbsp;years to form, slightly faster in younger edmontosaurs.
The first, the "Trachodon mummy" (AMNH&nbsp;5060), was discovered in 1908 by Charles Hazelius Sternberg and his sons in Lance Formation rocks near Lusk, Wyoming.
regalis'' is known only from the Horseshoe Canyon Formation of Alberta, dating from the late Campanian stage of the late Cretaceous period.
Sternberg was working for the British Museum of Natural History, but Henry Fairfield Osborn of the American Museum of Natural History was able to purchase the specimen for $2,000.
Evidence does exist in the form of two fossilized specimens housed at the Museum of the Rockies for an even greater maximum size of  and weighing  for ''Edmontosaurus annectens''.
Each hand had four fingers, with no thumb (first finger).
'''''Edmontosaurus''''' ( ) is a genus of hadrosaurid (duck-billed) dinosaur.
''Edmontosaurus'' may have been dimorphic, with more robust and more lightly built forms, but it has not been established if this is related to sexual dimorphism.
Weishampel developed his model with the aid of a computer simulation.
Several other hadrosaurids, including ''Brachylophosaurus'', ''Gilmoreosaurus'', and ''Bactrosaurus'', also tested positive.
The second specimen, paratype NMC&nbsp;2289, consists of a skull and skeleton lacking the beak, most of the tail, and part of the feet.
Kräusel, who described the material, interpreted it as the gut contents of the animal, while Abel could not rule out that the plants had been washed into the carcass after death.
annectens'' is known from the Frenchman Formation of Saskatchewan, the Hell Creek Formation of Montana, and the Lance Formation of South Dakota and Wyoming.
It was discovered in 1916 by George F. Sternberg.
The ossified tendons are interpreted as having strengthened the vertebral column against gravitational stress, incurred through being a large animal with a horizontal vertebral column otherwise supported mostly by the hind legs and hips.
Some edmontosaur bone beds were sites of scavenging.
This state of affairs persisted for several decades, until Michael K. Brett-Surman reexamined the pertinent material for his graduate studies in the 1970s and 1980s.
He proposed that the animal had a diet much like that of some modern ducks, filtering plants and aquatic invertebrates like mollusks and crustaceans from the water and discharging water via V-shaped furrows along the inner face of the upper beak.
annectens'' (an ''E.
annectens'', from the late Maastrichtian.
Several have been well-publicized, such as the "Trachodon mummy" of the early 20th century, and the specimen nicknamed "Dakota", the latter apparently including remnant organic compounds from the skin.
annectens'' and ''E.
He also noted that his species had more vertebrae than Marsh's in the back and neck, but proposed that Marsh was mistaken in assuming that the ''annectens'' specimens were complete in those regions.
Although theses and dissertations are not regarded as official publications by the International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature, which regulates the naming of organisms, his conclusions were known to other paleontologists, and were adopted by several popular works of the time.
navajovius'' by Wagner (2001), before being assigned to ''Kritosaurus'' sp.
It was either closely related to or includes the species ''Anatosaurus annectens'' (alternately ''Edmontosaurus annectens''), a large hadrosaurid from various latest Cretaceous formations of western North America.
NMC&nbsp;8399 was discovered on the Red Deer River in 1912 by a Sternberg party.
The fore legs were not as heavily built as the hind legs, but were long enough to be used in standing or movement.
Substantial remains of the keratinous upper beak are known from the "mummy" kept at the Senckenberg Museum.
Two specimens still under study in the collection of the Museum of the Rockies - a  tail labelled as MOR 1142 and another labelled as MOR 1609 - indicate that ''Edmontosaurus annectens'' could have grown to larger sizes, possibly rivaling ''Shantungosaurus'' in size.
A study published in 2008 by Casey Holliday and Lawrence Witmer found that ornithopods like ''Edmontosaurus'' lacked the types of skull joints seen in those modern animals that are known to have kinetic skulls (skulls that permit motion between their constituent bones), such as squamates and birds.
The teeth of the upper jaw would grind against the teeth of the lower jaw like rasps, processing plant material trapped between them.
It may have had soft-tissue display structures in the skull, though: the bones around the nasal openings had deep indentations surrounding the openings, and this pair of recesses are postulated to have held inflatable air sacs, perhaps allowing for both visual and auditory signaling.
They sold this specimen (SM&nbsp;4036) to the Senckenberg Museum in Germany.
Rothschild ''et al.''
Although more than 10,000&nbsp;fossils were examined in this manner, the tumors were limited to ''Edmontosaurus'' and closely related genera.
Thus, the various species became ''Anatosaurus annectens'', ''A.
copei'' specimens continues to the present: returning to Hatcher's argument of 1902, Jack Horner, David B. Weishampel, and Catherine Forster regarded ''Anatotitan copei'' as representing specimens of ''Edmontosaurus annectens'' with crushed skulls.
Natalia Rybczynski and colleagues have updated this work with a much more sophisticated three-dimensional animation model, scanning a skull of ''E.
''Edmontosaurus'' was also reported from the Javelina Formation of Big Bend National Park, western Texas based on TMM 41442-1, but was later referred to ''Kritosaurus cf.
The Lance Formation is the setting of two edmontosaur "mummies".
Additionally, it is more likely that the supposed gastroliths represent gravel washed in during burial.
However, these are probably subadult individuals, and there is at least one report of a much larger potential ''E.
As many as three quarters of the dinosaur specimens from badlands near Drumheller, Alberta may pertain to ''Edmontosaurus''.
The skull was roughly triangular in profile, with no bony cranial crest.
A 2007 study by Terry Gates and Scott Sampson found broadly similar results, in that ''Edmontosaurus'' remained close to ''Saurolophus'' and ''Prosaurolophus'' and distant from ''Gryposaurus'', ''Brachylophosaurus'', and ''Maiasaura''.
annectens'' (including ''Anatosaurus edmontoni'', emended to ''edmontonensis''), and ''E.
These rocks are older than the rocks in which ''Claosaurus annectens'' was found.
''Anatosaurus'' would come to be called the "classic duck-billed dinosaur."
Genetic predisposition, trauma, feeding intensity, alterations in blood supply, excess thyroid hormones, and deficiencies in various growth factors have been suggested.
Although ''Edmontosaurus'' was only named in 1917, its oldest well-supported species (''E.
Thomas and Carlson put forward several factors that may have been operating, and found the most likely to include a diet heavy in gymnosperms, consuming salt-stressed plants from coastal areas adjacent to the Western Interior Seaway, and a physiological difference between dinosaurs and mammals that caused dinosaurs to form tissue with different carbon ratios than would be expected for mammals.
copei'' as adults, and ''E.
In 2003, evidence of tumors, including hemangiomas, desmoplastic fibroma, metastatic cancer, and osteoblastoma, was described in ''Edmontosaurus'' bones.
Initially, Lambe only described the skulls of the two skeletons, but returned to the genus in 1920 to describe the skeleton of NMC&nbsp;2289.
Sternberg opted to assign it to ''Thespesius'' because that was the only hadrosaurid genus known from the Lance Formation at the time.
The tumors may have been caused by environmental factors or genetic propensity.
The best known of these is ''E.
In 1926, Charles Mortram Sternberg named ''Thespesius saskatchewanensis'' for NMC&nbsp;8509, a skull and partial skeleton from the Wood Mountain plateau of southern Saskatchewan.
''Edmontosaurus'' was a wide-ranging genus in both time and space.
The fore legs were shorter and less heavily built than the hind legs.
Of the remaining species, ''A.
The anterior back was curved toward the ground, with the neck flexed upward and the rest of the back and tail held horizontally.
This condition has been described as making the back and at least part of the tail "ramrod" straight.
The wealth of fossils has allowed researchers to study its paleobiology in detail, including its brain, how it may have fed, and its injuries and pathologies, such as evidence for tyrannosaur attacks on a few edmontosaur specimens.
Michael Triebold, informally reporting on the specimen, suggested a scenario where small theropods attacked the throat of the edmontosaur; the animal survived the initial attack but succumbed to its injuries shortly thereafter.
The brain of ''Edmontosaurus'' has been described in several papers and abstracts through the use of endocasts of the cavity where the brain had been.
It used its broad beak to cut loose food, perhaps by cropping, or by closing the jaws in a clamshell-like manner over twigs and branches and then stripping off the more nutritious leaves and shoots.
They were able to replicate the proposed motion with their model, although they found that additional secondary movements between other bones were required, with maximum separations of  between some bones during the chewing cycle.
The Lancian time interval was the last interval before the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event that eliminated non-avian dinosaurs.
While long thought to have been aquatic or semiaquatic, hadrosaurids were not as well-suited for swimming as other dinosaurs (particularly theropods, who were once thought to have been unable to pursue hadrosaurids into water).
Traditionally, ''E.
The Edmontonian land vertebrate age is defined by the first appearance of ''Edmontosaurus regalis'' in the fossil record.
regalis'' specimens come from older formations than ''E.
The damage also shows signs of bone infection.
Extensive bone beds are known for ''Edmontosaurus'', and such groupings of hadrosaurids are used to suggest that they were gregarious, living in groups.
It was based on NMC&nbsp;8399, another nearly complete skeleton lacking most of the tail.
In regards to ''Claosaurus annectens'', he recommended that it be considered the same as ''Thespesius occidentalis''.
In this specimen, the preserved nonbony part of the beak extended for at least  beyond the bone, projecting down vertically.
Their results showed that within both recognized ''Edmontosaurus'' species, many features previously used to classify additional species or genera were directly correlated with skull size.
saskatchewanensis'', a large lower jaw that Marsh had named ''Trachodon longiceps'' in 1890, and a new species, ''Anatosaurus copei'', for two skeletons on display at the American Museum of Natural History that had long been known as ''Diclonius mirabilis'' (or variations thereof).
It contains two known species: ''Edmontosaurus regalis'' and ''Edmontosaurus annectens''.
