Some students who have indicated a high potential for learning, by testing with a high intelligence quotient, may not achieve their full academic potential, due to financial difficulties.
Online courses often can be more expensive than face-to-face classes.
This helped him to be a responsive teacher and fix errors on the fly.
Instructors in primary and secondary institutions are often called teachers, and they direct the education of students and might draw on many subjects like reading, writing, mathematics, science and history.
Education through recreation is the opportunity to learn in a seamless fashion through all of life's activities.
Children with disabilities were repeatedly denied an education by physicians or special tutors.
Yet criticism and blame are common among people in the developed countries.
The laptops were widely available as of 2008.
The various types of fine arts are music, dance, and theatre.
The Enlightenment saw the emergence of a more secular educational outlook in Europe.
Surveys suggest these types of schools are expanding across Africa and Asia.
An academic discipline is a branch of knowledge which is formally taught, either at the university–or via some other such method.
When someone tries to improve education, the educational establishment itself occasionally showers the person with criticism rather than gratitude.
Founded in 1088, the University of Bologne is considered the first, and the oldest continually operating university.
In India, for example, compulsory education spans over twelve years, with eight years of elementary education, five years of primary schooling and three years of upper primary schooling.
He simply pursues his vision of excellence through whatever he is doing and leaves others to determine whether he is working or playing.
Those who have higher intelligence tend to perform better at school and go on to higher levels of education.
As an academic field, philosophy of education is "the philosophical study of education and its problems&nbsp;(...) its central subject matter is education, and its methods are those of philosophy".
Examples of broad areas of academic disciplines include the natural sciences, mathematics, computer science, social sciences, humanities and applied sciences.
*Quality and educational outcomes: It is difficult to generalize about the quality of private schools.
In 2004, the Indian Space Research Organisation launched EDUSAT, a communications satellite providing access to educational materials that can reach more of the country's population at a greatly reduced cost.
Some of the most valued educational resources available are all the books, music and videos works that belongs to Public Domain and were written or recorded (on audio or video formats, most of them are preserved on internet archive website.
Educational psychology both draws from and contributes to cognitive science and the learning sciences.
While most achieve better results than government counterparts, even after their social background is taken into account, some studies find the opposite.
A curriculum is prescriptive, and is based on a more general syllabus which merely specifies what topics must be understood and to what level to achieve a particular grade or standard.
The medieval universities of Western Christendom were well-integrated across all of Western Europe, encouraged freedom of inquiry, and produced a great variety of fine scholars and natural philosophers, including Thomas Aquinas of the University of Naples, Robert Grosseteste of the University of Oxford, an early expositor of a systematic method of scientific experimentation, and Saint Albert the Great, a pioneer of biological field research.
Higher education, also called tertiary, third stage, or postsecondary education, is the non-compulsory educational level that follows the completion of a school such as a high school or secondary school.
However, technology transfer requires knowledgeable managers and engineers who are able to operate new machines or production practices borrowed from the leader in order to close the gap through imitation.
Presently, many of the major open education sources offer their own form of certificate.
They focused on individualized instruction and functional skills.
'''Informal learning''' is one of three forms of learning defined by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD).
Alternative education developed in part as a reaction to perceived limitations and failings of traditional education.
This work has motivated a large number of studies, but is also controversial.
The OLPC foundation, a group out of MIT Media Lab and supported by several major corporations, has a stated mission to develop a $100 laptop for delivering educational software.
Vocational education is a form of education focused on direct and practical training for a specific trade or craft.
Educational institutions may incorporate fine arts as part of K-12 grade curricula or within majors at colleges and universities as electives.
There, the great Library of Alexandria was built in the 3rd century BCE.
In 2012,  the modern use of electronic educational technology (also called e-learning) had grown at 14 times the rate of traditional learning.
The purpose of secondary education can be to give common knowledge, to prepare for higher education, or to train directly in a profession.
*Choice and affordability for the poor: Parents can choose private schools because of perceptions of better-quality teaching and facilities, and an English language instruction preference.
Secondary education has a longer history in Europe, where grammar schools or academies date from as early as the 16th century, in the form of public schools, fee-paying schools, or charitable educational foundations, which themselves date even further back.
Preschools provide education from ages approximately three to seven, depending on the country, when children enter primary education.
In most regions education is compulsory up to a certain age.
At the level of the individual, there is a large literature, generally related to the work of Jacob Mincer, on how earnings are related to the schooling and other human capital.
The Soros Foundation provides many opportunities for students from central Asia and eastern Europe.
Educational psychology in turn informs a wide range of specialties within educational studies, including instructional design, educational technology, curriculum development, organizational learning, special education and classroom management.
In pre-literate societies this was achieved orally and through imitation.
The division between primary and secondary education is somewhat arbitrary, but it generally occurs at about eleven or twelve years of age.
In time, some ideas from these experiments and paradigm challenges may be adopted as the norm in education, just as Friedrich Fröbel's approach to early childhood education in 19th-century Germany has been incorporated into contemporary kindergarten classrooms.
The chief controversies revolve around how to interpret the impact of schooling.
Higher education typically involves work towards a degree-level or foundation degree qualification.
Educational methods include storytelling, discussion, teaching, training, and directed research.
Autodidacticism (also autodidactism) is a contemplative, absorbing process, of "learning on your own" or "by yourself", or as a self-teacher.
For example, students may create study groups, meetups and movements such as UnCollege.
Educational psychology is the study of how humans learn in educational settings, the effectiveness of educational interventions, the psychology of teaching, and the social psychology of schools as organizations.
With the passing of NCLB in the United States (No Child Left Behind), teachers must be highly qualified.
The concept of 'education through recreation' was applied to childhood development in the 19th century.
Gratitude for all these resources and the determination to develop oneself would be more productive than criticism and blame because the resources are readily available and because, if you blame others, there is no need for you to do something different tomorrow or for you to change and improve.
Sustainable capacity development requires complex interventions at the institutional, organizational and individual levels that could be based on some foundational principles:
In most countries today, full-time education, whether at school or otherwise, is compulsory for all children up to a certain age.
Each discipline usually has several sub-disciplines or branches, and distinguishing lines are often both arbitrary and ambiguous.
He would show (a) the correct way to perform a action, (b) the incorrect way the player performed it, and again (c) the correct way to perform an action.
Secondary education occurs mainly during the teenage years.
Elsewhere during the Middle Ages, Islamic science and mathematics flourished under the Islamic caliphate which was established across the Middle East, extending from the Iberian Peninsula in the west to the Indus in the east and to the Almoravid Dynasty and Mali Empire in the south.
The methodology of teaching is called pedagogy.
Story-telling passed knowledge, values, and skills from one generation to the next.
Although the terms "educational psychology" and "school psychology" are often used interchangeably, researchers and theorists are likely to be identified as educational psychologists, whereas practitioners in schools or school-related settings are identified as school psychologists.
classrooms), student-teacher interactions, methods of assessment, class size, educational activities, and more.
Nevertheless, the concept of 'choice' does not apply in all contexts, or to all groups in society, partly because of limited affordability (which excludes most of the poorest) and other forms of exclusion, related to caste or social status.
Some claim that there is education inequality because children did not exceed the education of their parents.
Similarities&nbsp;— in systems or even in ideas&nbsp;— that schools share internationally have led to an increase in international student exchanges.
The early years of schooling generally focus around developing basic interpersonal communication and literacy skills.
Education can take place in formal or informal settings and any experience that has a formative effect on the way one thinks, feels, or acts may be considered educational.
Individuals who complete tertiary education generally receive certificates, diplomas, or academic degrees.
It has been argued that high rates of education are essential for countries to be able to achieve high levels of economic growth.
Also, less communication from him meant more time that the player could practice.
Students often blame their teachers and their textbooks, despite the availability of libraries and the internet.
Many open universities are working to have the ability to offer students standardized testing and traditional degrees and credentials.
Vocational education may come in the form of an apprenticeship or internship as well as institutions teaching courses such as carpentry, agriculture, engineering, medicine, architecture and the arts.
Furthermore, demand in the developing world for improved educational access is not as high as foreigners have expected.
Since 1909, the ratio of children in the developing world attending school has increased.
The exact meaning of any of these terms varies from one system to another.
Education frequently takes place under the guidance of educators, but learners may also educate themselves.
That is, it may be part of the discipline in the sense of being concerned with the aims, forms, methods, or results of the process of educating or being educated; or it may be metadisciplinary in the sense of being concerned with the concepts, aims, and methods of the discipline."
Etymologically, the word "education" is derived from the Latin ''ēducātiō'' ("A breeding, a bringing up, a rearing") from ''ēdūcō'' ("I educate, I train") which is related to the homonym ''ēdūcō'' ("I lead forth, I take out; I raise up, I erect") from ''ē-'' ("from, out of") and ''dūcō'' ("I lead, I conduct").
He hardly knows which is which.
Some autodidacts spend a great deal of time reviewing the resources of libraries and educational websites.
A broad range of educational approaches emerged, including alternative schools, self learning, homeschooling and unschooling.
The conventional merit-system degree is currently not as common in open education as it is in campus universities, although some open universities do already offer conventional degrees such as the Open University in the United Kingdom.
Charter schools are another example of alternative education, which have in the recent years grown in numbers in the US and gained greater importance in its public education system.
However, one can also use economic data to gain some insight into this.
Higher education is therefore very important to national economies, both as a significant industry in its own right, and as a source of trained and educated personnel for the rest of the economy.
Education is often understood as a means of overcoming handicaps, achieving greater equality, and acquiring wealth and status for all (Sargent 1994).
People also pursue education for its own sake to satisfy innate curiosity, out of interest in a specific subject or skill, or for overall personal development.
The city of Alexandria in Egypt, established in 330 BCE, became the successor to Athens as the intellectual cradle of Ancient Greece.
A popular way to gauge teaching performance is to use student evaluations of teachers (SETS), but these evaluations have been criticized for being counterproductive to learning and inaccurate due to student bias.
In the United States, universities can be private and independent like Yale University; public and state-governed like the Pennsylvania State System of Higher Education; or independent but state-funded like the University of Virginia.
Therefore, a country's ability to learn from the leader is a function of its stock of "human capital".
Guy Claxton has questioned the extent that learning styles such as Visual, Auditory and Kinesthetic(VAK) are helpful, particularly as they can have a tendency to label children and therefore restrict learning.
Other influential writers and thinkers have included the Swiss humanitarian Johann Heinrich Pestalozzi; the American transcendentalists Amos Bronson Alcott, Ralph Waldo Emerson, and Henry David Thoreau; the founders of progressive education, John Dewey and Francis Parker; and educational pioneers such as Maria Montessori and Rudolf Steiner, and more recently John Caldwell Holt, Paul Goodman, Frederick Mayer, George Dennison and Ivan Illich.
Most school systems are designed around a set of values or ideals that govern all educational choices in that system.
Cost of education has been an issue throughout history, and a major political issue in most countries today.
Out of 182 colleges surveyed in 2009 nearly half said tuition for online courses was higher than for campus based ones.
Such choices include curriculum, organizational models, design of the physical learning spaces (e.g.
Educational psychology is concerned with the processes of educational attainment in the general population and in sub-populations such as gifted children and those with specific disabilities.
Securing charitable funding from prospective donors is one particularly persistent problem.
Formal education occurs in a structured environment whose explicit purpose is teaching students.
Under the Education For All programs driven by UNESCO, most countries have committed to achieving universal enrollment in primary education by 2015, and in many countries, it is compulsory.
than most of the world's population.
Schools that provide primary education, are mostly referred to as ''primary schools ''or ''elementary schools''.
Education is commonly divided formally into such stages as preschool or kindergarten, primary school, secondary school and then college, university, or apprenticeship.
In most developed countries a high proportion of the population (up to 50%) now enter higher education at some time in their lives.
It is experienced directly in its "natural" function of everyday life and is often spontaneous.
After the public school system was widely developed beginning in the 19th century, some parents found reasons to be discontented with the new system.
The European Age of Empires saw European ideas of education in philosophy, religion, arts and sciences spread out across the globe.
Colleges and universities mainly provide tertiary education.
Informal learning for young people is an ongoing process that also occurs in a variety of places, such as out of school time, in youth programs at community centres and media labs.
These early physicians (people like Itard, Seguin, Howe, Gallaudet) set the foundation for special education today.
This success is attributed to excess demand.
Although critical thinking is a goal of education, criticism and blame are often the unintended by products of our current educational process.
For example, it might study what constitutes upbringing and education, the values and norms revealed through upbringing and educational practices, the limits and legitimization of education as an academic discipline, and the relation between education theory and practice.
Instructors in post-secondary institutions might be called teachers, instructors, or professors, depending on the type of institution; and they primarily teach only their specific discipline.
The European Socrates-Erasmus Program facilitates exchanges across European universities.
These files can be used, copied, edited and played without restrictions by any teacher or institution and used for freely to teach about any writer, music or topic in the way that teachers choose to teach, this resources can also be modified and adapted by every teacher.
In the past, those who were disabled were often not eligible for public education.
The report examined the main challenges encountered by development organizations which support LCPSs.
* plans should employ an integrated set of complementary interventions, though implementation may need to proceed in steps;
These are also known as nursery schools and as kindergarten, except in the US, where kindergarten is a term used for primary education.
For many learners this includes language acquisition, cultural norms and manners.
The report findings suggest that girls may be underrepresented and that LCPS are reaching low-income families in smaller numbers than higher-income families.
In universities, departments of educational psychology are usually housed within faculties of education, possibly accounting for the lack of representation of educational psychology content in introductory psychology textbooks (Lucas, Blazek, & Raley, 2006).
Open education is fast growing to become the dominant form of education, for many reasons such as its efficiency and results compared to traditional methods.
Howard Gardner identified a wide range of modalities in his Multiple Intelligences theories.
Confucius gathered disciples and searched in vain for a ruler who would adopt his ideals for good governance, but his Analects were written down by followers and have continued to influence education in East Asia into the modern era.
In Africa, the New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD) has launched an "e-school program" to provide all 600,000 primary and high schools with computer equipment, learning materials and internet access within 10 years.
They are sold at cost or given away based on donations.
In order to meet this new job demand, high schools were created, with a curriculum focused on practical job skills that would better prepare students for white collar or skilled blue collar work.
Universal Primary Education is one of the eight international Millennium Development Goals, towards which progress has been made in the past decade, though barriers still remain.
Education is also often perceived as a place where children can develop according to their unique needs and potentials, with the purpose of developing every individual to their full potential.
During the High Middle Ages, Chartres Cathedral operated the famous and influential Chartres Cathedral School.
* a certain percentage of students should be removed for improvisation of academics (usually practiced in schools, after 10th grade).
In most contemporary educational systems of the world, secondary education comprises the formal education that occurs during adolescence.
India is developing technologies that will bypass land-based telephone and Internet infrastructure to deliver distance learning directly to its students.
One type of university education is a liberal arts education, which can be defined as a "college or university curriculum aimed at imparting broad general knowledge and developing general intellectual capacities, in contrast to a professional, vocational, or technical curriculum."
Researchers at the Overseas Development Institute have indicated that the main obstacles to funding for education include conflicting donor priorities, an immature aid architecture, and a lack of evidence and advocacy for the issue.
* partners should commit to a long-term investment in capacity development, while working towards some short-term achievements;
These surveys found concern for:
The global campus online, led by American universities, allows free access to class materials and lecture files recorded during the actual classes.
Often in a post-colonial context, the growing recognition and use of indigenous education methods can be a response to the erosion and loss of indigenous knowledge and language through the processes of colonialism.
Empirical analyses tend to support the theoretical prediction that poor countries should grow faster than rich countries because they can adopt cutting edge technologies already tried and tested by rich countries.
The work of David Kolb and Anthony Gregorc's Type Delineator follows a similar but more simplified approach.
Many large university institutions are now starting to offer free or almost free full courses such as Harvard, MIT and Berkeley teaming up to form edX.
Secondary education in the United States did not emerge until 1910, with the rise of large corporations and advancing technology in factories, which required skilled workers.
Universities are generally composed of several colleges.
Due to the popularity of open education, these new kind of academic certificates are gaining more respect and equal "academic value" to traditional degrees.
In the early 20th century, the concept was broadened to include young adults but the emphasis was on physical activities.
They provide nonresidential junior college courses to people living in a particular area.
* strategies must be context relevant and context specific;
Although what is known today as liberal arts education began in Europe, the term "liberal arts college" is more commonly associated with institutions in the United States.
Education began in prehistory, as adults trained the young in the knowledge and skills deemed necessary in their society.
Due to this the proliferation of compulsory education, combined with population growth, UNESCO has calculated that in the next 30&nbsp;years more people will receive formal education than in all of human history thus far.
It has been called the biggest change in the way we learn since the printing press.
Quality in terms of levels of teacher absence, teaching activity, and pupil to teacher ratios in some countries are better in LCPSs than in government schools.
Globally, around 89% of children aged  six to twelve are enrolled in primary education, and this proportion is rising.
To himself he always seems to be doing both.
A consequence of the latter theory is that effective teaching should present a variety of teaching methods which cover all three learning modalities so that different students have equal opportunities to learn in a way that is effective for them.
While considered "alternative" today, most alternative systems have existed since ancient times.
An International Development Agency project called nabuur.com, started with the support of former American President Bill Clinton, uses the Internet to allow co-operation by individuals on issues of social development.
Before then, a small minority of boys attended school.
One merely needs to see through travel or the media how many people in the undeveloped countries live to sense this.
It is informed primarily by psychology, bearing a relationship to that discipline analogous to the relationship between medicine and biology.
Primary (or elementary) education consists of the first five to seven years of formal, structured education.
Around 1450, Johannes Gutenberg developed a printing press, which allowed works of literature to spread more quickly.
Tertiary education is normally taken to include undergraduate and postgraduate education, as well as vocational education and training.
Dunn and Dunn focused on identifying relevant stimuli that may influence learning and manipulating the school environment, at about the same time as Joseph Renzulli recommended varying teaching strategies.
It is characterized by transition from the typically compulsory, comprehensive primary education for minors, to the optional, selective tertiary, "postsecondary", or "higher" education (e.g.
Indigenous education refers to the inclusion of indigenous knowledge, models, methods, and content within formal and non-formal educational systems.
Some of these establishments ultimately evolved into medieval universities and forebears of many of Europe's modern universities.
Some theories propose that all individuals benefit from a variety of learning modalities, while others suggest that individuals may have preferred learning styles, learning more easily through visual or kinesthetic experiences.
A number of career specific courses are now available to students through the Internet.
Example alternative schools include Montessori schools, Waldorf schools (or Steiner schools), Friends schools, Sands School, Summerhill School, Walden's Path, The Peepal Grove School, Sudbury Valley School, Krishnamurti schools, and open classroom schools.
Informal learning occurs in a variety of places, such as at home, work, and through daily interactions and shared relationships among members of society.
In China, Confucius (551-479 BCE), of the State of Lu, was the country's most influential ancient philosopher, whose educational outlook continues to influence the societies of China and neighbours like Korea, Japan and Vietnam.
A study conducted by the UNESCO International Institute for Educational Planning indicates that stronger capacities in educational planning and management may have an important spill-over effect on the system as a whole.
Where there is a will, there is a way.
After the Fall of Rome, the Catholic Church became the sole preserver of literate scholarship in Western Europe.
Informal learning usually takes place outside educational establishments, does not follow a specified curriculum and may originate accidentally, sporadically, in association with certain occasions, from changing practical requirements.
"The philosophy of education may be either the philosophy of the process of education or the philosophy of the discipline of education.
Plato founded the Academy in Athens, the first institution of higher learning in Europe.
Despite favourable studies on effectiveness, many people may still desire to choose traditional campus education for social and cultural reasons.
Intelligence is an important factor in how the individual responds to education.
Indigenous governments are reluctant to take on the ongoing costs involved.
Depending on the system, schools for this period, or a part of it, may be called secondary or high schools, gymnasiums, lyceums, middle schools, colleges, or vocational schools.
They occasionally need more gratitude for the resources they have, including their teachers and their textbooks.
College basketball coach John Wooden the Wizard of Westwood would teach through quick "This not That" technique.
Other universities offering open education are Stanford, Princeton, Duke, Johns Hopkins, Edinburgh, U. Penn, U. Michigan, U. Virginia, U. Washington, and Caltech.
There is also economic pressure from some parents, who prefer their children to earn money in the short term rather than work towards the long-term benefits of education.
As an idea, '''curriculum''' stems from the Latin word for ''race course'', referring to the course of deeds and experiences through which children grow to become mature adults.
Better by products of an educational system would be gratitude and determination.
The church established cathedral schools in the Early Middle Ages as centres of advanced education.
