As he later wrote, "My condition was verging on madness—it was touch and go."
His paintings ''Still Life (The Murderess)'' and ''The Death of Marat I'', done in 1906-7, clearly reference the shooting incident and the emotional after effects.
The family moved to Christiania (renamed Kristiania in 1877, and now Oslo) in 1864 when Christian Munch was appointed medical officer at Akershus Fortress.
These paintings have been interpreted as reflections of the artist's sexual anxieties, though it could also be argued that they represent his turbulent relationship with love itself and his general pessimism regarding human existence.
Munch's nude paintings from this period survive only in sketches, except for ''Standing Nude'' (1887).
Munch's works are now represented in numerous major museums and galleries in Norway and abroad.
In sketches, paintings, pastels and prints, he tapped the depths of his feelings to examine his major motifs: the stages of life, the femme fatale, the hopelessness of love, anxiety, infidelity, jealousy, sexual humiliation, and separation in life and death.
Only his friend Christian Krohg defended him:
After the Cultural Revolution in the People's Republic of China ended, the National Gallery in Beijing chose Munch as the first Western artist whose works they exhibited.
He felt a need to go deeper and explore situations brimming with emotional content and expressive energy.
Munch arrived in Paris during the festivities of the Exposition Universelle (1889) and roomed with two fellow Norwegian artists.
File:Model by the Wicker Chair.jpeg|''Naked model by the wicker chair''.
Munch often uses shadows and rings of color around his figures to emphasize an aura of fear, menace, anxiety, or sexual intensity.
My friends went on walking, while I lagged behind, shivering with fear.
Munch also received his father's ire for his relationship with Hans Jæger, the local nihilist who lived by the code "a passion to destroy is also a creative passion" and who advocated suicide as the ultimate way to freedom.
In 1911 the final competition for the decoration of the large walls of the University of Oslo Aula (assembly hall) was held between Munch and Emanuel Vigeland.
Munch's image appears on the Norwegian 1,000 kroner note, along with pictures inspired by his artwork.
Three Munch works were stolen from the Hotel Refsnes Gods in 2005; they were shortly recovered, although one of the works was damaged during the robbery.
The episode is known as the ''Aula Controversy''.
The Berlin critics were beginning to appreciate Munch's work even though the public still found his work alien and strange.
File:Portrett av Edvard Munch.jpg|Portrait of Edvard Munch
'''Edvard Munch''' (; ; 12 December 1863 – 23 January 1944) was a Norwegian painter and printmaker whose intensely evocative treatment of psychological themes built upon some of the main tenets of late 19th-century Symbolism and greatly influenced German Expressionism in the early 20th century.
He also created landscapes and scenes of people at work and play, using a new optimistic style—broad, loose brushstrokes of vibrant color with frequent use of white space and rare use of black—with only occasional references to his morbid themes.
File:Edvard Munch - Self-Portrait Somewhere on the Continent I - Google Art Project.jpg|''Self-Portrait Somewhere on the Continent I''.
He returned to copy the paintings, and soon he began to paint in oils.
Munch recorded little enthusiasm for Bonnat's drawing lessons—"It tires and bores me—it's numbing"—but enjoyed the master's commentary during museum trips.
Under Jæger's commandment that Munch should "write his life", meaning that Munch should explore his own emotional and psychological state, the young artist began a period of reflection and self-examination, recording his thoughts in his "soul's diary".
(It was surpassed in November 2013 by ''Three Studies of Lucian Freud'', which sold for $142.4 million).
He wrote his goal in his diary: "in my art I attempt to explain life and its meaning to myself."
Munch's younger sister Laura was the subject of his 1899 interior ''Melancholy: Laura''.
File:Portrait photographique dEdvard Munch (4865295519).jpg|Portrait of Edvard Munch 1902.
Munch declared: “I wanted the decorations to form a complete and independent world of ideas, and I wanted their visual expression to be both distinctively Norwegian and universally human.” In 2014 it was suggested that the Aula paintings have a value of at least 500 million kroner.
"To walk in Åsgårdstrand is like walking among my paintings—I get so inspired to paint when I am here".
With this painting, Munch met his stated goal of "the study of the soul, that is to say the study of my own self".
Still dependent on his family for many of his meals, Munch's relationship with his father remained tense over concerns about his bohemian life.
During these early years, Munch experimented with many styles, including Naturalism and Impressionism.
Munch was pleased with the "great commotion", and wrote in a letter: "Never have I had such an amusing time—it's incredible that something as innocent as painting should have created such a stir."
Munch was 76 years old.
File:Edvard Munch - Self-Portrait at 53 Am Strom in Warnemünde - Google Art Project.jpg|''Self-Portrait at 53 Am Strom in Warnemünde''.
82&nbsp;×&nbsp;87&nbsp;mm.
Painted with broad bands of garish color and highly simplified forms, and employing a high viewpoint, it reduces the agonized figure to a garbed skull in the throes of an emotional crisis.
In 1896 he created his first woodcuts—a medium that proved ideal to Munch's symbolic imagery.
He later described the personal anguish behind the painting, "for several years I was almost mad… You know my picture, 'The Scream?'
So to capitalize on his production and make some income, he turned to graphic arts to reproduce many of his most famous paintings, including those in this series.
Christian Munch's military pay was very low, and his attempts to develop a private side practice failed, keeping his family in genteel but perennial poverty.
Munch's paintings of the following year included sketchy tavern scenes and a series of bright cityscapes in which he experimented with the pointillist style of Georges Seurat.
Without any effort, Munch attracted a steady stream of female models, whom he painted as the subjects of numerous nude paintings.
File:Edvard Munch - Self-Portrait Somewhere on the Continent II - Google Art Project.jpg|''Self-Portrait Somewhere on the Continent II''.
File:Portrett av Edvard Munch, 1929 (8382627071).jpg|Portrait of Edvard Munch 1929
Edvard Munch was born in a farmhouse in the village of Ådalsbruk in Løten, Norway, to Laura Catherine Bjølstad and Christian Munch, the son of a priest.
During his four years in Berlin, Munch sketched out most of the ideas that would comprise his major work, ''The Frieze of Life'', first designed for book illustration but later expressed in paintings.
He found it superficial and too akin to scientific experimentation.
Munch's art was highly personalized and he did little teaching.
His cabin, "the Happy House", was given to the municipality of Åsgårdstrand in 1944; it serves as a small Munch museum.
Munch hated to part with his paintings because he thought of his work as a single body of expression.
In contrast to his father's rabid pietism, Munch adopted an undogmatic stance toward art.
Munch continued to employ a variety of brushstroke techniques and color palettes throughout the 1880s and early 1890s, as he struggled to define his style.
As one of his Berlin friends said later of Munch, "he need not make his way to Tahiti to see and experience the primitive in human nature.
The entire ''Frieze'' was shown for the first time at the secessionist exhibition in Berlin in 1902.
Oh, yes, they are complete.
Munch wrote, "My father was temperamentally nervous and obsessively religious—to the point of psychoneurosis.
The oppressive religious milieu, plus Edvard's poor health and the vivid ghost stories, helped inspire his macabre visions and nightmares; the boy felt that death was constantly advancing on him.
He likely had sexual relations with some of them.
His idiom continued to veer between naturalistic, as seen in ''Portrait of Hans Jæger'', and impressionistic, as in ''Rue Lafayette''.
After their mother's death, the Munch siblings were raised by their father and by their aunt Karen.
89&nbsp;×&nbsp;89&nbsp;mm.
He sees only the essential, and that, naturally, is all he paints.
Influenced by Gauguin, as well as the etchings of German artist Max Klinger, Munch experimented with prints as a medium to create graphic versions of his works.
Munch also produced multi-colored versions of "The Sick Child" which sold well, as well as several nudes and multiple versions of ''Kiss'' (1892) Many of the Parisian critics still considered Munch's work "violent and brutal" but his exhibitions received serious attention and good attendance.
Considered by the artist and journalist Christian Krohg as the first Symbolist painting by a Norwegian artist, ''Melancholy'' was exhibited in 1891 at the Autumn Exhibition in Oslo.
While stylistically influenced by the Post-Impressionists, what evolved was a subject matter which was symbolist in content, depicting a state of mind rather than an external reality.
He wrote that his painting ''The Sick Child'' (1886), based on his sister's death, was his first "soul painting", his first break from Impressionism.
Many of his paintings, including ''The Scream'', have universal appeal in addition to their highly personal meaning.
This major work in Norwegian monumental painting includes 11 paintings covering 223 m2.
Often ill for much of the winters and kept out of school, Edvard would draw to keep himself occupied.
Then I heard the enormous, infinite scream of nature."
His drinking and poor health reinforced his fears, as he wrote in the third person: "Ever since he was a child he had hated marriage.
His full-length portrait of Karl Jensen-Hjell, a notorious bohemian-about-town, earned a critic's dismissive response: "It is impressionism carried to the extreme.
The lonely'' (''To mennesker.
The theatre's director Max Reinhardt later sold it; it is now in the Berlin Nationalgalerie.
It is a travesty of art."
The Munch Museum serves as Munch's official estate, and has been active in responding to copyright infringements, as well as clearing copyright for the work, such as the appearance of Munch's ''The Scream'' in a 2006 M&M's advertising campaign.
Munch was particularly inspired by Gauguin's "reaction against realism" and his credo that "art was human work and not an imitation of Nature", a belief earlier stated by Whistler.
Subject to hallucinations and feelings of persecution, he entered the clinic of Dr. Daniel Jacobson.
For this reason Munch's pictures are as a rule "not complete", as people are so delighted to discover for themselves.
These themes are expressed in paintings such as ''The Sick Child'' (1885), ''Love and Pain'' (retitled ''Vampire''; 1893–94), ''Ashes'' (1894), and ''The Bridge''.
Other motifs illuminate the nocturnal side of love, such as ''Rose and Amelie'' and ''Vampire''.
Edvard Munch was related to painter Jacob Munch and historian Peter Andreas Munch.
In 2004, another version of ''The Scream'', along with one of ''Madonna'', were stolen from the Munch Museum in a daring daylight robbery.
"The Frieze of Life" themes recur throughout Munch's work but he especially focused on them in the mid-1890s.
Munch occasionally left his home to paint murals on commission, including those done for the Freia chocolate factory.
The painting received a negative response from critics and from his family, and caused another "violent outburst of moral indignation" from the community.
He later turned cynical concerning sexual matters, expressed not only in his behavior and his art, but in his writings as well, an example being a long poem called ''The City of Free Love''.
In February 2012, a major Munch exhibition, ''Edvard Munch.
He described the turn of events in his diary, "After twenty years of struggle and misery forces of good finally come to my aid in Germany—and a bright door opens up for me."
Munch came under his malevolent, anti-establishment spell.
Further brightening his mood, the general public of Kristiania finally warmed to his work, and museums began to purchase his paintings.
The following year, much to his father's disappointment, Munch left the college determined to become a painter.
During this time, Munch received many commissions for portraits and prints which improved his usually precarious financial condition.
Many of these sketches and paintings were done in several versions, such as ''Madonna'', ''Hands'' and ''Puberty'', and also transcribed as wood-block prints and lithographs.
This deeper perspective helped move him to a new view of his art.
The dramatic focus of the painting, portraying his entire family, is dispersed in the separate and disconnected figures of sorrow.
He was made a Knight of the Royal Order of St. Olav "for services in art".
Christian's death depressed him and he was plagued by suicidal thoughts: "I live with the dead—my mother, my sister, my grandfather, my father…Kill yourself and then it's over.
After studying the sculpture of Rodin, Munch may have experimented with plasticine as an aid to design, but he produced little sculpture.
This began a cycle he later called the ''Frieze of Life—A Poem about Life, Love and Death.''
''The Scream'' is Munch's most famous work, and one of the most recognizable paintings in all art.
Munch's figures appear to play roles on a theatre stage (''Death in the Sick-Room''), whose pantomime of fixed postures signify various emotions; since each character embodies a single psychological dimension, as in ''The Scream'', Munch's men and women began to appear more symbolic than realistic.
In 1894, he enlarged the spectrum of motifs by adding ''Anxiety'', ''Ashes'', ''Madonna'' and ''Women in Three Stages'' (from innocence to old age).
Munch's stay in hospital stabilized his personality, and after returning to Norway in 1909, his work became more colorful and less pessimistic.
It is also the only version not held by a Norwegian museum.
He made a wooden frame with carved reliefs for the large painting ''Metabolism'' (1898), initially called ''Adam and Eve''.
Together with his contemporary Nikolai Astrup, Munch is considered an innovator of the woodcut medium in Norway.
She finally left him and married a younger colleague of Munch.
In the autumn of 1908, Munch's anxiety, compounded by excessive drinking and brawling, had become acute.
All were eventually recovered, but the paintings stolen in the 2004 robbery were extensively damaged.
They had already been formed by then."
Christian was a doctor and medical officer who married Laura, a woman half his age, in 1861.
Munch followed this advice and in the process produced several full-length portraits of high quality of friends and patrons—honest portrayals devoid of flattery.
He carries his own Tahiti within him."
Munch portrayed women either as frail, innocent sufferers (see ''Puberty'' and ''Love and Pain'') or as the cause of great longing, jealousy and despair (see ''Separation'', ''Jealousy'', and ''Ashes'').
In October 2006, the color woodcut ''Two people.
Munch's early drawings and watercolors depicted these interiors, and the individual objects, such as medicine bottles and drawing implements, plus some landscapes.
They moved frequently from one cheap flat to another.
They may have been confiscated by his father.
Of the five siblings, only Andreas married, but he died a few months after the wedding.
In May 2012, ''The Scream'' sold for $119.9 million, and is the second most expensive artwork ever sold at an open auction.
The inventory has been maintained exactly as he left it.
In the 1930s, his German patrons, many Jewish, lost their fortunes and some their lives during the rise of the Nazi movement.
In the 1930s and 1940s, the Nazis labeled Munch's work "degenerate art" (along with that of Picasso, Paul Klee, Matisse, Gauguin and many other modern artists) and removed his 82 works from German museums.
His financial situation improved considerably and in 1897, Munch bought himself a summer house facing the fjords of Kristiania, a small fisherman's cabin built in the late 18th century, in the small town of Åsgårdstrand in Norway.
Munch died in his house at Ekely near Oslo on 23 January 1944, about a month after his 80th birthday.
90&nbsp;×&nbsp;90&nbsp;mm.
From him I inherited the seeds of madness.
He wrote, "No longer should interiors be painted, people reading and women knitting: there would be living people, breathing and feeling, suffering and loving."
He returned home and arranged a large loan from a wealthy Norwegian collector when wealthy relatives failed to help, and assumed financial responsibility for his family from then on.
In 1906 he painted the screen for an Ibsen play in the Berlin Deutsches Theater small Kammerspiele Theatre, in which the ''Frieze of Life'' was hung.
In December 1889 his father died, leaving Munch's family destitute.
That year, Munch demonstrated his quick absorption of his figure training at the Academy in his first portraits, including one of his father and his first self-portrait.
In 1897 Munch returned to Kristiania, where he also received grudging acceptance—one critic wrote, "A fair number of these pictures have been exhibited before.
The U.S. copyright representative for the Munch Museum and the Estate of Edvard Munch is the Artists Rights Society.
His picture ''Morning'' (1884) was displayed at the Norwegian pavilion.
In 1881, Munch enrolled at the Royal School of Art and Design of Kristiania, one of whose founders was his distant relative Jacob Munch.
They traveled to Italy together and upon returning, Munch began another fertile period in his art, which included landscapes and his final painting in "The Frieze of Life" series, ''The Dance of Life'' (1899).
The museum holds a collection of approximately 1,100 paintings, 4,500 drawings, and 18,000 prints, the broadest collection of his works in the world.
Edvard's mother died of tuberculosis in 1868, as did Munch's favorite sister Johanne Sophie in 1877.
83&nbsp;×&nbsp;87&nbsp;mm.
After numerous experiments, Munch concluded that the Impressionist idiom did not allow sufficient expression.
The outbreak of World War I found Munch with divided loyalties, as he stated, "All my friends are German but it is France that I love."
He further developed his woodcut and lithographic technique.
In 1896, Munch moved to Paris, where he focused on graphic representations of his "Frieze of Life" themes.
His "private" symbolism was far more personal than that of other Symbolist painters such as Gustave Moreau and James Ensor.
Motifs such as ''The Empty Cross'' and ''Golgotha'' (both c. 1900) reflect a metaphysical orientation, and also reflect Munch's pietistic upbringing.
One version of ''The Scream'' was stolen from the National Gallery in 1994.
Christian reprimanded his children by telling them that their mother was looking down from heaven and grieving over their misbehavior.
In 1903-4, Munch exhibited in Paris where the coming Fauvists, famous for their boldly false colors, likely saw his works and might have found inspiration in them.
Amanda O'Neill says of the work, "In this heated claustrophobic scene Munch not only portrays Laura's tragedy, but his own dread of the madness he might have inherited."
In 1889, Munch presented his first one-man show of nearly all his works to date.
His ''Inger On the Beach'' (1889), which caused another storm of confusion and controversy, hints at the simplified forms, heavy outlines, sharp contrasts, and emotional content of his mature style to come.
By 1892, Munch formulated his characteristic, and original, Synthetist aesthetic, as seen in ''Melancholy'' (1891), in which color is the symbol-laden element.
It was this place he missed when he was abroad and when he felt depressed and exhausted.
To the end of his life, Munch continued to paint unsparing self-portraits, adding to his self-searching cycle of his life and his unflinching series of takes on his emotional and physical states.
On 3 November 2008, the painting ''Vampire'' set a new record for his paintings when it was sold for US$38.162 million at Sotheby's New York.
File:Edvard Munch - Rosa Meissner at the Hotel Rohn in Warnemünde - Google Art Project.jpg|''Rosa Meissner at the Hotel Rohn in Warnemünde''.
At one point, however, Munch's father, perhaps swayed by the negative opinion of Munch's cousin Edvard Diriks (an established, traditional painter), destroyed at least one painting (likely a nude) and refused to advance any more money for art supplies.
By his teens, art dominated Munch's interests.
Munch also began to favor a shallow pictorial space and a minimal backdrop for his frontal figures.
His Nazi-orchestrated funeral suggested to Norwegians that he was a Nazi sympathizer, a kind of appropriation of the independent artist.
Edvard had an elder sister, Johanne Sophie, and three younger siblings: Peter Andreas, Laura Catherine, and Inger Marie.
However, his paintings evoked bitter controversy (dubbed "The Munch Affair"), and after one week the exhibition closed.
Seventy-one of the paintings previously taken by the Nazis had been returned to Norway through purchase by collectors (the other eleven were never recovered), including ''The Scream'' and ''The Sick Child'', and they too were hidden from the Nazis.
Larsen was eager for marriage, and Munch begged off.
When Munch died, his remaining works were bequeathed to the city of Oslo, which built the Munch Museum at Tøyen (it opened in 1963).
The Modern Eye,'' opened at the Schirn Kunsthalle Frankfurt; the exhibition was opened by Mette-Marit, Crown Princess of Norway.
His teachers were sculptor Julius Middelthun and the naturalistic painter Christian Krohg.
Munch was still highly influential, particularly with the German Expressionists, who followed his philosophy, "I do not believe in the art which is not the compulsive result of Man's urge to open his heart."
File:Edvard Munch - Self-Portrait “à la Marat” - Google Art Project.jpg|''Self-Portrait “à la Marat”''.
His ''Girls on the Jetty'', created in eighteen different versions, demonstrated the theme of feminine youth without negative connotations.
He began to carefully calculate his compositions to create tension and emotion.
81&nbsp;×&nbsp;85&nbsp;mm.
In 2013, four of Munch's paintings were depicted in a series of stamps by the Norwegian postal service, to commemorate the 150th anniversary of his birth in 2014.
He painted a number of pictures, several of them in larger format and to some extent featuring the Art Nouveau aesthetics of the time.
The 1895 pastel sold at auction on 2 May 2012 for US$119,922,500, including commission.
The good press coverage gained Munch the attention of influential patrons Albert Kollman and Max Linde.
While attracting strongly negative reactions, in the 1890s Munch began to receive some understanding of his artistic goals, as one critic wrote, "With ruthless contempt for form, clarity, elegance, wholeness, and realism, he paints with intuitive strength of talent the most subtle visions of the soul."
"My ideas developed under the influence of the bohemians or rather under Hans Jæger.
This work reveals Munch's preoccupation with the "fall of man" and his pessimistic philosophy of love.
Art is complete once the artist has really said everything that was on his mind, and this is precisely the advantage Munch has over painters of the other generation, that he really knows how to show us what he has felt, and what has gripped him, and to this he subordinates everything else.
His sick and nervous home had given him the feeling that he had no right to get married."
In summing up the painting's effects, author Martha Tedeschi has stated: "''Whistler's Mother'', Wood's ''American Gothic'', Leonardo da Vinci's ''Mona Lisa'' and Edvard Munch's ''The Scream'' have all achieved something that most paintings—regardless of their art historical importance, beauty, or monetary value—have not: they communicate a specific meaning almost immediately to almost every viewer.
It also set a record for the highest price paid in auction in Norway.
These few works have successfully made the transition from the elite realm of the museum visitor to the enormous venue of popular culture."
In 1914 Munch was finally commissioned to decorate the Aula and the work was completed in 1916.
He paints, or rather regards, things in a way that is different from that of other artists.
"Frieze of Life" motifs, such as ''The Storm'' and ''Moonlight,'' are steeped in atmosphere.
In ''Death in the Sickroom'', the subject is the death of his sister Sophie, which he re-worked in many future variations.
He was unsettled by the sexual revolution going on at the time and by the independent women around him.
The latter shows limp figures with featureless or hidden faces, over which loom the threatening shapes of heavy trees and brooding houses.
The 1910 painting was stolen in 2004 from The Munch Museum in Oslo, but recovered in 2006 with limited damage.
The angels of fear, sorrow, and death stood by my side since the day I was born."
