His genial good humour and confident ''bonhomie'' made the tour a great success.
"He had a tremendous zest for pleasure but he also had a real sense of duty", wrote J.
Edward has been recognised as the first truly constitutional British sovereign and the last sovereign to wield effective political power.
Albert Victor was the second of Edward's children to die.
As a son of Prince Albert, he also held the titles of Prince of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha and Duke of Saxony.
The Entente was negotiated between the French foreign minister, Théophile Delcassé, and the British foreign secretary, Lord Lansdowne.
Reform of the Royal Navy was also suggested, partly due to the ever-increasing Naval Estimates, and because of the emergence of the Imperial German Navy as a new strategic threat.
In a break with precedent, Edward asked Campbell-Bannerman's successor, H. H. Asquith, to travel to Biarritz to kiss hands.
On Asquith's advice, however, he did not offer them an election (at which, to judge from recent by-elections, they were likely to gain seats) as a reward for doing so.
In 1870 republican sentiment in Britain was given a boost when the French Emperor, Napoleon III, was defeated in the Franco-Prussian War and the French Third Republic was declared.
Edward was a patron of the arts and sciences and helped found the Royal College of Music.
During the election campaign Lloyd George talked of "guarantees" and Asquith of "safeguards" that would be necessary before forming another Liberal government, but the King informed Asquith that he would not be willing to contemplate creating peers until after a second general election.
In response, Edward stated that he "could not see it.
As king, Edward's main interests lay in the fields of foreign affairs and naval and military matters.
His refusal threatened to damage British attempts to gain influence in Persia, but Edward resented his ministers' attempts to reduce the King's traditional powers.
Wilson was reluctant to return to active duty, but Edward persuaded him to do so, and Wilson became First Sea Lord on 25 January 1910.
Usually, Edward's outbursts of temper were short-lived, and "after he had let himself go&nbsp;... he would smooth matters by being especially nice".
He remained there to convalesce, while in London Asquith tried to get the Finance Bill passed.
In December 1909, a proposal to create peers (to give the Liberals a majority in the Lords) or give the prime minister the right to do so was considered "outrageous" by Knollys, who thought the King should abdicate rather than agree to it.
Edward's finances had been ably managed by Sir Dighton Probyn, Comptroller of the Household, and had benefited from advice from Edward's Jewish financier friends, such as Ernest Cassel, Maurice de Hirsch and the Rothschild family.
He ordered all the clocks at Sandringham to run half an hour ahead to provide more daylight time for shooting.
As Barbara Tuchman noted in ''The Guns of August'', his funeral, held on 20 May 1910, marked "the greatest assemblage of royalty and rank ever gathered in one place and, of its kind, the last."
The King suggested a compromise whereby only 50 peers from each side would be allowed to vote, which would also redress the large Conservative majority in the Lords, but Lord Crewe, Liberal leader in the Lords, advised that this would reduce the Lords' independence as only peers who were loyal party supporters would be picked.
You've won the Derby.
I am very glad": his final words.
How far these relationships went is not always clear.
At the same time, he enjoyed gambling and country sports and was an enthusiastic hunter.
Edward involved himself heavily in discussions over army reform, the need for which had become apparent with the failings of the Boer War.
Signed in London on 8 April 1904 by Lansdowne and the French ambassador Paul Cambon, it marked the end of centuries of Anglo-French rivalry and Britain's splendid isolation from Continental affairs, and attempted to counterbalance the growing dominance of the German Empire and its ally, Austria-Hungary.
The Budget was passed by both Commons and Lords in April.
Publication of the official biography of Edward was delayed by its author, Sidney Lee, who feared German propagandists would select material to portray Edward as an anti-German warmonger.
In late 1891 Edward's eldest son, Albert Victor, was engaged to Princess Victoria Mary of Teck.
Edward told Queen Victoria, "I would have given my life for him, as I put no value on mine".
In 1861, he transferred to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he was tutored in history by Charles Kingsley, Regius Professor of Modern History.
At least fifty-five liaisons are conjectured.
Ultimately, he did not do so but Edward was called as a witness in the case in early 1870.
Before his accession to the throne, Edward was the longest-serving heir apparent in British history.
Edward doted on his grandchildren, and indulged them, to the consternation of their governesses.
He socialised with actress Lillie Langtry; Lady Randolph Churchill (born Jennie Jerome, she was the mother of Winston Churchill); Daisy Greville, Countess of Warwick; actress Sarah Bernhardt; noblewoman Lady Susan Vane-Tempest; singer Hortense Schneider; prostitute Giulia Beneni (known as "La Barucci"); wealthy humanitarian Agnes Keyser; and Alice Keppel.
Alexandra refused to allow the King's body to be moved for eight days afterwards, though she allowed small groups of visitors to enter his room.
In his short reign, he ensured that his second son and heir, George V, was better prepared to take the throne.
As Prince of Wales, he had come to enjoy warm and mutually respectful relations with W. E. Gladstone, whom his mother detested.
Edward's coronation had originally been scheduled for 26 June, but two days before on 24 June, he was diagnosed with appendicitis.
Balfour refused to be drawn on whether or not he would be willing to form a Conservative government, but advised the King not to promise to create peers until he had seen the terms of any proposed constitutional change.
One of his most important foreign trips was an official visit to France in May 1903 as the guest of President Émile Loubet.
He fostered good relations between Britain and other European countries, especially France, for which he was popularly called "Peacemaker", but his relationship with his nephew, Kaiser Wilhelm II, was poor.
A stickler for proper dress, he is said to have admonished Lord Salisbury for wearing the trousers of an Elder Brother of Trinity House with a Privy Councillor's coat.
Asquith now revealed that there were no "guarantees" for the creation of peers.
Edward habitually smoked twenty cigarettes and twelve cigars a day.
But Gladstone's son, Home Secretary Herbert Gladstone, angered the King by planning to permit Roman Catholic priests in vestments to carry the Host through the streets of London, and by appointing two ladies, Lady Frances Balfour and Mrs H. J. Tennant, to serve on a Royal Commission on reforming divorce law – Edward thought divorce could not be discussed with "delicacy or even decency" before ladies.
The tradition of men not buttoning the bottom button of waistcoats is said to be linked to Edward, who supposedly left his undone because of his large girth.
Public celebrations included the composition of Arthur Sullivan's Festival Te Deum.
Beresford continued his campaign outside of the navy and Fisher ultimately announced his resignation in late 1909, although the bulk of his policies were retained.
In October 1875 Edward set off for India on an extensive eight-month tour of the sub-continent.
Albert died in December 1861 just two weeks after the visit.
The next day, Edward was sitting up in bed, smoking a cigar.
Edward always strove to be discreet, but this did not prevent society gossip or press speculation.
While staying at Londesborough Lodge, near Scarborough, North Yorkshire, Edward contracted typhoid, the disease that was believed to have killed his father.
Following a visit to the Pope in Rome, this trip helped create the atmosphere for the Anglo-French Entente Cordiale, an agreement delineating British and French colonies in North Africa, and ruling out any future war between the two countries.
On 27 April he returned to Buckingham Palace, still suffering from severe bronchitis.
He died in 1910 in the midst of a constitutional crisis that was resolved the following year by the Parliament Act 1911, which restricted the power of the unelected House of Lords.
It is now a museum piece.
Liberal Prime Minister William Ewart Gladstone sent him papers secretly.
Edward was related to nearly every other European monarch and came to be known as the "uncle of Europe".
In October, he matriculated as an undergraduate at Christ Church, Oxford.
As the eldest son of the British sovereign, he was automatically Duke of Cornwall and Duke of Rothesay at birth.
Charles has held the title since 1958.
During the campaign the leading Conservative Walter Long had asked Knollys for permission to state that the King did not favour Irish Home Rule, but Knollys refused on the grounds that it was not appropriate for the monarch's views to be known in public.
contrary to Edward's earlier stipulation that there be a second election).
The Finance Bill passed the Commons on 5 November 1909 but was rejected by the Lords on 30 November; they instead passed a resolution of Lord Lansdowne's stating that they were entitled to oppose the bill as it lacked an electoral mandate.
In the same year Edward was involved in a personal conflict, when Lord Charles Beresford threatened to reveal details of Edward's private life to the press, as a protest against Edward interfering with Beresford's affair with Daisy Greville, Countess of Warwick.
Queen Victoria and Prince Albert had already decided that Edward and Alexandra should marry.
His advisors remarked on his habit of treating all people the same, regardless of their social station or colour.
Sir Frederick Treves, with the support of Lord Lister, performed a then-radical operation of draining a pint of pus from the infected abscess through a small incision (through 4½ inch thickness of belly fat and abdomen wall); this outcome showed thankfully that the cause was not cancer.
It was rumoured that Camilla's grandmother, Sonia Keppel (born in May 1900), was the illegitimate daughter of Edward, but she was "almost certainly" the daughter of George Keppel, whom she resembled.
Edward had mistresses throughout his married life.
Edward refurbished the royal palaces, reintroduced the traditional ceremonies, such as the State Opening of Parliament, that his mother had forgone, and founded new honours, such as the Order of Merit, to recognise contributions to the arts and sciences.
Just a few weeks later, in early 1892, Albert Victor died of pneumonia.
He was created Prince of Wales and Earl of Chester on 8 December 1841, Earl of Dublin on 17 January 1850, a Knight of the Garter on 9 November 1858, and a Knight of the Thistle on 24 May 1867.
Edward had insisted on placing Alexander John in a coffin personally with "the tears rolling down his cheeks".
Edward never acknowledged any illegitimate children.
The following day, the King suffered several heart attacks, but refused to go to bed, saying, "No, I shall not give in; I shall go on; I shall work to the end."
The Cabinet considered resigning and leaving it up to Balfour to try to form a Conservative government.
Lee was also hampered by the extensive destruction of Edward's personal papers; Edward had left orders that all his letters should be burned on his death.
During his reign he said use of the word ''nigger'' was "disgraceful" despite it then being in common parlance.
Shortly after Prince Albert's death, she arranged for Edward to embark on an extensive tour of the Middle East, visiting Egypt, Jerusalem, Damascus, Beirut and Constantinople.
In 1902, the Shah of Persia, Mozzafar-al-Din, visited England expecting to receive the Order of the Garter.
The King replied, "Yes, I have heard of it.
He was sent summaries of important government documents, but she refused to give him access to the originals.
In 1871, his youngest son, Alexander John, had died just 24 hours after being born.
Though lauded as "Peacemaker", he had been afraid his nephew, the German Emperor Wilhelm II, would tip Europe into war.
Edward is the longest-serving holder of that title; he was Prince of Wales for 59 years.
He was named Albert after his father and Edward after his maternal grandfather Prince Edward, Duke of Kent and Strathearn.
Edward married Alexandra at St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle, on 10 March 1863.
However, his personal charm with people at all levels of society and his strong condemnation of prejudice went some way to assuage republican and racial tensions building during his lifetime.
In April 1908, during Edward's annual stay at Biarritz, he accepted the resignation of British Prime Minister Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman.
Determined to get some army experience, Edward attended manoeuvres in Ireland, during which he spent three nights with an actress, Nellie Clifden, who was hidden in the camp by his fellow officers.
Lord Esher wrote that Edward was "kind and debonair and not undignified – but too human".
He died 15 minutes later.
One room contained a custom made bath which was sometimes filled with champagne; and a specially designed and crafted ''siège d'amour'' (love seat) that allowed easy access for oral and other forms of sex for two or three people.
In 1896, his horse Persimmon won both the Derby Stakes and the St Leger Stakes.
But in that debate Asquith hinted – to ensure the support of the nationalist MPs – that he would ask the King to break the deadlock "in that Parliament" (i.e.
While Prince of Wales, Edward had to be dissuaded from breaking with constitutional precedent by openly voting for Gladstone's Representation of the People Bill (1884) in the House of Lords.
He chose to reign under the name Edward VII, instead of Albert Edward—the name his mother had intended for him to use—declaring that he did not wish to "undervalue the name of Albert" and diminish the status of his father with whom the "name should stand alone".
Lord Crewe announced publicly that the government's wish to create peers should be treated as formal "ministerial advice" (which, by convention, the monarch must obey) although Lord Esher argued that the monarch was entitled ''in extremis'' to dismiss the government rather than take their "advice".
From this time, Edward gained a reputation as a playboy.
He met Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, Ralph Waldo Emerson and Oliver Wendell Holmes.
He donated his parents' house, Osborne on the Isle of Wight, to the state and continued to live at Sandringham.
His waist measured 48&nbsp;inches (122&nbsp;cm) shortly before his coronation.
At age seven, Edward embarked on a rigorous educational programme devised by Prince Albert, and supervised by several tutors.
One of Alice Keppel's great-granddaughters, Camilla Parker Bowles, became the mistress and subsequently wife of Charles, Prince of Wales, one of Edward's great-great-grandsons.
He was regarded worldwide as an arbiter of men's fashions.
Queen Victoria was inconsolable, wore mourning clothes for the rest of her life and blamed Edward for his father's death.
In September 1861, Edward was sent to Germany, supposedly to watch military manoeuvres, but actually in order to engineer a meeting between him and Princess Alexandra of Denmark, the eldest daughter of Prince Christian of Denmark and his wife Louise.
Edward received criticism for his apparent pursuit of self-indulgent pleasure but he received great praise for his affable and kind good manners, and his diplomatic skill.
After the marriage, she expressed anxiety about their socialite lifestyle and attempted to dictate to them on various matters, including the names of their children.
He travelled throughout Britain performing ceremonial public duties, and represented Britain on visits abroad.
The King was annoyed that his efforts to urge passage of the budget had become public knowledge and had forbidden his adviser Lord Knollys, who was an active Liberal peer, from voting for the budget, although Knollys had suggested that this would be a suitable gesture to indicate royal desire to see the Budget pass.
Go back home and dissolve this bloody Parliament!"
He was christened ''Albert Edward'' at St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle, on 25 January 1842.
The election resulted in a hung parliament, with the Liberal government dependent on the support of the third largest party, the Irish nationalists.
Gladstone was sacked in the reshuffle the following year and the King agreed, with some reluctance, to appoint him Governor-General of South Africa.
Two weeks later, it was announced that the King was out of danger.
He was known as ''Bertie'' to the royal family throughout his life.
The eldest son of Queen Victoria and Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha, Edward was related to royalty throughout Europe.
He supported the redesign of army command, the creation of the Territorial Force, and the decision to provide an Expeditionary Force supporting France in the event of war with Germany.
The perceived laxity of the Belgian authorities, combined with British disgust at Belgian atrocities in the Congo, worsened the already poor relations between the United Kingdom and the Continent.
Queen Victoria was of two minds whether it was a suitable match given the political climate.
Edward was rarely interested in politics, although his views on some issues were notably liberal for the time.
Edward was so dispirited at the tone of class warfare – although Asquith told him that party rancour had been just as bad over the First Home Rule Bill in 1886 – that he introduced his son to Secretary of State for War Richard Haldane as "the last King of England".
The Prince was forced to appear as a witness in court for a second time when one of the participants unsuccessfully sued his fellow players for slander after being accused of cheating.
The title Prince of Wales is not automatically held by the heir apparent; it is bestowed by the reigning monarch at a time of his or her choosing.
As soon as Edward returned to Britain, preparations were made for his engagement, which was sealed at Laeken in Belgium on 9 September 1862.
At 11:30&nbsp;p.m. he lost consciousness for the last time and was put to bed.
In 1891 Edward was embroiled in the royal baccarat scandal, when it was revealed he had played an illegal card game for money the previous year.
B. Priestley recalled, "I was only a child when he succeeded Victoria in 1901, but I can testify to his extraordinary popularity.
Cabinet minister Winston Churchill publicly demanded a general election, for which Asquith apologised to the King's adviser Lord Knollys and rebuked Churchill at a Cabinet meeting.
He re-instituted traditional ceremonies as public displays and broadened the range of people with whom royalty socialised.
In 1863, he renounced his succession rights to the Duchy of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha in favour of his younger brother, Prince Alfred.
The January 1910 election was dominated by talk of removing the Lords' veto.
In 1860, Edward undertook the first tour of North America by an heir to the British throne.
In 1900, Persimmon's brother, Diamond Jubilee, won five races (Derby, St Leger, 2,000 Guineas Stakes, Newmarket Stakes and Eclipse Stakes) and another of Edward's horses, Ambush II, won the Grand National.
The numeral VII was occasionally omitted in Scotland, even by the national church, in deference to protests that the previous Edwards were English kings who had "been excluded from Scotland by battle".
On the morning of 17 May, the coffin was placed on a gun carriage and drawn by black horses to Westminster Hall, with the new King and his family walking behind.
The Commons passed resolutions on 14 April that would form the basis for the Parliament Act: to remove the power of the Lords to veto money bills, to replace their veto of other bills with a power to delay, and to reduce the term of Parliament from seven years to five (the King would have preferred four).
As king, Edward played a role in the modernisation of the British Home Fleet and the reorganisation of the British Army after the Second Boer War.
The couple established Marlborough House as their London residence and Sandringham House in Norfolk as their country retreat.
I never had a cross word with him in my life.
Appendicitis was generally not treated operatively and carried a high mortality rate, but developments in anaesthesia and antisepsis in the preceding 50 years made life-saving surgery possible.
Vast crowds greeted him everywhere.
Kingsley's efforts brought forth the best academic performances of Edward's life, and Edward actually looked forward to his lectures.
Edward lived a life of luxury that was often far removed from that of the majority of his subjects.
However, in the winter of 1871, a brush with death led to an improvement in both Edward's popularity with the public and his relationship with his mother.
The previous month, Edward visited the Scandinavian countries, becoming the first British monarch to visit Sweden.
In March 1910, he was staying at Biarritz when he collapsed.
Consequently, Lord Salisbury, the Secretary of State for India, issued new guidance and at least one resident was removed from office.
Although Edward was not a diligent student—his true talents were those of charm, sociability and tact—Benjamin Disraeli described him as informed, intelligent and of sweet manner.
Esher's view has been called "obsolete and unhelpful".
It was shown that Edward had visited the Mordaunts' house while Sir Charles was away sitting in the House of Commons.
They threatened to vote against the Budget unless they had their way (an attempt by Lloyd George to win their support by amending whisky duties was abandoned as the Cabinet felt this would recast the Budget too much).
On other matters he was less progressive: he did not, for example, favour giving votes to women, although he did suggest that the social reformer Octavia Hill serve on the Commission for Working Class Housing.
The King's Speech from the Throne on 21 February made reference to introducing measures restricting the Lords' power of veto to one of delay, but Asquith inserted a phrase "in the opinion of my advisers" so the King could be seen to be distancing himself from the planned legislation.
Once widowed, Queen Victoria effectively withdrew from public life.
At a time of widespread anti-Semitism, Edward attracted criticism for openly socialising with Jews.
His tours of North America in 1860 and the Indian subcontinent in 1875 were popular successes, but despite public approval his reputation as a playboy prince soured his relationship with his mother.
He tried to meet the expectations of his parents, but to no avail.
By the 1870s the future king had taken a keen interest in horseracing and steeplechasing.
Edward cultivated politicians from all parties, including republicans, as his friends, and thereby largely dissipated any residual feelings against him.
The naval reforms he had supported and his part in securing the Triple Entente between Britain, France and Russia, as well as his relationships with his extended family, fed the paranoia of the German Emperor, who blamed Edward for the war.
They entertained on a lavish scale.
Prince Albert, though ill, was appalled and visited Edward at Cambridge to issue a reprimand.
Edward also objected to inducting a Muslim into a Christian order of chivalry.
He also laid out a golf course at Windsor.
Following a brief service, the royal family left, and the hall was opened to the public; over 400,000 people filed past the coffin over the next two days.
I am heart-broken and overwhelmed with grief".
Royal coat of arms in Scotland
During Queen Victoria's widowhood, Edward pioneered the idea of royal public appearances as we understand them today—for example, opening the Thames Embankment in 1871, the Mersey Tunnel in 1886, and Tower Bridge in 1894—but his mother did not allow Edward an active role in the running of the country until 1898.
He was in fact the most popular king England had known since the earlier 1660s."
The King was intimately involved in the appointment of Fisher's successor as the Fisher-Beresford feud had split the service, and the only truly qualified figure known to be outside of both camps was Sir Arthur Knyvet Wilson, who had retired in 1907.
He was also opposed to Irish Home Rule, instead preferring a form of dual monarchy.
Wilhelm went on to attack his British guests for supporting Japan against Russia, suggesting that the British were committing "race treason".
He suffered a momentary loss of consciousness during a state visit to Berlin in February 1909.
However, in the next ten years, Edward's affability and popularity, as well as his use of family connections, assisted Britain in building European alliances.
Pressure to remove the Lords' veto now came from the Irish nationalist MPs, who wanted to remove the Lords' ability to block the introduction of Irish Home Rule.
In 1904, during an Anglo-German summit in Kiel between Wilhelm II and Edward, Wilhelm with the Russo-Japanese War in mind started to go on about the "Yellow Peril", which he called "the greatest peril menacing&nbsp;... Christendom and European civilisation.
Four years after Edward's death, World War I broke out.
A royal train conveyed the King's coffin from London to Windsor Castle, where Edward VII was buried at St George's Chapel.
Ultimately a dispute arose between Admiral Lord Charles Beresford, who favoured increased spending and a broad deployment, and the First Sea Lord Admiral Sir John Fisher, who favoured efficiency savings, scrapping obsolete vessels, and a strategic realignment of the Royal Navy relying on torpedo craft for home defence backed by the new dreadnoughts.
Asquith complied, but the press criticised the action of the King in appointing a prime minister on foreign soil instead of returning to Britain.
In 1907, a rodent ulcer, a type of cancer affecting the skin next to his nose, was cured with radium.
Sipido, though obviously guilty, was acquitted by a Belgian court because he was underage.
He had been gazetted colonel on 9 November 1858—to his disappointment, as he had wanted to earn his commission by examination.
I claim for music that it produces that union of feeling which I much desire to promote."
The King's continued ill health was unreported and he attracted criticism for staying in France while political tensions were so high.
Their marriage met with disapproval in certain circles because most of Queen Victoria's relations were German, and Denmark was at loggerheads with Germany over the territories of Schleswig and Holstein.
Unlike his elder sister Victoria, Edward did not excel in his studies.
He was 21; she was 18.
He watched Charles Blondin traverse Niagara Falls by highwire, and stayed for three days with President James Buchanan at the White House.
He pioneered the pressing of trouser legs from side to side in preference to the now normal front and back creases, and was thought to have introduced the stand-up turn-down shirt collar.
As his grandson Edward VIII wrote, "his lighter side&nbsp;... obscured the fact that he had both insight and influence."
