The Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor occurred less than a week after this speech, and the U.S. entered the war as a combatant on the Allied side.
However, the early effects of cancer kept him from taking an active role in the Bay of Pigs Invasion planning.
On September 16, 1962, he introduced educational television to New York City via the maiden broadcast of WNDT, which became WNET.
As hostilities expanded, Murrow expanded CBS News in London into what Harrison Salisbury described as "the finest news staff anybody had ever put together in Europe".
Murrow was assistant director of the Institute of International Education from 1932 to 1935 and served as assistant secretary of the Emergency Committee in Aid of Displaced Foreign Scholars, which helped prominent German scholars who had been dismissed from academic positions.
ET by the end of 1956) and could not develop a regular audience.
After earning his bachelor's degree in 1930, he moved back east to New York.
In the 1999 film ''The Insider'', Lowell Bergman, a television producer for the CBS news magazine ''60 Minutes'', played by Al Pacino, is confronted by Mike Wallace, played by Christopher Plummer, after an exposé of the tobacco industry is edited down to suit CBS management and then, itself, gets exposed in the press for the self-censorship.
They led to his second famous catchphrase.
Murrow's phrase became synonymous with the newscaster and his network.
Murrow immediately sent Shirer to London, where he delivered an uncensored, eyewitness account of the Anschluss.
The center awards Murrow fellowships to mid-career professionals who engage in research at Fletcher, ranging from the impact of the "new world information order" debate in the international media during the 1970s and 1980s to, currently, telecommunications policies and regulation.
It's now nearly 2:30 in the morning, and Herr Hitler has not yet arrived."
(Shirer would describe his Berlin experiences in his best-selling 1941 book ''Berlin Diary''.)
Ultimately, McCarthy's rebuttal served only to further decrease his already fading popularity.
In 1950 the records evolved into a weekly CBS Radio show, ''Hear It Now'', hosted by Murrow and co-produced by Murrow and Friendly.
Murrow joined CBS as director of talks and education in 1935 and remained with the network for his entire career.
Over time, as Murrow's career seemed on the decline and Cronkite's on the rise, the two found it increasingly difficult to work together.
He also recorded a series of narrated "historical albums" for Columbia Records called ''I Can Hear It Now'', which inaugurated his partnership with producer Fred W. Friendly.
ET newscast sponsored by Campbell's Soup and anchored by his old friend and announcing coach Bob Trout.
''See It Now'' ended entirely in the summer of 1958 after a clash in Paley's office.
During Murrow's tenure as vice president, his relationship with Shirer ended in 1947 in one of the great confrontations of American broadcast journalism, when Shirer was fired by CBS.
He listened to Truman.
Murrow's reports, especially during the Blitz, began with what became his signature opening, "''This'' is London," delivered with his vocal emphasis on the word ''this'', followed by the hint of a pause before the rest of the phrase.
CBS, of which Murrow was then vice president for public affairs, decided to "move in a new direction," hired a new host, and let Shirer go.
On April 12, 1945, Murrow and Bill Shadel were the first reporters at the Buchenwald concentration camp in Germany.
In 1953, Murrow launched a second weekly TV show, a series of celebrity interviews entitled ''Person to Person''.
Veteran journalist Crocker Snow, Jr. was named director of the Murrow Center in 2005.
During the war he assembled a team of foreign correspondents who came to be known as the Murrow Boys.
After contributing to the first episode of the documentary series ''CBS Reports'', Murrow, increasingly under physical stress due to his conflicts and frustration with CBS, took a sabbatical from summer 1959 to mid-1960, though he continued to work on ''CBS Reports'' and ''Small World'' during this period.
Shirer contended that the root of his troubles was the network and sponsor not standing by him because of his comments critical of the Truman Doctrine, as well as other comments that were considered outside of the mainstream.
Featuring multipoint, live reports in the days before modern technology (and without each of the parties necessarily being able to hear one another), it came off almost flawlessly.
Murrow appeared as himself in a cameo in the British film production of ''Sink the Bismarck!''
McCarthy accepted the invitation and appeared on April 6, 1954.
Murrow's celebrity gave the agency a higher profile, which may have helped it earn more funds from Congress.
Beginning in 1958, Murrow hosted a talk show entitled ''Small World'' that brought together political figures for one-to-one debates.
In the program following McCarthy's appearance, Murrow commented that the senator had "made no reference to any statements of fact that we made" and rebutted McCarthy's accusations against himself.
'''Edward R. Murrow'''  (born '''Egbert Roscoe Murrow'''; April 25, 1908 – April 27, 1965) was an American broadcast journalist.
Another contributing element to Murrow's career decline was the rise of a new crop of television journalists.
At the end of 1940, with every night's German bombing raid, Londoners who might not necessarily see each other the next morning often closed their conversations with "good night, and good luck."
Younger colleagues at CBS became resentful toward this, viewing it as preferential treatment, and formed the "Murrow Isn't God Club."
This marked the beginning of the "Murrow Boys" team of war reporters.
Murrow knew the Diem government did no such thing.
CBS president Frank Stanton had reportedly been offered the job but declined, suggesting that Murrow be offered the job.
Before his departure, his last recommendation was of Barry Zorthian to be chief spokesman for the U.S. government in Saigon, Vietnam.
In 1950, he narrated a half-hour radio documentary called "The Case of the Flying Saucer."
Franklin D. Roosevelt sent a welcome-back telegram, which was read at the dinner, and Librarian of Congress Archibald MacLeish gave an encomium that commented on the power and intimacy of Murrow's wartime dispatches.
Murrow's last major TV milestone was reporting and narrating the ''CBS Reports'' installment "Harvest of Shame", a report on the plight of migrant farm workers in the United States.
Their incisive reporting heightened the American appetite for radio news, with listeners regularly waiting for Murrow's shortwave broadcasts, introduced by analyst H. V. Kaltenborn in New York saying, "Calling Ed Murrow ... come in Ed Murrow."
In his response, McCarthy rejected Murrow's criticism and accused him of being a communist sympathizer.
After the end of ''See It Now,''  Murrow was invited by New York's Democratic Party to run for the Senate.
After graduation from high school in 1926, Murrow enrolled at Washington State College (now Washington State University) across the state in Pullman, and eventually majored in speech.
His parents were Quakers.
Speech teacher Anderson insisted he stick with it, and another Murrow catchphrase was born.
British newspapers delighted in the irony of the situation, with one ''Daily Sketch'' writer saying: "if Murrow builds up America as skillfully as he tore it to pieces last night, the propaganda war is as good as won."
Throughout the 1950s the two got into heated arguments stoked in part by their professional rivalry.
Murrow insisted on a high level of presidential access, telling Kennedy, "If you want me in on the landings, I'd better be there for the takeoffs."
This is London calling."
There are four other awards also known as the "Edward R. Murrow Award," including the one at Washington State University.
Murrow went to London in 1937 to serve as the director of CBS's European operations.
Murrow's library and selected artifacts are housed in the Murrow Memorial Reading Room that also serves as a special seminar classroom and meeting room for Fletcher activities.
In 1937, Murrow hired journalist William L. Shirer, and assigned him to a similar post on the continent.
But the onetime Washington State speech major was intrigued by Trout's on-air delivery, and Trout gave Murrow tips on how to communicate effectively on radio.
1986, HBO broadcast the made-for-cable biographical movie, ''Murrow'', with Daniel J. Travanti in the title role, and Robert Vaughn in a supporting role.
Murrow died at his home on April 27, 1965, two days after his 57th birthday.
Murrow had considered making such a broadcast since ''See It Now'' debuted and was encouraged to by multiple colleagues including Bill Downs.
There are different versions of these events; Shirer's was not made public until 1990.
Murrow is portrayed by actor David Strathairn, who received an Oscar nomination.
In 1971 the RTNDA (Now Radio Television Digital News Association) established the Edward R. Murrow Awards, honoring outstanding achievement in the field of electronic journalism.
The result was a group of reporters acclaimed for their intellect and descriptive power, including Eric Sevareid, Charles Collingwood, Howard K. Smith, Mary Marvin Breckinridge, Cecil Brown, Richard C. Hottelet, Bill Downs, Winston Burdett, Charles Shaw, Ned Calmer, and Larry LeSueur.
Shirer and his supporters felt he was being muzzled because of his views.
The club disbanded when Murrow asked if he could join.
Friendly, executive producer of ''CBS Reports'', wanted the network to allow Murrow to again be his co-producer after the sabbatical, but he was eventually turned down.
President John F. Kennedy offered Murrow the position, which he viewed as "a timely gift."
''See It Now'' was knocked out of its weekly slot in 1955 after sponsor Alcoa withdrew its advertising, but the show remained as a series of occasional TV special news reports that defined television documentary news coverage.
Directed by Friendly and produced by David Lowe, it ran in November 1960, just after Thanksgiving.
In the film, Murrow's conflict with CBS boss Bill Paley occurs immediately after his skirmish with McCarthy.
It was reported that he smoked between sixty and sixty-five cigarettes a day, equivalent to roughly three packs.
Murrow so closely cooperated with the British that in 1943 Winston Churchill offered to make him joint director-general of the BBC, in charge of programming.
Walter Cronkite's arrival at CBS in 1950 marked the beginning of a major rivalry which continued until Murrow resigned from the network in 1961.
With the Murrow Boys dominating the newsroom, Cronkite felt like an outsider soon after joining the network.
Murrow then chartered the only transportation available, a 23-passenger plane, to fly from Warsaw to Vienna so he could take over for Shirer.
The future British monarch, Princess Elizabeth, said as much to the Western world in a live radio address at the end of the year, when she said "good night, and good luck to you all".
''See It Now'''s final broadcast, "Watch on the Ruhr" (covering postwar Germany), aired July 7, 1958.
Asked to stay on by President Lyndon B. Johnson, Murrow did so but resigned in early 1964, citing illness.
Many distinguished journalists, diplomats, and policymakers have spent time at the center, among them the late David Halberstam, who worked on his Pulitzer Prize–winning book, ''The Best and the Brightest'', as a writer-in-residence in the early 1970s.
Although he declined the job, during the war Murrow did fall in love with Churchill's daughter-in-law, Pamela, whose other American lovers included Averell Harriman, whom she married many years later.
Murrow and Paley had become close when the network chief himself joined the war effort, setting up Allied radio outlets in Italy and North Africa.
During the following year, leading up to the outbreak of World War II, Murrow continued to be based in London.
Despite this, Cronkite went on to have a long career as an anchor at CBS.
Several movies were filmed, either completely or partly about Murrow.
He attended high school in nearby Edison, and was president of the student body in his senior year and excelled on the debate team.
In January 1959, he appeared on WGBH's ''The Press and the People'' with Louis Lyons, discussing the responsibilities of television journalism.
Murrow gained his first glimpse of fame during the March 1938 ''Anschluss,'' in which Adolf Hitler engineered the annexation of Austria by Nazi Germany.
Before his death, Friendly said that the RTNDA (now RTDNA) address did more than the McCarthy show to break the relationship between the CBS boss and his most respected journalist.
Murrow used excerpts from McCarthy's own speeches and proclamations to criticize the senator and point out episodes where he had contradicted himself.
A member of the Kappa Sigma fraternity, he was also active in college politics.
Murrow's job was to line up newsmakers who would appear on the network to talk about the issues of the day.
In another instance, an argument devolved into a "duel" in which the two drunkenly took a pair of antique dueling pistols and pretended to shoot at each other.
The episode hastened Murrow's desire to give up his network vice presidency and return to newscasting, and it foreshadowed his own problems to come with his friend Paley, boss of CBS.
He continued to present daily radio news reports on the CBS Radio Network until 1959.
In September 1938, Murrow and Shirer were regular participants in CBS's coverage of the crisis over the Sudetenland in Czechoslovakia, which Hitler coveted for Germany and eventually won in the Munich Agreement.
Murrow flew on 25 Allied combat missions in Europe during the war, providing additional reports from the planes as they droned on over Europe (recorded for delayed broadcast).
Cronkite's demeanor was similar to reporters Murrow had hired; the difference being that Murrow viewed the Murrow Boys as satellites rather than potential rivals, as Cronkite seemed to be.
Murrow's reporting brought him into repeated conflicts with CBS, especially its chairman Bill Paley, which Friendly summarized in his book ''Due to Circumstances Beyond our Control''.
The position did not involve on-air reporting; his job was persuading European figures to broadcast over the CBS network, which was in direct competition with NBC's two radio networks.
Harry Truman advised Murrow that his choice was between being the junior senator from New York or being Edward R. Murrow, beloved broadcast journalist and hero to millions.
Despite the show's prestige, CBS had difficulty finding a regular sponsor, since it aired intermittently in its new time slot (Sunday afternoons at 5 p.m.
He was generally referred to as Ed Murrow.
When Murrow was six years old, his family moved across the country to Skagit County in western Washington, to homestead near Blanchard,  south of the Canada–US border.
He said he resigned in the heat of an interview at the time, but was actually terminated.
The special became the basis for ''World News Roundup''—broadcasting's oldest news series, which still runs each weekday morning and evening on the CBS Radio Network.
Wallace passes Bergman an editorial printed in ''The New York Times'', which accuses CBS of betraying the legacy of Edward R. Murrow.
Lacey Van Buren was four years old and Dewey Roscoe was two years old when Murrow was born.
His presence and personality shaped the newsroom.
According to some biographers, near the end of Murrow's life, when health problems forced him to resign from the USIA, Paley reportedly invited Murrow to return to CBS.
Murrow and Shirer never regained their close friendship.
Cronkite initially accepted, but after receiving a better offer from his current employer, the United Press, he turned down the offer.
He first came to prominence with a series of radio broadcasts for the news division of the Columbia Broadcasting System during World War II, which were followed by millions of listeners in the United States.
Murrow, who had long despised sponsors despite also relying on them, responded angrily.
His transfer to a governmental position – Murrow was a member of the National Security Council, a position for life – led to an embarrassing incident shortly after taking the job; he asked the BBC not to show his documentary "Harvest of Shame," in order to not damage the European view of the USA; however, the BBC refused as it had bought the program in good faith.
The dispute began when J.B. Williams, maker of shaving soap, withdrew its sponsorship of Shirer's Sunday news show.
Paley was enthusiastic and encouraged him to do it.
Murrow was born Egbert Roscoe Murrow at Polecat Creek, near Greensboro, in Guilford County, North Carolina, the son of Roscoe Conklin Murrow and Ethel F. (née Lamb) Murrow.
The broadcast contributed to a nationwide backlash against McCarthy and is seen as a turning point in the history of television.
in 1960, recreating some of the wartime broadcasts he did from London for CBS.
After Murrow's death, the Edward R. Murrow Center of Public Diplomacy was established at Tufts University's Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy.
In 1973, Murrow's alma mater, Washington State University, dedicated its expanded communication facilities the Edward R. Murrow Communications Center and established the annual Edward R. Murrow Symposium.
A chain smoker throughout his life, Murrow was almost never seen without his trademark Camel cigarette.
In December 1945 Murrow reluctantly accepted Paley's offer to become a vice president of the network and head of CBS News, and made his last news report from London in March 1946.
At a dinner party hosted by Bill Downs at his home in Bethesda, Cronkite and Murrow argued over the role of sponsors, which Cronkite accepted as necessary and said "paid the rent."
He was also a member of the basketball team which won the Skagit County championship.
In his report three days later, Murrow said:
The USIA had been under fire during the McCarthy era, and Murrow brought back at least one of McCarthy's targets, Reed Harris.
Murrow was drawn into Vietnam because the USIA was assigned to convince reporters in Saigon that the government of Ngo Dinh Diem embodied the hopes and dreams of the Vietnamese people.
He did advise the president during the Cuban Missile Crisis but was ill at the time the president was assassinated.
McCarthy also made an appeal to the public by attacking his detractors, stating:
CBS carried a memorial program, which included a rare on-camera appearance by Paley.
Murrow and Friendly paid for their own newspaper advertisement for the program; they were not allowed to use CBS's money for the publicity campaign or even use the CBS logo.
It offered a balanced look at UFOs, a subject of widespread interest at the time.
Pamela wanted Murrow to marry her, and he considered it; however, after his wife gave birth to their only child, Casey, he ended the affair.
''Good Night, and Good Luck'' is a 2005 Oscar-nominated film directed, co-starring and co-written by George Clooney about the conflict between Murrow and Joseph McCarthy on ''See It Now''.
Murrow returned to the air in September 1947, taking over the nightly 7:45&nbsp;p.m.
The firstborn, Roscoe Jr., lived only a few hours.
He was the youngest of three brothers and was a "mixture of English, Scottish, Irish and German" descent.
According to Friendly, Murrow asked Paley if he was going to destroy ''See It Now'', into which the CBS chief executive had invested so much.
CBS did not have news staff when Murrow joined, save for announcer Bob Trout.
In 1944, Murrow sought Walter Cronkite to take over for Bill Downs at the CBS Moscow bureau.
He married Janet Huntington Brewster on March 12, 1935.
His former speech teacher, Ida Lou Anderson, suggested the opening as a more concise alternative to the one he had inherited from his predecessor at CBS Europe, Cesar Saerchinger: "Hello America.
He developed lung cancer and lived for two years after an operation to remove his left lung.
While Murrow was in Poland arranging a broadcast of children's choruses, he got word from Shirer of the annexation—and the fact that Shirer could not get the story out through Austrian state radio facilities.
Murrow achieved great celebrity status as a result of his war reports.
Murrow's papers are available for research at the  Digital Collections and Archives at Tufts, which has a  website for the collection and makes many of the digitized papers available through the Tufts Digital Library.
Murrow offered McCarthy the chance to respond to the criticism with a full half-hour on ''See It Now''.
Three months later, on October 15, 1958, in a speech before the Radio and Television News Directors Association in Chicago, Murrow blasted TV's emphasis on entertainment and commercialism at the expense of public interest in his "wires and lights" speech:
On March 9, 1954, Murrow, Friendly, and their news team produced a half-hour ''See It Now'' special titled "A Report on Senator Joseph McCarthy".
For the next several years Murrow focused on radio, and in addition to news reports he produced special presentations for CBS News Radio.
After the war, he would often go to Paley directly to settle any problems he had.
By his teen years, Murrow went by the nickname "Ed" and during his second year of college, he changed his name from Egbert to Edward.
Murrow interviewed both Kenneth Arnold and astronomer Donald Menzel.
William Shirer's reporting from Berlin brought him national acclaim, and a commentator's position with CBS News upon his return to the United States in December 1940.
His home was a log cabin without electricity or plumbing, on a farm bringing in only a few hundred dollars a year from corn and hay.
On March 13, 1938, the special was broadcast, hosted by Bob Trout in New York, including Shirer in London (with Labour MP Ellen Wilkinson), reporter Edgar Ansel Mowrer of the ''Chicago Daily News'' in Paris, reporter Pierre J. Huss of the International News Service in Berlin, and Senator Lewis B. Schwellenbach in Washington, D.C. Reporter Frank Gervasi, in Rome, was unable to find a transmitter to broadcast reaction from the Italian capital, but phoned his script to Shirer in London, who read it on the air.
It provoked tens of thousands of letters, telegrams, and phone calls to CBS headquarters, running 15 to 1 in favor.
1,100 guests attended the dinner, which the network broadcast.
After the war, Murrow recruited journalists such as Alexander Kendrick, David Schoenbrun, Daniel Schorr  and Robert Pierpoint into the circle of the Boys, as a virtual "second generation", though the track record of the original wartime crew set it apart.
The broadcast was considered revolutionary at the time.
However, Friendly wanted to wait for the right time to do so.
Murrow had complained to Paley he could not continue doing the show if the network repeatedly provided (without consulting Murrow) equal time to subjects who felt wronged by the program.
In a retrospective produced for ''Biography'', Friendly noted how truck drivers pulled up to Murrow on the street in subsequent days and shouted "Good show, Ed."
In 1990, the WSU Department of Communications became the Edward R. Murrow School of Communication, followed on July 1, 2008, with the school becoming the Edward R. Murrow College of Communication.
His colleague and friend Eric Sevareid said of him, "He was a shooting star; and we will live in his afterglow a very long time."
Veteran international journalist Lawrence Pintak is the college's founding dean.
''See It Now'' was the first television program to have a report about the connection between smoking and cancer; Murrow said during the show that "I doubt I could spend a half hour without a cigarette with any comfort or ease."
His appointment as head of the United States Information Agency was seen as a vote of confidence in the agency, which provided the official views of the government to the public in other nations.
From 1951 to 1955, Murrow was the host of ''This I Believe'', which offered ordinary people the opportunity to speak for five minutes on radio.
Paley replied that he did not want a constant stomach ache every time Murrow covered a controversial subject.
The harsh tone of the Chicago speech seriously damaged Murrow's friendship with Paley, who felt Murrow was biting the hand that fed him.
During this time, he made frequent trips around Europe.
Although the prologue was generally omitted on telecasts of the film, it was included in home video releases.
A pioneer of television news broadcasting, Murrow produced a series of reports that helped lead to the censure of Senator Joseph McCarthy.
Murrow held a grudge dating back to 1944, when Cronkite turned down his offer to head the CBS Moscow bureau.
Fellow journalists Eric Sevareid, Ed Bliss, Bill Downs, Dan Rather, and Alexander Kendrick consider Murrow one of journalism's greatest figures, noting his honesty and integrity in delivering the news.
When Murrow returned to the U.S. in 1941, CBS hosted a dinner in his honor on December 2 at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel.
Murrow's skill at improvising vivid descriptions of what was going on around or below him, derived in part from his college training in speech, aided the effectiveness of his radio broadcasts.
When the war broke out in September 1939, Murrow stayed in London, and later provided live radio broadcasts during the height of the Blitz in ''London After Dark''.
"Ed Murrow was Bill Paley's one genuine friend in CBS," noted Murrow biographer Joseph Persico.
Meanwhile, Murrow, and even some of Murrow's Boys, felt that Shirer was coasting on his high reputation and not working hard enough to bolster his analyses with his own research.
Murrow, possibly knowing he could not work, declined Paley's offer.
These broadcasts electrified radio audiences as news programming never had: previous war coverage had mostly been provided by newspaper reports, along with newsreels seen in movie theaters; earlier radio news programs had simply featured an announcer in a studio reading wire service reports.
In 1956, Murrow took time to appear as the on-screen narrator of a special prologue for Michael Todd's epic production, ''Around the World in 80 Days''.
At the request of CBS management in New York, Murrow and Shirer put together a ''European News Roundup'' of reaction to the Anschluss, which brought correspondents from various European cities together for a single broadcast.
Murrow resigned from CBS to accept a position as head of the United States Information Agency, parent of the Voice of America, in January 1961.
After the war, he maintained close friendships with his previous hires, including members of the Murrow Boys.
So, at the end of one 1940 broadcast, Murrow ended his segment with "Good night, and good luck."
Murrow reported live from Vienna, in the first on-the-scene news report of his career: "This is Edward Murrow speaking from Vienna....
In 1929, while attending the annual convention of the National Student Federation of America, Murrow gave a speech urging college students to become more interested in national and world affairs; this led to his election as president of the federation.
Their son, Charles Casey Murrow, was born in the west of London on November 6, 1945.
Many of them, Shirer included, were later dubbed "Murrow's Boys"—despite Breckinridge being a woman.
