They spent many long hours together in the darkroom, and by 1956 they had produced what Weston called “The Project Prints”, eight sets of 8” × 10” prints from 830 of his negatives.
The show was a critical success.
A joint exhibition of their work in 2001 revealed that during this period Weston emulated Mather's style and, later, her choice of subjects.
This film was rated at about ISO 25, but the developing technique Weston used reduced the effective rating to about ISO 12.
A strength that originally brought them together - her lack of interest in becoming a photographer herself - eventually led to their break-up.
He wanted to spend a couple of months there photographing and promoting his work, and, conveniently, he could travel under the pretense of Modotti being his assistant and translator.
Often he adds up everything ‒ filters, extension, film, speed, and so on ‒ and doubles the computation."
He commissioned Neil to build a small home in the Carmel Highlands on property owned by Wilson's father.
Over the summer, Weston taught photography at the first Ansel Adams Workshop at Yosemite National Park.
While there he met artist Charles Sheeler, photographers  Clarence H. White, Gertrude Kasebier and finally, Stieglitz.
Named after Weston and his wife, he later became a portrait photographer and sometimes assistant to his father.
When he wanted a print that was larger than the original negative size, he used an enlarger to create a larger inter-positive, then contact printed it to a new negative.
This is the first known publication of any of his photographs.
Later that year, Weston was asked by Dr. George L. Waters of Kodak to produce 8 × 10 Kodachrome transparencies for their advertising campaign.
He worked with his sons and Dody to catalog his images and especially to oversee the publication and printing of his work.
Later he would remember that even at that early age his work showed strong artistic merit.
For the next two decades he recorded his thoughts about his work, observations about photography, and his interactions with friends, lovers and family.
The first edition, featuring 96 of Weston's photos with text by Wilson, sold for $3.95.
At that time New York City was the cultural center for photography as an art form in America, and Alfred Stieglitz was the most influential figure in photography.
Later that same year the Smithsonian Institution displayed nearly 100 of these prints at a major exhibit, “The World of Edward Weston”, paying tribute to his accomplishments in American photography.
The only complete set today is housed at the University of California, Santa Cruz.
He decided to stay there and pursue a career in photography, but he soon realized he needed more professional training.
Buoyed by the success of their first book, in 1940 they published ''California and the West''.
His new relationship with Lerner did not last long, and in August 1925 he returned to Mexico, this time with his son Brett.
Each month subscribers would receive a new print from Weston, with a limited edition of 40 copies of each print.
By the time they returned from their trip, Weston and Modotti's relationship had crumbled, and within less than two weeks he and Brett returned to California.
Modotti was grief-stricken, but within a few weeks she felt well enough that she decided to stay and carry out the exhibition that Robo had planned.
One of his strongest images of this period is of three black clay pots that art historian Rene d'Harnoncourt described as "the beginning of a new art."
Weston was known to extensively use dodging and burning to achieve the look he wanted in his prints.
They have been called the artistic prototypes for his most famous nudes, those of Charis Wilson which he would take more than a decade later.
Although he was succeeding professionally his personal life was very complex.
Weston badly wanted to go to New York to meet with him, but he did not have enough money to make the trip.
In May, 1928, Weston and Brett made a brief but important trip to the Mojave Desert.
Weston made 1,260 negatives during the trip.
It was during this period that Weston first met photographer Johan Hagemeyer, whom Weston mentored and lent his studio to from time to time.
It was there that he first explored and photographed landscapes as an art form.
There is no extraneous space nor is there too little."
For the remainder of 1947 through the beginning of 1948, Dody commuted from San Francisco on weekends to learn from Weston the basics of photography.
This allowed Weston to concentrate on her as his muse and model, and in turn Wilson devoted her time to promoting Weston's art as his assistant and quasi-agent.
In his journal he declared "these negatives are the most important I have ever done."
Eventually he was able to get most of the same qualities he preferred with Kodak's Azo glossy silver gelatin paper developed in Amidol.
In early 1934, "a new and important chapter opened" in Weston's life when he met Charis Wilson at a concert.
Serendipitously, an eager young photographic enthusiast, Dody Weston Thompson, contacted him in search of employment.
Later that year he and Brett moved to San Francisco, where they lived and worked in a small studio owned by Hagemeyer.
During this time he worked with Cole, Brett, and Dody Thompson (Brett's wife by 1952), to select and have them print a master set of what he considered his  best work.
He began to experience the first symptoms of Parkinson's disease, a debilitating ailment that gradually stole his strength and his ability to photograph.
On March 22, 1937, Weston received notification that he had been awarded a Guggenheim grant, the first ever given to a photographer.
She became his primary model for the next several years.
At this same time he met Canadian painter Henrietta Shore, whom he asked to comment on the photos of Wardell.
He found the stark rock forms and empty spaces to be a visual revelation, and over a long weekend he took twenty-seven photographs.
Within a few years, however, he abandoned that style and went on to be one of the foremost champions of highly detailed photographic images.
Weston and Modotti were immediately attracted to each other, and they soon became lovers.
Weston was near the end of the Whitman trip, and he was deeply affected by the outbreak of the war.
These images signaled a change in Weston's photographic style, a transition from the soft-focus pictorialism of the past to a new, cleaner-edge style.
He followed these with several more photographs of nude models, the first of dozens of figure studies he would make of friends and lovers over the next twenty years.
He had recently corresponded  with a woman he had known for several years named Miriam Lerner, and as her letters became more passionate he longed to see her again.
Although he created these prints with the same high standards that he did for his exhibition prints, it is thought that he never had more than eleven subscribers.
Weston always made contact prints, meaning that the print was exactly the same size as the negative.
*The camera should be used for a recording of ''life'', for rendering the very substance and quintessence of the ''thing'' itself…I feel definite in the belief that the approach to photography is through realism.
At the open of the show he met fellow photographer Willard Van Dyke, who later introduced Weston to Ansel Adams.
He never traveled to Mexico again.
Among Weston's most important early writings are those that provide insights into his development of the concept of previsualization.
Six months later he wrote one final entry, looking back from April 22:
In 1911 Weston opened his own business, called "The Little Studio", in Tropico.
He began taking close-up nudes of Noskowiak and other models.
Of the hundreds of images he took, forty-nine were selected for publication.
His contract required him to give Brenner three finished prints from 400 8x10 negatives, and it took him until November of that year to complete the work.
Within a few months she moved out and arranged to sell the property to him.
One of the first who agreed to model nude for Weston was Modotti.
The Center for Creative Photography at the University of Arizona, which now houses most of Weston's archives, reports that it houses 75 linear feet of pages from his Daybooks, correspondence, financial records, memorabilia, and other personal documents in his possession when he died.
Weston continued to work on images centered on Wildcat Hill, including shots of the many cats that lived  there.
When he used one of the Graflex cameras the exposure times were much shorter (usually less than ¼ second), and he was sometimes able to work without a tripod.
Chandler had inherited some money when her father died, and although she was not as wealthy as  her cousins, Weston recognized that she had enough money to allow him to start working full-time as a photographer.
Almost immediately he began taking a new series of nudes with Wilson as the model.
Sometime in 1920 he began photographing nude models for the first time.
*After eight months we are closer together than ever.
On December 7, 1941, Pearl Harbor was attacked, and the United States entered World War II.
He said, "I feel that my earliest work of 1903 ‒ though immature ‒ is related more closely, both with technique and composition, to my latest work than are several of my photographs dating from 1913–1920, a period in which I was trying to be artistic."
He spent the first few months of 1942 organizing and printing the negatives from the Whitman trip.
In 1937 Weston was the first photographer to receive a Guggenheim Fellowship, and over the next two years he produced nearly 1,400 negatives using his 8 × 10 view camera.
He wrote that these images were "the start of a new period in my approach and attitude towards photography."
Soon after Weston returned from New York, Robo moved to Mexico and set up a studio there to create batiks.
I have used thirty of them at a sitting if I did not secure the effect to suit me."
Over the course of his 40-year career Weston photographed an increasingly expansive set of subjects, including landscapes, still lifes, nudes, portraits, genre scenes and even whimsical parodies.
In 1947 he was diagnosed with Parkinson's disease and he stopped photographing soon thereafter.
While working on a major retrospective exhibition for the Museum of Modern Art, he and Wilson separated.
They purchased a new car and set out on Weston's dream trip to go and photograph whatever he wanted.
He made portraits to earn an income, but he longed to get away by himself and get back to his art.
The smaller Graflex cameras he used had the advantage of using film magazines that held either 12 or 18 sheets of film.
He reported that with his Graflex he once made three dozen negatives of Tina Modotti within 20 minutes.In 1946 a representative from Kodak asked Weston to try out their new Kodachrome film, and over the next two years he made at least 60 8 x 10 color images using this film."
In early 1948, Dody moved into “Bodie House,” the guest cottage at Edward's Wildcat Hill compound, as his full-time assistant.
The lens, now in the George Eastman House, did not have a manufacturer's name.
He also followed in the footsteps of his father and became a well-known photographer.
Already I have achieved certain heights reached with no other love.
He quickly arranged a dual exhibition at University of California of the photographs that he and Brett had made the year before.
These images were very different from his previous nude studies - sharply focused and showing her entire body in relation to the natural setting.
When combined with his photographs, his writings provide an extraordinarily vivid series of insights into his development as an artist and his impact of future generations of photographers.
He asked to look at her work and was intrigued by her large paintings of sea shells.
Inspired by Weston's show at the De Young Museum the previous year, they approached the museum with the idea of mounting a group exhibition of their work.
Weston mentioned he had just that morning written a letter to Ansel Adams, looking for someone seeking to learn photography in exchange for carrying his bulky large-format camera and to provide a much needed automobile.
In 1904 May and her family moved to California, leaving Weston further isolated in Chicago.
He burned all of his pre-Mexico journals, as though trying to erase the past, and started a new series of nudes with Lerner and with his son Neil.
He is "feeling the light" and checking his own observations.
In 1950 there was a major retrospective of his work at the Musee National d'Art Moderne in Paris, and in 1952 he published a Fiftieth Anniversary portfolio, with images printed by Brett.
Weston died at his home on Wildcat Hill on New Year’s Day, 1958.
Finally relieved from the financial stresses of the past and inordinately happy with his work and his relationship, Weston married Wilson in a small ceremony on April 24.
*8 x 10 Century Universal
However, the Wall Street Crash of 1929 had wiped out most of her savings, and Weston felt increased pressure to help provide more for her and his sons.
He asked Mather to be his studio assistant, and for the next decade they worked closely together, making individual and jointly signed portraits of such luminaries as Carl Sandburg and Max Eastman.
Over the next twelve months they made seventeen trips and covered 16,697 miles according to Wilson's detailed log.
She was very outgoing and artistic in a flamboyant way, and her permissive sexual morals were far different from the conservative Weston at the time - Mather had been a prostitute and was bisexual with a preference for women.
As a present for his 16th birthday Weston's father gave him his first camera, a Kodak Bull's-Eye #2, which was a simple box camera.
Their fourth son, Cole Weston (1919–2003), was born on January 30, 1919, and afterward she rarely had time to leave their home.
He implored Wilson to come and live with him, and in August 1935 she finally agreed.
He has been called "one of the most innovative and influential American photographers…" and "one of the masters of 20th century photography."
The new larger negative was then used to make a print of that size.
And I can seldom say that of photographs."
He began as a more serious photographer in 1902 when he purchased a 5 x 7 camera.
Weston treated them with the same serious intent that he applied to all of his other subjects, and Charis assembled the results into their most unusual publication, ''The Cats of Wildcat Hill,'' which was finally published in 1947.
Some of his most famous photographs were taken of the trees and rocks at Point Lobos, California, near where he lived for many years.
Weston seemed to be struggling with his past and his future during this period.
*"Weston arranged his compositions so that things happened on the edges; lines almost cross or meet and circular lines just touch the edges tangentially; his compositions were now created exclusively for a space with the proportions of eight by ten.
The first of their four sons, Edward Chandler Weston (1910–1993), known as Chandler, was born on April 26, 1910.
They would continue to live together for five years.
He was surprised by her honest critique: "I wish you would not do so many nudes &ndash; you are getting ''used'' to them, the subject no longer amazes you ‒ most of these are ''just'' nudes."
In early 1923 Modotti left by train to be with Robo in Mexico, but he contracted smallpox and died shortly before she arrived.
When he went to Mexico in 1924 he took an 8 × 10 Seneca folding-bed view camera with several lenses, including a Graf Variable and a Wollensak Verito.
The first was at Alma Reed's Delphic Studio Galley in New York, followed closely by a mounting of the same show at the Denny Watrous Gallery in Carmel.
For several months they took portraits that they signed with both of their names.
For the next three years he worked alone in his studio, making portraits of children and friends.
Due to the war, Point Lobos was closed to the public for several years.
Weston had never worked in color before, primarily because he had no means of developing or printing the more complicated color process.
Meanwhile, Flora was spending all of her time caring for their children.
Early in his career Weston printed on several kinds of paper, including Velox, Apex, Convira, Defender Velour Black and Haloid.
He placed a sign in studio window that said, "Edward Weston, Photographer, Unretouched Portraits, Prints for Collectors."
Wilson set up a writing studio in what was intended to be a small garage behind the house, and she spent several months writing and editing stories from their travels.
After the show closed Modotti returned to California, and Weston and she made plans to return to Mexico together.
The smaller camera allowed him to interact more with his models, while at the same time the nudes he took during this period began to resemble some of the contorted root and vegetables he had taken the year before.
Perhaps C. will be remembered as the great love of my life.
According to his son Cole, after Agfa Isopan film came out in the 1930s Weston used it for his black-and-white images for the rest of his life.
At that time many of his prints were still for sale, and he sold 97 prints from the exhibit at $25 per print.
His first models were his wife Flora and their children, but soon thereafter he took at least three nude studies of Mather.
During his lifetime Weston worked with several cameras.
He withdrew from Wilson, who at the same time began to become more involved in local politics and the Carmel cultural scene.
His critical eye paid off as he quickly gained more recognition for his work.
The different culture and scenery in Mexico forced Weston to look at things in new ways.
He took it on vacation in the Midwest, and by the time he returned home his interest in photography was enough to lead him to purchase a used 5 × 7&nbsp;inch view camera.
This was the only time in his long career that Weston shared credit with another photographer.
They arrived in Mexico City on August 11 and rented a large hacienda outside of the city..
Charis did not want to scurry.
Weston did not have an artificial ultra-violet light source, so he had to place the contact print directly in sunlight in order to expose it.
He immediately recognized the change and later recorded it in his notes: "The Middletown visit was something to remember…most of all in importance was my photographing of 'Armco'…That day I made great photographs, even Stieglitz thought they were important!"
After May was married and left their home in 1897, Weston's father devoted most of his time to his new wife and her son.
Sometime in the summer of 1908 Weston was introduced to his sister's best friend, Flora May Chandler.
He continued to use this equipment throughout his life.
In June he, Modotti and Brett started traveling around the country in search of lesser known native arts and crafts.
Photo historian Nancy Newhall wrote that "Young photographers are confused and amazed when they behold him measuring with his meter every value in the sphere where he intends to work, from the sky to the ground under his feet.
During the first 20 years of his photography Weston determined all of his exposure settings by estimation based on his previous experiences and the relatively narrow tolerances of the film at that time.
It was edited by Merle Armitage and dedicated to Alice Rohrer, an admirer and patron of Weston whose $500 donation helped pay for the book to be published.
Sometime in the fall of 1913, Los Angeles photographer, Margrethe Mather visited Weston's studio because of his growing reputation, and within a few months they developed an intense relationship.
The school refused to give him a diploma unless he paid for the full nine months; Weston refused and instead moved back to California in the spring of 1908.
In August of that year Noskowiak brought him several green peppers, and over a four-day period he shot at least thirty different negatives.
The freedom of this trip with the "love of his life", combined with all of his sons now reaching the age of adulthood, gave Weston the motivation to finally divorce his wife.
Each sheet of film was viewed under either a green or an orange safelight in his darkroom, allowing him to control the individual development of a negative.
These were followed by shows at De Young Museum in San Francisco and the Galerie Jean Naert in Paris.
In 1947 as his Parkinson’s disease progressed, Weston began looking for an assistant.
Modotti, who was then known only as a stage and film actress, was never married to Robo, but they pretended to be for the sake of his family.
Weston was born in Chicago and moved to California when he was 21.
He also wrote dozens of articles and commentaries, beginning in 1906 and ending in 1957, and he hand-wrote or typed at least 5,000 letters to colleagues, friends, lovers, his wives and his children.
In January, 1935 Weston was facing increasing financial difficulties.
Although he initially denied that his images reflect his own interpretations of the subject matter, by 1932 his writings revealed that he had come to accept the importance of artistic impression in his work.
Weston wrote that Stieglitz told him, "Your work and attitude reassures me.
The 8 × 10 cameras he preferred were large and heavy, and due to the weight and the cost of the film he never carried more than twelve sheet film holders with him.
Within a few months he moved to the more established studio of Louis Mojonier.
One of the first photographs he took of her, on the balcony of their home, became one of his most published images (''Nude (Charis, Santa Monica)'').
She was nine years older than he, and they developed a very close bond that was one of the few steady relationships in Weston's life.
He exhibited only one or two of this series in his lifetime, thinking several of the others were "too erotic" for the general public.
Intrigued by the many kinds and shapes of kelp he found on the beaches near Carmel, in 1930 Weston began taking close-ups of vegetables and fruits.
One of this series, of her kneeling body cut off at the shoulders, is one of Weston's most well-known figure studies.
In his ''Daybooks'' he provided an unusually detailed record of his evolution as an artist.
Brett was only 15 years old at the time.
After he began taking more portraits of children, he bought a 3 ¼ x 4 ¼ Graflex in 1912 in order to better capture their quickly changing expressions.
He did not mention that Wilson had written the new application for him.
He would receive $1,000 for photographs and $500 travel expenses.
Soon after they took the first of several trips to Oceano Dunes, not far from Santa Monica.
One of these, simply called ''Nautilus'', 1927" (sometimes called ''Shell'', 1927), became one of his most famous images.
This process was very labor-intensive; he once wrote in his ''Daybooks'' "I am utterly exhausted tonight after a whole day in the darkroom, making eight contact negatives from the enlarged positives."
Roi Partridge, Imogen Cunningham's husband, later made an etching of Weston in his studio, dwarfed by the giant camera in front of him.
His sister later asked him why he opened his studio in Tropico rather than in the nearby metropolis of Los Angeles, and he replied "Sis, I'm going to make my name so famous that it won’t matter where I live."
A decade later he described her as "the first important person in my life, and perhaps even now, though personal contact has gone, the most important."
He and Beaumont Newhall selected 313 prints for the exhibition, and eventually 250 photographs were displayed along with 11 negatives.
For the next several years Weston continued to earn a living by taking portraits in his small studio which he called "the shack".
He closed his studio in Carmel and moved to Santa Monica Canyon, California, where he opened a new studio with Brett.
He and Chandler returned to San Francisco at the end of 1924, and the next month he set up a studio with Hagemeyer.
Modotti had arranged a joint show of their photographs, and it opened the week he returned.
In 1933 he purchased a 4 x 5 R. B. Auto-Graflex and used it thereafter for all portraits.
His father remarried when he was nine, but neither Weston nor his sister got along with their new stepmother and stepbrother.
Weston initially returned to his old studio in Glendale (previously called Tropico).
On December 6, 1916, a third son, Lawrence Neil Weston, was born.
That year he took his last photographs, at Point Lobos.
