Several generations of Egyptians exposed to the ideas of constitutionalism made up the emerging intellectual and political milieu that slowly filled the ranks of the government, the army and institutions which had long been dominated by an aristocracy of Turks, Greeks, Circassians and Armenians.
Nasser's successor Anwar el-Sadat, both through public policy and his peace initiative with Israel, revived an uncontested Egyptian orientation, unequivocally asserting that only Egypt and Egyptians were his responsibility.
In 1931, following a visit to Egypt, Syrian Arab nationalist Sati' al-Husri remarked that "Egyptians did not possess an Arab nationalist sentiment; did not accept that Egypt was a part of the Arab lands, and would not acknowledge that the Egyptian people were part of the Arab nation."
Ismail's reign witnessed the growth of the army, major education reforms, the founding of the Egyptian Museum and the Royal Opera House, the rise of an independent political press, a flourishing of the arts, and the inauguration of the Suez Canal.
Native Egyptians filled administrative ranks and continued to worship freely so long as they paid the jizya poll tax, in addition to a land tax that all Egyptians irrespective of religion also had to pay.
Hence, names and many toponyms may end with ''-nouda'', ''-noudi'' or ''-nuti'', which means ''Of God'' in Egyptian and Coptic.
Ancient Egypt was among the earliest and greatest civilizations during which the Egyptians maintained a strikingly complex and stable culture that influenced later cultures of Europe, the Near East and Africa.
The Byzantine period was particularly brutal in its zeal to erase any traces of ancient Egyptian religion.
In 1907, he founded the Umma Party newspaper, el-Garida, whose statement of purpose read: "El-Garida is a purely Egyptian party which aims to defend Egyptian interests of all kinds."
The 25th dynasty of Nubian rulers was again briefly replaced by native nobility in the 7th century BC, and in 525 BC, Egypt fell under Persian rule.
Meanwhile, the new religion of Islam was making headway in Arabia, culminating in the Muslim conquests that took place following Muhammad's Passing on.
Arabic was adopted by the Egyptians after the Arab invasion of Egypt.
The main temple of Isis remained a major center of worship in Egypt until the reign of the Byzantine emperor Justinian I in the 6th century, when it was finally closed down.
In addition, Egyptian families often derive their name from places in Egypt, such as Minyawi from Minya and Suyuti from Asyut; or from one of the local Sufi orders such as el-Shazli and el-Sawy.
A revival in animal cults, the hallmark of the Predyanstic and Early Dyanstic periods, is said to have come about to fill a spiritual void as Egyptians became increasingly disillusioned and weary due to successive waves of foreign invasions.
The societal structure created by this system of government remained virtually unchanged up to modern times.
The Roman emperor Caracalla advocated the expulsion of all ethnic Egyptians from the city of Alexandria, saying "genuine Egyptians can easily be recognized among the linen-weavers by their speech."
Nasser's politics was shaped by his conviction that all the Arab states were contending with anti-imperialist struggles and thus solidarity between them was imperative for independence.
Questions of identity came to fore in the 20th century as Egyptians sought to free themselves from British occupation, leading to the rise of ethno-territorial secular Egyptian nationalism (also known as "Pharaonism").
This attitude lasted until AD 212 when Roman citizenship was finally granted to all the inhabitants of Egypt, though ethnic divisions remained largely entrenched.
Throughout the Pharaonic epoch (viz., from 2920 BC to 525 BC in conventional Egyptian chronology), divine kingship was the glue which held Egyptian society together.
Sadat was assassinated in Cairo by members of the Egyptian Islamic Jihad in 1981, and was succeeded by Hosni Mubarak.
Dhul-Nun was regarded as the Patron Saint of the Physicians and is credited with having introduced the concept of Gnosis into Islam, as well as of being able to decipher a number of hieroglyphic characters due to his knowledge of Coptic.
He garnered such massive popularity among the Egyptian people that he came to be known as 'Father of the Egyptians'.
Frequent revolts by the Egyptian peasantry against the Ottoman-Mamluk Beys took place throughout the 18th century, particularly in Upper Egypt where the peasants at one point wrested control of the region and declared a separatist government.
According to Dawisha, the terms "Arab", "Arabism" and "Arab unity", save for the new official name, became conspicuously absent.
With the adoption of Christianity and eventually Islam, Egyptians began to take on names associated with these religions.
The peoples of Egypt, the Sudan, and much of East Africa, Ethiopia and Somalia are now generally regarded as a Nile Valley continuity, with widely ranging physical features (complexions light to dark, various hair and craniofacial types) but with powerful common cultural traits, including cattle pastoralist traditions (Trigger 1978; Bard, Snowden, this volume).
Mohammed Ali is credited for having undertaken a massive campaign of public works, including irrigation projects, agricultural reforms and the cultivation of cash crops (notably cotton, rice and sugar-cane), increased industrialization, and a new educational system—the results of which are felt to this day.
It was focused on earlier stages of Egyptian history when Egyptians were independent and ruled by great native pharaohs such as Ramesses II.
The Psalms and part of the New Testament were translated at the school from Greek to Egyptian, which had already begun to be written in Greek letters with the addition of a number of demotic characters.
Under the Ayyubids, the country for the most part continued to prosper until it fell to the Mamluks.
According to Irish:
When the role of the king waned, the country became more susceptible to foreign influence and invasion.
In 1866, the Assembly of Delegates was founded to serve as an advisory body for the government.
A sizable Egyptian diaspora did not begin to form until well into the 1980s, when political and economic conditions began driving Egyptians out of the country in significant numbers.
This suggests that the language by then was spoken by the majority of Egyptians.
Foreigners in Egyptian texts were described in derogatory terms, e.g., 'wretched Asiatics' (Semites), 'vile Kushites' (Nubians), and 'Ionian dogs' (Greeks).
The degree to which Egyptians identify with each layer of Egypt's history in articulating a sense of collective identity can vary.
Although power was ostensibly organized under a multi-party semi-presidential system, in practice it rested almost solely with the president.
Classical Arabic is also a significant cultural element in Egyptian culture, as Egyptian novelists and poets were among the first to experiment with modern styles of Arabic literature, and the forms they developed have been widely imitated.
The Fatimids with some exceptions were known for their religious tolerance and their observance of local Muslim, Coptic and indigenous Egyptian festivals and customs.
Under emperor Theodosius I, Christianity had already been proclaimed the religion of the Empire and all pagan cults were forbidden.
Egyptians fought one last time in the 1973 October War in an attempt to liberate Egyptian territories captured by Israel six years earlier.
According to tradition, Christianity was brought to Egypt by Saint Mark the Evangelist in the early 40s of the 1st century, under the reign of the Roman emperor Nero.
Three of his published volumes were works of political and moral philosophy.
While a huge majority of the Egyptian Arabic dialect is derived from the formal Arabic language, it has also been highly influenced by many other languages such as French, Turkish and even the old Pharaonic language.
Thus in seeking a cultural identity, Egypt has revived its Arab cultural heritage."
For that matter, the Neolithic Western Desert sample is significantly different from all others but is closest to predynastic and early dynastic samples.
The Egyptian sense of superiority was given religious validation, as foreigners in the land of ''Ta-Meri'' (Egypt) were anathema to the maintenance of Maat—a view most clearly expressed by the admonitions of Ipuwer in reaction to the chaotic events of the Second Intermediate Period.
The art of mummy portraiture flourished, but Egypt became further stratified with Romans at the apex of the social pyramid, Greeks and Jews occupied the middle stratum, while Egyptians, who constituted the vast majority, were at the bottom.
Prior to 1974, only few Egyptian professionals had left the country in search for employment.
The Egyptian army was disbanded and a smaller army commanded by British officers was installed in its place.
Ismail's massive modernization campaign, however, left Egypt indebted to European powers, leading to increased European meddling in local affairs.
A 2006 bioarchaeological study on the dental morphology of ancient Egyptians by Prof. Joel Irish shows dental traits characteristic of indigenous North Africans and to a lesser extent Southwest Asian and southern European populations.
Many Egyptians today feel that Egyptian and Arab identities are inextricably linked, and emphasize the central role that Egypt plays in the Arab world.
The king of Egypt, as a living personification of Horus, could claim the throne after burying his predecessor, who was typically his father.
By the end of the 4th century, it is estimated that the mass of the Egyptians had either embraced Christianity or were nominally Christian.
Nevertheless, a year after the establishment of the League of Arab States in 1945, to be headquartered in Cairo, Oxford University historian H. S. Deighton was still writing:
One of these students, whose name was Rifa'a et-Tahtawy, was the first in a long line of intellectuals that started the modern Egyptian Renaissance.
The Egyptians were deeply hostile to the French, whom they viewed as yet another foreign occupation to be resisted.
He was keenly interested in ancient Egyptian sciences, and claimed to have received his knowledge of alchemy from Egyptian sources.
Conversely, some Levantines might carry the surname el-Masri ("the Egyptian") suggesting a possible Egyptian extraction.
The French occupation was short-lived, ending when British troops drove out the French in 1801.
Keita describes the northern and southern patterns of the early predynastic period as "northern-Egyptian-Maghreb" and "tropical African variant" (overlapping with Nubia/Kush) respectively.
Tahtawi encouraged his compatriots to invite Europeans to come and teach the modern sciences in Egypt, drawing on the example of Pharaoh Psamtek I who had enlisted the Greeks' help in organizing the Egyptian army.
Among these were Mustafa Kamil and Ahmed Lutfi el-Sayed, the architects of modern Egyptian nationalism.
After the resignation of Hosni Mubarak presidential powers were transferred to the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces, who relinquished power on 30 June 2012 when Mohamed Morsi became the first democratically elected head of state in Egyptian history.
Many Egyptians student missions were sent to Europe in the early 19th century to study at European universities and acquire technical skills such as printing, shipbuilding and modern military techniques.
The third theologian to head the Catachetical School was a native Egyptian by the name of Origen.
The majority live near the banks of the Nile River where the only arable land is found.
The recorded history of Egyptian Arabic as a separate dialect begins in Ottoman Egypt with a document by a 17th-century author writing about the peculiarities of the speech of the Egyptian people.
Alexander the Great was greeted as a liberator when he conquered Egypt in 332 BC.
The Egyptians' attachment to Arabism was particularly questioned after the 1967 Six-Day War.
The language of administration became Greek, but the mass of the Egyptian population was Egyptian-speaking and concentrated in the countryside, while most Greeks lived in Alexandria and only few had any knowledge of Egyptian.
For example, phenetic distances between First-Second Dynasty Abydos and samples from Fourth Dynasty Saqqara (MMD ¼ 0.050), 11–12th Dynasty Thebes (0.000), 12th Dynasty Lisht (0.072), 19th Dynasty Qurneh (0.053), and 26th–30th Dynasty Giza (0.027) do not exhibit a directional increase through time...
Origen was an outstanding theologian and one of the most influential Church Fathers.
When Egypt fell under the jurisdiction of Constantinople after the split of the Roman Empire, many ancient Egyptians temples were either destroyed or converted into monasteries.
The official language of Egypt today is Arabic.
Approximately 90% of the population of Egypt are Muslim and 10% are Christian (9% Coptic, 1% other Christian) based on the government census that is estimated, though estimates vary.
Coptic art developed its own national character, and the Copts stood united against the imperial power."
It remained a super-regional power throughout the Amarna Period as well as during the 19th and 20th dynasties (the Ramesside Period), lasting into the Early Iron Age.
During this period, the Egyptian civilization rose to the status of an empire under Pharaoh Thutmose III of the 18th dynasty.
Although the Arabism instilled in the country by Nasser was not deeply embedded in society, a certain kinship with the rest of the Arab world was firmly established and Egypt saw itself as the leader of this larger cultural entity.
Egyptian independence at this stage was provisional, as British forces continued to be physically present on Egyptian soil.
Dinshaway, a watershed in the history of Egyptian anti-colonial resistance, galvanized Egyptian opposition against the British, culminating in the founding of the first two political parties in Egypt: the secular, liberal ''Umma'' (the Nation, 1907) headed by Ahmed Lutfi el-Sayed, and the more radical, pro-Islamic ''Watani'' Party (National Party, 1908) headed by Mustafa Kamil.
3200 BC, the distinction began to blur, resulting in a more homogeneous population in Egypt, though the distinction remains true to some degree to this day.
The Late Period of ancient Egypt is taken to end with his death in 323 BC.
The Egyptian is Pharaonic before being Arab."
As others have noted, Egyptians are Egyptians, and they were so in the past as well."
This period was looked upon with fondness by future generations of Egyptians as a Golden Age of Egyptian liberalism, openness, and an Egypt-centered attitude that put the country's interests center stage.
The spoken vernacular is known as Egyptian Arabic, while Modern Standard Arabic is reserved for more formal contexts as is the case in all Arab countries.
Some biological anthropologists such as Shomarka Keita believe the range of variability to be primarily indigenous and not necessarily the result of significant intermingling of widely divergent peoples.
Sheikh Muhammad Abduh, the son of a Delta farmer who was briefly exiled for his participation in the Urabi revolt and a future Azhar Mufti, was its most notable advocate.
In them he introduces his students to Enlightenment ideas such as secular authority and political rights and liberty; his ideas regarding how a modern civilized society ought to be and what constituted by extension a civilized or "good Egyptian"; and his ideas on public interest and public good.
As Coptologist Jill Kamil notes, the position taken by the Egyptians "paved the way for the Coptic church to establish itself as a separate entity...No longer even spiritually linked with Constantinople, theologians began to write more in Coptic and less in Greek.
The form of Islam that eventually took hold in Egypt was Sunni, though very early in this period Egyptians began to blend their new faith with indigenous beliefs and practices that had survived through Coptic Christianity.
Thousands of Egyptians had lost their lives, and the country became disillusioned with Arab politics.
Prominent among these was Saad Zaghlul who led the new movement through the Wafd Party.
This made Alexander in the eyes of the Egyptians a legitimate heir to the native pharaohs.
During this era, in 1978, Egyptian-American sociologist Saad Eddin Ibrahim studied the national discourse between 17 Egyptian intellectuals relating to Egypt's identity and peace with Israel.
Egyptians are predominantly adherents of Sunni Islam with a Shia minority and a significant proportion who follow native Sufi orders.
Saad Zaghlul became the first popularly elected Prime Minister of Egypt in 1924.
Various Sufi orders were founded in the 8th century and flourished until the present day.
Egyptian identity is closely tied to geography.
In 2003, the Egyptian Movement for Change or simply ''Kefaya'' (Arabic for "Enough!")
A large influx of fellahin into urban cities, and rapid urbanization of many rural areas since the early 20th century, have shifted the balance between the number of urban and rural citizens.
The calendar revolved around the annual Nile Inundation (''akh.t''), the first of three seasons into which the year was divided.
When Napoleon invited the Egyptian ''ulama'' to head a French-supervised government in Egypt, for some, it awakened a sense of nationalism and a patriotic desire for national independence from the Turks.
He also co-founded with his contemporary Ali Mubarak, the architect of the modern Egyptian school system, a native Egyptology school that looked for inspiration to medieval Egyptian scholars like Suyuti and Maqrizi, who studied ancient Egyptian history, language and antiquities.
This unique geography has been the basis of the development of Egyptian society since antiquity.
In this manner, surnames continuously change with generations, as first names of 4th or 5th generations get dropped.
Names starting with the Egyptian affix ''pu'' ("of the place of") were sometimes Arabized to ''abu'' ("father of"); for example, Busiri ("of the place of Osiris") occasionally became Abusir and al-Busiri.
The Roman emperors lived abroad and did not perform the ceremonial functions of Egyptian kingship as the Ptolemies had.
Biological continuity was also found intact from the dynastic to the post-pharaonic periods.
It gathered momentum between 1882 and 1906, ultimately leading to a resentment against European occupation.
When Egyptians were persecuted by Diocletian, many retreated to the desert to seek relief.
Among Mohammed Ali's successors, the most influential was Isma'il Pasha who became khedive in 1863.
Egyptians built tombs for their dead that were meant to last for eternity.
It will remain so, and it must continue and become stronger.
For a while Egypt and Syria formed the United Arab Republic (UAR).
Before the Muslim conquest of Egypt, the Byzantine Emperor Heraclius was able to reclaim the country after a brief Persian invasion in AD 616, and subsequently appointed Cyrus of Alexandria, a Chalcedonian, as Patriarch.
The Romans, like the Ptolemies, treated Egypt like their own private property, a land exploited for the benefit of a small foreign elite.
Close to half of the Egyptian people today are urban; most of the rest are fellahin that are native, along with descendants of several Arab tribes living in rural towns and villages.
Twice Libya was on the brink of war with Egypt due to mistreatment of Egyptian workers and after the signing of the peace treaty with Israel.
The southern pattern continues to predominate in Abydos, Upper Egypt by the First Dynasty, but "lower Egyptian, Maghrebian, and European patterns are observed also, thus making for great diversity."
He was famous for coining the popular expression, "If I had not been an Egyptian, I would have wished to become one."
As each nation came and went, the Egyptians kept the few words and phrases that made the language seem easier.
Saad Zaghlul held several ministerial positions before he was elected to the Legislative Assembly and organized a mass movement demanding an end to the British Protectorate.
Over the years, abuse, exploitation and/or ill-treatment of Egyptian workers and professionals in the Arab states of the Persian Gulf, Iraq and Libya have been reported by the Egyptian Human Rights Organization and different media outlets.
Arab nationals have in the past expressed fear over an "'Egyptianization' of the local dialects and culture that were believed to have resulted from the predominance of Egyptians in the field of education" (see also Egyptian Arabic – Geographics).
The new Muslim rulers moved the capital to Fustat and, through the 7th century, retained the existing Byzantine administrative structure with Greek as its language.
By the 15th century most Egyptians had already been converted to Islam, while Coptic Christians were reduced to a minority.
On the other hand, Egyptians migrating to Arab countries almost always only go there with the intention of returning to Egypt; virtually none settle in the new country on a permanent basis.
Others continue to believe that Egypt and Egyptians are simply not Arab, emphasizing indigenous Egyptian heritage, culture and independent polity, pointing to the perceived failures of Arab and pan-Arab nationalist policies.
Today, the diaspora numbers nearly 4 million (2006 est).
It is best known for the renewed interest in Egyptian antiquity and the cultural achievements that were inspired by it.
In 1936, the Anglo-Egyptian Treaty was concluded.
He rallied support among the Egyptians until he was elected by the native Muslim ''ulama'' as governor of Egypt.
All the samples, particularly those of the Dynastic period, were significantly divergent from a neolithic West Saharan sample from Lower Nubia.
In addition, the French introduced the printing press in Egypt and published its first newspaper.
Slowly, an organized national movement for independence began to form.
When on March 8, 1919 the British arrested Zaghlul and his associates and exiled them to Malta, the Egyptian people staged their first modern revolution.
When Alexander died, a story began to circulate that Nectanebo II was Alexander's father.
Consequently, many sites believed to have been the resting places of the holy family during their sojourn in Egypt became sacred to the Egyptians.
Demonstrations and strikes across Egypt became such a daily occurrence that normal life was brought to a halt.
Regular inundations were a cause for celebration; low waters often meant famine and starvation.
After the Pharaonic era, the Egyptians themselves came under the influence of Hellenism, Christianity and Islamic culture.
Egyptian anthropologist Laila el-Hamamsy illustrates the modern-day relationship between the two trends, stating: "in light of their history, Egyptians ... should be conscious of their national identity and consider themselves, above all, Egyptians.
The king in his role as Son of Ra was entrusted to maintain Ma'at, the principle of truth, justice and order, and to enhance the country's agricultural economy by ensuring regular Nile floods.
It is also noteworthy that the Egyptian dialect is the most understood version of the Arabic language amongst the Arab world.
This was done by the addition of the Greek suffix ''-ios'' to Egyptian names; for example, Pakhom to Pakhomios; or by adding the Arabic definite article ''el'' to names such as Baymoui to el-Bayoumi.
Most Egyptians today were skeptical about the process of democratization and feared that power might ultimately be transferred to the president's first son, Gamal Mubarak.
Many died in the chaos, and the resentment of the Egyptians against their Byzantine conquerors reached a peak.
Egyptians in neighboring countries face additional challenges.
Prophetic writings circulated among Egyptians promising expulsion of the Greeks, and frequent revolts by the Egyptians took place throughout the Ptolemaic period.
Egyptians under the Ottoman Turks from the 16th to the 18th centuries lived within a social hierarchy similar to that of the Mamluks, Arabs, Romans, Greeks and Persians before them.
Sadat revived an ''Egypt Above All'' orientation, switched Egypt's Cold War allegiance from the Soviet Union to the United States, expelling Soviet advisors in 1972, and launched the Infitah economic reform policy.
The authority of the Miaphysite doctrine of the Coptic Church was for the first time nationally recognized.
He was born in Akhmim in AD 796 and achieved political and social leadership over the Egyptian people.
Egyptian scholar Gamal Hamdan stressed that Egyptian identity was unique, but that Egypt was the center and "cultural hub" of the Arab world, arguing that "Egypt in the Arab world is like Cairo in Egypt."
The concept of a surname is lacking in Egypt.
He expelled Coptic monks and bishops from their monasteries and sees.
At the same time, the French expedition introduced Egyptians to the ideals of the French Revolution which were to have a significant influence on their own self-perception and realization of modern independence.
The greatest was one in which disaffected Muslim Egyptians joined their Christian compatriots around AD 830 in an unsuccessful attempt to repel the Arabs.
Christianity was tolerated in the Roman Empire until AD 284, when the Emperor Diocletian persecuted and put to death a great number of Christian Egyptians.
The October War presented Sadat with a political victory that later allowed him to regain the Sinai.
A sizable minority of Egyptians belong to the Coptic Orthodox Church, whose liturgical language, Coptic, is the most recent stage of the indigenous Egyptian language.
According to one historian, "Egypt had, for the first time since 343 BC, been ruled not by a Macedonian Greek, nor a Roman, nor an Arab, nor a Turk, but by an Egyptian."
It became known as the 'Era of the Martyrs' and is commemorated in the Coptic calendar in which dating of the years began with the start of Diocletian's reign.
The Egyptian Muslim historian Ibn Abd al-Hakam spoke harshly of the Abbasids—a reaction that according to Egyptologist Okasha El-Daly can be seen "within the context of the struggle between proud native Egyptians and the central Abbasid caliphate in Iraq."
When the Gulf War ended, Egyptian workers in Iraq were subjected to harsh measures and expulsion by the Iraqi government and to violent attacks by Iraqis returning from the war to fill the workforce.
The local priesthood continued to wield power as they had during the Dynastic age.
Within 50 years of St. Mark's arrival in Alexandria, a fragment of New Testament writings appeared in Oxyrhynchus (Bahnasa), which suggests that Christianity already began to spread south of Alexandria at an early date.
Egyptians have also been impacted by the wars between Egypt and Israel, particularly after the Six-Day War in 1967, when migration rates began to rise.
Similar craniofacial measurements among samples from these regions were reported as well (Brace et al., 1993)... an inspection of MMD values reveals no evidence of increasing phenetic distance between samples from the first and second halves of this almost 3,000-year-long period.
The daily language of the Egyptians is the local variety of Arabic, known as Egyptian Arabic or ''Masri.
It constitutes its own branch of the Afroasiatic family.
The Egyptians for their part object to what they call the "" of their culture due to Saudi Arabian petrodollar-flush investment in the Egyptian entertainment industry.
One of the earliest Egyptian Sufis was Dhul-Nun al-Misri (i.e., Dhul-Nun the Egyptian).
The Egyptian peasants, pressed for maximum production to meet Roman quotas, suffered and fled to the desert.
It was not until the Nasser era more than a decade later that Arab nationalism, and by extension Arab socialism, became a state policy and a means with which to define Egypt's position in the Middle East and the world, usually articulated vis-à-vis Zionism in the neighboring new state of Israel.
It is represented in a body of vernacular literature comprising novels, plays and poetry published over the course of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
The feast of the coming of the Lord of Egypt on June 1 became an important part of Christian Egyptian tradition.
But while Christianity continued to thrive in Egypt, the old pagan beliefs which had survived the test of time were facing mounting pressure.
Thus, despite increasing foreign influence after the Second Intermediate Period, not only did Egyptian culture remain intact (Lloyd, 2000a), but the people themselves, as represented by the dental samples, appear biologically constant as well... Gebel Ramlah Neolithic Nubian/Western Desert sample is, in fact, significantly different from Badari based on the 22-trait MMD (Table 4).
The visit of the holy family later circulated among Egyptian Christians as fulfillment of the Biblical prophecy "When Israel was a child, then I loved him, and called my son out of Egypt" (Hosea 11:1).
It is not entirely unusual for families of Egyptian origin (especially Coptic ones) to have names or family names beginning with the Egyptian masculine possessive pronoun ''pa'' (generally ''ba'' in Arabic, which lost the phoneme  in the course of developing from Proto-Semitic).
St. Mark is said to have founded the Holy Apostolic See of Alexandria and to have become its first Patriarch.
The army would later conduct military expeditions in the Levant, Sudan and against the Wahabis in Arabia.
Egyptian critics of Arab nationalism contend that it has worked to erode and/or relegate native Egyptian identity by superimposing only one aspect of Egypt's culture.
They delineated a liberal outlook for their country expressed as a commitment to individual freedom, secularism, an evolutionary view of the world and faith in science to bring progress to human society.
Hamdan further contended "We do not see the Egyptian personality, no matter how distinct it may be, as anything other than a part of the personality of the greater Arab homeland."
Some people might also have surnames like el-Shamy ("the Levantine") indicating a possible Levantine origin, or Dewidar indicating an Ottoman-Mamluk remnant.
Ascendancy to the Egyptian throne reflected the myth of Horus who assumed kingship after he buried his murdered father Osiris.
A segment of the most Westernized upper class argued that Egypt was part of a Mediterranean civilization.
He shows that a progressive change in Upper Egypt toward the northern Egyptian pattern takes place through the predynastic period.
The ancient Egyptians personified the river flood as the god Hapy and dedicated a ''Hymn to the Nile'' to celebrate it.
This was most prominently expressed by the Great Pyramids.
Al-Azhar was founded in AD 970 in the new capital Cairo, not very far from its ancient predecessor in Memphis.
