Ahmed set a new world record Friday when he reached a depth of more than 1,000 feet.
Doctors, engineers, teachers, lawyers, journalists, constituted the bulk of the swelling middle class in Egypt under Nasser.
Egyptian women writers include Nawal El Saadawi, well known for her feminist activism, and Alifa Rifaat who also writes about women and tradition.
Football is the most popular national sport of Egypt.
By May 2014, approximately 16,000 people (and as high as more than 40,000 by one independent count), mostly Brotherhood members or supporters, have been imprisoned after the coup  after the Muslim Brotherhood was labelled as terrorist organisation by the post-coup interim Egyptian government.
The country was later invaded and conquered by Libyans, Nubians and Assyrians, but native Egyptians eventually drove them out and regained control of their country.
This in turn requires government subsidies even for operating costs, a situation that has been aggravated by salary increases without tariff increases after the Arab Spring.
On 3 July 2013, the military removed President Morsi from power in a coup d'état and installed an interim government.
It is an important cultural element in the life of Egypt.
Fried onions can be also added to koshari.
The government has invested in communications and physical infrastructure.
Egypt is the most populated country in the Middle East, and the third most populous on the African continent, with about 88 million inhabitants .
He introduced conscription of the male peasantry in 19th century Egypt, and took a novel approach to create his great army, strengthening it with numbers and in skill.
It fell to the Persians again in 343 BC after the last native Pharaoh, King Nectanebo II, was defeated in battle.
Land reform and distribution, the dramatic growth in university education, and government support to national industries greatly improved social mobility and flattened the social curve.
A 2008 court ruling allowed members of unrecognised faiths to obtain identification and leave the religion field blank.
During the 1960s, the Egyptian economy went from sluggish to the verge of collapse, the society became less free, and Nasser's appeal waned considerably.
To enter Egypt, it is necessary to have a valid passport and in most cases a visa.
To gain recognition by the native Egyptian populace, they named themselves as the successors to the Pharaohs.
Egypt produces its own energy, but has been a net oil importer since 2008 and is rapidly becoming a net importer of natural gas.
The Ahmadiyya population is estimated at less than 50,000, whereas the Salafi (ultra-conservative) population is estimated at five to six million.
The name is realised as '''' and '''' in the Coptic stage of the Egyptian language, and appeared in early Greek as  ('''').
The earliest known Lower Egyptian site, Merimda, predates the Badarian by about seven hundred years.
This Thirty-first Dynasty of Egypt, however, did not last long, for the Persians were toppled several decades later by Alexander the Great.
Sadat made a historic visit to Israel in 1977, which led to the 1979 peace treaty in exchange for Israeli withdrawal from Sinai.
The president is elected to a four-year term and may serve 2 terms.
He constructed a military state with around four percent of the populace serving the army to raise Egypt to a powerful positioning in the Ottoman Empire in a way showing  various similarities to the Soviet strategies (without communism) conducted in the 20th century.
Other faiths and minority Muslim sects practised by Egyptians, such as the small Bahá'í and Ahmadi community, are not recognised by the state and face persecution since they are labelled as far right groups that threaten Egypt's national security.
His military ambition required him to modernise the country: he built industries, a system of canals for irrigation and transport, and reformed the civil service.
Equipment from the former Soviet Union is being progressively replaced by more modern US, French, and British equipment, a significant portion of which is built under license in Egypt, such as the M1 Abrams tank.
Modern Egypt is considered to be a regional and middle power, with significant cultural, political, and military influence in North Africa, the Middle East and the Muslim world.
Egypt is a recognised cultural trend-setter of the Arabic-speaking world.
Egypt's foreign ministry quickly issued a rebuttal to this report.
A new taxation law implemented in 2005 decreased corporate taxes from 40% to the current 20%, resulting in a stated 100% increase in tax revenue by the year 2006.
Millions of previously poor Egyptians, through education and jobs in the public sector, joined the middle class.
Border control methods can be "harsh, sometimes lethal."
Ismailia lies on its west bank, 3&nbsp;km (1.9&nbsp;mi) from the half-way point.
1550–1070 BC began with the Eighteenth Dynasty, marking the rise of Egypt as an international power that expanded during its greatest extension to an empire as far south as Tombos in Nubia, and included parts of the Levant in the east.
Contemporaneous Lower Egyptian communities coexisted with their southern counterparts for more than two thousand years, remaining culturally distinct, but maintaining frequent contact through trade.
Jubilant celebrations broke out in Cairo's Tahrir Square at the news.
The Giza Necropolis is Egypt's most iconic site.
With the end of the Kurdish Ayyubid dynasty, the Mamluks, a Turco-Circassian military caste, took control about 1250.
In the 1967 Six Day War, Israel attacked  Egypt, and occupied Sinai Peninsula and the Gaza Strip, which Egypt had occupied since the 1948 Arab–Israeli War.
Under this law, police powers were extended, constitutional rights suspended and censorship legalised.
It presented Sadat with a victory that allowed him to regain the Sinai later in return for peace with Israel.
On 26 March 2014 Abdel Fattah el-Sisi the head of the Egyptian Armed Forces, who at this time was in control of the country, resigned from the military, announcing he would stand as a candidate in the 2014 presidential election.
Egyptian culture flourished during this long period and remained distinctively Egyptian in its religion, arts, language and customs.
Liberal and secular groups walked out of the constituent assembly because they believed that it would impose strict Islamic practices, while Muslim Brotherhood backers threw their support behind Morsi.
Egypt has a wide range of beaches situated on the Mediterranean and the Red Sea that extend to over 3,000&nbsp;km.
General secondary education prepares students for further education, and graduates of this track normally join higher education institutes based on the results of the Thanaweya Amma, the leaving exam.
Where many CBD National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plans neglect biological kingdoms apart from animals and plants, Egypt's plan was unusual in providing balanced information about all forms of life.
The "Koiné" dialect of the Greek language, though not native to Egypt, was important in Hellenistic Alexandria.
Egypt also used to have a large Roman Catholic community, largely made up of Italians and Maltese.
The first modern Egyptian novel ''Zaynab'' by Muhammad Husayn Haykal was published in 1913 in the Egyptian vernacular.
The museum will be sited on  of land approximately two kilometres from the Giza Necropolis and is part of a new master plan for the plateau.
In 1970, President Nasser died and was succeeded by Anwar Sadat.
Nasser's policies changed this.
The parliament may impeach the president.
For some major groups, for example lichen-forming fungi and nematode worms, the number was not known.
The resentment for the military way of life eventually faded from the men and a new ideology took hold, one of nationalism and pride.
Even though Sadat's policy was intended to modernise Egypt and assist the middle class, it mainly benefited the higher class, and, because of the elimination of subsidies on basic foodstuffs, led to the 1977 Egyptian Bread Riots.
Egypt remained semi-autonomous under the Mamluks until it was invaded by the French forces of Napoleon Bonaparte 1798 (see French campaign in Egypt and Syria).
The Current EgyptAir fleet includes 80 aeroplane.
The Suez Canal is an artificial sea-level waterway in Egypt considered the most important centre of the maritime transport in the Middle East, connecting the Mediterranean Sea and the Red Sea.
Later translations from Greek to Arabic became the subject of study by Arab scholars.
South of Cairo, rainfall averages only around  per year and at intervals of many years.
In April 2016, such violations have also affected international students and tourists, when an Italian PhD student from the University of Cambridge was found brutally murdered in Cairo after he went missing in January of the same year.
Constitutional changes voted on 19 March 2007 prohibited parties from using religion as a basis for political activity, allowed the drafting of a new anti-terrorism law, authorised broad police powers of arrest and surveillance, and gave the president power to dissolve parliament and end judicial election monitoring.
There are also tribal Beja communities concentrated in the south-eastern-most corner of the country, and a number of Dom clans mostly in the Nile Delta and Faiyum who are progressively becoming assimilated as urbanisation increases.
Tensions with Iran are mostly due to Egypt's peace treaty with Israel and its rivalry with traditional Egyptian allies in the Gulf.
2700–2200 BC., which constructed many pyramids, most notably the Third Dynasty pyramid of Djoser and the Fourth Dynasty Giza pyramids.
On 18 January 2014, the interim government successfully institutionalised a more secular constitution.
Under Anwar Sadat, Islam became the official state religion and Sharia the main source of law.
This gave Egypt a consistent harvest throughout the years.
Non-native Christian communities are largely found in the urban regions of Cairo and Alexandria, such as the Syro-Lebanese, who belong to Greek Catholic, Greek Orthodox, and Maronite Catholic denominations.
The IT sector has been stimulated by new Egyptian entrepreneurs with government encouragement.
An Egyptian court ruled in early 2008 that members of other faiths may obtain identity cards without listing their faiths, and without becoming officially recognised.
The personal status law that regulates matters such as marriage, divorce and child custody is governed by Sharia.
The introduction in 1820 of long-staple cotton transformed its agriculture into a cash-crop monoculture before the end of the century, concentrating land ownership and shifting production towards international markets.
Subsequently, Italy withdrew its ambassador to Egypt for consultations in Rome regarding the criminal death of Giulio Regeni, who, at the time, conducted critical academic research on Egyptian labour rights and trade unions.
Individuals, particularly Baha'is and atheists, wishing to include their religion (or lack thereof) on their mandatory state issued identification cards are denied this ability (see Egyptian identification card controversy), and are put in the position of either not obtaining required identification or lying about their faith.
The plan stated that the following numbers of species of different groups had been recorded from Egypt: algae (1483 species), animals (about 15,000 species of which more than 10,000 were insects), fungi (more than 627 species), monera (319 species), plants (2426 species), protozoans (371 species).
The completion of the Aswan High Dam in 1970 and the resultant Lake Nasser have altered the time-honored place of the Nile River in the agriculture and ecology of Egypt.
Even though the military-backed authorities extended voting to a third day, the 46% turnout was lower than the 52% turnout in the 2012 election.
For the grasses, 284 native and naturalized species have been identified and recorded in Egypt.
On 22 November 2012, President Morsi issued a temporary declaration immunising his decrees from challenge and seeking to protect the work of the constituent assembly.
Election observers also alleged government interference in the election process.
The Egyptians were one of the first major civilisations to codify design elements in art and architecture.
Egypt lies primarily between latitudes 22° and 32°N, and longitudes 25° and 35°E.
Demand soon outstripped the level of available state resources, causing the quality of public education to deteriorate.
The later Ptolemies took on Egyptian traditions, had themselves portrayed on public monuments in Egyptian style and dress, and participated in Egyptian religious life.
Egypt has hosted several international competitions.
Additionally, Greek, Armenian and Italian are the main languages of immigrants.
With a lot of touristic activities in Egypt it's considered a fun place for historical, religious, medical and entertainment tourism.
From academic year 1953–54 through 1965–66, overall public school enrolments more than doubled.
A second period of disunity heralded the arrival of the first foreign ruling dynasty in Egypt, that of the Semitic Hyksos.
It is estimated that 15 million Egyptians follow Native Sufi orders, with the Sufi leadership asserting that the numbers are much greater as many Egyptian Sufis are not officially registered with a Sufi order.
Well-known examples are the Pyramid of Djoser designed by ancient architect and engineer Imhotep, the Sphinx, and the temple of Abu Simbel.
Among the achievements are an increase of piped water supply between 1990 and 2010 from 89% to 100% in urban areas and from 39% to 93% in rural areas despite rapid population growth, the elimination of open defecation in rural areas during the same period, and in general a relatively high level of investment in infrastructure.
When they defeated the Byzantine Armies in Egypt, the Arabs brought Sunni Islam to the country.
The Armed Forces' inventory includes equipment from different countries around the world.
A very small amount of snow fell on Cairo on 13 December 2013, the first time in many decades.
On a very thin strip of the northern coast the rainfall can be as high as , mostly between October and March.
Tourism is one of the most important sectors in Egypt's economy.
The vehicle road network has expanded rapidly to over 21,000 miles, consisting of 28 line, 796 stations, 1800 train covering the Nile Valley and Nile Delta, the Mediterranean and Red Sea coasts, the Sinai, and the Western oases.
Egypt is a predominantly Sunni Muslim country with Islam as its state religion.
Gulf monarchies, including the United Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia, have pledged billions of dollars to help Egypt overcome its economic difficulties since the July 2013 coup.
At least 18 journalists were imprisoned in Egypt in August 2015.
They forged a liberal path for Egypt expressed as a commitment to personal freedom, secularism and faith in science to bring progress.
In September 1999 a national project for a technological renaissance was announced reflecting the commitment of the Egyptian government to developing the country's IT-sector.
In the 21st century, Egypt has had a major problem with immigration, as millions of persons from other African nations flee poverty and war.
However, the new law placed restrictions on the candidates, and led to Mubarak's easy re-election victory.
A new anti-terror law was enacted in August 2015 that threatens members of the media with fines ranging from about US$25,000 to 60,000 for the distribution of wrong information on acts of terror inside the country "that differ from official declarations of the Egyptian Department of Defense".
Elections were last held between November 2011 and January 2012 which was later dissolved.
Also, Egypt possesses the largest oil refinery capacity in Africa 726,000&nbsp;bbl/d (in 2012).
The military retains the ability to appoint the national Minister of Defence for the next 8 years.
Egyptians are divided demographically into those who live in the major urban centres and the fellahin, or farmers, that reside in rural villages.
The United States provides Egypt with annual military assistance, which in 2015 amounted to US$1.3 billion.
After the election, Mubarak imprisoned Ayman Nour, the runner-up.
In the 1950s, president Nasser phased in free education for all Egyptians.
Mohamed Hussein Tantawi, chairman of the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces, became the ''de facto'' interim head of state.
The Red Sea has serene waters, coloured coral reefs, rare fish and beautiful mountains.
Egypt's economy depends mainly on agriculture, media, petroleum imports, natural gas, and tourism; there are also more than three million Egyptians working abroad, mainly in Saudi Arabia, the Persian Gulf and Europe.
Egypt is the driest and the sunniest country in the world, and most of its land surface is desert.
The oldest attestation of this name for Egypt is the Akkadian  𒆳 𒈪 𒄑 𒊒 '''KUR''''''mi-iṣ-ru''' ''miṣru,'' related to ''miṣru/miṣirru/miṣaru'', meaning "border" or "frontier".
Between 1687 and 1731, Egypt experienced six famines.
Foreign direct investment (FDI) in Egypt increased considerably before the removal of Hosni Mubarak, exceeding $6 billion in 2006, due to economic liberalisation and privatisation measures taken by minister of investment Mahmoud Mohieddin.
The canal is 193.30&nbsp;km (120.11&nbsp;mi) long, 24&nbsp;m (79&nbsp;ft) deep and 205 metres (673&nbsp;ft) wide .
Former Egyptian Deputy Prime Minister Boutros Boutros-Ghali served as Secretary-General of the United Nations from 1991 to 1996.
On 26 December 2012, the Muslim Brotherhood attempted to institutionalise a controversial new constitution.
Originally, the parliament was to be formed before the president was elected, but interim president Adly Mansour pushed the date.
Israel re-iterated that the Straits of Tiran closure was a Casus belli.
About one half of the population is connected to sanitary sewers.
On 13 March 2015, plans for a proposed new capital of Egypt were announced.
Due to the extreme aridity of Egypt's climate, population centres are concentrated along the narrow Nile Valley and Delta, meaning that about 99% of the population uses about 5.5% of the total land area.
Access to an improved water source in Egypt is now practically universal with a rate of 99%.
In 2013, Egypt was the largest consumer of oil and natural gas in Africa, as more than 20% of total oil consumption and more than 40% of total dry natural gas consumption in Africa.
Among the people of the ancient Near East, only the Egyptians have stayed where they were and remained what they were, although they have changed their language once and their religion twice.
Average high temperatures are high in the north but very to extremely high in the rest of the country during summer.
Tahtawi co-founded with education reformer Ali Mubarak a native Egyptology school that looked for inspiration to medieval Egyptian scholars, such as Suyuti and Maqrizi, who themselves studied the history, language and antiquities of Egypt.
Safaga tops the Red Sea zone with its beautiful location on the Suez Gulf.
It was approved by the public in a referendum held 15–22 December 2012 with 64% support, but with only 33% electorate participation.
In 1936, the Anglo-Egyptian Treaty was concluded.
Contemporary Arabic and Middle-Eastern culture is heavily influenced by Egyptian literature, music, film and television.
Egypt's renaissance peaked in the late 19th and early 20th centuries through the work of people like Muhammad Abduh, Ahmed Lutfi el-Sayed, Muhammad Loutfi Goumah, Tawfiq el-Hakim, Louis Awad, Qasim Amin, Salama Moussa, Taha Hussein and Mahmoud Mokhtar.
A 50-member constitution committee was formed for modifying the constitution which was later published for public voting and was adopted on 18 January 2014.
In 1875 Ismail was forced to sell Egypt's share in the canal to the British government.
Egypt includes parts of the Sahara desert and of the Libyan Desert.
Saad Zaghlul was popularly elected as Prime Minister of Egypt in 1924.
An estimated 90% are identified as Muslim, 9% as Coptic Christians, and 1% as other Christian denominations.
Egypt is divided into 27 governorates.
Ramadan has a special flavour in Egypt, celebrated with sounds, lights (local lanterns known as ''fawanees'') and much flare that many Muslim tourists from the region flock to Egypt to witness during Ramadan.
Across the Gulf of Aqaba lies Jordan, and across from the Sinai Peninsula lies Saudi Arabia, although Jordan and Saudi Arabia do not share a land border with Egypt.
Apart from the Nile Valley, the majority of Egypt's landscape is desert, with a few oases scattered about.
Egyptian civilisation is renowned for its colossal pyramids, temples and monumental tombs.
The potential rise in sea levels due to global warming could threaten Egypt's densely populated coastal strip and have grave consequences for the country's economy, agriculture and industry.
Egypt Post is the company responsible for postal service in Egypt.
When the British exiled Zaghlul and his associates to Malta on 8 March 1919, the country arose in its first modern revolution.
Early in this period, Egyptians began to blend their new faith with indigenous beliefs and practices, leading to various Sufi orders that have flourished to this day.
The work of early 19th-century scholar Rifa'a al-Tahtawi renewed interest in Egyptian antiquity and exposed Egyptian society to Enlightenment principles.
He launched the Infitah economic reform policy, while clamping down on religious and secular opposition.
Relations with Russia have improved significantly following Mohamed Morsi's removal and both countries have worked since then to strengthen military and trade ties among other aspects of bilateral co-operation.
Egypt was conquered by the Ottoman Turks in 1517, after which it became a province of the Ottoman Empire.
For the fungi, including lichen-forming species, for example, subsequent work has shown that over 2200 species have been recorded from Egypt, and the final figure of all fungi actually occurring in the country is expected to be much higher.
The spoken languages are: Egyptian Arabic (68%), Sa'idi Arabic (29%), Eastern Egyptian Bedawi Arabic (1.6%), Sudanese Arabic (0.6%), Domari (0.3%), Nobiin (0.3%), Beja (0.1%), Siwi and others.
Most of Egypt's rain falls in the winter months.
It replaced the 2011 Provisional Constitution of Egypt, adopted following the revolution.
The Grand Egyptian Museum (GEM), also known as the Giza Museum, is a planned museum of artefacts of ancient Egypt.
British forces completed their withdrawal from the occupied Suez Canal Zone on 13 June 1956.
The ancient spring festival of Sham en Nisim (Coptic:  ''shom en nisim'') has been celebrated by Egyptians for thousands of years, typically between the Egyptian months of Paremoude (April) and Pashons (May), following Easter Sunday.
Although the chief of staff Mohamed Fawzi verified them as "baseless", Nasser took three successive steps that made the war virtually inevitable: On 14 May he deployed his troops in Sinai near the border with Israel, on 19 May he expelled the UN peacekeepers stationed in the Sinai Peninsula border with Israel, and on 23 May he closed the Straits of Tiran to Israeli shipping.
Intolerance of Bahá'ís and non-orthodox Muslim sects, such as Sufis, Shi'a and Ahmadis, also remains a problem.
The 14-hour feat took Gabr 1,066 feet down into the abyss near the Egyptian town of Dahab in the Red Sea, where he works as a diving instructor.
Alexandria became the capital city and a centre of Greek culture and trade.
Substantial coal deposits in the northeast Sinai are mined at the rate of about  per year.
While he carried the title of viceroy of Egypt, his subordination to the Ottoman porte was merely nominal.
Access to healthcare in both urban and rural areas greatly improved and immunisation programs are now able to cover 98% of the population.
The weakening of the economic system combined with the effects of plague left Egypt vulnerable to foreign invasion.
Egyptian commitment in Yemen was greatly undermined later.
At , it is the world's 30th-largest country.
After the French were expelled, power was seized in 1805 by Muhammad Ali Pasha, an Albanian military commander of the Ottoman army in Egypt.
Prior to the construction of the Aswan Dam, the Nile flooded annually (colloquially ''The Gift of the Nile'') replenishing Egypt's soil.
In 2013, Freedom House rated political rights in Egypt at "5" (with 1 representing the most free and 7 the least), and civil liberties at "5", which gave it the freedom rating of "Partly Free".
Egyptian literature traces its beginnings to ancient Egypt and is some of the earliest known literature.
In 1958, Egypt and Syria formed a sovereign union known as the United Arab Republic.
Egypt is counting on top liquid natural gas (LNG) exporter Qatar to obtain additional gas volumes in summer, while encouraging factories to plan their annual maintenance for those months of peak demand, said EGPC chairman, Tarek El Barkatawy.
Coptic Christians face discrimination at multiple levels of the government, ranging from disproportionate representation in government ministries to laws that limit their ability to build or repair churches.
in Egypt is the first of only two full-fledged metro systems in Africa and the Arab World.
The Ptolemaic Kingdom was a powerful Hellenistic state, extending from southern Syria in the east, to Cyrene to the west, and south to the frontier with Nubia.
Transport in Egypt is centred around Cairo and largely follows the pattern of settlement along the Nile.
On 28 November 2011, Egypt held its first parliamentary election since the previous regime had been in power.
Strabo attributed the word to a folk etymology in which '''' () evolved as a compound from '''' (), meaning "below the Aegean".
Reporters Without Borders ranked Egypt in their World Press Freedom Index as #158 out of 180.
Several Americans and Canadians were sentenced to death in 2012.
2040 BC, reaching a peak during the reign of Pharaoh Amenemhat III.
Sisi was sworn into office as President of Egypt on 8 June 2014.
The new government drafted and implemented a constitution in 1923 based on a parliamentary system.
The poll, held between 26 and 28 May 2014, resulted in a landslide victory for el-Sisi.
The revolt led the UK government to issue a unilateral declaration of Egypt's independence on 22 February 1922.
The governorates are further divided into regions.
