A majority of Central European immigrants in El Salvador arrived during World War II as refugees from the Czech Republic, Germany, Hungary, Poland, and Switzerland.
In pre-Columbian times, the country was also inhabited by various other indigenous peoples, including the Lenca, a Chilanga Lencan-speaking group who settled in the eastern highlands.
After the mid-19th century, the economy was based on coffee growing.
In October 1980, several other major guerrilla groups of the Salvadoran left had formed the Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front, or FMLN.
In an analysis of ARENA's electoral defeat in 2009, the U.S. Embassy in San Salvador pointed to official corruption under the Saca administration as a significant reason for public rejection of continued ARENA government.
A 2015 conducted study by the University of North Carolina called El Salvador the country that has achieved the greatest progress in the world in terms of increased access to water supply and sanitation and the reduction of inequity in access between urban and rural areas.
''Día del Soldado''
Week-long festival in celebration of ''El Salvador del Mundo'', patron saint of San Salvador.
Robin Broad and John Cavanagh of the Foreign Policy in Focus, an international network of policy analysts and advocates, presented a first hand report on the situation.
However, El Salvador had 66 homicides per 100,000 inhabitants in 2012, more than triple the rate in Mexico that year.
The country also has an independent Judiciary and Supreme Court.
However "caliche" is considered informal, and a few people choose not to use it.
The U.S. Embassy warned in 2009 that the Salvadoran government's populist policies of mandating artificially low electricity prices were damaging private sector profitability, including the interests of American investors in the energy sector.
GDP in purchasing power parity (PPP) in 2008 was estimated at $25.895 billion USD.
Alvarado retreated and sent Mexican Indian messengers to demand that the Cuzcatlec warriors return the stolen weapons and surrender to the Spanish king.
Salvadoran music is a mixture of indigenous Pipil and Spanish influences.
El Salvador signed the Central American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) — negotiated by the five countries of Central America and the Dominican Republic — with the United States in 2004.
Salvadorans also live in other nearby countries such as Belize, Honduras and Nicaragua.
This sandwich is traditionally served with tomato and watercress along with cucumber, onion, lettuce, mayonnaise, and mustard.
Those not affiliated with any religious group amount to 17% of the population.
For example, some Salvadorans are no longer willing to take jobs that pay them less than what they receive monthly from family members abroad.
Early in the new millennium, El Salvador's government created the Ministerio de Medio Ambiente y Recursos Naturales – the Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources (MARN) and began promoting the integration of climate change into national policy.
Since the 1990s, there has been an increase in the frequency and duration of storms, as well as a marked change in the pattern of their occurrence.
Other countries with notable Salvadoran communities include Canada, Mexico, the United Kingdom (including the Cayman Islands), Sweden, Brazil, Italy, Colombia, and Australia.
'''Pacific Rim Mining Corp. sues El Salvador for $301 million'''
The colón, the official currency of El Salvador since 1892, was replaced by the U.S. dollar in 2001.
Nevertheless, the oligarchy opposed agrarian reform, and a junta formed with young liberal elements from the army such as Gen. Majano and Gen. Gutierrez,  as well as with progressives such as Guillermo Ungo and Alvarez.
His government lasted only nine months before it was overthrown by junior military officers who accused his Labor Party of lacking political and governmental experience and of using its government offices inefficiently.
Their qualification for the 1970 tournament was marred by the Football War, a war against Honduras, whose team El Salvador's had defeated.
A new Civil Police was to be organized.
El Salvador has signed free trade agreements with Mexico, Chile, the Dominican Republic, and Panama and increased its trade with those countries.
Some indigenous people still speak their native tongues (such as Nawat and Maya), but indigenous Salvadoreans who do not identify as mestizo constitute only 1% of the country's population.
In late 2006, the government and the Millennium Challenge Corporation signed a five-year, $461 million compact to stimulate economic growth and reduce poverty in the country's northern region, the primary conflict zone during the civil war, through investments in education, public services, enterprise development, and transportation infrastructure.
El Salvador's economy was historically dominated by agriculture, beginning with the indigo plant (''añil'' in Spanish), the most important crop during the colonial period, and followed thereafter by coffee, which by the early 20th century accounted for 90 percent of export earnings.
From 1989 until 2004, Salvadorans favored the Nationalist Republican Alliance (ARENA) party, voting in ARENA presidents in every election (Alfredo Cristiani, Armando Calderón Sol, Francisco Flores Pérez, Antonio Saca) until 2009, when Mauricio Funes was elected president from the Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front (FMLN) party.
El Salvador has a multi-party system.
ARENA candidates won four consecutive presidential elections until the election of Mauricio Funes of the FMLN in March 2009.
The paleontological site was discovered accidentally in 2000, and in the following year an excavation by the Museum of Natural History of El Salvador revealed not only several remnants of Cuvieronius, but also several other species of vertebrates.
After signing the armistice, the president stood up and shook hands with all the now ex-guerrilla commanders, an action which was widely admired.
It mostly is accompanied by a plate of ''pupusas'' or fried yuca.
The capital city of San Salvador has a population of about 2.1 million people.
Throughout the last half of the 19th century, a succession of presidents from the ranks of the Salvadoran oligarchy, nominally both conservative and liberal, generally agreed on the promotion of coffee as the predominant cash crop, the development of infrastructure (railroads and port facilities) primarily in support of the coffee trade, the elimination of communal landholdings to facilitate further coffee production, the passage of anti-vagrancy laws to ensure that displaced campesinos and other rural residents provided sufficient labor for the coffee fincas (plantations), and the suppression of rural discontent.
There are around 17,000 personnel in the armed forces in total.
Sophisticated civilization in El Salvador dates to its settlement by the indigenous Lenca people; theirs was the first and the oldest indigenous civilization to settle in El Salvador.
The first indigenous people to have contact with the Spanish were the Lenca of eastern El Salvador.
With 12 loyalists in the National Assembly, Saca established his own party, GANA (Gran Alianza por la Unidad Nacional or Grand Alliance for National Unity), and entered into a tactical legislative alliance with the FMLN.
Almost all the annual rainfall occurs during this period; yearly totals, particularly on southern-facing mountain slopes, can be as high as 2170&nbsp;mm.
In the 2015 elections for mayors and members of the National Assembly, ARENA appeared to be the winner with tight control of the National Assembly.
The Salvadoran government reported that the Super Mano Dura gang legislation led to a 14% drop in murders in 2004.
It is only natural for a small, under-developed country like El Salvador to subsidize some of the resources for the vast majority of its poor population.
There have also been recent large migrations of Hondurans and Nicaraguans into the country.
In El Salvador if a woman miscarries it is frequently assumed she deliberately induced an abortion or could have saved the baby.
The kingdom of Lenca was alarmed by de Moscoso's invasion, and Antu Silan travelled from village to village, uniting all the Lenca towns in present-day El Salvador and Honduras against the Spaniards.
The use of the United States dollar as Salvadoran currency and direct flights of 4 to 6 hours from most cities in the United States are factors that attract American tourists.
As the smallest country in continental America, El Salvador is affectionately called ''Pulgarcito de America'' (the "Tom Thumb of the Americas").
Duarte later ran for president with a political grouping called the National Opposition Union (UNO) but was defeated in the 1972 presidential elections.
Since 1997 inflation has averaged 3%, with recent years increasing to nearly 5%.
''Note: Departmental capitals are in parentheses.
El Salvador shares borders with Guatemala and Honduras, the total national boundary length is :  with Guatemala and  with Honduras.
Pacific Rim is not the best example of a good friend of the environment.
Any counter-cyclical policy response to the downturn must be through fiscal policy, which is constrained by legislative requirements for a two-thirds majority to approve any international financing.
Since El Salvador resided on the eastern edge of the Maya Civilization, the origins of many of El Salvador's ruins are controversial.
Inflation has been steady and among the lowest in the region.
Although some events may have tarnished the image of the El Salvadoran government, not everything is bad news.
These include the Goascorán, Jiboa, Torola, Paz and the Río Grande de San Miguel.
CAFTA has bolstered exports of processed foods, sugar, and ethanol, and supported investment in the apparel sector, which faced Asian competition with the expiration of the Multi-Fiber Agreement in 2005.
El Salvador has one of the highest murder rates in the world.
''El día de los difuntos''
Thus, the government has formally limited the implementing of open market monetary policies to influence short-term variables in the economy.
National Festival Of Pupusa
The bird is marinated and then roasted with Pipil spices and handpulled.
The coastline on the Pacific is  long.
He disembarked in the Gulf of Fonseca on May 31, 1522, at Meanguera island, naming it Petronila, and then discovered Jiquilisco Bay on the mouth of Lempa River.
Four years later, Enel indicated it would seek arbitration against El Salvador, blaming the government for technical problems that prevent it from completing its investment.
Presently, the Alto al Crimen or Crime Stoppers program is in operation and provides financial rewards for information leading to the capture of gang leadership.
Towards the end of 1811, a combination of internal and external factors motivated Central American elites to attempt to gain independence from the Spanish Crown.
In 1912, the national guard was created as a rural police force.
Amongst the more renowned representatives of the graphic arts are the painters Augusto Crespin, Noe Canjura, Carlos Cañas, Julia Díaz, Mauricio Mejia, Maria Elena Palomo de Mejia, Camilo Minero, Ricardo Carbonell, Roberto Huezo, Miguel Angel Cerna, (the painter and writer better known as MACLo), Esael Araujo, and many others.
The remainder of the population (3%) is made up of Jehovah's Witnesses, Hare Krishnas, Muslims, Jews, Buddhists, Latter-day Saints, and those adhering to indigenous religious beliefs.
El Salvador has a long history of destructive earthquakes and volcanic eruptions.
In 2013, the influx of FDI increased.
Centuries later they themselves were replaced by the Pipil people, Nahua speaking groups who migrated from Mexico in the centuries before the European conquest and occupied the central and western regions.
The departamentos azules, or blue departments in the east, western and highland regions are relatively conservative.
Some consider this to be the beginning of the full Salvadoran Civil War, which lasted from 1980 to 1992.
El Salvador has over 300 rivers, the most important of which is the Rio Lempa.
An unknown number of people "disappeared" during the conflict, and the UN reports that more than 75,000 were killed.
Celebration dedicated to the Children of the country, celebrated across the country.
The Accords also removed some security forces who were in command of the army, such as the National Guard, Treasury Police and special battalions that were formed to fight against the insurgency of the 1980s.
In the Tomayate site, they have recovered at least 19 species of vertebrates, including giant tortoises, Megatherium, Glyptodon, Toxodon, extinct horses, paleo-llamas and especially a large number of skeletal remains of proboscis genus Cuvieronius.
Two parallel mountain ranges cross El Salvador to the west with a central plateau between them and a narrow coastal plain hugging the Pacific.
Napoleón Duarte was recalled from his exile in Venezuela to head this new junta.
Celebration dedicated to Christopher Columbus' arrival in America.
El Salvador is also considered an epicenter of a gang crisis, along with Guatemala and Honduras.
For the period between 2005 and 2010, El Salvador had the third lowest birth rate in Central America, with 22.8 births per 1,000.
The best time to visit El Salvador would be at the beginning or end of the dry season.
It opened in 1976 and seats 53,400, making it the largest stadium in Central America and the Caribbean.
Lower-income families are forced to rely on public education.
A day when most people visit the tombs of deceased loved ones.
The capital San Salvador was destroyed in 1756 and 1854, and it suffered heavy damage in the 1919, 1982, and 1986 tremors.
In December 1931, a coup d'état organized by junior officers and led by Gen. Martínez started in the First Regiment of Infantry across from the National Palace in downtown San Salvador.
With the adoption of the US dollar as its currency in 2001, El Salvador lost control over monetary policy.
Marks the founding of its armed forces in 1824.
The main external factors motivating the independence movement were the success of the French and American revolutions in the 18th century, and the weakening of the Spanish Crown's military power as a result of the Napoleonic Wars, with the resulting inability to control its colonies effectively.
The conflict ended with a negotiated settlement that established a multiparty constitutional republic, which remains in place to this day.
In 1525, the conquest of Cuzcatlán was completed and the city of San Salvador was established.
Historically, the high Salvadoran population density has contributed to tensions with neighboring Honduras, as land-poor Salvadorans emigrated to less densely populated Honduras and established themselves as squatters on unused or underused land.
Under Salvadoran law, an extractive company needs to gain titles, or local permission, for any lands it wants to develop.
Day of the children
Institutionally a single public institution is both de facto in charge of setting sector policy and of being the main service provider.
El Salvador was for centuries inhabited by several Mesoamerican nations, especially the Cuzcatlecs, as well as the Lenca and Maya.
One of El Salvador's typical breakfasts is fried plantain, usually served with cream.
El Salvador's rating compares relatively well with Panama (94 of 175) and Costa Rica (47 of 175).
Originating in Guatemala, the Rio Lempa cuts across the northern range of mountains, flows along much of the central plateau, and cuts through the southern volcanic range to empty into the Pacific.
The mountain ranges and central plateau, covering 85% of the land, comprise the interior highlands.
''Pupusas revueltas'' are ''pupusas'' filled with beans, cheese and pork.
By 2012, there were about 2.0 million Salvadoran immigrants and Americans of Salvadoran descent in the U.S., making them the sixth largest immigrant group in the country.
It is estimated that there are 500 species of birds, 1,000 species of butterflies, 400 species of orchids, 800 species of trees, and 800 species of marine fish in El Salvador.
Another insurrection was launched in 1814, and again this insurrection was also suppressed.
The majority of the population in El Salvador is Christian.
It stretches  from west-northwest to east-southeast and  north to south, with a total area of .
At the same time, it is considered the richest vertebrate paleontological site in Central America and one of the largest accumulations of proboscis in the Americas.
Remittances have increased steadily in the last decade, and reached an all-time high of $3.32 billion in 2006 (an increase of 17% over the previous year).
The San Salvador area has been hit by earthquakes in 1576, 1659, 1798, 1839, 1854, 1873, 1880, 1917, 1919, 1965, 1986, 2001 and 2005.
Duarte returned to the country in 1979 to enter politics after working on projects in Venezuela as an engineer.
One of El Salvador's notable dishes is the ''pupusa''.
Two subsequent expeditions (the first in 1525, followed by a smaller group in 1528) brought the Pipil under Spanish control, since the Pipil also were weakened by a regional epidemic of smallpox.
Nevertheless, El Salvador receives less FDI than other countries of Central America.
From November through April, the northeast trade winds control weather patterns; this time of year is referred to as ''verano'', or summer.
The Peace Accords re-imagined the ''Frente Farabundo Marti para la Liberacion Nacional'' (FMLN) as a political party and redefined the role of the army to be for the defense of the sovereignty and territorial integrity.
In December 1999, net international reserves equaled US $1.8 billion or roughly five months of imports.
In the mestizo population, Salvadorans who are racially European, especially Mediterranean, as well as Afro-Salvadoran, and the indigenous people in El Salvador who do not speak indigenous languages or have an indigenous culture, all identify themselves as being culturally mestizo.
The Spanish withdrew and the Cuzcatlec army attacked, running behind them with war chants and shooting bow arrows.
The Lenca were succeeded by the Olmecs, who eventually also disappeared, leaving their monumental architecture in the form of the pyramids still extant in western El Salvador.
#  The Judiciary, headed by the Supreme Court, which is composed of 15 judges, one of them being elected as President of the Judiciary.
Tourism contributed US$855.5 million to El Salvador's GDP in 2013.
However, all of them can speak Spanish.
In the extreme northeastern part of the country near Cerro El Pital, snow is known to fall during summer as well as during winter due to the high elevations (it is the coldest part of the country).
Wounded, unable to fight and hiding in the cliffs, Alvarado sent his Spanish men on their horses to approach the Cuzcatlec to see if they would fear the horses, but they did not retreat, Alvarado recalls in his letters to Hernan Cortez.
When the Federal Republic of Central America dissolved in 1841, El Salvador maintained its own government until it joined Honduras and Nicaragua in 1896 to form the Greater Republic of Central America, which dissolved in 1898.
From the late 19th to the mid-20th century, El Salvador endured chronic political and economic instability characterized by coups, revolts, and a succession of authoritarian rulers.
The government has made little progress in terms of improving the business climate.
It also has a young and skilled labor force and a strategic geographical position.
Tourism directly supported 80,500 jobs in 2013.
Also, the local propensity for consumption over investment has increased.
When he arrived at the borders of the Cuzcatlan kingdom he saw that civilians had been evacuated.
The FMLN Party is Leftist in ideology, and is split between the dominant Marxist-Leninist faction in the legislature, and the liberal wing led by President Funes.
As with other former colonies, El Salvador was considered a mono-export economy (an economy that depended heavily on one type of export) for many years.
Remittances from Salvadorans living and working in the United States, sent to family members in El Salvador, are a major source of foreign income and offset the substantial trade deficit of $4.12 billion.
President Araujo faced general popular discontent, as the people had expected economic reforms and the redistribution of land.
The Yuca is sometimes served boiled instead of fried.
This airport is located about  southeast of San Salvador.
Protected areas and the central plateau receive less, although still significant, amounts.
By the time this air reaches El Salvador, it is dry, hot, and hazy, and the country experiences hot weather, excluding the northern higher mountain ranges, where temperatures will be cool.
Cuzcatlec warriors moved to the coastal city of Acajutla and waited for Alvarado and his forces.
Only the First Regiment of Cavalry and the National Police defended the presidency (the National Police had been on its payroll), but later that night, after hours of fighting, the badly outnumbered defenders surrendered to rebel forces.
The U.S. supported and financed the creation of a second junta to change the political environment and stop the spread of a leftist insurrection.
Day of the Queen of Peace, the patron saint.
Luckily, many families were able to find safety from the landslides caused by the earthquake.
The 5.7 Mw-earthquake of 1986 resulted in 1,500 deaths, 10,000 injuries, and 100,000 people left homeless.
Very few Amerindians have retained their customs and traditions, having over time assimilated into the dominant Mestizo/Spanish culture.
In 2014, crime rose 56% in El Salvador, with the government attributing the rise to a break in the truce between the two major gangs in El Salvador, which began having turf wars.
During colonial times, El Salvador was a thriving exporter of indigo, but after the invention of synthetic dyes in the 19th century, the newly created modern state turned to coffee as the main export.
New rivals also include the rising mara, The Rebels 13.
Both armies suffered many casualties, with a wounded Alvarado retreating and losing a lot of his men, especially among the Mexican Indian auxiliaries.
Urbanization and Americanization of Salvadoran culture has also led to the abundance of American-style malls, stores, and restaurants in the three main urban areas, especially greater San Salvador.
Rainfall during this season generally comes from low pressure systems formed over the Pacific and usually falls in heavy afternoon thunderstorms.
One of the government programs was a gang reform called "Super Mano Dura" (Super Firm Hand).
El Salvador leads the region in remittances per capita, with inflows equivalent to nearly all export income; about a third of all households receive these financial inflows.
''Pan con pollo/pavo'' (bread with chicken/turkey) are warm turkey or chicken-filled submarine sandwiches.
El Salvador's most recent destructive volcanic eruption took place on October 1, 2005, when the Santa Ana Volcano spewed a cloud of ash, hot mud and rocks that fell on nearby villages and caused two deaths.
This event, held at Chapultepec Castle in Mexico, was attended by U.N. dignitaries and other representatives of the international community.
Painting, ceramics and textiles are the principal manual artistic mediums.
There are eight species of sea turtles in the world; six of them nest on the coasts of Central America, and four make their home on the Salvadoran coast: the leatherback turtle (Dermochelys coriacea), the hawksbill (Eretmochelys imbricata), the Green Sea turtle (Chelonia agasizzii) and the olive ridley (Lepidochelys olivacea).
''Fiestas de agosto''
The Santa Ana Volcano in El Salvador is active; the most recent eruptions were in 1904 and 2005.
Persistent socioeconomic inequality and civil unrest culminated in the devastating Salvadoran Civil War (1979–1992), which was fought between the military-led government and a coalition of left-wing guerrilla groups.
His vice president and minister of war was Gen. Maximiliano Hernández Martínez.
The Pacific lowlands are uniformly hot; the central plateau and mountain areas are more moderate.
Healthy life expectancy was 57 for males and 62 for females in 2003.
An estimated 42% of El Salvador's population live in rural areas.
Then the Spanish returned with more soldiers, including about 2,000 forced conscripts from indigenous communities in Guatemala.
In the early 16th century, the Spanish Empire conquered the territory, incorporating it into the Viceroyalty of New Spain ruled from Mexico City.
Urbanization has expanded at a phenomenal rate in El Salvador since the 1960s, with millions moving to the cities and creating associated problems for urban planning and services.
President Funes' chief of cabinet, Alex Segovia, acknowledged that the economy was at the "point of collapse."
The President, currently Salvador Sánchez Cerén, is both head of state and head of government.
According to the Center for International Environmental Law, "the Pacific Rim Mining Corporation (Pac Rim) has attempted to bypass El Salvador’s environmental protection laws using investor-state dispute settlement (ISDS) to sue the country for $77 million USD – as of July 2014 now more than $300 million USD – under the US-Central America Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA).
Salvadorans who can afford the cost often choose to send their children to private schools, which are regarded as being better-quality than public schools.
Super Mano Dura had little success and was highly criticized by the UN.
The people of El Salvador today are referred to as Salvadoran, while the term ''Cuzcatleco'' is commonly used to identify someone of Salvadoran heritage.
The remaining coastal plains are referred to as the Pacific lowlands.
There are a total of 15 free trade zones in El Salvador.
They called their territory ''Kuskatan'', a Pipil word meaning ''The Place of Precious Jewels'', backformed into Classical Nahuatl ''Cōzcatlān'', and Hispanicized as ''Cuzcatlán''.
As per Santander Trade, a Spanish think tank in foreign investment, "Foreign investment into El Salvador has been steadily growing during the last few years.
Q'eqchi' is spoken by immigrants of Guatemalan and Belizean indigenous people living in El Salvador.
It was estimated that 1,394,000 international tourists would visit El Salvador in 2014.
The revolt was probably due to the army's discontent at not having been paid by President Araujo for some months.
Antiguo Cuscatlán has the highest per capita income of all the cities in the country, and is a center of international investment.
In November 1811 Salvadoran priest José Matías Delgado rang the bells of Iglesia La Merced in San Salvador, calling for insurrection and launching the 1811 Independence Movement.
In October 1979, a coup d'état brought the Revolutionary Government Junta of El Salvador to power.
A Mexican military detachment marched to San Salvador and suppressed dissent, but with the fall of Iturbide on 19 March 1823, the army decamped back to Mexico.
