ERC emphasizes international understanding, including proficiency in a foreign language and a regional specialization.
Roosevelt sent his wife."
"You have been a rare wife and have borne your heavy burden most bravely," he said, proclaiming her "one of my heroines".
She and Eleanor were close throughout their lives.
She was later given her own "coming out party".
Eleanor married Franklin on March 17, 1905 (St. Patrick's Day), in a wedding officiated by Endicott Peabody, the groom's headmaster at Groton School.
Early on, Eleanor had a breakdown in which she explained to Franklin that "I did not like to live in a house which was not in any way mine, one that I had done nothing about and which did not represent the way I wanted to live", but little changed.
It was located on the banks of a stream that flowed through the Roosevelt family estate in Hyde Park, New York.
Smith writes, "remarkably, both ER and Franklin recognized, accepted, and encouraged the arrangement....Eleanor and Franklin were strong-willed people who cared greatly for each other's happiness but realized their own inability to provide for it."
However, Roosevelt wrote at 14 that one's prospects in life were not totally dependent on physical beauty: "no matter how plain a woman may be if truth and loyalty are stamped upon her face all will be attracted to her."
Before her father died, he implored her to act as a mother towards Hall, and it was a request she made good upon for the rest of Hall's life.
In December 1945, President Harry S. Truman appointed Eleanor as a delegate to the United Nations General Assembly.
In 1937 she began writing her autobiography, all volumes of which were compiled into ''The Autobiography of Eleanor Roosevelt'' in 1961 (Harper & Brothers, ISBN 0-306-80476-X).
Each year, when Eleanor held a picnic at Val-Kill for delinquent boys, Seagraves assisted her with this.
The film won numerous awards, including 11 Primetime Emmy Awards, a Golden Globe Award, and the Peabody Award.
It is the only presidential memorial to depict a First Lady.
Arthurdale continued to sink as a government spending priority for the federal government until 1941, when the U.S. sold off the last of its holdings in the community at a loss.
On August 18, 1933, at Hickok's urging, Roosevelt visited the families of homeless miners in Morgantown, West Virginia, who had been blacklisted following union activities.
*John Aspinwall Roosevelt II (March 13, 1916&nbsp;– April 27, 1981)
Despite becoming pregnant and giving birth six times, Eleanor disliked sex with her husband.
However, the union from that point on was more of a political partnership.
However, the project was criticized by both the political left and right.
Catholics comprised a major element of the Democratic Party in New York City.
Alice and Eleanor reconciled after Eleanor wrote Alice a comforting letter upon the death of Alice's daughter, Paulina Longworth.
On May 10, 1940, Germany invaded Belgium, Luxembourg, and the Netherlands, marking the end of the relatively conflict-free "Phoney War" phase of World War II.
Eleanor Roosevelt came in ninth.
In her 2003 autobiography ''Living History'', Clinton titled an entire chapter "Conversations with Eleanor", and stated that holding "imaginary conversations is actually a useful mental exercise to help analyze problems, provided you choose the right person to visualize.
She was also the first First Lady to write a monthly magazine column and to host a weekly radio show.
The previous year, President Herbert Hoover had ordered them dispersed, and the US Army cavalry charged and bombarded the veterans with tear gas.
Nancy's failing health and pressures from the Great Depression compelled the women to dissolve the partnership in 1938, at which time Roosevelt converted the shop buildings into a cottage at Val-Kill, that eventually became her permanent residence after Franklin died in 1945.
When asked for his thoughts on the Roosevelt-Roosevelt union, Theodore Roosevelt said, "It is a good thing to keep the name in the family."
Anna took care of her mother when she was terminally ill in 1962.
In his Pulitzer Prize-winning biography of Eleanor Roosevelt, ''Eleanor and Franklin: The Story of their Relationship, Based on Eleanor Roosevelt's Private Papers'' (1971), Joseph P. Lash describes her in childhood as insecure and starved for affection, and she considered herself the "ugly duckling".
Kennedy later reappointed her to the United Nations, where she served again from 1961 to 1962, and to the National Advisory Committee of the Peace Corps.
Hazel Rowley concludes, "There is no doubt that Eleanor was in love with Earl for a time&nbsp;...
She dogged Theodore on the New York State campaign trail in a car fitted with a ''papier-mâché'' bonnet shaped like a giant teapot that was made to emit simulated steam (to remind voters of Theodore's supposed, but later disproved, connections to the Teapot Dome Scandal), and countered his speeches with those of her own, calling him immature.
Hickok and George T. Bye, Eleanor's literary agent, encouraged her to write the column.
We have got to bring these young people into the active life of the community and make them feel that they are necessary."
Her daughter Anna took care of Roosevelt when she was terminally ill in 1962.
Franklin died on April 12, 1945 after suffering a cerebral hemorrhage at Warm Springs, Georgia.
Eleanor became one of the only voices in the Roosevelt White House insisting that benefits be equally extended to Americans of all races.
It concluded that female equality was best achieved by recognition of gender differences and needs, and not by an Equal Rights Amendment.
Roosevelt was active with the New York Junior League shortly after its founding, teaching dancing and calisthenics in the East Side slums.
As well, her aunt Anna "Bamie" Roosevelt publicly broke with her after the ordeal.
In 1924, she campaigned for Democrat Alfred E. Smith in his successful re-election bid as governor of New York State against the Republican nominee and her first cousin Theodore Roosevelt, Jr. Franklin had spoken out on Theodore's "wretched record" as Assistant Secretary of the Navy during the oil scandals, and in return, Theodore said of him, "He's a maverick!
In 1942, she urged women of all social backgrounds to learn trades, saying: "if I were of a debutante age I would go into a factory–any factory where I could learn a skill and be useful."
Afterwards, many of the same youth picketed the White House as representatives of the American Peace Mobilization.
Spellman said she was anti-Catholic, and supporters of both took sides in a battle that drew national attention and is "still remembered for its vehemence and hostility."
According to the organization, it exists "to carry forward the legacy and values of Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt by developing progressive ideas and bold leadership in the service of restoring America’s promise of opportunity for all."
Eleanor and Franklin had six children:
She had an unhappy childhood, having suffered the deaths of both parents and one of her brothers at a young age.
The Declaration was adopted by the General Assembly on December 10, 1948.
The Legacy sponsors campaign training schools, links candidates with volunteers and experts, collaborates with like-minded organizations and provides campaign grants to endorsed candidates.
She only relaxed the rule once, on her return from her 1943 Pacific trip.
She would later decry these methods, admitting that they were below her dignity but saying that they had been contrived by Democratic Party "dirty tricksters."
At Franklin's 1933 inauguration, Eleanor wore a sapphire ring Hickok had given her.
FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover despised Roosevelt's liberalism, her stance regarding civil rights, and her and her husband FDR's criticisms of Hoover's surveillance tactics, and so Hoover maintained a large file on Roosevelt, which the filmmakers of the biopic ''J.
It was produced with the cooperation of the Roosevelt family, and Eleanor herself was present on the set during location shooting at the Roosevelt estate in Hyde Park, New York.
When brother Elliott published this book in 1973, Franklin Delano Roosevelt Jr. led the family's denunciation of him; the book was fiercely repudiated by all Elliot's siblings.
She launched an experimental community at Arthurdale, West Virginia, for the families of unemployed miners, later widely regarded as a failure.
She persuaded Franklin to stay in politics after he was stricken with debilitating polio in 1921, which cost him the use of his legs, and Roosevelt began giving speeches and appearing at campaign events in his place.
After landing, she cheerfully announced, "Well, you can fly all right."
Eleanor became an important connection for Franklin's administration to the African-American population during the segregation era.
She also considered herself ill-suited to motherhood, later writing, "It did not come naturally to me to understand little children or to enjoy them".
Other notable awards she received during her life postwar included the Award of Merit of the New York City Federation of Women's Clubs in 1948, the Four Freedoms Award in 1950, the Irving Geist Foundation Award in 1950, and the Prince Carl Medal (from Sweden) in 1950.
Signorile also criticized Burns' dismissal of a possible sexual relationship between Eleanor Roosevelt and Lorena Hickok as "tabloid" material.
In 1989, the Eleanor Roosevelt Fund Award was founded; it "honors an individual, project, organization, or institution for outstanding contributions to equality and education for women and girls."
In 1998, Save America's Treasures (SAT) announced Val-Kill cottage as a new official project.
The relationship was further strained because Eleanor desperately wanted to go with her husband to Yalta but he chose Anna.
The organization had been brought to Roosevelt's attention by her friend, organization founder Mary Harriman, and a male relative who criticized the group for "drawing young women into public activity".
Roosevelt's relationship with the AYC eventually led to the formation of the National Youth Administration, a New Deal agency in the United States, founded in 1935, that focused on providing work and education for Americans between the ages of 16 and 25.
In July 1949, Roosevelt had a bitter public disagreement with Cardinal Francis Spellman, the Archbishop of New York, over federal funding for parochial schools.
Eleanor's son Elliot authored numerous books, including a mystery series in which Eleanor was the detective.
According to rumor, the letters were anonymously purchased and destroyed, or locked away when she died.
She was the longest-serving First Lady of the United States, having held the post from March 1933 to April 1945 during her husband President Franklin D. Roosevelt's four terms in office, and served as United States Delegate to the United Nations General Assembly from 1945 to 1952.
The award was first awarded on the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, honoring Eleanor Roosevelt's role as the "driving force" in the development of the UN's Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
After an initial, disastrous experiment with prefab houses, construction began again in 1934 to Roosevelt's specifications, this time with "every modern convenience", including indoor plumbing and central steam heat.
However, her visits to Washington, D.C. caused family tensions, and when in D.C., she was often asked by both Eleanor and Alice (Alice was a leader in Washington society) to stay at her home.
The Academy Film Archive preserved it in 2006.
Eleanor spoke in favor of the Declaration, calling it "the international Magna Carta of all men everywhere" in a speech on the night of September 28, 1948.
Beginning in 1941, she co-chaired the Office of Civilian Defense (OCD) with New York City Mayor Fiorello H. LaGuardia, working to give civilian volunteers expanded roles in war preparations.
Yet after a few years, the two were able to reconcile and cooperate on numerous projects.
But cooperative communities such as Westmoreland Homesteads, she went on, offered an alternative to "our rather settled ideas" that could "provide equality of opportunity for all and prevent the recurrence of a similar disaster depression in the future."
"I know what pain I must have caused you," Franklin wrote his mother of his decision.
Also in 1941, the short film ''Women in Defense'', written by Roosevelt, was released.
Seagraves also is one of the few surviving people who witnessed Eleanor's diplomacy.
SAT's involvement led to the Honoring Eleanor Roosevelt (HER) project, initially run by private volunteers and now a part of SAT.
He garnered almost all the attention from the press, and his attendance at the ceremony was front-page news, including in the ''New York Times''.
He does not wear the brand of our family," which infuriated Eleanor.
Also in 1976, the American television miniseries ''Eleanor and Franklin'' was released, starring Edward Herrmann as Franklin Roosevelt and Jane Alexander as Eleanor Roosevelt; it was broadcast on ABC on January 11 and 12, 1976.
Although she had reservations about John F. Kennedy for his failure to condemn McCarthyism, she supported him for president against Richard Nixon.
Theodore's elder daughter Alice also broke with Eleanor over her campaign.
In contrast to her usual support of African-American rights, the "sundown town" Eleanor, in West Virginia, was named for her and was established in 1934 when she and Franklin visited the county and developed it as a test site for families.
With James Brough, Elliot also wrote a highly personal book about his parents called ''The Roosevelts of Hyde Park: An Untold Story'', in which he revealed details about the sexual lives of his parents, including his father's relationships with mistress Lucy Mercer and secretary Marguerite ("Missy") LeHand as well as graphic details surrounding the illness that crippled his father.
Eleanor lobbied behind the scenes for the 1934 Costigan-Wagner Bill to make lynching a federal crime, including arranging a meeting between Franklin and NAACP president Walter Francis White.
Seagraves concentrated her career as an educator and librarian on keeping alive many of the causes Eleanor began and supported.
She was beloved by everybody."
She took pleasure in Hall's brilliant performance at school, and was proud of his many academic accomplishments, which included a master's degree in engineering from Harvard.
That summer they went on their formal honeymoon, a three-month tour of Europe.
She was close to Eleanor throughout her life.
She served as the first chair of the UN Commission on Human Rights, and oversaw the drafting of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
A sequel to ''An Untold Story'' with James Brough, published in 1975 and titled ''A Rendezvous With Destiny'', carried the Roosevelt saga to the end of World War II.
Eleanor Roosevelt did use her position as a trustee of the Julius Rosenwald Fund to arrange a loan of $175,000 to help finance the building of Moton Field.
Roosevelt was in attendance at the hearings and afterward invited the subpoenaed witnesses to board at the White House during their stay in Washington D.C. Joseph P. Lash was one of her boarders.
He became her friend as well as official escort, taught her different sports, such as diving and riding, and coached her in tennis.
The significance of Eleanor Roosevelt is she helped reform social life.
Roosevelt attributed the abstention of the Soviet bloc nations to Article 13, which provided the right of citizens to leave their countries.
When that lease expired in 1958, she returned to The Park Sheraton as she waited for the house she purchased with Edna and David Gurewitsch at 55 East 74th Street to be renovated.
Though never handsome, she always had to me a charming effect.
One time, the two sneaked out from the White House and went to a party dressed up for the occasion.
Published in 1973, the biography also contains valuable insights into FDR's run for vice-president, his rise to the governorship of New York, and his capture of the presidency in 1932, particularly with the help of Louis McHenry Howe.
Her brother Hall later suffered from alcoholism.
Roosevelt personally considered the project a success, later speaking of the improvements she saw in people's lives there and stating, "I don't know whether you think that is worth half a million dollars.
President John F. Kennedy ordered all United States flags lowered to half-staff throughout the world on November 8 in tribute to Roosevelt.
Faber published some of Roosevelt and Hickok's correspondence in 1980, but concluded that the lovestruck phrasing was simply an "unusually belated schoolgirl crush" and warned historians not to be misled.
Houston encouraged Clinton to pursue the Roosevelt connection, and while no psychic techniques were used with Clinton, critics and comics immediately suggested that Clinton was holding séances with Roosevelt.
Eleanor and Miller's relationship is said to have continued until her death in 1962.
In the same years, Washington gossip linked Eleanor romantically with New Deal administrator Harry Hopkins, with whom she worked closely.
Throughout the 1920s, Eleanor became increasingly influential as a leader in the New York State Democratic Party while Franklin used her contacts among Democratic women to strengthen his standing with them, winning their committed support for the future.
Daniel Petrie again won a Primetime Emmy for Director of the Year – Special for the second film.
Val-Kill Industries never became the subsistence program that Roosevelt and her friends imagined, but it did pave the way for larger New Deal initiatives during Franklin's presidential administration.
In the 1920 presidential election, Franklin was nominated as the Democratic vice presidential candidate with presidential candidate James M. Cox.
In 2001, the Eleanor Roosevelt Legacy Committee (Eleanor's Legacy) was founded by Judith Hollensworth Hope, who was its president until April 2008.
*Anna Eleanor Roosevelt (May 3, 1906&nbsp;– December 1, 1975)
Roosevelt promoted Val-Kill through interviews and public appearances.
In 1996, the Eleanor Roosevelt Monument, in New York's Riverside Park, was dedicated, with then–First Lady Hillary Clinton as the keynote speaker.
In it Meryl Streep provided the voice of Eleanor Roosevelt.
*Elliott Roosevelt (September 23, 1910&nbsp;– October 27, 1990)
By the time of her death, Roosevelt was regarded as "one of the most esteemed women in the world"; she was called "the object of almost universal respect" in her ''New York Times'' obituary.
In February 1933, just before Franklin assumed the presidency, Eleanor published an editorial in the ''Women's Daily News'' conflicting so sharply with his intended public spending policies that he published a rejoinder in the following issue.
She continued her articles in other venues, publishing more than sixty articles in national magazines during her tenure as First Lady.
''Mother R.: Eleanor Roosevelt's Untold Story'', also with Brough, was published in 1977.
The headmistress, Marie Souvestre, was a noted feminist educator who sought to cultivate independent thinking in young women.
After the funeral, Eleanor packed and moved out of the White House, returning to Val-Kill.
From the beginning, Eleanor had a contentious relationship with her controlling mother-in-law.
Disillusioned, Eleanor again became active in public life, and focused increasingly on her social work rather than her role as a wife, as she had for the previous decade.
In 1924, she campaigned for Democrat Alfred E. Smith in his successful re-election bid as governor of New York State against the Republican nominee and her first cousin Theodore Roosevelt, Jr. Theodore never forgave Eleanor.
The President admonished them to condemn not merely the Nazi regime but all dictatorships.
Researcher Leila J. Rupp criticized Faber's argument, calling her book "a case study in homophobia" and arguing that Faber unwittingly presented "page after page of evidence that delineates the growth and development of a love affair between the two women".
She lived here until 1953 when she moved to 211 East 62nd Street.
When the extent of his disability became clear, Eleanor fought a protracted battle with her mother-in-law over his future, persuading him to stay in politics despite Sara's urgings that he retire and become a country gentleman.
Roosevelt also arranged the appointment of African-American educator Mary McLeod Bethune, with whom she had struck up a friendship, as Director of the Division of Negro Affairs of the National Youth Administration.
In 1999, the Gallup Organization published the poll Gallup's List of Most Widely Admired People of the 20th Century, to determine which people around the world Americans most admired for what they did in the 20th century.
She also flew with African-American chief civilian instructor C. Alfred "Chief" Anderson.
Kennedy appointed Roosevelt to chair the commission, with Peterson as director.
While he was attending Groton, she wrote him almost daily, but always felt a touch of guilt that Hall had not had a fuller childhood.
In 1949, she was made an honorary member of the historically black organization Alpha Kappa Alpha.
Eleanor also broke with precedent by inviting hundreds of African-American guests to the White House.
They continued until Harrington's death in 2000, ten years after Elliott's death.
The letters included such endearments as, "I want to put my arms around you & kiss you at the corner of your mouth," and, "I can't kiss you, so I kiss your 'picture' good night and good morning!"
On entering the White House, she signed a contract with the magazine ''Woman's Home Companion'' to provide a monthly column, in which she answered mail sent to her by readers; the feature was canceled in 1936 as another presidential election approached.
'''Anna Eleanor Roosevelt ''' (; October 11, 1884 – November 7, 1962) was an American politician, diplomat, and activist.
In 1977, Roosevelt's cottage at Val-Kill and its surrounding property of 181 acres (0.73 km2), was formally designated by an act of Congress as the Eleanor Roosevelt National Historic Site, "to commemorate for the education, inspiration, and benefit of present and future generations the life and work of an outstanding woman in American history."
Of course I had been so long abroad that I had lost touch with all the girls I used to know in New York.
Roosevelt was tutored privately and, at the age of 15, with the encouragement of her aunt Anna "Bamie" Roosevelt, the family sent her to Allenswood Academy, a private finishing school in Wimbledon, outside London, England, from 1899 to 1902.
Though Roosevelt had hoped for a racially mixed community, the miners insisted on limiting membership to white Christians.
She resigned from her UN post in 1953, when Dwight D. Eisenhower became President.
Conservatives condemned it as socialist and a "communist plot", while Democratic members of Congress opposed government competition with private enterprise.
Another of the siblings, James, published ''My Parents, a Differing View ''(with Bill Libby, 1976), which was written in part as a response to Elliot's book.
Eleanor Roosevelt Seagraves, née Dall, born in 1927, was named for Eleanor, who was her maternal grandmother, as well as for Seagraves' own mother, Anna Roosevelt Halsted.
This was Roosevelt's last public position.
At the services, Adlai Stevenson II said: "What other single human being has touched and transformed the existence of so many?
As an unprecedentedly outspoken First Lady, Roosevelt made far more use of the media than her predecessors had, holding 348 press conferences over the span of her husband's 12-year presidency.
''Eleanor Roosevelt, with Love: A Centenary Remembrance'', came out in 1984.
Eleanor dismissed Bamie's criticisms by referring to her as an "aged woman."
They lived there for many years until Curtis' mother remarried.
Roosevelt remained a vigorous fundraiser for the community for several years, as well as spending most of her own income on the project.
Eleanor's first cousin Corinne Douglas Robinson, whose first term at Allenswood overlapped with Eleanor's last, said that when she arrived at the school, Eleanor was "'everything' at the school.
Residents were so taken by her personal expression of interest in the program that they promptly agreed to rename the community in her honor.
In August 1943, she visited American troops in the South Pacific on a morale-building tour, of which Admiral William Halsey, Jr. later said, "she alone accomplished more good than any other person, or any groups of civilians, who had passed through my area."
Anderson, who had been flying since 1929, and was responsible for training thousands of rookie pilots, took her on a half-hour flight in a Piper J-3 Cub.
Roosevelt supported increased roles for women and African-Americans in the war effort, and began to advocate for factory jobs to be given to women a year before it became a widespread practice.
As the U.S. began to move toward war footing, Roosevelt found herself again depressed, fearing that her role in fighting for domestic justice would become extraneous in a nation focused on foreign affairs.
Roosevelt's chief project during her husband's first two terms was the establishment of a planned community in Arthurdale, West Virginia.
Eleanor joined Franklin in touring the country, making her first campaign appearances.
Eventually, she would join with her old friends Herbert Lehman and Thomas Finletter to form the New York Committee for Democratic Voters, a group dedicated to opposing DeSapio's reincarnated Tammany Hall.
It was Anna who told her that Franklin had been with Lucy when he died; in addition, she told her that Franklin had continued the relationship for decades, and people surrounding him had hidden it from Eleanor.
Franklin encouraged Eleanor to develop this property as a place that she could develop some of her ideas for work with winter jobs for rural workers and women.
She addressed the Democratic National Convention in 1952 and 1956.
In 1998, the Eleanor Roosevelt Award for Human Rights was established by the then-President of the United States Bill Clinton, honoring outstanding American promoters of rights in the United States.
She notably supported the Tuskegee Airmen in their successful effort to become the first black combat pilots, visiting the Tuskegee Air Corps Advanced Flying School in Alabama.
The vote was unanimous, with eight abstentions: six Soviet Bloc countries as well as South Africa and Saudi Arabia.
She once told her daughter Anna that it was an "ordeal to be borne".
In 1988, Eleanor Roosevelt College, one of six undergraduate residential colleges at the University of California, San Diego, was founded.
Learning of the high rate of absenteeism among working mothers, she also campaigned for government-sponsored day care.
Speaking of the NYA in the 1930s, Roosevelt expressed her concern about ageism, stating that "I live in real terror when I think we may be losing this generation.
However, the residents considered the town a "utopia" compared to their previous circumstances, and many were returned to economic self-sufficiency.
Accompanying her on the trip was the wife of Henry Morgenthau, Jr., the president's Secretary of the Treasury.
In 2002, Eleanor Roosevelt High School, a small public high school on the Upper East Side of Manhattan in New York City, was founded.
A number of Congressional Republicans criticized her for using scarce wartime resources for her trip, prompting Franklin to suggest that she take a break from traveling.
The couple spent a preliminary honeymoon of one week at Hyde Park, then set up housekeeping in an apartment in New York.
Having known all of the twentieth century's previous First Ladies, she was seriously depressed at having to assume the role, which had traditionally been restricted to domesticity and hostessing.
Deeply affected by the visit, Roosevelt proposed a resettlement community for the miners at Arthurdale, where they could make a living by subsistence farming, handicrafts, and a local manufacturing plant.
In September 2014, ''The Roosevelts'' became the most streamed documentary on the PBS website to date.
Scholars, including Lillian Faderman and Hazel Rowley, have asserted that there was a physical component to the relationship, while Hickok biographer Doris Faber has argued that the insinuative phrases have misled historians.
Despite the President's desire to placate Southern sentiment, Eleanor was vocal in her support of the African-American civil rights movement.
On February 10, 1940, members of the AYC, as guests of Roosevelt in her capacity as First Lady, attended a picnic on the White House lawn where they were addressed by Franklin from the South Portico.
Following the Democrats' loss of congressional control in the 1994 elections, Clinton had engaged the services of Human Potential Movement proponent Jean Houston.
She supported Adlai Stevenson for president in 1952 and 1956, and urged his renomination in 1960.
Roosevelt also had a close relationship with a New York State Police sergeant, Earl Miller, whom her husband had assigned as her bodyguard.
