Prince Louis was sent to Bordeaux with an escort of 500 knights, along with Abbot Suger, Theobald II, Count of Champagne, and Count Ralph.
The pope, recalling similar attempts by William X to exile supporters of Innocent from Poitou and replace them with priests loyal to himself, blamed Eleanor, saying that Louis was only a child and should be taught manners.
Louis of France had remarried and been widowed; he married for the third time and finally fathered a long hoped-for son, Philip Augustus (also known as Dieudonne - God-given).
Over the next few years Eleanor often travelled with her husband and was sometimes associated with him in the government of the realm, but still had a custodian so that she was not free.
The existence and reasons for this court are debated.
The French, with what remained of the Germans, then began to march in increasingly disorganized fashion towards Antioch.
Fortunately for him, in the autumn of 1145, Pope Eugene III requested that Louis lead a Crusade to the Middle East to rescue the Frankish Kingdoms there from disaster.
Possessing a high-spirited nature, Eleanor was not popular with the staid northerners; according to sources, Louis's mother Adélaide de Maurienne thought her flighty and a bad influence.
It was rumored by some that Eleanor had had an affair with Henry's own father, Geoffrey V, Count of Anjou, who had advised his son to avoid any involvement with her.
It was decided that he would escort the Queen and Princess north.
In response, Eleanor broke down and meekly excused her behaviour, claiming to be bitter because of her lack of children.
Eleanor's conduct was repeatedly criticized by church elders, particularly Bernard of Clairvaux and Abbot Suger, as indecorous.
Eleanor then returned to Fontevraud where she took the veil as a nun.
His heir, Prince Louis, had originally been destined for the monastic life of a younger son but became the heir apparent when his older brother, Philip, died from a riding accident in 1131.
This vase is the only object connected with Eleanor of Aquitaine that still survives.
Eleanor of Aquitaine also formally took up the cross symbolic of the Second Crusade  during a sermon preached by Bernard of Clairvaux.
About four miles from Shrewsbury and close by Haughmond Abbey is "Queen Eleanor's Bower", the remains of a triangular castle which is believed to have been one of her prisons.
She was compared with Penthesilea, mythical queen of the Amazons, by the Greek historian Nicetas Choniates.
The Abbot Suger stops to chat with Eleanor and stays to wait, too.
Henry II's troops besieged the town, forcing his son to flee.
He had met her in 1166 and began his liaison in 1173, supposedly contemplating divorce from Eleanor.
Rancon however chose to continue on, deciding in concert with Amadeus III, Count of Savoy (Louis's uncle) that a nearby plateau would make a better campsite: such disobedience was reportedly common.
Eleanor's purported relationship with her uncle Raymond, the ruler of Antioch, was a major source of discord.
Archbishop Samson of Reims acted for Eleanor.
This tragedy was too much for the elderly queen, who was fatigued and unable to continue to Normandy.
Louis then decided to cross the Phrygian mountains directly in the hope of reaching Eleanor's uncle Raymond in Antioch more quickly.
He records some twenty-one cases, the most famous of them being a problem posed to the women about whether true love can exist in marriage.
Eleanor ended up developing skills in conversation, dancing, games such as backgammon, checkers, and chess, playing the harp, and singing.
That she had another half brother, William, has been discredited.
She and Blanche rode in easy stages to the valley of the Loire, and she entrusted Blanche to the Archbishop of Bordeaux, who took over as her escort.
In 1199, under the terms of a truce between King Philip II and King John, it was agreed that Philip's twelve-year-old heir-apparent Louis would be married to one of John's nieces, daughters of his sister Eleanor of Castile.
Eleanor was related to Henry even more closely than she had been to Louis: they were cousins to the third degree through their common ancestor Ermengarde of Anjou (wife of Robert I, Duke of Burgundy and Geoffrey, Count of Gâtinais), and they were also descended from King Robert II of France.
On 21 March, the four archbishops, with the approval of Pope Eugene, granted an annulment on grounds of consanguinity within the fourth degree.
Archbishop Samson received assurances from Louis that Eleanor's lands would be restored to her.
From there, "the younger Henry, devising evil against his father from every side by the advice of the French King, went secretly into Aquitaine where his two youthful brothers, Richard and Geoffrey, were living with their mother, and with her connivance, so it is said, he incited them to join him".
Eleanor is said to have been named for her mother Aenor and called ''Aliénor'' from the Latin ''alia Aenor'', which means ''the other Aenor''.
As soon as they disembarked at Southampton, Eleanor was taken either to Winchester Castle or Sarum Castle and held there.
To strengthen their argument, they state that there is no other evidence that Marie ever stayed with her mother in Poitiers.
He and Eleanor were anointed and crowned King and Queen of the Franks on Christmas Day of the same year.
Their two daughters were, however, declared legitimate.
(Eleanor was Louis' third cousin once removed, and shared common ancestry with Robert II of France.)
However, Henry and Eleanor eventually became estranged.
Upon reaching Bordeaux, he left them in the charge of the Archbishop of Bordeaux, one of his few loyal vassals.
Eleanor ruled England as regent while King Richard went off on the Third Crusade.
Louis, however, still burned with guilt over the massacre at Vitry and wished to make a pilgrimage to the Holy Land to atone for his sins.
Eleanor became the heir presumptive to her father's domains.
Some, such as John of Salisbury and William of Tyre, say Eleanor's reputation was sullied by rumours of an affair with her uncle Raymond.
The duke also insisted to his companions that his death be kept a secret until Louis was informed&nbsp;– the men were to journey from Saint James of Compostela  across the Pyrenees as quickly as possible to call at Bordeaux to notify the archbishop, then to make all speed to Paris to inform the king.
Eleanor reputedly had had a dream in which she foresaw her son Henry's death.
Eleanor supported her uncle's desire to re-capture the nearby County of Edessa, the objective of the Crusade.
The king did not announce the arrest publicly; for the next year, the Queen's whereabouts were unknown.
The books in the series are written as fictional diaries of royal women in their earlier years; Eleanor's is set in the year 1136.
The flashbacks trace the highlights of Eleanor's life from 1137 (when she is 15 years old and about to wed Louis Capet, soon to be King Louis VII of France) to her death in 1204.
By the time of her death, she had outlived all her children except for John and Eleanor.
However, while camping near Nicea, the remnants of the German army, including a dazed and sick King Conrad, staggered past the French camp, bringing news of their disaster.
In response, Bernard became more kindly towards her: "My child, seek those things which make for peace.
In April 2011, English published a second novel, ''To Be Queen'', which is another historical novel centered on Eleanor of Aquitaine's life.
She may not have been anointed on this occasion, however, because she had already been anointed in 1137.
Reputedly Eleanor then requested to stay with Raymond and brought up the matter of consanguinity&nbsp;– the fact that she and her husband, King Louis, were too closely related.
By the time of her death she had outlived all of her children except for King John of England and Queen Eleanor of Castile.
As soon as she arrived in Poitiers, Eleanor sent envoys to Henry, Duke of Normandy and future king of England, asking him to come at once to marry her.
Hugues de Toucy, Archbishop of Sens, presided, and Louis and Eleanor were both present, as were the Archbishops of Bordeaux and Rouen.
Official blame for the disaster was placed on Geoffrey de Rancon, who had made the decision to continue, and it was suggested that he be hanged (a suggestion which the king ignored).
''Courts of Love'' is written from a first person perspective in Plaidy's ''Queens of England series'', and in ''The Plantagenet Saga'', Eleanor of Aquitaine is featured in ''The Plantagenet Prelude'', ''Revolt of the Eaglets'', ''The Heart of the Lion'', and ''Prince of Darkness''.
Although her native tongue was Poitevin, she was taught to read and speak Latin, was well versed in music and literature, and schooled in riding, hawking, and hunting.
The duke then set out for the Shrine of Saint James of Compostela in the company of other pilgrims.
This novel covers the years 1132–1152, from before she became Duchess of Aquitaine until the end of her first marriage to Louis VII of France.
It may have been largely to teach manners, as the French courts would be known for in later generations.
The second, titled ''The Winter Crown'' was published in 2014.
As soon as the annulment was granted, Eleanor became engaged to Henry, Duke of Normandy and Count of Anjou, who became King Henry II of England in 1154.
The flashbacks on earth are set during the Middle Ages in France and England, with a brief trip to the Holy Land.
On 11 March 1152, they met at the royal castle of Beaugency to dissolve the marriage.
This did nothing for her popularity in Christendom&nbsp;– she was also blamed for the size of the baggage train and the fact that her Aquitainian soldiers had marched at the front, thus not involved in the fight.
They were in high spirits on Christmas Eve, when they chose to camp in a lush Dercervian valley near Ephesus.
John instructed his mother to travel to Castile to select one of the princesses.
He reportedly "nimbly and bravely scaled a rock by making use of some tree roots which God had provided for his safety", and managed to survive the attack.
The marriage was now doomed.
She inherited the Duchy of Aquitaine from her father, William X, in 1137, and later became queen consort of France (1137–1152) and of England (1154–1189).
This resulted in the army becoming separated, with some having already crossed the summit and others still approaching it.
To pass the time, the four recall Eleanor's time on Earth.
Eleanor selected the younger daughter, Blanche.
Eventually, he arranged events so that Eleanor had no choice but to sleep with Louis in a bed specially prepared by the pope.
Originally published in 1973, the novel was put back in print by Atheneum in 2001.
While there, the queen met with Bernard of Clairvaux, demanding that he have the excommunication of Petronilla and Raoul lifted through his influence on the pope, in exchange for which King Louis would make concessions in Champagne and recognise Pierre de la Chatre as Archbishop of Bourges.
As Duchess of Aquitaine, Eleanor was the most eligible bride in Europe.
As Queen of France, she participated in the unsuccessful Second Crusade.
In ''The Art of Courtly Love'', Andreas Capellanus (Andrew the chaplain) refers to the court of Poitiers.
Eleanor survived Richard and lived well into the reign of her youngest son, King John.
She was not aided by memories of Constance of Arles, the Provençal wife of Robert II, tales of whose immodest dress and language were still told with horror.
The film is about the difficult relationship between them and the struggle of their three sons Richard, Geoffrey, and John for their father's favour and the succession.
Accordingly, by mid-afternoon, the rear of the column&nbsp;– believing the day's march to be nearly at an end&nbsp;– was dawdling.
Accordingly, Louis declared on Christmas Day 1145 at Bourges his intention of going on crusade.
She was portrayed by Mary Clare in the silent film, ''Becket'' (1923), by Prudence Hyman in ''Richard the Lionheart'' (1962), and twice by Jane Lapotaire; in the BBC TV drama series, ''The Devil's Crown'' (1978), and again in Mike Walker's BBC Radio 4 series, ''Plantagenet'' (2010).
In 1183, the Young King Henry tried again to force his father to hand over some of his patrimony.
Eleanor was a major character in Chadwick's historical novels about William Marshal especially ''The Greatest Knight''.
However, no one left a more detailed description of Eleanor; the colour of her hair and eyes, for example, are unknown.
Sometime between the end of March and the beginning of May, Eleanor left Poitiers, but was arrested and sent to the king at Rouen.
In early summer, Eleanor was ill and John visited her at Fontevraud.
In the spring of 1130, her four-year-old brother William Aigret and their mother died at the castle of Talmont, on Aquitaine's Atlantic coast.
In the 2010 film, ''Robin Hood,'' starring Russell Crowe, Eleanor is played by Eileen Atkins.
As Eleanor traveled to Poitiers, two lords&nbsp;– Theobald V, Count of Blois, and Geoffrey, Count of Nantes (brother of Henry II, Duke of Normandy)&nbsp;– tried to kidnap and marry her to claim her lands.
In the 1964 film, "Becket" (1964), Eleanor is briefly played by Pamela Brown to Peter O'Toole's first performance as a young Henry II.
Some believe that Eleanor’s court in Poitiers was the "Court of Love", where Eleanor and her daughter Marie meshed and encouraged the ideas of troubadours, chivalry, and courtly love into a single court.
Louis was personally involved in the assault and burning of the town of Vitry.
More than a thousand people who sought refuge in the church there died in the flames.
Cease to stir up the King against the Church, and urge upon him a better course of action.
Henry donated much money to Godstow Nunnery, where Rosamund was buried.
A recording made by Opera Rara (1994), features Nelly Miricioiu as Eleanor and Renée Fleming as Rosamund.
A marriage between Henry and Eleanor's daughter Marie had earlier been declared impossible due to their status as third cousins once removed.
This, and her known age of 82 at her death, make 1122 more likely the year of birth.
Eleanor rode to Westminster and received the oaths of fealty from many lords and prelates on behalf of the king.
In Paris as the Queen of France she was called Helienordis, her honorific name as written in the Latin epistles.
Rather than allowing her to stay, Louis took Eleanor from Antioch against her will and continued on to Jerusalem with his dwindling army.
Attempts were made to claim Toulouse, the rightful inheritance of Eleanor's grandmother Philippa of Toulouse, but they ended in failure.
Within hours the king had arranged for Prince Louis to be married to Eleanor, with Abbot Suger in charge of the wedding arrangements.
Once her sons had left for Paris, Eleanor may have encouraged the lords of the south to rise up and support them.
This was duly lifted for long enough to allow Theobald's lands to be restored; it was then lowered once more when Raoul refused to repudiate Petronilla, prompting Louis to return to Champagne and ravage it once more.
In the 2014 film, ''Richard the Lionheart: Rebellion'', Eleanor is played by Debbie Rochon.
Rather than act as guardian to the duchess and duchy, he decided to marry the duchess to his 17-year-old heir and bring Aquitaine under the control of the French crown, thereby greatly increasing the power and prominence of France and its ruling family, the Capets.
Eleanor was extroverted, lively, intelligent, and strong-willed.
Later, when Richard was captured, she personally negotiated his ransom by going to Germany.
Eleanor appears to have taken an ambivalent attitude towards these affairs: for example, Geoffrey of York, an illegitimate son of Henry, was acknowledged by Henry as his child and raised at Westminster in the care of the queen.
Outraged, Louis swore upon relics that so long as he lived Pierre should never enter Bourges.
Arthur learned of her whereabouts and besieged her in the castle of Mirebeau.
Her birthplace may have been Poitiers, Bordeaux, or Nieul-sur-l'Autise, where her mother and brother died when Eleanor was 6 or 8.
However, this may have been a ruse, as Raymond through Eleanor tried to sway Louis forcibly to use his army to attack the actual Muslim encampment at nearby Aleppo, gateway to retaking Edessa,  by papal decree the objective of the Crusade.
In 1193 she would tell Pope Celestine III that she was tortured by his memory.
Eleanor is associated with Nicole des Jardins in Arthur C. Clarke and Gentry Lee's follow-up series to Clarke's ''Rendezvous with Rama''.
His sources no longer exist, and he alone mentions this birth.
Three months after she became duchess, she married King Louis VII of France, son of her guardian, King Louis VI.
Raymond had plans to abduct Eleanor, to which she consented.
He claims that Eleanor, her daughter Marie, Ermengarde, Viscountess of Narbonne, and Isabelle of Flanders would sit and listen to the quarrels of lovers and act as a jury to the questions of the court that revolved around acts of romantic love.
On 25 October 1154, Henry became King of England.
In 1137, Duke William X left Poitiers for Bordeaux and took his daughters with him.
The death of William, one of the king's most powerful vassals, made available the most desirable duchy in France.
She did not have the opportunity to see her sons very often during her imprisonment, though she was released for special occasions such as Christmas.
Custody of them was awarded to King Louis.
After wandering aimlessly through Aquitaine, Henry the Younger caught dysentery.
On Saturday, 11 June 1183, the Young King realized he was dying and was overcome with remorse for his sins.
Continuing on, the army became split, with the commoners marching toward Antioch and the royalty traveling by sea.
Damascus was a major trading centre that abounded in wealth and was under normal circumstances a potential threat, but the rulers of Jerusalem had recently entered into a truce with the city, which they then forswore.
The vanguard, with which Queen Eleanor marched, was commanded by her Aquitainian vassal Geoffrey de Rancon.
Eleanor features in Susan Appleyard's novel of Henry II 'The First Plantagenet'.
Although they escaped this attempt  unharmed, stormy weather drove Eleanor's ship far to the south (to the Barbary Coast) and caused her to lose track of her husband.
Also published in April 2010 was Alison Weir's novel, ''The Captive Queen'', which details Eleanor's life from when she first met Henry II of England to her death in 1204.
Immediately after the wedding, the couple was enthroned as Duke and Duchess of Aquitaine.
In 1167, Eleanor's third daughter, Matilda, married Henry the Lion of Saxony.
The Crusade itself achieved little.
Eleanor secured her freedom by agreeing to his demands.
On the day set for the crossing of Mount Cadmos, Louis chose to take charge of the rear of the column, where the unarmed pilgrims and the baggage trains marched.
Eleanor is one of four women profiled in Helen Castor's 2011 book ''She-Wolves: The Women Who Ruled England Before Elizabeth'' (Faber & Faber), and of the BBC documentary ''She-Wolves: England's Early Queens'', presented by Castor.
All that can be said is that her court at Poitiers was most likely a catalyst for the increased popularity of courtly love literature in the Western European regions.
King Alfonso VIII and Eleanor's daughter, Queen Eleanor of Castile, had two remaining unmarried daughters, Urraca and Blanche.
Although Louis was a pious man, he soon came into a violent conflict with Pope Innocent II.
However, until a husband was found, the king had the legal right to Eleanor's lands.
As they ascended the mountains, however, the army and the king and queen were horrified to discover the unburied corpses of the previously slaughtered German army.
Eleanor was crowned Queen of England by the Archbishop of Canterbury on 19 December 1154.
Her tomb effigy shows her reading a bible and is decorated with magnificent jewelry.
'''Eleanor of Aquitaine''' (, ; 1122 &nbsp;– 1 April 1204) was one of the wealthiest and most powerful women in western Europe during the High Middle Ages and a member of the Ramnulfid dynasty of rulers in southwestern France.
Over the next thirteen years, she bore Henry eight children: five sons, three of whom would become kings; and three daughters.
Here they were ambushed by a Turkish detachment; the French proceeded to slaughter this detachment and appropriate their camp.
The marriage was annulled on 11 March 1152 on the grounds of consanguinity within the fourth degree.
When war broke out between John and Philip, Eleanor declared her support for John and set out from Fontevraud to her capital Poitiers to prevent her grandson Arthur I, Duke of Brittany, posthumous son of Eleanor's son Geoffrey and John's rival for the English throne, from taking control.
"On the second day in Easter week, he was slain in the city by a man-at-arms in the service of Brandin", a rival mercenary captain.
Even in an era when ladies of the nobility were excessively praised, their praise of her was undoubtedly sincere.
Louis became involved in a war with Count Theobald by permitting Raoul I, Count of Vermandois and seneschal of France, to repudiate his wife Eléonore of Blois, Theobald's sister, and to marry Petronilla of Aquitaine, Eleanor's sister.
Over the next thirteen years, she bore Henry five sons and three daughters: William, Henry, Richard, Geoffrey, John, Matilda, Eleanor, and Joan.
Now queen dowager, Eleanor acted as regent while Richard went on the Third Crusade, where on his return he was captured and held prisoner.
Eleanor recruited some of her royal ladies-in-waiting for the campaign, as well as 300 non-noble Aquitainian vassals.
Louis and Eleanor stayed in the Philopation palace just outside the city walls.
Eleanor went back to England probably early in 1184.
Upon the death of her husband Henry II on 6 July 1189, Richard I was the undisputed heir.
Eleanor was again unwell in early 1201.
On the other hand, some chronicles mention a fidelity oath of some lords of Aquitaine on the occasion of Eleanor's fourteenth birthday in 1136.
The king and queen were still optimistic&nbsp;– the Byzantine Emperor had told them that the German King Conrad had won a great victory against a Turkish army (when in fact the German army had been massacred), and the troupe was still eating well.
Henry did not stop her; on the contrary, he and his army personally escorted her there before attacking a castle belonging to the rebellious Lusignan family.
In a matter of weeks, peace had returned to France: Theobald's provinces were returned and Pierre de la Chatre was installed as Archbishop of Bourges.
He died, however, on Good Friday of that year (9 April).
When Patrick was killed in a skirmish, Eleanor (who proceeded to ransom his captured nephew, the young William Marshal), was left in control of her lands.
Neither was heard of for over two months.
In 2013, Elizabeth Chadwick published the first of three announced books about Eleanor's life, titled ''The Summer Queen''.
William requested the king to take care of both the lands and the duchess, and to also find her a suitable husband.
Eleanor came to learn arithmetic, the constellations, and history.
Thus was conceived their second child&nbsp;– not a son, but another daughter, Alix of France.
Eleanor, aged twelve to fifteen, then became the Duchess of Aquitaine, and thus the most eligible heiress in Europe.
William of Newburgh emphasized the charms of her person, and even in her old age, Richard of Devizes described her as beautiful, while Matthew Paris, writing in the 13th century, recalled her "admirable beauty."
He was joined by troops sent by his brother Geoffrey and Philip II of France.
Contemporary sources praise Eleanor's beauty.
The effigy on her tomb shows a tall and large-boned woman with brown skin, though this may not be an accurate representation.
During her imprisonment, Eleanor became more and more distant with her sons, especially Richard (who had always been her favorite).
According to Capellanus, the women decided that it was not at all likely.
E.L. Konigsburg's young adult novel ''A Proud Taste for Scarlet and Miniver'' takes place in Heaven of the late 20th century, where Eleanor of Aquitaine, Empress Matilda, and William the Marshall are waiting for King Henry II to be admitted to eternity at last.
On 8 July 1174, Henry and Eleanor took ship for England from Barfleur.
Eleanor's year of birth is not known precisely: a late 13th-century genealogy of her family listing her as 13 years old in the spring of 1137 provides the best evidence that Eleanor was perhaps born as late as 1124.
Thus, her holdings would not be merged with France until the next generation.
Louis's tenure as Count of Poitou and Duke of Aquitaine and Gascony lasted only a few days.
There is no claim that Eleanor invented courtly love, since it was a concept that had begun to grow before Eleanor’s court arose.
In eastern Europe, the French army was at times hindered by Manuel I Comnenus, the Byzantine Emperor, who feared that the Crusade would jeopardize the tenuous safety of his empire.
This was grounds for divorce in the medieval period.
Soon after, Eleanor sought an annulment of her marriage, but her request was rejected by Pope Eugene III.
