The intrinsic angular momentum became known as spin, and explained the previously mysterious splitting of spectral lines observed with a high-resolution spectrograph; this phenomenon is known as fine structure splitting.
Stoney initially coined the term ''electrolion'' in 1881.
In 1924, Austrian physicist Wolfgang Pauli observed that the shell-like structure of the atom could be explained by a set of four parameters that defined every quantum energy state, as long as each state was inhabited by no more than a single electron.
The electrons emit synchrotron radiation that coherently interacts with the same electrons to strongly amplify the radiation field at the resonance frequency.
This technique employs the photoelectric effect to measure the reciprocal space—a mathematical representation of periodic structures that is used to infer the original structure.
Since an electron behaves as a wave, at a given velocity it has a characteristic de Broglie wavelength.
He then showed that the luminescence rays appearing within the tube carried energy and moved from the cathode to the anode.
In 1919, the American chemist Irving Langmuir elaborated on the Lewis' static model of the atom and suggested that all electrons were distributed in successive "concentric (nearly) spherical shells, all of equal thickness".
While an electron–positron virtual pair is in existence, the coulomb force from the ambient electric field surrounding an electron causes a created positron to be attracted to the original electron, while a created electron experiences a repulsion.
The net result is a steady reduction in the number of electrons, and a matching increase in the number of neutrons.
The German physicist Johann Wilhelm Hittorf studied electrical conductivity in rarefied gases: in 1869, he discovered a glow emitted from the cathode that increased in size with decrease in gas pressure.
These devices are used in manufacturing, communication, and in medical applications, such as soft tissue surgery.
While studying naturally fluorescing minerals in 1896, the French physicist Henri Becquerel discovered that they emitted radiation without any exposure to an external energy source.
Comparable experiments had been done earlier by Thomson's team, using clouds of charged water droplets generated by electrolysis, and in 1911 by Abram Ioffe, who independently obtained the same result as Millikan using charged microparticles of metals, then published his results in 1913.
Chemical bonds between atoms were explained by Gilbert Newton Lewis, who in 1916 proposed that a covalent bond between two atoms is maintained by a pair of electrons shared between them.
Ionization or changes in the proportions of particles changes the binding energy of an atomic system.
Electron gas can undergo plasma oscillation, which is waves caused by synchronized variations in electron density, and these produce energy emissions that can be detected by using radio telescopes.
After studying the phenomenon of electrolysis in 1874, Irish physicist George Johnstone Stoney suggested that there existed a "single definite quantity of electricity", the charge of a monovalent ion.
The '''electron'''  is a subatomic particle, symbol  or , with a negative elementary electric charge.
British natural philosopher Richard Laming first hypothesized the concept of an indivisible quantity of electric charge to explain the chemical properties of atoms in 1838; Irish physicist George Johnstone Stoney named this charge 'electron' in 1891, and J. J. Thomson and his team of British physicists identified it as a particle in 1897.
This capability makes the electron microscope a useful laboratory instrument for high resolution imaging.
With this model Langmuir was able to qualitatively explain the chemical properties of all elements in the periodic table, which were known to largely repeat themselves according to the periodic law.
Since an electron has charge, it has a surrounding electric field, and an electron moving relative to an observer generates a magnetic field.
When there is an excess of electrons, the object is said to be negatively charged.
On the other hand, metals have an electronic band structure containing partially filled electronic bands.
Electrons are identical particles because they cannot be distinguished from each other by their intrinsic physical properties.
Laboratory instruments are capable of containing individual electrons as well as electron plasma using electromagnetic fields.
Also an upper bound of electron radius of 10−18&nbsp;meters can be derived using the uncertainty relation in energy.
An example is the muon, which decays into an electron, a neutrino and an antineutrino, with a mean lifetime of &nbsp;seconds.
Since the absolute value is not changed by a sign swap, this corresponds to equal probabilities.
The apparent paradox (mentioned above in the properties subsection) of a point particle electron having intrinsic angular momentum and magnetic moment can be explained by the formation of virtual photons in the electric field generated by the electron.
This particle was discovered in 1932 by Carl Anderson, who proposed calling standard electrons ''negatrons'', and using ''electron'' as a generic term to describe both the positively and negatively charged variants.
The Coulomb force interaction between positive protons inside atomic nuclei and negative electrons composes atoms.
Leptons differ from the other basic constituent of matter, the quarks, by their lack of strong interaction.
This property of induction supplies the magnetic field that drives an electric motor.
The first successful attempt to accelerate electrons using electromagnetic induction was made in 1942 by Donald Kerst.
The magnetic moment of the nucleus is negligible compared with that of the electrons.
However, the electron is thought to be stable on theoretical grounds: the electron is the least massive particle with non-zero electric charge, so its decay would violate charge conservation.
Ten years later, he switched to ''electron'' to describe these elementary charges, writing in 1894: "... an estimate was made of the actual amount of this most remarkable fundamental unit of electricity, for which I have since ventured to suggest the name ''electron''".
The effects of special relativity are based on a quantity known as the Lorentz factor, defined as  where ''v'' is the speed of the particle.
The physical mechanism to explain the fourth parameter, which had two distinct possible values, was provided by the Dutch physicists Samuel Goudsmit and George Uhlenbeck.
The electron has an intrinsic angular momentum or spin of .
intensive electron radiation causes a many orders of magnitude decrease of viscosity and stepwise decrease of its activation energy.
In 1911, Charles Wilson used this principle to devise his cloud chamber so he could photograph the tracks of charged particles, such as fast-moving electrons.
The second and third generation contain charged leptons, the muon and the tau, which are identical to the electron in charge, spin and interactions, but are more massive.
During the 1870s, the English chemist and physicist Sir William Crookes developed the first cathode ray tube to have a high vacuum inside.
This difference was later explained by the theory of quantum electrodynamics, developed by Sin-Itiro Tomonaga, Julian Schwinger and
In quantum mechanics, this means that a pair of interacting electrons must be able to swap positions without an observable change to the state of the system.
The strength of this force is determined by Coulomb's inverse square law.
From electrostatics theory, the potential energy of a sphere with radius ''r'' and charge ''e'' is given by:
When there are fewer electrons than the number of protons in nuclei, the object is said to be positively charged.
where ''ε''0 is the vacuum permittivity.
The development of the Paul trap and Penning trap allows charged particles to be contained within a small region for long durations.
The energy emission in turn causes a recoil of the electron, known as the Abraham–Lorentz–Dirac Force, which creates a friction that slows the electron.
The distribution of the electrons in solid materials can be visualized by angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES).
The interaction with virtual particles also explains the small (about 0.1%) deviation of the intrinsic magnetic moment of the electron from the Bohr magneton (the anomalous magnetic moment).
For this reason, EBL is primarily used for the production of small numbers of specialized integrated circuits.
Transmission electron microscopes function like overhead projectors, with a beam of electrons passing through a slice of material then being projected by lenses on a photographic slide or a charge-coupled device.
The wave properties of electrons are easier to observe with experiments than those of other particles like neutrons and protons because electrons have a lower mass and hence a larger De Broglie wavelength for a given energy.
These are electrons with opposed spins, allowing them to occupy the same molecular orbital without violating the Pauli exclusion principle (much like in atoms).
The gravitational potential of the black hole can then supply the energy that transforms this virtual particle into a real particle, allowing it to radiate away into space.
A fundamental factor in these molecular structures is the existence of electron pairs.
Vacuum tubes use the flow of electrons to manipulate electrical signals, and they played a critical role in the development of electronics technology.
This collision results in a transfer of momentum and energy between the particles, which modifies the wavelength of the photon by an amount called the Compton shift.
In 1900, Becquerel showed that the beta rays emitted by radium could be deflected by an electric field, and that their mass-to-charge ratio was the same as for cathode rays.
This motion produces both the spin and the magnetic moment of the electron.
Within the limits of experimental accuracy, the electron charge is identical to the charge of a proton, but with the opposite sign.
The acceleration from this curving motion induces the electron to radiate energy in the form of synchrotron radiation.
The strongest bonds are formed by the sharing or transfer of electrons between atoms, allowing the formation of molecules.
Because the electron is charged, it produces an orbital magnetic moment that is proportional to the angular momentum.
Other methods of orbital transfer include collisions with particles, such as electrons, and the Auger effect.
This occurs because electrical signals propagate as a wave, with the velocity dependent on the dielectric constant of the material.
According to the Pauli exclusion principle each orbital can be occupied by up to two electrons, which must differ in their spin quantum number.
It is given by ''α''&nbsp;≈&nbsp;, which is approximately equal to .
However, the process of stellar evolution can result in the synthesis of radioactive isotopes.
With the development of the particle accelerator during the first half of the twentieth century, physicists began to delve deeper into the properties of subatomic particles.
These photons were sufficiently energetic that they could react with each other to form pairs of electrons and positrons.
When cooled below a point called the critical temperature, materials can undergo a phase transition in which they lose all resistivity to electric current, in a process known as superconductivity.
He gave them the modern charge nomenclature of positive and negative respectively.
Electron and positron beams are collided upon the particles' accelerating to the required energies; particle detectors observe the resulting energy emissions, which particle physics studies .
If a body has more or fewer electrons than are required to balance the positive charge of the nuclei, then that object has a net electric charge.
Charged current interactions are responsible for the phenomenon of beta decay in a radioactive atom.
That is, under the appropriate conditions, electrons and other matter would show properties of either particles or waves.
The net magnetic moment of an atom is equal to the vector sum of orbital and spin magnetic moments of all electrons and the nucleus.
Around the beginning of the twentieth century, it was found that under certain conditions a fast-moving charged particle caused a condensation of supersaturated water vapor along its path.
This means that during weak interactions, electron neutrinos behave like electrons.
This device could measure the electric charge from as few as 1–150 ions with an error margin of less than 0.3%.
If the number of electrons is different from the nucleus' electrical charge, such an atom is called an ion.
The German-born British physicist Arthur Schuster expanded upon Crookes' experiments by placing metal plates parallel to the cathode rays and applying an electric potential between the plates.
Electrons inside conducting solids, which are quasi-particles themselves, when tightly confined at temperatures close to absolute zero, behave as though they had split into three other quasiparticles: spinons, orbitons and holons.
Electrons can transfer between different orbitals by the emission or absorption of photons with an energy that matches the difference in potential.
On the contrary, in non-bonded pairs electrons are distributed in a large volume around nuclei.
In 1892 Hendrik Lorentz suggested that the mass of these particles (electrons) could be a consequence of their electric charge.
The shells were, in turn, divided by him in a number of cells each containing one pair of electrons.
Electrons are important in cathode ray tubes, which have been extensively used as display devices in laboratory instruments, computer monitors and television sets.
The required energy of the electrons is typically in the range 20–200&nbsp;eV.
FEL can emit a coherent high-brilliance electromagnetic radiation with a wide range of frequencies, from microwaves to soft X-rays.
The name electron was again proposed for these particles by the Irish physicist George F. Fitzgerald, and the name has since gained universal acceptance.
Thus the effective charge of an electron is actually smaller than its true value, and the charge decreases with increasing distance from the electron.
Electrons belong to the first generation of the lepton particle family, and are generally thought to be elementary particles because they have no known components or substructure.
Some electrons change their properties, such as movement direction, angle, and relative phase and energy as the beam interacts with the material.
Such interaction between the light and free electrons is called Thomson scattering or Linear Thomson scattering.
Selected isotopes can subsequently undergo negative beta decay, emitting an electron and antineutrino from the nucleus.
In a simplified picture, every photon spends some time as a combination of a virtual electron plus its antiparticle, the virtual positron, which rapidly annihilate each other shortly thereafter.
As a bound electron transitions between different energy levels of an atom, it absorbs or emits photons at characteristic frequencies.
In 1876, the German physicist Eugen Goldstein showed that the rays from this glow cast a shadow, and he dubbed the rays cathode rays.
Beginning in 1846, German physicist William Weber theorized that electric current is due to positively and negatively charges moving with equal velocity and opposite direction along the conductor.
The wave function of fermions, including electrons, is antisymmetric, meaning that it changes sign when two electrons are swapped; that is, , where the variables ''r''1 and ''r''2 correspond to the first and second electrons, respectively.
These radioactive materials became the subject of much interest by scientists, including the New Zealand physicist Ernest Rutherford who discovered they emitted particles.
Once spin and the interaction between multiple electrons were considered, quantum mechanics later made it possible to predict the configuration of electrons in atoms with higher atomic numbers than hydrogen.
His initial betatron reached energies of 2.3&nbsp;MeV, while subsequent betatrons achieved 300&nbsp;MeV.
The admission of the hypothesis of a finite radius of the electron is incompatible to the premises of the theory of relativity.
in the pairs that actually bind atoms together) electrons can be found with the maximal probability in a relatively small volume between the nuclei.
The chemical bond between atoms occurs as a result of electromagnetic interactions, as described by the laws of quantum mechanics.
Electrons can be created through beta decay of radioactive isotopes and in high-energy collisions, for instance when cosmic rays enter the atmosphere.
In exchange, the other member of the pair is given negative energy, which results in a net loss of mass-energy by the black hole.
For such particles the spin magnitude is &nbsp;''ħ''.
Electrons have an electric charge of  coulomb, which is used as a standard unit of charge for subatomic particles, and is also called the elementary charge.
The antiparticle of the electron is called the positron; it is identical to the electron except that it carries electrical and other charges of the opposite sign.
These antimatter particles immediately annihilate with electrons, releasing gamma rays.
External electromagnetic fields affect an electron according to the Lorentz force law.
Spectroscopic measurements of the strength and width of these lines allow the composition and physical properties of a substance to be determined.
In a photomultiplier tube, every photon striking the photocathode initiates an avalanche of electrons that produces a detectable current pulse.
Synchrotron radiation can also cool the electron beams to reduce the momentum spread of the particles.
The issue of the radius of the electron is a challenging problem of the modern theoretical physics.
The suffix -''on'' which is now used to designate other subatomic particles, such as a proton or neutron, is in turn derived from electron.
In the theory of electroweak interaction, the left-handed component of electron's wavefunction forms a weak isospin doublet with the electron neutrino.
The scientists used extremely short flashes of light, called attosecond pulses, which allowed an electron's motion to be observed for the first time.
In 1926, this equation, the Schrödinger equation, successfully described how electron waves propagated.
This causes what is called vacuum polarization.
In 1925, Goudsmit and Uhlenbeck suggested that an electron, in addition to the angular momentum of its orbit, possesses an intrinsic angular momentum and magnetic dipole moment.
At a given temperature, each material has an electrical conductivity that determines the value of electric current when an electric potential is applied.
The first video images of an electron's energy distribution were captured by a team at Lund University in Sweden, February 2008.
where ''m''e is the mass of electron.
In quantum mechanics, the wave-like property of one particle can be described mathematically as a complex-valued function, the wave function, commonly denoted by the Greek letter psi (''ψ'').
The field deflected the rays toward the positively charged plate, providing further evidence that the rays carried negative charge.
By comparison, electron microscopes are limited by the de Broglie wavelength of the electron.
Instead, virtual photons can transfer momentum between two charged particles.
In the case of antisymmetry, solutions of the wave equation for interacting electrons result in a zero probability that each pair will occupy the same location or state.
This approach led to a second formulation of quantum mechanics (the first being by Heisenberg in 1925), and solutions of Schrödinger's equation, like Heisenberg's, provided derivations of the energy states of an electron in a hydrogen atom that were equivalent to those that had been derived first by Bohr in 1913, and that were known to reproduce the hydrogen spectrum.
For example, in one instance a Penning trap was used to contain a single electron for a period of 10 months.
(Cooper pairs have a radius of roughly 100&nbsp;nm, so they can overlap each other.)
The Ampère-Maxwell law relates the magnetic field to the mass motion of electrons (the current) with respect to an observer.
Metals make relatively good conductors of heat, primarily because the delocalized electrons are free to transport thermal energy between atoms.
The speed of an electron can approach, but never reach, the speed of light in a vacuum, ''c''.
Franklin thought of the charge carrier as being positive, but he did not correctly identify which situation was a surplus of the charge carrier, and which situation was a deficit.
The scanning tunneling microscope uses quantum tunneling of electrons from a sharp metal tip into the studied material and can produce atomically resolved images of its surface.
However, the mechanism by which higher temperature superconductors operate remains uncertain.
These Cooper pairs have their motion coupled to nearby matter via lattice vibrations called phonons, thereby avoiding the collisions with atoms that normally create electrical resistance.
Polarized electron beams can be useful for various experiments.
Low-energy electron diffraction (LEED) is a method of bombarding a crystalline material with a collimated beam of electrons and then observing the resulting diffraction patterns to determine the structure of the material.
More than half of the cosmic radiation observed from the Earth's surface consists of muons.
For an electron with rest mass ''m''0, the rest energy is equal to:
This property is usually stated by referring to the electron as a spin- particle.
Special telescopes can detect electron plasma in outer space.
On the other hand, high-energy photons can transform into an electron and a positron by a process called pair production, but only in the presence of a nearby charged particle, such as a nucleus.
When free electrons—both in vacuum and metals—move, they produce a net flow of charge called an electric current, which generates a magnetic field.
However, the terminology comes from a simplistic calculation that ignores the effects of quantum mechanics; in reality, the so-called classical electron radius has little to do with the true fundamental structure of the electron.
As they interact with the medium, they generate a faint light called Cherenkov radiation.
To resolve some problems within his relativistic equation, in 1930 Dirac developed a model of the vacuum as an infinite sea of particles having negative energy, which was dubbed the Dirac sea.
However, they have been largely supplanted by solid-state devices such as the transistor.
For example, the Stanford linear accelerator can accelerate an electron to roughly 51&nbsp;GeV.
A possible explanation of this paradoxical situation is given below in the "Virtual particles" subsection by taking into consideration the Foldy-Wouthuysen transformation.
In the early 1700s, Francis Hauksbee and French chemist Charles François de Fay independently discovered what they believed were two kinds of frictional electricity—one generated from rubbing glass, the other from rubbing resin.
This means that it is a fermion, and so no two electrons can occupy the same quantum state, in accordance with the Pauli exclusion principle.
Interactions involving electrons and other subatomic particles are of interest in fields such as chemistry and nuclear physics.
In any dielectric material, the electrons remain bound to their respective atoms and the material behaves as an insulator.
The experimental lower bound for the electron's mean lifetime is  years, at a 90% confidence level.
This value is a dimensionless quantity formed by the ratio of two energies: the electrostatic energy of attraction (or repulsion) at a separation of one Compton wavelength, and the rest energy of the charge.
In 1896, the British physicist J. J. Thomson, with his colleagues John S. Townsend and H. A. Wilson, performed experiments indicating that cathode rays really were unique particles, rather than waves, atoms or molecules as was believed earlier.
The combination of the energy variation needed to create these particles, and the time during which they exist, fall under the threshold of detectability expressed by the Heisenberg uncertainty relation, Δ''E''&nbsp;·&nbsp;Δ''t''&nbsp;≥&nbsp;''ħ''.
Likewise a current can be created by a changing magnetic field.
In 1947 Willis Lamb, working in collaboration with graduate student Robert Retherford, found that certain quantum states of hydrogen atom, which should have the same energy, were shifted in relation to each other, the difference being the Lamb shift.
Magnifications range from 100× to 1,000,000× or higher for both microscope types.
This process peaked after about five minutes.
The positron is symbolized by  because it has the same properties as the electron but with a positive rather than negative charge.
Electrons are involved in many applications such as electronics, welding, cathode ray tubes, electron microscopes, radiation therapy, lasers, gaseous ionization detectors and particle accelerators.
The extraordinarily precise agreement of this predicted difference with the experimentally determined value is viewed as one of the great achievements of quantum electrodynamics.
A macroscopic body can develop an electric charge through rubbing, by the triboelectric effect.
Furthermore, by applying a magnetic field, he was able to deflect the rays, thereby demonstrating that the beam behaved as though it were negatively charged.
An inelastic collision between a photon (light) and a solitary (free) electron is called Compton scattering.
Energy events as high as  have been recorded.
Electrons play an essential role in numerous physical phenomena, such as electricity, magnetism, and thermal conductivity, and they also participate in gravitational, electromagnetic and weak interactions.
Any leftover neutrons underwent negative beta decay with a half-life of about a thousand seconds, releasing a proton and electron in the process,
This welding technique must be performed in a vacuum to prevent the electrons from interacting with the gas before reaching their target, and it can be used to join conductive materials that would otherwise be considered unsuitable for welding.
About the same time, Polykarp Kusch, working with Henry M. Foley, discovered the magnetic moment of the electron is slightly larger than predicted by Dirac's theory.
However, oil drops were more stable than water drops because of their slower evaporation rate, and thus more suited to precise experimentation over longer periods of time.
Remote observation of electrons requires detection of their radiated energy.
Rather than yielding a solution that determined the location of an electron over time, this wave equation also could be used to predict the probability of finding an electron near a position, especially a position near where the electron was bound in space, for which the electron wave equations did not change in time.
The electron has a mass that is approximately 1/1836 that of the proton.
Wave-like nature is observed, for example, when a beam of light is passed through parallel slits and creates interference patterns.
In the Standard Model of particle physics, electrons belong to the group of subatomic particles called leptons, which are believed to be fundamental or elementary particles.
This force is caused by a back-reaction of the electron's own field upon itself.
From this, Du Fay theorized that electricity consists of two electrical fluids, ''vitreous'' and ''resinous'', that are separated by friction, and that neutralize each other when combined.American scientist Ebenezer Kinnersley later also independently reached the same conclusion.
An equilibrium between electrons, positrons and photons was maintained during this phase of the evolution of the Universe.
This experiment used an electric field to prevent a charged droplet of oil from falling as a result of gravity.
The wave-like behavior of a bound electron is described by a function called an atomic orbital.
The invariant mass of an electron is approximately &nbsp;kilograms, or &nbsp;atomic mass units.
This polarization was confirmed experimentally in 1997 using the Japanese TRISTAN particle accelerator.
Likewise, positron-electron pairs annihilated each other and emitted energetic photons:
