Some psychiatrists in India argued against the ban on unmodified ECT due to a lack of trained anesthesiologists available to administer ECT with anesthesia.
The use of ECT is not as common in ethnic minorities.
A 1974 study of ECT in Massachusetts reported that women made up 69 per cent of those given ECT.
Typically, the electrical stimulus used in ECT is about 800 milliamps and has up to several hundred watts, and the current flows for between one and 6 seconds.
The proceedings were published in the ''American Journal of Psychiatry'' and, within three years, cardiazol convulsive therapy was being used worldwide.
A patient may not be capable of making the decision (they "lack capacity"), and in that situation ECT can be given if it's appropriate and also if there are no advance directives that prevent the use of ECT.
The authors also stated:
Memory loss and confusion are more pronounced with bilateral electrode placement rather than unilateral, and with outdated sine-wave rather than brief-pulse currents.
This is reflected in the Jan 2011 vote by the United States Food and Drug Administration's (FDA's) Neurological Devices Advisory Panel to recommend that FDA maintain ECT devices in the Class III device category for high risk devices except for patients suffering from catatonia.
At this time psychiatric hospitals were overrun with patients whom doctors were desperate to treat and cure.
The practices of ECT and lobotomies became popular because they held some promise of addressing the overpopulation problem.
About 70 percent of ECT patients are women.
There is evidence and rationale to support giving low doses of benzodiazepines or else low doses of general anesthetics which induce sedation but not anesthesia to patients to reduce adverse effects of ECT.
In China, ECT is usually considered as a means to tackle Internet addiction, initiated by Dr. Yang Yongxin, Dr. Yang introduced ECT to Hong Kong later, nowadays public hospitals in Hong Kong do also provide such therapies to teenagers "suffering" from net addiction.
Whereas lobotomies would reduce a patient to a more manageable submissive state ECT helped to improve mood in those with severe depression.
He is reported to have said to his biographer, "Well, what is the sense of ruining my head and erasing my memory, which is my capital, and putting me out of business?
However, the methods used to measure memory loss are generally poor, and their application to people with depression, who have cognitive deficits including problems with memory, have been problematic.
ECT is often used with informed consent as a last line of intervention for major depressive disorder, mania, and catatonia.
If steps are taken to decrease potential risks, ECT is generally accepted to be relatively safe during all trimesters of pregnancy, particularly when compared to pharmacological treatments.
"For Big Nurse in ''One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest,'' it was a tool of terror, and, in the public mind, ''shock therapy'' has retained the tarnished image given it by Ken Kesey's novel: dangerous, inhumane and overused".
Duchenne, the mid-19th century "Father of Electrotherapy," said its use was integral to a neurological practice.
In the 1940s and early 1950s ECT was usually given in "unmodified" form, without muscle relaxants, and the seizure resulted in a full-scale convulsion.
The Mental Health Act 2007 allows people to be treated against their will.
Most modern ECT devices deliver a brief-pulse current, which is thought to cause fewer cognitive effects than the sine-wave currents which were originally used in ECT.
The death rate due to ECT is around 4 per 100,000 procedures.
Placement can be bilateral, in which the electric current is passed across the whole brain, or unilateral, in which the current is passed across one hemisphere of the brain.
After treatment, drug therapy is usually continued, and some patients receive maintenance ECT.
In his 40s, this successful surgeon's depression became so severe that he had to be institutionalized.
Eighty-one percent had a diagnosis of mood disorder; schizophrenia was the next most common diagnosis.
ECT is more commonly used in private psychiatric hospitals than in public hospitals, and minority patients are underrepresented in the ECT statistics.
Convulsive therapy was introduced in 1934 by Hungarian neuropsychiatrist Ladislas J. Meduna who, believing mistakenly that schizophrenia and epilepsy were antagonistic disorders, induced seizures first with camphor and then metrazol (cardiazol).
ECT appears to work in the short term via an anticonvulsant effect mostly in the frontal lobes, and longer term via neurotrophic effects primarily in the medial temporal lobe.
These three forms of application have significant differences in both adverse side effects and symptom remission.
A voluntary accreditation scheme, ECTAS, was set up in 2004 by the Royal College, but as of 2006 only a minority of ECT clinics in England, Wales, Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland have signed up.
In the UK, in order for consent to be valid it requires an explanation in "broad terms" of the nature of the procedure and its likely effects.
ECT is considered one of the least harmful treatment options available for severely depressed pregnant women.
ECT machines have been placed in the Class III category (high risk) by the FDA since 1976.
Cerletti had noted a shock to the head produced convulsions in dogs.
From 2003 to 2005, about 2,000 people a year in England and Wales were treated without their consent under the Mental Health Act.
The idea to use electroshock on humans came to Cerletti when he saw how pigs were given an electric shock before being butchered to put them in an anesthetized state.
Chinese national practice guidelines recommend ECT for the treatment of schizophrenia, depressive disorders, and bipolar disorder and in the Chinese literature, ECT is an effective treatment for schizophrenia and mood disorders.
Aside from effects in the brain, the general physical risks of ECT are similar to those of brief general anesthesia; the U.S.
The NICE guidance, as the British Medical Journal editorial points out, is only a policy statement and psychiatrists may deviate from it if they see fit.
Overall remission rate for patients given a round of ECT treatment was 51.5% for those with unipolar depression and 50.9% for those with bipolar depression.
Below these levels treatment may not be effective in spite of a seizure, while doses massively above threshold level, especially with bilateral ECT, expose patients to the risk of more severe cognitive impairment without additional therapeutic gains.
A rare but serious complication of unmodified ECT was fracture or dislocation of the long bones.
A 2005 study published in the ''British Journal of Psychiatry'' described patients' perspectives on the adequacy of informed consent before ECT.
Occasionally it is given on a daily basis.
About twice as many relapsed with no antidepressants.
Most of the evidence for continuation therapy is with tricyclics; evidence for relapse prevention with newer antidepressants is lacking.
Cerletti and Bini were nominated for a Nobel Prize but did not receive one.
In 2003, The UK ECT Review group published a systematic review and meta-analysis comparing ECT to placebo and antidepressant drugs.
Finally in 2001 the American Psychiatric Association released its latest task force report.
One state which does report such data is Texas, where in the mid-1990s ECT was used in about one third of psychiatric facilities and given to about 1,650 people annually.
In 1985 the National Institute of Mental Health and National Institutes of Health convened a consensus development conference on ECT and concluded that, while ECT was the most controversial treatment in psychiatry and had significant side-effects, it had been shown to be effective for a narrow range of severe psychiatric disorders.
Accurate statistics about the frequency, context and circumstances of ECT in the United States are difficult to obtain because only a few states have reporting laws that require the treating facility to supply state authorities with this information.
To demonstrate what he believes should be required to fully satisfy the legal obligation for informed consent, one psychiatrist, working for an anti-psychiatry organisation, has formulated his own consent form using the consent form developed and enacted by the Texas Legislature as a model.
In 13 of the 50 states, the practice of ECT is regulated by law.
'''Electroconvulsive therapy''' ('''ECT'''), formerly known as '''electroshock therapy''', and often referred to as '''shock treatment,''' is a psychiatric treatment in which seizures are electrically induced in patients to provide relief from psychiatric illnesses.
Once they started trials on patients they found that after 10-20 treatments the results were significant.
Immediately following treatment, the most common adverse effects are confusion and memory loss.
ECT was introduced in China in the early 1950s and while it was originally practiced without anesthesia, as of 2012 almost all procedures were conducted with it.
Some psychiatrists use dose titration, some still use "fixed dose" (that is, all patients are given the same dose) and others compromise by roughly estimating a patient's threshold according to age and sex.
The guidance received a mixed reception.
A usual course of ECT involves multiple administrations, typically given two or three times per week until the patient is no longer suffering symptoms.
There is a lack of clinical evidence for its efficacy but "the excellent efficacy of ECT in catatonia is generally acknowledged".
A questionnaire survey of 379 members of the general public in Australia indicated that more than 60% of respondents had some knowledge about the main aspects of ECT.
A course usually consists of 6–12 treatments, but may be more or fewer.
The New York Times described the public's negative perception of ECT as being caused mainly by one movie.
By 1940, the procedure was introduced to both England and the US.
In 1785, the therapeutic use of seizure induction was documented in the ''London Medical Journal''.
In Germany and Austria it was promoted by Friedrich Meggendorfer.
A few psychiatrists in the USA use multiple-monitored ECT (MMECT) where patients receive more than one treatment per anesthetic.
Cerletti and Bini practiced until they felt they had the right parameters needed to have a successful human trial.
Older men tend to have higher thresholds than younger women, but it is not a hard and fast rule, and other factors, for example drugs, affect seizure threshold.
This may result in the manufacturers of such devices having to do controlled trials on their safety and efficacy for the first time.
The Surgeon General stated there were problems with electroshock therapy in the initial years before anesthesia was routinely given, and that "these now-antiquated practices contributed to the negative portrayal of ECT in the popular media."
ECT has also been used in selected cases of depression occurring in the setting of multiple sclerosis, Parkinson's disease, Huntington's chorea, developmental delay, brain arteriovenous malformations and hydrocephalus.
Because of the backlash noted previously, national institutions reviewed past practices and set new standards.
In the United States, ECT devices came into existence prior to medical devices being regulated by the Food and Drug Administration; when the law came into effect the FDA was obligated to retrospectively review already existing devices and classify them, and determine whether clinical trials were needed to prove efficacy and safety.
In 2008, a meta-analytic review paper found in terms of efficacy, "a significant superiority of ECT in all comparisons: ECT versus simulated ECT, ECT versus placebo, ECT versus antidepressants in general, ECT versus TCAs and ECT versus MAOIs."
The study found that, "About half (45–55%) of patients reported they were given an adequate explanation of ECT, implying a similar percentage felt they were not."
Dr. Charles Kellner, a prominent ECT researcher and former chief editor of the ''Journal of ECT'',  stated in a 2007 interview that, "There are a number of well-designed studies that show ECT does not cause brain damage and numerous reports of patients who have received a large number of treatments over their lifetime and have suffered no significant problems due to ECT."
The introduction of suxamethonium (succinylcholine), a safer synthetic alternative to curare, in 1951 led to the more widespread use of "modified" ECT.
The form states how many treatments are recommended and also makes the patient aware that consent may be revoked and treatment discontinued at any time during a course of ECT.
Retrograde amnesia occurs to some extent in almost all ECT recipients.
This device eventually largely replaced earlier devices because of the reduction in cognitive side effects, although as of 2012 some ECT clinics still were using sine-wave devices.
This law has extra protections for electro convulsive therapy.
When ECT is followed by treatment with antidepressants, about 50% of people relapsed by 12 months following successful initial treatment with ECT, with about 37% relapsing within the first 6 months.
In 2000, American psychiatrist Sarah Lisanby and colleagues found that bilateral ECT left patients with more persistently impaired memory of public events as compared to RUL ECT.
Suicidal intent is a common justification for its involuntary use, especially when other treatments are ineffective.
Through the 1940s and 1950s, the use of ECT became widespread.
The vast majority of modern treatment uses brief pulse currents.
In a minority of countries such as Japan, India, and Nigeria, ECT may be used without anesthesia.
The practice was abolished in Turkey's largest psychiatric hospital in 2008.
In 2003, the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, a government body which was set up to standardize treatment throughout the National Health Service in England and Wales, issued guidance on the use of ECT.
In the early 1940s, in an attempt to reduce the memory disturbance and confusion associated with treatment, two modifications were introduced: the use of unilateral electrode placement and the replacement of sinusoidal current with brief pulse.
Treatment and cure of hysterical blindness was documented eleven years later.
The Ministry of Health in Canada reported that from 1999 until 2000 in Ontario, women were 71 per cent of those given ECT in provincial psychiatric institutions, and 75 per cent of the total ECT given was given to women.
Unilateral ECT may be used first to minimize side effects (memory loss).
ECT is administered under anesthetic with a muscle relaxant.
Until 2009 in England and Wales, the Mental Health Act 1983 allowed the use of ECT on detained patients whether or not they had capacity to consent to it.
There is little agreement on the most appropriate followup to ECT for people with major depressive disorder.
This report emphasizes the importance of informed consent, and the expanded role that the procedure has in modern medicine.
It was believed early on that inducing convulsions aided in helping those with severe schizophrenia but later found to be most useful with affective disorders such as depression.
Immediately prior to treatment, a patient is given a short-acting anesthetic such as methohexital, etomidate, or thiopental, a muscle relaxant such as suxamethonium (succinylcholine), and occasionally atropine to inhibit salivation.
One published review summarizing the results of questionnaires about subjective memory loss found that between 29% and 55% of respondents believed they experienced long-lasting or permanent memory changes.
Italian Professor of neuropsychiatry Ugo Cerletti, who had been using electric shocks to produce seizures in animal experiments, and his colleague Lucio Bini developed the idea of using electricity as a substitute for metrazol in convulsive therapy and, in 1938, experimented for the first time on a person.
Usage of ECT has since declined slightly; in 2000–01 ECT was given to about 1500 people aged from 16 to 97 (in Texas it is illegal to give ECT to anyone under sixteen).
This meta-analysis demonstrated a large effect size (high efficacy relative to the mean in terms of the standard deviation) for ECT versus placebo, and versus antidepressant drugs.
Older and more affluent patients are also more likely to receive ECT.
Suggested preparation for ECT during pregnancy includes a pelvic examination, discontinuation of nonessential anticholinergic medication, uterine tocodynamometry, intravenous hydration, and administration of a nonparticulate antacid.
Specifically critics pointed to shortcomings such as noted side effects, the procedure being used as a form of abuse, and uneven application of ECT.
A small minority of psychiatrists in the USA still use sine-wave stimuli.
ECT became popular in the United States in the 1940s.
As early as the 16th century, agents to induce seizures were used to treat psychiatric conditions.
In unilateral ECT, both electrodes are placed on the same side of the patient's head.
Results indicated that although patients with unipolar depression and bipolar depression responded to other medical treatments very differently, both groups responded equally well to ECT.
Surgeon General's report says that there are "no absolute health contraindications" to its use.
The Union Health Ministry of India recommended a ban on ECT without anesthesia in India's Mental Health Care Bill of 2010 and the Mental Health Care Bill of 2013.
ECT is usually administered three times a week, on alternate days, over a course of two to four weeks.
It was welcomed by an editorial in the British Medical Journal but the Royal College of Psychiatrists launched an unsuccessful appeal.
In the second half of the 19th century, such efforts were frequent enough in British asylums as to make it notable.
In Scotland the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003 also gives patients with capacity the right to refuse ECT.
Sixteen percent were treated without their consent.
In the United Kingdom in 1980, an estimated 50,000 people received ECT annually, with use declining steadily since then to about 12,000 per annum in 2002.
However, there is an exception regardless of consent and capacity; under Section 62 of the Act, if the treating psychiatrist says the need for treatment is urgent they may start a course of ECT without authorization.
It was because of this side effect that patients could not remember the treatments and had no ill feelings toward it.
A positive side effect to the treatment was retrograde amnesia.
The ECT procedure was first conducted in 1938 and is the only currently used form of shock therapy in psychiatry.
The American Psychiatric Association released its second task force report in 1990 where specific details on the delivery, education, and training of ECT were documented.
The 1985 NIMH Consensus Conference confirmed the therapeutic role of ECT in certain circumstances.
In one of the few jurisdictions where recent statistics on ECT usage are available, a national audit of ECT by the Scottish ECT Accreditation Network indicated that 77% of patients who received the treatment in 2008 were capable of giving informed consent.
For people with autism spectrum disorders who  have catatonia, there is little published evidence about the efficacy of ECT; as of 2014 there were twelve case reports, and while ECT had "life saving" efficacy in some, results were mixed and temporary, and maintenance ECT was necessary to sustain any benefit.
The anticonvulsant effects are decreased blood flow and decreased metabolism, while the neurotrophic effects are opposite - increased perfusion and metabolism, as well as increased volume of the hippocampus.
It was a brilliant cure but we lost the patient...."  American surgeon and award-winning author Sherwin B. Nuland is another notable person who has undergone ECT.
A 1999 report by the U.S.
Immediately following treatment, the most common adverse effects are confusion and memory loss.
It is useful in the case of severe exacerbations of catatonic schizophrenia, whether excited or stuporous.
One review from 2005 found that only about half of patients felt they were given sufficient information about ECT and its adverse effects and another survey found that about fifty percent of psychiatrists and nurses agreed with them.
As to its earliest antecedents one doctor claims 1744 as the dawn of electricity's therapeutic use, as documented in the first issue of ''Electricity and Medicine''.
The musical ''Next to Normal'' centers around the family of a woman who undergoes the procedure.
The steady growth of antidepressant use along with negative depictions of ECT in the mass media led to a marked decline in the use of ECT during the 1950s to the 1970s.
Participants were generally opposed to the use of ECT on depressed individuals with psychosocial issues, on children, and on involuntary patients.
While the FDA has classified the devices used to administer ECT as Class III medical devices,  as of 2011 the FDA had not yet determined whether the devices should be withdrawn from the market until clinical trials prove their safety and efficacy.
This is due to the muscle relaxants given during the procedure and rarely due to muscle activity.
The use of ECT declined until the 1980s, "when use began to increase amid growing awareness of its benefits and cost-effectiveness for treating severe depression".
A round of ECT is effective for about 50% of people with treatment-resistant major depressive disorder, whether it is unipolar or bipolar.
Throughout the history of ECT, women have received it two to three times as often as men, and continue to do so irrespective of diagnosis.
Ernest Hemingway, American author, committed suicide shortly after ECT at the Mayo Clinic in 1961.
In adolescents, ECT is highly efficient for several psychiatric disorders, with few and relatively benign adverse effects.
Bilateral placement seems to have greater efficacy than unilateral, but also carries greater risk of memory loss.
In the USA most patients receive bilateral ECT.
Aside from effects in the brain, the general physical risks of ECT are similar to those of brief general anesthesia.
Electroconvulsive therapy can differ in its application in three ways: electrode placement, frequency of treatments, and the electrical waveform of the stimulus.
It is controversial in some European countries such as the Netherlands and Italy, where its use is severely restricted".
However, ECT can also be involuntarily administered in situations with less immediate danger.
In the weeks and months following ECT these memory problems gradually improve, but some people have persistent losses, especially with bilateral ECT.
Considerable controversy exists over the effects of ECT on brain tissue, although a number of mental health associations — including the American Psychiatric Association — have concluded that there is no evidence that ECT causes structural brain damage.
A survey of ECT use in 1980 found that more than half of ECT clinics failed to meet minimum standards set by the Royal College of Psychiatrists, with a later survey in 1998 finding that minimum standards were largely adhered to, but that two-thirds of clinics still fell short of current guidelines, particularly in the training and supervision of junior doctors involved in the procedure.
The patient is then given the opportunity to accept or reject the treatment.
and as a second-line treatment for bipolar mania.
During ECT, elevation of the pregnant woman's right hip, external fetal cardiac monitoring, intubation, and avoidance of excessive hyperventilation are recommended.
The American Psychiatric Association report (2001) acknowledges: “In some patients the recovery from retrograde amnesia will be incomplete, and evidence has shown that ECT can result in persistent or permanent memory loss”.
ECT is used with informed consent in treatment-resistant major depressive disorder, treatment-resistant catatonia, or prolonged or severe mania, and in conditions where "there is a need for rapid, definitive response because of the severity of a psychiatric or medical condition (e.g., when illness is characterized by stupor, marked psycho-motor retardation, depressive delusions or hallucinations, or life–threatening physical exhaustion associated with mania)."
Seizure threshold is determined by trial and error ("dose titration").
The FDA considers ECT machinery to be experimental devices.
In fact, even if a patient is deemed to lack capacity, if they made a valid advance decision refusing ECT then they should not be given it; and even if they do not have an advance decision, the psychiatrist must obtain an independent second opinion (which is also the case if the patient is under age of consent).
The decade also saw criticism of ECT.
In 1976, Dr. Blatchley demonstrated the effectiveness of his constant current, brief pulse device ECT.
Its use was recommended "only to achieve rapid and short-term improvement of severe symptoms after an adequate trial of treatment options has proven ineffective and/or when the condition is considered to be potentially life-threatening in individuals with severe depressive illness, catatonia or a prolonged manic episode".
Follow-up treatment is still poorly studied, but about half of people who respond relapse within 12 months.
Unilateral is thought to cause fewer cognitive effects than bilateral but is considered less effective if the dose administered is close to the seizure threshold.
It took many years for brief-pulse equipment to be widely adopted.
In the US, this doctrine places a legal obligation on a doctor to make a patient aware of: the reason for treatment, the risks and benefits of a proposed treatment, the risks and benefits of alternative treatment, and the risks and benefits of receiving no treatment.
ECT is used to treat people who have severe or prolonged mania; NICE recommends it only in life-threatening situations or when other treatments have failed.
In the United States, ECT is usually given three times a week; in the UK, it is usually given twice a week.
Ladislas Meduna is thought to be the father of convulsive therapy.
Sine-wave is no longer used in the UK or Ireland.
Adherence to standards has not been universal in the past.
ECT is generally a second-line treatment for people with catatonia who do not respond to other treatments, but is a first-line treatment for severe or life-threatening catatonia.
Compared with transcranial magnetic stimulation for people with treatment-resistant major depressive disorder, ECT relieves depression about twice as well, reducing the score on the Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression by about 15 points, while TMS reduced it by 9 points.
In the UK almost all patients receive bilateral ECT.
In bifrontal ECT, an uncommon variation, the electrode position is somewhere between bilateral and unilateral.
After exhausting all treatment options, a young resident assigned to his case suggested ECT, which ended up being successful.
In the UK, the market for ECT devices was long monopolized by Ectron Ltd, which was set up by psychiatrist Robert Russell.
In 1801, Giovanni Aldini used galvanism to treat patients suffering from various mental disorders.
While there are no absolute contraindications for ECT, there is increased risk for patients who have unstable or severe cardiovascular conditions or aneurysms; who have recently had a stroke; who have increased intracranial pressure (for instance, due to a solid brain tumor), or who have severe pulmonary conditions, or who are generally at high risk for receiving anesthesia.
When electrodes are placed on both sides of the head, this is known as bilateral ECT.
This may be due to the fact that women are more likely to be diagnosed with depression.
It is the purported effects of ECT on long-term memory that give rise to much of the concern surrounding its use.
Procedures for involuntary ECT vary from country to country depending on local mental health laws.
A patient capable of making the decision can decline the treatment, and in that case treatment cannot be given unless it's an emergency situation and it will save that patient's life or is immediately necessary to prevent deterioration of the patient's condition.
In justifying their position, panelists referred to the memory loss associated with ECT and the lack of long-term data.
Retrograde amnesia is most marked for events occurring in the weeks or months before treatment, with one study showing that although some people lose memories from years prior to treatment, recovery of such memories was "virtually complete" by seven months post-treatment, with the only enduring loss being memories in the weeks and months prior to the treatment.
ECT soon replaced metrazol therapy all over the world because it was cheaper, less frightening and more convenient.
The stimulus levels recommended for ECT are in excess of an individual's seizure threshold: about one and a half times seizure threshold for bilateral ECT and up to 12 times for unilateral ECT.
The patient's EEG, ECG, and blood oxygen levels are monitored during treatment.
However, following amendments which took effect in 2009, ECT may not generally be given to a patient who has capacity and refuses it, irrespective of his or her detention under the Act.
Patients had much improved.
