These features also reduce the use of the conventional brakes, significantly reducing wear and tear and maintenance costs as well as improving vehicle range.
At higher speeds, the sound created by tire friction and the air displaced by the vehicle start to make sufficient audible noise.
SAE J1772 (16.8&nbsp;kW),IEC 62196 (44&nbsp;kW),Magne&nbsp;Charge (Obsolete),Avcon,IEC&nbsp;60309&nbsp;16&nbsp;A&nbsp;(3.8&nbsp;kW)  IEC 62198-2 Type 2 same as VDE-AR-E 2623-2-2, colloquially known as the "Mennekes connector" (43.5&nbsp;kW)IEC 62198-2 Type 3 colloquially known as "Scame"
The researchers found that buyers of plug-in electric vehicles were significantly less satisfied and rated the dealer purchase experience much lower than buyers of non-premium conventional cars, while Tesla Motors earned industry-high scores.
The marginal analysis, applied to plug-in electric vehicles, found that the emissions of charging PEVs vary by region and hours of the day.
However, most vehicles also support much faster charging, where a suitable power supply is available.
According to a survey taken by Nielsen for the Financial Times in 2010, around three quarters of American and British car buyers have or would consider buying an electric car, but they are unwilling to pay more for an electric car.
The Tesla Model S is one of the few electric cars without warning sounds, because Tesla Motors will await until regulations are enacted.
The following table list the best-selling highway-capable all-electric cars with cumulative global sales of around or more than 20,000 units since their inception through June 2016:
The local population may be exposed to toxic substances through air and groundwater contamination.
The study found that in areas where electricity is generated from natural gas, nuclear, or renewable resources such as hydroelectric, the potential of plug-in electric cars to reduce greenhouse emissions is significant.
Variants such as Lithium iron phosphate and Lithium-titanate attempt to solve the durability issues with traditional lithium-ion batteries.
According to Nissan, the operating cost of the Leaf in the UK is 1.75 pence per mile (1.09p per km) when charging at an off-peak electricity rate, while a conventional petrol-powered car costs more than 10 pence per mile (6.25p per km).
* Tesla Model X with 90 kWh battery and dual motors has a range of .
In 2015 nine countries or autonomous territories achieved plug-in electric car sales with a market share equal or higher than 1% of total new car sales, up from six in 2014.
Most models therefore have a PRNDL selector traditionally found in cars with automatic transmission despite the underlying mechanical differences.
However, since factors can vary over the route, the estimate can vary from the actual achieved range.
, China is the largest country market within the light-duty all-electric segment, with a stock of 225,720 vehicles on the roads, representing 30.5% of the global stock.
Electric cars have expensive batteries that must be replaced if they become defective; however, the lifetime of said batteries can be very long (many years).
An accident in a  vehicle will on average cause about 50% more injuries to its occupants than a  vehicle.
After a 7-hour charge, the car should also be able to run up to a speed of .
Examples include marketing
Volkswagen and BMW also decided to add artificial sounds to their electric drive cars only when required by regulation.
Volkswagen conducted a life-cycle assessment of its electric vehicles certified by an independent inspection agency.
Delco Electronics developed the Magne Charge inductive charging system around 1998 for the General Motors EV1 and it was also used for the Chevrolet S-10 EV and Toyota RAV4 EV vehicles.
The survey showed that 65% of Americans and 76% of Britons are not willing to pay more for an electric car than the price of a conventional car.
Researchers in Germany have claimed that while there is some technical superiority of electric propulsion compared with conventional technology that in many countries the effect of electrification of vehicles' fleet emissions will predominantly be due to regulation rather than technology.
However, even an 'end of life' battery which has insufficient capacity has market value as it can be re-purposed, recycled or used as a spare.
Electric cars also do not have cooling problems like other vehicles.
Market share (%)2014
An EV would coast under these conditions, but applying mild regenerative braking instead provides a more familiar response and recharges the battery somewhat.
For long distance driving, many cars support fast charging that can give around 80% charge in half an hour using public rapid chargers.
To calculate the cost per kilometer of an electric vehicle it is therefore necessary to assign a monetary value to the wear incurred on the battery.
SAE J1772 standard pending
It is believed to be the first time that an electric vehicle has beaten cars powered by combustion engines in any accredited motorsport competition.
Solar cars are electric vehicles powered completely or significantly by direct solar energy, usually, through photovoltaic (PV) cells contained in solar panels that convert the sun's energy directly into electric energy.
By the end of 2015, the global stock of light-duty pure electric vehicles totaled almost 740,000 units out of total global sales of 1.26 million plug-in electric cars sold since 2005 (58.9%).
At the Formula Student competition at the Silverstone Circuit in July 2013, the electric powered car of the ETH Zurich won against all cars with internal combustion engines.
An EV can go to a battery switch station and swap a depleted battery with a fully charged one in a few minutes.
According to a study published in February 2016 by Bloomberg New Energy Finance (BNEF), battery prices fell 65% since 2010, and 35% just in 2015, reaching  per kWh.
After the introduction of the Nissan Leaf and the Chevrolet Volt in late December 2010, the first mass-production plug-in cars by major carmakers, plug-in car sales grew to about 50,000 units in 2011, and climbed to over 315,000 units in 2014, up 48% from 2013.
The study concluded also that carmakers could do much more to support dealers selling PEVs.
However, battery prices are coming down about 8% per annum with mass production, and are expected to drop further.
The superchargers developed by Tesla Motors provided up to 130&nbsp;kW of charging, allowing a 50% charge in 20 minutes.
, the GEM neighborhood electric vehicle was the market leader in North America, with global sales of more than 50,000 units since 1998. , global sales of the Renault Twizy heavy quadricycle, a popular model in Europe, totaled 17,873 units.
On-board electrical systems generate enough interference that some manufacturers have removed AM radios from their vehicles due to poor reception.
When the foot is lifted from the accelerator of an ICE, engine braking causes the car to slow.
250&nbsp;V AC or 480&nbsp;V three-phase), Mode 3 (max.
Sales people have ample knowledge of internal combustion cars while they do not have time to learn about a technology that represents a fraction of overall sales.
Battery life should be considered when calculating the extended cost of ownership, as all batteries eventually wear out and must be replaced.
And the Wrightspeed X1 prototype created by Wrightspeed Inc was in 2009 the worlds fastest street legal electric car to accelerate from , which it does in 2.9&nbsp;seconds.
While battery cost is decreasing fairly rapidly, it is still relatively high, and because of this, most electric cars have a more limited range and a somewhat higher purchase cost than conventional vehicles.
Push buttons are the easiest to implement as all modes are implemented through software on the vehicle's controller.
Based on where EVs are being sold in the United States in 2015, the average EV produces global warming emissions equal to a gasoline vehicle with a  fuel economy rating.
Research continues on ways of reducing the charging times for electric cars.
This study concluded that introducing 1&nbsp;million EV cars to Germany would, in the best-case scenario, only reduce  emissions by 0.1%, if nothing is done to upgrade the electricity infrastructure or manage demand.
Otherwise, electric cars incur very low maintenance costs, particularly in the case of current lithium-based designs.
Tesla Model S (60 kWh)
At a demonstration event Tesla showed that a battery swap operation with the Model S takes just over 90 seconds, about half the time it takes to refill a gasoline-powered car.
Electric vehicles can also use a direct motor-to-wheel configuration which increases the amount of available power.
The ITS-Davis study also found that a small but influential minority of dealers have introduced new approaches to better meet the needs of plug-in customers.
The Tesla Roadster 2.5 Sport can accelerate from  in 3.7&nbsp;seconds with a motor rated at .
Mitsubishi Motors is the third best selling all-electric vehicle manufacturer, with global sales of about 50,000 all-electric vehicles between July 2009 and June 2015, including the rebadged variants Peugeot iOn and Citroën C-Zero sold in Europe; and over 7,000 Mitsubishi Minicab MiEV all-electric utility vans and trucks sold in Japan through December 2015.
A 2010 report, by J.D.
More electrical power to the car reduces charging time.
Electricity generation has been getting cleaner, as coal-fired generation has declined while lower-carbon alternatives have increased.
Total emissions include the emissions associated with the production and distribution of electricity used to charge the vehicle, and for plug-in hybrid electric vehicles, it also includes emissions associated with tailpipe emissions produced from the internal combustion engine.
Power 2013 Sales Satisfaction Index (SSI) study data on customer satisfaction with new car dealerships and Tesla retail stores.
Richard Martin, editorial director for clean technology marketing and consultant firm Navigant Research, stated:
The amount of carbon dioxide emitted depends on the emission intensity of the power sources used to charge the vehicle, the efficiency of the said vehicle and the energy wasted in the charging process.
In this case the motor is disabled in "N" and an electrically actuated hand brake provides the "P" mode.
AC energy to the vehicle's on-board charger; 208 - 240 V, single phase.
Maximum continuous input power is specified as 7.68&nbsp;kW (= 240&nbsp;V × 32&nbsp;A*).
These charging rates are slow compared with the effective power delivery rate of an average petrol pump, about 5,000&nbsp;kW.
Renault Kangoo Z.E.
PHEVs, will be more expensive than BEVs in almost all comparison scenarios, and more expensive than conventional cars unless battery costs are very low and gasoline prices high.
In contrast, in a region that is completely reliant on natural gas, the plug-in would be equivalent to a gasoline-powered car rated at  combined.
Power is limited by the capacity of the grid connection, and, for level 1 and 2 charging, by the power rating of the car's on-board charger.
In the early 1990s, the California Air Resources Board (CARB) began a push for more fuel-efficient, lower-emissions vehicles, with the ultimate goal being a move to zero-emissions vehicles such as electric vehicles.
Electric motors have very flat torque curves down to zero speed.
Nissan has announced that 200 of its dealers in Japan will install fast chargers for the December 2010 launch of its Leaf EV, with the goal of having fast chargers everywhere in Japan within a 25-mile radius.
The Renault Kangoo Z.E.
There are few vehicles that have already covered more than  anyway.
It concludes that the global warming potential of the process used to make electric cars is twice that of conventional cars.
The maximum power of 96&nbsp;kW (continuous).
Overall, the secret shoppers reported that only 13 dealers “discouraged sale of EV,” with seven of them being in New York.
, Estonia is the first and only country that had deployed an EV charging network with nationwide coverage, with fast chargers available along highways at a minimum distance of between , and a higher density in urban areas.
Some electric cars, for example the Citroën Berlingo Electrique, use an auxiliary heating system (for example gasoline-fueled units manufactured by Webasto or Eberspächer) but sacrifice "green" and "Zero emissions" credentials.
, Tesla Motors has sold almost 125,000 electric cars worldwide since delivery of its first Tesla Roadster in 2008.
The study found that there are no regions in the U.S. where plug-in electric cars will have higher greenhouse gas emissions than the average new compact gasoline engine automobile, and the area with the dirtiest power supply produces  emissions equivalent to a gasoline-powered car rated .
Thus, an electric car that derives its power from an on-board battery pack is a form of battery electric vehicle (BEV).
The failure rate of some electric vehicles batteries already on the road is as low as 0.003%.
Not only is the high purchase price hindering mass transition from gasoline cars to electric cars, but also the continued subsidization of fossil fuels, such as huge tax breaks and financial help in finding and developing oil fields for oil companies, higher allowed pollution for coal-fired power stations owned by oil refineries, as well as unpriced harm resulting from tailpipe emissions.
The electricity on the grid is in turn generated from a variety of sources; such as coal, hydroelectricity, nuclear and others.
The provisions of IEC 62196 charging modes for conductive charging of electric vehicles include Mode 1 (max.
These batteries offered much better power-to-weight ratios allowing vehicle conversions to typically achieve  per charge.
The electric car receives its charge from an electrified road.
The consumer magazine decided to conduct the survey after several consumers who wanted to buy a plug-in car reported to the organization that some dealerships were steering them toward gasoline-powered models.
Since all-electric cars do not produce tailpipe emissions, for comparison purposes the two most fuel efficient plug-in hybrids and the typical gasoline-powered car are included in the table.
The initial construction costs are significantly lower than for other battery types, but the power to weight ratio is poorer than other designs, Nickel metal hydride (NiMH) which are somewhat heavier and less efficient than lithium ion, but also cheaper.
The Union of Concerned Scientists (UCS) published in 2012, a report with an assessment of average greenhouse gas emissions resulting from charging plug-in car batteries considering the full life-cycle (well-to-wheel analysis) and the fuel used to generate electric power by region in the U.S.
shows a comparison between the parts that require replacement in gasoline-powered cars and EV1s, with the garages stating that they bring the electric cars in every , rotate the tires, fill the windshield washer fluid and send them back out again.
In the worst-case scenario, the study estimated that for a region where all energy is generated from coal, a plug-in electric car would emit greenhouse gas emissions equivalent to a gasoline car rated at a combined city/highway fuel economy of .
'''Notes:''' (1) Vehicles are considered highway-capable if able to achieve at least a top speed of .
However, the weight and bulk of the batteries themselves usually makes an EV heavier than a comparable gasoline vehicle, reducing range and leading to longer braking distances.
In the case of plug-in hybrids, and since their all-electric range depends on the size of the battery pack, the analysis introduced a utility factor as a projection of the share of miles that will be driven using electricity by an average driver.
EPA five-cycle tests
Average 2014 gasoline-powered car
There are several types of charging machines.
The EV1 energy use at  was about .
Range may also significantly be reduced in cold weather.
A study in 2016 stated that 87% of US vehicle-days can be met by current affordable electric cars.
While most current highway-speed electric vehicle designs focus on lithium-ion and other lithium-based variants a variety of alternative batteries can also be used.
;Other methods of energy storage
When not fitted with an axle, differential, or transmission, electric vehicles have less drivetrain rotational inertia.
In states with a cleaner mix generation, the gains were larger.
The following table presents the top 10 countries, and selected regional markets or autonomous territories according to their PEV market share of total new car sales between 2015 and 2013.
The fire broke out many minutes after the driver exited the vehicle.
The now-defunct company Better Place provided another cost comparison when it anticipated meeting contractual obligations to deliver batteries, as well as clean electricity to recharge the batteries, at a total cost of  per  in 2010,  per mile by 2015 and  per mile by 2020.   of driving would initially cost  and fall over time to .
This will also use Power Line Carrier technology to communicate between the vehicle, off-board charger, and smart grid.
However, at 35 of the 85 dealerships visited, the secret shoppers said sales people recommended buying a gasoline-powered car instead.
The former approach does not take into account the generation mix within interconnected electricity markets and shifting load profiles throughout the day.
Smart electric drive
According to the findings, plug-in buyers expect more from dealers than conventional buyers, including product knowledge and support that extends beyond traditional offerings.
, Norway had a concentration of 21.5 registered plug-in cars per 1,000 people, 14.2 times higher than the U.S.
Market share (%)2013
Several other battery chemistries are in development such as zinc-air battery which could be much lighter, and liquid batteries that might be rapidly refilled, rather than recharged, are also under development.
In response, automakers developed electric models, including the Chrysler TEVan, Ford Ranger EV pickup truck, GM EV1, and S10 EV pickup, Honda EV Plus hatchback, Nissan Altra EV miniwagon, and Toyota RAV4 EV.
However, in 2014 manufacturers were already offering battery packs with a cost of about $300/kWh.
Most of these small electric cars are used in small cities, but hey are expanding to larger cities.
In March 2014, Norway became the first country where over 1 in every 100 passenger cars on the roads is a plug-in electric, and the segment's market penetration reached 2% in March 2015, and passed 3% in December 2015.
Top 10 countries by plug-in electric passenger car market share of total new car sales between 2015 and 2013
Cities in this group included Portland, Oregon, San Francisco, Los Angeles, New York City, and Salt Lake City, and the cleanest cities achieved well-to-wheel emissions equivalent to a fuel economy of .
An important goal for electric vehicles is overcoming the disparity between their costs of development, production, and operation, with respect to those of equivalent internal combustion engine vehicles (ICEVs).
The study compared the lifetime net present value at 2010 purchase and operating costs for the US market with no government subsidies.
There are also high mileage warranties on electric vehicle batteries.
Tesla Model X has been build since 2015.
Several anti-noise and electric car advocates have opposed the introduction of artificial sounds as warning for pedestrians, as they argue that the proposed system will only increase noise pollution.. Added to this, such an introduction is based on vehicle type and not actual noise level, a concern regarding ICE vehicles which themselves are becoming quieter.
On the other hand, electric motors are more efficient in converting stored energy into driving a vehicle, and electric drive vehicles do not consume energy while at rest or coasting, and some of the energy lost when braking is captured and reused through regenerative braking, which captures as much as one fifth of the energy normally lost during braking.
These have no problems with the battery.
The nine countries are Norway (22.39%), the Netherlands (9.74%), Hong Kong (4.84%), Iceland (2.93%), Sweden (2.62%), Denmark (2.29%), Switzerland (1.98%), France (1.2%), and the UK (1.1%).
71% of all car drivers in America drive less than  per day, and require only a relatively quick topping up.
Tests have shown that this is a valid concern, as vehicles operating in electric mode can be particularly hard to hear below  for all types of road users and not only the visually impaired.
Organizations such as NEDRA keep track of records worldwide using certified equipment.
SAE J1772 Combo Coupler
In this case the vehicle was being driven at high speed through a roundabout and crashed through a wall and into a tree.
The Roadster was the first highway legal serial production all-electric car to use lithium-ion battery cells, and the first production all-electric car to travel more than  per charge.
This could drive down the cost of electric cars that use Tesla's battery technology such as the Toyota RAV4 EV, Smart ED and Tesla Model X which announced for 2014. , and based on the three battery size options offered for the Tesla Model S, the New York Times estimated the cost of automotive battery packs between  to  per kilowatt-hour.
: * or potentially 208&nbsp;V × 37&nbsp;A, out of the strict specification but within circuit breaker and connector/cable power limits.
In 2011, Better Place deployed the first modern commercial application of the battery switching model, but due to financial difficulties, the company filed for bankruptcy in May 2013.
In contrast to other countries, in the UK a stable part of the electricity is produced by nuclear, coal and gas plants.
The Tesla Model S, released in June 2012, ranks second with global sales of over 129,000 units through June 2016.
The UCS study found two reasons for the improvement.
The rollout was undertaken by Switzerland-based power and automation company ABB and Dutch startup Fastned, and aims to provide at least one station every 50 kilometres (31 miles) for the Netherlands' 16 million residents.
As examples of on-board chargers, the Nissan Leaf at launch had a 3.3&nbsp;kW charger, and the Tesla Roadster can accept up to 16.8&nbsp;kW (240&nbsp;V at 70&nbsp;A) from the ''High Power Wall Connector''.
Their conclusion is that natural gas will provide most of the energy used to reload EV, while renewable energy will not represent more than a few percent of the energy used.
Norway also has the world's largest plug-in electric segment market share of total new car sales, growing from 5.6% in 2013, to 13.8% in 2014, and reaching 22.4% in 2015.
to come up with an estimated driving range.
The stock of plug-in electric cars represented 0.1% of the one billion cars on the world's roads by the end of 2015.
Cities in this group include Phoenix, Arizona, Houston, Miami, Columbus, Ohio and Atlanta, Georgia.
There is a cottage industry supporting the conversion and construction of BEVs by hobbyists.
Plug in America did a survey on the service life of the installed battery in the Tesla Roadster.
The study concludes that battery costs are on a trajectory to make electric vehicles without government subsidies as affordable as internal combustion engine cars in most countries by 2022.
Most of them have been thermal runaway incidents related to their lithium-ion battery packs, and have involved the Zotye M300 EV, Chevrolet Volt, Fisker Karma, BYD e6, Dodge Ram 1500 Plug-in Hybrid, Toyota Prius Plug-in Hybrid, Mitsubishi i-MiEV and Outlander P-HEV.
The electric supercar Rimac Concept One can go from  in 2.8 seconds using .
BNEF projects that by 2040, long-range electric cars will cost less than  expressed in 2016 dollars.
The term "electric vehicle" refers to any vehicle that uses electric motors for propulsion, while "electric car" generally refers to highway-capable automobiles powered by electricity.
Presently most EV manufacturers do their best to emulate the driving experience as closely as possible to that of a car with a conventional automatic transmission that motorists are familiar with.
In 2015 the European plug-in passenger car market share passed the one percent mark (1.41%) for the first time.
However, they can be charged at home overnight, which fossil fueled cars cannot.
These differences reflect the different design and utility targets for the vehicles, and the varying testing standards.
Both are direct-current quick-charging systems designed to charge the battery of an electric vehicle to 80 percent in approximately 20 minutes, but the two systems are incompatible.
Unless the two companies cooperate, experts have warned that the momentum of the electric vehicle market will be restricted.
Many electric cars use a lithium-ion battery and an electric motor which uses rare earth elements.
Electric cars are not completely environmentally friendly, and have impacts arising from manufacturing the vehicle.
Several national and local governments have established tax credits, subsidies, and other incentives to promote the introduction and now adoption in the mass market of new electric vehicles depending on battery size and their all-electric range.
The study also analyzed national and state-level J.D.
However, in other regions, such as the Upper Midwest, charging during the recommended hours of midnight to 4 a.m. implies that PEVs generate more emissions per mile than the average car currently on the road.
Some electric cars use low rolling resistance tires, which typically offer less grip than normal tires.
The second reported incident occurred in the United States on October 1, 2013, when a Tesla Model S caught fire over ten minutes after the electric car hit metal debris on a highway in Kent, Washington state, and the debris punctured one of 16 modules within the battery pack.
Lithium-based batteries are often chosen for their high power and energy density but have a limited shelf life and cycle lifetime which can significantly increase the running costs of the vehicle.
Overallfuel economy(mpg-e)
BMW i is offering a built-in gasoline-powered range extender engine as an option for its BMW i3 all-electric car.
Because of the stable nuclear production, the timing of charging electric cars has almost no impact on their environmental footprint.
In 2015, sales of low-speed small electric passenger vehicles totaled more than 600,000 units in China.
* The supercar Rimac Concept One with 82 kWh battery has a range of .
Also in that year the second place on all classes was won by an electric car.
One criticism to the UCS analysis and several other that have analyze the benefits of PEVs is that these analysis were made using average emissions rates across regions instead of marginal generation at different times of the day.
In the United States, General Motors ran in several cities a training program for firefighters and first responders to demonstrate the sequence of tasks required to safely disable the Chevrolet Volt’s powertrain and its 12 volt electrical system, which controls its high-voltage components, and then proceed to extricate injured occupants.
The car has been build since 2013.
Many countries are introducing  average emissions targets across all cars sold by a manufacturer, with financial penalties on manufacturers that fail to meet these targets.
208-240&nbsp;V&nbsp;AC; 11.6 to 96&nbsp;kW
cells require more expensive battery management and charging systems than lead acid batteries.
'''Formula E''', officially the '''FIA Formula E Championship''', is a class of auto racing, sanctioned by the Fédération Internationale de l'Automobile (FIA), and is the highest class of competition for one-make, single-seater, electrically powered racing cars.
An analysis by three economist affiliated with the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER), published in November 2014, developed a methodology to estimate marginal emissions of electricity demand that vary by location and time of day across the United States.
Alternatively, this voltage would impose a lower power rating of 6.7&nbsp;kW at 32&nbsp;A.
Electric motors give electric cars instant torque, creating strong and smooth acceleration.
By including a manual transmission, short-range EVs can obtain both better performance and greater efficiency than the single-speed EVs developed by major manufacturers.
Production and conversion electric cars typically use 10 to 23&nbsp;kW·h/100&nbsp;km (0.17 to 0.37&nbsp;kW·h/mi).
Other advantages of electric cars are that they do not need to be driven to petrol stations and there are often fewer fluids which need to be changed.
