It served as a major component in the development of electric blues, rock and roll, rock music, heavy metal music and many other genres of music.
A rackmount effects unit may contain an electronic circuit nearly identical to a stompbox-based effect, but it is mounted in a standard 19" equipment rack, which is usually mounted in a road case that is designed to protect the equipment during transport.
With expiration of the Fender patent on the Stratocaster-style vibrato, various improvements on this type of internal, multi-spring vibrato system are now available.
There are four basic types of bridge and tailpiece systems on electric guitars.
One of its best-known players was Tiny Grimes, who played on 52nd Street with the beboppers and played a major role in the Prestige Blues Swingers.
A functionally solid-body electric guitar was designed and built in 1940 by Les Paul from an Epiphone acoustic archtop.
Stephen Carpenter of Deftones also switched from a seven-string to an eight-string in 2008 and released his signature STEF B-8 with ESP Guitars.
Don Felder of the Eagles used the Gibson EDS-1275 during the Hotel California tour.
Another early user was John McLaughlin.
One of the first solid-body guitars was invented by Les Paul.
A common tonal coloration sought out by guitarists is rolling off some of the high frequencies.
The fingerboard surface usually has a cross-sectional radius that is optimized to accommodate finger movement for different playing techniques.
Many believe this design improves a guitar's sustain and timbre.
A low-priced multi-effects pedal may provide 20 or more effects for the price of a regular single-effect pedal.
Jazz chords also often include the 11th and 13th notes of the chord.
Fingerboards vary as much as necks.
Brewer publicized his new instruments in an article in the ''Wichita Beacon'' of 2 October 1932 and through performances that month.
They also had a limited pitch range.
Aside from possible engineering advantages, some feel that in relation to the rising cost of rare tonewoods, man-made materials may be economically preferable and more ecologically sensitive.
These appear on Rickenbackers, Gretsches, Epiphones, a wide variety of archtop guitars, particularly Jazz guitars, and the 1952 Gibson Les Paul.
Several neck shapes appear on guitars, including shapes known as C necks, U necks, and V necks.
Gibson's first production electric guitar, marketed in 1936, was the ES-150 model ("ES" for "Electric Spanish", and "150" reflecting the $150 price of the instrument, along with matching amplifier).
* Filters, such as wah-wah
Rock and pop chord voicings tend to focus on the first, third, and fifth notes of the chord.
Commonly, but not exclusively, stereo guitars route the neck and bridge pickups to separate output buses on the guitar.
Many believe it is highly significant, while others think the difference between woods is subtle.
with retrofitted pickups were among the very earliest electric guitars.
Whereas chambered guitars are made, like solid-body guitars, from a single block of wood, semi-acoustic and full-hollowbody guitars bodies are made from thin sheets of wood.
Reports of playing feel are greatly complicated by the many factors involved in this perception.
Seven-string guitars experienced a resurgence in popularity in the 2000s, championed by Deftones, Limp Bizkit, Slayer, KoRn, Fear Factory, Strapping Young Lad, Nevermore, Muse and other hard rock and metal bands.
The ES-150 guitar featured a single-coil, hexagonally shaped "bar" pickup, which was designed by Walt Fuller.
The tenor guitar can also be tuned like a soprano, concert, or tenor ukulele, using versions of GCEA tuning.
Alfred Schnittke also used electric guitar in several works, like the "Requiem", "Concerto Grosso N°2" and "Symphony N°1".
There are a variety of ways the "stereo" effect may be implemented.
Rock musicians often prefer the lightest gauge of roundwound string, which is easier to bend, while jazz musicians go for heavier, flatwound strings, which have a rich, dark sound.
Jazz chord voicings are usually rootless and emphasize the third and seventh notes of the chord.
Zero is the nut; 5 is the fifth (tuning) fret.
Within these four types are many variants.
"Guitar pedalboards" are used by musicians who use multiple stomp-boxes; these may be a DIY project made with plywood or a commercial stock or custom-made pedalboard.
Electric acoustic guitars should not be confused with semi-acoustic guitars, which have pickups of the type found on solid-body electric guitars, or solid-body hybrid guitars with piezoelectric pickups.
While a set-in neck can be carefully unglued by a skilled luthier, and a bolt-on neck can simply be unscrewed, a neck-through design is difficult or even impossible to repair, depending on the damage.
Effects units come in several formats, the most common of which are the stompbox "pedal" and the rackmount unit.
In a small group, such as a power trio, one guitarist switches between both roles.
Makers known for these unusual materials include John Veleno, Travis Bean, Geoff Gould, and Alembic.
A stereo cable then routes each pickup to its own signal chain or amplifier.
Guitars have a fixed bridge or a spring-loaded hinged bridge that lets players bend notes or chords up or down in pitch or perform  vibrato effects.
However, wood remains popular in production instruments, though sometimes in conjunction with new materials.
Identical pickups produce different tones depending on how near they are to the neck or bridge.
In contrast, in many modern jazz styles, the guitarist plays much more sparsely, intermingling periodic chords and delicate voicings into pauses in the melody or solo.
The motivation for this may be to reduce weight, to achieve a semi-acoustic tone (see below) or both.
In the signal chain, the effects loop is typically located between the preamplifier and the power amplifier (though reverb units generally precede the effects loop if both are featured on an amplifier).
As well, a jazz guitarists' solo improvisations have to have a rhythmic drive and "time feel" that creates a sense of "swing" and "groove".
Set-in necks are glued to the body in the factory.
Jazz guitarists using a seven-string include George Van Eps, Lenny Breau, Bucky Pizzarelli and his son John Pizzarelli.
Position markers (2.2) provide the player with a reference to the playing position on the fingerboard.
The term ''archtop'' refers to a method of construction subtly different from the typical acoustic (or "folk" or "western" or "steel-string" guitar): the top is formed from a moderately thick (1&nbsp;inch or 2–3&nbsp;cm) piece of wood, which is then carved into a thin (0.1 in, or 2–3&nbsp;mm) domed shape, whereas conventional acoustic guitars have a thin, flat top.
They are typically controlled by knobs or switches on the front panel, and often by a MIDI digital control interface.
Lee Ranaldo of Sonic Youth plays with a third bridge.
Feedback can also be reduced by making them with a solid block in the middle of the soundbox.
Invented in 1931, the amplified electric guitar was adopted by jazz guitarists, who sought to be able to be heard in large big band ensembles.
* Effects such as octavers, which displace pitch by an exact musical interval
Bill Kelliher, guitarist for the heavy metal group Mastodon, worked with First Act on a custom mass-produced nine-string guitar.
Instead, solid-body instruments depend on electric pickups and an amplifier (or amp) and speaker.
Opinions vary regarding the effect of scale length on tone and feel.
Most seven-string guitars add a low B string below the low E. Both electric and classical guitars exist designed for this tuning.
The third-bridge guitar is an electric prepared guitar with an additional, third bridge.
The seven-string guitar has also played an essential role in progressive metal rock and is commonly used in bands such as Dream Theater and Pain of Salvation and by experimental guitarists such as Ben Levin.
* Time-shift effects, such as delay and reverb
In 2008, Ibanez released the Ibanez RG2228-GK, which is the first mass-produced eight-string guitar.
Jazz guitar improvising is not merely the recitation of jazz scales and rapid arpeggios.
Neck-through bodies are somewhat more common in bass guitars.
Popular opinion holds that longer scale length contributes to greater amplitude.
The vintage Fender Telecaster, for example, has a typical small radius of approximately 7.25&nbsp;inches.
In 2002, Gibson announced the first digital guitar, which performs analog-to-digital conversion internally.
Leo Fender pioneered bolt-on necks on electric guitars to facilitate easy adjustment and replacement.
After distortion became popular amongst rock music groups, guitar amplifier manufacturers included various provisions for it, making amps easier to overdrive, and providing separate "dirty" and "clean" channels so that distortion could easily be switched on and off.
The solid-body electric guitar is made of solid wood, without functionally resonating air spaces.
Later Fender designs were better, but Fender held the patent on these, so other companies used older designs for many years.
McGuinn began using electric twelve-string guitars to create the jangly sound of the Byrds.
Bourgerie worked through World War II at Howard Radio Company, making electronic equipment for the American military.
Some incorrectly attribute the first recording to Eddie Durham, but his recording with the Kansas City Five was made 15 days later.
Bob Dunn of Milton Brown's Musical Brownies introduced the electric Hawaiian guitar to Western swing with his January 1935 Decca recordings, departing almost entirely from the Hawaiian musical influence and heading towards jazz and blues.
Until the 1950s, the acoustic, nylon-stringed classical guitar was the only type of guitar favored by classical, or art music composers.
Electric guitar necks vary in composition and shape.
The guitar also provides independent signal processing for each individual string.
The neck and fretboard (2.1) extend from the body.
In the 1970s, designers began to use exotic man-made materials such as aircraft-grade aluminum, carbon fiber, and ebonol.
It uses a lever ("vibrato arm") attached to the bridge that can temporarily slacken or tighten the strings to alter the pitch.
Many top guitarists are associated with a specific brand of guitar amp.
Strings vibrating in the magnetic field of the pickups (3.1, 3.2) produce an electric current in the pickup winding that passes through the tone and volume controls (3.8) to the output jack.
* Distortion, such as transistor-style fuzz, effects incorporating, emulating vacuum tube distortion or overdrive
The pairs of strings are played together as one, so the technique and tuning are the same as a conventional guitar, but they create a much fuller tone.
Along with the Japanese guitar company Ibanez, Vai created the Universe series seven-string guitars in the 1980s, with a double locking tremolo system for a seven-string guitar.
In that year Beauchamp applied for a United States patent for an ''Electrical Stringed Musical Instrument'' and the patent was issued in 1937.
There are many free guitar effects computer programs that can be downloaded from the Internet.
In the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s, a growing number of composers (many of them composer-performers who had grown up playing the instrument in rock bands) began writing contemporary classical music for the electric guitar.
A blend knob controls the mix between electromagnetic and piezoelectric sounds.
In addition to the traditional rhythm/comping and lead/blowing roles, some jazz guitarists use the electric instrument to play unaccompanied, combining harmony and melody to form a complete piece of music, like classical guitarists.
To do this, they used overdrive — increasing the gain of the preamplifier beyond the level where the signal could be faithfully reproduced, resulting in a "fuzzy" sound.
A few examples of string-through body guitars are the Fender Telecaster Thinline, the Fender Telecaster Deluxe, the B.C.
The body (3) is typically made of wood with a hard, polymerized finish.
Similarly, Mårten Hagström and Fredrik Thordendal of Meshuggah used 8-string guitars made by Nevborn Guitars and now guitars by Ibanez.
This table only shows up to the twelfth fret.
Fingerboard radius typically ranges from nearly flat (a very large radius) to radically arched (a small radius).
This model featured a guitar-shaped body of a single sheet of plywood affixed to a wood frame.
At the neck joint (2.4), the neck is either glued or bolted to the body.
Mississippi blues musician Lonnie Pitchford played a similar, homemade instrument.
The maple body prototype for the one-piece cast aluminum "frying pan" was built by Harry Watson, factory superintendent of the National Guitar Corporation.
Many guitars with active electronics use a jack with an extra contact normally used for stereo.
In bands with a single guitarist, the guitarist may switch between these two roles, playing chords to accompany the singer's lyrics, and then playing a guitar solo in the middle of the song.
It became known as the "Charlie Christian" pickup (named for the great jazz guitarist who was among the first to perform with the ES-150 guitar).
Metal musicians often prefer the seven-string guitar for its extended lower range.
Early proponents of the electric guitar on record included Les Paul, Lonnie Johnson, Sister Rosetta Tharpe, T-Bone Walker, and Charlie Christian.
These include Frank Zappa, Shawn Lane, Steven Mackey, Nick Didkovsky, Scott Johnson, Lois V Vierk, Tim Brady, Tristan Murail, and Randall Woolf.
Some guitars have no frets—and others, like the Gittler guitar, have no neck in the traditional sense.
Twelve-string electric guitars feature six pairs of strings, usually with each pair tuned to the same note.
These are common on carved-top guitars, such as the Gibson Les Paul and the  Paul Reed Smith models, and on slab-body guitars, such as the Music Man Albert Lee and Fender guitars that are not equipped with a vibrato arm.
The first electric guitars used in jazz were hollow archtop acoustic guitar bodies with electromagnetic transducers.
This was not actually a new development in the instrument, but rather a shift of aesthetics, the sound having not been recognized as desirable previously.
The strings fitted to the guitar also have an influence on tone.
Further circuitry sometimes combines pickups in different ways.
The use of offboard effects is assisted with the provision of an effects loop, an arrangement that allows effects to be electrically or mechanically switched out of the signal path when not required.
Guitar amplifiers are designed with a different approach than that used to design sound reinforcement system power amplifiers and home "hi-fi" stereo systems.
The fourth type of system employs string-through body anchoring.
Alvino Rey was an artist who took this instrument to a wide audience in a large orchestral setting and later developed the pedal steel guitar for Gibson.
Guitars don't require a uniform pickup type: a common mixture is the "fat Strat" arrangement of one dual-coil at the bridge position and single coils in the middle and neck positions, known as HSS (humbucker/single/single).
Individual pickups can also have their timbre altered by switches, typically coil tap switches that effectively short-circuit some of a dual-coil pickup's windings to produce a tone similar to a single-coil pickup (usually done with push-pull volume knobs).
String gauge and design, neck construction and relief, guitar setup, playing style and other factors contribute to the subjective impression of playability or feel.
This can be a normal guitar with, for instance, a screwdriver placed under the strings, or it can be a custom-made instrument.
Durham introduced the instrument to a young Charlie Christian, who made the instrument famous in his brief life and would be a major influence on jazz guitarists for decades thereafter.
Probably the most ambitious and perhaps significant work to date is ''Ingwe'' (2003–2009) by Georges Lentz (written for Australian guitarist Zane Banks), a 60-minute work for solo electric guitar, exploring that composer's existential struggles and taking the instrument into realms previously unknown in a concert music setting.
A player can use this to create a vibrato or a portamento effect.
They may also be fitted with a piezoelectric pickup under the bridge, attached to the bridge mounting plate, or with a low-mass microphone (usually a condenser mic) inside the body of the guitar that converts the vibrations in the body into electronic signals.
The instrument originated during the Jazz Age, in the 1920s and 1930s, and are still considered the classic jazz guitar (nicknamed "jazzbox").
These hollows are designed specifically not to interfere with the critical bridge and string anchor point on the solid body.
They can often be played at the same volume as an acoustic guitar and therefore can be used unplugged at intimate gigs.
Most jazz guitarists play hollow-body instruments, but solid-body guitars are also used.
The first solid-body Spanish standard guitar was offered by Vivi-Tone no later than 1934.
The two coils are wired in phase, so their signal adds together.
A plastic pickguard on some guitars protects the body from scratches or covers the control cavity, which holds most of the wiring.
Whereas concert sound systems and home "hi-fi" systems are designed to accurately reproduce the source signal without adding unwanted tonal coloration (i.e., they have a flat frequency response) or unwanted distortion, most electric guitar amplifiers are used for the tonal coloration and/or overdrive that they can add to a guitar signal.
The resulting digital signal is delivered over a standard Ethernet cable, eliminating cable-induced line noise.
More expensive multi-effects pedals may also include more input and output jacks (e.g., an auxiliary input or a "dry" output), MIDI inputs and outputs, and an expression pedal, which can control volume or modify effect parameters (e.g., the rate of the simulated rotary speaker effect).
They qualify as electric guitars inasmuch as they have fitted pickups.
This allows the guitarist to apply modulation effects to the signal after it has been processed through the preamplifier, something generally desirable, particularly with time-based effects such as delay.
In acoustic and archtop guitars, wood choices more clearly affect tone.
However, some features are present on most guitars.
The resulting hum is particularly strong with single-coil pickups, and it is aggravated by the fact that many vintage guitars are insufficiently shielded against electromagnetic interference.
These typically select or combine the outputs of two or more pickups, so that two-pickup guitars have three-way switches, and three-pickup guitars have five-way switches (a Gibson Les Paul three-pickup Black Beauty has a three-position toggle switch which configures bridge, bridge and middle switch in middle position and neck pickups).
to solo over chord progressions.
Unlike acoustic guitars, solid-body electric guitars have no vibrating soundboard to amplify string vibration.
Pedals are smaller than rackmount effects and usually less expensive.
In performances of the song "Xanadu" during the band's 2015 R40 anniversary tour, Lifeson played a white Gibson EDS-1275 double-neck guitar with six-string and twelve-string necks, while bassist Geddy Lee performed with a double-neck Rickenbacker guitar with four-string bass and twelve-string guitar necks.
These models were based on Vai's six-string signature series, the Ibanez Jem.
It is estimated that fewer than 50 Electro-Spanish Ken Roberts were constructed between 1933 - 1937; fewer than 10 are known to survive today.
Historically, the bolt-on style has been more popular for ease of installation and adjustment.
Another notable solid-body design is the Fender Stratocaster, which was introduced in 1954 and became extremely popular among musicians in the 1960s and 1970s for its wide tonal capabilities and more comfortable ergonomics than other models.
Materials for necks are selected for dimensional stability and rigidity, and some allege that they influence tone.
Another early, substantially solid Spanish electric guitar, called the Electro Spanish, was marketed by the Rickenbacker guitar company in 1935 and made of Bakelite.
Some innovations were intended to improve playability by ergonomic means, such as Warmoth Guitars' compound radius fingerboard.
They are used almost solely to play harmony and rhythm.
These can be blocked off to prevent feedback, as in B.
Few, if any, extensive formal investigations have been widely published that confirm or refute claims over the effects of different woods or materials on electric guitar sound.
They are said to have a warmer tone and greater sustain.
While the scale length of the Les Paul is often described as 24.75&nbsp;inches, it has varied through the years by as much as a half inch.
The Electro-Spanish Ken Roberts provided players a full 25" scale, with 17 frets free of the fretboard.
Dual-coil pickups sound warm, thick, perhaps even muddy; single-coil pickups sound clear, bright, perhaps even biting.
More recently, as signal-processing technology continuously becomes more feature-dense, rack-mount effects units frequently contain several types of effects.
Like semi-acoustic guitars, they often have f-shaped sound holes.
The most common source is 50- or 60-Hz hum from power transmission systems (house wiring, etc.).
Piezo pickups produce a more acoustic sound.
Humbuckers have two coils of opposite magnetic and electric polarity to produce a differential signal.
They do not provide enough acoustic volume for live performance, but they can be used unplugged for quiet practice.
Many experiments at electrically amplifying the vibrations of a string instrument date back to the early part of the 20th century.
Another notable guitarist to utilize electric twelve-string guitars is Jimmy Page, the guitarist with Led Zeppelin.
Their models are used by Trey Gunn (ex King Crimson), who has his own ''signature'' line from the company.
Muse guitarist and vocalist Matthew Bellamy uses a silver Manson double-neck on his band's Resistance Tour.
Lead Belly is the folk artist most identified with the twelve-string guitar, usually acoustic with a pickup.
In the 21st century, European avant garde composers like Richard Barrett, Fausto Romitelli, Peter Ablinger, Bernhard Lang, Claude Ledoux and Karlheinz Essl have used the electric guitar (together with extended playing techniques) in solo pieces or ensemble works.
The first electrically amplified guitar was designed in 1931 by George Beauchamp, the general manager of the National Guitar Corporation, with Paul Barth, who was vice president.
Some 2010-era amps provide digital amp modeling effects units, which emulate popular guitar amp tones.
A ''floating'' or ''trapeze'' tailpiece (similar to a violin's) fastens to the body at the base of the guitar.
This is the traditional type of joint.
Some "hybrid" electric guitars are equipped with additional microphone, piezoelectric, optical, or other types of transducers to approximate an acoustic instrument tone and broaden the sonic palette of the instrument.
However, the feedback associated with hollow-bodied electric guitars was understood long before Paul's "log" was created in 1940; Gage Brewer's Ro-Pat-In of 1932 had a top so heavily reinforced that it essentially functioned as a solid-body instrument.
The strings pass over the bridge saddles, then through holes through the top of the guitar body to the back.
Guitar amplifiers have long included at least a few effects, often tone controls for bass and treble, an integrated tremolo system (sometimes incorrectly marketed as vibrato), and/or a spring reverb unit.
Eight-string electric guitars are rare but not unused.
Bridge pickups produce a bright or trebly timbre, and neck pickups are warmer or more bassy.
Another less common seven-string arrangement is a second G string situated beside the standard G string and tuned an octave higher, in the same manner as a twelve-stringed guitar (see below).
Electric guitar design and construction vary greatly in the shape of the body and the configuration of the neck, bridge, and pickups.
This allows musicians to have quick on-stage access to different effects combinations.
Combinations of these types of pickups may be used, with an integral mixer/preamp/graphic equalizer.
The bridge and tailpiece, while serving separate purposes, work closely together to affect playing style and tone.
Piezoelectric pickups use a "sandwich" of quartz crystal or other piezoelectric material, typically placed beneath the string saddles or nut.
Digital and synthesizer guitars, below.
These pickups are not sensitive to EMI.
Some solid-bodied guitars, such as the Gibson Les Paul Supreme, the PRS Singlecut, and the Fender Telecaster Thinline, among others, are built with hollows in the body.
One is played by Charlie Hunter, which was manufactured by Novax Guitars.
Historically, archtop guitars
