This species reached a height of  and weighed .
At Amboseli, young males spend over 80% of their time away from their families when they are 14–15.
Elephants are capable of hearing at low frequencies and are most sensitive at 1 kHz.
The throat of an elephant appears to contain a pouch where it can store water for later use.
It is S-shaped when fully erect and has a Y-shaped orifice.
Female same-sex behaviours have been documented only in captivity where they are known to masturbate one another with their trunks.
Early proboscideans developed longer mandibles and smaller craniums, while more advanced ones developed shorter mandibles, which shifted the head's centre of gravity.
Elephants are important seed dispersers; African forest elephants ingest and defecate seeds, with either no effect or a positive effect on germination.
When standing, the elephant's heart beats approximately 30 times per minute.
Adults and most of the other young will gather around the newborn, touching and caressing it with their trunks.
Of all the elephants, African bush elephants live in the hottest climates, and have the largest ear flaps.
With its trunk, an elephant can reach items at heights of up to  and dig for water under mud or sand.
For instance, a "white elephant" is a byword for something expensive, useless and bizarre.
This approach is not taken by the United Nations Environment Programme's World Conservation Monitoring Centre nor by the IUCN, both of which list ''L.&nbsp;cyclotis'' as a synonym of ''L.&nbsp;africana''.
In the Late Pleistocene, most proboscidean species vanished during the Quaternary glaciation which killed off 50% of genera weighing over  worldwide.
Elephants are known to communicate with seismics, vibrations produced by impacts on the earth's surface or acoustical waves that travel through it.
Fertility rates in cows decline around 45–50 years of age.
A male elephant's testes are located internally near the kidneys.
It is likely that around half of the population is in India.
In Africa, groups of adolescent elephants damaged homes in villages after cullings in the 1970s and 1980s.
Despite this, he denied that any of these practices harm elephants.
The use of elephants in circuses has also been controversial; the Humane Society of the United States has accused circuses of mistreating and distressing their animals.
For the first few days, the mother is intolerant of other herd members near her young.
''Loxodonta'' branched off earliest, around the Miocene and Pliocene boundary, while ''Mammuthus'' and ''Elephas'' diverged later during the early Pliocene.
The largest captive population is in North America, which has an estimated 370 Asian and 350 African elephants.
Elephants have a unique organ, the temporal gland, located in both sides of the head.
Calves have brownish or reddish hair, especially on the head and back.
The relatively long pregnancy is maintained by five corpus luteums (as opposed to one in most mammals) and gives the foetus more time to develop, particularly the brain and trunk.
Sleeping occurs at night while the animal is lying down.
The lungs are attached to the diaphragm, and breathing relies mainly on the diaphragm rather than the expansion of the ribcage.
Agonistic encounters typically consist of threat displays, chases and minor sparring with the tusks.
They have even been observed lifting up their legs, presumably in an effort to expose their soles to the air.
Similar ideas existed among other African tribes, who believed that their chiefs would be reincarnated as elephants.
Asian elephants have some patches of depigmentation, particularly on the forehead and ears and the areas around them.
Prior to mounting, it curves forward and upward.
Other elephant heroes given human qualities include Jean de Brunhoff's Babar, David McKee's Elmer and Dr. Seuss's Horton.
Their incisors grow into tusks, which can serve as weapons and as tools for moving objects and digging.
Warm blood flows into the capillaries, helping to release excess body heat into the environment.
In 1989, the African elephant was listed under Appendix I by the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES), making trade illegal.
Larger bull groups consisting of over 10 members occur only among African bush elephants, the largest of which numbered up to 144 individuals.
Although Asian elephants are declining in numbers overall, particularly in Southeast Asia, the population in the Western Ghats appears to be increasing.
It relies on touch, smell and hearing, as its eyesight is poor.
The Asian elephant also has dorsal bumps on its head and some patches of depigmentation on its skin.
Alloparenting – where a calf is cared for by someone other than its mother – takes place in some family groups.
After CITES listed the Asian elephant under Appendix I in 1975, the number of African elephants in zoos increased in the 1980s, although the import of Asians continued.
''Mammuthus'' evolved into several species, including the well-known woolly mammoth.
Males ("bulls") leave their family groups when they reach puberty, and may live alone or with other males.
While most mammals have one surge of luteinizing hormone during the follicular phase, elephants have two.
Like many mammals, elephants can contract and transmit diseases to humans, one of which is tuberculosis.
The ivory trade contributed to the African elephant population decline in the late 20th century.
Families may associate and bond with each other, forming what are known as bond groups.
With no "aerial phase", the fast gait does not meet all the criteria of running, although the elephant uses its legs much like other running animals, with the hips and shoulders falling and then rising while the feet are on the ground.
The adult females of the group start to show aggression towards the male, which encourages him to permanently leave.
They were not used as much as horse-drawn chariots by either the Pandavas or Kauravas.
As elephants mature, their hair darkens and becomes sparser, but dense concentrations of hair and bristles remain on the end of the tail as well as the chin, genitals and the areas around the eyes and ear openings.
The third edition of ''Mammal Species of the World'' lists the two forms as full species and does not list any subspecies in its entry for ''Loxodonta africana''.
The total population of Asian elephants is estimated to be around 40,000–50,000, although this may be a loose estimate.
The trunk is elongated and specialised to become the elephant's most important and versatile appendage.
Elephants can have a negative impact on ecosystems.
Elephants have been working animals since at least the Indus Valley Civilization and continue to be used in modern times.
Rumbles are produced during mild arousal and some appear to be infrasonic.
The dominant tusk, called the master tusk, is generally more worn down, as it is shorter with a rounder tip.
Calves are the centre of attention in their family groups and rely on their mothers for as long as three years.
They are considered to be keystone species due to their impact on their environments.
In 1942, 18 subspecies of African elephant were recognised by Henry Fairfield Osborn, but further morphological data has reduced the number of classified subspecies, and by the 1990s, only two were recognised, the savannah or bush elephant (''L.&nbsp;a.&nbsp;africana'') and the forest elephant (''L.&nbsp;a.&nbsp;cyclotis''); the latter has smaller and more rounded ears and thinner and straighter tusks, and is limited to the forested areas of western and Central Africa.
Elephants belong to the family Elephantidae, the sole remaining family within the order Proboscidea.
This may allow the animal to deal with the pressure differences when its body is underwater and its trunk is breaking the surface for air, although this explanation has been questioned.
For African elephants, calls range from 15–35&nbsp;Hz with sound pressure levels as high as 117&nbsp;dB, allowing communication for many kilometres, with a possible maximum range of around .
A male may stop showing signs of musth when he encounters a musth male of higher rank.
The upper second incisors grew into tusks, which varied in shape from straight, to curved (either upward or downward), to spiralled, depending on the species.
In testimony to a US federal court in 2009, Barnum & Bailey Circus CEO Kenneth Feld acknowledged that circus elephants are struck behind their ears, under their chins and on their legs with metal-tipped prods, called bull hooks or ankus.
The older matriarchs tend to be more effective decision-makers.
Older elephants use trunk-slaps, kicks and shoves to discipline younger ones.
This has been observed in 54% of individuals in UK zoos.
There appear to be cohesive family units and loose aggregations.
The African elephant has two finger-like extensions at the tip of the trunk that allow it to grasp and bring food to its mouth.
When fighting, they are used to attack and defend, and to protect the trunk.
There were 13,000–16,500 working elephants employed in Asia as of 2000.
In the past they were used in war; today, they are often controversially put on display in zoos, or exploited for entertainment in circuses.
The third radiation started in the late Miocene and led to the arrival of the elephantids, which descended from, and slowly replaced, the gomphotheres.
Their limbs grew longer and the feet shorter and broader.
Elephants are popularly thought of as having an excellent memory.
The animal's field of vision is compromised by the location and limited mobility of the eyes.
Major feeding bouts take place in the morning, afternoon and night.
The IUCN estimates a total of around 440,000 individuals for 2012.
Elephants usually have 26 teeth: the incisors, known as the tusks, 12 deciduous premolars, and 12 molars.
In India, male elephants regularly enter villages at night, destroying homes and killing people.
At Murchison Falls National Park in Uganda, the overabundance of elephants has threatened several species of small birds that depend on woodlands.
This could have a factual basis; they possibly have cognitive maps to allow them to remember large-scale spaces over long periods of time.
As characters, elephants are most common in children's stories, in which they are generally cast as models of exemplary behaviour.
As in heterosexual interactions, this involves mounting.
They appear to have self-awareness and show empathy for dying or dead individuals of their kind.
Sri Lankan zoologist Paules Edward Pieris Deraniyagala described it in 1950 under the trinomial ''Elephas maximus borneensis'', taking as his type an illustration in ''National Geographic''.
One of the earliest references to war elephants is in the Indian epic ''Mahabharata'' (written in the 4th century BCE, but said to describe events between the 11th and 8th centuries BCE).
The Mbuti people believe that the souls of their dead ancestors resided in elephants.
A cow in oestrus releases chemical signals (pheromones) in her urine and vaginal secretions to signal her readiness to mate.
Elephants have a fission–fusion society in which multiple family groups come together to socialise.
Dwarf proboscideans are known to have lived in Indonesia, the Channel Islands of California, and several islands of the Mediterranean.
The circular feet of an elephant have soft tissues or "cushion pads" beneath the manus or pes, which distribute the weight of the animal.
The skeleton of the elephant is made up of 326–351 bones.
The animals' religious importance is only totemic in Africa but is much more significant in Asia.
During the 10th century AD, the people of Igbo-Ukwu buried their leaders with elephant tusks.
Elephant ears have thick bases with thin tips.
As he matures, a male spends more time at the edge of his group and associates with outside males or even other families.
The first chewing tooth on each side of the jaw falls out when the elephant is two to three years old.
Among African elephants, the forest form is smaller than the savannah form.
As such, newborn elephants are precocial and quickly stand and walk to follow their mother and family herd.
They are usually bluffing when performing these actions.
The African ''Primelephas gomphotheroides'' gave rise to ''Loxodonta'', ''Mammuthus'' and ''Elephas''.
Ralph Helfer is known to have relied on gentleness and reward when training his animals, including elephants and lions.
During the Magadha Kingdom (which began in the 6th century BCE), elephants began to achieve greater cultural importance than horses, and later Indian kingdoms used war elephants extensively; 3,000 of them were used in the Nandas (5th and 4th centuries BCE) army, while 9,000 may have been used in the Mauryan army (between the 4th and 2nd centuries BCE).
Calves may be preyed on by lions, spotted hyenas, and wild dogs in Africa and tigers in Asia.
Elephants killed around 300 people between 2000 and 2004 in Jharkhand, while in Assam 239 people were reportedly killed between 2001 and 2006.
One notable species of this epoch was ''Eritreum melakeghebrekristosi'' of the Horn of Africa, which may have been an ancestor to several later species.
A population of small woolly mammoths survived on Wrangel Island, now  north of the Siberian coast, as recently as 4,000 years ago.
These are typically made of two family groups.
The sixth (and usually final) set must last the elephant the rest of its life.
The muscles of the trunk connect to a bony opening in the skull.
As of 2008, local numbers were controlled by contraception or translocation.
Appendix II status (which allows restricted trade) was given to elephants in Botswana, Namibia and Zimbabwe in 1997 and South Africa in 2000.
At Mount Elgon,  elephants excavate caves that are used by ungulates, hyraxes, bats, birds and insects.
When detecting the seismics of an alarm call signalling danger from predators, elephants enter a defensive posture and family groups will pack together.
Historically, elephants were considered formidable instruments of war.
Elephants are the largest living terrestrial animals.
Tusks serve multiple purposes.
Mammutids continued to evolve into new species, such as the American mastodon.
Elephants exhibit mirror self-recognition, an indication of self-awareness and cognition that has also been demonstrated in some apes and dolphins.
CITES approved an international ban on ivory that went into effect in January 1990.
The female has a well-developed clitoris at up to .
Gestation in elephants typically lasts around two years with interbirth intervals usually lasting four to five years.
A group containing more than two adult females plus offspring is known as a "joint family".
The cranium is particularly large and provides enough room for the attachment of muscles to support the entire head.
About 214,000 elephants were estimated to live in the rainforests, fewer than had previously been thought.
These cavities give the inside of the skull a honeycomb-like appearance.
Unlike many other animals, the heart rate speeds up by 8 to 10 beats per minute when the elephant is lying down.
Those of equal rank tend to avoid each other.
Elephants have been recorded displaying stereotypical behaviours in the form of swaying back and forth, trunk swaying or route tracing.
They have a hindgut fermentation system, and their large and small intestines together reach  in length.
Elephants appear to distinguish between the growls of larger predators like tigers and smaller ones like leopards (which have not been recorded killing calves); the latter they react less fearfully and more aggressively to.
In 1798, Georges Cuvier classified the Indian elephant under the binomial ''Elephas indicus''.
Groups within these clans do not form strong bonds, but they defend their dry-season ranges against other clans.
When detecting seismic signals, the animals lean forward and put more weight on their larger front feet; this is known as the "freezing behaviour".
The poaching of elephants for their ivory, meat and hides has been one of the major threats to their existence.
This organ is associated with sexual behaviour, and males secrete a fluid from it when in musth.
They were equipped with armour to protect their sides, and their tusks were given sharp points of iron or brass if they were large enough.
Their weight can compact the soil, which causes the rain to run off, leading to erosion.
Elephants can live up to 70 years in the wild.
From 1977 to 1989, elephant populations declined by 74% in East Africa.
The Asian elephant lives in areas with some of the highest human populations.
His son and successor Ptolemy II (who began his rule in 285 BCE) obtained his supply of elephants further south in Nubia.
Elephants produce several sounds, usually through the larynx, though some may be modified by the trunk.
Elephants are scattered throughout sub-Saharan Africa, South Asia, and Southeast Asia.
Only when ''Elephas'' disappeared from Africa did ''Loxodonta'' become dominant once again, this time in the form of the modern species.
Births tend to take place during the wet season.
The story of the blind men and an elephant teaches that reality may be viewed by different perspectives.
This allows individuals to pick up chemical cues.
This has been interpreted as expressing "concern", however, others would dispute such an interpretation as being anthropomorphic; the ''Oxford Companion to Animal Behaviour'' (1987) advised that "one is well advised to study the behaviour rather than attempting to get at any underlying emotion".
In both cases, males are larger than females.
One of the biggest threats to elephant populations is the ivory trade, as the animals are poached for their ivory tusks.
As many as five toenails can be found on both the front and hind feet.
This occurs when the pinnae are still, and the animal can enhance the effect by flapping them.
Elephants can suck up water both to drink and to spray on their bodies.
By its second week of life, the calf can walk more firmly and has more control over its trunk.
They can consume as much as  of food and  of water in a day.
Bulls appear to associate with family groups if an oestrous cow is present.
Other descendants of the straight-tusked elephant existed in Cyprus.
Some scientists believe a cloned mammoth embryo could one day be implanted in an Asian elephant's womb.
Elephants and sirenians are further grouped in the clade Tethytheria.
When removed, ivory begins to dry up and crack if not kept cool and moist.
The elephant's penis can reach a length of  and a diameter of  at the base.
Keeping elephants in zoos has met with some controversy.
At Amboseli, bulls under 24 do not go into musth, while half of those aged 25–35 and all those over 35 do.
Elephants will try to appear more threatening by raising their heads and spreading their ears.
For the African elephants, tusks are present in both males and females, and are around the same length in both sexes, reaching up to , but those of males tend to be thicker.
In the Asian species, only the males have large tusks.
Suckling after two years may serve to maintain growth rate, body condition and reproductive ability.
In walking, the legs act as pendulums, with the hips and shoulders rising and falling while the foot is planted on the ground.
If a calf wants to rest, it will press against its mother's front legs and when it wants to suckle, it will touch her breast or leg.
''Loxodonta'', the generic name for the African elephants, is Greek for "oblique-sided tooth".
A "let's go" soft rumble is emitted by the matriarch to signal to the other herd members that it is time to move to another spot.
Individuals greet each other by stroking or wrapping their trunks; the latter also occurs during mild competition.
War elephants were trained to grasp an enemy soldier and toss him to the person riding on them or to pin the soldier to the ground and impale him.
Proboscidean diversity declined during the Oligocene.
Elephants tend to have high numbers of parasites, particularly nematodes, compared to other herbivores.
The long bones of the limbs have cancellous bone in place of medullary cavities.
Bulls in musth emit a distinctive, low-frequency pulsated rumble nicknamed the "motorcycle".
Elephant teeth have loop-shaped dental ridges, which are thicker and more diamond-shaped in African elephants.
The use of the elephant as a symbol of the US Republican Party began with an 1874 cartoon by Thomas Nast.
The skull contains air cavities (sinuses) that reduce the weight of the skull while maintaining overall strength.
When moving, elephant mothers will touch their calves with their trunks or feet when side-by-side or with their tails if the calf is behind them.
The trunk's ability to make powerful twisting and coiling movements allows it to collect food, wrestle with conspecifics, and lift up to .
''Elephas'' diversified into new species in Asia, such as ''E.&nbsp;hysudricus'' and ''E.&nbsp;platycephus''; the latter the likely ancestor of the modern Asian elephant.
It has little precise control over its trunk, which wiggles around and may cause it to trip.
English zoologist Frederick Nutter Chasen classified all three as subspecies of the Asian elephant in 1940.
Some trainers have tried to train elephants without the use of physical punishment.
Despite this, some Europeans continued to portray them in a more stylised fashion.
From South Asia, the use of elephants in warfare spread west to Persia and east to Southeast Asia.
Calves continue to suckle at the same rate as before until their sixth month, after which they become more independent when feeding.
After 1987, losses in elephant numbers accelerated, and savannah populations from Cameroon to Somalia experienced a decline of 80%.
Elephants are highly recognisable and have been featured in art, folklore, religion, literature and popular culture.
