Elves had danced there.
# '''Integrating elves into Christian cosmology without demonising them.'''
They therefore give people an unusual degree of access to ideas of elves in older traditional culture.
In order to protect themselves and their livestock against malevolent elves, Scandinavians could use a so-called Elf cross (''Alfkors'', ''Älvkors'' or ''Ellakors''), which was carved into buildings or other objects.
These words must come from Common Germanic, the ancestor-language of English, German, and the Scandinavian languages: the Common Germanic forms must have been *''ɑlβi-z'' and ''ɑlβɑ-z''.
It is generally agreed that these names indicate that elves were positively regarded in early Germanic culture.
Recent scholars have emphasised, in the words of Ármann Jakobsson, that
Both Continental Scandinavia and Iceland have a scattering of mentions of elves in medical texts, most of them with Low German connections.
:''Or, stretched on earth, the heart-smit heifers lie.''
Personal names provide the only evidence for ''elf'' in Gothic, which must have had the word ''*albs'' (plural ''*albeis'').
Elves have a prominent place in a number of closely related ballads which must have originated in the Middle Ages but are first attested in the early modern period, many in Karen Brahes Folio, a Danish manuscript from the 1570s.
''älva'') were stunningly beautiful girls who lived in the forest with an elven king.
Jakob Grimm thought that whiteness implied positive moral connotations, and, noting Snorri Sturluson's ''ljósálfar'', suggested that elves were divinities of light.
: elf’s sister and father,
In English literature of the Elizabethan era, elves became conflated with the fairies of Romance culture, so that the two terms began to be used interchangeably.
Most famously, the early thirteenth-century Heinrich von Morungen's fifth ''Minnesang'' begins 'Von den elben virt entsehen vil manic man | Sô bin ich von grôzer lieber entsên' ('full many a man is bewitched by elves | thus I too am bewitched by great love').
The elves pose a threat to the everyday community by trying to lure people to into the elves' world.
The ballads are characterised by sexual encounters between everyday people and human(-like) beings referred to in at least some variants as elves (the same characters also appear as mermen, dwarves, and other kinds of supernatural beings).
: let the mare not ride me,
Germanic ''*ɑlβi-z~*ɑlβɑ-z'' is generally agreed to be cognate with the Latin ''albus'' ('(matt) white'), Old Irish ''ailbhín'' (‘flock’); Albanian ''elb'' (‘barley’); and Germanic words for ‘swan’ such as Modern Icelandic ''álpt''.
Later evidence for elves appears in diverse sources such as medical texts, prayers, ballads, and folktales.
Evidence for elf-beliefs in medieval Scandinavia outside Iceland is very sparse, but the Icelandic evidence is uniquely rich.
In the early modern period, elves are attested in north Germany doing the evil bidding of witches; Martin Luther believed his mother to have been afflicted in this way.
Many commentators have also (or instead) argued for conceptual overlap between elves and dwarves in Old Norse mythology, which may fit with trends in the medieval German evidence.
Nineteenth-century Icelandic folklore about elves mostly presents them as a human agricultural community parallel to the visible human community, that may or may not be Christian.
He apparently considered elves and fairies to be the same race.
This incubus motif recurs in the ''Þiðreks saga'' version of the parentage of Hagen (ON Högni), who was the product of his mother Oda being impregnated by an elf (ON álfr) while she lay in bed; ''Þiðreks saga'' was translated from a lost German text.
For example, a number of early modern ballads in the British Isles and Scandinavia, originating in the medieval period, describe human encounters with elves.
:''On lake shores, where the forest met the lake, you could find elf circles.
The Germanic word presumably originally meant 'white person', perhaps as a euphemism.
Likewise, in medieval British poetry, the supernatural beauty of biblical Judith is described as ‘elf shining’ (ælfscinu), a magical beauty that shines an aura of light.
This in turn inspired Goethe's poem ''Der Erlkönig''.
Although the term ''elf'' was sustained in some Scandinavian traditions, during and after the medieval period it largely disappears in favour either of euphemisms for the same beings or different beliefs entirely, such as ''huldufólk'' ('hidden people', Icelandic), ''huldra'' ('hidden people', Norwegian and Swedish, along with terms like ''skogsfru'' and ''skogsrå''), ''vetter'', ''nisse'' (Denmark, along with ''bjærgfolk'') and ''tomte'' (Sweden).
: I forbid you to blow on people
For example, angels are unambiguously masculine in ancient biblical texts, yet because of their beauty, modern British artists often depict angels as feminine.
The Kings' sagas include a rather elliptical account of an early Swedish king being worshipped after his death and being called Ólafr Geirstaðaálfr ('Ólafr the elf of Geirstaðir') and the elf as a demon at the beginning of ''Norna-Gests þáttr'', which is a portion of the ''Greatest Saga of Olaf Tryggvason''.
Notable is the association of both Old Norse ''Alfr'' and Sanskrit ''Rbhu'' with the solar corona and sun rays.
When seen, they are distant.'
Elves were not exclusively young and beautiful.
Elves appear as a threatening, even demonic, force widely in later medieval prayers.
The effects of this on writing about elves are most apparent in England and Germany, with developments in each country influencing the other.
The elves of Norse mythology have survived into folklore mainly as females, living in hills and mounds of stones.
The influence of Shakespeare and Michael Drayton made the use of ''elf'' and ''fairy'' for very small beings the norm, and had a lasting effect seen in fairy tales about elves collected in the modern period.
However, some generalisations are possible.
The only character explicitly identified as an elf in classical Eddaic poetry, if any, is Völundr, the protagonist of ''Völundarkviða''.
This second kind of elf cross was worn as a pendant in a necklace and in order to have sufficient magic it had to be forged during three evenings with silver from nine different sources of inherited silver.
In ''The Queen of Elfland's Nourice'', a woman is abducted to be a wet-nurse to the elf-queen's baby, but promised that she may return home once the child is weaned.
: Ir sult uz varen obir dē gatir
In some locations it also had to be on the altar of a church for three consecutive Sundays.
One could appease the elves by offering them a treat (preferably butter) placed into an elven mill.
Reconstructing the early concept of an elf depends almost entirely on texts in Old English or relating to Norse mythology.
Like words for gods and men, the word ''elf'' is used in personal names where words for monsters and demons are not.
An '''elf''' (plural: ''elves'') is a type of supernatural being in Germanic mythology and folklore.
In works where elves are the main characters, such as ''The Silmarillion'' or Wendy and Richard Pini’s comic book series ''Elfquest'', elves exhibit a similar range of behaviour to a human cast, distinguished largely by their superhuman physical powers.
In ''A Midsummer Night's Dream'', the elves are almost as small as insects.
Skuld was skilled in witchcraft (''seiðr'').
:''How, winged with fate, their elf-shot arrows fly,''
It may not always have denoted an actual projectile as there is evidence that 'shot' could mean 'a sharp pain', but it and terms like ''elf-arrow(head)'' are sometimes used of neolithic arrow-heads, apparently thought to have been made by elves, and in a few witchcraft trials people attest that these were used in healing rituals, and occasionally alleged to be used by witches (and perhaps elves) to injure people and cattle.
German examples are ''Alberich'', ''Alphart'' and ''Alphere'' (father of Walter of Aquitaine) and Icelandic examples include ''Álfhildur''.
'In the more realistic Sagas of Icelanders, Bishops' Sagas, and ''Sturlunga saga'', ''álfar'' are rare.
: albes svestir vn vatir
As the apparent convergence with ''Gezwerc'' suggests, the word ''alp'' declined in use in German after the medieval period, though it still occurs in some fossilised uses, most prominently the word for 'nightmare', ''Alptraum'' ('elf dream').
: alb vnde ł elbelin
Ultimately, beauty and luminosity are identical.
In the same vein, Johann Gottfried Herder translated the Danish ballad ''Elveskud'' in his 1778 collection of folk songs, '''', as '' ('The Erl-king's Daughter'; it appears that Herder introduced the term ''Erlkönig'' into German through a mis-Germanisation of the Danish word for ''elf'').
Accounts of Skuld in earlier sources, however, do not include this material.
Scholars, but not the primary texts, labelled the illnesses elves caused as "elf-shot" This was encouraged by the idea that "elf-shot" is depicted in the Eadwine Psalter, in an image which became well known in this connection.
Accordingly, elves appear in Middle German most often associated with deception or bewildering people 'in a phrase that occurs so often it would appear to be proverbial: "die elben/der alp trieget mich" (the elves/elf is/are deceiving me)' and are often associated with the mare.
This shows a strong tradition of associating elves with the Æsir, or sometimes even of not distinguishing between the two groups.
This is not necessarily the case, however.
The Alberich in the epic ''Ortnit'' is a dwarf of childlike-stature who turns out to be the real father of the titular hero, having raped his mother.
The most common, though also most harmless case was various irritating skin rashes, which were called ''älvablåst'' (elven blow) and could be cured by a forceful counter-blow (a handy pair of bellows was most useful for this purpose).
However, oral traditions about beings like elves remained prominent in Scandinavia into the early twentieth century.
The Swedish ''älvor'', (sing.
: the time has come to resist reviewing information about ''álfar'' ''en masse'' and trying to impose generalizations on a tradition of a thousand years.
In this case, *ɑlβi-z connotes the meaning, ‘skillful, inventive, clever’, and is cognate with Latin ''labor'', in the sense of ‘creative work’.
''Skålgropar'', a particular kind of petroglyph found in Scandinavia, were known in older times as ''älvkvarnar'' (elven mills), pointing to their believed usage.
As German Romanticism got underway and writers started to seek authentic folklore, Jacob Grimm rejected ''Elf'' as a recent Anglicism, and promoted the reuse of the old form ''Elb'' (plural ''Elbe'' or ''Elben'').
: Ir sult uz zu dē virste varē
The noun ''elf-shot'' is first attested in a Scots poem, 'Rowlis Cursing' from around 1500, where 'elf schot' is listed among a range of curses to be inflicted on some chicken-thieves.
The role of elves as Santa's helpers has continued to be popular, as evidenced by the success of the popular Christmas movie ''Elf''.
They circulated widely in Scandinavia and northern Britain.
However, elves are frequently mentioned in the alliterating formulaic collocation ''Æsir ok Álfar'' ('Æsir and elves') and its variants.
As in Old Norse, however, there are few characters identified as elves.
By contrast, British cultural values tend to downplay male beauty and only emphasize femininity as an ideal of beauty.
Some of the early modern ballads, indeed, are still quite widely known, whether through school syllabuses or modern folk music.
As his most prominent deed in the poem is to rape Böðvildr, the poem associates elves with being a sexual threat to maidens.
Here elves are most often attested in Old English glosses which translate Latin words for nymphs, and in medical texts which attest to elves afflicting humans and livestock with illnesses: apparently mostly sharp, internal pains and mental disorders.
The lead researcher, Terry Gunnell stated: 'Icelanders seem much more open to phenomena like dreaming the future, forebodings, ghosts and elves than other nations'.
If a human watched the dance of the elves, he would discover that even though only a few hours seemed to have passed, many years had passed in the real world.
The Modern German ''Elf'' (m) and ''Elfe'' (f) was introduced as a loan from English in the 1740s and was prominent in Christoph Martin Wieland's 1764 translation of ''A Midsummer Night's Dream''.
The most famous is the fourteenth-century ''Münchener Nachtsegen'', a prayer to be said at night, which includes the lines:
Icelandic Sagas celebrate the beauty of the cliff giants (bergrisi), and certain warrior kings that descend from them.
Post-Tolkien fantasy elves (popularized by the ''Dungeons & Dragons'' role-playing game) tend to be more beautiful and wiser than humans, with sharper senses and perceptions.
As in English, however, twentieth-century fantasy fiction has helped to reinvigorate the term.
Other words for supernatural beings in personal names almost all denote pagan gods, suggesting that elves were in a similar category of beings.
There does not seem to have been any clear-cut distinction between humans and gods; like the Æsir, then, elves were presumably thought of as being human(-like) and existing in opposition to the giants.
The clearest English example is ''Elveden'' ("elves' hill", Suffolk); other examples may be ''Eldon Hill'' ("Elves' hill", Derbyshire); and ''Alden Valley'' ("elves' valley", Lancashire).
The second form was an ordinary cross carved onto a round or oblong silver plate.
These seem to associate elves fairly consistently with woods and valleys.
They are often skilled archers.
Sometimes the everyday person is a woman and the elf is a man, as in the northern British ''Tam Lin'', ''The Elfin Knight'', and ''Lady Isabel and the Elf-Knight'', in which the Elf-Knight bears away Isabel to murder her, or the Scandinavian ''Harpans kraft''.
: you shall go out to the roof-ridge!
Sigvatr Þórðarson’s skaldic travelogue ''Austrfaravísur'', composed around 1020, mentions an ''álfablót'' (‘elves' sacrifice’) in Edskogen in what is now southern Sweden.
During the Old English period, separate forms were used for female elves (such as ''ælfen'', putatively from common Germanic *''ɑlβ(i)innjō''), but during the Middle English period the word ''elf'' came routinely to include female beings.
They make the toys in a workshop located in the North Pole.
In folk-stories, they often play the role of disease-spirits.
The elves could be seen dancing over meadows, particularly at night and on misty mornings.
In Scandinavia, the Romantic movement was also prominent, and literary writing was the main context for continued use of the word ''elf ''except in fossilised words for illnesses.
The elves in this story are more alike those of traditional Danish folklore, who were beautiful females, living in hills and boulders, capable of dancing a man to death.
William Shakespeare also imagined elves as little people.
By the end of the medieval period, ''elf'' was increasingly being supplanted by the French loan-word ''fairy'', as in Geoffrey Chaucer's satirical ''Sir Thopas'' where the title character sets out in quest of the 'elf-queen', who dwells in the 'countree of the Faerie'.
These conceptions remained prominent in twentieth-century children's literature, for example Enid Blyton's The Faraway Tree series, and were influenced by German Romantic literature.
Like the ''huldra'' in Norway and Sweden, they are hollow when seen from the back.
For example, Alaric Hall, noting that the cognates suggest matt white or soft white, has instead tentatively suggested that later evidence associating both elves and whiteness with beauty may indicate that it was this beauty that gave elves their name.
Sexual allure becomes increasingly prominent in the source material.
: Ir sult nich beng’ bliben hin
One famous Icelandic folktale explains elves as the lost children of Eve.
Although this word took a variety of forms in different Old English dialects, these converged on the form ''elf'' during the Middle English period.
: elf’s mother, ''trute'' and mare,
She is described as a beautiful old woman and by her aspect people saw that she belonged to the ''subterraneans''.
Scholars of Old Norse mythology now focus on references to elves in Old Norse poetry, particularly the Elder Edda.
In Iceland, expression of belief in the cognate huldufólk or 'hidden people', the elves that dwell in rock formations, is still relatively common.
Typically, elf circles were fairy rings consisting of a ring of small mushrooms, but there was also another kind of elf circle:
Early modern Europe saw the emergence for the first time of a distinctive elite culture, while the Reformation encouraged new scepticism and opposition to traditional beliefs, while subsequently Romanticism encouraged their fetishisation by intellectual elites.
As in ''Elveskud'', sometimes the everyday person is a man and the elf a woman, as also in ''Elvehøj'' (much the same story as ''Elveskud'' but with a happy ending), ''Herr Magnus og Bjærgtrolden'', ''Herr Tønne af Alsø'', ''Herr Bøsmer i elvehjem'', or the Northern British ''Thomas the Rhymer''.
: Noc mich dy mare druche
Elves also appear in a couple of verse spells, including the Bergen rune-charm from among the Bryggen inscriptions.
In a speech in ''Romeo and Juliet'' (1592) an 'elf-lock' (tangled hair) is not caused by an elf as such, but Queen Mab, who is referred to as 'the fairies' midwife'.
For example, the Norse Eddas similarly celebrate the male beauty of Baldr.
:''When the sick ewe her summer food forgoes,''
An example is Andrew Lang's fairy tale ''Princess Nobody'' (1884), illustrated by Richard Doyle, where fairies are tiny people with butterfly wings, whereas elves are tiny people with red stocking caps.
The main medieval Germanic cognates of ''elf'' are Old Norse ''alfr'', plural ''alfar'', and Old High German ''alp'', plural ''alpî'', ''elpî'' (alongside the feminine ''elbe'').
Early modern English notions of elves became influential in eighteenth-century Germany.
Elves appear in some place-names, though it is hard to be sure how many as a variety of other words, including personal names, can appear similar to ''elf''.
This fits well with the use of Old English ''ælf'' and its feminine derivative ''ælbinne'' to gloss words for nymphs and with the word ''ælfscȳne'', which meant 'elf-beautiful' and is attested describing seductively beautiful women.
In medieval Germanic-speaking cultures, elves seem generally to have been thought of as a group of beings with magical powers and supernatural beauty, ambivalent towards everyday people and capable of either helping or hindering them.
Compare with the following excerpt from a 1749–50 ode by William Collins:
With industrialisation and mass education, traditional folklore about elves waned, but as the phenomenon of popular culture emerged, elves were reimagined, in large part on the basis of Romantic literary depictions and associated medievalism.
Elves were viewed as being supernaturally powerful people who lived invisibly alongside everyday rural people.
These texts include a fleeting mention of elves seen out riding in 1168 (in ''Sturlunga saga''); mention of an ''álfablót'' in ''Kormáks saga''; and the existence of the euphemism ''ganga álfrek'' ('go to drive away the elves') for 'going for a poo' in ''Eyrbyggja saga''.
This seems to have led people to associate legendary heroes called Álfr with the elves.
Some dwarfs that appear in German heroic poetry have been seen as relating to elves, especially when the dwarf's name is ''Alberich'', which etymologically means 'elf-powerful'; Jacob Grimm thought that the name echoed the notion of the king of the nation of elves or dwarfs.
Norse cultural values view masculinity as an ideal of beauty, which the Alfr personifies.
However, where narratives are more human-centered, as in ''The Lord of the Rings'', elves tend to sustain their role as powerful, sometimes threatening, outsiders.
The same idea is present in two post-classical Eddaic poems, which are also influenced by romance or Breton ''lais'', ''Kötludraumur'' and ''Gullkársljóð'' and in later traditions in Scandinavia and beyond, so may be an early attestation of a prominent tradition.
However, this is now thought to be a misunderstanding: the image proves to be a conventional illustration of God's arrows and of Christian demons.
:''There every herd, by sad experience, knows''
In early modern sources, the German ''alp'' is also described as "cheating" or "deceiving" (, ) its victims.
In Denmark and Sweden, the elves appear as beings distinct from the ''vetter'', even though the border between them is diffuse.
The only widespread survivor of these in modern English is Alfred (Old English ''Ælfrēd'', "elf-advice").
: let the ''trute'' not ?pinch me (reading ''zücke''),
: Noc mich dy mare rite
The similarities with Old English material, and particularly ''Wið færstice'', are close.
The people who copied the Poetic Edda do not seem to have attempted to integrate elves into Christian thought.
Elves are prominently associated with sexual threats, seducing people and causing them harm.
This shows how the meanings of ''elf'' had changed, and was in itself influential: the usage is echoed, for example, in the house-elf of J. K. Rowling's Harry Potter stories.
Humans being invited or lured to the elf dance is a common motif transferred from older Scandinavian ballads.
It is even possible that stories were sometimes told from this perspective to subvert the dominance of the Church.
Accordingly, in the Brothers Grimm fairy tale ''Die Wichtelmänner'' (literally 'the little men'), the title protagonists are two tiny naked men who help a shoemaker in his work.
: Noc mich dy mare bescrite
The most famous such name is ''Alboin''.
Tolkien's writing has such popularity that in the 1960s and afterwards, elves speaking an elvish language similar to those in Tolkien's novels (like Quenya, and Sindarin) became staple non-human characters in high fantasy works and in fantasy role-playing games.
Thus in the USA, Canada, the United Kingdom, and Ireland the modern children's folklore of Santa Claus typically includes green-clad elves with pointy ears, long noses, and pointy hats as Santa's helpers or hired workers.
Yet Andersen also wrote about ''elvere'' in ''The Elfin Hill''.
A hallmark of many fantasy elves is their pointed ears.
It seems likely that elves were to a significant extent conflated with dwarves ().
: elf, or also little elf,
The "Christmas elves" of contemporary popular culture are of relatively recent tradition, popularized during the late nineteenth-century in the United States.
Even though ''Wichtelmänner'' are akin to beings such as kobolds, dwarves and brownies, the tale was translated into English by Margaret Hunt in 1884 as ''The Elves and the Shoemaker''.
Much the most popular example is ''Elveskud'' and its many variants (paralleled in English as ''Clerk Colvill''), where a woman from the elf-world tries to tempt a young knight to join her in dancing, or simply to live among the elves; sometimes he refuses and sometimes he accepts, but in either case he dies, tragically.
Elves played a central role in Tolkien's legendarium, notably ''The Silmarillion'' and ''The Lord of the Rings''; this legendarium was enormously influential on subsequent fantasy writing.
There are hints that Freyr was associated with elves, particularly that ''Álfheimr'' (literally 'elf-world') is mentioned as being given to Freyr in ''Grímnismál''.
In his turn, J.&nbsp;R.&nbsp;R. Tolkien recommended using the older German form ''Elb'' in his ''Guide to the Names in The Lord of the Rings'' (1967) and ''Elb, Elben'' was consequently introduced in the 1972 German translation of ''The Lord of the Rings'', having a role in repopularising the form in German.
In the Swedish folktale ''Little Rosa and Long Leda'', an elvish woman (''älvakvinna'') arrives in the end and saves the heroine, Little Rose, on condition that the king's cattle no longer graze on her hill.
Auberon entered English literature through Lord Berner's translation of the ''chanson de geste'' around 1540, then as ''Oberon'', the king of elves and fairies in Shakespeare's ''A Midsummer Night's Dream'' (see below).
The insect-winged fairies in Celtic mythology are often called ''älvor'' in modern Swedish or ''alfer'' in Danish, although the more formal translation is ''feer''.
A 2006 and 2007 study on superstition by the University of Iceland’s Faculty of Social Sciences revealed that many would not rule out the existence of elves and ghosts, a result similar to a 1974 survey by Erlendur Haraldsson.
English and German literary traditions both influenced the British Victorian image of elves, which appeared in illustrations as tiny men and women with pointed ears and stocking caps.
Goethe's poem then took on a life of its own, inspiring the Romantic concept of the Erlking, which was influential on literary images of elves from the nineteenth century on.
However, this is not uniformly accepted.
But there is good evidence that elves were associated with the succuba-like ''mære'' and could cause illness, recent scholarship suggests Anglo-Saxon elves, like elves in later evidence from Britain and Scandinavia or the Irish Aos Sí, were like people.
As in earlier English, ''elbe'' is attested translating words for nymphs.
The English word ''elf'' is from the Old English word most often attested as ''ælf'' (whose plural would have been *''ælfe'').
German Romanticist writers were influenced by this notion of the 'elf', and reimported the English word ''elf'' in that context into the German language.
Meanwhile, German folklore has tended to see the conflation of elves with dwarfs.
Modern Scandinavian folklore celebrates the male beauty of the Fossegrim and the Huldrekarl/Huldrekall, nature spirits comparable to nymphs, but masculine men.
A completely different etymology, making ''elf'' cognate with the ''Rbhus'', semi-divine craftsmen in Indian mythology, was also suggested by Kuhn, in 1855.
Elves in German tradition also show the seductive side apparent in English and Scandinavian material, however.
After the Middle Ages, the word ''elf'' tended to be replaced by other terms, becoming archaic, dialectal, or surviving only in fossilised terms.
Although the relevant words are of slightly uncertain meaning, it seems fairly clear that Völundr is described as one of the elves in ''Völundarkviða''.
The ''Þiðreks saga'' version of the Nibelungen (Niflungar) describes Högni as the son of a human queen and an elf, but no such lineage is reported in the Eddas, ''Völsunga saga'', or the ''Nibelungenlied''.
In a similar vein, the ''alf'' found in the fairy tale ''The Elf of the Rose'' by Danish author Hans Christian Andersen is so tiny that he can have a rose blossom for home, and has 'wings that reached from his shoulders to his feet'.
They were round places where the grass had been flattened like a floor.
The relatively few mentions of elves in the Chivalric sagas tend even to be whimsical.
According to ''Hrólfs saga kraka'', Hrolfr Kraki's half-sister Skuld was the half-elven child of King Helgi and an elf-woman (''álfkona'').
: Noc mich dy trute zciche
Despite the decline in references to elves in England, beliefs in elves remained prominent in early modern Scotland, where elves appear in English-language sources in the early modern Scottish witchcraft trials.
Legends of ''álfar'' may have been constantly changing and were perhaps always heterogeneous so it might be argued that any particular source will only reflect the state of affairs at one given time.
Elves entered the twentieth-century high fantasy genre in the wake of works published by authors such as J.&nbsp;R.&nbsp;R. Tolkien, for which, see Elf (Middle-earth).
