In some subtle or not-so-subtle way, every film is autobiographical.
Although initially he worked as an actor on stage, and told early in his acting career that he had no acting ability, he surprised many critics by becoming one of the Group’s most capable actors.
Kazan acted in a few films, including ''City for Conquest'' (1940).
The powerful dramatic roles Kazan brought out from many of his actors was due, partly, to his ability to recognize their personal character traits.
As a young boy, he was remembered as being shy, and his college classmates described him as more of a loner.
Kazan explains that he and Schulberg were trying to warn "of the power TV would have in the political life of the nation."
Martin Scorsese has directed a film documentary, ''A Letter to Elia''  (2010), considered to be an "intensely personal and deeply moving tribute" to Kazan.
His first such "issue" film was ''Gentleman's Agreement'' (1947), with Gregory Peck, which dealt with anti-Semitism in America.
Kazan strove for "cinematic realism," a quality he often achieved by discovering and working with unknown actors, many of whom treated him as their mentor, which gave him the flexibility to depict "social reality with both accuracy and vivid intensity."
In his memoirs, Kazan writes that his testimony meant that "the big shot had become the outsider."
It remained a non-profit enterprise.
:I want to thank the Academy for its courage, its generosity.
Co-star Julie Harris worked overtime to quell Dean's panic attacks.
As a result, Kazan was forced to "baby-sit the young actor in side-by-side trailers," so he wouldn't run away during production.
Despite these plaudits, the film was considered a step back cinematically with the feel of filmed theater, though Kazan did at first use a more open setting, but he then felt compelled to revert to the stage atmosphere to remain true to the script.
Kazan won the New York Drama Critics Award for Best Director and Bankhead for best actress.
During an interview in 1988, Kazan said, "I did whatever was necessary to get a good performance ''including'' so-called Method acting.
Williams wrote the screenplay specifically for Kazan to direct during the 1950s.
His maternal grandfather was Isaak Shishmanoglou.
It too was nominated for 12 Academy Awards, and won 8, including Best Picture, Best Director and Best Actor, for Marlon Brando.
In 1999, when he was 90 years old, Kazan received an honorary Oscar for lifetime achievement.
As a continuation of the socially relevant themes that he developed in New York, the film exposed corruption within New York's longshoremen's union.
Kazan influenced the films of the 1950s and '60s with his provocative, issue-driven subjects.
Before undertaking the film, Kazan wanted to confirm many of the details about his family's background.
According to film author Harry Keyishian, Kazan and screenwriter Budd Schulberg were using the film to warn audiences about the dangerous potential of the new medium of television.
Then I know it experientially, not just mentally.
I still like it when I see it," writes Kazan.
Many in Hollywood felt that enough time had passed since the hearings that it was appropriate to recognize Kazan's accomplishments in this manner, although others in attendance of the ceremony did not and would not applaud, including actors Ed Harris and Nick Nolte; on the other side, Warren Beatty, a liberal, gave Kazan a standing ovation.
As a product of the Group Theater and Actors Studio, he was most noted for his use of "Method" actors, especially Brando and Dean.
Kazan cast her as the female lead in ''Splendor in the Grass'', and her career rebounded.
In 1951, Lee Strasberg became its director.
He had the energy, a very keen intelligence, and more chutzpah than any Jew I've ever known.
In his later years he changed his mind about some of the philosophy behind the Group Theater, in that he no longer felt that the theater was a
Kazan's favorite scene in the movie was the last one, when Wood goes back to see her lost first love, Bud (Beatty).
Kazan was armed with the confidence born of age and success, while Beatty was virtually aflame with the arrogance of youth."
He never made me feel as though I was acting for the camera.
:He was an arch-manipulator of actors' feelings, and he was extraordinarily talented; perhaps we will never see his like again.
I think what I was concerned about all my life was to say something artistically that was uniquely my own.
Beatty's costar, Natalie Wood, was in a transition period in her career, having mostly been cast in roles as a child or teenager, and she was now hoping to be cast in adult roles.
Jack was a crapshooter of the first order, and said, "Go ahead."
The scene on the swings (Eli Wallach and Carroll Baker) in ''Baby Doll'' is my exact idea of what eroticism in films should be.
I am a mediocre director except when a play or film touches a part of my life's experience...
Mills notes that prior to becoming a "friendly witness," Kazan discussed the issues with Miller:
In 1947, he founded the Actors Studio, a non-profit workshop, with actors Robert Lewis and Cheryl Crawford.
:The Group Theater said that we shouldn't be committed to any fixed political program set by other people outside the organization.
I think I'm a self-centered animal...
Thank you all very much.
He also worked as a bartender at various fraternities, but never joined one.
Lee Strasberg and Harold Clurman, both of whom were around thirty years old.
He has good emotion.
I constantly sought his company...
Actor Gary Lockwood, who also acted in the film, felt that "Kazan and Natalie were a terrific marriage, because you had this beautiful girl, and you had somebody that could get things out of her."
Kazan later justified his act by saying he took "only the more tolerable of two alternatives that were either way painful and wrong."
Upon his death, at the age of 94, the ''New York Times'' described him as "one of the most honored and influential directors in Broadway and Hollywood history."
The film's success introduced James Dean to the world and established him as a popular actor.
During his career, he won two Oscars as Best Director and received an Honorary Oscar, won three Tony Awards, and four Golden Globes.
At twenty-eight, somehow—this was the wonder—he made his way to New York.
Other critics have likewise noted his "strong commitment to the social and social psychological—rather than the purely political—implications of drama".
He called Williams "the most loyal and understanding friend I had through those black months."
Kazan was the best actors' director by far of any I've worked for... the only one who ever really stimulated me, got into a part with me and virtually acted it with me... he chose good actors, encouraged them to improvise, and then improvised on the improvisation...
In 1942 he achieved his first notable success by directing a play by Thornton Wilder, ''The Skin of Our Teeth'', starring Tallulah Bankhead and Fredric March.
His marriage, in 1982, to Frances Rudge continued until his death, in 2003, aged 94.
The play, though controversial, was a critical and commercial success and won Wilder a Pulitzer Prize.
Biskind notes also that they "were wildly dissimilar—mentor vs. protege, director vs. actor, immigrant outsider vs. native son.
Kazan himself states that "unless the character is somewhere in the actor himself, you shouldn't cast him."
I liked Bob Wagner, I still do.
Author Peter Biskind points out that Kazan "was the first in a string of major directors Beatty sought out, mentors or father figures from whom he wanted to learn."
By the mid-1930s, when he was 26, he began directing a number of the Group Theater's plays, including Robert Ardrey's well-known play Thunder Rock.
He is also a member of the American Theater Hall of Fame.
Kazan, however, has downplayed that impression:
But not in the American Communists.
The nickname was eventually taken up by his stage and film stars.
"collective art," as he once believed:
In that film, Kazan experimented with a documentary style of cinematography, which succeeded in "energizing" the action scenes.
After struggling to be accepted by them, he discovered his first strong sense of self in America within the "family of the Group Theater, and more loosely in the radical social and cultural movements of the time," writes film author Joanna E. Rapf.
Biographer Suzanne Finstad notes that a "turning point" in her life as an actress was upon seeing the film ''A Streetcar Named Desire'': "She was transformed, in awe of Kazan and of Vivien Leigh's performance... who became a role model for Natalie."
:I don't move unless I have some empathy with the basic theme.
What I actually did was to make the set smaller.
Kazan adds that De Niro "is one of a select number of actors I've directed who work hard at their trade, and the only one who asked to rehearse on Sundays.
Kazan was aware of the limited range of his directing abilities:
Both novels were later made into films.
During the summer I was an apprentice, they were entertaining in a Jewish summer camp... At the end of the summer they said to me: "You may have talent for something, but it's certainly not acting."
She understood it perfectly."
Ray felt Dean was shy and totally withdrawn as he sat there hunched over.
James Dean died the following year, at the age of 24, in an accident with his sports car outside of Los Angeles.
Kazan then went on to direct ''Death of a Salesman'' by Arthur Miller, and then directed ''A Streetcar Named Desire'' by Tennessee Williams, both of which were also successful.
He testified that Odets quit the party at the same time that he did.
Kazan states that "A.E.
:I don't have great range.
The trial left an indelible impression on me... Everybody else voted against me and they stigmatized me and condemned my acts and attitude.
She adds that a scene in the film, as a result of "Kazan's wizardry ...  produced a hysteria in Natalie that may be her most powerful moment as an actress."
He gave his cast freedom and ... was always emotionally involved in the process and his instincts were perfect...
Stevens speculates on why he, Beatty, and many others in the audience chose to stand and applaud:
Actor Robert De Niro called him a "master of a new kind of psychological and behavioral faith in acting."
:I was tried by the Party and that was one of the reasons I became so embittered later.
You deal with them as people who are poets to a certain degree."
:The Group was the best thing professionally that ever happened to me.
He also felt that casting the right actors accounted for 90% of a movie's ultimate success or failure.
When Kazan was awarded an honorary Oscar in 1999, dozens of actors chose not to applaud as 250 demonstrators picketed the event.
Kazan recalls his impressions of Beatty:
In 1954, he directed ''On the Waterfront'', a film about union corruption on the New York harbor waterfront.
His second marriage, to the actress Barbara Loden, lasted from 1969 until her death in 1980, and produced one son.
Strasberg introduced the "Method" to the Actors Studio, an umbrella term for a constellation of systemizations of Konstantin Stanislavski's teachings.
Film author Ian Freer concludes that "if his achievements are tainted by political controversy, the debt Hollywood—and actors everywhere—owes him is enormous."
He figures everything out both inside and outside.
His mother gave him the answer, however: "A.E.
Anthony Franciosa, a supporting actor in the film, explains how Kazan encouraged his actors:
In it, he describes his family as "alienated" from both their parents' Greek Orthodox values and from those of mainstream America.
In 1949 he again dealt with a controversial subject when he directed ''Pinky'', which dealt with issues of racism in America, and was nominated for 3 Academy Awards.
In 1961, he introduced Warren Beatty in his first screen appearance with a starring role in ''Splendor in the Grass'' (1961), with Natalie Wood; the film was nominated for two Oscars and won one.
He was an actor and he knew how we acted.
He's a character actor: everything he does he calculates.
:Now what I try to do is get to know them very well.
Kazan's first national success came as a New York theatrical director.
Kazan called this his "first real film" because of those factors.
Kazan, many years later, explained his rationale for scenes in that film:
Much of his early life was portrayed in his autobiographical book, ''America America'', which he made into a film in 1963.
I never had another director that ever touched him.
With his many years with the Group Theater and Actors Studio in New York City and later triumphs on Broadway, he became famous "for the power and intensity of his actors' performances."
With "East of Eden" ... it's really the story of my father and me, and I didn't realize it for a long time...
I used to be an actor for eight years, so I do appreciate their job.
Kazan writes of the movie, "It's my favorite of all the films I've made; the first film that was entirely mine."
In 1954 he again used Brando as a star in ''On the Waterfront''.
I start with an instinct.
He writes, "I used to say to myself when I was making the film that America was a dream of total freedom in all areas."
I don't know any other way of getting an extraordinary performance out of an actor."
I used to make a difference and think: "These people here are damned fools but in Russia they have got the real thing," until I learned about the Hitler-Stalin pact, and gave up on the USSR.
Among the themes that would run through all of his work were "personal alienation and an outrage over social injustice", writes film critic William Baer.
He sent home money and in time brought my father over.
Biskind describes how "Kazan grabbed his arm, asking, 'What did you say?'
In 1978, the U.S. government paid for Kazan and his family to travel to Kazan's birthplace where many of his films were to be shown.
:To defend a secrecy I don’t think right and to defend people who have already been named or soon would be by someone else...
was my uncle Avraam Elia, the one who left the Anatolian village with the donkey.
Ray watched Dean's powerful acting on the screen; but it didn't seem possible that it was the same person in the room.
He would come and talk to you privately.
"Dean himself did not seem to believe it," notes Rathgeb.
He won the Venice Film Festival, International Award as director, and the film also won two Academy Awards.
During his career, Kazan won both Tony and Oscar Awards for directing on stage and screen.
Kazan would later write in his autobiography of the "warrior pleasure at withstanding his 'enemies.'"
His films were concerned with personal or social issues of special concern to him.
Most of the others play tennis.
Kazan writes of his decision:
'', and in 1950 he directed ''Panic in the Streets'', starring Richard Widmark, in a thriller shot on the streets of New Orleans.
A turning point in Kazan's career came with his testimony as a witness before the House Committee on Un-American Activities in 1952 at the time of the Hollywood blacklist, which brought him strong negative reactions from many liberal friends and colleagues.
:I have worked with many movie directors—some good, some fair, some terrible.
Some critics consider it "one of the greatest films in the history of international cinema."
I take them to dinner.
I didn't betray it.
I thought he was an extreme grotesque of a boy, a twisted boy.
He first directed two short films, but his first feature film was ''A Tree Grows in Brooklyn'' (1945), one of his first attempts to film dramas focused on contemporary concerns, which later became his forte.
Film critic Marie Brenner writes that "for De Niro, it is a role that surpasses even his brilliant and daring portrayal of Vito Corleone in ''The Godfather, part II'', ... his performance deserves to be compared with the very finest."
According to Mills, "It's time for the Academy to recognize this genius," adding that "We applauded when the great Chaplin finally had his hour."
Saint recalls that Kazan selected her for the role after he had her do an improvisational skit with Brando playing the other character.
I talked with her more quietly then and more personally.
His first opportunity came with a small group of actors engaged in presenting plays containing "social commentary".
Although he became a respected director on Broadway, he made an equally impressive transition into one of the major film directors of his time.
Father sent for my mother and my baby brother and me when I was four.''
During the ceremony, he was accompanied by Martin Scorsese and Robert De Niro.
Elia's brother, Avraam, was born in Berlin and later became a psychiatrist.
He was the force that held the thirty-odd members of the theatre together, and made them permanent.
The director is a ''desperate beast!''
I will give up my film career if it is in the interests of defending something I believe in, but not this.
:I would rather do what I did than crawl in front of a ritualistic Left and lie the way those other comrades did, and betray my own soul.
Kazan, in his autobiography, also describes Strasberg as a vital leader of the group:
In later interviews, Kazan explained some of the early events that made him decide to become a friendly witness, most notably in relation to the Group Theater, which he called his first "family," and the "best thing professionally" that ever happened to him:
He was the pivotal figure in launching the film careers of Marlon Brando, James Dean, Julie Harris, Eva Marie Saint, Warren Beatty, Lee Remick, Karl Malden, and many others.
He snapped, 'Lemme ask you something—why did you name all those names?'"
Despite the strong eroticism created in ''Baby Doll'', for example, he set limits.
Kazan had seen Dean on stage in New York and after an audition gave him the starring role along with an exclusive contract with Warner Bros. Dean flew back to Los Angeles with Kazan in 1954, the first time he had ever flown in a plane, bringing his clothes in a brown paper bag.
The classics are beyond me...
Kazan himself writes that the "sages" of the film community declared her as "washed up" as an actress, although he still wanted to interview her for his next film:
Kazan never lost his identification with the oppressed people he remembered from the depths of the Great Depression.
Although the film did poorly at the box office, some reviewers praised De Niro's acting.
Don't talk to me about it.'
In one important and highly emotional scene, for example, Kazan had to give Griffith fair warning: "I may have to use extraordinary means to make you do this.
In 1954, he directed ''On the Waterfront'', written by screenwriter Budd Schulberg, which was a film about union corruption in New York.
''Life'' magazine described ''On the Waterfront'' as the "most brutal movie of the year" but with "the year's tenderest love scenes," and stating that Saint was a "new discovery" in films.
Whatever you do is okay with me, because I know that your heart is in the right place."
They were asking for confession and self-humbling.
I met two wonderful men.
In 1961, after a "series of bad films, her career was already in decline," notes Rathgeb.
Kazan, however, held strong ideas about the scenes, and would try to merge an actor's suggestions and inner feelings with his own.
To make his point, the character who portrays Kazan's uncle Avraam kisses the ground when he gets through customs, while the Statue of Liberty and the American flag are in the background.
Kazan was noted for his close collaboration with screenwriters.
The "Method" school of acting became the predominant system of post-WWII Hollywood, though it has waned in influence somewhat since.
Nonetheless, there have been clear messages in some of his films that involved politics in various ways.
''Los Angeles Times'' film critic Kenneth Turan agreed, writing "The only criterion for an award like this is the work".
Film historian Joanna E. Rapf notes that among the methods Kazan used in his work with actors, was his initial focus on "reality", although his style was not defined as "naturalistic."
In general, Dean was oblivious to Hollywood's methods, and Rathgeb notes that "his radical style did not mesh with Hollywood's corporate gears."
Seven of Kazan's films won a total of 20 Academy Awards.
His mother's family were cotton merchants who imported cotton from England, and sold it wholesale.
"He watched himself with an odd, almost adolescent fascination, as if he were admiring someone else."
In a good way, but he calculates."
Beatty, years later, during a Kennedy Center tribute to Kazan, stated to the audience that Kazan "had given him the most important break in his career."
In between his directing work he wrote four best-selling novels, including ''America, America'', and ''The Arrangement'', both of which tell the story of Kazan's Greek immigrant ancestors.
In 1935 he played the role of a strike-leading taxi driver in a drama by Clifford Odets, ''Waiting for Lefty'', and his performance was called "dynamic," leading some to describe him as the "proletarian thunderbolt."
In response, former vice president of the Los Angeles Film Critics Association, Joseph McBride, claimed that an honorary award recognizes "the totality of what he represents, and Kazan's career, post 1952, was built on the ruin of other people's careers."
In 1951, after introducing and directing Marlon Brando and Karl Malden in the stage version, he went on to cast both in the film version of the play, ''A Streetcar Named Desire'', which won 4 Oscars, being nominated for 12.
Kazan had invited director Nicholas Ray to a private showing, with Dean, as Ray was looking for someone to play the lead in ''Rebel Without a Cause''.
Poor R.J., I said to myself.
