Alternatives have been proposed for many years; for example Adam Clarke treats it as a discussion already of long standing.
Elijah sends Obadiah back to Ahab to announce his return to Israel.
Many Christian Church fathers also (Aphraates, "Homilies," ed.
Here they were treated with great courtesy and hospitality.
In the fifth century BC,  and the remaining Elisha stories were inserted to give prophecy a legitimate foundation in the history of Israel.
The disciples also see Moses and Elijah appear and talk with Jesus.
They were allowed to spend the night with only the smallest of provisions.
He agreed and they began their journey.
Lilith promises, "where I see those names, I shall run away at once.
So he prayed that God might have the angel take the cow instead.
Wood is laid on the altars.
As part of the concluding hymn, an appeal is made to God that Elijah will come during the following week.
The Qur'an states, "They denied him (Elijah), and will surely be brought to punishment, Except the sincere and devoted Servants of God (among them).
The narratives about the Omride wars were added shortly afterwards to illustrate a newly introduced theme, that the attitude of the king towards the word of the prophets determines the fate of Israel.
Perhaps you should tell the Master Architect how ugly is this, His construction."
However, Wilcock argues that Elijah's letter, 'does address a very 'northern' situation in the southern kingdom', and thus is authentic.
The reference to the fiery chariot is likely why the Lebanese celebrate this holiday with fireworks.
The parallelism with the incident that follows, where Elijah is fed by the widow, also suggests a human, if mildly improbable, agent.
Elijah prayed that the wall be restored thus keeping the treasure away from the miser.
The rabbi realized his wrong and asked for pardon.
Elijah encounters Ahab again in , after Ahab has acquired possession of a vineyard by murder.
He offers a better vineyard or a fair price for the land.
Others have argued that Elijah was only "caught away" such as Philip in Acts 8:39 John Lightfoot reasoned that it must have been a different Elijah.
Elijah is rarely associated with Islamic eschatology and Islam views Jesus as the Messiah.
Thus, a cup was left for the arrival of Elijah.
Pope Benedict XIV is said to have approved Bishop Dragičević's request with the remark that a wild nation deserved a wild patron.
Elijah also appears in later works of literature, including the ''Hamzanama''.
And the Arabs brought him bread in the morning and flesh in the evening and he would drink of the wadi.
Jesus makes it clear that John the Baptist is "the Elijah" ( Matthew 11:14 &  Matthew 17:11-12) who was promised to come in  Malachi 4:5.
Fire falls from the sky, consuming the water, the sacrifice and the stones of the altar itself as well.
When the brook dries up, God sends him to a widow living in the town of Zarephatho in Phoenicia.
When he awakens he finds bread and a jar of water.
But Naboth tells Ahab that God has told him not to part with the land.
A homily entitled ''De ascensione Heliae'', misattributed to Chrysostom, claims that poets and painters use the ascension of Elijah as a model for their depictions of the sun, and says that "Elijah is really Helios".
The second place they came to was the home of a wealthy man.
"Know then, that if thou seest an evil-doer prosper, it is not always unto his advantage, and if a righteous man suffers need and distress, think not God is unjust."
The Qur'an and certain Islamic traditions describe Elijah as a great and righteous man of God who preached powerfully against the worship of Baal.
Latter-day Saints deny this and say that the difference they make between the two is deliberate and prophetic.
Carmel where the first hermits of the order established themselves, the Calced Carmelite and Discalced Carmelite traditions pertaining to Elijah focus upon the prophet’s withdrawal from public life.
Their epithet is: "the Righteous."
'''Elijah''' (Arabic: '''إلياس''' or '''إليا'''; ''Ilyas'' or ''Ilya'') is also mentioned as a prophet in the Qur'an, al-An'am 85.
Elijah, in company with Elisha (Eliseus), approaches the Jordan.
This world was shown to the prophet in the form of the wind, since it disappears as the wind; storm () is the day of death, before which man trembles (); fire is the judgment in Gehenna, and the stillness is the last day (Tan., Peḳude, p.&nbsp;128, Vienna ed.
() Finally, the verses in Malachi are believed to indicate that Elijah has a role in the end-times, immediately before the second coming of Jesus.
Elijah then orders the death of the prophets of Baal.
It tells him that he has led the people of Judah astray in the same way that Israel was led astray.
The medieval Carmelite Book of the First Monks offers some insight into the heart of the Orders' contemplative vocation and reverence for the prophet.
They respond by cutting themselves and adding their own blood to the sacrifice (such mutilation of the body was strictly forbidden in the Mosaic law).
O Prophet and foreseer of the great works of God, O greatly renowned Elias, who by your word held back the clouds of rain, intercede for us to the only Loving One.
But few shrines of Helios were on mountaintops, and sun-worship was subsumed by Apollo-worship by Christian times, and so could not be confused with Elias.
Ahab desires to have the vineyard of Naboth of Jezreel.
That day is described as the burning of a great furnace, "... so that it will leave them neither root nor branch."
Elijah encountered Lilith and instantly recognized and challenged her, "Unclean one, where are you going?"
In , Jesus uses Elijah as an example of rejected prophets.
), but since the location of paradise is itself uncertain, the last two statements may be identical.
Three years after this vision (Seder 'Olam R.
A map of mountain-cults of Zeus shows that most of these sites are now dedicated to Elias, including Mount Olympus, Mount Lykaion, Mount Arachnaion, and Mount Taleton on the mainland, and Mount Kenaion, Mount Oche, and Mount Kynados in the islands.
These solutions brought security and economic prosperity to Israel for a time, but did not bring peace with the Israelite prophets, who were interested in a strict deuteronomic interpretation of Mosaic law.
A Georgian story about Elijah:
This is the first instance of raising the dead recorded in Scripture.
Today, a place is reserved at the seder table and a cup of wine is placed there for Elijah.
Elijah tells her that God will not allow her supply of flour or oil to run out, saying, "Don't be afraid..this is what the Lord, the God of Israel, says: 'The jar of flour will not be used up and the jug of oil will not run dry until the day the Lord gives rain on the land."
In Judaism, Elijah's name is invoked at the weekly Havdalah ritual that marks the end of Shabbat, and Elijah is invoked in other Jewish customs, among them the Passover Seder and the Brit milah (ritual circumcision).
When forced to choose between death and dishonor, Rabbi Kahana chose to leap to his death.
Unlike Moses, who tried to defend Israel when they sinned with the golden calf, Elijah bitterly complains over the Israelites' unfaithfulness and says he is the "only one left".
The rabbi answered only that he be able to join Elijah in his wanderings.
Then the rains begin, signaling the end of the famine.
In spite of Elijah's many miracles, the mass of the Jewish people remained as godless as before.
He had no patience for his visitors and chased them away with the admonition that they should get jobs and not beg from honest people.
At Jewish circumcision ceremonies, a chair is set aside for the use of the prophet Elijah.
Elijah then invites the priests of Baal to pray for fire to light the sacrifice.
First, Elijah went up to the shepherd and asked him for a sheep.
The scene opens with Ahaziah seriously injured in a fall.
She promises to "forsake my evil ways" if Elijah will remove his curse.
was added in early post-Exilic times (after 538 BC) to demonstrate the possibility of a new life in community with God after the time of judgment.
Traditionally, the cup is viewed as Elijah’s and is used for no other purpose.
Jesus implicitly separates himself from Elijah when he rebukes James and John for desiring to call down fire upon an unwelcoming Samaritan village in a similar manner to Elijah.
He asks God to accept the sacrifice.
The story ends with a moral: A synagogue with many leaders will be ruined by many arguments.
Elijah is believed to have preached with zeal to Ahab and his wife Jezebel, who according to Muslim tradition was partly responsible for the worship of false idols in this area.
Modern scholars have rejected this claim, stating that the connection of the city with Elijah would have been made because of the first half of the city's name, that of ''Baal'', which was the deity that Elijah exhorted his people to stop worshiping.
It has been suggested that Elijah was chosen because of his importance to all three main religious groups in Bosnia and Herzegovina - Catholics, Muslims and Orthodox Christians.
They form a connected group round Jesus.
Second, the message begins with "Thus says YHVH, God of your father David..." rather than the more usual "...in the name of YHVH the God of Israel."
The first stage dates from the final edition of the History, about 560 BC, when the three stories of Naboth’s vineyard, the death of Ahaziah, and the story of Jehu’s coup were included to embody the themes of the reliability of God's word and the cycle of Baal worship and religious reform in the history of the Northern Kingdom.
She came to be seen as a demon and a witch.
Once, when walking a beach, he came upon a hideously ugly man—the prophet in disguise.
and  however, make it clear that John was the spiritual successor to Elijah.
Elijah then goes beyond the prophecy he was given and tells Ahab that his entire kingdom will reject his authority; that Jezebel will be eaten by dogs within Jezreel; and that his family will be consumed by dogs as well (if they die in a city) or by birds (if they die in the country).
Ahaziah sends out three groups of soldiers to arrest Elijah.
This day is a major holiday in Lebanon and is one of a handful of holidays there whose celebration is accompanied by a launching of fireworks by the general public.
The next verse, "And ''I will bring you'' into the land which I swore to give to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob; I will give it to you for a possession.
The association of Elias with mountaintops seems to come from a different pagan tradition: Elias took on the attributes and the locales associated with Zeus, especially his associations with mountains and his powers over rain, thunder, lighting, and wind.
At this point Elijah proposes a direct test of the powers of Baal and Yahweh.
8), a task which according to the apocalyptic literature is entrusted to Enoch.
His translation of the verses in question is: And the word of Jehovah came to Elijah saying, Go hence and turn eastward and hide thyself in the Wadi Chorath east of the Jordan, and it shall be that thou shalt drink of the wadi, and I have commanded the Arabs to feed thee there.
As Elijah is lifted up, his mantle falls to the ground and Elisha picks it up.
From the time of Malachi, who says of Elijah that God will send him before "the great and dreadful day" (Mal.
Jesus says, "No prophet is accepted in his own country," and then mentions Elijah, saying that there were many widows in Israel, but Elijah was sent to one in Phoenicia.
taking the prophet up to heaven "by a whirlwind".
Elijah speaks with sharp irony: in the religious ambivalence of Israel, he is portraying here as engaging in a wild and futile religious "dance".
Zachariah was the father of John the Baptist, who is referenced as "Elias, which was for to come" (Matt 11:14); and Elias is said to have been present and talked to Jesus at the Transfiguration on the Mount (Matt.
One such story is that of Rabbi Joshua ben Levi.
Scholars who reject identification of Elijah's town with Baalbek further argue that the town of Baalbek is not mentioned with the narrative of Elijah in either the Qur'an or the Hebrew Bible.
References to Elijah appear in the Mishnah and Talmud, the New Testament and the Quran.
Likewise, Jesus rebukes a potential follower who wanted first to return home to say farewell to his family, whereas Elijah permitted this of his replacement Elisha.
Elijah's narrative in the Qur'an and later Muslim tradition resembles closely that in the Hebrew Bible and Muslim literature records Elijah's primary prophesying as taking place during the reign of Ahab and Jezebel as well as Ahaziah.
The next morning, as the travelers left, Elijah prayed that the old cow would die and it did.
Muslim literature and tradition recounts that Elijah preached to the Kingdom of Israel, ruled over by Ahab and later his son Ahaziah.
She made a confession that the Israelites had failed to make.
"I am the Lord, and ''I will bring you out'' from under the burdens of the Egyptians, and ''I will deliver you'' from their bondage, and ''I will redeem you'' with an out-stretched arm and with great acts of judgment, and ''I will take you'' for my people, and I will be your God; and you shall know that I am the Lord your God, who has brought you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians" ().
God again speaks to Elijah and sends him to confront Ahab with a question and a prophecy: "Have you killed and also taken possession?"
This is also a possible explanation for some variation in manuscripts of Josephus' ''Antiquities of the Jews'' when dealing with this issue.
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints believes that Elijah returned on April 3, 1836 in an appearance to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, fulfilling the prophecy in Malachi.
Louis Ginzberg equates him with Phinehas the grandson of Aaron ().
Elijah did not give a direct answer to the Lord's question but evades and equivocates, implying that the work the Lord had begun centuries earlier had now come to nothing, and that his own work was fruitless.
He is believed to have been a "prophet of the desert—like John the Baptist".
Suddenly, a chariot of fire and horses of fire appear and Elijah is lifted up in a whirlwind.
When they became tired and hungry they stopped to dine.
According to Rabbinic tradition, Elijah's words were patently untrue ( and ), and since Elijah accused Israel of failing to uphold the covenant, God would require Elijah to be present at every covenant of circumcision.
In the Gospel of Luke, Herod Antipas hears some of the stories surrounding Jesus Christ.
In later literature paradise is generally designated as the abode of Elijah (compare Pirḳe R. El.
In many Slavic countries Elijah is known as Elijah the Thunderer (Ilija Gromovnik), who drives the heavens in a chariot and administers rain and snow, thus actually taking the place of Perun in popular beliefs.
Elijah is the only person described in the Bible as returning to Horeb, after Moses and his generation had left Horeb several centuries before.
Some tell Herod that Jesus is John the Baptist (whom Herod had executed)  come back to life.
God again speaks to Elijah (): "What doest thou here, Elijah?".
Elijah is revered as the spiritual Father and traditional founder of the Catholic religious Order of Carmelites.
Elijah is mentioned in the Qur'an, where his preaching is recounted in a concise manner.
People to whom the title Elias is applied in Mormonism include Noah, the angel Gabriel (who is considered to be the same person as Noah in Mormon doctrine), Elijah, John the Baptist, John the Apostle, and an unspecified man who was a contemporary of Abraham.
(After Elijah, Jesus and St. George attempt to get help and eventually succeed).
Due to his importance to Muslims, Catholics and Orthodox Christians, Elijah has been venerated as the patron saint of Bosnia and Herzegovina since 1752.
Instead of returning the greeting, the rabbi could not resist an insult, "How ugly you are!
In , Paul cites Elijah as an example of God's never forsaking his people (the Israelites).
When he spend forty days in a cave, it was on Mount Horeb ().
Unable to avoid or lie to the prophet, she admitted she was on her way to the house of a pregnant woman.
John Van Seters, however, rejects the letter as having any connection with the Elijah tradition.
He eats, drinks, and goes back to sleep.
The Qur'an makes it clear that the majority of Elijah's people denied the prophet and continued to follow idolatry.
Elijah is mentioned once more in , which will be his final mention in the Hebrew Bible.
Elijah is mentioned four more times in the New Testament: in Luke, Romans, Hebrews, and James.
He wore a coat of camel's hair secured with a leather girdle (, ).
The Qur'an narrates that Elijah told his people to come to the worship of God and to leave the worship of Baal, the primary idol of the area.
The Apolytikion in the Fourth Tone for St. Elias:
In addition to taking their name from Mt.
Elijah now orders that the altar of Yahweh be drenched with water from "four large jars" poured three times ().
Two oxen are slaughtered and cut into pieces; the pieces are laid on the wood.
Therefore, Elijah is a priest as well as a prophet.
Elijah intercepts his messengers and sends them back to Ahaziah with a message "Is it because there is no God in Israel that you are sending to inquire of Baalzebub, the god of Ekron?"().
Concerning the place to which Elijah was transferred, opinions differ among Jews and Christians, but the old view was that Elijah was received among the heavenly inhabitants, where he records the deeds of men (Ḳid.
Elijah's name typically occurs in Jewish lists of those who have entered heaven alive.
Elijah's figure has been identified with a number of other prophets and saints, including Idris, which is believed by some scholars to have been another name for Elijah, and Khidr.
() In Christianity it is traditionally believed that Elijah's appearance during the transfiguration of Jesus fulfilled this prophecy.
By the 9th century BC, the Kingdom of Israel, once united under Solomon, was divided into the northern Kingdom of Israel and southern Kingdom of Judah, which retained the historic seat of government and focus of the Israelite religion at the Temple in Jerusalem.
Each serving of wine corresponds to one of the "four expressions of redemption" in the Book of Exodus:
The reasons for the replacement are unclear.
3:23), down to the later stories of the Chasidic rabbis, reverence and love, expectation and hope, were always connected in the Jewish consciousness with Elijah.
As Elijah was described as ascending into heaven in a fiery chariot, the Christian missionaries who converted Slavic tribes likely found him an ideal analogy for Perun, the supreme Slavic god of storms, thunder and lightning bolts.
In Latter-day Saint theology, the name-title Elias is not always synonymous with Elijah and is often used for people other than the biblical prophet.
"How long will you go limping with two different opinions?
Since Wachsmuth (1864), the usual explanation for this has been that Elias was identified with Helios, who had mountaintop shrines.
Others tell him that Jesus is Elijah.
This is applicable to John the Baptist coming to prepare the way for the Lord and His baptism; it also refers to Elijah appearing during the transfiguration to prepare for Jesus by restoring keys of sealing power.
Then a fire passes the mountain, but God is not in the fire.
Later in the same gospel, Jesus asks his disciples who the people say that he is.
"Will ye call upon Ba'al and leave the Best of Creators, God, your  and Cherisher and the  and Cherisher of your fathers of old?"
In the Bahá'í Faith, the Báb, founder of the Bábí Faith, is believed to be the return of Elijah and John the Baptist.
They are to arrange a feast and invite Naboth.
John the Baptist preached a message of repentance and baptism.
("Women received their dead raised to life again...") refers to both Elijah raising the son of the widow of Zarephath and Elisha raising the son of the woman of Shunem, citing both Elijah and Elisha as Old Testament examples of faith.
Elijah has been the subject of legends and folktales in Muslim culture, usually involving his meeting with Khidr, and in one legend, with Muhammad himself.
The Báb is buried on Mount Carmel, where Elijah had his confrontation with the prophets of Baal.
The water immediately divides and Elijah and Elisha cross on dry land.
Elijah has been venerated as the patron saint of Bosnia and Herzegovina since 26 August 1752, replacing George of Lydda at the request of Bishop Pavao Dragičević.
This was found in the person of Lilith.
There is agreement among some Christian theologians that Elijah appears to hand over the responsibility of the prophets to Jesus as the woman by the well said to Jesus (John 4:19) "I perceive thou art a prophet."
"Elijah the Prophet, Elijah the Tishbite.
Elijah responds by throwing the charge back at Ahab, saying that it is Ahab who has troubled Israel by allowing the worship of false gods.
and, "In the place where dogs licked up the blood of Naboth shall dogs lick up your own blood" ().
While the final mention of Elijah in the Hebrew Bible is in the Book of Chronicles, the Christian Bible's ordering of the books of the Septuagint places the Book of Malachi, which prophesies a messiah, before the Gospels  and means that Elijah's final Old Testament appearance is in the Book of Malachi, where it is written, "Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and terrible day of the Lord."
Yet another name for Elijah is "Angel of the Covenant"
Elijah not only challenges Baal on behalf of his own God, Yahweh, he challenges Jezebel, her priests, Ahab and the people of Israel.
The Hebrew for this word, "go limping" or "waver", is the same as that used for "danced" in verse 26, where the prophets of Baal frantically dance.
In the King James Version, "Elias" appears only in the texts translated from Greek.
The old couple gave of their hospitality as best they could.
In practice the fifth cup has come to be seen as a celebration of future redemption.
According to Susanne Otto, the Elijah stories were added to the Deuteronomistic History in four stages.
Muslims refer to this day as Aligjyn (Ali Day), and it is even believed that Ali becomes Elias at midday.
The feast of St. Elias is known as ''Ilinden'' in South Slavic, and was chosen as the day of the Ilinden-Preobrazhenie Uprising in 1903; it is now the holiday of Republic Day in the Republic of Macedonia.
This is considered less important than their belief that Allah himself showed up in the person of Fard Muhammad, the founder of the group.
Elijah was "translated."
As in the case of most figures of Jewish legend, so in the case of Elijah, the biblical account became the basis of later legend.
After the shepherd asked his identity Elijah said that, he was the one who sent him rain to get him a good profit from farming.
Is there anyone as ugly as you in your town?"
First, it concerns a king of the southern kingdom, while Elijah concerned himself with the kingdom of Israel.
One legend reported that Elijah and Khidr met together every year in Jerusalem to go on the pilgrimage to Mecca.
Elijah travels for forty days and forty nights to Mount Horeb, where Moses had received the Ten Commandments.
relates how God "heard the voice of Elijah; and the soul of the child came into him again, and he revived."
After Elijah's confrontation with Ahab, God tells him to flee out of Israel, to a hiding place by the brook Chorath, east of the Jordan, where he will be fed by ravens.
A town with a single wise leader will be guided to success and prosperity.
The angel comes a second time and tells him to eat and drink because he has a long journey ahead of him.
