She had gained weight and was nearing middle age, and did not fit in with the new generation of stars, such as Jane Fonda and Julie Christie.
accessdate=November 3, 2015}} Published for the first time on March 29, 2011.
One of them was the fiancée of Universal Pictures' head executive John Cheever Cowdin, who arranged Taylor to audition for the studio in early 1941.
''Woolf'' was considered groundbreaking for its adult themes and uncensored language, and opened to "glorious" reviews.
Although she was devastated, pressure from the studio and the knowledge that Todd had large debts led Taylor to return to work only three weeks later.
The event was organized by MGM, and used as part of the publicity campaign for Taylor's next film, Vincente Minelli's comedy ''Father of the Bride'' (1950), in which she appeared opposite Spencer Tracy and Joan Bennett as a bride preparing for her wedding.
His death in a plane crash on March 22, 1958 left Taylor devastated.
Taylor also struggled with her weight; she became overweight during her marriage to senator John Warner and published a diet book about her experiences, ''Elizabeth Takes Off'' (1988).
'''Elizabeth Taylor''', DBE (February 27, 1932&nbsp;– March 23, 2011) was a British-American actress, businesswoman and humanitarian.
Walker has compared these films to "illustrated gossip columns", as their film roles often reflected their public personas, while Doty has noted that the majority of Taylor's films during this period seemed to "conform to, and reinforce, the image of an indulgent, raucous, immoral or amoral, and appetitive (in many senses of the word) "Elizabeth Taylor" ".
She continued her career successfully into the 1960s, and remained a well known public figure for the rest of her life.
Todd, known for publicity stunts, encouraged the media attention to their marriage; for example, in June 1957, he threw a birthday party at Madison Square Garden, which was attended by 18,000 guests and broadcast on CBS.
She was treated at the Betty Ford Center for seven weeks from December 1983 to January 1984, becoming the first celebrity to openly admit herself to the clinic.
Taylor married her third husband, theater and film producer Mike Todd, in Acapulco, Mexico on February 2, 1957.
Universal terminated her contract in March 1942.
Their next project, ''Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?''
It was also panned by critics and grossed only $600,000 in the box office.
The studio also published a book of Taylor's writings about her pet chipmunk, ''Nibbles and Me'' (1946), and had paper dolls and coloring books made after her.
The wedding was again subject to intense media attention, with one photographer parachuting to the ranch and Taylor selling the wedding pictures to ''People'' for $1 million, which she used to start her AIDS foundation.
The film's production—characterized by costly sets and costumes, constant delays, and a scandal caused by Taylor's extramarital affair with her co-star Richard Burton—was closely followed by the media, with ''Life'' proclaiming it the "Most Talked About Movie Ever Made".
After her death, GLAAD issued a statement saying that she "was an icon not only in Hollywood, but in the LGBT community where she worked to ensure that everyone was treated with the respect and dignity we all deserve", and Sir Nick Partridge of the Terrence Higgins Trust called her "the first major star to publicly fight fear and prejudice towards AIDS".
She also published a book about her collection, ''My Love Affair with Jewelry'', in 2002.
Taylor and Wilding separated in July 1956, and were divorced in January 1957.
Taylor and Burton's next project, Franco Zeffirelli's ''The Taming of the Shrew'' (1967), which they also co-produced, was more successful.
Taylor's second husband was British actor Michael Wilding, 20 years her senior, whom she married in a low-key ceremony at Caxton Hall in London on February 21, 1952.
Wanting to challenge herself, she then appeared in her first substantial stage role, playing Regina Giddens in a Broadway production of Lillian Hellman's ''The Little Foxes''.
Film tycoon Howard Hughes also wanted to marry her, and offered to pay her parents a six-figure sum of money if she were to become his wife.
Taylor's third film released in 1967, John Huston's ''Reflections in a Golden Eye'', was her first without Burton since ''Cleopatra''.
Although it received generally negative reviews, Burton produced it into a film, ''Doctor Faustus'' (1967), with the same cast.
Taylor made the transition to adult roles in 1950, the year she turned eighteen.
She began receiving better roles in the mid-1950s, beginning with the epic drama ''Giant'' (1956), and starred in several critically and commercially successful films in the following years.
The American Film Institute named her the seventh greatest female screen legend in 1999.
Released soon after ''Cleopatra'', it became a box office success.
She was next paid a record-breaking $1 million to play the title role in the historical epic ''Cleopatra'' (1963), the most expensive film made up to that point.
The claim was challenged by several people, including amfAR's former vice-president for development and external affairs, Taylor's former publicist, and activists who were involved in the Project Inform in the 1980s and 1990s.
Taylor was honored with several awards for her philanthropic work.
Her other films released in 1973 were the British thriller ''Night Watch'' (1973), and the American drama ''Ash Wednesday'' (1973).
Encouraged by the success of ''The Little Foxes'', Taylor and producer Zev Bufman founded the Elizabeth Taylor Repertory Company.
After ''Lassie'', she appeared in minor uncredited roles in two other films set in England, ''Jane Eyre'' (1943) and ''The White Cliffs of Dover'' (1944).
Taylor was nominated for an Academy Award and a BAFTA.
Instead of portraying Giddens in negative light as had often been the case in previous productions, Taylor's idea was to show her as a victim of circumstance, explaining "She's a killer, but she's saying 'Sorry fellas, you put me in this position'".
All the men after Richard were really just company."
In the fall, Taylor starred in two more film releases.
She received positive reviews for her performance, with Crowther of ''The New York Times'' calling her "terrific" and ''Variety'' praising her for "a well-accented, perceptive interpretation".
Speaking of her charity work, former President Bill Clinton said at her death, "Elizabeth's legacy will live on in many people around the world whose lives will be longer and better because of her work and the ongoing efforts of those she inspired."
Lord calls Taylor an "accidental feminist", stating that while she did not identify as a feminist, many of her films had feminist themes and "introduced a broad audience to feminist ideas".
Camille Paglia writes that Taylor was a "pre-feminist woman" who "wields the sexual power that feminism cannot explain and has tried to destroy.
Filming was finally completed in July 1962.
Taylor's last adolescent role was as Amy March in Mervyn LeRoy's ''Little Women'' (1949).
Taylor's eyes in particular drew attention; they were blue to the extent of appearing violet, and were rimmed by dark double eyelashes, caused by a genetic mutation.
There's some acting in it, as well as some personal display."
''A Place in the Sun'' was a critical and commercial success, grossing $3 million.
After completing ''The V.I.P.s'', Taylor took a two-year hiatus from films, during which she and Burton divorced their spouses and married each other.
The second film was Richard Brooks' ''The Last Time I Saw Paris'', based on F. Scott Fitzgerald's short story.
Taylor received her second Academy Award, a BAFTA, a National Board of Review and a New York City Film Critics Circle awards for her performance.
It was a drama about a repressed homosexual and his unfaithful wife, and was originally slated to co-star Taylor's old friend Montgomery Clift.
According to Taylor, it was the first film in which she had been asked to act instead of simply being herself, and it brought her critical acclaim for the first time since ''National Velvet''.
After completing ''Raintree Country'', she had divorced Wilding and married producer Mike Todd.
The independent production earned Taylor $500,000 for playing the role of a severely traumatized patient in a mental institution.
Her few acting roles included characters in the animated series ''Captain Planet and the Planeteers'' (1992) and ''The Simpsons'' (1992, 1993), and cameos in four CBS series—''The Nanny'', ''Can't Hurry Love'', ''Murphy Brown'', and ''High Society''—in one night in February 1996 to promote her new fragrance.
Taylor also received an audition with Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer through one of her school friends, whose father was a studio producer.
Taylor was one of the first celebrities to participate in HIV/AIDS activism, helping to raise more than $270&nbsp;million for the cause during her lifetime.
Sociologist Karen Sternheimer states that they "became a cottage industry of speculation about their alleged life of excess.
It was released in May, and the same month, Taylor married hotel-chain heir Conrad Hilton, Jr. in a highly publicized ceremony.
The audition led to a three-month "test option" contract, which was upgraded to a standard seven-year contract in January 1943.
Although the film was a drama about mental illness, childhood traumas and homosexuality, it was again promoted with Taylor's sex appeal; both its trailer and poster featured her in a white swimsuit.
She was married eight times to seven men, endured serious illnesses, and led a jet set lifestyle, including amassing one of the most expensive private collections of jewelry.
In 2000, she was made a Dame by Queen Elizabeth II.
American ambassador Joseph P. Kennedy also contacted Francis and encouraged him to return to the U.S. with his family.
Walker believes that Taylor was influenced in her decision by Victor Cazalet and her mother, who were active supporters of Zionism in her childhood.
According to biographers Sam Kashner and Nancy Schoenberger, she earned more money through the fragrance collection than during her entire acting career, and upon her death, the British newspaper ''The Guardian'' estimated that majority of her estimated $600 million–$1 billion estate consisted of revenue from fragrances.
Taylor's next film, Joseph L. Mankiewicz' ''Suddenly, Last Summer'' (1959), was also an adaptation from a Tennessee Williams play, and co-starred Montgomery Clift and Katharine Hepburn.
Stevens cast Taylor as she was "the only one&nbsp;... who could create this illusion" of being "not so much a real girl as the girl on the candy-box cover, the beautiful girl in the yellow Cadillac convertible that every American boy sometime or other thinks he can marry."
She met her seventh and last husband, construction worker Larry Fortensky, at the Betty Ford Center in 1988.
MGM next reunited Taylor with Montgomery Clift in ''Raintree County'' (1957), a Civil War drama it hoped would replicate the success of ''Gone with the Wind'' (1939).
They were followed by supporting roles as a teenage "man-stealer" who seduces her peer's date to a high school dance in the musical ''A Date with Judy'' (1948), and as a bride in the romantic comedy ''Julia Misbehaves'' (1948), which became a commercial success by grossing over $4 million in the box office.
In March 1961, she developed nearly fatal pneumonia, which necessitated a tracheotomy to be performed; one news agency even erroneously reported that she had died.
At MGM, her costumes were mostly designed by Helen Rose and Edith Head, and in the 1960s by Irene Sharaff.
To convincingly play 50-year-old Martha, Taylor gained weight, wore a wig, and used make-up to make herself look old and tired—a stark contrast to her public image as a glamorous film star.
The Taylors' privileged life in London was little affected by the Great Depression.
Taylor and Burton's last film of the year was the Graham Greene adaptation ''The Comedians'', which received mixed reviews and was a box office disappointment.
''Variety'' wrote that Taylor's "characterization is at once sensual, spiteful, cynical, pitiable, loathsome, lustful and tender" and Stanley Kauffman of ''The New York Times'' stated that she "does the best work of her career, sustained and urgent".
Critics found the play to be fitting material for the couple, and the film became a box office success by grossing $12 million.
From the mid-1980s, Taylor acted mostly in television productions.
When the era of classical Hollywood ended in the 1960s and paparazzi photography became a normal feature of media culture, Taylor came to define a new type of celebrity, whose real private life was the focus of public interest.
Taylor took fewer roles after the mid-1970s and focused on supporting the career of her sixth husband, Republican politician John Warner.
After supporting roles in the television film ''These Old Broads'' (2001) and in the animated sitcom ''God, the Devil and Bob'' (2001), Taylor announced that she was retiring from acting to devote her time to philanthropy.
Although the film failed to become the type of success MGM had planned, Taylor was nominated for the first time for an Academy Award for Best Actress for her performance.
Her last theatrically released film was in the critically panned but commercially very successful ''The Flintstones'' (1994), in which she played Pearl Slaghoople in a brief supporting role.
Taylor was granted divorce from Fisher on March 6, 1964 in Puerto Vallarta, Mexico, and married Burton nine days later in a private ceremony at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel in Montreal.
During this time she also began receiving honorary awards for her career, the Cecil B. DeMille Award in 1985, and the Film Society of Lincoln Center's Chaplin Award in 1986.
Following her conversion, Taylor became an active supporter of Jewish and Zionist causes.
Dubbed "Liz and Dick" by the media, Taylor and Burton starred together in eleven films and led a jet set lifestyle, spending millions on "furs, diamonds, paintings, designer clothes, travel, food, liquor, a yacht, and a jet".
Taylor played a famous model attempting to leave her husband for a lover, and Burton her estranged millionaire husband.
The following month, the foundation merged with Dr.&nbsp;Mathilde Krim's AIDS foundation to form the American Foundation for AIDS Research (amfAR).
Taylor's second film of 1950 was the comedy ''The Big Hangover'' (1950), co-starring Van Johnson.
have been preserved in the National Film Registry, and the American Film Institute has named her the seventh greatest female screen legend of classical Hollywood cinema.
Taylor has also been discussed by journalists and scholars interested in the role of women in Western society.
As predicted, ''BUtterfield 8'' was a major commercial success, grossing $18 million in world rentals.
Her make-up look in ''Cleopatra'' (1963) started a trend for "cat-eye" make-up done with black eyeliner.
While it did not match the popularity of the previous 1933 film adaptation of Louisa M. Alcott's novel, it was a box office success.
Her screen debut was in a minor role in ''There's One Born Every Minute'' (1942), but Universal terminated her contract after a year.
Taylor's health declined increasingly in the last two decades of her life, and she rarely attended public events in the 2000s.
Taylor helped to popularize the work of fashion designers Valentino Garavani and Halston.
As she was deemed too short, filming was pushed back several months to allow her to grow; she spent the time practising riding.
MGM organized the large and expensive wedding, which became a major media event.
After many years of ill health, Taylor died from congestive heart failure at the age of 79 in 2011.
She was enrolled in Byron House, a Montessori school in Highgate, and was raised according to the teachings of Christian Science, the religion of her mother and Cazalet.
In the meantime, film producers were eager to profit from the scandal surrounding Taylor and Burton, and they next starred together in Anthony Asquith's ''The V.I.P.s'' (1963), which mirrored the headlines about them.
Francis stayed behind to close the London gallery and joined them in December.
According to Walker, "whether she liked it or not&nbsp;... marriage is the matrix of the myth that began surrounding Elizabeth Taylor from when she was sixteen".
Taylor's personal life was subject to constant media attention throughout her life.
From reports of massive spending&nbsp;... affairs, and even an open marriage, the couple came to represent a new era of "gotcha" celebrity coverage, where the more personal the story, the better."
Once she had recovered, Fox discarded the already filmed material and moved the production to Rome, changing its director to Joseph Mankiewicz and the actor playing Mark Antony to Burton.
The following spring, she continued performing ''The Little Foxes'' in London's West End, but received largely negative reviews from the British press.
She used a wheelchair due to her back problems and was diagnosed with congestive heart failure in 2004.
She died of the illness six years later, aged 79, on March 23, 2011 at the Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles, after being hospitalized six weeks earlier.
Taylor declined the offer, but was otherwise eager to marry young, as her "rather puritanical upbringing and beliefs" made her believe that "love was synonymous with marriage".
She began as a child actress in the early 1940s, and was one of the most popular stars of classical Hollywood cinema in the 1950s.
Taylor and Warner separated in December 1981, and divorced a year later in November 1982.
The fracture went undetected for several years, although it caused her chronic back problems.
Her first mature role was playing a woman who begins to suspect that her husband is a Soviet spy in the thriller ''Conspirator'' (1950).
Taylor was both one of the last stars of classical Hollywood cinema, and one of the first modern celebrities.
Taylor was then signed by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, and had her breakthrough role in ''National Velvet'' (1944), becoming one of the studio's most popular teenage stars.
Although she disliked her role in ''BUtterfield 8'' (1960), her last film for MGM, she won the Academy Award for Best Actress for her performance.
Her most famous costumes include a white ball gown in ''A Place in the Sun'' (1951), a Grecian dress in ''Cat on a Hot Tin Roof'' (1958), and a slip and a fur coat in ''BUtterfield 8'' (1960).
Taylor became pregnant again during the production, and had to agree to add another year to her contract to make up for the period spent on maternity leave.
The film also became one of the biggest commercial successes of the year.
She hated the film for the same reason, but had no choice in the matter, although the studio agreed to her demands of filming in New York and casting Eddie Fisher in a sympathetic role.
His career had been in decline for several years due to his substance abuse problems, but Taylor was determined to secure his involvement in the project, even offering to pay for his insurance.
She also advocated for the right of Soviet Jews to emigrate to Israel, canceled a visit to the USSR because of its condemnation of Israel due to the Six-Day War, and signed a letter protesting the United Nations General Assembly Resolution 3379 of 1975.
In early 1940, he opened a new gallery in Los Angeles, and after briefly living in Pacific Palisades, the family settled in Beverly Hills, where Taylor and her brother were enrolled in Hawthorne School.
Taylor found her role as a mentally disturbed Southern belle fascinating, but overall disliked the film.
Herb Golden of ''Variety'' stated that Taylor's "the histrionics are of a quality so far beyond anything she has done previously, that Stevens' skilled hands on the reins must be credited with a minor miracle" and A.H. Weiler of ''The New York Times'' wrote that she gives "a shaded, tender performance and one in which her passionate and genuine romance avoids the bathos common to young love as it sometimes comes to the screen."
In August 1985, she and Dr.&nbsp;Michael Gottlieb founded the National AIDS Research Foundation after her friend and former co-star Rock Hudson announced that he was dying of the disease.
She began by helping to organize and by hosting the first AIDS fundraiser to benefit the AIDS Project Los Angeles.
Taylor also won the Academy Award for Best Actress for her performance.
''Beau Brummell'' was a Regency era period film, another project in which she was cast against her will.
''Cat'' grossed $10 million in American cinemas alone and made Taylor the year's second most profitable star.
The same year, ''Time'' featured her on its cover and called her the leader among Hollywood's next generation of stars, "a jewel of great price, a true sapphire".
In 1956, she underwent an operation in which some of her spinal discs were removed and replaced with donated bone.
Taylor collected jewelry through her life, and owned several notable pieces, such as the  Krupp Diamond, the  Taylor-Burton Diamond and the  La Peregrina Pearl, formerly owned by Mary&nbsp;I of England—all three were gifts from husband Richard Burton.
She was also barred from entering Egypt to film ''Cleopatra'' in 1962, but the ban was lifted two years later after the Egyptian officials deemed that the film brought positive publicity for the country.
Taylor found their age gap appealing as she wanted "the calm and quiet and security of friendship" from their relationship; he hoped that the marriage would aid his career in Hollywood.
Taylor testified before the Senate and Congress for the Ryan White Care Act in 1986, 1990 and 1992.
While it was not as profitable as many other MGM films, it garnered positive reviews.
The scandal caused Taylor and Burton to be condemned for "erotic vagrancy" by the Vatican, with calls also in the U.S. Congress to bar them from re-entering the country.
It posed another challenge for Taylor, as she was the only actor in the project with no previous experience of performing Shakespeare; Zeffirelli later stated that this made her performance interesting, as she "invented the part from scratch".
In 1976, she participated in the Soviet-American fantasy film ''The Blue Bird'' (1976), another critical and box office failure, and had a small role in the television film ''Victory at Entebbe'' (1976), and in 1977 sang in the critically panned film adaptation of Stephen Sondheim's ''A Little Night Music'' (1977).
It premiered in Boston in spring 1983, and although commercially successful, received generally negative reviews, with critics noting that both stars were in noticeably poor health—Taylor admitted herself to a drug and alcohol rehabilitation center after the play's run ended, and Burton died the following year.
Cazalet was Taylor's unofficial godfather and an important influence in her early life.
The film became a box office success upon its release in June, grossing $6 million worldwide, and was followed by a successful sequel, ''Father's Little Dividend'' (1951), ten months later.
The production premiered in May 1981, and had a sold out six-month run despite mixed reviews.
Once Warner had been elected to the Senate, she started to find her life as a politician's wife in Washington D.C. boring and lonely, becoming depressed, overweight and increasingly addicted to prescription drugs and alcohol.
She appeared as evil socialite Helena Cassadine in the daytime soap opera ''General Hospital'' in November 1981.
When she was away filming ''Giant'' in 1955, gossip magazine ''Confidential'' caused a scandal by claiming that he had entertained strippers at their home.
In the 1980s, she acted in her first substantial stage roles and in several television films and series, and became the first celebrity to launch a perfume brand.
Taylor disliked historical films in general, as their elaborate costumes and make-up required her to wake up earlier than usual to prepare, and later stated that she gave one of the worst performances of her career in ''Beau Brummell''.
Its first and only production was a revival of Noël Coward's comedy ''Private Lives'', starring Taylor and Richard Burton.
Taylor struggled with health problems for most of her life.
They had one daughter, Elizabeth "Liza" Frances (born August 6, 1957).
In contrast, cultural critic M.G.
From the early 1990s until her death, she dedicated her time to philanthropy.
In 1966, Taylor and Burton also performed ''Doctor Faustus'' for a week in Oxford to benefit the Oxford University Dramatic Society; he starred and she appeared in her first stage role as Helen of Troy, a part which required no speaking.
She described the studio as a "big extended factory" where she was required to adhere to a strict daily schedule: days were spent attending school and filming at the studio lot, and evenings in dancing and singing classes and in practising the following day's scenes.
David Thomson stated that "she had the range, nerve and instinct that only Bette Davis had had before—and like Davis, Taylor was monster and empress, sweetheart and scold, idiot and wise woman."
Taylor's personal life and especially her eight marriages drew a large amount of media attention and public disapproval throughout her adult life.
She gave one last public performance in 2007, when she and James Earl Jones performed the play ''Love Letters'' at an AIDS benefit at the Paramount Studios.
I hardly know or care whether she can act or not."
MGM organized her to date football champion Glenn Davis in 1948, and the following year she was briefly engaged to William Pawley Jr., son of U.S. ambassador William D. Pawley.
Taylor disliked the film; she thought it superficial and her role as Rebecca too small.
Taylor was the first celebrity to create her own collection of fragrances.
During the era of the studio system, she exemplified the classic film star; portrayed as different from "ordinary" people, and with a public image carefully crafted and controlled by MGM.
Regardless, it took several years for the film to earn back its production costs, which drove Fox near to bankruptcy.
She became the first actress to be paid $1 million for a role; Fox also granted her ten per cent of the film's profits as well as shooting the film in Todd-AO, a widescreen format for which she had inherited the rights from Mike Todd.
She had completed only two weeks of filming in March 1958, when Todd was killed in a plane crash.
Despite being one of MGM's most bankable stars, Taylor wished to end her career in the early 1950s, as she resented the studio's control and disliked many of the films she was assigned to.
In contrast, Mel Gussow of ''The New York Times'' stated that "the range of  Taylor's acting was surprisingly wide", despite the fact that she never received any professional training.
The three films in which Taylor acted in 1972 were somewhat more successful.
Taylor was raised as a Christian Scientist, but converted to Judaism in 1959, taking the Hebrew name Elisheba Rachel.
The Taylors decided to return to the United States in the spring of 1939 due to the political developments in Europe.
Rumors about the affair began to circulate in the press and were confirmed by a paparazzi shot of them on a yacht in Ischia.
accessdate=November 3, 2015}}
Crowther wrote that Taylor "looks like a million dollars, in mink or in negligée", while ''Variety'' stated that she gives "a torrid, stinging portrayal with one or two brilliantly executed passages within".
The jewelry sold for a record-breaking sum of $156.8 million, and the clothes and accessories for a further $5.5 million.
I feel as if I have been a Jew all my life."
She received a Lifetime of Glamour Award from the Council of Fashion Designers of America (CFDA) in 1997.
In Los Angeles, Taylor's mother was frequently told that her "beautiful" daughter should audition for films.
After the failure of ''Private Lives'', Taylor dissolved her theater company.
In addition to granting her a weekly salary of $4,700, MGM agreed to give the couple a loan for a house and signed Wilding for a three-year contract.
Taylor and Burton's relationship was often referred to as the "marriage of the century" by the media, and she later stated that "after Richard, the men in my life were just there to hold the coat, to open the door.
The strategy worked, as ''Suddenly'' became a financial success.
Taylor also founded the Elizabeth Taylor Medical Center to offer free HIV/AIDS testing and care at the Whitman-Walker Clinic in Washington, D.C., and The Elizabeth Taylor Endowment Fund for the UCLA Clinical AIDS Research and Education Center in Los Angeles.
Elizabeth Rosemond Taylor was born on February 27, 1932 at Heathwood, her family's home on 8 Wildwood Road in Hampstead Garden Suburb, London.
In the 1990s, Taylor focused her time on HIV/AIDS activism.
While filming ''Cleopatra'' in Italy in 1962, Taylor began an affair with her co-star, Welsh actor Richard Burton, although both of them were married.
The affair and Fisher's subsequent divorce changed Taylor's public image from a grieving widow to a "homewrecker".
Her persona ate her alive."
They were married on December 4, 1976, after which Taylor concentrated on working for his electoral campaign.
Due to her financial dependency, the studio now had even more control over her than previously.
