In 1947, Princess Elizabeth went on her first overseas tour, accompanying her parents through southern Africa.
No attempt was made, but a riot did break out while she was in Montreal; the Queen's "calmness and courage in the face of the violence" was noted.
When her grandfather died in 1936 and her uncle succeeded as Edward VIII, she became second-in-line to the throne, after her father.
Six years later, in 1963, Macmillan resigned and advised the Queen to appoint the Earl of Home as prime minister, advice that she followed.
In 1961, she toured Cyprus, India, Pakistan, Nepal, and Iran.
Marion Crawford wrote, "Some of the King's advisors did not think him good enough for her.
Notable photographers of Elizabeth have included Cecil Beaton, Yousuf Karsh, Annie Leibovitz, Lord Lichfield, Terry O'Neill, John Swannell, and Dorothy Wilding.
As a constitutional monarch, she has not expressed her own political opinions in a public forum.
Elizabeth has occasionally faced republican sentiments and severe press criticism of the royal family, but support for the monarchy remains high, as does her personal popularity.
Consequently, Elizabeth's father became king, and she became heir presumptive.
During the 1981 Trooping the Colour ceremony, six weeks before the wedding of Charles, Prince of Wales, and Lady Diana Spencer, six shots were fired at the Queen from close range as she rode down The Mall on her horse, Burmese.
Elizabeth was born in London as the elder daughter of the Duke and Duchess of York, later King George VI and Queen Elizabeth.
The Queen also possesses royal standards and personal flags for use in the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Jamaica, Barbados, and elsewhere.
She has demonstrated support for inter-faith relations and has met with leaders of other churches and religions, including five popes: Pius XII, John XXIII, John Paul II, Benedict XVI and Francis.
During the war, many of London's children were evacuated to avoid the frequent aerial bombing.
Thatcher reputedly said the Queen would vote for the Social Democratic Party – Thatcher's political opponents.
Intense media interest in the opinions and private lives of the royal family during the 1980s led to a series of sensational stories in the press, not all of which were entirely true.
I remember we were terrified of being recognised&nbsp;...
She again undertook an extensive tour of her realms, which began in Jamaica in February, where she called the farewell banquet "memorable" after a power cut plunged the King's House, the official residence of the governor-general, into darkness.
They are second cousins once removed through King Christian IX of Denmark and third cousins through Queen Victoria.
He and Elizabeth lived intermittently, for several months at a time, in the hamlet of Gwardamanġa, at Villa Guardamangia, the rented home of Philip's uncle, Lord Mountbatten.
In an unusually personal speech, the Queen said that any institution must expect criticism, but suggested it be done with "a touch of humour, gentleness and understanding".
In each of her realms she has a distinct title that follows a similar formula: ''Queen of Jamaica and her other realms and territories'' in Jamaica, ''Queen of Australia and her other realms and territories'' in Australia, etc.
The year ended with a lawsuit as the Queen sued ''The Sun'' newspaper for breach of copyright when it published the text of her annual Christmas message two days before it was broadcast.
In November 1956, Britain and France invaded Egypt in an ultimately unsuccessful attempt to capture the Suez Canal.
She was 21 when their engagement was officially announced on 9 July 1947.
In 1965, however, the Rhodesian Prime Minister, Ian Smith, in opposition to moves towards majority rule, declared unilateral independence from Britain while still expressing "loyalty and devotion" to Elizabeth.
Before her tour through parts of Quebec in 1964, the press reported that extremists within the Quebec separatist movement were plotting Elizabeth's assassination.
On 3 March 2013, Elizabeth was admitted to the King Edward VII's Hospital as a precaution after developing symptoms of gastroenteritis.
As a result, much of the public hostility evaporated.
If Margaret had contracted a civil marriage, she would have been expected to renounce her right of succession.
She was represented at the summit in Sri Lanka by her son, Prince Charles.
Later that year Edward abdicated, after his proposed marriage to divorced socialite Wallis Simpson provoked a constitutional crisis.
In the 1950s, as a young woman at the start of her reign, Elizabeth was depicted as a glamorous "fairytale Queen".
Because of her age and the need for her to limit travelling, in 2013 she chose not to attend the biennial meeting of Commonwealth heads of government for the first time in 40 years.
After the trauma of the Second World War, it was a time of hope, a period of progress and achievement heralding a "new Elizabethan age".
Criticism was focused on the institution of the monarchy itself and the Queen's wider family rather than her own behaviour and actions.
Elizabeth gave birth to her first child, Prince Charles, on 14 November 1948.
Thatcher's biographer John Campbell claimed "the report was a piece of journalistic mischief-making".
In 1956, the British and French prime ministers, Sir Anthony Eden and Guy Mollet, discussed the possibility of France joining the Commonwealth.
From 21 April 1944 until her accession, Elizabeth's arms consisted of a lozenge bearing the royal coat of arms of the United Kingdom differenced with a label of three points argent, the centre point bearing a Tudor rose and the first and third a cross of St George.
It was reported, most notably in ''The Sunday Times'' of 20 July 1986, that the Queen was worried that Margaret Thatcher's economic policies fostered social divisions and was alarmed by high unemployment, a series of riots, the violence of a miners' strike, and Thatcher's refusal to apply sanctions against the apartheid regime in South Africa.
The Queen, who opened the 1976 Summer Olympics in Montreal, also opened the 2012 Summer Olympics and Paralympics in London, making her the first head of state to open two Olympic Games in two different countries.
The ceremony in Westminster Abbey, with the exception of the anointing and communion, was televised for the first time.
Her sister and mother died in February and March respectively, and the media speculated whether the Jubilee would be a success or a failure.
She was particularly interested after the failure of Bill C-60, which would have affected her role as head of state.
As in 1977, there were street parties and commemorative events, and monuments were named to honour the occasion.
He was a prince without a home or kingdom.
In 1997, a year after the divorce, Diana was killed in a car crash in Paris.
Eventually, she decided to abandon her plans with Townsend.
Times of personal significance have included the births and marriages of her children, grandchildren and great grandchildren, her coronation in 1953, and the celebration of milestones such as her Silver, Golden and Diamond Jubilees in 1977, 2002, and 2012, respectively.
Lord Altrincham's accusation in 1957 that her speeches sounded like those of a "priggish schoolgirl" was an extremely rare criticism.
She inherited an estimated £70&nbsp;million estate from her mother in 2002.
The 17-year-old assailant, Marcus Sarjeant, was sentenced to five years in prison and released after three.
Referenda in Tuvalu in 2008 and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines in 2009 both rejected proposals to become republics.
As Whitlam had a majority in the House of Representatives, Speaker Gordon Scholes appealed to the Queen to reverse Kerr's decision.
Lessons concentrated on history, language, literature and music.
194–195 Aside from her official religious role as Supreme Governor of the established Church of England, she is personally a member of that church and the national Church of Scotland.
In post-war Britain, it was not acceptable for the Duke of Edinburgh's German relations, including his three surviving sisters, to be invited to the wedding.
Her first royal walkabout, meeting ordinary members of the public, took place during a tour of Australia and New Zealand in 1970.
At her Silver Jubilee in 1977, the crowds and celebrations were genuinely enthusiastic, but in the 1980s, public criticism of the royal family increased, as the personal and working lives of Elizabeth's children came under media scrutiny.
Later biographies reported that Elizabeth's mother initially opposed the union, dubbing Philip "The Hun".
Newspaper editor Donald Trelford wrote in ''The Observer'' of 21 September 1986: "The royal soap opera has now reached such a pitch of public interest that the boundary between fact and fiction has been lost sight of&nbsp;... it is not just that some papers don't check their facts or accept denials: they don't care if the stories are true or not."
During the war, plans were drawn up to quell Welsh nationalism by affiliating Elizabeth more closely with Wales.
The involvement of younger members of the royal family in the charity game show ''It's a Royal Knockout'' was ridiculed, and the Queen was the target of satire.
Despite the death of Queen Mary on 24 March, the coronation on 2 June 1953 went ahead as planned, as Mary had asked before she died.
According to Paul Martin, Sr., by the end of the 1970s the Queen was worried that the Crown "had little meaning for" Pierre Trudeau, the Canadian Prime Minister.
The Royal Collection, which includes thousands of historic works of art and the Crown Jewels, is not owned by the Queen personally but is held in trust, as are her official residences, such as Buckingham Palace and Windsor Castle, and the Duchy of Lancaster, a property portfolio valued in 2014 at £442&nbsp;million.
The following year brought two blows: one was the unmasking of Anthony Blunt, former Surveyor of the Queen's Pictures, as a communist spy; the other was the assassination of her relative and in-law Lord Mountbatten by the Provisional Irish Republican Army.
Though generally healthy throughout her life, in 2003 she had keyhole surgery on both knees.
They divorced in 1978; she did not remarry.
The Duke complained, "I am the only man in the country not allowed to give his name to his own children."
The Queen asked them to wait for a year; in the words of Martin Charteris, "the Queen was naturally sympathetic towards the Princess, but I think she thought – she hoped – given time, the affair would peter out."
In December, Prince Charles and his wife, Diana, formally separated.
On 4 April 2013, she received an honorary BAFTA for her patronage of the film industry and was called "the most memorable Bond girl yet" at the award ceremony.
In a magazine, which he owned and edited, Lord Altrincham accused her of being "out of touch".
Home Secretary, Herbert Morrison supported the idea, but the King rejected it because he felt such a title belonged solely to the wife of a Prince of Wales and the Prince of Wales had always been the heir apparent.
She was proclaimed queen throughout her realms and the royal party hastily returned to the United Kingdom.
The election resulted in a hung parliament; Heath's Conservatives were not the largest party, but could stay in office if they formed a coalition with the Liberals.
The engagement was not without controversy: Philip had no financial standing, was foreign-born (though a British subject who had served in the Royal Navy throughout the Second World War), and had sisters who had married German noblemen with Nazi links.
She returned to Buckingham Palace the following day.
She stated: "We are trying to do all we can to help our gallant sailors, soldiers and airmen, and we are trying, too, to bear our share of the danger and sadness of war.
I won't leave without the King.
Polls in Britain in 2006 and 2007 revealed strong support for Elizabeth, and in 2012, her Diamond Jubilee year, approval ratings hit 90 percent.
The Queen surpassed her great-great-grandmother, Queen Victoria, to become the longest-lived British monarch in December 2007, and the longest-reigning British monarch on 9 September 2015.
As monarch of Fiji, Elizabeth supported the attempts of the Governor-General, Ratu Sir Penaia Ganilau, to assert executive power and negotiate a settlement.
Elizabeth met her future husband, Prince Philip of Greece and Denmark, in 1934 and 1937.
The proposal was never accepted and the following year France signed the Treaty of Rome, which established the European Economic Community, the precursor to the European Union.
The suggestion by senior politician Lord Hailsham that the two princesses should be evacuated to Canada was rejected by Elizabeth's mother, who declared, "The children won't go without me.
Trudeau's supposed republicanism seemed to be confirmed by his antics, such as sliding down banisters at Buckingham Palace and pirouetting behind the Queen's back in 1977, and the removal of various Canadian royal symbols during his term of office.
Throughout her reign, the Queen has made hundreds of state visits to other countries and tours of the Commonwealth; she is the most widely travelled head of state.
The two princesses were educated at home under the supervision of their mother and their governess, Marion Crawford, who was casually known as "Crawfie".
The 1960s and 1970s saw an acceleration in the decolonisation of Africa and the Caribbean.
Moments of sadness for her include the death of her father, aged 56; the assassination of Prince Philip's uncle, Lord Mountbatten; the breakdown of her children's marriages in 1992 (her ''annus horribilis''); the death in 1997 of her son's ex-wife, Diana, Princess of Wales; and the deaths of her mother and sister in 2002.
Harold Macmillan wrote, "The Queen has been absolutely determined all through&nbsp;... She is impatient of the attitude towards her to treat her as&nbsp;... a film star&nbsp;... She has indeed 'the heart and stomach of a man'&nbsp;... She loves her duty and means to be a Queen."
Pressured by the hostile reaction, the Queen agreed to return to London and do a live television broadcast on 5 September, the day before Diana's funeral.
From February to May 1940, they lived at Royal Lodge, Windsor, until moving to Windsor Castle, where they lived for most of the next five years.
Senior politicians were against the match and the Church of England did not permit remarriage after divorce.
She was baptised by the Anglican Archbishop of York, Cosmo Gordon Lang, in the private chapel of Buckingham Palace on 29 May, and named Elizabeth after her mother, Alexandra after George V's mother, who had died six months earlier, and Mary after her paternal grandmother.
In 2015, she surpassed the reign of her great-great-grandmother, Queen Victoria, to become the longest-reigning British monarch and the longest-reigning queen regnant and female head of state in world history.
In the broadcast, she expressed admiration for Diana and her feelings "as a grandmother" for the two princes.
The UN Secretary General, Ban Ki-moon, introduced her as "an anchor for our age".
With Elizabeth's accession, it seemed probable that the royal house would bear her husband's name, becoming the ''House of Mountbatten'', in line with the custom of a wife taking her husband's surname on marriage.
Lord Salisbury and Lord Kilmuir, the Lord Chancellor, consulted the British Cabinet, Winston Churchill, and the Chairman of the backbench 1922 Committee, resulting in the Queen appointing their recommended candidate: Harold Macmillan.
On 9 July, the Queen awoke in her bedroom at Buckingham Palace to find an intruder, Michael Fagan, in the room with her.
The Queen again came under criticism for appointing the prime minister on the advice of a small number of ministers or a single minister.
On 6 February 1952, they had just returned to their Kenyan home, Sagana Lodge, after a night spent at Treetops Hotel, when word arrived of the death of the King and consequently Elizabeth's immediate accession to the throne.
Coat of arms of Elizabeth II in Scotland
During her grandfather's reign, Elizabeth was third in the line of succession to the throne, behind her uncle Edward, Prince of Wales, and her father, the Duke of York.
She became the first reigning monarch of Australia and New Zealand to visit those nations.Marr, p. 126 During the tour, crowds were immense; three-quarters of the population of Australia were estimated to have seen her.
The Suez crisis and the choice of Eden's successor led in 1957 to the first major personal criticism of the Queen.
In February 1945, she joined the Women's Auxiliary Territorial Service as an honorary second subaltern with the service number of 230873.
Elizabeth's personal fortune has been the subject of speculation for many years.
On 20 March 2008, at the Church of Ireland St Patrick's Cathedral, Armagh, the Queen attended the first Maundy service held outside England and Wales.
At various times between 1949 and 1951, the Duke of Edinburgh was stationed in the British Crown Colony of Malta as a serving Royal Navy officer.
In 1987, in Canada, Elizabeth publicly supported politically divisive constitutional amendments, prompting criticism from opponents of the proposed changes, including Pierre Trudeau.
At the invitation of the Irish President, Mary McAleese, the Queen made the first state visit to the Republic of Ireland by a British monarch in May 2011.
I remember lines of unknown people linking arms and walking down Whitehall, all of us just swept along on a tide of happiness and relief."
Following their wedding, the couple leased Windlesham Moor, near Windsor Castle, until July 1949, when they took up residence at Clarence House in London.
She was celebrated in Canada as the "longest-reigning sovereign in Canada's modern era".
Amid preparations for the coronation, Princess Margaret informed her sister that she wished to marry Peter Townsend, a divorcé‚ 16 years Margaret's senior, with two sons from his previous marriage.
After another meeting at the Royal Naval College in Dartmouth in July 1939, Elizabeth – though only 13 years old – said she fell in love with Philip and they began to exchange letters.
The Duke of Windsor, formerly King Edward VIII, was not invited, either.
In addition to performing traditional ceremonies, she also instituted new practices.
As in 1927, when her parents had toured Australia and New Zealand, Elizabeth remained in Britain, since her father thought her too young to undertake public tours.
By the time of her accession in 1952, her role as head of multiple independent states was already established.
On 4 June, Jubilee beacons were lit around the world.
The absence of a formal mechanism within the Conservative Party for choosing a leader meant that, following Eden's resignation, it fell to the Queen to decide whom to commission to form a government.
One month earlier, the King had issued letters patent allowing her children to use the style and title of a royal prince or princess, to which they otherwise would not have been entitled as their father was no longer a royal prince.
They received 2500 wedding gifts from around the world.
Two years later, solely in her capacity as Queen of Canada, she revisited the United States and toured Canada.
A second child, Princess Anne, was born in 1950.
A personal note about her faith often features in her annual Christmas message broadcast to the Commonwealth.
Crawford published a biography of Elizabeth and Margaret's childhood years entitled ''The Little Princesses'' in 1950, much to the dismay of the royal family.
In 1953, the Queen and her husband embarked on a seven-month round-the-world tour, visiting 13 countries and covering more than 40,000 miles by land, sea and air.
Coat of arms of Elizabeth II in Canada (one of three versions used in her reign)
Elizabeth later said in a rare interview, "We asked my parents if we could go out and see for ourselves.
Elizabeth's only sibling, Princess Margaret, was born in 1930.
She is the world's oldest reigning monarch as well as Britain's longest-lived.
Many people believed that he would marry and have children of his own.
Coat of arms of Princess Elizabeth (1944–1947)
She was educated privately at home.
In 1980, Canadian politicians sent to London to discuss the patriation of the Canadian constitution found the Queen "better informed&nbsp;... than any of the British politicians or bureaucrats".
The Queen was on holiday with her extended family at Balmoral.
Additional styles include Defender of the Faith and Duke of Lancaster.
Princesses Elizabeth and Margaret stayed at Balmoral Castle, Scotland, until Christmas 1939, when they moved to Sandringham House, Norfolk.
Welsh politicians suggested that she be made Princess of Wales on her 18th birthday.
After that single public appearance, for five days the Queen and the Duke shielded their grandsons from the intense press interest by keeping them at Balmoral where they could grieve in private, but the royal family's seclusion and the failure to fly a flag at half-mast over Buckingham Palace caused public dismay.
Others echoed such observations: Winston Churchill described Elizabeth when she was two as "a character.
She was delivered by Caesarean section at her maternal grandfather's London house: 17 Bruton Street, Mayfair.
In early 1952, Elizabeth and Philip set out for a tour of Australia and New Zealand by way of Kenya.
The Queen's composure and skill in controlling her mount were widely praised.
Eden recommended that she consult Lord Salisbury, the Lord President of the Council.
She and her husband undertook an extensive tour of the United Kingdom, while her children and grandchildren embarked on royal tours of other Commonwealth states on her behalf.
Upon her accession, she inherited the various arms her father held as sovereign.
Discontent with the monarchy reached its peak on the death of Diana, Princess of Wales, though Elizabeth's personal popularity and support for the monarchy rebounded after her live television broadcast to the world five days after Diana's death.
In 1946, she was inducted into the Welsh Gorsedd of Bards at the National Eisteddfod of Wales.
Elizabeth's popularity sank to a low point in the 1990s.
A year later, at the height of the 1975 Australian constitutional crisis, the Australian Prime Minister, Gough Whitlam, was dismissed from his post by Governor-General Sir John Kerr, after the Opposition-controlled Senate rejected Whitlam's budget proposals.
Lord Mountbatten claimed the Queen was opposed to the invasion, though Eden denied it.
As Kelvin MacKenzie, editor of ''The Sun'', told his staff: "Give me a Sunday for Monday splash on the Royals.
Elizabeth's coronation gown was embroidered on her instructions with the floral emblems of Commonwealth countries: English Tudor rose; Scots thistle; Welsh leek; Irish shamrock; Australian wattle; Canadian maple leaf; New Zealand silver fern; South African protea; lotus flowers for India and Ceylon; and Pakistan's wheat, cotton, and jute.
In May 2007, ''The Daily Telegraph'', citing unnamed sources, reported that the Queen was "exasperated and frustrated" by the policies of the British Prime Minister, Tony Blair, that she was concerned the British Armed Forces were overstretched in Iraq and Afghanistan, and that she had raised concerns over rural and countryside issues with Blair.
The monarchy came under increased criticism and public scrutiny.
When she toured Canada and visited President Harry S. Truman in Washington, D.C., in October 1951, her private secretary, Martin Charteris, carried a draft accession declaration in case the King died while she was on tour.
On 18 December, she became the first British sovereign to attend a peacetime Cabinet meeting since George III in 1781.
In 1943, at the age of 16, Elizabeth undertook her first solo public appearance on a visit to the Grenadier Guards, of which she had been appointed colonel the previous year.
And the King will never leave."
During 1951, George VI's health declined and Elizabeth frequently stood in for him at public events.
In 1978, the Queen endured a state visit to the United Kingdom by Romania's communist dictator, Nicolae Ceaușescu, and his wife, Elena, though privately she thought they had "blood on their hands".
The British Prime Minister, Winston Churchill, and Elizabeth's grandmother, Queen Mary, favoured the retention of the House of Windsor, and so on 9 April 1952 Elizabeth issued a declaration that ''Windsor'' would continue to be the name of the royal house.
In 2002, Elizabeth marked her Golden Jubilee.
For the London Olympics, she played herself in a short film as part of the opening ceremony, alongside Daniel Craig as James Bond.
In 2000, she spoke about the theological significance of the millennium marking the 2000th anniversary of the birth of Jesus:
From April to September 1982, the Queen was anxious but proud of her son, Prince Andrew, who was serving with British forces during the Falklands War.
Her father acceded to the throne on the abdication of his brother Edward VIII in 1936, from which time she was the heir presumptive.
Elizabeth has been portrayed in a variety of media by many notable artists, including painters Pietro Annigoni, Peter Blake, Chinwe Chukwuogo-Roy, Terence Cuneo, Lucian Freud, Damien Hirst, Juliet Pannett, and Tai-Shan Schierenberg.
She has seen major constitutional changes, such as devolution in the United Kingdom, Canadian patriation, and the decolonisation of Africa.
Diana's two sons by Charles – Princes William and Harry – wanted to attend church and so the Queen and Prince Philip took them that morning.
The Queen's visit to Australia in October 2011 – her sixteenth visit since 1954 – was called her "farewell tour" in the press because of her age.
A Girl Guides company, the 1st Buckingham Palace Company, was formed specifically so that she could socialise with girls her own age.
In 1940, the 14-year-old Elizabeth made her first radio broadcast during the BBC's ''Children's Hour'', addressing other children who had been evacuated from the cities.
Sandringham House and Balmoral Castle are privately owned by the Queen.
During her visit to New York, which followed a tour of Canada, she officially opened a memorial garden for the British victims of the September 11 attacks.
Before the marriage, Philip renounced his Greek and Danish titles, converted from Greek Orthodoxy to Anglicanism, and adopted the style ''Lieutenant Philip Mountbatten'', taking the surname of his mother's British family.
During the tour, in a broadcast to the British Commonwealth on her 21st birthday, she made the following pledge: "I declare before you all that my whole life, whether it be long or short, shall be devoted to your service and the service of our great imperial family to which we all belong."
From Elizabeth's birth onwards, the British Empire continued its transformation into the Commonwealth of Nations.
In 1977, Elizabeth marked the Silver Jubilee of her accession.
In consultation with her husband and the Prime Minister, John Major, as well as the Archbishop of Canterbury, George Carey, and her private secretary, Robert Fellowes, she wrote to Charles and Diana at the end of December 1995, saying that a divorce was desirable.
She has also reigned through various wars and conflicts involving many of her realms.
At Windsor, the princesses staged pantomimes at Christmas in aid of the Queen's Wool Fund, which bought yarn to knit into military garments.
In 1960, after the death of Queen Mary in 1953 and the resignation of Churchill in 1955, the surname ''Mountbatten-Windsor'' was adopted for Philip and Elizabeth's male-line descendants who do not carry royal titles.
In the Channel Islands and Isle of Man, which are Crown dependencies rather than separate realms, she is known as Duke of Normandy and Lord of Mann, respectively.
When in conversation with the Queen, the practice is to initially address her as ''Your Majesty'' and thereafter as ''Ma'am''.
The British Crown Estate – with holdings of £9.4&nbsp;billion in 2014 – is held in trust by the sovereign and cannot be sold or owned by Elizabeth in a private capacity.
Her main leisure interests include equestrianism and dogs, especially her Pembroke Welsh Corgis.
The same year, the elected Fijian government was deposed in a military coup.
Altrincham was denounced by public figures and slapped by a member of the public appalled by his comments.
Coup leader Sitiveni Rabuka deposed Ganilau and declared Fiji a republic.
She does have a deep sense of religious and civic duty, and takes her coronation oath seriously.Shawcross, pp.
