** Tian Shan wapiti (''C.
The eastern elk (''C.
The long-term impact will be an alteration of the types of plants and trees found, and in other animal and plant species dependent upon them.
Elk live 20 years or more in captivity but average 10 to 13 years in the wild.
Males also engage in ritualized mating behaviors during the rut, including posturing, antler wrestling (sparring), and ''bugling'', a loud series of vocalizations that establishes dominance over other males and attracts females.
Bulls are some 40% larger than cows at maturity, weighing an average of , standing  at the shoulder and averaging  in length.
Elk that have contracted the disease begin to show weight loss, increased watering needs, disorientation and listlessness, and at an advanced stage the disease leads to death.
The largest antlers may be  long and weigh .
canadensis sibiricus'') and the Tianshan wapiti (''C.
Male elk have large antlers which are shed each year.
It is transmitted to humans as undulant fever, producing flu-like symptoms which may last for years.
During the fall, elk grow a thicker coat of hair, which helps to insulate them during the winter.
Bulls that enter the rut in poor condition are less likely to make it through to the peak conception period or have the strength to survive the rigors of the oncoming winter.
All Asian subspecies, along with other deer, have been raised for their antlers in central and eastern Asia by Han Chinese, Turkic peoples, Tungusic peoples, Mongolians, and Koreans.
Throughout their range, they live in forest and in forest edge habitat, similar to other deer species.
Once the antlers have been shed, bulls tend to form bachelor groups which allow them to work cooperatively at fending off predators.
Young and old bulls that do acquire a harem hold it later in the breeding season than do bulls in their prime.
This characteristic has also been observed in the forest-adapted European red deer.
Researchers are attempting to eradicate the disease through vaccinations and herd management measures, which are expected to be successful.
In parts of Asia, antlers and their velvet are used in traditional medicines.
Only the males have antlers, which start growing in the spring and are shed each winter.
Their diets vary somewhat depending on the season, with native grasses being a year-round supplement, tree bark being consumed in winter and forbs and tree sprouts during the summer.
The previous classification had over a dozen subspecies under the ''C.
** Merriam's elk (''C.
canadensis xanthopygus'') and the Alashan wapitis (''C.
** Manchurian wapiti (''C.
If neither bull backs down, they engage in antler wrestling, and bulls sometimes sustain serious injuries.
When the females are near to giving birth, they tend to isolate themselves from the main herd, and will remain isolated until the calf is large enough to escape predators.
Range and wildlife managers conduct surveys of elk pellet groups to monitor populations and resource use.
File:Audubon-eastern-elk.jpg|Illustration of eastern elk
** Altai wapiti (''C.
In 2010,  of antlers were auctioned, bringing in over $46,000.
c. merriami''; extinct)
Asian subspecies are sometimes referred to as the ''maral'', but this name applies primarily to the Caspian red deer (''Cervus elaphus maral''), a subspecies of red deer.
All American forms seem to belong to one subspecies (''Cervus canadensis canadensis'').
First documented in the late 1960s in mule deer, the disease has affected elk on game farms and in the wild in a number of regions.
Elk consume an average of  of various vegetation daily.
Recent DNA studies suggest that there are no more than three or four subspecies of elk.
Wolf and coyote packs and the solitary cougar are the most likely predators, although brown and black bears also prey on elk.
However, mitochondrial DNA studies, conducted on hundreds of samples in 2004 from red deer and elk subspecies as well as other species of the ''Cervus'' deer family, strongly indicate that elk, or wapiti, should be a distinct species, namely ''Cervus canadensis''.
Calves are born spotted, as is common with many deer species, and they lose their spots by the end of summer.
Bull elk may have eight or more tines on each antler; however, the number of tines has little to do with the age or maturity of a particular animal.
A bull will defend his harem of 20 cows or more from competing bulls and predators.
canadensis canadensis'') and Merriam's elk (''C.
By the beginning of the Bronze Age, the elk is depicted less frequently in rock art, coinciding with a cultural transformation away from hunting.
The Benevolent and Protective Order of Elks (B.P.O.E.)
The meat has a taste somewhere between beef and venison and is higher in protein and lower in fat and cholesterol than beef, pork, and chicken.
DNA investigations of the Eurasian subspecies revealed that phenotypic variation in antlers, mane and rump patch development are based on "climatic-related lifestyle factors".
c. canadensis''; extinct)
After the breeding season in late fall, the level of pheromones released during estrus declines in the environment and the testosterone levels of males drop as a consequence.
Adult Manchurian wapiti may retain a few orange spots on the back of their summer coats until they are older.
When approached by predators, the largest and most robust females may make a stand, using their front legs to kick at their attackers.
** Roosevelt elk (''C.
Males, females and calves of Siberian and North American elk all grow thin neck manes; female and young Manchurian and Alaskan wapitis do not.
The Gram-negative bacterial disease brucellosis occasionally affects elk in the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem, the only place in the U.S. where the disease is still known to exist.
There are numerous subspecies of elk described, with six from North America and four from Asia, although some taxonomists consider them different ecotypes or races of the same species (adapted to local environments through minor changes in appearance and behavior).
These Chinese subspecies are sometimes treated as a distinct species, namely the Central Asian red deer (''Cervus wallichi''), which also includes the Kashmir stag.
All elk have small and clearly defined rump patches with short tails.
In what is known as a canned hunt, a hunter pays a fee for an essentially guaranteed chance to shoot an elk in an escape-proof range.
Eurasian lynx and wild boar sometimes prey on Asian elk calves.
Of the six subspecies of elk known to have inhabited North America in historical times, four remain, including the Roosevelt (''C.
canadensis merriami'') subspecies have been extinct for at least a century.
These deer have had an adverse impact on forest regeneration of some plant species, as they consume more palatable species which are replaced with those that are less favored by the elk.
File:The deer of all lands (1898) Hangul.png|Illustration of Kashmir stag
Subspecies living in arid climates tend to have lighter colored coats than do those living in forests.
Two distinct subspecies found in China and Korea are the Manchurian wapiti (''C.
The largest of the subspecies is the Roosevelt elk (''C.
Bugling is most common early and late in the day and is one of the most distinctive sounds in nature, akin to the howl of the gray wolf.
Female elk have a short estrus cycle of only a day or two, and matings usually involve a dozen or more attempts.
* Northern and American group
canadensis songaricus'').
The Rocky Mountain elk subspecies has been reintroduced by hunter-conservation organizations in the Appalachian region of the eastern U.S., where the now extinct eastern elk once lived After elk were reintroduced in the states of Kentucky, North Carolina and Tennessee, they migrated into the neighboring states of Virginia and West Virginia, and have established permanent populations there.
Since infection by either of these parasites can be lethal to some commercial livestock species, their presence in elk herds is of some concern.
Prior to the European colonization of North America, there were an estimated 10 million elk on the continent.
A male elk can produce  of antler velvet annually and on ranches in the United States, Canada and New Zealand, this velvet is collected and sold to markets in East Asia, where it is used in medicine.
Conservationists there ensure the herd is well fed during the harsh winters.
In North America they adapted to almost all ecosystems except for tundra, true deserts, and the gulf coast of the U.S.
Even the Siberian elk (''Cervus canadensis sibiricus'') are more or less identical to the American forms and therefore may belong to this subspecies, too.
In North America, males are called ''bulls'', and females are called ''cows''.
Four subspecies described in Asia include the Altai wapiti (''C.
** Tibetan red deer (''C.
This animal should not be confused with the still larger moose (''Alces alces'') to which the name "elk" applies in British English and in reference to populations in Eurasia.
Major predators in Asia include the wolf, dhole, brown bear, Siberian tiger, Amur leopard, and snow leopard.
While elk are not generally harvested for meat production on a large scale, some restaurants offer the meat as a specialty item and it is also available in some grocery stores.
Adult elk usually stay in single-sex groups for most of the year.
In mountainous regions, they often dwell at higher elevations in summer, migrating down slope for winter.
Although they are native to North America and eastern Asia, they have adapted well to countries in which they have been introduced, including Argentina, Australia and New Zealand.
At least 53 species of protist and animal parasites have been identified in elk.
Unlike white-tailed deer and moose which are primarily browsers, elk have a similarity to cattle as they are primarily grazers, but like other deer, they also browse.
There is significant hybridization of elk with the more numerous red deer to the extent that pure elk may no longer exist in the wild in New Zealand.
elaphus'' species designation; DNA evidence concludes that elk are more closely related to Thorold's deer and even sika deer than they are to the red deer.
The Lakota believed that the mythical or spiritual elk, not the physical one, was the teacher of men and the embodiment of strength, sexual prowess and courage.
Elk have played an important role in the cultural history of a number of peoples.
chose the elk as its namesake because a number of its attributes seemed appropriate for cultivation by members of the fraternity.
Historically, tigers in the Lake Baikal region fed on Manchurian wapiti, and continue to do so in the Amur region.
** Kansu red deer (''C.
canadensis roosevelti''), tule (''C.
(The name "Siberian elk" is used for ''Alces alces'' ssp.
The Chinese forms MacNeill's deer, Kansu red deer, and Tibetan red deer belong also to the wapitis and were not distinguishable from each other by mitochondrial DNA studies.
It was long believed to be a subspecies of the European red deer (''Cervus elaphus''), but evidence from a number of mitochondrial DNA genetic studies beginning in 1998 show that the two are distinct species.
Elk are ruminants and therefore have four-chambered stomachs.
Dominant bulls follow groups of cows during the rut, from August into early winter.
Bulls between two and four years and over 11 years of age rarely have harems, and spend most of the rut on the periphery of larger harems.
''Parelaphostrongylus tenuis'' (brainworm or meningeal worm) is a parasitic nematode known to affect the spinal cord and brain tissue of elk and other species, leading to death.
Antlers are made of bone which can grow at a rate of  per day.
Snails and slugs, the intermediate hosts, can be inadvertently consumed by elk during grazing.
Manchurian wapiti may retain a few orange spots on the back of their summer coats until they are older.
The urine soaks into their hair and gives them a distinct smell which attracts cows.
Populations vary as to antler shape and size, body size, coloration and mating behavior.
Modern subspecies are descended from elk that once inhabited Beringia, a steppe region between Asia and North America that connected the two continents during the Pleistocene.
Elk gather in herds, while moose are solitary.
By early summer, the heavy winter coat has been shed, and elk are known to rub against trees and other objects to help remove hair from their bodies.
They have different coloration based on the seasons and types of habitats, with gray or lighter coloration prevalent in the winter and a more reddish, darker coat in the summer.
File:The deer of all lands (1898) Altai wapiti.png|Illustration of Altai wapiti
A representation of the majestic head of the male, with its spreading antlers, was adopted as the first badge of the Order; and is still the most conspicuous element of its copyrighted fraternal emblem.
Elk have also been reintroduced to a number of other states, including Pennsylvania,  Michigan, Wisconsin, and Etolin and Afognak Islands in Alaska.
A bull with a harem rarely feeds and he may lose up to 20 percent of his body weight.
Elk are more than twice as heavy as mule deer and have a more reddish hue to their hair coloring, as well as large, buff colored rump patches and smaller tails.
As of 1989, population figures for the Rocky Mountain subspecies were 782,500, and estimated numbers for all North American subspecies exceeded 1 million.
Herds tend to employ one or more scouts while the remaining members eat and rest.
An image of an elk and a moose appear on the state seal and flag of Michigan.
Many of the elk that reside in the northern sections of the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem migrate to lower altitudes in Montana, mainly to the north and west.
The elk was of particular importance to the Lakota, and played a spiritual role in their society.
By the autumn of their second year, females can produce one and, very rarely, two offspring, although reproduction is most common when cows weigh at least .
Beringia provided a migratory route for numerous mammal species, including brown bear, camel, horse, caribou, and moose, as well as humans.
Particularly fond of aspen sprouts which rise in the spring, elk have had some impact on aspen groves which have been declining in some regions where elk exist.
The highly adaptable elk also inhabit semi-deserts in North America, such as the Great Basin.
File:The deer of all lands (1898) Bedford's deer.png|Illustration of Manchurian wapiti
During the summer, elk eat almost constantly, consuming between  of vegetation daily.
During the mating period known as the rut, mature bulls compete for the attentions of the cow elk and will try to defend females in their harem.
Since 1967, the Boy Scouts of America have assisted employees at the National Elk Refuge in Wyoming by collecting the antlers which are shed each winter.
Elk farms are relatively common in North America and New Zealand.
Elk have a tendency to do most of their feeding in the mornings and evenings, seeking sheltered areas in between feedings to digest.
Bulls also dig holes in the ground, in which they urinate and roll their body.
Most of these parasites seldom lead to significant mortality among wild or captive elk.
Velvet is also considered by some cultures to be an aphrodisiac.
Apart from the moose, the only other member of the deer family to rival the elk in size is the south Asian sambar (''Rusa unicolor'').
At birth, Lakota males were given an elk's tooth to promote a long life since that was seen as the last part of dead elk to rot away.
The Siberian and North American elk carry the largest antlers while the Altai wapiti have the smallest.
The smallest-bodied race is the tule elk (''C.
The formation and retention of antlers is testosterone-driven.
Elk hides have been used for thousands of years for tepee covering, blankets, clothing and footwear.
** Rocky Mountain elk (''C.
canadensis nannodes''), Manitoban (''C.
The gestation period is the same for all subspecies.
Though bison are more likely to transmit the disease to other animals, elk inadvertently transmitted brucellosis to horses in Wyoming and cattle in Idaho.
** Eastern elk (''C.
The habitat of Siberian elk in Asia is similar to that of the Rocky Mountain subspecies in North America.
Bulls have a loud vocalization consisting of screams known as ''bugling'', which can be heard for miles.
Key morphological differences that distinguish ''C.
This allows potential combatants to assess the other's antlers, body size and fighting prowess.
In the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem which includes Yellowstone National Park, bears are the most significant predators of calves.
Most have lighter yellow-brown to orange-brown coats in contrast to dark brown hair on the head, neck, and legs during the summer.
canadensis'' from ''C.
Modern uses are more decorative, but elk skin shoes, gloves and belts are not uncommon.
The Manchurian wapiti is darker and more reddish in coloration than the other populations.
** Kashmir stag (''C.
are jewel encrusted, gold mounted elk teeth – which are actually ivory.
The liver fluke  ''Fascioloides magna'' and the nematode ''Dictyocaulus viviparus'' are also commonly found parasites that can be fatal to elk.
In some subspecies that suffer less predation, they may live an average of 15 years in the wild.
The definitive host is the white-tailed deer, in which it normally has no ill effects.
Elk cows average , stand  at the shoulder, and are  from nose to tail.
A recent necropsy study of captive elk in Pennsylvania attributed the cause of death in 33 of 65 cases to either gastrointestinal parasites (21 cases, primarily ''Eimeria'' sp.
Though elk and red deer can produce fertile offspring in captivity, geographic isolation between the species in the wild and differences in mating behaviors indicate that reproduction between them outside a controlled environment would be unlikely.
Only mature bulls have large harems and breeding success peaks at about eight years of age.
The disease is similar to but not the same as mad cow disease, and no risks to humans have been documented, nor has the disease been demonstrated to pose a threat to domesticated cattle.
Elk are held in captivity, or farmed, for hunting, meat production and velvet collection.
While actively growing, the antlers are covered with and protected by a soft layer of highly vascularised skin known as velvet.
Rival bulls challenge opponents by bellowing and by paralleling each other, walking back and forth.
canadensis alashanicus'').
or bacterial infections (12 cases, mostly pneumonia).
A male elk's urethra points upward so that urine is sprayed almost at a right angle to the penis.
c. roosevelti''), found west of the Cascade Range in the U.S. states of California, Oregon and Washington, and in the Canadian province of British Columbia.
Elk and red deer were introduced to Argentina in the early 20th century.
** Manitoban elk (''C.
canadensis canadensis'', claiming that classification of the four surviving North American groups as subspecies is driven, at least partly, for political purposes to secure individualized conservation and protective measures for each of the surviving populations.
The Alashan wapiti of north central China is the smallest of all subspecies, has the lightest coloration and is the least studied.
Coyote packs mostly prey on elk calves, though they can sometimes take a winter-weakened adult.
Elk calves are as large as an adult white-tailed deer by the time they are six months old.
During the winter, they favor wooded areas and sheltered valleys for protection from the wind and availability of tree bark to eat.
The gestation period is 240 to 262 days and the offspring weigh between .
The elk of southern Siberia and central Asia were once more widespread but today are restricted to the mountain ranges west of Lake Baikal including the Sayan and Altai Mountains of Mongolia and the Tianshan region that borders Kyrgyzstan, Kazakhstan, and China's Xinjiang Province.
However, the two species have freely inter-bred in New Zealand's Fiordland National Park, where the cross-bred animals have all but removed the pure elk blood from the area.
Newborn calves are kept close by a series of vocalizations; larger nurseries have an ongoing and constant chatter during the daytime hours.
However, consuming velvet from elk in North America may be risky since velvet from animals infected with chronic wasting disease may contain prions that could result in a human getting variant Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease.
The Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem elk herd numbers over 200,000 individuals and during the spring and fall, they take part in the longest elk migration in the continental U.S. Elk in the southern regions of Yellowstone National Park and in the surrounding National Forests migrate south towards the town of Jackson, Wyoming, where they winter for up to six months on the National Elk Refuge.
Pictograms and petroglyphs of elk were carved into cliffs thousands of years ago by the Anasazi of the southwestern U.S. More recent Native American tribes, including the Kootenai, Cree, Blackfeet, Ojibwa and Pawnee, produced blankets and robes from elk hides.
Roosevelt elk are generally non-migratory due to less seasonal variability of food sources.
Guttural grunts and posturing effectively deter all but the most determined predators.
Bugling is often associated with an adaptation to open environments such as parklands, meadows, and savannas, where sound can travel great distances.
The offspring will remain with their mothers for almost a year, leaving about the time that the next season's offspring are produced.
canadensis manitobensis'') and Rocky Mountain (''C.
Chronic wasting disease, transmitted by a misfolded protein known as a prion, affects the brain tissue in elk, and has been detected throughout their range in North America.
Efforts to eliminate infectious diseases from elk populations, largely by vaccination, have had mixed success.
Brought to these countries for hunting and ranching for meat, hides and antler velvet, they have proven highly adaptable and have often had an adverse impact on local ecosystems.
Elk are hunted as a game species.
Neolithic petroglyphs from Asia depict antler-less female elk, which have been interpreted as symbolizing rebirth and sustenance.
Moose are larger and darker than elk; bulls have distinctively different antlers.
Antlers are also used in artwork, furniture and other novelty items.
and ''Ostertagia'' sp.)
