He could barely get through the introductions".
Also known as ''Welcome Home Elvis'', the show had been taped in late March, the only time all year Presley performed in front of an audience.
Elvis Presley is a supreme figure in American life, one whose presence, no matter how banal or predictable, brooks no real comparisons.&nbsp;...
It was so bad the words to the songs were barely intelligible.&nbsp;...
Several record companies had by now shown interest in signing him.
A combination of his strong response to rhythm and nervousness at playing before a large crowd led Presley to shake his legs as he performed: his wide-cut pants emphasized his movements, causing young women in the audience to start screaming.
The general development of Presley's voice is described by critic Dave Marsh as "A voice, high and thrilled in the early days, lower and perplexed in the final months."
Blues'', the soundtrack to Presley's first film since his return, was a number one album in October.
Trading in his old guitar for $8 (and seeing it promptly dispatched to the garbage), he purchased a Martin instrument for $175, and his trio began playing in new locales including Houston, Texas, and Texarkana, Arkansas.
The live segments saw Presley clad in tight black leather, singing and playing guitar in an uninhibited style reminiscent of his early rock-and-roll days.
I think it's a Coke bottle.&nbsp;... We just can't have this on a Sunday night.
He denied making such a statement or holding in any way to its racist view: "I never said anything like that, and people who know me know that I wouldn't have said it … A lot of people seem to think I started this business.
He played and sang during lunchtime, and was often teased as a "trashy" kid who played hillbilly music.
Leiber declined, and Presley's fruitful collaboration with the writing team was over.
He was jailed for eight months, and Gladys and Elvis moved in with relatives.
At the end of the month, they appeared at the Overton Park Shell, with Slim Whitman headlining.
In the United States, Presley also had five or six number-one R&B singles and seven number-one adult contemporary singles; in 1964, his "Blue Christmas" topped the Christmas singles chart during a period when ''Billboard'' did not rank holiday singles in its primary pop chart.
By his senior year, he was wearing them.
A studio session on February 1 marked another ending: it was the final occasion on which Black was to perform with Presley.
After the session, Moore and Black—drawing only modest weekly salaries, sharing in none of Presley's massive financial success—resigned.
His forthcoming soundtrack album, ''Speedway'', would die at number 82 on the ''Billboard'' chart.
And then they entered me in this talent show&nbsp;... when I came onstage I heard people kind of rumbling and whispering and so forth, 'cause nobody knew I even sang.
In January 1954, Presley cut a second acetate at Sun Records—"I'll Never Stand In Your Way" and "It Wouldn't Be the Same Without You"—but again nothing came of it.
Leaving behind the bland clothes he had worn on the first two shows, he stepped out in the outlandish costume of a pasha, if not a harem girl.
Presley and Linda Thompson split in November 1976, and he took up with a new girlfriend, Ginger Alden.
Elvis's singing wasn't sexy, it was pornographic."
It warned that "Presley is a definite danger to the security of the United States.&nbsp;... His actions and motions were such as to rouse the sexual passions of teenaged youth.&nbsp;... After the show, more than 1,000 teenagers tried to gang into Presley's room at the auditorium.&nbsp;...
Not long after, the City of Memphis named the stretch of Highway 51 South on which Graceland is located "Elvis Presley Boulevard".
Not long after, he failed an audition for a local vocal quartet, the Songfellows.
After he recorded, Sun boss Sam Phillips asked Keisker to note down the young man's name, which she did along with her own commentary: "Good ballad singer.
In the Memphis Mafia's defense, Marty Lacker has said, "Presley was his own man.&nbsp;...
He was now becoming increasingly unwell.
Jorgensen calls the 1966 recording of "How Great Thou Art" "an extraordinary fulfillment of his vocal ambitions," as Presley had "crafted for himself an ad-hoc arrangement in which he took every part of the four-part vocal, from the bass intro to the soaring heights of the song's operatic climax," in the process becoming "a kind of one-man quartet."
In this regard, Little Richard said of Presley, "He was an integrator.
Allegations of a cover-up were widespread.
Allen's show with Presley had, for the first time, beaten CBS's ''Ed Sullivan Show'' in the ratings.
In Lacker's description, "The only thing that kept Elvis going after the early years was a new challenge.
In Memphis, Presley frequently attended all-night gospel singings at the Ellis Auditorium, where groups such as the Statesmen Quartet led the music in a style that, Guralnick suggests, sowed the seeds of Presley's future stage act:
During his junior year, Presley began to stand out more among his classmates, largely because of his appearance: he grew out his sideburns and styled his hair with rose oil and Vaseline.
The story was similar with his singles—there were no major pop hits, but Presley was a significant force in not just the country market, but on adult contemporary radio as well.
I just didn't know what to make of it.
Leiber and Stoller were again in the studio for the recording of ''Elvis' Christmas Album''.
In his first full year at RCA, one of the music industry's largest companies, Presley had accounted for over 50 percent of the label's singles sales.
They wouldn't let black music through.
On the night of March 20, he entered RCA's Nashville studio to cut tracks for a new album along with a single, "Stuck on You", which was rushed into release and swiftly became a number one hit.
In the analysis of Yvonne Tasker, "Elvis was an ambivalent figure who articulated a peculiar feminised, objectifying version of white working-class masculinity as aggressive sexual display."
During a luncheon preceding the event, RCA presented him with a plaque certifying worldwide sales of over 75 million records.
Presley's divorce took effect on October 9, 1973.
Presley made his third and final ''Ed Sullivan Show'' appearance on January 6, 1957—on this occasion indeed shot only down to the waist.
Presley was by now performing in a jumpsuit, which would become a trademark of his live act.
The cultural range of his music has expanded to the point where it includes not only the hits of the day, but also patriotic recitals, pure country gospel, and really dirty blues.&nbsp;... Elvis has emerged as a great ''artist,'' a great ''rocker,'' a great ''purveyor of schlock,'' a great ''heart throb,'' a great ''bore,'' a great ''symbol of potency,'' a great ''ham,'' a great ''nice person,'' and, yes, a great American.
Parker effectively ended the relationship, deliberately or not, with the new contract he sent Leiber in early 1958.
Presley's condition declined precipitously in September.
For instance: ''Elvis' 40 Greatest'', released in 1974, a compilation on the budget Arcade label, was the fourth highest selling album of the year in the United Kingdom; at the time, the main British chart did not rank such compilations, relegating them to a chart for midpriced and TV-advertised albums, which ''Elvis' 40 Greatest'' topped for 15 weeks.
A pair of lab reports filed two months later each strongly suggested that polypharmacy was the primary cause of death; one reported "fourteen drugs in Elvis' system, ten in significant quantity."
Blues singer Ivory Joe Hunter, who had heard the rumor before he visited Graceland one evening, reported of Presley, "He showed me every courtesy, and I think he's one of the greatest."
His first motion picture, ''Love Me Tender'', was released on November 21.
In 1973, Presley was featured in the first globally broadcast concert via satellite, ''Aloha from Hawaii''.
Though he never had any formal training, he was blessed with a remarkable memory, and his musical knowledge was already considerable by the time he made his first professional recordings in 1954 at the age of 19.
A cousin, Billy Smith, recalled how Presley would sit in his room and chat for hours, sometimes recounting favorite Monty Python sketches and his own past escapades, but more often gripped by paranoid obsessions that reminded Smith of Howard Hughes.
She recalls of their encounter, "He was so anti-drug when I met him.
It was permanently revoked in the 1990s after the Tennessee Medical Board brought new charges of over-prescription.
Despite the largely positive view of Presley held by African Americans, a rumor spread in mid-1957 that he had at some point announced, "The only thing Negroes can do for me is buy my records and shine my shoes."
He placed second in 2006, returned to the top spot the next two years, and ranked fourth in 2009.
On hearing reports of the meeting, Paul McCartney later said he "felt a bit betrayed" and commented: "The great joke was that we were taking illegal drugs, and look what happened to him", a reference to Presley's death, hastened by prescription drug abuse.
A number of stories, both real and exaggerated, detail Presley's appetite for rich or heavy food.
The biggest seller was ''Elvis Sings the Wonderful World of Christmas'', "the truest statement of all", according to Greil Marcus.
Another week-long tour, of the West Coast, followed in November.
Interviewing Presley on-air, Phillips asked him what high school he attended in order to clarify his color for the many callers who had assumed he was black.
Though Phillips no longer had the right to release any Presley material, he made sure the session was captured on tape.
Most of the film albums featured a song or two from respected writers such as the team of Doc Pomus and Mort Shuman.
Presley made the first of two appearances on NBC's ''Milton Berle Show'' on April 3.
Two days later, the Memphis draft board announced that Presley would be classified 1-A and would probably be drafted sometime that year.
As for non-film albums, between the June 1962 release of ''Pot Luck'' and the November 1968 release of the soundtrack to the television special that signaled his comeback, only one LP of new material by Presley was issued: the gospel album ''How Great Thou Art'' (1967).
According to Joe Moscheo of the Imperials, the failure of Presley's marriage "was a blow from which he never recovered."
Asked for a response, Presley said, "I admire the man.
I was very shy about it."
Whether or not combined drug intoxication was in fact the cause, there is little doubt that polypharmacy contributed significantly to Presley's premature death.
His first LP of sacred material, ''His Hand in Mine'', followed two months later.
There were two country songs and a bouncy pop tune.
Moore, Fontana, and the Jordanaires declined to participate, afraid of losing the lucrative session work they had in Nashville.
His stylistic range now began to embrace a more contemporary rock sound as well as soul and funk.
on his second LP to the blues of "Santa Claus Is Back In Town".
In the case of his albums, the distinction between "official" studio records and other forms is often blurred.
Presley discographer Ernst Jorgensen refers only to the Top 100 chart for pop hits.
Soon after, Moore and Black quit their old band to play with Presley regularly, and DJ and promoter Bob Neal became the trio's manager.
"Way Down", Presley's last single issued during his lifetime, came out on June 6.
According to Elvis legend, Presley was shot from only the waist up.
"As Presley set the artistic pace, other artists followed.&nbsp;... Presley, more than anyone else, gave the young a belief in themselves as a distinct and somehow unified generation—the first in America ever to feel the power of an integrated youth culture."
Allen, for his part, later wrote that he found Presley's "strange, gangly, country-boy charisma, his hard-to-define cuteness, and his charming eccentricity intriguing" and simply worked the singer into the customary "comedy fabric" of his program.
The sessions yielded eight songs, including a cover of Carl Perkins' rockabilly anthem "Blue Suede Shoes".
Presley's rankings for top-ten and number-one hits vary depending on how the double-sided "Hound Dog/Don't Be Cruel" and "Don't/I Beg of You" singles, which precede the inception of ''Billboard''s unified Hot 100 chart, are analyzed.
Singing and playing guitar, he opened with "Till I Waltz Again with You", a recent hit for Teresa Brewer.
After another two full days of raging, Red West, his friend and bodyguard, felt compelled to get a price for a contract killing and was relieved when Presley decided, "Aw hell, let's just leave it for now.
''Rolling Stone'' called Presley "supernatural, his own resurrection."
He was sufficiently affected by what he heard to invite two local musicians, guitarist Winfield "Scotty" Moore and upright bass player Bill Black, to work something up with Presley for a recording session.
1 hits "It's Now or Never" of 1960, based on the Italian aria "O Sole Mio" and concluding with a "full-voiced operatic cadence,"  and the 1962 hit "She's Not You" which "integrates the Jordanaires so completely, it's practically doo-wop."
Having successfully managed top country star Eddy Arnold, Parker was now working with the new number-one country singer, Hank Snow.
(Presley and his friends had had a four-hour get-together with the Beatles five years earlier.)
In April, the single "The Wonder of You" was issued—a number one hit in the UK, it topped the U.S. adult contemporary chart, as well.
Presley was in Palm Springs at the time, and some suggest the singer was too cowardly to face the three himself.
Presley renewed Neal's management contract in August 1955, simultaneously appointing Parker as his special adviser.
In Pleasants' view, his voice was "variable and unpredictable" at the bottom, "often brilliant" at the top, with the capacity for "full-voiced high Gs and As that an opera baritone might envy".
The first, on September 9, 1956, was seen by approximately 60 million viewers—a record 82.6 percent of the television audience.
Regardless of whether parents were aware of the Negro sexual origins of the phrase 'rock 'n' roll', Presley impressed them as the visual and aural embodiment of sex."
By January 1969, the single "If I Can Dream", written for the special, reached number 12.
Ben Gross of the New York ''Daily News'' opined that popular music "has reached its lowest depths in the 'grunt and groin' antics of one Elvis Presley.&nbsp;... Elvis, who rotates his pelvis&nbsp;... gave an exhibition that was suggestive and vulgar, tinged with the kind of animalism that should be confined to dives and bordellos".
The modern blues/R&B sound captured so successfully on ''Elvis Is Back!''
To close, displaying his range and defying Sullivan's wishes, Presley sang a gentle black spiritual, "Peace in the Valley".
Presley returned to the studio in Hollywood in March 1975, but Parker's attempts to arrange another session toward the end of the year were unsuccessful.
Soon after, he failed an audition for ''Arthur Godfrey's Talent Scouts'' on the CBS television network.
I think TV is important so I'm going to go along, but I won't be able to give the kind of show I do in a personal appearance."
Throughout his entire career, Presley performed in only three venues outside the United States—all of them in Canada, during brief tours there in 1957.
It was obvious there was something terribly wrong with his body.
The year ended with a front-page story in ''The Wall Street Journal'' reporting that Presley merchandise had brought in $22 million on top of his record sales, and ''Billboard''s declaration that he had placed more songs in the top 100 than any other artist since records were first charted.
Before late 1958, rather than unified pop and country singles charts, ''Billboard'' had as many as four charts for each, separately ranking records according to sales, jukebox play, jockey spins (i.e., airplay), and, in the case of pop, a general "Top 100".
On the next tour, CBS filmed two concerts for a TV Special, ''Elvis in Concert'', to be aired in October.
Between 1977 and 1981, six posthumously released singles by Presley were top ten country hits.
In May, the brand new International Hotel in Las Vegas, boasting the largest showroom in the city, announced that it had booked Presley, scheduling him to perform 57 shows over four weeks beginning July 31.
In the early 1960s, the circle of friends with whom Presley constantly surrounded himself until his death came to be known as the "Memphis Mafia".
Joined by five previously unreleased Sun recordings, its seven recently recorded tracks were of a broad variety.
Bond rejected him after a tryout, advising Presley to stick to truck driving "because you're never going to make it as a singer".
Addressing his '68 Comeback Special audience, he said, "Rock 'n' roll music is basically gospel or rhythm and blues, or it sprang from that.
Five months later, Presley's new girlfriend, Linda Thompson, a songwriter and one-time Memphis beauty queen, moved in with him.
In 2008, an 1800-year-old Roman bust described as bearing a "striking" resemblance to Elvis was displayed ahead of an intended auction.
June Juanico of Memphis, one of Presley's early girlfriends, later blamed Parker for encouraging him to choose his dating partners with publicity in mind.
During this engagement, he was threatened with murder unless $50,000 was paid.
Presley returned to the United States on March 2, 1960, and was honorably discharged with the rank of sergeant on March 5.
A few days later, the singer made an outdoor concert appearance in Memphis at which he announced, "You know, those people in New York are not gonna change me none.
Any demo you gave him he knew by heart in ten minutes."
On January 10, 1956, Presley made his first recordings for RCA in Nashville.
'', cowritten by the three bodyguards fired the previous year, was published on August 1.
The Presleys survived the F5 tornado in the 1936 Tupelo–Gainesville tornado outbreak.
Some of the songs, like "That's All Right", were in what one Memphis journalist described as the "R&B idiom of negro field jazz"; others, like "Blue Moon of Kentucky", were "more in the country field", "but there was a curious blending of the two different musics in both".
A spokesman for the auctioneers said that fans could "be forgiven for thinking that their idol may well have lived a previous life in Rome."
He sang with the kind of power people no longer expect of rock 'n' roll singers.
According to Whitburn's analysis, Presley and Madonna share the record for most top ten hits with 38; per ''Billboard''s current assessment, he ranks second with 36.
When his protégé was 12 years old, Slim scheduled him for two on-air performances.
Following the success of the Comeback Special, offers came in from around the world.
Gladys's great-great-grandmother, Morning Dove White, was possibly a Cherokee Native American.
According to his primary care physician, Dr. George C. Nichopoulos, Presley "felt that by getting drugs from a doctor, he wasn't the common everyday junkie getting something off the street."
His gospel album ''He Touched Me'', released that month, would earn him his second Grammy Award, for Best Inspirational Performance.
The Army also introduced Presley to karate, which he studied seriously, later including it in his live performances.
I don't want to do anything to make people dislike me.
Shortly before Christmas 1966, more than seven years since they first met, Presley proposed to Priscilla Beaulieu.
Presley's funeral was held at Graceland on Thursday, August 18.
In 1958, he was drafted into military service.
The identification of Presley with racism—either personally or symbolically—was expressed most famously in the lyrics of the 1989 rap hit "Fight the Power", by Public Enemy: "Elvis was a hero to most / But he never meant shit to me / Straight-up racist that sucker was / Simple and plain".
A vast number of recordings have been issued under Presley's name.
A Junkie XL remix of Presley's "A Little Less Conversation" (credited as "Elvis Vs JXL") was used in a Nike advertising campaign during the 2002 FIFA World Cup.
Not only Presley's achievements, but his failings as well, are seen by some cultural observers as adding to the power of his legacy, as in this description by Greil Marcus:
In 1971, an affair he had with Joyce Bova resulted—unbeknownst to him—in her pregnancy and an abortion.
Eight studio singles from this period released during his lifetime were top ten hits on one or both charts, four in 1974 alone.
After the end of his International engagement on September 7, Presley embarked on a week-long concert tour, largely of the South, his first since 1958.
Presley's rise to national attention in 1956 transformed the field of popular music and had a huge effect on the broader scope of popular culture.
Under the headline "Presley Records a Craze in Soviet", ''The New York Times'' reported that pressings of his music on discarded X-ray plates were commanding high prices in Leningrad.
Two weeks later, Presley was booked on ''Louisiana Hayride'', the ''Opry''s chief, and more adventurous, rival.
An extraordinary compass&nbsp;... and a very wide range of vocal color have something to do with this divergence of opinion."
Best received by critics was ''Elvis Country'', a concept record that focused on genre standards.
The audience response at Presley's live shows became increasingly fevered.
He was only interested in 'now money'—get the buck and get gone."
Let's face it: I can't sing like Fats Domino can.
Coroner Dr. Joseph Davis declared, "There is nothing in any of the data that supports a death from drugs.
The evening concert on July 10 was recorded and issued in LP form a week later.
Overcoming his reticence about performing outside the Lauderdale Courts, he competed in Humes's Annual "Minstrel" show in April 1953.
Presley was a central figure in the development of rockabilly, according to music historians.
From the beginning of his national fame, Presley expressed respect for African American performers and their music, and disregard for the norms of segregation and racial prejudice then prevalent in the South.
He was again the second-highest-earning deceased celebrity.
To Presley's displeasure, he soon found himself being referred to as "Elvis the Pelvis", which he called "one of the most childish expressions I ever heard, comin' from an adult."
Presley retains the record for cumulative weeks at number one: alone at 80, according to Whitburn and the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame; tied with Carey at 79, according to ''Billboard''.
The films' rapid production and release schedules—he frequently starred in three a year—affected his music.
Since his comeback, he had staged more live shows with each passing year, and 1973 saw 168 concerts, his busiest schedule ever.
In each case, any ambitions the singer may have had to play such parts were thwarted by his manager's negotiating demands or flat refusals.
On December 20, Presley received his draft notice.
More than any other single event, it was this first appearance on ''The Ed Sullivan Show'' that made Presley a national celebrity of barely precedented proportions.
The same year, Presley became the first rock and roll singer to be awarded the Lifetime Achievement Award (then known as the Bing Crosby Award) by the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences, the Grammy Award organization.
''Billboard'' now regards the sales charts as definitive for the period.
The year given, in the table below, is the year the record first reached number one, rather than its original year of release.
The policy was altered in 1975, allowing the album to hit number one on the main chart in 1977, following Presley's death.
With country put on the back burner, and soul and R&B left in Memphis, what was left was very classy, very clean white pop—perfect for the Las Vegas crowd, but a definite retrograde step for Elvis."
He has a right to say what he wants to say.
Several of his family members had been alcoholics, a fate he intended to avoid.
The film was panned by the critics but did very well at the box office.
It is sung, played and written, for the most part, by cretinous goons.&nbsp;...
It won him his first Grammy Award, for Best Sacred Performance.
Songwriters were obliged to forgo one third of their customary royalties in exchange for having him perform their compositions.
He responded, "That's fine for me, now how much can you get for Elvis?"
This blend of styles made it difficult for Presley's music to find radio airplay.
While that was a dramatic number, most of what Presley recorded for his film soundtracks was in a much lighter vein.
For the fifth straight year, ''Forbes'' named Presley the top-earning deceased celebrity, with a gross income of $45 million.
Jesse Garon Presley, his identical twin brother, was delivered stillborn 35 minutes before his own birth.
He has inspired a legion of impersonators.
It proved to be Presley's last U.S. number one pop album during his lifetime.
Parker arranged with the owners of Hill and Range Publishing, Jean and Julian Aberbach, to create two entities, Elvis Presley Music and Gladys Music, to handle all the new material recorded by Presley.
According to Moore, "His movement was a natural thing, but he was also very conscious of what got a reaction.
Neal recalled, "It was almost frightening, the reaction that came to Elvis from the teenaged boys.
His films were almost universally panned; critic Andrew Caine dismissed them as a "pantheon of bad taste".
RCA publicity materials referred to its "mild rock beat"; discographer Ernst Jorgensen calls it "upbeat pop".
According to Stoller, the duo was "surprised at the kind of knowledge that he had about black music.
"Don't worry, we'll fill it in later."
