It was written in English in 1957.
She asks if he’s wearing his long johns but Henry is difficult about answering her.
", but also in the recurrent "Please!
In October his mother rented "a little house by the sea just beyond Dalkey Harbour.
This was a source of some embarrassment to her when they were together.
Furthermore, the sound in question is not just that of the human voice but includes a complex network of nonverbal elements, musical or otherwise.
He twice asks for the sound of hooves, hoping that the 'ten-ton mammoth' can be trained to mark time; have it 'stamp all day' and 'tramp the world down'.
This infuriates Holloway and he insists Bolton stop which he does.
The omnipresent sea is less of a natural phenomenon than another mental ghost haunting him no matter where he goes, even reacting to events (e.g.
He says he’s not ready and begs her to stay even if she won’t speak and "Henry improvises upon her story, attempting to build it into a more complex and extended narrative but he fails".
Even when he finally received his inheritance he only relocated to the other side of the bay; it has been a great many years since he actually swam in it.
Henry's information thus functions ironically, or even metalinguistically: on the one hand, it shows the narrator having a brief moment of power over the father whose death haunts him; on the other, we can read the speech as an aside to the audience," emphasising that everything they are experiencing is a part of a fiction, even the sea.
Henry is like the "writer-protagonists of the novels, using their speech/writing to fill the moments until death."
He wonders what age the girl is now but – unexpectedly for a mother – Ada says she doesn’t know.
Ada is "immensely ''there''", though, her personality is allowed to shine throughout her conversation with Henry; she doesn’t merely respond, she initiates lines of thought, she nags him like a mother with her list of don’ts, jokes with him, reproves him in a matter-of-fact way and refuses to mollycoddle him.
: Holloway is annoyed.
Is he perhaps just another of the fictional characters?
Henry tells his father that, after a time, his stories were not company enough and he began feeling the need for someone from his past to be with him.
She remembers meeting his family in the midst of having a row, his father, mother and a sister threatening to kill herself.
Like the old woman in ''Rockaby'' he only has himself and the voices in his head left to acknowledge his existence however pathetic that existence has become.
Ada makes a joke about horses and tries to get him to laugh.
Beckett spent several months there up until his brother’s eventual death in September.
She doesn’t appear to take him very seriously either.
In May 1954 he received a phone call from his sister-in-law to let him know that his brother, Frank, had been diagnosed with terminal lung cancer.
He interrogates the past rigorously but never gets round to actually verbalising what is really on his mind: How did his father die?
She did not get pregnant right away however and it was years before they had Addie.
The Physician of the Gospels exclaimed, ‘I am the way, the truth and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me’ (''John'' 14:6); the physician of ''Embers'' is a ''hollow-way'', a way leading nowhere.
Like many of Beckett’s characters (e.g.
Anthony Cronin records in his biography of Beckett that "Embers met with a mixed reception but tempers this comment by noting that the general tone of English criticism was somewhat hostile to Beckett" at the time.
Evidently he is remembering better times here.
Why should the figure of the father loom so large in every element of the play?
First broadcast on the BBC Third Programme on 24 June 1959, the play won the RAI prize at the Prix Italia awards later that year.
As Henry is not only talking to his father at the start it is also true that he is talking to a "blind" audience too.
Only all is not silent, not entirely, there is the sound of a drip (evocative of the remark Hamm makes in ''Endgame'': "There is something dripping in my head"); this agitates Henry greatly, and he breaks off his story there for a second.
He has no "professional obligations", no familial ties and now not even a woman to justify his hanging around this place like, as he puts it, an "old grave I cannot tear myself away from".
If critics get frustrated because there are no answers then they’ve got the point.
This option offers a simpler explanation of the story.
He told me he did not create symbols where they did not exist, only where they are apparent.
The father storms out slamming the door, as he did the day he disappeared for good (if this is in fact ''not'' the same day), but she passes him later sitting staring out to sea (bear in mind Henry said his father was blind) in a posture that reminded her of Henry himself.
Her advice to Henry that he seeks medical assistance from Holloway, assuming him to be "a figure in the fiction he has been weaving", would add weight to the argument that Ada is both part imagined as well as part remembered.
He kept repeating that line from ''Watt'' – ‘no symbols where none intended’.
Beckett’s own father (actually a superb swimmer) died at home, of a heart attack it has to be said, on 26 June 1933.
: The third scene briefly recalls Henry forcing his attentions on Ada, some twenty years earlier.
A man, Bolton, is standing there in his dressing gown awaiting the arrival of his doctor, Holloway, who we learn later may be the name of Henry’s own doctor.
Is vital information missing or has he repressed it?
Throughout the play the sea acts like a character in its own right (much as the light in Play does).
Henry, the central character in this play, cannot find the words to articulate his situation and fills in the blanks with what he can in an effort to make sense of things.
He similarly asks for a drip, as if the sea could be drained by the sound effect."
Needless to say opinions differ.
The moment the story can be finished, there will be no one there to finish it'".
He proposes going for a row, "to be with my father", he tells her but, again, she reminds him that their daughter will be coming soon and would be upset to find him gone.
Was he, in any way, responsible for that death?
Henry is undoubtedly a tormented soul.
Beckett himself, Zilliacus believes, has made the most important point about ''Embers'': "‘''Cendres,''’ he remarked in an interview with P.L.
: Bolton’s desperate plea to Holloway for help mirrors the confrontation between Henry and his father.
She is not surprised and predicts that a day will come when there will be no one left and he will be alone with only his own voice for company.
Henry starts to talk, a single word, "on," followed by the sea again, followed by the voice – louder and more insistent this time, repeating the same word, as it will say, then repeat as a command, the words "stop" and "down."
Words have become redundant, but they are all Henry has to explain the unexplainable.
It is late, past midnight.
He remembers " a great one" and starts to tell it:
The author’s own view was that it was a "rather ragged" text.
Beckett accompanied her, laden with his books, manuscripts and typewriter.
"The ‘you’ here can be taken to be the dead father, with whom Henry is sitting on the strand.
He does this with great imaginative sympathy and the ending, where Bolton does not receive the recognition he has longed for throughout the night, is the more painful because it is clearly Henry’s loneliness."
Instead he complains about the fact that, despite his being dragged out on a night like this, his old friend has not had the common decency to heat and light the room suitably let alone provide a proper welcome and some kind of refreshment.
He hears the doorbell and goes to the window to check; it is winter and the ground is covered with snow.
Like Christ, Holloway is a physician, a potential healer of men’s souls.
She can’t understand why such "a lovely peaceful gentle soothing sound" should upset him so and refuses to believe that his talking helps drown it out.
He re-enacts going for a walk with her and how he ended up reducing the girl to tears when she refuses to let go of his hand.
There the story peters out with the two men standing eye to eye in silence.
It is still only an anaesthetic, numbing the pain.
My fault, text too difficult."
Jonathan Kalb has even suggested that ''everything'' including the sea and the beach are all merely figments of Henry’s imagination.
That the story is missing key elements is due to the fact that Henry himself doesn’t have these pieces.
Parts of their conversation, for example, sound as if they are simply reenactments of things said to each other when they were a couple but noticeably not all.
Henry tells us at the very start of the play that his father is blind and yet when Ada passes him she makes mention that he did not see her.
Back straight Miss!
He tells he that he’s even taken to "walking about with a gramophone" but forget it this day.
"I can try and go on a little if you wish."
"In the first chord of bass, bar 5, she plays E instead of F." The teacher strikes the piano with his cylindrical ruler and Addie stops playing.
He curses, gets to his feet, walks over to the water’s edge where he takes out and consults a pocket diary.
she wonders out loud.
"But there is a very good reason for the omission, which is that, unlike the theatre, radio makes it possible to represent characters by means of metonymic sound images: The ghost of Henry's father is indeed "heard" throughout the play: not only when his son acts the role of medium, imitating such parental exhortations as "Are you coming for a dip?
In a letter to Alan Schneider dated 6 September 1959, after finally hearing a tape of the BBC production, Beckett wrote: "Good performance and production but doesn't come off.
He reminds Ada that it was on this very beach they had sex for the first time.
If it is based on his father’s seeking some kind of escape from a life that has become unendurable, with a worthless son, a suicidal daughter and possibly an argumentative wife all symptoms of it, then Holloway could simply be a personification of ''any'' means of release.
''Molloy'', May in ''Footfalls''), Henry is a writer or at the very least a storyteller, albeit by his own admission, a poor one never actually finishing anything he starts.
A fuller appreciation of the story of Bolton and Holloway helps with an overall understanding of the rest of the play.
"The sea presents an antithetical image to Henry.
Ada suggests that he consult Holloway about his talking.
Also beforehand she was aware of "the least feather of smoke on the horizon" but now "she cannot see the beach where Henry is sitting (‘is there anyone about?’) without his words to describe it."
This production was rebroadcast on BBC Radio 3 on 16 May 2010 as part of a double bill with a 2006 production of ''Krapp's Last Tape''.
"The consequent judgement that Henry was a ‘sulky little bastard, better off dead’ is consistent with his father’s final verdict of his son as a ‘washout’."
"Henry also demands certain sound effects to provide a contrast to the monotony of the sea.
She chides him for sitting on the cold stones and offers to put her shawl under him, which he allows.
It moans in one’s dreams at night.’" The beach there – "by contract with most Irish beaches – is notoriously composed of shingle and pebble".
Before this the two engage in quasi-domestic small talk.
"Please, Holloway!"
''’" (''Embers'' rests on an ambiguity: is the person having an hallucination or is this really happening?)
He calls on her because he needs her, his father doesn’t answer and he is struggling with his story on his own.
Lawley’s contention could equally be valid in that "Henry is losing his creative impersonality and is consequently moving inexorably into identity with his fictional creation, Bolton."
Henry says she is with her music master.
Paul Lawley feels the need to qualify this statement however: "The most important point perhaps, but one to start from rather than conclude with."
Ruby Cohn notes that ‘Henry is a name derived from German ''Heimrih'', meaning head of the family’ he too is a father or father or father-surrogate – his own.
Hugh Kenner calls it "Beckett’s most difficult work" and yet maintains that the piece "coheres to perfection," John Pilling disagrees, remarking that ''Embers'' "is the first of Beckett’s dramatic works that seems to lack a real centre," whereas Richard N. Coe considers the play "not only minor, but one of Beckett’s very few failures."
He then returns to his old preoccupation, the sound of the sea.
He may or may not commit what he has written to paper but he performs the core function of a writer, the creation of stories.
But he finds he can’t go on.
: "Into this tale in which Bolton … calls out his friend and doctor, Holloway, in the middle of an icy winter night, not because he is ill but because he is alone, Henry puts all his own isolation and desire for companionship.
: The doctor says if Bolton wants an injection – "meaning an anaesthetic" – just to let down his trousers and he’ll give him one but Bolton doesn’t reply.
that Bolton addresses to Holloway, and, most important, in the voice of the sea itself."
and then they stand there in silence, the doctor trying to warm himself by the fire, what is left of it, and his patient staring out the window.
: "Beckett told me that when I came to a passage with several meanings, the obvious one is the right one.
Roger Blin, in an interview on 2 March 1975, in Paris, said: "Beckett absolutely didn't want me to try to do ''Embers'' for the theatre because, when you listen, you don't know if Ada exists or not, or whether she only exists in the imagination of the character Henry."
For all his personal reservations the play won the RAI prize in the 1959 Prix Italia contest, not, as has been often reported, "the ''actual'' Prix Italia … which went to John Reeve’s play, ''Beach of Strangers''."
To drown out the sound, rather than seek out company, he began making up stories but could never finish any of them.
Understandably Henry has punished himself for years over his decision not to go with him.
He imagines his father, whom he describes as “old … blind and foolish”, sitting beside him on the beach and addresses the whole opening monologue to him, apart from a single aside to the audience, but the father never once responds.
Henry treats his Addie in much the same way his father appears to have treated him.
he pleads one final time.
But the identification is an ironic one.
Donald McWhinnie directed Jack MacGowran – for whom the play was specially written – as "Henry", Kathleen Michael as "Ada" and Patrick Magee as "Riding Master" and "Music Master".
He wanted Henry to go swimming with him but Henry refuses and so the last words his father ends up saying to him are: "A washout, that’s what you are, a washout!"
What is interesting here is that Henry imagines that Ada, after witnessing his father sitting on the rock, gets on the tram (possibly horse-driven) to go home, then alights and returns to check on him only to find the beach empty.
: Bolton lets him in.
during the sex scene) by getting louder; it clearly has its own voice or perhaps it is all that remains of his father’s voice since it represents his grave.
(''Hooves trotting''.)
Whereas most scholars take Bolton’s begging to suggest he wants to die, Michael Robinson, in ''The Long Sonata of the Dead'', puts forward a simpler interpretation:
Ada wants to know where their daughter, Addie, is.
At the time he was very annoyed with the symbol-hunting scholars who seemed to be breathing down his neck all the time."
She’d shown great reluctance and they had to wait a long time before the coast was clear.
Their nature of their dialogue is odd too – quite civilized – considering the comment Henry made just before evoking her presence: "Ada too, conversation with her, that was something, that’s what hell will be like."
The sad fact is that company is not the real answer.
(''Hooves galloping''.)
She cites an instance where she has to explain to their daughter why her father was talking to himself in the lavatory.
Then I think I’ll be getting back?"
But he never settled down there and questioned ‘how people have the nerve to live so near, ''on'' the sea.
The doctor has arrived, a "fine old chap, six foot, burly" standing there in his macfarlane, a heavy caped overcoat.
In this context, the play is its own metaphor.
He again offers to give him an injection but Bolton wants something else, something he has obviously asked for before and the doctor has refused to go through with, possibly to administer a lethal injection rather than merely a jab to dull the pain.
'''''Embers''''' is a radio play by Samuel Beckett.
It ends with Ada crying out, the cry merging with the sound of the sea, louder now.
(''Hooves cantering''.)
In the Beckettian universal construct sadly death rarely brings any relief either.
Eff!” he insists and eventually has to show her the note.
And as a writer he also needs readers or listeners to hear what he has to say.
For one thing Beckett stipulates that she makes "''no sound as she sits.''"
With the exception of an appointment with the "plumber at nine to attend to the waste" pipe his future is empty.
The images (symbols and metaphors) that spring to mind when people ''see the sea'' (another pun Beckett cannot have failed to notice) have become somewhat clichéd over the years and Beckett takes full advantage of this fact; literature (not forgetting the visual arts) has done much of his groundwork for him.
He wants to go but Ada says they can’t because they’re waiting on Addie.
He says he is going to leave, regretting having come in the first place, but doesn’t make any move to go.
He must stay near it, and yet he attempts to distance himself from its sound."
: He describes a scene before a fire that is about to go out.
His father’s eventual disappearance followed an angry interchange between the two of them.
Presumably he understands what he’s being asked for but avoids showing that he does.
Holloway wants to know why he was called for but he is cut short.
"‘To "act" it is to kill it’: ‘radio text,’ Beckett here reminds us, is ''par excellence'' an art that depends on sound alone and hence cannot be converted to the stage.
Henry explains to Ada that his father doesn’t talk with him like she does.
Instead he lights a candle and, holding it "above his head, walks over and looks Holloway full in the eye" but still says nothing.
:The second involves Addie again, this time with her riding instructor: "Now Miss!
And whereas Christ’s death on the cross at `the ninth hour’ represents birth into a new life and a promise of salvation, Holloway’s actions, likewise at the ninth hour, result in the death of new life, a universal denial of salvation: `If it’s an injection you want, Bolton, let down your trousers and I’ll give you one, I have a ''panhysterectomy'' at nine’ (italics added by Zeifman).
Having performed her function to the best of her plainly limited abilities she leaves him to it with a down-to-earth, "Is this rubbish a help to you, Henry?
There seems to be no good reason for the omission.’
As before the scene is unceremoniously truncated.
If, at this point, Henry were able to end his story, he would be "going beyond the confines of his own condition, of which his story is, in all essential aspects, a duplicate.
The sound of the sea continues throughout the play always "moving according to the temporal laws of the tide" suggesting a linearality to the time line but the action is grouped by association rather than presented in a chronological order.
Resigning himself to being alone Henry picks up the Bolton story from where he left off:
He remembers: "That was always the way, walk all over the mountains with you talking and talking and then suddenly mum and home in misery and not a word to a soul for a week."
The cast included Michael Gambon as Henry, Sinéad Cusack as Ada, Rupert Graves, Alvaro Lucchesi and Carly Baker.
It makes little sense, then, to complain, as does John Pilling, that Beckett should have included the voice of Henry's father, along with Ada's and Addie's voices, in the play:
Is this why he can never complete any of his stories because they are all really the same story and are all missing that something?
His life is like a sentence (pun intended) – it reached a comma with his father’s death and he has been unable to satisfactorily finish it.
Was she the last person to see him alive?
Henry is obviously incapable of imagining her any other way than how she was when they were together, further evidence of his declining creative powers.
Whether Holloway is a real person or the character in the story even based on a real person is unclear.
The most recent version of ''Embers'' was broadcast in 2006 on BBC Radio 3 and directed by Stephen Rea.
And Holloway, the recipient of Bolton’s supplication, is a surrogate for Henry’s father—implicitly identified with Christ as saviour.
: ‘The puzzling thing is that Henry's control over voices does not extend to the most crucial figure of all, his father … The failure to incorporate into the physical existence of the play its most important figure is not so much a failure of conception – though it might have served to link Henry's life to his story of Bolton – as of tact.
Bolton pleads with him, "Please!
This obviously makes the doctor uncomfortable.
He tried once going to landlocked Switzerland but still couldn’t get the sound of the sea out of his head.
Robert Pinget translated the work as '''''Cendres''''' and "The first stage production was by the French Graduate Circle of Edinburgh, Edinburgh Festival, 1977."
: In his first flashback Henry imagines the couple's daughter, with her overbearing music master.
(ADDIE ''begins to wail''.)
Henry’s conversation with his wife at first "appears to take place in the present, but Ada does not really move into the scene and certain clues show that this dialogue actually took place years before when their marriage was only twenty years old and Addie was still a child."
His father could never stay away from the sea and it seems neither can his son.
"Is this rubbish a help to you, Henry?
But if so, it makes little sense since, as we soon learn, the father lived at the sea's edge all his life and presumably would know how the sea sounds.
Each time, Henry obediently yet reluctantly does what his voice first says, then tells him to do, he stops and sits down on the shingle.
Is the man actually blind or even figuratively blind?
The play ends with no resolution other than the certainty that the next day and the next day will be the same as the previous ones.
"As their names suggest, Ada and Addie may not be wife and daughter at all, not even imagined wife and daughter, only father-surrogates: Ada is a near anagram of Dad and Addie a rhyme for Daddie.
Katharine Worth conjectures that Ada represents a kind of muse, "a hint stressed in the sound of her voice – ‘''low and remote throughout''’ – and in the curious fact that she has been present in some mysterious way before he spoke her name."
Mignon, ‘''repose sur une ambiguité: le personage a-t-il une hallucination ou est-il en présence de la réalité?
Addie first plays some scales and then begins a Chopin waltz, number 5 in A-flat major.
"Most evenings he walked alone after dinner along the seashore below the house"
This triggers the first evocation.
Opinions vary as to whether the work succeeds.
Perhaps Ada was unaware that he was blind though think seems unlikely.
The sound of hooves distracts him.
