Most peasants did not turn to cash crops, instead growing subsistence crops such as corn, beans, and vegetables.
Nonetheless in mid July, Huerta was forced to flee as a Constitutionalist force under Carranza, Obregón and Villa took the Federal District.
Upon leaving Jojutla with his two sons, Burgos was surprised by a federal police patrol who subsequently shot all three of the men on the spot.
After Zapata's assassination, according to ''La Demócrata'', Zapata "had taken in the consciousness of the natives the proportions of a myth“ because he had “given them a formula of vindication against old offenses”.
In the fall of 1917 a force led by Gonzalez and the ex-Zapatista Sidronio Camacho, who had killed Zapata's brother Eufemio, moved into the eastern part of Morelos taking Cuautla, Zacualpan and Jonacatepec.
He was joined by two newcomers to the Revolution, Venustiano Carranza and Alvaro Obregón, who raised large armies in Coahuila and Sonora respectively.
Through 1916 Zapata raided federal forces from Hidalgo to Oaxaca, and Genovevo de la O fought the Carrancistas in Guerrero.
Carranza was wary of the threat of an U.S. intervention, and Zapatista generals decided to take a conciliatory approach.
However, Zapata's clothing was displayed outside a newspaper's office across from the Alameda Park in the capital.
Nonetheless, during the ensuing campaign in Puebla, Zapata was disappointed by Villa's lack of support.
Through Castro, Carranza issued offers to the main Zapatista generals to join the nationalist cause, with pardon.
Zapata decided that on the surface it seemed as though Madero was doing good things for the people of Mexico, but Zapata did not know the level of sincerity in Madero's actions and thus did not know if he should support him completely.
From a family of farmers, Emiliano Zapata had insight into the severe difficulties of the countryside and his village's long struggle to regain land taken by expanding haciendas.
On April 21, 1914 U.S. President Woodrow Wilson sent a contingent of troops to occupy the port city of Veracruz.
Due to this amazing sum of money Zapata's group of rebels became one of the strongest in the state financially.
Zapata's introduction to anarchism came via Montaño Sánchez – later a general in Zapata's army, executed on May 17, 1917 (by order of Zapata) – who exposed Zapata to the works of Peter Kropotkin and Flores Magón at the same time as Zapata was observing and beginning to participate in the struggles of the peasants for the land.
Through low scale attacks on Gonzalez's positions, Zapata had driven Gonzalez out of Morelos by the end of 1916 (Womack 269-71).
The director was Elia Kazan and the writer was John Steinbeck.
Even though Mexico still has not implemented the sort of land reform he wanted, he is remembered as a visionary who fought for his countrymen.
Zapata's body was photographed, displayed for 24 hours, and then buried in Cuautla.
Madero and Zapata's relations worsened during the summer of 1911 as Madero appointed a governor who supported plantation owners and refused to meet Zapata’s agrarian demands.
Shortly after, Burgos called a meeting and resigned from his position.
Having been put in charge of the efforts to root out Zapatismo in Morelos, Gonzalez was humiliated by Zapata’s attacks, and enforced increasingly draconian measures against the locals.
''Zapata vive, la lucha sigue'', "Zapata lives; the struggle continues."
Zapata became a leading figure in the village of Anenecuilco, where his family had lived for many generations, and he became involved in struggles for the rights of the ''campesinos'' of Morelos.
By the 7th, the plans were set: Zapata ordered Guajardo to attack the Federal garrison at Jonacatepec because the garrison included troops who had defected from Zapata.
For many years, he campaigned steadfastly for the rights of the villagers, first establishing via ancient title deeds their claims to disputed land, and then pressing the recalcitrant governor of Morelos into action.
It was decided that Zapata should work on securing the area east of Morelos from Puebla towards Veracruz.
In March Zapata finally emitted an open letter to Carranza urging him for the good of the fatherland to resign his leadership to Vazquez Gómez, by now the rallying point of the anti-constitutionalist movement  (Womack 319-20).
It seemed as though Zapata would shortly be able to overthrow Madero.
He did not initially provide the Zapatistas with the weaponry they had agreed on and, when he did, he did not provide adequate transportation.
Zapata and Otilio Montaño Sánchez, a former school teacher, fled to the mountains of southwest Puebla.
Zapata emitted statements accusing Carranza of being secretly sympathetic to the Germans (Womack 315).
However, Pablo Torres Burgos, the commander of the operation, was disappointed that the army disobeyed his orders against looting and ransacking.
Cárdenas would fulfill not only the land distribution policies written in Article 27, but also the other reforms written in the Mexican Constitution as well.
In spite of being faced with a possible foreign invasion Zapata refused to unite with Huerta in defense of the nation.
There are controversies about the portrayal of Emiliano Zapata and his followers, whether they were bandits or revolutionaries.
Mythmaking would continue for decades after Zapata was gunned down.
These officials became enforcers of changes in land tenure that favored the concentration of land progressively into the hands of fewer and wealthier landowners.
Zapata was not alone: in the north, Pancho Villa, who had supported Madero, immediately took to the field against Huerta.
In mid-March, Gen. Pablo González ordered his subordinate Col. Jesús Guajardo to commence operations against the Zapatistas in the mountains around Huautla.
Zapata and Villa broke with Carranza; and Mexico descended into civil war among the winners.
In 1916, Carranza sent a force under general Pablo Gonzalez Garza to attack Morelos from the northwest.
These skills as a horseman brought him work as a horse trainer of Porfirio Díaz's son-in-law, who had an hacienda nearby, and served Zapata well as a revolutionary leader.
Reluctantly, Zapata had Montaño tried for treason and executed (Womack 1983-86).
Díaz ran local elections to give the semblance of democracy; however, his close confidants and associates were given offices in districts throughout Mexico.
Bands of Zapatistas started surrendering in exchange for amnesties, and many Zapatista generals went on to become local authorities, such as Fortino Ayaquica who became municipal president of Tochimilco.
Zapata joined Madero's campaign against President Diaz.
Zapata did not recognize the authority that Carranza asserted as leader of the revolutionary movement, continuing his adherence to the Plan of Ayala.
Emiliano was the ninth of ten children; his older brother Euphemio Zapata is also figure in Morelos history.
Zapata immediately began to use his newly found power and began to overthrow city after city with gaining momentum.
The army took complete control of the area and it seemed as though Torres Burgos lost any type of control that he believed he had over his forces prior to this event.
Furthermore, Zapata began to worry that by the end of the World War, the US would turn its attention to Mexico forcing the Zapatistas to either join the Carrancistas in a national defense or to acquiesce to foreign domination of Mexico.
Zapata once again retook Morelos in 1917 and held most of the state against Carranza's troops until he was killed in an ambush in April 1919.
Zapata, seeing an opportunity to promote land reform in Mexico, made quiet alliances with Madero, whom he perceived to be the best chance for genuine change in the country.
This seemed to be the fix to all of the problems that had just arisen, but other individuals wanted to replace Zapata as well.
Zapata early on participated in political movements against Diaz and the landowning ''hacendados'', and when the Revolution broke out in 1910 he was positioned as a central leader of the peasant revolt in Morelos.
For example, there is a ''Zapata'' (1980) stage musical written by Harry Nilsson and Perry Botkin, libretto by Allan Katz, which ran for 16 weeks at the Goodspeed Opera House in East Haddam, Connecticut.
Like many charismatic idealists, Zapata became a martyr after his murder.
Zapata revised the Plan of Ayala and named himself the leader of his revolution.
This officially and formally ended the civil war.
In spite of González's attempts to sully the name of Zapata and the Plan de Ayala during his 1920 campaign for the presidency, for the people of Morelos continued to support Zapatista generals, providing them with weapons, supplies and protection.
Madero sent the Federal Army to root out the Zapatistas in Morelos.
This strengthened Zapata's standing among the peasants and Zapata was able to drive the forces of Madero led by Victoriano Huerta out of Morelos.
Although promising them to deal favorably with their petition, Díaz had them arrested and Zapata was conscripted into the Federal Army.
The constitutionalists established a peace treaty inserting Carranza as First Authority of the nation.
Cooperating with a number of other peasant leaders he formed the Liberation Army of the South of which he soon became the undisputed leader.
He sent Dr. Atl as an envoy to propose a compromise with Zapata.
The year 1915 was a short period of peace and prosperity for the farmers of Morelos, in between the massacres of the  Huerta era and the civil war of the winners to come.
Zapata's family were Mexicans of Nahua and Spanish ancestry, that is mestizos.
Although some  believed that this could be the best course of action, Madero simply demanded that "Public servants act 'morally' in enforcing the law&nbsp;...".
Meanwhile, the disintegration of the revolution outside of Morelos put pressure on the Zapatistas.
Zapata's forces contributed to the fall of Díaz, defeating the Federal Army in the Battle of Cuautla, but when the revolutionary leader Francisco I. Madero became president he disavowed the role of the Zapatistas, denouncing them as simple bandits.
After the nominations were closed, a vote was taken and Zapata became the new council president without contest.
If this political location could be overthrown, the army would have enough power to "veto anyone else's control of the state, negotiate for Cuernavaca or attack it directly, and maintain independent access to Mexico City as well as escape routes to the southern hills."
Zapata responded that, if the people could not win their rights now, when they were armed, they would have no chance once they were unarmed and helpless.
Zapata mobilized his Liberation Army and allied with former Maderistas Pascual Orozco and Emiliano Vázquez Gómez.
If there was anyone that Zapata hated more than Díaz and Madero, it was Victoriano Huerta, the bitter, violent alcoholic who had been responsible for many atrocities in southern Mexico while trying to end the rebellion.
The first line of action demanded that Zapata and his men "control the area behind and below a line from Jojutla to Yecapixtla."
In 1920, Zapatistas managed to obtain powerful posts in the governance of Morelos after Carranza's fall.
Due to this new conflict, the individual who would come out on top would have to do so by "convincing his peers he deserved their backing".
Community members in Anenecuilco, including Zapata, sought redress against land seizures.
In order to succeed, Zapata needed a strong financial backing for the battles to come.
In spite of having contributed decisively to the fall of Huerta, the Zapatistas were left out of the peace treaties, probably because of Carranza’s intense dislike for the Zapatistas whom he saw as uncultured savages.
The only official event in Morelos during this entire year was a bullfight in which Zapata himself and his nephew Amador Salazar participated.
It also argued that if any large plantation owner resisted this action, they should have the other two-thirds confiscated as well.
In 1909 an important meeting was called by the elders of Anenecuilco, whose chief elder was José Merino.
Zapata is now one of the most revered national heroes of Mexico.
Convinced that Guajardo was sincere, Zapata agreed to a final meeting where Guajardo would defect.
In Tlaltizapan Gonzalez executed 289 civilians, including minors of both sexes.
One eyewitness account by Luz Jimenez of Milpa Alta states that Emiliano Zapata spoke Nahuatl fluently when his forces arrived in her community.
He was a skilled horseman and competed in rodeos and races, as well as bullfighting from horseback.
He attacked Carrancista positions with large forces trying to harry the Carrancistas in the rear as they were occupied with routing Villa throughout the Northwest.
In Morelos Zapata once more reorganized the Zapatista state, continuing with democratic reforms and legislation meant to keep the civil population safe from abuses by soldiers.
This was a turning point in the level of authority and influence that Zapata had gained and proved useful in the direct overthrow of Morelos.
The brutality of the nationalist forces further drove the Morelos peasantry towards Zapata, who mounted guerrilla warfare throughout the state and into the Federal District, blowing up trains between Cuernavaca and the capital.
"Among revolutionaries in other districts of the state, however, Zapata's authority was more tenuous."
In December 1918 Carrancistas under Gonzalez undertook an offensive campaign taking most of the state of Morelos, and pushing Zapata to retreat.
They also laid siege to Cuernavaca where a small contingent of federal troops were holed up (Womack 187).
In the aftermath of the revolutionaries' victory over Huerta, they attempted to sort out power relations in the Convention of Aguascalientes.
These experiences led Zapata to grow unsatisfied with the alliance, turning instead his efforts to reorganizing the state of Morelos that had been left in shambles by the onslaught of Huerta and Robles.
Zapata and his envoys managed to get the Convention to adopt some of the agrarian principles of the Plan de Ayala .
Over the summer of 1915 Zapata’s forces had by then taken the southern edge of the federal district, occupying Milpa Alta and Xochimilco, poised to move into the capital.
After Porfirio Díaz came to the presidency of Mexico by coup in 1876, the Mexican social and economic system was dominated by large estates ''(haciendas)''  controlling much of the land and squeezing the holdings of independent communities.
When Carranza's forces were poised to move into Morelos, Zapata took action.
Though Zapata managed to take many important sites such as the Necaxa power plant that supplied Mexico City, he was unable to hold them.
They instituted many of the land reforms envisioned by Zapata in Morelos.
In the original design of the armed force, Zapata was a mere colonel among several others; however, the true plan that came about through this organization lent itself to Zapata.
Madero's generals employed a scorched earth policy, burning villages and forcibly removing their inhabitants, and drafting many men into the Army or sending them to forced labor camps in Southern Mexico.
Zapata nonetheless refused to recognize Carranza’s leadership, stating that the only acceptable result is following the Plan de Ayala, which would make him supreme chief of an interim government.
At the outbreak of the Revolution, "Zapata's agrarian revolt was soon construed as a 'caste war' race war, in which members of an 'inferior race' were captained by a 'modern Attila'".
But apart from Manuel Palafox, who having fallen in disgrace among the Zapatistas had joined the Arenistas, none of the major generals did (Womack 313-14).
At the conclusion of the mock battle, the former Zapatistas were arrested and shot.
Zapata also declared the Maderistas as a counter-revolution and denounced Madero.
He announced "my intention to resign from my position due to my old age and limited abilities to continue the fight for the land rights of the village."
A movie called ''Zapata: El sueño de un héroe'' (''Zapata: A Hero's Dream'') was produced in 2004, starring Mexican actors Alejandro Fernandez, Jaime Camil, and Lucero.
The main Zapatista headquarters were moved to Tochimilco, Puebla, although Tlaltizapan also continued to be under Zapatista control.
After reducing Guajardo to tears, González explained to him that he could recover from this disgrace if he feigned a defection to Zapata.
However, Zapata was dissatisfied with Madero's stance on land reform, which Madero did not really believe in, and was unable, despite repeated efforts, to make him understand the importance of the issue or to get him to act on it.
Pablo González and Guajardo notified the Jonacatepec garrison ahead of time, and a mock battle was staged on April 9.
Zapata fled into the hills as his headquarters were raided, returning after a few months later to organize guerrilla resistance throughout Morelos.
As the constitutionalist forces began to split with Francisco “Pancho” Villa posing a popular front against Carranza’s constitutionalism, Carranza worked diplomatically to get the Zapatistas to recognize his rule.
Although he was wary about Madero, Zapata cooperated with him when Madero made vague promises about land reform in his Plan of San Luis Potosí.
Together they made short work of Huerta, who resigned and fled in June 1914 after repeated military losses to the “Big Four."
Modern activists in Mexico frequently make reference to Zapata in their campaigns; his image is commonly seen on banners, and many chants invoke his name: ''Si Zapata viviera con nosotros anduviera'', "If Zapata lived, he would walk with us."
The meeting was used as a time for discussion and nomination of individuals as a replacement for Merino as the president of the village council.
Having posed this formidable moral challenge to Carranza prior to the upcoming 1920 presidential elections, the Zapatista generals at Tochimilco, Magaña and Ayaquica, urged Zapata not to take any risks and to lay low.
Through 1915 there was a tentative peace in Morelos and the rest of the country.
Villa and the other anti-Carrancista leaders of the north established the Aguascalientes against Carranza.
Even though Zapata's efforts failed, he was able to create and cultivate relationships with political authority figures that would prove useful for him.
In the winter of 1918 a harsh cold and the onset of the Spanish flu decimated the population of Morelos, causing the loss of a quarter of the total population of the state, almost as many as had been lost to Huerta in 1914.
Before he was elected he had shown the village his nature by helping to head up a campaign in opposition to the candidate Díaz had chosen governor.
As General Arenas had turned over to the constitutionalists, he had secured peace for his region and he remained in control there.
The result was that as the capital was starving Morelos peasants had more to eat than they had had in 1910 and at lower prices.
The major method of agrarian relations had been that of communal lands, called "ejidos".
A movement within the Zapatista ranks led by former General Vazquez and Zapata's erstwhile adviser and inspiration Otilio Montaño moved against the Tlaltizapan headquarters demanding surrender to the Carrancistas.
The nominations made were: Modesto Gonzales, Bartolo Parral, and Emiliano Zapata.
On 21 March, Zapata attempted to smuggle in a note to Guajardo, inviting him to switch sides.
Zapata's influence continues to this day, particularly in revolutionary tendencies in south Mexico.
When Zapata's army captured Cuautla after a six-day battle on May 19, 1911, it became clear that Diaz would not hold on to power for long.
As the opposition of the federal army and police detachments slowly dissipated, the army would be able to eventually gain powerful control over key locations in the Interoceanic Railway from Puebla City to Cuautla.
It had a long history of protesting the local haciendas taking community members' land and its leaders gathered colonial-era documentation of their land titles to prove their claims.
The battle continued for years to come over the fact that Mexican individuals did not have agrarian rights that were fair, nor did they have the protection necessary to fight against those who pushed such exploitation upon them.
This sudden threat caused Huerta to withdraw his troops from Morelos and Puebla leaving only Jojutla and Cuernavaca under federal control.
In early 1919, events conspired to cause the death of Zapata.
Nonetheless, outside of Morelos the revolutionary forces started disbanding.
After some time Zapata became the leader of his "strategic zone."
Dismayed with the alliance with Villa, Zapata focused his energies on rebuilding society in Morelos which he now controlled, instituting the land reforms of the Plan de Ayala.
The note, however, never reached Guajardo but instead wound up on González’s desk.
Upon seeing the response by villagers, Madero offered formal justice in courts to individuals who had been wronged by others with regard to agrarian politics.
Obregón seized on the opportunity to attack Carranza and González, Obregón's rival candidate for the presidency by saying "this crime reveals a lack of ethics in some members of the government and also of political sense, since peasant votes in the upcoming election will now go to whoever runs against Pablo González."
Shortly after Burgos' death, a party of rebels elected Zapata as "Supreme Chief of the Revolutionary Movement of the South" (Womack, p.&nbsp;78).
The plan of action was carried out successfully in Jojutla.
The flawed 1910 elections were a major reason for the outbreak of the Mexican Revolution in 1910.
Having taken Puebla, Zapata left a couple of garrisons there but did not support Villa further against Obregón and Carranza.
The plan declared Madero a traitor, named Pascual Orozco head of the Revolution, and outlined a plan for true land reform.
Many popular organizations take their name from Zapata, most notably the Zapatista Army of National Liberation ''(Ejército Zapatista de Liberación Nacional'' or EZLN in Spanish), the initially Marxist guerrilla group that emerged in the state of Chiapas in 1983 and precipitated the 1994 indigenous Zapatista uprising which still continues in Chiapas.
Zapata believed that the best route of attack would be to center the fighting and action in Cuautla.
Zapata continued his work to try to unite with the national anti-Carrancista movement through the next year, and the constitutionalists did not make further advances.
He was a realist with the goal of achieving political and economic emancipation of the peasants in southern Mexico and leading them out of severe poverty.
Some joined the constitutionalists such as Domingo Arena, or lapsed into banditry.
He observed numerous conflicts between villagers and ''hacendados'', or landowners, over the constant theft of village land, and in one instance, saw the ''hacendados'' torch an entire villa.
Throughout Morelos thousands of civilian prisoners were stuffed on box cars and carried to Mexico City, and further to the Henequen plantations of Yucatán as forced laborers.
Zapata has been depicted in movies, comics, books, music, and clothing popular with teenagers and young adults.
He accused Guajardo of not only being a drunk, but of being a traitor.
There were also a series of abuses by Villistas against Zapatista soldiers and chiefs.
In the following weeks, the development of military operations "betray(ed) good evidence of clear and intelligent planning."
Porfirio Díaz was being threatened by the candidacy of Francisco I. Madero.
After a meeting with Zapata and Ambrosio Figueroa in Jolalpan, it was decided that Zapata would have joint power with Figueroa with regard to operations in Morelos.
However, in order to gain this great success, Zapata realized that his men needed to be better armed and trained.
The influence of Flores Magón on Zapata can be seen in the Zapatistas' Plan de Ayala, but even more noticeably in their slogan (this slogan was never used by Zapata) "''Tierra y libertad''" or "land and liberty", the title and maxim of Flores Magón's most famous work.
Zapata finally did gain the support necessary by his peers and was considered a "singularly qualified candidate".
Even though the Mexican Revolution did restore some land that had been taken under Diaz, the land reform on the scale imagined by Zapata was never enacted.
In 1892, a delegation had an audience with Díaz, who with the intervention of a lawyer, agreed to hear them.
Though his advisers urged him to mount a concerted campaign against the Carrancistas across southern Mexico, again he concentrated entirely on stabilizing Morelos and making life tolerable for the peasants (Womack 281-2).
Madero, alarmed, asked Zapata to disarm and demobilize.
The meeting was awkward but amiable, and was widely publicized.
He had a striking appearance, with a large mustache in which he took pride, and good quality clothing  described by a comrade: "General Zapata's dress until his death was a ''charro'' outfit: tight-fitting black cashmere pants with silver buttons, a broad charro hat, a fine linen shirt or jacket, a scarf around his neck, boots of a single piece, Amozoqueña-style spurs, and a pistol at his belt."
To many Mexicans, especially the peasant and indigenous citizens, Zapata was a practical revolutionary who sought the implementation of liberties and agrarian rights outlined in the Plan of Ayala.
The Zapatistas attempted to amass support for their cause by promulgating new manifestos against the hacendados, but this had little effect since the hacendados had already lost power throughout the country.
First Cuernavaca, then Cuautla and then Tlaltizapan.
Genovevo de la O and Magaña supported him in the coup by former Constitutionalists, fighting in Morelos against Carranza and helping prompt Carranza to flee Mexico City toward Veracruz in May 1920.
Orozco was from Chihuahua, near the U.S. border, and thus was able to aid the Zapatistas with a supply of arms.
Finally, Zapata decided to side with Villa against Carranza and Obregon (Womack 196-99).
This came in the form of 10,000 pesos delivered by Rodolfo from the Tacubayans.
Before he could overthrow Madero,  General Victoriano Huerta beat him to it in February 1913, ordering Madero arrested and executed.
So Guajardo wrote to Zapata telling him that he would bring over his men and supplies if certain guarantees were promised.
His daughter, Paulina Ana María Zapata Portillo was aware of her father's legacy from a very early age.
Meanwhile, Carranza mounted national elections in all state capitals except Cuernavaca, and promulgated the 1917 Constitution which incorporated elements of the Plan de Ayala.
Zapata and Villa met in Xochimilco to negotiate an alliance and divide the responsibility for ridding Mexico of the remaining Carrancistas.
But when González later discovered Guajardo carousing in a cantina, he had him arrested, and a public scandal ensued.
"Obregón and Genovevo de la O entered Mexico City in triumph."
Zapata answered Guajardo’s letter on April 1, 1919, agreeing to all of Guajardo’s terms.
The Plan of Ayala also invoked the name of Benito Juárez, one of Mexico's great leaders, and compared the taking of land from the wealthy to Juarez's actions when he took land from the church in the 1860s.
Zapata began looking for allies among the northern revolutionaries and the southern Felicistas, followers of the Liberalist Felix Diaz.
There they formed the most radical reform plan in Mexico; the Plan de Ayala (Plan of Ayala).
In a coup against Madero in February 1913, Huerta took power in Mexico, but a coalition of Constitutionalist forces in Northern Mexico led by Venustiano Carranza, Álvaro Obregón and Francisco Villa ousted him in July 1914 with the support of Zapata's troops.
Some of the colonial documentation was in Nahuatl, with contemporary translations to Spanish for use in legal cases in the Spanish courts.
At the age of 16 or 17, Zapata had to care for his family following his father's death.
Zapata remains an iconic figure in Mexico, used both as a nationalist symbol as well as a symbol of the neo-Zapatista movement.
