Feminist criticism, on the other hand, declares that there is a necessary and powerful conjunction between Dickinson being a woman and a poet.
In the fall of 1884, she wrote that "The Dyings have been too deep for me, and before I could raise my Heart from one, another has come."
Although part of a prominent family with strong ties to its community, Dickinson lived much of her life highly introverted.
Rather than seeing Dickinson's poetic styling as a result of lack of knowledge or skill, modern critics believed the irregularities were consciously artistic.
During the last year of her stay at the Academy, Emily became friendly with Leonard Humphrey, its popular new young principal.
A solemn thing&nbsp;– it was&nbsp;– I said&nbsp;–
Some critics hailed Dickinson's effort, but disapproved of her unusual non-traditional style.
and to another, "Why is any other book needed?"
It was from 1858 to 1861 that Dickinson is believed to have written a trio of letters that have been called "The Master Letters".
In the first collection of critical essays on Dickinson from a feminist perspective, she is heralded as the greatest woman poet in the English language.
Dickinson's herbarium, which is now held in the Houghton Library at Harvard University, was published in 2006 as ''Emily Dickinson's Herbarium'' by Harvard University Press.
When Emily was seven, he wrote home, reminding his children to "keep school, and learn, so as to tell me, when I come home, how many new things you have learned".
Dickinson scholar and poet Anthony Hecht finds resonances in Dickinson's poetry not only with hymns and song-forms but also with psalms and riddles, citing the following example: "Who is the East?&nbsp;/ The Yellow Man&nbsp;/ Who may be Purple if he can&nbsp;/ That carries the Sun.&nbsp;/ Who is the West?&nbsp;/ The Purple Man&nbsp;/ Who may be Yellow if He can&nbsp;/ That lets Him out again."
Referring to his plays, she wrote to one friend "Why clasp any hand but this?"
Although she liked the girls at Holyoke, Dickinson made no lasting friendships there.
Lavinia recognized the poems' worth and became obsessed with seeing them published.
Backed by Higginson and with a favorable notice from William Dean Howells, an editor of ''Harper's Magazine'', the poetry received mixed reviews after it was first published in 1890.
The second wave of feminism created greater cultural sympathy for her as a female poet.
The experience did not last: Dickinson never made a formal declaration of faith and attended services regularly for only a few years.
At Dickinson's request, her "coffin was not driven but carried through fields of buttercups" for burial in the family plot at West Cemetery on Triangle Street.
Her high spirits soon turned to melancholy after another death.
Her gift for words and the cultural predicament of her time drove her to poetry instead of antimacassars ... She came... at the right time for one kind of poetry: the poetry of sophisticated, eccentric vision."
Emily Dickinson, c. 1884
When Higginson urged her to come to Boston in 1868 so that they could formally meet for the first time, she declined, writing: "Could it please your convenience to come so far as Amherst I should be very glad, but I do not cross my Father's ground to any House or town".
While she was diagnosed as having "nervous prostration" by a physician during her lifetime, some today believe she may have suffered from illnesses as various as agoraphobia and epilepsy.
In the late 1850s, the Dickinsons befriended Samuel Bowles, the owner and editor-in-chief of the ''Springfield Republican'', and his wife, Mary.
Dickinson spent seven years at the Academy, taking classes in English and classical literature, Latin, botany, geology, history, "mental philosophy," and arithmetic.
But the incoherence and formlessness of her&nbsp;— versicles are fatal ... an eccentric, dreamy, half-educated recluse in an out-of-the-way New England village (or anywhere else) cannot with impunity set at defiance the laws of gravitation and grammar".
On June 16, 1874, while in Boston, Edward Dickinson suffered a stroke and died.
A narrow Fellow in the Grass
Her poetry is frequently anthologized and has been used as texts for art songs by composers such as Aaron Copland, Nick Peros, John Adams and Michael Tilson Thomas.
In some of her poems, she varies the meter from the traditional ballad stanza by using trimeter for lines one, two and four, while only using tetrameter for line three.
She associates some flowers, like gentians and anemones, with youth and humility; others with prudence and insight.
Until Thomas H. Johnson published Dickinson's ''Complete Poems'' in 1955, Dickinson's poems were considerably edited and altered from their manuscript versions.
There is controversy over how to view Emily's friendship with Susan; according to a point of view first promoted by Mabel Loomis Todd, Austin's longtime mistress, Emily's missives typically dealt with demands for Sue's affection and the fear of unrequited admiration.
Dickinson found a kindred soul in Lord, especially in terms of shared literary interests; the few letters which survived contain multiple quotations of Shakespeare's work, including the plays ''Othello'', ''Antony and Cleopatra'', ''Hamlet'' and ''King Lear''.
Although she had a few terms off due to illness—the longest of which was in 1845–1846, when she was enrolled for only eleven weeks—she enjoyed her strenuous studies, writing to a friend that the Academy was "a very fine school".
She reserved her sharpest insights into the "death blow aimed by God" and the "funeral in the brain", often reinforced by images of thirst and starvation.
The poem "I taste a liquor never brewed&nbsp;–" is an example of the edited versions; the last two lines in the first stanza were completely rewritten.
Without touching her, she drew from me.
The Amherst Academy principal, Leonard Humphrey, died suddenly of "brain congestion" at age 25.
The Emily Dickinson Museum was created in 2003 when ownership of the Evergreens, which had been occupied by Dickinson family heirs until 1988, was transferred to the college.
'''The Master poems''': Dickinson left a large number of poems addressed to "Signor", "Sir" and "Master", who is characterized as Dickinson's "lover for all eternity".
His notice sudden is&nbsp;–
She stressed her solitary nature, stating that her only real companions were the hills, the sundown, and her dog, Carlo.
Although she continued to write in her last years, Dickinson stopped editing and organizing her poems.
Austin wrote in his diary that "the day was awful ... she ceased to breathe that terrible breathing just before the afternoon whistle sounded for six."
In a letter to a confidante, Emily wrote she "always ran Home to Awe Austin when a child, if anything befell me.
Apart from the major themes discussed below, Dickinson's poetry frequently uses humor, puns, irony and satire.
Although Johnson's landmark 1955 edition of poems was relatively unaltered from the original, later scholars critiqued it for deviating from the style and layout of Dickinson's manuscripts.
The forty fascicles she created from 1858 through 1865 eventually held nearly eight hundred poems.
An example that brings together many of these ideas is: "Me from Myself&nbsp;– to banish&nbsp;–&nbsp;/ Had I Art&nbsp;–&nbsp;/ Impregnable my Fortress&nbsp;/ Unto All Heart&nbsp;–&nbsp;/ But since myself—assault Me&nbsp;–&nbsp;/ How have I peace&nbsp;/ Except by subjugating&nbsp;/ Consciousness.&nbsp;/ And since We're mutual Monarch&nbsp;/ How this be&nbsp;/ Except by Abdication&nbsp;–&nbsp;/ Me&nbsp;– of Me?
He also felt that he never was "with any one who drained my nerve power so much.
Dickinson was familiar not only with the Bible but also with contemporary popular literature.
He was an awful Mother, but I liked him better than none."
Back in Amherst, Dickinson occupied her time with household activities.
In April 1862, Thomas Wentworth Higginson, a literary critic, radical abolitionist, and ex-minister, wrote a lead piece for ''The Atlantic Monthly'' entitled, "Letter to a Young Contributor".
And wear&nbsp;– if God should count me fit&nbsp;–
Critical attention to Dickinson's poetry was meager from 1897 to the early 1920s.
I taste a liquor never brewed&nbsp;–
When Sophia Holland, her second cousin and a close friend, grew ill from typhus and died in April 1844, Emily was traumatized.
With her health and spirits restored, she soon returned to Amherst Academy to continue her studies.
In early 1850, Dickinson wrote that "Amherst is alive with fun this winter ... Oh, a very great town this is!"
Samuel Dickinson's eldest son, Edward, was treasurer of Amherst College for nearly forty years, served numerous terms as a State Legislator, and represented the Hampshire district in the United States Congress.
The first half of the 1860s, after she had largely withdrawn from social life, proved to be Dickinson's most productive writing period.
When visitors came to either the Homestead or the Evergreens, she would often leave or send over small gifts of poems or flowers.
At about the same time, her father purchased a house on North Pleasant Street.
''Such a delirious whirl!''
The funeral service, held in the Homestead's library, was simple and short; Higginson, who had met her only twice, read "No Coward Soul Is Mine", a poem by Emily Brontë that had been a favorite of Dickinson's.
Around this time, Dickinson's behavior began to change.
A complete, and mostly unaltered, collection of her poetry became available for the first time when scholar Thomas H. Johnson published ''The Poems of Emily Dickinson'' in 1955.
In 1864, several poems were altered and published in ''Drum Beat'', to raise funds for medical care for Union soldiers in the war.
They visited the Dickinsons regularly for years to come.
In the 1930s, a number of the New Critics&nbsp;– among them R. P. Blackmur, Allen Tate, Cleanth Brooks and Yvor Winters&nbsp;– appraised the significance of Dickinson's poetry.
I do not go out at all, lest father will come and miss me, or miss some little act, which I might forget, should I run away&nbsp;– Mother is much as usual.
Newton held her in high regard, believing in and recognizing her as a poet.
Her brother smuggled a copy of Henry Wadsworth Longfellow's ''Kavanagh'' into the house for her (because her father might disapprove) and a friend lent her Charlotte Brontë's ''Jane Eyre'' in late 1849.
Meaningful distinctions, these scholars assert, can be drawn from varying lengths and angles of dash, and differing arrangements of text on the page.
Critics such as John Cody, Lillian Faderman, Vivian R. Pollak, Paula Bennett, Judith Farr, Ellen Louise Hart, and Martha Nell Smith have argued that Susan was the central erotic relationship in Dickinson's life.
'''Emily Elizabeth Dickinson''' (December 10, 1830&nbsp;– May 15, 1886) was an American poet.
They were untitled, only numbered in an approximate chronological sequence, strewn with dashes and irregularly capitalized, and often extremely elliptical in their language.
Her education was "ambitiously classical for a Victorian girl".
The first volume of Dickinson's ''Poems,'' edited jointly by Mabel Loomis Todd and T. W. Higginson, appeared in November 1890.
The first 115-poem volume was a critical and financial success, going through eleven printings in two years.
Significantly though, Dickinson had left no instructions about the 40 notebooks and loose sheets gathered in a locked chest.
Another appeared in April 1864 in the ''Brooklyn Daily Union''.
A digital facsimile of the herbarium is available online.
Emily eventually sent her over three hundred letters, more than to any other correspondent, over the course of their friendship.
Adrienne Rich theorized in ''Vesuvius at Home: The Power of Emily Dickinson'' (1976) that Dickinson's identity as a woman poet brought her power: "she chose her seclusion, knowing she was exceptional and knowing what she needed.
What is thought to be her last letter was sent to her cousins, Louise and Frances Norcross, and simply read: "Little Cousins, Called Back.
Twentieth-century critic Harold Bloom has placed her alongside Walt Whitman, Wallace Stevens, Robert Frost, T. S. Eliot, and Hart Crane as a major American poet, and in 1994 listed her among the 26 central writers of Western civilization.
In 1981, ''The Manuscript Books of Emily Dickinson'' was published.
A feud ensued, with the manuscripts divided between the Todd and Dickinson houses, preventing complete publication of Dickinson's poetry for more than half a century.
Her father wanted his children well-educated and he followed their progress even while away on business.
Sue married Austin in 1856 after a four-year courtship, though their marriage was not a happy one.
She did not leave the Homestead unless it was absolutely necessary and as early as 1867, she began to talk to visitors from the other side of a door rather than speaking to them face to face.
During the 1850s, Emily's strongest and most affectionate relationship was with her sister-in-law, Susan Gilbert.
Dickinson never married, and most friendships between her and others depended entirely upon correspondence.
It was the last poem published during Dickinson's lifetime.
Dickinson biographer Alfred Habegger wrote in ''My Wars Are Laid Away in Books: The Life of Emily Dickinson'' (2001) that "The consequences of the poet's failure to disseminate her work in a faithful and orderly manner are still very much with us".
She stresses the Gospels' contemporary pertinence and recreates them, often with "wit and American colloquial language".
Thomas Bailey Aldrich, a poet and novelist, equally dismissed Dickinson's poetic technique in ''The Atlantic Monthly'' in January 1892: "It is plain that Miss Dickinson possessed an extremely unconventional and grotesque fancy.
Two years before this, on April 1, 1882, Dickinson's "Shepherd from 'Little Girl'hood", Charles Wadsworth, also had died after a long illness.
Otis Phillips Lord, an elderly judge on the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court from Salem, in 1872 or 1873 became an acquaintance of Dickinson's.
Using the physical evidence of the original papers, the poems were intended to be published in their original order for the first time.
Forty years later, Lavinia stated that because their mother was chronically ill, one of the daughters had to remain always with her.
Biographers believe that Dickinson's statement of 1862—"When a little Girl, I had a friend, who taught me Immortality&nbsp;– but venturing too near, himself&nbsp;– he never returned"—refers to Newton.
Despite seeing him only twice after 1855 (he moved to San Francisco in 1862), she variously referred to him as "my Philadelphia", "my Clergyman", "my dearest earthly friend" and "my Shepherd from 'Little Girl'hood".
In a 1915 essay, Elizabeth Shepley Sergeant called the poet's inspiration "daring" and named her "one of the rarest flowers the sterner New England land ever bore".
In 1880 he gave her Cowden Clarke's ''Complete Concordance to Shakespeare'' (1877).
Jackson was deeply involved in the publishing world, and managed to convince Dickinson to publish her poem "Success is counted sweetest" anonymously in a volume called ''A Masque of Poets''.
Emily Dickinson, c. 1861
'''''Republican'' version'''
Occasionally rides&nbsp;–
Literary critic Edmund Wilson, in his review of Civil War literature, surmised that "with encouragement, she would certainly have published".
Her books perpetrated the myths surrounding her aunt, while combining family tradition, personal recollections, and pieces of correspondence.
Dickinson's mother died on November 14, 1882.
Although their relationship was probably not romantic, Newton was a formative influence and would become the second in a series of older men (after Humphrey) that Dickinson referred to, variously, as her tutor, preceptor or master.
She went on to say that it was her "greatest pleasure to commune alone with the great God & to feel that he would listen to my prayers."
Higginson's essay, in which he urged aspiring writers to "charge your style with life", contained practical advice for those wishing to break into print.
Though the great Waters sleep,
Carlo died during this time after providing sixteen years of companionship; Dickinson never owned another dog.
Dickinson kept no garden notebooks or plant lists, but a clear impression can be formed from the letters and recollections of friends and family.
I taste a liquor never brewed&nbsp;–
Their friendship brought out some of her most intense writing and Bowles published a few of her poems in his journal.
Despite Dickinson's prolific writing, fewer than a dozen of her poems were published during her lifetime.
Often, this intensely private place is referred to as the "undiscovered continent" and the "landscape of the spirit" and embellished with nature imagery.
As death succeeded death, Dickinson found her world upended.
Susan was supportive of the poet, playing the role of "most beloved friend, influence, muse, and adviser" whose editorial suggestions Dickinson sometimes followed, Sue played a primary role in Emily's creative processes."
A narrow Fellow in the Grass
Dickinson's most psychologically complex poems explore the theme that the loss of hunger for life causes the death of self and place this at "the interface of murder and suicide".
Dickinson left no formal statement of her aesthetic intentions and, because of the variety of her themes, her work does not fit conveniently into any one genre.
Many of her poems deal with themes of death and immortality, two recurring topics in letters to her friends.
'''Original wording'''
The town of Amherst Jones Library's Special Collections department has an Emily Dickinson Collection consisting of approximately seven thousand items, including original manuscript poems and letters, family correspondence, scholarly articles and books, newspaper clippings, theses, plays, photographs and contemporary artwork and prints.
Emily once again was responsible for chores, including the baking, at which she excelled.
By the start of the 20th century, interest in her poetry became broader in scope and some critics began to consider Dickinson as essentially modern.
Austin and his family began to protect Emily's privacy, deciding that she was not to be a subject of discussion with outsiders.
Dickinson avoids pentameter, opting more generally for trimeter, tetrameter and, less often, dimeter.
When she was eighteen, Dickinson's family befriended a young attorney by the name of Benjamin Franklin Newton.
On May 6, 1828, he married Emily Norcross from Monson.
As early as 1891, William Dean Howells wrote that "If nothing else had come out of our life but this strange poetry, we should feel that in the work of Emily Dickinson, America, or New England rather, had made a distinctive addition to the literature of the world, and could not be left out of any record of it."
Dickinson was born in Amherst, Massachusetts.
No one was aware of the existence of these books until after her death.
She remained unconscious late into the night and weeks of ill health followed.
His judgment that her opus was "incomplete and unsatisfactory" would be echoed in the essays of the New Critics in the 1930s.
Dickinson scholar Vivian Pollak considers these references an autobiographical reflection of Dickinson's "thirsting-starving persona", an outward expression of her needy self-image as small, thin and frail.
On May 15, 1886, after several days of worsening symptoms, Emily Dickinson died at the age of 55.
Her niece, Martha Dickinson Bianchi, remembered "carpets of lily-of-the-valley and pansies, platoons of sweetpeas, hyacinths, enough in May to give all the bees of summer dyspepsia.
At other times, the imagery is darker and forbidding—castles or prisons, complete with corridors and rooms—to create a dwelling place of "oneself" where one resides with one's other selves.
Until 1855, Dickinson had not strayed far from Amherst.
She was at the seminary for only ten months.
These confessional poems are often "searing in their self-inquiry" and "harrowing to the reader" and typically take their metaphors from texts and paintings of Dickinson's day.
When the simple funeral was held in the Homestead's entrance hall, Emily stayed in her room with the door cracked open.
She turned first to her brother's wife and then to Mabel Loomis Todd, her brother's mistress, for assistance.
The Archives and Special Collections at Amherst College has substantial holdings of Dickinson's manuscripts and letters as well as a lock of Dickinson's hair and the original of the only positively identified image of the poet.
In a Nativity poem, Dickinson combines lightness and wit to revisit an ancient theme: "The Savior must have been&nbsp;/ A docile Gentleman&nbsp;–&nbsp;/ To come so far so cold a Day&nbsp;/ For little Fellowmen&nbsp;/ The Road to Bethlehem&nbsp;/ Since He and I were Boys&nbsp;/ Was leveled, but for that twould be&nbsp;/ A rugged billion Miles&nbsp;–".
Dickinson also had a good rapport with the children in her life.
The work that was published during her lifetime was usually altered significantly by the publishers to fit the conventional poetic rules of the time.
Then they went to Philadelphia for two weeks to visit family.
She wrote to Higginson that her father's "Heart was pure and terrible and I think no other like it exists."
Franklin also used typeset dashes of varying length to approximate the manuscripts' dashes more closely.
She became so melancholic that her parents sent her to stay with family in Boston to recover.
Since then, many critics have argued for thematic unity in these small collections, believing the ordering of the poems to be more than chronological or convenient.
His notice sudden is.
'''Morbidity''': Dickinson's poems reflect her "early and lifelong fascination" with illness, dying and death.
Withdrawing more and more from the outside world, Emily began in the summer of 1858 what would be her lasting legacy.
Emily took this role as her own, and "finding the life with her books and nature so congenial, continued to live it".
From the mid-1850s, Emily's mother became effectively bedridden with various chronic illnesses until her death in 1882.
Five weeks later, Dickinson wrote "We were never intimate ... while she was our Mother&nbsp;– but Mines in the same Ground meet by tunneling and when she became our Child, the Affection came."
Modern scholars and researchers are divided as to the cause for Dickinson's withdrawal and extreme seclusion.
The Homestead garden was well-known and admired locally in its time.
Todd believed that because Sue was often aloof and disagreeable, Emily was continually hurt by what was mostly a tempestuous friendship.
Higginson himself stated in his preface to the first edition of Dickinson's published work that the poetry's quality "is that of extraordinary grasp and insight", albeit "without the proper control and chastening" that the experience of publishing during her lifetime might have conferred.
''Not all the Frankfort Berries''
Martha Dickinson Bianchi, the daughter of Susan and Edward Dickinson, published collections of her aunt's poetry based on the manuscripts held by her family, whereas Mabel Loomis Todd's daughter, Millicent Todd Bingham, published collections based on the manuscripts held by her mother.
In direct opposition to the immense productivity that she displayed in the early 1860s, Dickinson wrote fewer poems in 1866.
Forming the basis of later Dickinson scholarship, Johnson's variorum brought all of Dickinson's known poems together for the first time.
After her younger sister Lavinia discovered the collection of nearly 1800 poems, Dickinson's first volume was published four years after her death.
Dickinson's own ambivalence on the matter militated against the likelihood of publication.
Since 1890 Dickinson has remained continuously in print.
Blackmur, in an attempt to focus and clarify the major claims for and against the poet's greatness, wrote in a landmark 1937 critical essay: "... she was a private poet who wrote as indefatigably as some women cook or knit.
An 8-cent commemorative stamp in honor of Dickinson was issued by the United States Postal Service on August 28, 1971 as the second stamp in the "American Poet" series.
Sometimes her use of these meters is regular, but oftentimes it is irregular.
She wrote later that he, "whose name my Father's Law Student taught me, has touched the secret Spring".
Few of the locals who exchanged messages with Dickinson during her last fifteen years ever saw her in person.
''Poems: Second Series'' followed in 1891, running to five editions by 1893; a third series appeared in 1896.
I Know not what to hope of her".
She was probably influenced by Lydia Maria Child's ''Letters from New York'', another gift from Newton (after reading it, she gushed "This then is a book!
After her church-going ended, about 1852, she wrote a poem opening: "Some keep the Sabbath going to Church&nbsp;– / I keep it, staying at Home".
It contained 424 pressed flower specimens that she collected, classified, and labeled using the Linnaean system.
Dickinson's chief physician gave the cause of death as Bright's disease and its duration as two and a half years.
The wisdom of the ages and the nature of man insist on so much".
That spring, accompanied by her mother and sister, she took one of her longest and farthest trips away from home.
Beset with personal loss as well as loss of domestic help, Dickinson may have been too overcome to keep up her previous level of writing.
In Philadelphia, she met Charles Wadsworth, a famous minister of the Arch Street Presbyterian Church, with whom she forged a strong friendship which lasted until his death in 1882.
She said of herself, "I am small, like the wren, and my hair is bold, like the chestnut bur, and my eyes like the sherry in the glass that the guest leaves."
While Dickinson was a prolific private poet, fewer than a dozen of her nearly 1,800 poems were published during her lifetime.
* William Austin (1829–1895), known as Austin, Aust or Awe
Reviewing poems she had written previously, she began making clean copies of her work, assembling carefully pieced-together manuscript books.
