Berkman offered sharply critical feedback, which she eventually incorporated at the price of a strain on their relationship.
Goldman has been honored by a number of organizations named in her memory.
At the age of seven, Goldman moved with her family to the Prussian city of Königsberg (then part of the German Empire), and she enrolled in a Realschule.
Instead, Goldman advocated targeted resistance in the form of strikes, protests, and "direct action against the invasive, meddlesome authority of our moral code".
and set about securing their release.
Later in Papilė she witnessed a peasant being whipped with a knout in the street.
Earlier, Czolgosz had tried but failed to become friends with Goldman and her companions.
Berkman took the helm of ''Mother Earth'' in 1907, while Goldman toured the country to raise funds to keep it functional.
The printer created a statement based on these sentiments that has become one of Goldman's most famous quotations, even though she probably never said or wrote it as such: "If I can't dance I don't want to be in your revolution."
Goldman intended the book, ''Living My Life'', as a single volume for a price the working class could afford (she urged no more than $5.00); her publisher Alfred A. Knopf, however, released it as two volumes sold together for $7.50.
Emma Goldman was born on June 27, 1869.
Her exact words are unclear: undercover agents insist she ordered the crowd to "take everything&nbsp;...&nbsp;by force", while Goldman later recounted this message: "Well then, demonstrate before the palaces of the rich; demand work.
Another philosopher who influenced Goldman was Friedrich Nietzsche.
However, her preferred fields of specialization—midwifery and massage—were not available to nursing students in the US.
Anarchism and free association were to her logical responses to the confines of government control and capitalism.
The ensuing turmoil intrigued Goldman, even though she did not fully understand it at the time.
"I care if his spirit of today is correct."
She began editing the weekly ''CNT-FAI Information Bulletin'' and responded to English-language mail.
A week later she was arrested in Philadelphia and returned to New York City for trial, charged with "inciting to riot".
When Taube became pregnant, Abraham hoped desperately for a son; a daughter, he believed, would serve as one more sign of failure.
In 1915 Goldman conducted a nationwide speaking tour in part to raise awareness about contraception options.
The state, anti-capitalist though it was, also posed a threat.
She called it "the most beautiful tribute I have ever received".
However, this second attempt was denied.
In prison, she was again assigned to work as a seamstress, under the eye of a "miserable gutter-snipe of a 21-year-old boy paid to get results".
Goldman found it difficult to acclimate to the German leftist community.
After convincing Helena not to tell their parents of her speech, Goldman found her mind a blank once on stage.
The philosophy of Atheism expresses the expansion and growth of the human mind.
After only a few months of operating the shop, however, Goldman and Berkman were deflected from the venture by their involvement in the Homestead Strike.
"I don't care if a man's theory for tomorrow is correct," she once wrote.
After the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War, she traveled to Spain to support the anarchist revolution there.
Fleeing the rising antisemitism of Saint Petersburg, their parents and brothers joined them a year later.
For weeks, he struggled to readjust to life on the outside; an abortive speaking tour ended in failure, and in Cleveland he purchased a revolver with the intent of killing himself.
Soon she was surrounded by admirers and friends, besieged with invitations to talks and interviews.
Her writing and lectures spanned a wide variety of issues, including prisons, atheism, freedom of speech, militarism, capitalism, marriage, free love, and homosexuality.
She saw early feminists as confined in their scope and bounded by social forces of Puritanism and capitalism.
A passionate student, Goldman passed the exam for admission into a gymnasium, but her religion teacher refused to provide a certificate of good behavior and she was unable to attend.
Some 58 enlisted men and four officers provided security on the journey and pistols were distributed to the crew.
Although the nation's attitude toward the topic seemed to be liberalizing, Goldman was arrested on February 11, 1916, as she was about to give another public lecture.
She spent two hours talking to Goldman, and wrote a positive article about the woman she described as a "modern Joan of Arc".
He would be in charge of the deed; she of the word.
Goldman and Berkman were released from prison during America's Red Scare of 1919–20, when public anxiety about wartime pro-German activities had morphed into a pervasive fear of Bolshevism and the prospect of an imminent radical revolution.
When she read Chernyshevsky's novel, ''What Is to Be Done?''
The ensuing hardship combined with the emotional distance of husband and wife to make the household a tense place for the children.
Once he moved in with Goldman's family, however, their relationship faltered.
Anarchism stands for a social order based on the free grouping of individuals for the purpose of producing real social wealth; an order that will guarantee to every human being free access to the earth and full enjoyment of the necessities of life, according to individual desires, tastes, and inclinations.
After four months, they married in February 1887.
She left for Nice immediately but when she arrived that morning, Goldman found that he had shot himself and was in a nearly comatose paralysis.
(1863), she found a role model in the protagonist Vera, who adopts a Nihilist philosophy and escapes her repressive family to live freely and organize a sewing cooperative.
One persistent suitor took her into a hotel room and committed what Goldman called "violent contact"; two biographers call it rape.
These were later collected and published in book form as ''My Disillusionment in Russia'' (1923) and ''My Further Disillusionment in Russia'' (1924).
He encouraged her vigorously, telling her that she was "to take my place when I am gone."
Desperate, Goldman threatened to throw herself into the Neva River if she could not go.
One of the first political moments that brought Berkman and Goldman together was the Homestead Strike.
Worse, anarchists and other radicals around the world refused to support their cause.
As she awaited trial, Goldman was visited by Nellie Bly, a reporter for the ''New York World''.
The authorities used this as a pretext to charge Goldman with planning McKinley's assassination.
Anarchism was central to Goldman's view of the world and she is today considered one of the most important figures in the history of anarchism.
She met with renowned anarchists like Errico Malatesta, Louise Michel, and Peter Kropotkin.
One of her first public talks in support of "the Cause" was in Rochester.
Berkman was convicted of attempted murder and sentenced to 22 years in prison; his absence from her life was very difficult for Goldman.
In the spring of 1908, Goldman met and fell in love with Ben Reitman, the so-called "Hobo doctor".
Yet it is one thing to employ violence in combat, as a means of defense.
The means employed become, through individual habit and social practice, part and parcel of the final purpose...."  In the same chapter, however, Goldman affirmed that "Revolution is indeed a violent process," and noted that violence was the "tragic inevitability of revolutionary upheavals..."  Some misinterpreted her comments on the Bolshevik terror as a rejection of all militant force, but Goldman corrected this in the preface to the first US edition of ''My Disillusionment in Russia'':
When the US Justice Department sent spies to observe, they reported the meetings as "packed".
Two years later, Goldman began feeling frustrated with lecture audiences.
Her new status gave her peace of mind, and allowed her to travel to France and Canada.
Convinced Goldman was involved in the plot, police raided her apartment and—finding no evidence—pressured her landlord into evicting her.
Frick survived the attempt on his life in 1892 and Berkman was sentenced to 22 years in prison.
In the wake of these events, socialism gained support over anarchism among US radicals.
In the fighting that ensued, approximately 1,000 rebelling sailors and soldiers were killed and two thousand more were arrested.
Less than a year after the wedding, they were divorced; he begged her to return and threatened to poison himself if she did not.
She soon became swamped with requests for interviews and lectures.
She responded by throwing a glass of ice water in his face.
''Buford'', a ship the press nicknamed the "Soviet Ark," sailed from the Army's New York Port of Embarkation on December 21.
When her first husband died of tuberculosis, Taube was devastated.
Most of the press approved enthusiastically.
Originally opposed to anything less than complete revolution, Goldman was challenged during one talk by an elderly worker in the front row.
In 1923, she published a book about her experiences, ''My Disillusionment in Russia''.
Another teacher tried to molest his female students and was fired when Goldman fought back.
This event traumatized her and contributed to her lifelong distaste for violent authority.
Attracted to anarchism after the Haymarket affair, Goldman became a writer and a renowned lecturer on anarchist philosophy, women's rights, and social issues, attracting crowds of thousands.
She quickly discovered that her fears were justified.
The unrest spread to the port town of Kronstadt, where a military response was ordered.
As a doctor, he attended to people suffering from poverty and illness, particularly venereal diseases.
Were they also to forgo the release of perhaps two hours a day from the hated work?
After Czolgosz's execution, Goldman withdrew from the world.
Her faith in the movement unshaken, Goldman returned to London as an official representative of the CNT-FAI.
Although they were only distant acquaintances, she accepted and they were married on June 27, 1925.
In March 1921, strikes erupted in Petrograd when workers took to the streets demanding better food rations and more union autonomy.
First drawn to it during the persecution of anarchists after the 1886 Haymarket affair, she wrote and spoke regularly on behalf of anarchism.
Attorney General Alexander Mitchell Palmer and J. Edgar Hoover, head of the US Department of Justice's General Intelligence Division, were intent on using the Anarchist Exclusion Act and its 1918 expansion to deport any non-citizens they could identify as advocates of anarchy or revolution.
Russia, meanwhile, refused to send weapons to anarchist forces, and disinformation campaigns were being waged against the anarchists across Europe and the US.
The family moved to the Russian city of Saint Petersburg, where her father opened one unsuccessful store after another.
In February and March 1936, Berkman underwent a pair of prostate gland operations.
Helena, the oldest, provided the comfort they lacked from their mother; she filled Goldman's childhood with "whatever joy it had".
The assistant District Attorney questioned Goldman about her anarchism, as well as her atheism; the judge spoke of her as "a dangerous woman".
"The only demand that property recognizes," she wrote in ''Anarchism and Other Essays'', "is its own gluttonous appetite for greater wealth, because wealth means power; the power to subdue, to crush, to exploit, the power to enslave, to outrage, to degrade."
In 1925, the spectre of deportation loomed again, but a Scottish anarchist named James Colton offered to marry her and provide British citizenship.
He said that he understood my impatience with such small demands as a few hours less a day, or a few dollars more a week....
Goldman has been depicted in numerous works of fiction over the years, including Warren Beatty's 1981 film ''Reds'', in which she was portrayed by Maureen Stapleton, who won an Academy Award for her performance.
Shortly afterward, Congress passed the Selective Service Act of 1917, which required all males aged 21–30 to register for military conscription.
She also read dozens of books, including works by the American activist-writers Ralph Waldo Emerson and Henry David Thoreau; novelist Nathaniel Hawthorne; poet Walt Whitman, and philosopher John Stuart Mill.
Emma Goldman's Orthodox Jewish family lived in the Lithuanian city of Kaunas (called Kovno at the time, part of the Russian Empire).
On Saturday, February 17, 1940, Goldman suffered a debilitating stroke.
She was influenced by many diverse thinkers and writers, including Mikhail Bakunin, Henry David Thoreau, Peter Kropotkin, Ralph Waldo Emerson, Nikolai Chernyshevsky, and Mary Wollstonecraft.
During her life, Goldman was lionized as a free-thinking "rebel woman" by admirers, and denounced by detractors as an advocate of politically motivated murder and violent revolution.
In 1970, Dover Press reissued Goldman's biography, ''Living My Life'', and in 1972, feminist writer Alix Kates Shulman issued a collection of Goldman's writing and speeches, ''Red Emma Speaks''.
The league enlisted the aid of Clarence Darrow and Edgar Lee Masters, who took Turner's case to the US Supreme Court.
During a talk in Cleveland, Czolgosz had approached Goldman and asked her advice on which books he should read.
The song was later performed by Gailiunas' new band The Troublemakers and released on their 2004 album ''Here Come The Troublemakers''.
She sent him the selection from ''Living My Life'' about "the right to self-expression, everybody's right to beautiful, radiant things", recounting that she had been admonished "that it did not behoove an agitator to dance".
As she was transported to Missouri State Penitentiary (now Jefferson City Correctional Center), Goldman wrote to a friend: "Two years imprisonment for having made an uncompromising stand for one's ideal.
In the wake of these events, Goldman and Berkman decided there was no future in the country for them.
During interrogation he claimed to be an Anarchist and said he had been inspired to act after attending a speech held by Goldman.
The movement for women's emancipation has so far made but the first step in that direction."
She asked for a raise and was denied; she quit and took work at a smaller shop nearby.
Using the name E. G. Smith, she vanished from public life and took on a series of private nursing jobs.
Later in court, Detective-Sergeant Charles Jacobs offered yet another version of her speech.
Thus, she sailed to Europe, lecturing in London, Glasgow, and Edinburgh.
Goldman was a prolific writer, penning countless pamphlets and articles on a diverse range of subjects.
She and anarchist writer Alexander Berkman, her lover and lifelong friend, planned to assassinate industrialist and financier Henry Clay Frick as an act of propaganda of the deed.
When the US Congress passed the Anarchist Exclusion Act, however, a new wave of activism rose to oppose it, carrying Goldman back into the movement.
Goldman began to worry about the future of Spain's anarchism when the CNT-FAI joined a coalition government in 1937—against the core anarchist principle of abstaining from state structures—and, more distressingly, made repeated concessions to Communist forces in the name of uniting against fascism.
When the Panic of 1893 struck in the following year, the United States suffered one of its worst economic crises ever.
Initially supportive of that country's October Revolution which brought the Bolsheviks to power, Goldman reversed her opinion in the wake of the Kronstadt rebellion and denounced the Soviet Union for its violent repression of independent voices.
In 1892, Goldman joined with Berkman and Stein in opening an ice cream shop in Worcester, Massachusetts.
Goldman was pained by his rejection of her, but considered it a consequence of his prison experience.
Goldman returned to the US and continued speaking to large audiences.
Upon her arrival, the novelist Rebecca West arranged a reception dinner for her, attended by philosopher Bertrand Russell, novelist H. G. Wells, and more than two hundred others.
Her belief that social liberation should extend to gay men and lesbians was virtually unheard of at the time, even among anarchists.
If they deny you both, take bread."
The philosophy of theism, if we can call it a philosophy, is static and fixed.
In the afterword to ''My Disillusionment in Russia'', she wrote: "There is no greater fallacy than the belief that aims and purposes are one thing, while methods and tactics are another....
After touring a series of collectives in the province of Huesca, she told a group of workers: "Your revolution will destroy forever the notion that anarchism stands for chaos."
Goldman viewed crime as a natural outgrowth of an unjust economic system, and in her essay "Prisons: A Social Crime and Failure", she quoted liberally from the 19th-century authors Fyodor Dostoevsky and Oscar Wilde on prisons, and wrote: Year after year the gates of prison hells return to the world an emaciated, deformed, will-less, shipwrecked crew of humanity, with the Cain mark on their foreheads, their hopes crushed, all their natural inclinations thwarted.
Goldman was also an advocate of free love, and a strong critic of marriage.
In numerous speeches and letters, she defended the right of gay men and lesbians to love as they pleased and condemned the fear and stigma associated with homosexuality.
She was buried in German Waldheim Cemetery (now named Forest Home Cemetery) in Forest Park, Illinois, a western suburb of Chicago, among the graves of other labor and social activists including Ben Reitman and those executed after the Haymarket affair.
Goldman viewed the state as essentially and inevitably a tool of control and domination.
Goldman began speaking to crowds of frustrated men and women in New York.
She stayed in Canada, writing articles for US publications.
Tomorrow native Americans will be banished.
Louis Post at the Department of Labor, which had ultimate authority over deportation decisions, determined that the revocation of her husband's American citizenship in 1908 had revoked hers as well.
At her deportation hearing on October 27, she refused to answer questions about her beliefs on the grounds that her American citizenship invalidated any attempt to deport her under the Anarchist Exclusion Act, which could be enforced only against non-citizens of the US.
On May 18 of the same year, Alexander Berkman was released from prison.
She longed to join the mass demonstrations in Boston; memories of the Haymarket affair overwhelmed her, compounded by her isolation.
In June 1892, a steel plant in Homestead, Pennsylvania owned by Andrew Carnegie became the focus of national attention when talks between the Carnegie Steel Company and the Amalgamated Association of Iron and Steel Workers (AA) broke down.
At the corset shop, she was forced to fend off unwelcome advances from Russian officers and other men.
To this end, she and Berkman organized the No Conscription League of New York, which proclaimed: "We oppose conscription because we are internationalists, antimilitarists, and opposed to all wars waged by capitalistic governments."
When an English anarchist named John Turner was arrested under the Anarchist Exclusion Act and threatened with deportation, Goldman joined forces with the Free Speech League to champion his cause.
She had refused to cooperate with authorities, and was sent to prison for 14 months.
She yearned to "reach the few who really want to learn, rather than the many who come to be amused".
She left ''Freiheit'' and joined with another publication, ''Die Autonomie''.
Invigorated anew by this violation of freedom of assembly, he declared "My resurrection has come!"
Anarchists and syndicalists from around the world gathered to sort out the tension between the two ideologies, but no decisive agreement was reached.
After initially promising a court fight, she decided not to appeal his ruling.
Their poverty forced the children to work, and Goldman took an assortment of jobs including one in a corset shop.
The pair were charged with conspiracy to "induce persons not to register" under the newly enacted Espionage Act, and were held on US$25,000 bail each.
The book enthralled Goldman and remained a source of inspiration throughout her life.
When Margaret Sanger, an advocate of access to contraception, coined the term "birth control" and disseminated information about various methods in the June 1914 issue of her magazine ''The Woman Rebel'', she received aggressive support from Goldman, who had already been an active in efforts to increase birth control access for several years.
The factory's manager was Henry Clay Frick, a fierce opponent of the union.
Goldman saw the decision as an exercise in militarist aggression, driven by capitalism.
She wrote: "We are in need of unhampered growth out of old traditions and habits.
She was "too astounded for speech".
He told them: "There can be no free speech in a revolutionary period."
Lena, however, was distant and uncharitable.
To make money, Goldman decided to pursue the medical work she had studied in prison.
The Labor Department included Goldman and Berkman among 249 aliens it deported ''en masse'', mostly people with only vague associations with radical groups who had been swept up in government raids in November.
In her autobiography, she wrote: "Nietzsche was not a social theorist, but a poet, a rebel, and innovator.
Carrying a bouquet of roses, she met him on the platform and found herself "seized by terror and pity" as she beheld his gaunt, pale form.
She presented a written statement instead: "Today so-called aliens are deported.
On July 6, a fight broke out between three hundred Pinkerton guards and a crowd of armed union workers.
They tracked her to a residence in Chicago she shared with Havel, as well as Mary and Abe Isaak, an anarchist couple.
She met the socialist Kate Richards O'Hare, who had also been imprisoned under the Espionage Act.
Communists despised her outspokenness about Soviet repression; liberals derided her radicalism.
Goldman's and Reitman's experiences in the San Diego free speech fight (1912) were notorious examples of state and capitalist repression of the Industrial Workers of the World's campaign of free speech fights.
I did not believe that a Cause which stood for a beautiful ideal, for anarchism, for release and freedom from conventions and prejudice, should demand denial of life and joy.
Variations of this saying have appeared on thousands of T-shirts, buttons, posters, bumper stickers, coffee mugs, hats, and other items.
We say that if America has entered the war to make the world safe for democracy, she must first make democracy safe in America.
''Mother Earth'' was staffed by a cadre of radical activists, including Hippolyte Havel, Max Baginski, and Leonard Abbott.
"I could never in my life work within the confines of the State," she wrote to her niece, "Bolshevist or otherwise."
In May 1937, however, Communist-led forces attacked anarchist strongholds and broke up agrarian collectives.
In the midst of the nation's patriotic fervor, many elements of the political left refused to support the League's efforts.
Her outspoken championship of her ideals, in the face of persistent arrests, inspired Roger Baldwin, one of the founders of the American Civil Liberties Union.
By year's end, the unemployment rate was higher than 20%, and "hunger demonstrations" sometimes gave way to riots.
He died later that evening.
This position was vastly unpopular, as Hitler's attacks on Jewish communities reverberated throughout the Jewish diaspora.
A coalition of people and organizations across the left end of the political spectrum opposed the law on grounds that it violated freedom of speech, and she had the nation's ear once again.
Once on the street, she caught the eye of a man who took her into a saloon, bought her a beer, gave her ten dollars, informed her she did not have "the knack", and told her to quit the business.
She wrote in ''Mother Earth'' that despite its dependence on Communist government, it represented "the most fundamental, far-reaching and all-embracing principles of human freedom and of economic well-being".
She was impressed by his fiery oration, and he took her under his wing, training her in methods of public speaking.
They reunited, but after three months she left once again.
Born in Kovno, Russian Empire (present-day Kaunas, Lithuania) to a Jewish family, Goldman emigrated to the United States in 1885.
Despite Helena's offer to pay for the trip, Abraham turned a deaf ear to their pleas.
I have never denied that violence is inevitable, nor do I gainsay it now.
He and Goldman began an affair; they shared a commitment to free love, but whereas Reitman took a variety of lovers, Goldman did not.
Goldman has also been a character in two Broadway musicals, ''Ragtime'' and ''Assassins''.
In 1906, Goldman decided to start a publication of her own, "a place of expression for the young idealists in arts and letters".
It is quite another thing to make a principle of terrorism, to institutionalize it, to assign it the most vital place in the social struggle.
