Geher, Warner and Brown, 2001); scenarios are sometimes also depicted in printed form (e.g.
Some questionnaires claim to have been able to tap into both cognitive and affective substrates (e.g.
These practices include encouraging the child to imagine the perspectives of others and teaching the child to reflect on his or her own feelings.
Patnaik claims that the real opportunity for companies doing business in the 21st Century is to create a widely held sense of empathy for customers, pointing to Nike, Harley-Davidson, and IBM as examples of "Open Empathy Organizations".
The Extreme Male Brain (EMB) theory proposes that individuals on the autistic spectrum are characterized by impairments in empathy due to sex differences in the brain: specifically, people with autism spectrum conditions show an exaggerated male profile.
The same traits may commonly be found among those who practice bdsm.
The study of the neural underpinnings of empathy has received increased interest following the target paper published by Preston and Frans de Waal, following the discovery of mirror neurons in monkeys that fire both when the creature watches another perform an action as well as when they themselves perform it.
Heinz Kohut is the main introducer of the principle of empathy in psychoanalysis.
This would allow for a stronger sadness-based motivation to obscure the effects of an empathic concern-based altruistic motivation.
This study brings up the possibility that if ants have the capacity for empathy and/or altruism, these complex processes may be derived from primitive and simpler mechanisms.
Empathy promotes pro social relationships, helps mediate aggression, and allows us to relate to others, all of which make empathy an important emotion among children.
It is, therefore, possible that impaired cognitive empathy (the capacity for understanding another person's experience and perspective) may account for borderline personality disorder individuals' tendency for interpersonal dysfunction, while "hyper-emotional empathy" may account for the emotional over-reactivity observed in these individuals.
This finding shows the importance of mother-child attachment and bonding, and how it may be crucial to successful socio-emotional development, such as empathic-like behaviors.
One primary study confirmed that patients with borderline personality disorder were significantly impaired in cognitive empathy, yet there was no sign of impairment in affective empathy.
Gladstein (1987) summarizes the position noting that empathy has been measured from the point of view of the empathizer, the recipient for empathy and the third-party observer.
Researchers have approached the measurement of empathy from a number of perspectives.
A review published in the journal ''Neuropsychologia'' found that women tended to be better at recognizing facial effects, expression processing and emotions in general.
On average, female subjects score higher than males on the Empathy Quotient (EQ), while males tend to score higher on the Systemizing Quotient (SQ).
Empathic anger has direct effects on both helping and punishing desires.
One study found that, relative to typically developing children, high-functioning children with autism showed reduced mirror neuron activity in the brain's inferior frontal gyrus (pars opercularis) while imitating and observing emotional expressions.
In the 2011 book ''The Empathy Factor'', organizational consultant Marie Miyashiro similarly argues the value of bringing empathy to the workplace, and offers Nonviolent Communication as an effective mechanism for achieving this.
Measures of empathy show that mirror neurons are activated during arousal of sympathetic responses and prolonged activation shows increased probability to help others.
Altruism is behavior that is aimed at benefitting another person, while egotism is a behavior that is acted out for personal gain.
Their focus is upon measuring empathy through facial and other non-verbally expressed reactions in the empathizer.
In the field of medicine, a measurement tool for carers is the ''Jefferson Scale of Physician Empathy, Health Professional Version (JSPE-HP)''.
In essence, not every individual responds equally and uniformly the same to various circumstances.
Atypical empathic responses have been associated with autism and particular personality disorders such as psychopathy, borderline,  narcissistic, and schizoid personality disorders; conduct disorder; schizophrenia; bipolar disorder; and depersonalization.
In a second study, individuals with psychopathy exhibited a strong response in pain-affective brain regions when taking an imagine-self perspective, but failed to recruit the neural circuits that were activated in controls during an imagine-other perspective—in particular the ventromedial prefrontal cortex and amygdala—which may contribute to their lack of empathic concern.
Levenson and Ruef, 1992; Leslie et al., 2004).
Theory of mind involves the ability to understand that other people may have beliefs that are different from one's own, and is thought to involve the cognitive component of empathy.
Other research and publications by Tausch, Aspy, Roebuck.
According to positive psychologists, people can be adequately moved by their empathies to be altruistic.
A recent study on psychopaths found that, under certain circumstances, they could willfully empathize with others, and that their empathic reaction initiated the same way it does for controls.
However, even in people without conditions such as these, the balance between affective and cognitive empathy varies.
Neuroscientists have already discovered that people scoring high on empathy tests have especially busy mirror neuron systems in their brains (Dr. Christian Keysers).
This combined word is then modified by an alpha privative (prefix ''a-''; that is, "not").
It cannot be said that empathy is a single unipolar construct but rather a set of constructs.
Psychopathic criminals were brain-scanned while watching videos of a person harming another individual.
In order to achieve intercultural empathy, psychologists have employed empathy training.
Rodents have been shown to demonstrate empathy for cagemates (but not strangers) in pain.
A recent study has demonstrated prosocial behavior elicited by empathy in rodents.
Since the first mammals lacked a self-aware distinction between self and other, as shown by most mammals failing at mirror tests, the first mammals or anything more evolutionarily primitive than them cannot have had a context of default egoism requiring an empathy mechanism to be transcended.
The lack of empathic attunement inherent to alexithymic states may reduce quality and satisfaction of relationships.
He suggests that researchers should instead stipulate what kind of empathy they are setting out to measure rather than simplistically stating that they are setting out to measure the unitary phenomenon "empathy"; a view more recently endorsed by Duan and Hill (1996).
A multitude of behaviors observed in primates, both in captivity and in the wild, and in particular in bonobos, which are reported as the most empathetic of all the primates.
These empathy impairments are also associated with impairments in social cognitive tasks.
Empathy in the broadest sense refers to a reaction of one individual to another’s emotional state.
Proper empathic engagement helps an individual understand and anticipate the behavior of another.
The participants in the high-psychopathy group exhibited significantly less activation in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex, amygdala and periaqueductal gray parts of the brain, but more activity in the striatum and the insula when compared to control participants.
The research also found additional aspects of the brain were activated when youngsters saw another person intentionally hurt by another individual, including regions involved in moral reasoning.
The mirror neuron system is essential for emotional empathy.
The term was adapted by Hermann Lotze and Robert Vischer to create the German word ''Einfühlung'' ("feeling into"), which was translated by Edward B. Titchener into the English term empathy.
Studies today enable us to see the activation of mirror neurons and attempt to explain the basic processes of empathy.
The relationship between empathy and anger response towards another person has also been investigated, with two studies basically finding that the higher a person's perspective taking ability, the less angry they were in response to a provocation.
Empathy leads to sympathy by definition unlike the over-aroused emotional response that turns into personal distress and causes a turning-away from another’s distress.
Psychopathy is, however, associated with impairment in the other major component of empathy—affective (emotional) empathy—which includes the ability to ''feel'' the suffering and emotions of others (what scientists would term as emotional contagion), and those with the condition are therefore not distressed by the suffering of their victims.
Interestingly, however, maternal warmth was negatively related to empathy within children, especially in girls.
The observed study would then have sadness as less intense than more salient altruistic motivation.
Further analysis of brain tools such as event related potentials found that females who saw human suffering tended to have higher ERP waveforms than males.
In their paper, they argue that attended perception of the object's state automatically activates neural representations, and that this activation automatically primes or generates the associated autonomic and somatic responses (idea of perception-action-coupling), unless inhibited.
Work conducted by Professor Jean Decety with large samples of incarcerated psychopaths offers additional insights.
Their findings are consistent with previous fMRI studies of pain empathy with adults.
The extent to which a person's emotions are publicly observable, or mutually recognized as such has significant social consequences.
Research has shown that the ability of empathy in other species is attainable.
A 2006 meta-analysis by researcher Rena A Kirkland in the journal ''North American Journal of Psychology'' found significant sex differences favoring females in "Reading of the mind" test.
Empathy is a spontaneous sharing of affect, provoked by witnessing and sympathizing with another’s emotional state.
It also is the ability  to feel and share another person’s emotions.
For example, one alternative explanation for the problem-specific helping pattern may be that the sequence of events in the same problem condition first made subjects sad when they empathized with the problem and then maintained or enhanced subjects’ sadness when they were later exposed to the same plight.
Measures also frequently require subjects to self-report upon their own ability or capacity for empathy, using Likert-style numerical responses to a printed questionnaire that may have been designed to tap into the affective, cognitive-affective or largely cognitive substrates of empathic functioning.
Apart from the automatic tendency to recognize the emotions of others, one may also deliberately engage in empathic reasoning.
In most other respects, however, the experience is modified so that what is experienced is experienced as being the other's experience; in experiencing empathy, what is experienced is not "my" experience, even though ''I'' experience it.
Carl R. Rogers pioneered research in effective psychotherapy and teaching which espoused that empathy coupled with unconditional positive regard or caring for students and authenticity or congruence were the most important traits for a therapist or teacher to have.
While exact motives behind complex social behaviors are difficult to distinguish, the "ability to put oneself in the shoes of another person and experience events and emotions the way that person experienced them" is the definitive factor for truly altruistic behavior according to Batson's empathy-altruism hypothesis.
Jenkins argues that empathy only enjoys such a privileged position in the present because it corresponds harmoniously with the dominant liberal discourse of modern society and can be connected to John Stuart Mill's concept of reciprocal freedom.
Given the power of empathic feelings to evoke altruistic motivation, people may unfortunately learn to suppress or avoid these feelings.
Another recent study provides evidence of separate neural pathways activating reciprocal suppression in different regions of the brain associated with the performance of "social" and "mechanical" tasks.
This is particularly the case where we recognize the emotions that someone has towards us during real time interactions.
students than younger students.
"Reading of the mind" test is an advanced ability measure of cognitive empathy in which Kirkland's analysis involved 259 studies across 10 countries.
The existence of individuals with heightened personal distress on the autism spectrum has been offered as an explanation as to why at least some people with autism would appear to have heightened emotional empathy, although increased personal distress may be an effect of heightened egocentrism, emotional empathy depends on mirror neuron activity (which, as described previously, has been found to be reduced in those with autism), and empathy in people on the autism spectrum is generally reduced.
In situations of close temporal and physical distance, and with family or friends, our moral obligation seems stronger to us than with strangers at a distance naturally.
Baron-Cohen, Leslie & Frith, 1988; the Sally-Anne test).
This feeling can be transformed into empathic anger, feelings of injustice, or guilt.
The dogs did not approach the participants in the usual form of excitement, tail wagging or panting.
Although this could insinuate that dogs have the cognitive capacity for empathy, this could also mean that domesticated dogs have learned to comfort distressed humans through generations of being rewarded for that specific behavior.
Behavioral and neuroimaging research show that two underlying facets of the personality dimensions Extraversion and Agreeableness (the Warmth-Altruistic personality profile) are associated with empathic accuracy and increased brain activity in two brain regions important for empathic processing (medial prefrontal cortex and temporoparietal junction).
Recognitions that are both accurate and tolerable are central features of empathy.
Based on a metaphorical affinity with touch, philosopher Edith Wyschogrod claims that the proximity entailed by empathy increases the potential vulnerability of either party.
According to researchers at the University of Chicago who used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), children between the ages of 7 and 12 years appear to be naturally inclined to feel empathy for others in pain.
His claim is that moral motivation does, and should, stem from a basis of empathic response.
Such sympathetic action may afford access to sympathetic feelings for another and, perhaps, trigger emotions of kindness, forgiveness.
Others suggested that despite the results of the study, it remained unclear whether psychopaths' experience of empathy was the same as that of controls, and also questioned the possibility of devising therapeutic interventions that would make the empathic reactions more automatic.
It was observed in all ant species that rescue behavior was only directed towards nest mates.
There is no way of telling the present with the means of the past.
Lieutenant Colonel Dave Grossman, in his book ''On Killing'', suggests that military training artificially creates depersonalization in soldiers, suppressing empathy and making it easier for them to kill other human beings.
This behavior is found in humans, and particularly in human infants.
Such institutions, he claims, see new opportunities more quickly than competitors, adapt to change more easily, and create workplaces that offer employees a greater sense of mission in their jobs.
Paternal warmth was found to be significantly important, and was positively related to empathy within children, especially in boys.
The third and highest level is held to be a meta-ethical theory of the moral structure of care.
'''Empathy''' is the capacity to understand or feel what another person is experiencing from within the other being's frame of reference, i.e., the capacity to place oneself in another's position.
This distinction is vital because empathy is associated with the moral emotion sympathy, or empathetic concern, and consequently also prosocial or altruistic action.
In the development of human empathy, individual differences appear, ranging from no apparent empathic ability, or empathy which is harmful to self or others, to well-balanced empathy, including the ability to distinguish between self and other.
Theory of mind is the ability to understand the perspectives of others.
The ants not ensnared in the nylon thread proceeded to attempt to rescue their nest mates by sand digging, limb pulling, transporting sand away from the trapped ant, and when efforts remained unfruitful, began to attack the nylon thread itself; biting and pulling apart the threads.
This way it is possible to develop step-by-step the students' feeling for group reactions and networking.
Some believe that empathy involves the ability to match another’s emotions, while others believe that empathy involves being tenderhearted toward another person.
Sometimes, when someone is feeling empathetic towards another, acts of altruism occur.
Bodily or "somatic" measures can be looked upon as behavioral measures at a micro level.
The Empathic Concern scale assesses “other-oriented” feelings of sympathy and concern and the Personal Distress scale measures “self-oriented” feelings of personal anxiety and unease.
In phenomenology, empathy describes the experience of something from the other's viewpoint, without confusion between self and other.
However, empathy-induced altruism may not always produce prosocial effects.
Also during the second year, toddlers will play games of falsehood or "pretend" in an effort to fool others, and this requires that the child know what others believe before he or she can manipulate those beliefs.
Empathy is also considered to be the condition of intersubjectivity and, as such, the source of the constitution of objectivity.
Emotions motivate individual behavior that aids in solving communal challenges as well as guiding group decisions about social exchange.
An individual may simulate fictitious versions of the beliefs, desires, character traits and context of another individual to see what emotional feelings it provokes.
Empathy is distinct from sympathy, pity, and emotional contagion.
Another investigation with similar brain tools such as N400 amplitudes found, on average, higher N400 in females in response to social situations which positively correlated with self-reported empathy.
Another 2014 meta-analysis in the journal of ''Cognition and Emotion'', found overall female advantage in non-verbal emotional recognition across 215 samples.
Borderline personality disorder is characterized by extensive behavioral and interpersonal difficulties that arise from emotional and cognitive dysfunction.
A study has suggested that the empathy deficits associated with the autism spectrum may be due to significant comorbidity between alexithymia and autism spectrum conditions rather than a result of social impairment.
An analysis from the journal of ''Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews''  also found that, overall, there are sex differences in empathy from birth, growing larger with age and which remains consistent and stable across lifespan.
Empathy is not a process that is likely to deliver certain judgments about the emotional states of others.
Canines have been hypothesized to share empathic-like responding towards human species.
Jenkins argues the past is a foreign country and as we do not have access to the epistemological conditions of by gone ages we are unable to empathize.
At least one study using this tool with health sciences' students has found
These studies have shown that observing another person's emotional state activates parts of the neuronal network involved in processing that same state in oneself, whether it is disgust, touch, or pain.
It has been shown that males are generally less empathetic than females.
The ability to imagine oneself as another person is a sophisticated imaginative process.
Awareness of this impending futile effort—such as nurses caring for terminal patients or pedestrians walking by the homeless—may make individuals try to avoid feelings of empathy in order to avoid the resulting altruistic motivation.
Types of empathy include cognitive empathy, emotional empathy, and somatic empathy.
Empathic recognition may or may not be welcomed or socially desirable.
Clinical treatment of alexithymia could involve using a simple associative learning process between musically induced emotions and their cognitive correlates.
His principle applies to the method of gathering unconscious material.
An important target of the method Learning by teaching (LbT) is to train systematically and, in each lesson, teach empathy.
In empathy we feel what we believe are the emotions of another, which makes it both affective and cognitive by most psychologists.
Other studies show no significant difference, and suggest gender differences are the result of motivational differences.
It is possible to see this form of anger as a pro-social emotion.
But it has been shown that researchers in this area who have used very similar procedures sometimes obtain apparently contradictory results.
Those adults operating with level-III understanding synthesize systems of justice and care-based ethics.
Parenting style, parent empathy, and prior social experiences were looked at.
The English word ''empathy'' is derived from the Ancient Greek word ἐμπάθεια (''empatheia'', meaning "physical affection or passion").
Activity in this area was inversely related to symptom severity in the social domain, suggesting that a dysfunctional mirror neuron system may underlie social and communication deficits observed in autism, including impaired theory of mind and empathy.
One study hypothesized that empathy training would increase the measured level of relational empathy among the individuals in the experimental group when compared to the control group.
One of the most widely read studies on the evolution of empathy, which discusses a neural perception-action mechanism (PAM), is the one by Stephanie Preston and de Waal.
They were also tested on their responses to seeing short videos of facial expressions of pain.
The empathy-altruism relationship also has broad and practical implications.
Structural fMRI studies also found females to have larger grey matter volumes in posterior inferior frontal and anterior inferior parietal cortex  areas which are correlated with mirror neurons in fMRI literature.
He claims that our natural reaction to situations of moral significance are explained by empathy.
In studies by the Management Research Group, empathy was found to be the strongest predictor of ethical leadership behavior out of 22 competencies in its management model, and empathy was one of the three strongest predictors of senior executive effectiveness.
These may be rooted in another problem: deciding what empathy is and what it is not.
By the age of two years, children normally begin to display the fundamental behaviors of empathy by having an emotional response that corresponds with another person's emotional state.
Although there is general agreement that empathy is essential in educational settings, research has found that it is difficult to develop empathy in trainee teachers.
It has been suggested that dysfunctions in the prefrontal cortex could result in the impaired cognitive empathy, since impaired cognitive empathy has been related with neurocognitive task performance involving cognitive flexibility.
However, a series of studies, using a variety of neurophysiological measures, including MEG, spinal reflex excitability, electroencephalography and N400 paradigm have documented the presence of an overall gender difference in the human mirror neuron system, with female participants tending to exhibit stronger motor resonance than male participants.
These changes are presumably underpinned by physiological changes brought about by some form of "emotional contagion" or mirroring (e.g.
In this sense, arousal and empathy promote prosocial behavior as we accommodate each other to feel similar emotions.
Some postmodern historians such as Keith Jenkins in recent years have debated whether or not it is possible to empathize with people from the past.
Researchers then draw inferences about that person's empathic reactions from the electronic readings produced (e.g.
Another similarity between chimpanzee and human expression of empathy is that females provided more comfort than males on average.
This term comes from the negation of two Ancient Greek words: λέξις (''lexis'', meaning "speech") and ''θυμός'' (''thymos'', meaning "the soul, as the seat of emotion, feeling and thought").
It could lead one to increase the welfare of those for whom empathy is felt at the expense of other potential prosocial goals, thus inducing a type of bias.
On the other hand, if emotions are more centrally characterized by a combination of beliefs and desires, then grasping these beliefs and desires will be more essential to empathy.
Five different "brain types" can be observed among the population based on the scores, which should correlate with differences at the neural level.
A difference in distribution between affective and cognitive empathy has been observed in various conditions.
This review postulates a bottom-up model of empathy that ties together all levels, from state matching to perspective-taking.
However, such mechanisms would be unadapted to self-other distinction and beings already dependent on some form of behavior benefitting each other or their offspring would never be able to evolve a form of self-other distinction that necessitated evolution of specialized non-preevolved and non-preevolvable mechanisms for retaining empathic behavior in the presence of self-other distinction, and so a fundamental neurological distinction between egoism and empathy cannot exist in any species.
the ability to share the feelings of others, relies on the sensorimotor cortices as well as limbic and para-limbic structures.
The act of consolation was observed in both of the groups of chimpanzees.
He suggests that since the multiple measures used have produced results that bear little relation to one another, researchers should refrain from making comparisons between scales that are in fact measuring different things.
According to one theory, there are seven components involved in the effectiveness of intercultural communication; empathy was found to be one of the seven.
Researchers Teresa Romero and co-workers observed these empathic and sympathetic-like behaviors in chimpanzees at two separate outdoor housed groups.
Children usually become capable of passing "false belief" tasks, considered to be a test for a theory of mind, around the age of four.
The underlying biological surfaces for processing expressions of happiness are functionally intact in psychopaths, although less responsive than those of controls.
Empathic anger is an emotion, a form of empathic distress.
It has been suggested that mirroring-behavior in motor neurons during empathy may help duplicate feelings.
On a more positive note, empathically aroused individuals may focus on the long-term welfare rather than just the short-term of those in need.
Examples include dolphins saving humans from drowning or from shark attacks.
Empathy-based socialization is very different from current practices directed toward inhibition of egoistic impulses through shaping, modeling and internalized guilt.
Despite studies suggesting deficits in emotion perception and imagining others in pain, professor Simon Baron-Cohen claims psychopathy is associated with intact cognitive empathy, which would imply an intact ability to read and respond to behaviors, social cues and what others are feeling.
There are many definitions for empathy which encompass a broad range of emotional states.
Although comforting towards non-family chimpanzees was also observed, as with humans, chimpanzees showed the majority of comfort and concern to close/loved ones.
supersedes pure altruism, but if empathy is felt, an individual will help by actions or by word, regardless of whether it is in their self-interest to do so and even if the costs outweigh potential rewards.
There are concerns that the empathizer's own emotional background may affect or distort what emotions they perceive in others (e.g.
Various theories and aspects of empathy have been researched, including empathy within nonhuman animals.
Another similarity found between chimpanzees and humans is that empathic-like responding was disproportionately provided to individuals of kin.
In the most basic sense, this is the experience of the other's body and, in this sense, it is an experience of "my body over there".
It should be pointed out that these reactions, whilst appearing to reflect the internal emotional state of the empathizer, could also, if the stimulus incident lasted more than the briefest period, be reflecting the results of emotional reactions that are based upon more pieces of thinking through (cognitions) associated with role-taking ("if I were him I would feel&nbsp;...").
The lack of clear distinctions between theory of mind and empathy may have resulted in an incomplete understanding of the empathic abilities of those with Asperger syndrome; many reports on the empathic deficits of individuals with Asperger syndrome are actually based on impairments in theory of mind.
The combination in those on the autism spectrum of reduced empathic concern and increased personal distress may lead to the overall reduction of empathy.
Bipolar individuals have been observed to have impaired cognitive empathy and theory of mind, but increased affective empathy.
First, he argues that empathy uniquely has all the characteristics we can know about an ethical viewpoint – including that it is "partly self-standing", and so provides a source of motivation that is partly within us and partly outside, as moral motivations seem to be.
The psychopaths' empathic reaction initiated the same way it did for controls when they were instructed to empathize with the harmed individual, and the area of the brain relating to pain was activated when the psychopaths were asked to imagine how the harmed individual felt.
Mother-reared bonobos as opposed to orphaned bonobos sought out more physical contact after a stressful event happened to another.
Even earlier, at one year of age, infants have some rudiments of empathy, in the sense that they understand that, just like their own actions, other people's actions have goals.
The neuroimaging literature is unclear as to whether deficits are specific to particular emotions such as fear.
Research in recent years has focused on possible brain processes underlying the experience of empathy.
For example, chimpanzees are known to spontaneously contribute comforting behaviors to victims of aggressive behavior in natural and unnatural settings, a behavior recognized as consolation.
In some experiments, subjects are required to watch video scenarios (either staged or authentic) and to make written responses which are then assessed for their levels of empathy (e.g.
Paper-based indices involve one or more of a variety of methods of responding.
It can also be understood as having the separateness of defining oneself and another blur.
