After the Japanese occupied Manchuria in 1931, they proclaimed it to be the Empire of Manchukuo, and Puyi became emperor of Manchukuo.
Because of the cultural influence of China, China's neighbors adopted these titles or had their native titles conform in ''hanzi''.
During the rule of Henry VIII an Act of Parliament declared that 'this realm of England is an Empire...governed by one Supreme Head and King having the dignity and royal estate of the imperial Crown of the same'.
The name derived from Julius Caesar's cognomen "Caesar": this cognomen was adopted by all Roman emperors, exclusively by the ruling monarch after the Julio-Claudian dynasty had died out.
When Hungary was given self-government in 1867, the non-Hungarian portions were called the Empire of Austria and were officially known as the "Kingdoms and Lands Represented in the Imperial Council (''Reichsrat'')".
It then passed to his son-in-law, Alfonso I of Aragon in 1109.
Another title used by this dynasty was "Itegue Zetopia".
Georgian title "mephet'mephe" has the same meaning.
One important distinction between the post Constantine I (reigned AD 306–337) emperors and their pagan predecessors was cesaropapism, the assertion that the Emperor (or other head of state) is also the head of the Church.
The claims of other East Asian monarchies to the title may have been accepted for diplomatic purposes, but it was not necessarily used in more general contexts.
The line of emperors came to an end with Bảo Đại, who was deposed after the war, although he later served as head of state of South Vietnam from 1949-55.
In 1897, King Gojong proclaimed the founding of the Korean Empire (1897–1910), and became emperor of Korea.
The Trebizond emperor formally submitted in Constantinople in 1281, but frequently flouted convention by styling themselves emperor back in Trebizond thereafter.
*'''Augustus''' was the honorific first bestowed on Emperor Augustus: after him all Roman emperors added it to their name.
However, Byzantine resistance to the new empire meant that it was in constant struggle to establish itself.
Atahualpa may actually be considered a usurper as he had achieved power by killing his half-brother and he did not perform the required coronation with the imperial crown ''mascaipacha'' by the ''Huillaq Uma'' (high priest).
The Diet acquired all prerogative powers of the Crown, reverting the latter to a ceremonial role.
(''Imperium'' is Latin for the authority to command, one of a various types of authority delineated in Roman political thought.)
It was only employed by Stefan Uroš IV Dušan and his son Stefan Uroš V in Serbia (until his death in 1371), after which it became extinct.
An '''emperor''' (through Old French ''empereor'' from ) is a monarch, usually the sovereign ruler of an empire or another type of imperial realm.
Although technically already ruling, after the election he would be crowned as emperor by the Pope.
Byzantine Emperor Michael VII Palaiologos succeeded in recapturing Constantinople in 1261.
The Bulgarian monarch, who had further irritated his Byzantine counterpart by claiming the title "Emperor of the Romans" (''basileus tōn Rōmaiōn''), was eventually recognized, as "Emperor of the Bulgarians" (''basileus tōn Boulgarōn'') by the Byzantine Emperor Romanos I Lakapenos in 924.
His imperial title was recognized by Bulgaria and various other neighbors and trading partners but not by the Byzantine Empire.
In fact, through much of Japanese history, the emperor has been little more than a figurehead.
In the meantime, the Bulgarian imperial title may have been also confirmed by the pope.
The earliest known usage of ''huanghou'' was in the Han Dynasty.
In reciprocity, these rulers might accredit equal titles in their native languages to their European peers.
However, King Gojong used term of "His Majesty the Great Monarch" (Hangul: 대군주폐하, Hanja: 大君主陛下), not an official imperial title.
On 26 February 1815, Napoleon abandoned Elba for France, reviving the French Empire for a Hundred Days; the Allies declared an end to Napoleon's sovereignty over Elba on 25 March 1815, and on 31 March 1815 Elba was ceded to the restored Grand Duchy of Tuscany by the Congress of Vienna.
The Mughal Emperors were the only Indian rulers for whom the term was consistently used by Western contemporaries.
For a time the concept was of one empire ruled by multiple emperors with varying territory under their control, however following the death of Theodosius I the rule was divided between his two sons and increasingly became separate entities.
From the time of Otto the Great onward, much of the former Carolingian kingdom of Eastern Francia became the Holy Roman Empire.
Augustus, considered the first Roman Emperor, established his by collecting on himself offices, titles, and honours of Republican Rome that had traditionally been distributed to different people, concentrating what had been distributed power in one man.
In Mexico, the First Mexican Empire was the first of two empires created.
Instead of developing a new name for the new type of monarchy, they used  (''autokratōr'', only partly overlapping with the modern understanding of "autocrat") or  (''basileus'', until then the usual name for "sovereign").
Haiti again became an empire from 1849 to 1859 under Faustin Soulouque.
Three short lived secessionist attempts had their own emperors: the Gallic Empire, the Britannic Empire, and the Palmyrene Empire though the latter used ''rex'' more regularly.
However, it was the informal descriptive of ''Imperator'' ("commander") that became the title increasingly favored by his successors.
Historians generally refer to the continuing Roman Empire in the east as the Byzantine Empire after Byzantium, the original name of the town that Constantine I would elevate to the Imperial capital as New Rome in AD 330.
After the withdrawal of French protection in 1867, Maximilian was captured and executed by the liberal forces of Benito Juárez.
Pre-Mongol Kingdoms such as the Xiongnu used the title "Chanu" meaning "Ruler of all" in old Mongolian.
Soon thereafter "Imperator" became however a title reserved exclusively for the ruling monarch.
This practice is one of many indications of the idea "Vietnam's equality with China" which remained intact up to the twentieth century.
This change was a recognition of the reality that little remained of Imperial authority in the areas that had been the Western Empire, with even Rome and Italy itself now ruled by the essentially autonomous Odoacer.
It should be noted that after Bulgaria obtained full independence from the Ottoman Empire in 1908, its monarch, who was previously styled "Knyaz", i.e., Prince, took the traditional title of "Tsar" which in Bulgarian means King and was recognized internationally as such.
In general usage, the Byzantine imperial title evolved from simply "emperor" (''basileus''), to "emperor of the Romans" (''basileus tōn Rōmaiōn'') in the 9th century, to "emperor and autocrat of the Romans" (''basileus kai autokratōr tōn Rōmaiōn'') in the 10th.
After his final defeat, Napoleon was treated as a general by the British authorities during his second exile to Atlantic Isle of St. Helena.
The imperial title continued in China until the Qing Dynasty was overthrown in 1912.
He did, however, recognize his father, João VI, as ''Titular Emperor of Brazil'' —a purely honorific title—until João VI's death in 1826.
After the defeat of the Italians by the Ethiopians who were assisted by soldiers from Britain in 1941, Haile Selassie was restored to the throne but Victor Emmanuel did not relinquish his claim to the title until 1943.
Empress Matilda (1102–1167) is the only British monarch commonly referred to as "emperor" or "empress", but acquired her title through her marriage to Henry V, Holy Roman Emperor.
Diocletian sought to address the challenges of the Empire's now vast geography and the instability caused by the informality of succession by the creation of co-emperors and junior emperors.
After Alfonso VII's death in 1157, the title was abandoned, and the kings who used it are not commonly mentioned as having been "emperors", in Spanish or other historiography.
the "Bottom of the Steps"), corresponding to "Imperial Majesty"; shèngshàng (聖上, lit.
The only pre-Columbian South American rulers to be commonly called emperors were the ''Sapa Inca'' of the Inca Empire (1438–1533).
14th-century Bulgarian literary compositions clearly denote the Bulgarian capital (Tarnovo) as a successor of Rome and Constantinople, in effect, the "Third Rome".
After the Ottoman capture of Constantinople in 1453, the Ottoman sultans began to style themselves '''Kaysar-i Rum''' (Emperor of the Romans) as they asserted themselves to be the heirs to the Roman empire by right of conquest.
Basileus, a title which had long been used for Alexander the Great was already in common usage as the Greek word for the Roman emperor, but its definition and sense was "King" in Greek, essentially equivalent with the Latin ''Rex''.
The title Khagan (khan of khans or grand khan) was held by Genghis Khan, founder of the Mongol Empire in 1206.
Both were conquered under the reign of King Charles I of Spain who was simultaneously emperor-elect of the Holy Roman Empire during the fall of the Aztecs and fully emperor during the fall of the Incas.
The title was relinquished by George VI when India became independent on 15 August 1947.
The succeeding Nervan-Antonian Dynasty, ruling for most of the 2nd century, stabilised the Empire.
This concept became a key element of the meaning of "emperor" in the Byzantine and Orthodox east, but went out of favor with in the west with the rise of Roman Catholicism.
Vietnam sent tributary missions to China once in three years (with some periods of disruptions) until the 19th century, Sino-French War France replaced China in control of northern Vietnam.
For purposes of protocol, emperors were once given precedence over kings in international diplomatic relations; currently, however, precedence amongst heads of state – whether they be Kings, Queens, Emperors, or Presidents – is determined by the duration of time that each one has been continuously in office.
The areas administered from Rome are referred to by historians the Western Roman Empire and those under the immediate authority of Constantinople called the Eastern Roman Empire or (after the Battle of Yarmouk in 636 AD) the Later Roman or Byzantine Empire.
This empire ceased to exist when it was occupied by the Soviet Red Army in 1945.
In 1863, the invading French, under Napoleon III (see above), in alliance with Mexican conservatives and nobility, helped create the Second Mexican Empire, and invited Archduke Maximilian, of the House of Habsburg-Lorraine, younger brother of the Austrian Emperor Franz Josef I, to become emperor Maximilian I of Mexico.
With Constantinople occupied, claimants to the imperial succession styled themselves as emperor in the chief centers of resistance:  The Laskarid dynasty in the Empire of Nicaea, the Komnenid dynasty in the Empire of Trebizond and the Doukid dynasty in the Despotate of Epirus.
Ancient Romans abhorred the name Rex ("king"), and it was critical to the political order to maintain the forms and pretenses of republican rule.
The Korean Empire maintained their state until 1910 — though it was an Empire by name, it was in fact in the process of being absorbed by Japan.
On 31 October 1721, Peter I was proclaimed Emperor by the Senate.
Should the king refuse the position, the law provided for a member of the House of Bourbon to accede to the Mexican throne.
After the fall of Napoleon I and the Liberal revolution in Portugal, the Portuguese Royals returned to Europe (1820).
Napoleon I's nephew, Napoleon III, resurrected the title of emperor on 2 December 1852, after establishing the Second French Empire in a presidential coup, subsequently approved by a plebiscite.
They would receive their official title on several golden plates of several meters tall.
This was in the context of the divorce of Catherine of Aragon and the English Reformation, to emphasize that England had never accepted the quasi-imperial claims of the papacy.
The first Austrian Emperor was the last Holy Roman Emperor Francis II.
His son, Ferdinand I of Castile also took the title in 1039.
''Autokratōr'' was essentially used as a translation of the Latin ''Imperator'' in Greek-speaking part of the Roman Empire, but also here there is only partial overlap between the meaning of the original Greek and Latin concepts.
Japanese monarchs were given their official title by the Chinese emperor.
Similarly before the 19th century the term Emperor in Europe referred exclusively to the Holy Roman Emperor, despite the fact that the empire neither contained Rome nor did it exercise much power beyond the German speaking states, by the late 16th century the empire itself came to mean the dynastic lands held by the Habsburgs and following the Thirty Years' War the Habsburg emperors control over the German states outside Habsburg Austria became nearly non-existent, the position of Emperor however continued till the early 19th century, before it was abolished by  Francis II who became the first Emperor of Austria.
After World War II, all claims of divinity were dropped (see Ningen-sengen).
After India was invaded by the Mongol Khans and Turkic Muslims, the rulers of their major states on the subcontinent were titled ''Sultān'', In this manner, the only empress-regnant ever to have actually sat on the throne of Delhi was Razia Sultan.
With the size of his imperial realm significantly reduced, Francis II, ''Holy Roman Emperor'' became Francis I, ''Emperor of Austria''.
The rulers of the Joseon Dynasty (1392–1897) still used the term "King of the Joseon" (Hangul: 조선국왕, Hanja: 朝鮮國王).
This junior King then bore the title of Roman King (King of the Romans).
This idea was represented more emphatically in the composition the monk Filofej addressed to their son Vasili III.
The subdivisions and co-emperor system were formally abolished by Emperor Zeno in 480 AD following the death of Julius Nepos last Western Emperor and the ascension of Odoacer as the ''de facto'' King of Italy in 476 AD.
A half-brother of Dušan, Simeon Uroš, and then his son Jovan Uroš, claimed the same title, until the latter's abdication in 1373, while ruling as dynasts in Thessaly.
In the late Republic, as in the early years of the new monarchy, ''Imperator'' was a title granted to Roman generals by their troops and the Roman Senate after a great victory, roughly comparable to field marshal (head or commander of the entire army).
In the 10th century, Gwangjong of Goryeo took the title of emperor himself as a means of enhancing the prestige of the monarchy, and it was first used in Korea.
This word has been used as an epithet of various Vedic deities, like Varuna, and has been attested in the Holy Rig Veda, possibly the oldest compiled book among the Indo-Europeans.
''Basileus'' appears not to have been used exclusively in the meaning of "emperor" (and specifically, the Roman/Byzantine emperor) before the 7th century, although it was a standard informal designation of the Emperor in the Greek-speaking East.
''Kaisertum'' might literally be translated as "emperordom" (on analogy with "kingdom") or "emperor-ship"; the term denotes specifically "the territory ruled by an emperor", and is thus somewhat more general than Reich, which in 1804 carried connotations of universal rule.
"You, of Ten Thousand Years").
Đinh Bộ Lĩnh wasn't the first to claim the title of ''Đế'' (帝, ''Emperor'').
The translations of their titles were provided by the Spanish.
Incidentally by being king of Spain, he was also Roman (Byzantine) emperor in pretence through Andreas Palaiologos.
Byzantium's close cultural and political interaction with its Balkan neighbors Bulgaria and Serbia, and with Russia (Kievan Rus', then Muscovy) led to the adoption of Byzantine imperial traditions in all of these countries.
Spanish conquistador Francisco Pizarro, conquered the Inca for Spain, killed Emperor Atahualpa, and installed puppets as well.
Only the Khagans from Genghis Khan to the fall of the Yuan Dynasty in 1368 are normally referred to as Emperors in English.
His title was a matter of dispute with the governor of St Helena, who insisted on addressing him as "General Bonaparte", despite the "historical reality that he had been an emperor" and therefore retained the title.
When Francis took the title in 1804, the Habsburg lands as a whole were dubbed the ''Kaisertum Österreich''.
Before him, Lý Bí and Mai Thúc Loan also claimed this title.
Previously bestowed on high officials and military commanders who had ''imperium'', Augustus reserved it exclusively to himself as the ultimate holder of all ''imperium''.
The new Japanese monarch after coming into power would send a representative to China and receive the anointment.
Pretenders to the title continued among the European nobility until circa 1383.
China waged a number of wars against Vietnam throughout history, and after each failure, settled for the tributary relationship.
A formal address to the ruling Russian monarch adopted thereafter was 'Your Imperial Majesty'.
The empire came to an end in 1889, with the overthrow of Emperor Pedro II (Pedro I's son and successor), when the Brazilian republic was proclaimed.
After the declaration of independence on September 15, 1821, it was the intention of the Mexican parliament to establish a commonwealth whereby the King of Spain, Ferdinand VII, would also be Emperor of Mexico, but in which both countries were to be governed by separate laws and with their own legislative offices.
Napoleon's infant son, Napoleon II, was recognized by the Council of Peers, as Emperor from the moment of his father's abdication, and therefore reigned (as opposed to ruled) as Emperor for fifteen days, 22 June to 7 July 1815.
To see a list of these emperors, see Category of fictional emperors and empresses.
For a fairly long time, a shōgun (formally the imperial generalissimo, but made hereditary) or an imperial regent wielded actual political power.
His reign was marked by large scale public works, the development of social policy, and the extension of France's influence throughout the world.
In subsequent dynasties, when the distinction between wife and concubine became more accentuated, the crown prince would have chosen an empress-designate before his reign.
The rulers of China and (once Westerners became aware of the role) Japan were always accepted in the West as emperors, and referred to as such.
After 1271, the emperors of the Yuan Dynasty also took the Chinese title ''huangdi'', or Chinese emperor.
Rules for indicating successors also varied: there was a tendency towards ''male'' ''inheritance'' of the supreme office, but as well election by noblemen, as ruling empresses (for empires not too strictly under salic law) are known.
The Byzantine empire also produced three women who effectively governed the state: the Empress Irene and the Empresses Zoe and Theodora.
During the Siege of Paris in 1871, the North German Confederation, supported by its allies from southern Germany, formed the German Empire with the proclamation of the Prussian king Wilhelm I as German Emperor in the Hall of Mirrors at the Palace of Versailles, to the humiliation of the French, who ceased to resist only days later.
In ancient Japan, the earliest titles for the sovereign were either ヤマト大王/大君 (''yamato ōkimi'', Grand King of Yamato), 倭王/倭国王 (''waō''/''wakokuō'', King of Wa, used externally), or 治天下大王 (''amenoshita shiroshimesu ōkimi'', Grand King who rules all under heaven, used internally).
The most famous emperor was his grandson Ashoka the Great.
The emperors of the last dynasty of Vietnam continued to hold this title until the French conquered Vietnam.
The title has not been used in Russia since the abdication of Emperor Nicholas II on 15 March 1917.
''Chakravarti'' refers to the king of kings.
Many Goryeo sovereign alternately used both supreme king and emperor.
King Sancho III of Navarre conquered Leon in 1034 and began using it.
The Ottomans insisted on this elevated style while refusing to recognize the Holy Roman Emperors or the Russian tsars because of their rival claims of the Roman crown.
These Later Roman "Byzantine" Emperors completed the transition from the idea of the Emperor as a semi-republican official to the Emperor as an absolute monarch.
Although this principle was held by all emperors after Constantine, it met with increasing resistance and ultimately rejection by bishops in the west after the effective end of Imperial power in there.
It is also known that Tigranes the Great, king of Armenia, was named as the king of kings when he made his empire after defeating the Parthians.
In the face of aggressions by Napoleon, Francis feared for the future of the Holy Roman Empire.
The Yuan dynasty under Kublai Khan waged three wars against Vietnam to force it into a vassalage relationship but after successive failures, Kublai Khan's successor, Temür Khan, finally settled for a tributary relationship with Vietnam.
The  prince-electors elected one of their peers as King of the Romans and King of Italy before being crowned by the Pope.
Although current Japanese law prohibits female succession, all Japanese emperors claim to trace their lineage to ''Amaterasu'', the Sun Goddess of the Shintō religion.
In general, an emperor would have one empress (''Huanghou'', 皇后) at one time, although posthumous entitlement to empress for a concubine was not uncommon.
Byzantine recognition of Simeon's imperial title was revoked by the succeeding Byzantine government.
The Latin feminine form Imperatrix only developed after "Imperator" had taken on the connotation of "Emperor".
He wished to maintain his and his family's Imperial status in the event that the Holy Roman Empire should be dissolved, as it indeed was in 1806 when an Austrian-led army suffered a humiliating defeat at the Battle of Austerlitz.
Other honorifics used by the Roman Emperors have also come to be synonyms for Emperor:
Essentially, the Greek language did not incorporate the nuances of the Ancient Roman concepts that distinguished ''imperium'' from other forms of political power.
The title lasted just a little over one century until 1918, but it was never clear what territory constituted the "Empire of Austria".
After ending Muscovy's dependence on its Mongol overlords in 1480, Ivan III began the usage of the titles Tsar and Autocrat (''samoderzhets '').
His son Ivan IV emphatically crowned himself Tsar of Russia on 16 January 1547.
In its final simplified form, the Serbian imperial title read "Emperor of Serbs and Greeks" (''цар Срба и Грка'' in modern Serbian).
In Persia, from the time of Darius the Great, Persian rulers used the title "King of Kings" (''Shahanshah'' in Persian) since they had dominion over peoples from the borders of India to the borders of Greece and Egypt.
After the end of Roman rule in Britain, the Imperator Cunedda forged the Kingdom of Gwynedd in northern Wales, but all his successors were titled kings and princes.
Haiti was declared an empire by its ruler, Jean-Jacques Dessalines, who made himself Jacques I, on 20 May 1805.
The lone holders of the imperial title in Oceania were the heads of the semi-mythical Tuʻi Tonga Empire.
The crown prince was addressed as 'Your Imperial Highness'.
''Empire'' became identified instead with vast territorial holdings rather than the title of its ruler by the mid-18th century.
There is ongoing discussion of the Japanese Imperial succession controversy.
"Itegue" translates as Empress, and was also used by the only female reigning Empress, Zauditu, along with the official title ''Negiste Negest'' (Queen of Kings).
At one point, there were as many as five sharers of the ''imperium'' (see: Tetrarchy).
The last ''shahanshah'' (Mohammad Reza Pahlavi) was ousted in 1979 following the Iranian Revolution.
It was an elected monarchy chosen by the elite.
The emperor, however, was then a puppet figure only and could easily be disposed of by the French for more pro-France figure.
Another word for emperor is ''sārvabhaumā''.
Following the tragedy of the horrific sacking of the city, the conquerors declared a new "Empire of Romania", known to historians as the Latin Empire of Constantinople, installing Baldwin IX, Count of Flanders, as Emperor.
This epoch became known as the era of the ''Five Good Emperors'', and was followed by the short-lived Severan Dynasty.
The use of the ''king of kings'' style began a millennium earlier in this region, however, with the title being used by the Kings of Aksum, beginning with Sembrouthes in the 3rd century.
Ferdinand's son, Alfonso VI of León and Castile took the title in 1077.
The decade 914–924 was spent in destructive warfare between Byzantium and Bulgaria over this and other matters of conflict.
Currently, many believe the new prince of Japan will ascend the throne, as the law defines.
The Sanskrit word for emperor is ''Samrāṭ'' or ''Chakravarti'' (word stem: ''samrāj'').
One of these offices was ''princeps senatus'', ("first man of the Senate") and became changed into Augustus' chief honorific, ''princeps civitatis'' ("first citizen") from which the modern English word and title prince is descended.
It was associated with the Leonese monarchy perhaps as far back as Alfonso the Great (''r.''
However, shortly after the announcement that Princess Kiko was pregnant with her third child, the proposal to alter the Imperial Household Law was suspended by Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi.
Of course, intrigue, murder and military force could also mingle in for appointing successors; the Roman imperial tradition made no exception to other monarchical traditions in this respect.
His insistence on recognition as such by the emperor of the Holy Roman Empire since 1489 resulted in the granting of this recognition in 1514 by Emperor Maximilian I to Vasili III.
The title was briefly revived from 12 December 1915 to 22 March 1916 by President Yuan Shikai and again in early July 1917 when General Zhang Xun attempted to restore last Qing emperor Puyi to the throne.
Alexander probably crowned himself ''shahanshah'' after conquering Persia, bringing the phrase ''basileus toon basileoon'' to Greek.
What links them together is the use of the Chinese logographs 皇 (''huáng'') and 帝 (''dì'') which together or individually are imperial.
Although the empire was again subdivided and a co-emperor sent to Italy at the end of the fourth century, the office became unitary again only 95 years later at the request of the Roman Senate and following the death of Julius Nepos, last Western Emperor.
Three wars led to military successes and helped to convince German people to do this: the Second war of Schleswig against Denmark in 1864, the Austro-Prussian War against Austria in 1866, and the Franco-Prussian War against the Second French Empire in 1870–71.
The origin of the title ''Imperator totius Hispaniae'' (Latin for ''Emperor of All Spain'') is murky.
The earliest use of this term is found on a wooden slat, or ''mokkan'', unearthed in Asuka-mura, Nara Prefecture in 1998.
In the Roman Republic Imperator meant "(military) commander".
The Emperor of Japan is the only currently reigning monarch whose title is translated into English as "Emperor".
The Principate (27 BC – 284 AD) period was succeeded by what is known as the Dominate (284 AD – 527 AD), during which Emperor Diocletian tried to put the Empire on a more formal footing.
In 221 BC, Ying Zheng, who was king of Qin at the time, proclaimed himself ''Shi Huangdi'' (始皇帝), which translates as "first emperor".
*'''Autokrator''' (Αὐτοκράτωρ) or '''Basileus''' (βασιλεύς): although the Greeks used equivalents of "Caesar" (Καίσαρ, ''Kaisar'') and "Augustus" (in two forms: transliterated as , ''Augoustos'' or translated as , ''Sebastos'') these were rather used as part of the name of the Emperor than as an indication of the office.
In the First Sino-Japanese War of 1894–'95, Japan defeated the Qing Dynasty China, and the Treaty of Shimonoseki was concluded in which Japan had China recognize the independence and autonomy of Korea.
As of the early 21st century, Japan's succession law prohibits a female from ascending the throne.
The last two kings of its Pérez Dynasty were called emperors in a contemporary source.
Typically, in the later Vedic age, a Hindu high king (''Maharajah'') was only called ''Samrāṭ'' after performing the Vedic ''Rajasuya'' sacrifice, enabling him by religious tradition to claim superiority over the other kings and princes.
Sometimes this reference has even extended to non-monarchically ruled states and their spheres of influence such as the "Athenian Empire" of the late 5th century BC, the "Angevin Empire" of the Plantagenets, the Soviet, and American "empires" of the Cold War era.
Exceptions include the title of the ''Augustan History'', a semi-historical collection of Emperors' biographies of the 2nd and 3rd century.
Holy Highness); or wànsuì (萬歲, lit.
Emperors are generally recognized to be of a higher honour and rank than kings.
In 1936, the Italian king Victor Emmanuel III claimed the title of Emperor of Ethiopia after Ethiopia was occupied by Italy during the Second Italo-Abyssinian War.
However, their rules were very short lived.
To avoid unnecessary armed conflicts, the Vietnamese rulers accepted this in diplomatic relation and use the title Emperor only domestically.
Augustus had (by his last will) granted the feminine form of this honorific (Augusta) to his wife.
Although not as popular, the title 王 ''wang'' (king or prince) was still used by many monarchs and dynasties in China up to the Taipings in the 19th century.
The Aztec and Inca traditions are unrelated to one another.
For the period from 1877 to 1947 when British Emperors ruled British India as the pearl in the crown of the British Empire, see above.
