They took slaves and money from the peripheries to support the imperial center.
File:Rashidun654wVassal.png|The expansion of the Rashidun Empire.
The Akkadian Empire, established by Sargon of Akkad (24th century BC), was an early all-Mesopotamian empire.
Similarly, the United States was founded on a model inspired by the Roman Republic, with upper and lower legislative assemblies, and executive power vested in a single individual, the president.
Furthermore, empires can expand by both land and sea.
If governmental authority was maintained by controlling water supplies, vital to colonial subjects, such régimes were called hydraulic empires.
These surrogates were domestically-weak, right-wing governments that would collapse without US support.
The United States is not traditionally recognized as an empire, in part because the U.S. adopted a different political system from those that previous empires had used.
The latter method provides less tribute and indirect control, but avails military forces for further expansion.
These epochal clashes between civilizations profoundly shaped many people's thinking back then, and continues to do so in the present day.
Having convinced the other states of its military prowess, and having excluded the Austrians, Prussia dictated the terms of imperial membership.
This term was legitimized and justified by writers like Cicero who wrote that only under Roman rule could the world flourish and prosper.
Likewise, with the collapse of the Holy Roman Empire in 1806 during the Napoleonic Wars (1803–1815), the Austrian Empire (1804–1867) emerged reconstituted as the Empire of Austria–Hungary (1867–1918), having "inherited" the imperium of Central and Western Europe from the losers of said wars.
The political scientist  Jan Zielonka suggests that this behaviour is imperial because it coerces its neighbouring countries into adopting its ''European'' economic, legal, and political structures.
One family ruled the whole Eurasian land mass from the Pacific to the Adriatic and Baltic Seas.
However, conquest can "produce a proper ‘state’ if, as a result of internal reform, the world empire eventually recognizes all of its members (like the Roman Empire did, for example).”
Their military power, which came from effective strategy and an early adoption of European firearms, created an empire that stretched from central Akanland (in modern-day Ghana) to present day Benin and Ivory Coast, bordered by the Dagomba kingdom to the north and Dahomey to the east.
Yet before the advent of the unipolarity, world historian Arnold Toynbee and political scientist Martin Wight had drawn the same conclusion with an unambiguous implication for the modern world:
Characterizing some aspects of American foreign policy and international behavior as "American Empire" is controversial but not uncommon.
Both surpassed in territory their contemporary Near Eastern empires.
The Seleucid Empire broke apart and its former eastern part was absorbed by the Parthian Empire.
Following the demise of the Khmer Empire, the Siamese Empire flourished alongside the Burmese and Lan Chang Empires from the 13th through the 18th centuries.
the Other), the deliberate weakening of international organisations, the restructured international economy, economic nationalism, the expanded arming of most countries, the proliferation of nuclear weapon capabilities and the politics of identity emphasizing a state's ''subjective'' perception of its place in the world, as a nation and as a civilisation.
In the Old World, colonial imperialism was attempted and established on the Canary Islands and Ireland.
However, within two generations, the empire was separated into four discrete khanates under Genghis Khan's grandsons.
After the death of Mughal Emperor Aurangzeb, it expanded greatly under the rule of the Peshwas.
France still governs colonies (French Guyana, Martinique, Réunion, French Polynesia, New Caledonia, St Martin, Saint-Pierre-et-Miquelon, Guadeloupe, TAAF, Wallis and Futuna, Saint Barthélemy, and Mayotte) and exerts hegemony in Francophone Africa (29 francophone countries such as Chad, Rwanda, ''et cetera'').
Political scientist Robert Gilpin confirmed Bull's conclusion for the pre-modern period:
The Sikh Empire (1799–1846) was established in the Punjab region of India.
Ludden explains this phenomena with the concept of “ideological blinders”, which he says prevent American citizens from realizing the true nature of America’s current systems and strategies.
This was not just a rivalry of East and West but a rivalry between Christians and Muslims.
The term "empire" is associated with other words such as imperialism, colonialism, and globalization.
These changes constitute the "Age of Nation Empires"; as imperial usage, ''nation-empire'' denotes the return of geopolitical power from ''global'' power blocs to ''regional'' power blocs (i.e., centred upon a "regional power" state China, Russia, U.S., ''et al''.)
The empire collapsed when its founder, Ranjit Singh, died and its army fell to the British.
The title was given to generals who were victorious in battle.
Therefore, discursive practices of Empire are still present in countries today.
As David Ludden explains, “journalists, scholars, teachers, students, analysts, and politicians prefer to depict the U.S. as a nation pursuing its own interests and ideals.” This often results in imperialist endeavors being presented as measures taken to enhance national security.
Voltaire's "... nor an empire" observation applies to its late period.
Historian Michael Doyle who undertook an extensive research on empires extended the observation into the modern era:
This ideology, that was envisioned to bring a new world order, was eventually spread across the Mediterranean world and beyond.
The Qin Dynasty was short lived and in 207 BC was overthrown by the Han Dynasty (207 BC - AD 220) which became one of East Asia's most long-lived dynasties.
One of them, Kublai Khan, conquered China and established the Yuan Dynasty with the imperial capital at Beijing.
We're not imperialistic; we never have been."
Former President G.W.
The former method provides greater tribute and direct political control, yet limits further expansion because it absorbs military forces to fixed garrisons.
At this stage the ''empire'' as defined ceases to exist and becomes ''world state''.
The Ashanti Empire (or Confederacy), also Asanteman (1701–1896), was a West African state of the Ashanti, the Akan people of the Ashanti Region, Akanland in modern-day Ghana.
France has twice transitioned from being called the French Republic to being called the French Empire, while France remained an overseas empire.
Britain turned towards Asia, the Pacific, and later Africa, with subsequent exploration leading to the rise of the Second British Empire (1783–1815), which was followed by the Industrial Revolution and Britain's Imperial Century (1815–1914).
Stephen Howe notes that empires by land can be characterized by expansion over terrain, “extending directly outwards from the original frontier”  while an empire by sea can be characterized by  colonial expansion and empire building “by an increasingly powerful navy”.
Territorial empires (e.g., the Mongol Empire and Median Empire) tend to be contiguous areas.
Essentially, the United States was formed in an attempt to reject imperialism.
Empire and colonialism are used to refer to relationships between powerful state or society versus a less powerful one.
Despite these systematic differences, the political objectives and strategies of the United States government have been quite similar to those of previous empires.
Both existed for several generations before the arrival of the Europeans.
The Rashidun Caliphate expanded from the Arabian Peninsula and swiftly conquered the Persian Empire and much of the Byzantine Roman Empire.
Among the last of the empires in the 20th century were the Central African Empire, Ethiopia, Vietnam, Manchukuo, the German Empire, and Korea.
As a consequence, some monarchs assumed the title of "emperor" (or its corresponding translation, ''tsar'', ''empereur'', ''kaiser'',''shah''  etc.)
The Empire of Brazil declared itself an empire after separating from the Portuguese Empire in 1822.
Two famous contemporary observers—Frederick Turner and Halford Mackinder described the event and drew implications, the former predicting American overseas expansion and the latter stressing that the world empire is now in sight.
In his book review of ''Empire'' (2000) by Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri, Mehmet Akif Okur posits that since the 11 September 2001 terrorist attacks in the US, the international relations determining the world's balance of power (political, economic, military) have been altered.
The terrestrial empire's maritime analogue is the thalassocracy, an empire composed of islands and coasts which are accessible to its terrestrial homeland, such as the Athenian-dominated Delian League.
The Unification of Germany as the empire accreted to the Prussian metropole was less a military conquest of the German states than their political divorce from the Austrian Empire.
Definitions of what physically and politically constitute an empire vary.
It became the largest empire in world history, encompassing one quarter of the world's land area and one fifth of its population, the impacts of which are still widespread in the current age.
This imperial achievement was repeated by Hammurabi of Babylon in the 17th century BC.
In the 7th century, Maritime Southeast Asia witnessed the rise of a Buddhist thallasocracy, the Srivijaya Empire, which thrived for 600 years and was succeeded by the Hindu-Buddhist Majapahit Empire that ruled from the 13th to 15th centuries.
A later group of political scientists, working on the phenomenon of the current unipolarity, in 2007 edited research on several pre-modern civilizations by experts in respective fields.
Empires are usually larger than kingdoms.
Empires are typically formed from diverse ethnic, national, cultural, and religious components.
That ruler's nation logically becomes an "empire", despite having no additional territory or hegemony.
While traditional sovereignty has been granted to these political units, one must not forget the economic, political and cultural entanglements that continue to affect these subject populations.
Political scientist Hedley Bull wrote that "in the broad sweep of human history…the form of states system has been the exception rather than the rule."
This idea is explored in the “contemporary usage” section.
Without this inequality, the system would be seen as commonwealth.
In the Southeast Asian mainland, the Hindu-Buddhist Khmer Empire was centered in the city of Angkor and  flourished from the 9th to 13th centuries.
Fourteen British Overseas Territories remain under British sovereignty.
An empire is a large political party who rules over territories outside of its original borders.
The Latin word ''imperium'', referring to a magistrate's power to command, gradually assumed the meaning "The territory in which a magistrate can effectively enforce his commands", while the term "''imperator''" was originally an honorific meaning "commander".
Tom Nairn and Paul James define empires as polities that:
The Romans were the first nation to invent and embody the concept of empire in their two mandates: to wage war and to make and execute laws.
The Ashanti (or Asante) were a powerful, militaristic and highly disciplined people in West Africa.
Both the Christians and Muslims had alliances with other countries, and they had problems in them as well.
The Ottoman Empire was a successor of the Abbasid Empire and it was the most powerful empire to succeed the Abbasi empires at the time, as well as one of the most powerful empires in the world.
Nation-empire regionalism claims sovereignty over their respective (regional) political (social, economic, ideologic), cultural, and military spheres.
Such subjugation often elicited "client-state" resentment that the empire unwisely ignored, leading to the collapse of the European colonial imperial system in the late 19th century and the early and mid-20th century.
The most unitary form of empire was described by Michael Doyle in his ''Empires''.
The Holy Roman Empire was not always centrally-governed, as it had neither core nor peripheral territories, and was not governed by a central, politico-military elite.
It existed from 1674 to 1818, and at its peak, the empire's territories covered much of Southern Asia.
In 30 BC Rome annexed the Ptolemaic Egypt.
Under Emperor Asoka the Great, the Maurya Empire became the first Indian empire to conquer all Indian Peninsula—achievement repeated only twice, by the Gupta and Mughal Empires.
Weaker states may seek annexation into the empire.
The Athenian Empire, the Roman Empire, and the British Empire developed at least in part under elective auspices.
In the 15th century, European landings in the so-called "New World" (first, the Americas, and later Australia), along with Portuguese travels around the Cape of Good Hope and along the coast of Africa bordering the southeast Indian Ocean, proved ripe opportunities for the continent's Renaissance-era monarchies to establish colonial empires like those of the ancient Romans and Greeks.
An example is the bequest of Pergamon to the Roman Empire by Attalus III.
Its successor state, the Umayyad Caliphate, expanded across North Africa and into the Iberian Peninsula.
Examples of this form of empire are the Central African Empire, or the Korean Empire proclaimed in 1897 when Korea, far from gaining new territory, was on the verge of being annexed by the Empire of Japan, the last to use the name officially.
Aside from the more formal usage, the term "empire" can also be used to refer to a large-scale business enterprise (e.g.
Macau and Hong Kong were not incorporated into the provincial structure of China; they have an autonomous system of government as Special Administrative Regions of the People's Republic of China.
Some empires styled themselves as having greater size, scope, and power than the territorial, politico-military, and economic facts support.
However, the absolute reliance on conquered peoples to carry out the empire's fortune, sustain wealth, and fight wars would ultimately lead to the collapse of the Roman Empire.
To legitimise their ''imperium'', these states directly claimed the title of ''Empire'' from Rome.
Empires have been the dominant international organization in world history.
The United States was formed because colonists did not like being under control of the British Empire.
Even rights of citizenship and authority to rule were granted to people not of Roman or Italian birth.
His Empire was succeeded by three Empires ruled by the Diadochi—the Seleucid, Ptolemaic, and Macedonian, which, despite being independent, are called the "Hellenistic Empire" by virtue of their similarities in culture and administration.
The president, as "commander-in-chief" of the armed forces, reflects the ancient Roman titles ''imperator princeps''.
In India during the Axial Age appeared the Maurya Empire—a geographically extensive and powerful empire, ruled by the Mauryan dynasty from 321–185 BC.
Most notably, the Louisiana Purchase (1803), the Texas Annexation (1845), and the Mexican Cession (1848) highlight the imperialistic goals of the United States during this “modern period” of imperialism.
This characterization is controversial because of the strong tendency in American society to reject claims of American imperialism.
It is considered the first great empire of Ancient  History.
Kang Yu-wei in 1885 believed that the imperial trend will culminate in the contest between Washington and Berlin and Vacher de Lapouge in 1899 estimated that the final contest will be between Russia and America in which America is likely to triumph.
American Exceptionalism) impairs popular recognition of US imperial conduct since it governed other countries via surrogates.
This was done by financial means in some cases, and by military force in others.
For example, Japan is considered the world's sole remaining empire because of the continued presence of the Japanese Emperor in national politics.
Yet, these states did not always fit the geographic, political, or military profiles of empires in the modern sense of the word.
By the 6th century BC, after having allied with the Babylonians to defeat the Neo-Assyrian Empire, the Medes were able to establish their own empire, which was the largest of its day and lasted for about sixty years.
In China of the Axial Age, the era of the Warring States ended in 221 BC with the universal conquest of Qin.
In turn, historian Sidney Lens argues that from its inception, the US has used every means available to dominate other nations.
In the reign of Asoka Buddhism spread to become the dominant religion in ancient India.
Sometimes, an empire is a semantic construction, such as when a ruler assumes the title of "emperor".
The British Empire evolved into a loose, multinational Commonwealth of Nations, while the French colonial empire metamorphosed to a Francophone commonwealth.
The French territory of Kwang-Chou-Wan was given back to China in 1946.
This association of nationality and race became complex and has had a more intense drive for expansion.
While the notion of "formal empire" may have ended, it is important to note that many of these former colonial populations still continue to face the historical legacy of colonialism.
; Post-classical period
It has been estimated that the Maurya dynasty controlled an unprecedented one-third of the world's entire economy, was home to one-third of the world's population at the time (an estimated 50 million out of 150 million humans), contained the world's largest city of the time (Pataliputra, estimated to be larger than Rome under Emperor Trajan) and according to Megasthenes, the empire wielded a military of 600,000 infantry, 30,000 cavalry, and 9,000 war elephants.
The U.S. government has stopped pursuing additional territories since the mid 20th century.
This authority given to people outside of Roman culture is an example of how its empire collapsed, with a strong dependence on "foreign" rulers.
The Roman Catholic Church, founded in the early Imperial Period, spread across Europe, first by the activities of Christian evangelists, and later by official imperial promulgation.
By this time only three Empires stretched between the Pacific and the Atlantic—China, Parthia, and Rome.
The Ottoman Empire centered on modern day Turkey, dominated the eastern Mediterranean, overthrew the Byzantine Empire to claim Constantinople and it would start battering at Austria and Malta, which were countries that were key to central and to south-west Europe respectively &mdash; mainly for their geographical location.
Having decisively defeated Carthage in 202 BC, Rome defeated Macedonia in 200 BC and the Seleucids in 190/189 BC to establish all-Mediterranean Empire.
In western Asia, the term "Persian Empire" came to denote the Iranian imperial states established at different historical periods of pre–Islamic and post–Islamic Persia.
1300–1918), had conquered most of the region.
During the same period, the Maratha Empire (also known as the Maratha Confederacy) was a Hindu state located in present-day India.
These “ideological blinders” that people wear have resulted in an “invisible” American empire of which most American citizens are unaware.
extend relations of power across territorial spaces over which they have no prior or given legal sovereignty, and where, in one or more of the domains of economics, politics, and culture, they gain some measure of extensive hegemony over those spaces for the purpose of extracting or accruing value.
The emperor's actual legal power derived from holding the office of "consul", but he was traditionally honored with the titles of ''imperator'' (commander) and ''princeps'' (first man or, chief).
Since the European Union began in 1993 as a west European trade bloc, it has established its own currency, the Euro (1999), established discrete military forces, and exercised its limited hegemony in parts of eastern Europe and Asia.
Empires are built out of separate units with some kind of diversity – ethnic, national, cultural, religious – and imply at least some inequality between the rulers and the ruled.
By this time only these two Empires stretched between the Atlantic and the Pacific.
However, some scholars still consider U.S. foreign policy strategies to be imperialistic.
These conquered lands and people became ''de jure'' subordinates of the empire, rather than ''de facto'' imperial territories and subjects.
Moreover, Eastern Orthodox imperialism was not re-established until the coronation of Peter the Great as Emperor of Russia in 1721.
Later, these terms came to have legal significance in their own right; an army calling their general "''imperator''" was a direct challenge to the authority of the current emperor.
Europeans began applying the designation of "empire" to non-European monarchies, such as the Qing Empire and the Mughal Empire, as well as the Maratha Empire, eventually leading to the looser denotations applicable to any political structure meeting the criteria of "imperium".
The term “American Empire” refers to the United States’ cultural ideologies and foreign policy strategies.
Although historians use the terms "Republican Period" and "Imperial Period" to identify the periods of Roman history before and after absolute power was assumed by Augustus, the Romans themselves continued to refer to their government as a republic, and during the Republican Period, the territories controlled by the republic were referred to as "''Imperium Romanum''".
Politically, it was typical for either a monarchy or an oligarchy, rooted in the original core territory of the empire, to continue to dominate.
After the Second World War (1939–1945), the process became commonly known as decolonisation.
Constantinople was retaken in 1261 by the Byzantine successor state centered in Nicaea, re-establishing the Byzantine Empire until 1453, by which time the Turkish-Muslim Ottoman Empire (ca.
In 1761, the Maratha army lost the Third Battle of Panipat, which halted the expansion of the empire.
They reached the same conclusion that a world empire is not only pre-determined but close at hand and attempted to estimate the time of its appearance.
Sixteen countries of the Commonwealth of Nations share their head of state, Queen Elizabeth II, as Commonwealth realms.
Due to the empire's military prowess, sophisticated hierarchy, social stratification and culture, the Ashanti empire had one of the largest historiographies of any indigenous Sub-Saharan African political entity.
The ''sacrum Romanum imperium'' (Holy Roman Empire), which lasted from 800 to 1806, claimed to have exclusively comprehended Christian principalities, and was only nominally a discrete imperial state.
Empires were seen as an expanding power, administration, ideas and beliefs followed by cultural habits from place to place.
The Chou Empire dissolved in 770 BC into feudal multi-state system which lasted for five and a half centuries until the universal conquest of Qin in 221 BC.
File:Mongols-map.png|Mongol Empire in the 13th century.
At the time, in the Medieval West, the title "empire" had a specific technical meaning that was exclusively applied to states that considered themselves the heirs and successors of the Roman Empire.
Inca had gradually conquered the whole of the settled Andean world as far south as today Santiago in Chile.
In Oceania, the Tonga Empire was a lonely empire that existed from the Medieval to the Modern period.
Modern hatred against Muslim communities in South-Eastern Europe, mainly in Bosnia and Kosovo, has often been articulated in terms of seeing them as unwelcome residues of this imperialism: in short, as Turks.
Chalmers Johnson argues that the US globe-girding network of hundreds of military bases already represents a global empire in its initial form:
Empire is often used to describe a displeasure to overpowering situations.
It might be a state affecting imperial policies or a particular political structure.
a transnational corporation), a political organisation controlled by a single individual (a political boss) or a group (political bosses).
The initial motivations for the inception of the United States eventually led to the development of this tendency, which has been perpetuated by the country-wide obsession with this national narrative.
Much earlier, Fichte, having witnessed the battle at Jena in 1806 when Napoleon overwhelmed Prussia, described what he perceived as a deep historical trend:
Alexander Wendt in his article “Why the World State is Inevitable…” supposed the pathway of universal conquest and subsequent consolidation provided the conquering power recognizes all conquered members.
Many empires were the result of military conquest, incorporating the vanquished states into a political union, but imperial hegemony can be established in other ways.
This can have notable effects that outlast the empire itself, both positive and negative.
The King of Qin, Ying Zheng, became China's First Emperor and began the pattern of successive dynasties.
The overall conclusion was that the balance of power was inherently unstable order and usually soon broke in favor of imperial order.
By the beginning of the 8th century, the Umayyad Caliphate had become the largest empire in history, it would not be surpassed in size until the establishment of the Mongol Empire in the 13th century.
The empire was founded in 322 BC by Chandragupta Maurya, who rapidly expanded his power westward across central and western India, taking advantage of the disruptions of local powers following the withdrawal by Alexander the Great.
The Portuguese territory of Macau was given back to China in 1999.
Ideas about empires changed throughout century varying from approval from the public to becoming universally distasteful.
Two their contemporaries—Kang Yu-wei and George Vacher de Lapouge—stressed that imperial expansion cannot indefinitely proceed on the definite surface of the globe and world empire is imminent.
Regardless of the supposed motivation for this constant expansion, all of these land acquisitions were carried out by imperialistic means.
This makes it very hard for people to acknowledge America’s status as an empire.
Despite the semantic reference to imperial power, Japan is a de jure constitutional monarchy, with a homogeneous population of 127 million people that is 98.5 percent ethnic Japanese, making it one of the largest nation-states.
Later, four Anthropologists—Hornell Hart, Raoul Naroll, Louis Morano, and Robert Carneiro—researched expanding imperial cycles.
The Median Empire was the first empire within the territory of Persia.
The earliest known empire appeared in Egypt when King Narmer of the Upper Valley conquered the Lower Valley circa 3000 BC and laid the foundations for the Old Kingdom.
In the 15th century BC, the New Kingdom of Ancient Egypt, ruled by Thutmose III, was ancient Africa's major force upon incorporating Nubia and the ancient city-states of the Levant.
The Romans were strong believers in what they called their "civilizing mission".
The Bulgarian Empire remained a major power in the Balkans until its fall in the late 14th century.
The emergence of the Pax Mongolica had significantly eased trade and commerce across Asia.
Thus, an "empire" may include regions that are not legally within the territory of a state, but are under either direct or indirect control of that state, such as a colony, client state, or protectorate.
Many languages, cultural values, religious institutions, political divisions, urban centers, and legal systems can trace their origins to the Roman Empire.
In 1776, the Continental Congress of the Thirteen Colonies declared itself independent from the British Empire, thus beginning the American Revolution.
and regional multi-state power alliances (i.e., Europe, Latin America, South East Asia).
In Eastern Europe, during the year of 917, the Byzantine Empire was forced to recognize the Imperial title of Bulgarian rulers (who were called Tsars).
Bush's Secretary of Defense, Donald Rumsfeld, said: "We don't seek empires.
These alterations include the intellectual (political science) trends that perceive the contemporary world's order via the re-territorrialisation of ''political space'', the re-emergence of ''classical imperialist practices'' (the "inside" vs. "outside" duality, cf.
Throughout the 19th century, the United States government attempted to expand their territory by any means necessary.
An empire is a multi-ethnic or multinational state with political and/or military dominion of populations who are culturally and ethnically distinct from the imperial (ruling) ethnic group and its culture.
In 1204, after the Fourth Crusade conquered Constantinople, the crusaders established a Latin Empire (1204–1261) in that city, while the defeated Byzantine Empire's descendants established two smaller, short-lived empires in Asia Minor: the Empire of Nicaea (1204–1261) and the Empire of Trebizond (1204–1461).
