Emus forage in a diurnal pattern and eat a variety of native and introduced plant species.
The pelvic limb muscles of emus contribute a similar proportion of the total body mass as do the flight muscles of flying birds.
As they fall into deeper sleep, their neck droops closer to the body and the eyelids begin to close.
Emus flocked to the Chandler and Walgoolan area during a dry spell, damaging rabbit fencing and devastating crops.
The birds were first mentioned under the name of the "New Holland cassowary" in Arthur Phillip's ''Voyage to Botany Bay'', published in 1789 with the following description:
Emus drink infrequently, but ingest large amounts when the opportunity arises.
n. novaehollandiae'' (Latham, 1790), ''D.
Outside Australia, emus are farmed on a large scale in North America, with about 1&nbsp;million birds in the US, Peru, and China, and to a lesser extent in some other countries.
They function as visors to protect the eyes from the dust that is prevalent in windy arid regions.
The bird features prominently in Indigenous Australian mythology.
However, an alternate classification was proposed in 2014 by Mitchell et al., based on analysis of mitochondrial DNA.
It also contains various anti-oxidants, notably carotenoids and flavones.
During their early life, the young emus are defended by their father, who adopts a belligerent stance towards other emus, including the mother.
The first verified occurrence of genetically identical avian twins was demonstrated in the emu.
The isolated emu population of the New South Wales North Coast Bioregion and Port Stephens is listed as endangered by the New South Wales Government.
The main predator of emus today is the dingo, which was originally introduced by Aboriginals thousands of years ago from a stock of semi-domesticated wolves.
Breeding takes place in May and June, and fighting among females for a mate is common.
The oil is obtained from the subcutaneous and retroperitoneal fat; the macerated adipose tissue is heated and the liquefied fat is filtered to get a clear oil.
A 2008 study has claimed that emu oil has a better anti-oxidative and anti-inflammatory potential than ostrich oil, and linked this to emu oil's higher proportion of unsaturated to saturated fatty acids.
As she does this, she looks at him by turning her neck, while at the same time keeping her rump facing towards him.
The pitchuri thornapple (''Duboisia hopwoodii''), or some similar poisonous plant, could be used to contaminate a waterhole, after which the disoriented emus were easy to catch.
The eggs are on average  and weigh between .
The male does the incubation; during this process he hardly eats or drinks and loses a significant amount of weight.
The sexes are similar in appearance, although the male's penis can become visible when he urinates and defecates.
The diet depends on seasonal availability with such plants as ''Acacia'', ''Casuarina'' and grasses being favoured.
Like the cassowary, the emu has sharp claws on its toes which are its major defensive attribute, and are used in combat to inflict wounds on opponents by kicking.
This  splits off the Casuariidae into their own order, the Casuariformes, and includes only the cassowaries in the family Casuariidae, placing the emus in their own family, Dromaiidae.
It has been a point of contention ever since as to which name should be used; the latter is more correctly formed, but the convention in taxonomy is that the first name given to an organism stands, unless it is clearly a typographical error.
Emu leather has a distinctive patterned surface, due to a raised area around the feather follicles in the skin; the leather is used in such items as wallets, handbags, shoes and clothes, often in combination with other leathers.
Emus serve as an important agent for the dispersal of large viable seeds, which contributes to floral biodiversity.
This calling can occur when males are out of sight or more than  away.
The birds were known on the eastern coast before 1788, when the first Europeans settled there.
In the areas in which it was endemic, the emu was an important source of meat to Aboriginal Australians.
the largest individuals can reach up to  in height.
The nest can be placed on open ground or near a shrub or rock.
During the 19th and 20th centuries, many Australian companies and household products were named after the bird.
Cool air warms as it passes through into the lungs, extracting heat from the nasal region.
They typically drink once a day, first inspecting the water body and surrounding area in groups before kneeling down at the edge to drink.
Wedge-tailed eagles are the only avian predator capable of attacking fully-grown emus, though are perhaps most likely to take small or young specimens.
n. diemenensis'', a subspecies known as the Tasmanian emu, became extinct around 1865.
During incubation, the embryos are kept at a constant temperature but the chicks will need to be able to cope with varying external temperatures by the time they hatch.
They stand about  tall at first, weigh , and have distinctive brown and cream stripes for camouflage, which fade after three months or so.
As with other ratites, emus have a relatively low basal metabolic rate compared to other types of birds.
If it perceives a threat during this period, it will lie down on top of the nest and try to blend in with the similar-looking surrounds, and suddenly stand up to confront and scare the other party if it comes close.
The vocalisations of emus mostly consist of various booming and grunting sounds.
Several of the Sydney rock engravings depict emus, and the birds are mimicked in indigenous dances.
The eggs hatch after around eight weeks, and the young are nurtured by their fathers.
They drink infrequently, but take in copious amounts of water when the opportunity arises.
Emus begin to settle down at sunset and sleep during the night.
In the 1930s, emu killings in Western Australia peaked at 57,000, and culls were also mounted in Queensland during this period due to rampant crop damage.
The cladogram shown below is from their study.
baudinianus'' and ''D.
Both males and females put on weight during the breeding season, with the female becoming slightly heavier at between .
If a male is interested, he will stretch his neck and erect his feathers, then bend over and peck at the ground.
The beak is turned down so that the whole neck becomes S-shaped and folded onto itself.
Emus are large, powerful birds, and their legs are among the strongest of any animal and powerful enough to tear down metal fencing.
They are also known to feed on wheat, and any fruit or other crops that they can access, easily climbing over high fences if necessary.
As with many other Australian birds, such as the superb fairywren, infidelity is the norm for emus, despite the initial pair bond: once the male starts brooding, the female usually wanders off, and may mate with other males and lay in multiple nests; thus, as many as half the chicks in a brood may not be fathered by the incubating male, or even by either parent, as emus also exhibit brood parasitism.
The juvenile plumage develops at about three months and is blackish finely barred with brown, with the head and neck being especially dark.
In Victoria, some terms for the emu were ''Barrimal'' in the Dja Dja Wurrung language, ''myoure'' in Gunai, and ''courn'' in Jardwadjali.
They do not sleep continuously but rouse themselves several times during the night.
Every part of the carcass had some use; the fat was harvested for its valuable, multiple-use oil, the bones were shaped into knives and tools, the feathers were used for body adornment and the tendons substituted for string.
Emus weigh between , with an average of  in males and females, respectively.
They are able to swim when necessary, although they rarely do so unless the area is flooded or they need to cross a river.
The thermoneutral zone of emus lies between .
Both sexes sometimes boom or grunt during threat displays or on encountering strange objects.
In Western Australia, Emu beer has been produced since the early 20th century and the Swan Brewery continues to produce a range of beers branded as "Emu".
It has featured on numerous Australian postage stamps, including a pre-federation New South Wales 100th Anniversary issue from 1888, which featured a 2 pence blue emu stamp, a 36 cent stamp released in 1986, and a $1.35 stamp released in 1994.
The comedian Rod Hull featured a wayward emu puppet in his act for many years and the bird returned to the small screen in the hands of his son after the puppeteer's untimely death.
Emu meat is a low-fat product (less than 1.5% fat), and is comparable to other lean meats.
Emus are diurnal birds and spend their day foraging, preening their plumage with their beak, dust bathing and resting.
During this phase, the body is gradually lowered until it is touching the ground with the legs folded underneath.
Emus can suffer from both external and internal parasites, but under farmed conditions are more parasite-free than ostriches or rheas.
Aboriginal Australians used a variety of techniques to catch the birds, including spearing them while they drank at waterholes, catching them in nets, and attracting them by imitating their calls or by arousing their curiosity with a ball of feathers and rags dangled from a tree.
Other nematodes are found in the trachea and bronchi; ''Syngamus trachea'' causing haemorrhagic tracheitis and ''Cyathostoma variegatum'' causing serious respiratory problems in juveniles.
The '''emu''' (''Dromaius novaehollandiae'') is the second-largest living bird by height, after its ratite relative, the ostrich.
Young emus usually sleep with their neck flat and stretched forward along the ground surface.
Emu fat is rendered to produce oil for cosmetics, dietary supplements, and therapeutic products.
When walking, the emu takes strides of about , but at full gallop, a stride can be as long as .
The maternal investment in the egg is considerable, and the proportion of yolk to albumen, at about 50%, is greater than would be predicted for a precocial egg of this size.
A high-intensity boom is audible  away, while a low, more resonant call, produced during the breeding season, may at first attract mates and peaks while the male is incubating the eggs.
Emus were first reported as having been seen by Europeans when explorers visited the western coast of Australia in 1696; this was an expedition led by Dutch captain Willem de Vlamingh who was searching for survivors of a ship that had gone missing two years earlier.
The male becomes broody after his mate starts laying, and may begin to incubate the eggs before the clutch is complete.
Aboriginal Australians only killed emus out of necessity, and frowned on anyone who hunted them for any other reason.
On very hot days, emus pant to maintain their body temperature, their lungs work as evaporative coolers and, unlike some other species, the resulting low levels of carbon dioxide in the blood do not appear to cause alkalosis.
While the Maria Island population died out in the mid-1990s, more birds have since been introduced, and attempts are being made to breed a form similar to the Tasmanian emu.
The toe and claw total  in length.
It served as a valuable lubricant, was used to oil wooden tools and utensils such as the coolamon, and was mixed with ochre to make the traditional paint for ceremonial body adornment.
These interactions can be prolonged, lasting up to five hours, especially when the male being fought over is single and neither female has the advantage of incumbency.
The pair mate every day or two, and every second or third day the female lays one of a clutch of five to fifteen very large, thick-shelled, green eggs.
The insular dwarf emus, ''D.
Most of the booming is done by females; it is part of the courtship ritual, is used to announce the holding of territory and is issued as a threat to rivals.
It appears as a shield bearer on the Coat of arms of Australia with the red kangaroo, and as a part of the Arms also appears on the Australian 50 cent coin.
The booming is created by the inflatable throat pouch; the pitch can be regulated by the bird and depends on the size of the aperture.
Incubation takes 56&nbsp;days, and the male stops incubating the eggs shortly before they hatch.
Although the eggs are laid sequentially, they tend to hatch within two days of one another, as the eggs that were laid later experienced higher temperatures and developed more rapidly.
However, the Handbook of the Birds of the World argues that the last two of these subspecies are invalid; natural variations in plumage colour and the nomadic nature of the species make it likely that there is a single race in mainland Australia.
If the male shows interest in the parading female, he will move closer; the female continues the courtship by shuffling further away but continuing to circle him.
The early European settlers killed emus to provide food and used their fat for fuelling lamps.
While there are no scientific studies showing that emu oil is effective in humans, it is marketed and promoted as a dietary supplement with a wide variety of claimed health benefits.
In Western Australia, emu movements follow a distinct seasonal pattern – north in summer and south in winter.
Males construct a rough nest in a semi-sheltered hollow on the ground, using bark, grass, sticks and leaves to line it.
In this case, the emu's jumping technique as employed against the dingo is not useful.
Some females stay and defend the nest until the chicks start hatching, but most leave the nesting area completely to nest again; in a good season, a female emu may nest three times.
There are around six hundred gazetted places in Australia with "emu" in their title, including mountains, lakes, hills, plains, creeks and waterholes.
The Salem district administration in India advised farmers in 2012 not to invest in the emu business which was being heavily promoted at the time; further investigation was needed to assess the profitability of farming the birds in India.
He develops a brood patch, a bare area of wrinkled skin which is in intimate contact with the eggs.
Emus are farmed primarily for their meat, leather, feathers and oil, and 95% of the carcass can be used.
Due to the scarcity of water sources, emus are sometimes forced to go without water for several days.
There are few native natural predators of emus still alive.
He can also bend his knees to crouch over smaller chicks to protect them.
Solar radiation is absorbed by the tips, and the inner plumage insulates the skin.
The nest is usually placed in an area where the emu has a clear view of its surroundings and can detect approaching predators.
Females can mate several times and lay several clutches of eggs in one season.
At , the metabolic rate of an emu sitting down is about 60% of that when standing, partly because the lack of feathers under the stomach leads to a higher rate of heat loss when standing from the exposed underbelly.
When courting, females stride around, pulling their neck back while puffing out their feathers and emitting low, monosyllabic calls that have been compared to drum beats.
Emus were used as a source of food by indigenous Australians and early European settlers.
As of 2012, the International Union for Conservation of Nature considers their population trend to be stable and assesses their conservation status as being of least concern.
An extreme example of this was the Emu War in Western Australia in 1932.
Although the population of emus on mainland Australia is thought to be higher now than it was before European settlement, some local populations are at risk of extinction.
In the 1960s, bounties were still being paid in Western Australia for killing emus, but since then, wild emus have been granted  formal protection under the ''Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999''.
Other raptors, monitor lizards, introduced red foxes, feral and domestic dogs, and feral pigs occasionally feed on emu eggs or kill small chicks.
When other material is lacking, the bird sometimes uses a spinifex tussock a metre or so across, despite the prickly nature of the foliage.
These are translucent, secondary eyelids that move horizontally from the inside edge of the eye to the outside edge.
Emus are inquisitive birds and have been known to approach humans if they see unexpected movement of a limb or piece of clothing.
The commercial industry in the country is based on stock bred in captivity, and all states except Tasmania have licensing requirements to protect wild emus.
In captivity, emus can live for upwards of ten years.
Most of the usable portions (the best cuts come from the thigh and the larger muscles of the drum or lower leg) are, like other poultry, dark meat; emu meat is considered for cooking purposes by the US Food and Drug Administration to be a red meat because its red colour and pH value approximate that of beef, but for inspection purposes it is considered to be poultry.
Once the male's attention has been gained, the female circles  her prospective mate at a distance of .
If there are no disturbances, they fall into a deeper sleep after about twenty minutes.
Both of the rachis have the same length, and the texture is variable; the area near the skin is rather furry, but the more distant ends resemble grass.
If not disturbed, they may drink continuously for ten minutes.
The hats of the Australian Light Horse are decorated with emu feather plumes.
When falling asleep, emus first squat on their tarsi and enter a drowsy state during which they are alert enough to react to stimuli and quickly return to a fully awakened state if disturbed.
They are generally gregarious birds apart from the breeding season, and while some forage, others remain vigilant to their mutual benefit.
The species was named by ornithologist John Latham in 1790 based on a specimen from the Sydney area of Australia, a country which was known as New Holland at the time.
Females are usually slightly larger than males and are substantially wider across the rump.
The sperm from a mating is stored by the female and can suffice to fertilise about six eggs.
They have grey-brown plumage of shaggy appearance; the shafts and the tips of the feathers are black.
For normal breathing in cooler weather, they have large, multifolded nasal passages.
If females court a male that already has a partner, the incumbent female will try to repel the competitor, usually by chasing and kicking.
Emus breed well in captivity, and are kept in large open pens to avoid the leg and digestive problems that arise from inactivity.
This probably relates to the long incubation period which means the developing chick must consume greater resources before hatching.
In these cases, the females typically intensify their calls and displays.
Early in its species history it may have faced numerous terrestrial predators now extinct, including the giant lizard ''Megalania'', the thylacine, and possibly other carnivorous marsupials, which may explain their seemingly well-developed ability to defend themselves from terrestrial predators.
An example of how the emu was cooked comes from the Arrernte of Central Australia who called it ''Kere ankerre'':
The bird is sufficiently common for it to be rated as a least-concern species by the International Union for Conservation of Nature.
A unique feature of the emu feather is the double rachis emerging from a single shaft.
In the United States, it was reported in 2013 that many ranchers had left the emu business; it was estimated that the number of growers had dropped from over five thousand in 1998 to one or two thousand in 2013.
They also eat insects and other arthropods, including grasshoppers and crickets, beetles, cockroaches, ladybirds, Bogong and cotton-boll moth larvae, ants, spiders and millipedes.
Over the course of the eight-week incubation period, he will lose a third of his weight and will survive on stored body fat and on any morning dew that he can reach from the nest.
In his original 1816 description of the emu, the French ornithologist Louis Jean Pierre Vieillot used two generic names, first ''Dromiceius'' and later ''Dromaius''.
As the young emus cannot travel far, the parents must choose an area with plentiful food in which to breed.
Mating usually takes place between April and June;  the exact timing is determined by the climate as the birds nest during the coolest part of the year.
Overall, an emu sleeps for around seven hours in each twenty-four-hour period.
Commercially marketed emu oil supplements are poorly standardised.
They reach full size after around six months, but can remain as a family unit until the next breeding season.
The emu typically tries to repel the dingo by jumping into the air and kicking or stamping the dingo on its way down.
In Western Australia, food preferences have been observed in travelling emus; they eat seeds from ''Acacia aneura'' until the rains arrive, after which they move on to fresh grass shoots and caterpillars; in winter they feed on the leaves and pods of ''Cassia'' and in spring, they consume grasshoppers and the fruit of ''Santalum acuminatum'', a sort of quandong.
The adult plumage has developed by about fifteen months.
As with other ratites, the emu has great homeothermic ability, and can maintain this status from .
The population of these birds varies from decade to decade, largely being dependent on rainfall; in 2009, it was estimated that there were between 630,000 and 725,000 birds.
The egg surface is granulated and pale green.
The temperature of the nest rises slightly during the eight-week period.
External parasites include the louse ''Dahlemhornia asymmetrica'' and various other lice, ticks, mites and flies.
Emus can travel great distances, and when necessary can sprint at ; they forage for a variety of plants and insects, but have been known to go for weeks without eating.
Emus have good eyesight and hearing, which allows them to detect threats at some distance.
The nest is almost always a flat surface rather than a segment of a sphere, although in cold conditions the nest is taller, up to  tall, and more spherical to provide some extra heat retention.
The emu has a prominent place in Australian Aboriginal mythology, including a creation myth of the Yuwaalaraay and other groups in New South Wales who say that the sun was made by throwing an emu's egg into the sky; the bird features in numerous aetiological stories told across a number of Aboriginal groups.
However, the mainland sub-species, ''D.
Emus live in various habitats across Australia both inland and near the coast.
Often the female will reject his advances with aggression, but if amenable, she signals acceptance by squatting down and raising her rump.
During the breeding season, males experience hormonal changes, including an increase in luteinizing hormone and testosterone levels, and their testicles double in size.
This period of wakefulness lasts for ten to twenty minutes, after which they return to slumber.
n. woodwardi'' Mathews, 1912  and ''D.
This provides a large part of their protein requirements.
Their occurrence range is between , and a 1992 census suggested that their total population was between 630,000 and 725,000.
Emus typically awake from deep sleep once every ninety minutes or so and stand upright to feed briefly or defecate.
Examination of the DNA of the King Island emu shows this bird to be closely related to the mainland emu and hence best treated as a subspecies.
It is used principally during the breeding season in territorial defence, as a threat to other males, during courtship and while the female is laying.
The cacti were eventually controlled by an introduced moth (''Cactoblastis cactorum '') whose larvae fed on the plant, one of the earliest examples of biological control.
In the wild, they often share water holes with kangaroos, other birds and animals; they are wary and tend to wait for the other animals to leave before they quench their thirst.
Nevertheless, the oil has been linked to the easing of gastrointestinal inflammation, and tests on rats have shown that it has a significant effect in treating arthritis and joint pain, more so than olive or fish oils.
n. novaehollandiae'', remains common.
n. minor'', originally present on Kangaroo Island and King Island respectively, both became extinct shortly after the arrival of Europeans.
The colour of the male's plumage remains unchanged, although the bare patches of skin also turn light blue.
Most modern publications, including those of the Australian government, use ''Dromaius'', with ''Dromiceius'' mentioned as an alternative spelling.
The emu is an important cultural icon of Australia, appearing on the coat of arms and various coins.
There is some evidence that the oil has anti-inflammatory properties; however, there have not yet been extensive tests, and the USDA regards pure emu oil as an unapproved drug and highlighted it in a 2009 article entitled "How to Spot Health Fraud".
Captive emus have been known to eat shards of glass, marbles, car keys, jewellery, and nuts and bolts.
Female emus court the males; the female's plumage darkens slightly and the small patches of bare, featherless skin just below the eyes and near the beak turn turquoise-blue.
Commercial emu farming started in Western Australia around 1970.
The emu was long classified, with its closest relatives the cassowaries, in the family Casuariidae, part of the ratite order Struthioniformes.
The eyes of an emu are protected by nictitating membranes.
One story from Western Australia holds that a man once annoyed a small bird, who responded by throwing a boomerang, severing the arms of the man and transforming him into a flightless emu.
The Kangaroo Island birds have successfully established a breeding population.
Another theory is that it comes from the word "ema", which is used in Portuguese to denote a large bird akin to an ostrich or crane.
The emu jumps as the dingo barely has the capacity to jump high enough to threaten its neck, so a correctly timed leap to coincide with the dingo's lunge can keep its head and neck out of danger.
They prefer being on firm ground while drinking, rather than on rocks or mud, but if they sense danger, they often stand rather than kneel.
Two different ''Dromaius'' species were present in Australia at the time of European settlement, and one additional species is known from fossil remains.
