This age group is at risk for developing ovarian cancer at the same time.
Endometrial cancer is sometimes loosely referred to as "uterine cancer", although it is distinct from other forms of uterine cancer such as cervical cancer, uterine sarcoma, and trophoblastic disease.
Rates of endometrial cancer have risen in a number of countries between the 1980s and 2010.
Myometrial invasion and involvement of the pelvic and para-aortic lymph nodes are the most commonly seen patterns of spread.
Early research has shown it to be effective in slowing the rate of cancer cell proliferation.
Bleeding is especially common with adenocarcinoma, occurring in two-thirds of all cases.
Cervical stenosis, the narrowing of the cervical opening, is a sign of endometrial cancer when pus or blood is found collected in the uterus (pyometra or hematometra).
Side effects of surgery to remove endometrial cancer can specifically include sexual dysfunction, temporary incontinence, and lymphedema, along with more common side effects of any surgery, including constipation.
Women who wish to preserve their fertility and have low-grade stage I cancer can be treated with progestins, with or without concurrent tamoxifen therapy.
Cancers can be analyzed using genetic techniques (including DNA sequencing and immunohistochemistry) to determine if certain therapies specific to mutated genes can be used to treat it.
Research is ongoing on the use of metformin, a diabetes medication, in obese women with endometrial cancer before surgery.
Research on hyperbaric oxygen therapy to reduce side effects is also ongoing.
Immigration studies (migration studies), which examine the change in cancer risk in populations moving between countries with different rates of cancer, show that there is some environmental component to endometrial cancer.
New evidence shows that D&C has a higher false negative rate than endometrial biopsy.
It is more common in developed countries, where the lifetime risk of endometrial cancer in people born with uteri is 1.6%, compared to 0.6% in developing countries.
Low-grade endometrioid adenocarcinomas have well differentiated cells, have not invaded the myometrium, and are seen alongside endometrial hyperplasia.
Squamous cell carcinoma of the endometrium has a poor prognosis.
, approximately 320,000&nbsp;women are diagnosed with endometrial cancer worldwide each year and 76,000 die, making it the sixth most common cancer in women.
Most of the risk factors for endometrial cancer involve high levels of estrogens.
In the United States, white women have a higher survival rate than black women, who tend to develop more aggressive forms of the disease by the time of their diagnosis.
About 25% of metastatic endometrioid cancers show a response to progestins.
Like serous cell carcinoma, it is usually aggressive and carries a poor prognosis.
In stage IV disease, where there are distant metastases, surgery can be used as part of palliative therapy.
Pelvic recurrences are treated with surgery and radiation, and abdominal recurrences are treated with radiation and, if possible, chemotherapy.
The CTNNB1 (beta-catenin) gene is most commonly mutated in the squamous subtype of endometrioid adenocarcinoma.
These contraindications happen in about 5–10% of cases.
Type I and Type II cancers (explained below) tend to have different mutations involved.
Lymphadenectomy is routinely performed for all stages of endometrial cancer in the United States, but in the United Kingdom, the lymph nodes are typically only removed with disease of stage II or greater.
Epigenetic silencing and point mutations of several genes are commonly found in Type I endometrial cancer.
Stage III and especially Stage IV cancers has a worse prognosis, but these are relatively rare, occurring in only 13% of cases.
High-grade undifferentiated endometrial sarcoma (HGUS) has a worse prognosis, with high rates of recurrence and 25% five-year survival.
Mutations in the KRAS gene can cause endometrial hyperplasia and therefore Type I endometrial cancer.
This treatment is effective in endometrial stromal sarcomas because they typically have estrogen and/or progestin receptors.
Endometrial cancer metastasizes to the lungs 20–25% of the time, more than any other gynecologic cancer.
Uterine perforation may occur during a D&C or an endometrial biopsy.
Other symptoms include pain with urination or sexual intercourse, or pelvic pain.
Treatments for rare high-grade undifferentiated endometrial sarcoma are being researched, as there is no established standard of care yet for this disease.
HGUS prognosis is dictated by whether or not the cancer has invaded the arteries and veins.
Without vascular invasion, the five-year survival is 83%; it drops to 17% when vascular invasion is observed.
Mucinous carcinomas are a rare form of endometrial cancer, making up less than 1–2% of all diagnosed endometrial cancer.
The prognosis for low-grade endometrial stromal sarcoma is good, with 60–90% five-year survival.
Changes in the size, shape or consistency of the uterus and/or its surrounding, supporting structures may exist when the disease is more advanced.
In trans men who take testosterone and have not had a hysterectomy, the conversion of testosterone into estrogen via androstenedione may lead to a higher risk of endometrial cancer.
The vast majority of endometrial cancers are carcinomas (usually adenocarcinomas), meaning that they originate from the single layer of epithelial cells that line the endometrium and form the endometrial glands.
Endometrial cancer is also associated with excessive estrogen exposure, high blood pressure and diabetes.
In 10–20% of endometrial cancers, mostly Grade&nbsp;3 (the highest histologic grade), mutations are found in a tumor suppressor gene, commonly p53 or PTEN.
The primary treatment for endometrial cancer is surgery; 90% of women with endometrial cancer are treated with some form of surgery.
Specifically, obesity, type&nbsp;II diabetes, and insulin resistance are risk factors for Type&nbsp;I endometrial cancer.
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), which also causes irregular or no ovulation, is associated with higher rates of endometrial cancer for the same reasons as obesity.
A pap smear is not typically sufficient to show endometrial cancer.
This form of endometrial cancer is more common in postmenopausal women.
If the disease is diagnosed at an early stage, the outcome is favorable, and the overall five-year survival rate in the United States is greater than 80%.
Hormonal therapy is only beneficial in certain types of endometrial cancer.
The histopathology of endometrial cancers is highly diverse.
It is the result of the abnormal growth of cells that have the ability to invade or spread to other parts of the body.
The uterus may also fill with pus (pyometrea).
Adjuvant chemotherapy has been found to increase survival in stage III and IV cancer more than added radiotherapy.
Temsirolimus, an mTOR inhibitor, is under investigation as a potential treatment.
Preliminary research and clinical trials have shown these treatments to have a high rate of response even in metastatic disease.
Ovarian and endometrial cancer develop simultaneously in 20% of people.
Beta-catenin mutations are commonly found in endometrial cancers with squamous cells.
Endometrial cancer nearly always develops before colon cancer, on average, 11&nbsp;years before.
The worldwide median age of diagnosis is 63&nbsp;years of age; in the United States, the average age of diagnosis is 60&nbsp;years of age.
Carcinogenesis in Lynch syndrome comes from a mutation in MLH1 and/or MLH2: genes that participate in the process of mismatch repair, which allows a cell to correct mistakes in the DNA.
PARP inhibitors are used to treat endometrial cancer with PTEN mutations, specifically, mutations that lower the expression of PTEN.
Endometrial glandular dysplasia occurs with an overexpression of p53, and develops into a serous carcinoma.
This tissue is then examined histologically for characteristics of cancer.
'''Endometrial cancer''' is a cancer that arises from the endometrium (the lining of the uterus or womb).
Dilation and curettage or an endometrial biopsy are used to obtain a tissue sample for histological examination.
Genetic disorders can also cause endometrial cancer.
Women with Lynch syndrome should begin to have annual biopsy screening at the age of 35.
These abnormal cancer cells have many genetic abnormalities that cause them to grow excessively.
Ultrasound findings alone are not conclusive in cases of endometrial cancer, so another screening method (for example endometrial biopsy) must be used in conjunction.
There are several types of endometrial cancer, including the most common endometrial carcinomas, which are divided into Type&nbsp;I and Type&nbsp;II subtypes.
There are several experimental therapies for endometrial cancer under research, including immunologic, hormonal, and chemotherapeutic treatments.
Instead, women, particularly menopausal women, should be aware of the symptoms and risk factors of endometrial cancer.
This therapy can be continued until the cancer does not respond to treatment or until childbearing is done.
The topic of lymphadenectomy and what survival benefit it offers in stage I disease is still being debated.
Risk factors for endometrial cancer include obesity, diabetes mellitus, breast cancer, use of tamoxifen, never having had a child, late menopause, high levels of estrogen, and increasing age.
Painful sexual intercourse or painful or difficult urination are less common signs of endometrial cancer.
Hormone therapy that is effective in treating breast cancer, including use of aromatase inhibitors, is also being investigated for use in endometrial cancer.
Non-metastatic squamous cell carcinoma and transitional cell carcinoma are very rare in the endometrium.
Older age indicates a worse prognosis.
File:Diagram showing stage 2 cancer of the womb CRUK 206.svg|Stage II endometrial cancer|alt=A diagram of stage II endometrial cancer
Overall, genetic causes contribute to 2–10% of endometrial cancer cases.
This makes it the third most common cause of death in cancers which only affect women, behind ovarian and cervical cancer.
Research shows that mTOR inhibitors may be particularly effective for cancers with mutations in PTEN.
Stage I ESS has the best prognosis, with five-year survival of 98% and ten-year survival of 89%.
Progestin is present in the combined oral contraceptive pill and the hormonal intrauterine device (IUD).
Other genes mutated in Lynch syndrome include MSH2, MSH6, and PMS2, which are also mismatch repair genes.
Undifferentiated endometrial carcinomas make up less than 1–2% of diagnosed endometrial cancers.
In obesity, the excess of adipose tissue increases conversion of androstenedione into estrone, an estrogen.
It has been reported fewer than 100&nbsp;times in the medical literature since its characterization in 1892.
Surgery can be followed by radiation therapy and/or chemotherapy in cases of high-risk or high-grade cancers.
Endometrial cancer is not widely known by the general populace, despite its frequency.
In more advanced cases, radiation therapy, chemotherapy or hormone therapy may also be recommended.
P53 mutations and chromosome instability are associated with serous carcinomas, which tend to resemble ovarian and Fallopian carcinomas.
Women of lower weight are at greater risk from unopposed estrogen.
Japanese-American women and American Latina women have a lower rates and Native Hawaiian women have higher rates.
With progression of the disease, the myometrium is infiltrated.
The leading treatment option for endometrial cancer is abdominal hysterectomy (the total removal by surgery of the uterus), together with removal of the fallopian tubes and ovaries on both sides, called a bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy.
If relapse occurs from a cancer that has not been treated with radiation, EBRT is the first-line treatment and is often successful.
Endometrial cancer includes carcinomas, which are divided into Type I and Type II cancers and includes endometrioid adenocarcinoma, uterine papillary serous carcinoma, uterine clear-cell carcinoma, and several other very rare forms.
There is an apparent link with these genes but it is attributable to the use of tamoxifen, a drug that itself can cause endometrial cancer, in breast and ovarian cancers.
Abnormal menstrual cycles or extremely long, heavy, or frequent episodes of bleeding in women before menopause may also be a sign of endometrial cancer.
If a tumor is well-differentiated and known to have progesterone and estrogen receptors, progestins may be used in treatment.
Chemotherapies being researched include doxorubicin and ifosfamide.
Other research is exploring the potential of identifying the sentinel lymph nodes for biopsy by injecting the tumor with dye that shines under infrared light.
There are many microscopic subtypes of endometrial carcinoma, but they are broadly organized into two categories, Type I and Type II, based on clinical features and pathogenesis.
Radiation therapy (VBT and EBRT) for a local vaginal recurrence has a 50% five-year survival rate.
PTEN and p27 loss of function mutations are associated with a good prognosis, particularly in obese women.
File:Diagram showing stage 1A and 1B cancer of the womb CRUK 196.svg|Stage IA and IB endometrial cancer|alt=A diagram of stage IA and IB endometrial cancer
A Pap smear can detect disease that has spread to the cervix.
An estimated 40% of cases are thought to be related to obesity.
The first sign is most often vaginal bleeding not associated with a menstrual period.
MRI is also useful for examining the nearby lymph nodes.
There are several subtypes of endometrioid adenocarcinoma with similar prognoses, including villoglandular, secretory, and ciliated cell variants.
High-grade histological subtypes are also at elevated risk for recurrence.
The results of the PORTEC 3 trial assessing combining adjuvant radiotherapy with chemotherapy were awaited in late 2014.
Brachytherapy and EBRT can also be used, singly or in combination, when there is a contraindication for hysterectomy.
Mutations in tumor suppressor genes are common in Type II endometrial cancer.
Brachytherapy involves placing a radiation source in the organ affected; in the case of endometrial cancer a radiation source is placed directly in the vagina.
The tumor's glands form very close together, without the stromal tissue that normally separates them.
Pre-cancerous endometrial hyperplasias are also referred to as endometrial intraepithelial neoplasia.
Endometrial cancer appears most frequently during perimenopause (the period just before, just after, and during menopause), between the ages of 50 and 65; overall, 75% of endometrial cancer occurs after menopause.
Palliative chemotherapy, cytoreductive surgery, and radiation are also performed.
An atypical hyperplasia is one with visible abnormalities in the nuclei.
Endometrial cancer occurs most commonly after menopause.
Results from a pelvic examination are frequently normal, especially in the early stages of disease.
Two genes most commonly associated with some other women's cancers, BRCA1 and BRCA2, do not cause endometrial cancer.
Because of the rarity of this cancer, there are no guidelines for how it should be treated, nor any typical treatment.
Serous carcinomas spread differently than most other endometrial cancers; they can spread outside the uterus without invading the myometrium.
Type II endometrial carcinomas usually occur in older, post-menopausal people, in the United States are more common in black women, and are not associated with increased exposure to estrogen or a history of endometrial hyperplasia.
An experimental drug that combines a hormone with doxorubicin is also under investigation for greater efficacy in cancers with hormone receptors.
Higher levels of estrone in the blood causes less or no ovulation and exposes the endometrium to continuously high levels of estrogens.
White American women are at higher risk for endometrial cancer than black American women, with a 2.88% and 1.69% lifetime risk respectively.
In the United States they are more common in whites, particularly those with a history of endometrial hyperplasia.
Frank adenocarcinoma may be distinguished from atypical hyperplasia by the finding of clear stromal invasion, or "back-to-back" glands which represent nondestructive replacement of the endometrial stroma by the cancer.
If cancer is found, medical imaging may be done to see whether the cancer has spread or invaded tissue.
Mutations in mismatch repair genes, like those found in Lynch syndrome, can lead to resistance against platins, meaning that chemotherapy with platins is ineffective in people with these mutations.
A cervical screening test, such as a Pap smear, is not a useful diagnostic tool for endometrial cancer because the smear will be normal 50% of the time.
More distant metastases are spread by the blood and often occur in the lungs, as well as the liver, brain, and bone.
Other imaging studies are of limited use.
The buildup of extra cells often forms a mass of tissue called a growth or tumor.
There is a three-tiered system for histologically classifying endometrial cancers, ranging from cancers with well-differentiated cells (grade I), to very poorly-differentiated cells (grade III).
Grade I cancers are the least aggressive and have the best prognosis, while grade III tumors are the most aggressive and likely to recur.
The five-year survival rate for endometrial adenocarcinoma following appropriate treatment is 80%.
Imaging without these indications is discouraged because it is unlikely to detect a recurrence or improve survival, and because it has its own costs and side effects.
Surgical treatment typically consists of hysterectomy including a bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, which is the removal of the uterus, and both ovaries and Fallopian tubes.
File:Diagram showing stage 3A to 3C cancer of the womb CRUK 224.svg|Stage III endometrial cancer|alt=A diagram of stage III endometrial cancer
Adjuvant radiotherapy is commonly used in early-stage (stage I or II) endometrial cancer.
Usually, when cells grow old or get damaged, they die, and new cells take their place.
Cancer starts when new cells form unneeded, and old or damaged cells do not die as they should.
Low immune function has also been implicated in endometrial cancer.
CTNNB1 (beta-catenin; a transcription gene) mutations are found in 14–44% of endometrial cancers and may indicate a good prognosis, but the data is unclear.
In contrast to endometrial carcinomas, the uncommon endometrial stromal sarcomas are cancers that originate in the non-glandular connective tissue of the endometrium.
This often appears on a background of endometrial hyperplasia.
Before treatment is begun, several other investigations are recommended.
Progestin receptors function as tumor suppressors in endometrial cancer cells.
Heart disease is the most common cause of death among those who survive endometrial cancer, with other obesity-related health problems also being common.
The two procedures have no difference in overall survival.
It occurs in 12.9 out of 100,000&nbsp;women annually in developed countries.
The p53 cell signaling system is not active in endometrial clear cell carcinoma.
Roughly 30% of endometrial serous carcinomas also have psammoma bodies.
Northern Europe, Eastern Europe, and North America have the highest rates of endometrial cancer, whereas Africa and West Asia have the lowest rates.
Palliative chemotherapy, particularly using capecitabine and gemcitabine, is also often used to treat recurrent endometrial cancer.
Though EBRT significantly reduces the rate of relapse in the pelvis, overall survival and metastasis rates are not improved.
There is also a subtype characterized by squamous differentiation.
Depending on the gene mutation, women with Lynch syndrome have different risks of endometrial cancer.
Specifically, ovarian granulosa cell tumors and thecomas are tumors associated with endometrial cancer.
Also, endometrial stromal sarcomas can be treated with hormonal agents, including tamoxifen, hydroxyprogesterone caproate, letrozole, megestrol acetate, and medroxyprogesterone.
Development of an endometrial hyperplasia (overgrowth of endometrial cells) is a significant risk factor because hyperplasias can and often do develop into adenocarcinoma, though cancer can develop without the presence of a hyperplasia.
Mucinous carcinomas must be differentiated from cervical adenocarcinoma.
ARID1A, which often carries a point mutation in Type I endometrial cancer, is also mutated in 26% of clear cell carcinomas of the endometrium, and 18% of serous carcinomas.
One such drug is anastrozole, which is currently being researched in hormone-positive recurrences after chemotherapy.
Type I endometrial cancers are often low-grade, minimally invasive into the underlying uterine wall (myometrium), estrogen-dependent, and have a good outcome with treatment.
Radiotherapy can also be used before surgery in certain cases.
The inherited genetic condition Cowden syndrome can also cause endometrial cancer.
The most frequent type of endometrial cancer is endometrioid carcinoma, which accounts for more than 80% of cases.
Removal of the uterus via the abdomen is recommended over removal of the uterus via the vagina because it gives the opportunity to examine and obtain washings of the abdominal cavity to detect any further evidence of cancer.
There are also rarer types including uterine papillary serous carcinoma, adenosquamous carcinoma, carcinomasarcoma and uterine clear-cell carcinoma.
VBT provides a better quality of life than EBRT.
Research continues into the best imaging method for detecting and staging endometrial cancer.
Women with this disorder have a 5–10%&nbsp;lifetime risk of developing endometrial cancer, compared to the 2–3%&nbsp;risk for unaffected women.
Women younger than 40 make up 5% of endometrial cancer cases and 10–15% of cases occur in women under 50&nbsp;years of age.
Laparotomy, an open-abdomen procedure, is the traditional surgical procedure; however, laparoscopy (keyhole surgery) is associated with lower operative morbidity.
The two subtypes are genetically distinct.
ESS makes up 0.2% of uterine cancers.
The cancer usually first spreads into the myometrium and the serosa, then into other reproductive and pelvic structures.
Its pathophysiology and treatments have not been characterized.
Mucinous endometrial carcinomas are most often stage I and grade I, giving them a good prognosis.
Tamoxifen, a drug used to treat estrogen-positive breast cancers, has been associated with endometrial cancer in approximately 0.1% of users, particularly older women, but the benefits for survival from tamoxifen generally outweigh the risk of endometrial cancer.
Serous carcinoma is a Type II endometrial tumor that makes up 5–10% of diagnosed endometrial cancer and is common in postmenopausal women with atrophied endometrium and black women.
Higher-grade endometrioid adenocarcinomas have less well-differentiated cells, have more solid sheets of tumor cells no longer organized into glands, and are associated with an atrophied endometrium.
Preliminary research has shown that the levonorgestrel IUD placed for a year, combined with 6&nbsp;monthly injections of gonadotropin-releasing hormone, can stop or reverse the progress of endometrial cancer in young women.
Higher doses or longer periods of estrogen therapy have higher risks of endometrial cancer.
Examinations conducted every three to four months are recommended for the first two years following treatment, and every six months for the next three years.
More advanced disease shows more obvious symptoms or signs that can be detected on a physical examination.
Preliminary research has been promising, and a stage II trial for ridaforolimus was completed by 2013.
Serous carcinomas are thought to develop from endometrial intraepithelial carcinoma.
