All stellar phenomena (including solar activity) are driven by various kinds of energy transformations.
For example, consider a ball being hit by a bat.
Noether's theorem (1918) states that any differentiable symmetry of the action of a physical system has a corresponding conservation law.
This is because energy is the quantity which is canonical conjugate to time.
At its lowest point the kinetic energy is at maximum and is equal to the decrease of potential energy.
Release of the energy stored during photosynthesis as heat or light may be triggered suddenly by a spark, in a forest fire, or it may be made available more slowly for animal or human metabolism, when these molecules are ingested, and catabolism is triggered by enzyme action.
However, there are many other definitions of energy, depending on the context, such as thermal energy, radiant energy, electromagnetic, nuclear, etc., where definitions are derived that are the most convenient.
For instance, in SI units, energy is measured in joules, and one joule is defined "mechanically", being the energy transferred to an object by the mechanical work of moving it a distance of 1 metre against a force of 1 newton.
As the universe evolves in time, more and more of its energy becomes trapped in irreversible states (i.e., as heat or other kinds of increases in disorder).
Examples include the transmission of electromagnetic energy via photons, physical collisions which transfer kinetic energy, and the conductive transfer of thermal energy.
There are strict limits to how efficiently heat can be converted into work in a cyclic process, e.g.
Potential energies are often measured as positive or negative depending on whether they are greater or less than the energy of a specified base state or configuration such as two interacting bodies being infinitely far apart.
The most famous of them used the "Joule apparatus": a descending weight, attached to a string, caused rotation of a paddle immersed in water, practically insulated from heat transfer.
Denoting this energy by , one may write
The energy of a mechanical harmonic oscillator (a mass on a spring) is alternatively kinetic and potential.
This slow lifting represents a kind of gravitational potential energy storage of the thermal energy, which may be later released to active kinetic energy in landslides, after a triggering event.
These developments led to the theory of conservation of energy, formalized largely by William Thomson (Lord Kelvin) as the field of thermodynamics.
Thus, according to present understanding, familiar events such as landslides and earthquakes release energy that has been stored as potential energy in the Earth's gravitational field or elastic strain (mechanical potential energy) in rocks.
where  is the amount of energy transferred, &nbsp; represents the work done on the system, and  represents the heat flow into the system.
It is equal to the energy expended (or work done) in applying a force of one newton through a distance of one metre.
In processes where heat is generated, quantum states of lower energy, present as possible excitations in fields between atoms, act as a reservoir for part of the energy, from which it cannot be recovered, in order to be converted with 100% efficiency into other forms of energy.
Thermodynamics aided the rapid development of explanations of chemical processes by Rudolf Clausius, Josiah Willard Gibbs, and Walther Nernst.
In 1807, Thomas Young was possibly the first to use the term "energy" instead of ''vis viva'', in its modern sense.
In classical physics, energy is a scalar quantity, the canonical conjugate to time.
When an isolated system is given more degrees of freedom (i.e., given new available energy states that are the same as existing states), then total energy spreads over all available degrees equally without distinction between "new" and "old" degrees.
The modern analog of this property, kinetic energy, differs from ''vis viva'' only by a factor of two.
Virtual photons (which are simply lowest quantum mechanical energy state of photons) are also responsible for electrostatic interaction between electric charges (which results in Coulomb law), for spontaneous radiative decay of exited atomic and nuclear states, for the Casimir force, for van der Waals bond forces and some other observable phenomena.
Likewise, whenever energy is transferred between systems by any mechanism, an associated mass is transferred with it.
Simpler organisms can achieve higher energy efficiencies than more complex ones, but the complex organisms can occupy ecological niches that are not available to their simpler brethren.
In 1843 James Prescott Joule independently discovered the mechanical equivalent in a series of experiments.
The Schrödinger equation equates the energy operator to the full energy of a particle or a system.
:''E'' is the rest mass energy.
Put differently, yesterday, today, and tomorrow are physically indistinguishable.
The CGS energy unit is the erg and the imperial and US customary unit is the foot pound.
The uncertainty principle should not be confused with energy conservation - rather it provides mathematical limits to which energy can in principle be defined and measured.
An example of a solar-mediated weather event is a hurricane, which occurs when large unstable areas of warm ocean, heated over months, give up some of their thermal energy suddenly to power a few days of violent air movement.
It can only be transformed.
When calculating kinetic energy (work to accelerate a mass from zero speed to some finite speed) relativistically – using Lorentz transformations instead of Newtonian mechanics – Einstein discovered an unexpected by-product of these calculations to be an energy term which does not vanish at zero speed.
In practice all energy transformations are permitted on a small scale, but certain larger transformations are not permitted because it is statistically unlikely that energy or matter will randomly move into more concentrated forms or smaller spaces.
Our Sun transforms nuclear potential energy to other forms of energy; its total mass does not decrease due to that in itself (since it still contains the same total energy even if in different forms), but its mass does decrease when the energy escapes out to its surroundings, largely as radiant energy.
To account for slowing due to friction, Leibniz theorized that thermal energy consisted of the random motion of the constituent parts of matter, a view shared by Isaac Newton, although it would be more than a century until this was generally accepted.
This creates a limit to the amount of heat energy that can do work in a cyclic process, a limit called the available energy.
A reversible process is one in which this sort of dissipation does not happen.
In the solution of the Schrödinger equation for any oscillator (vibrator) and for electromagnetic waves in a vacuum, the resulting energy states are related to the frequency by Planck's relation:  (where  is Planck's constant and  the frequency).
If the object falls to the ground, gravity does mechanical work on the object which transforms the potential energy in the gravitational field to the kinetic energy released as heat on impact with the ground.
The total energy of a system can be calculated by adding up all forms of energy in the system.
Lifting against gravity performs mechanical work on the object and stores gravitational potential energy in the object.
In a slower process, radioactive decay of atoms in the core of the Earth releases heat.
In the case of an electromagnetic wave these energy states are called quanta of light or photons.
For example, consider electron&ndash;positron annihilation, in which the rest mass of individual particles is destroyed, but the inertia equivalent of the system of the two particles (its invariant mass) remains (since all energy is associated with mass), and this inertia and invariant mass is carried off by photons which individually are massless, but as a system retain their mass.
As Richard Feynman points out:
For these cases the change in internal energy of a ''closed'' system is expressed in a general form by
Yet another example is that of a pendulum.
While heat can always be fully converted into work in a reversible isothermal expansion of an ideal gas, for cyclic processes of practical interest in heat engines the second law of thermodynamics states that the system doing work always loses some energy as waste heat.
The Schrödinger equation describes the space- and time-dependence of a slowly changing (non-relativistic) wave function of quantum systems.
It showed that the gravitational potential energy lost by the weight in descending was equal to the internal energy gained by the water through friction with the paddle.
where  is the heat supplied to the system and  is the work applied to the system.
A generalisation of the seminal formulations on constants of motion in Lagrangian and Hamiltonian mechanics (1788 and 1833, respectively), it does not apply to systems that cannot be modeled with a Lagrangian; for example, dissipative systems with continuous symmetries need not have a corresponding conservation law.
He called it rest mass energy: energy which every mass must possess even when being at rest.
This law is a fundamental principle of physics.
The direction of transformations in energy (what kind of energy is transformed to what other kind) is often determined by entropy (equal energy spread among all available degrees of freedom) considerations.
1.25 H-e. For a difficult task of only a few seconds' duration, a person can put out thousands of watts, many times the 746 watts in one official horsepower.
This thermal energy drives plate tectonics and may lift mountains, via orogenesis.
It would be more accurate to state that every energy has an inertia and gravity equivalent, and because mass is a form of energy, then mass too has inertia and gravity associated with it.
.The list is also not necessarily complete.
The total inflow of energy into a system must equal the total outflow of energy from the system, plus the change in the energy contained within the system.
In physics, '''energy''' is a property of objects which can be transferred to other objects or converted into different forms.
Mechanical and other forms of energy can be transformed in the other direction into thermal energy without such limitations.
Living organisms require available energy to stay alive, such as the energy humans get from food.
In Newtonian physics, there is a universal law of conservation of energy which says that energy can be neither created nor be destroyed; however, it can change from one form to another.
In biology, energy can be thought of as what's needed to keep entropy low.
Thus, one joule is one watt-second, and 3600 joules equal one watt-hour.
The amount of energy is directly proportional to the mass of body:
Whenever physical scientists discover that a certain phenomenon appears to violate the law of energy conservation, new forms are typically added that account for the discrepancy.
Over the whole cycle, or over many cycles, net energy is thus equally split between kinetic and potential.
Energy in such transformations is either from gravitational collapse of matter (usually molecular hydrogen) into various classes of astronomical objects (stars, black holes, etc.
The processes of Earth's climate and ecosystem are driven by the radiant energy Earth receives from the sun and the geothermal energy contained within the earth.
This is called equipartition principle; total energy of a system with many degrees of freedom is equally split among all available degrees of freedom.
In other words, energy is invariant with respect to rotations of space, but not invariant with respect to rotations of space-time (= boosts).
In cosmology and astronomy the phenomena of stars, nova, supernova, quasars and gamma-ray bursts are the universe's highest-output energy transformations of matter.
This energy is triggered and released in nuclear fission bombs or in civil nuclear power generation.
The ''speed'' of a chemical reaction (at given temperature&nbsp;''T'') is related to the activation energy&nbsp;''E'', by the Boltzmann's population factor&nbsp;e−''E''/''kT''that is the probability of molecule to have energy greater than or equal to&nbsp;''E'' at the given temperature&nbsp;''T''.
The total energy of a system is sometimes called the Hamiltonian, after William Rowan Hamilton.
This can be demonstrated by the following:
Many of these classifications overlap; for instance, thermal energy usually consists partly of kinetic and partly of potential energy.
Some types of energy are a varying mix of both potential and kinetic energy.
as a time derivative of the wave function.
An irreversible process is one in which energy is dissipated (spread) into empty energy states available in a volume, from which it cannot be recovered into more concentrated forms (fewer quantum states), without degradation of even more energy.
Matter may be converted to energy (and vice versa), but mass cannot ever be destroyed; rather, mass/energy equivalence remains a constant for both the matter and the energy, during any process when they are converted into each other.
For example, classical mechanics distinguishes between kinetic energy, which is determined by an object's movement through space, and potential energy, which is a function of the position of an object within a field.
Items that transform between these forms are called transducers.
Mass is also equivalent to a certain amount of energy, and likewise always appears associated with it, as described in mass-energy equivalence.
It also led to a mathematical formulation of the concept of entropy by Clausius and to the introduction of laws of radiant energy by Jožef Stefan.
In special relativity energy is also a scalar (although not a Lorentz scalar but a time component of the energy–momentum 4-vector).
For an activity that must be sustained for an hour, output drops to around 300; for an activity kept up all day, 150 watts is about the maximum.
If one (unrealistically) assumes that there is no friction or other losses, the conversion of energy between these processes would be perfect, and the pendulum would continue swinging forever.
Entropy is a measure of evenness of a distribution of energy between parts of a system.
Each of the basic forces of nature is associated with a different type of potential energy, and all types of potential energy (like all other types of energy) appears as system mass, whenever present.
In the center-of-mass reference frame, the bat does no work on the ball.
The human equivalent assists understanding of energy flows in physical and biological systems by expressing energy units in human terms: it provides a "feel" for the use of a given amount of energy.
Thus, since 1918, theorists have understood that the law of conservation of energy is the direct mathematical consequence of the translational symmetry of the quantity conjugate to energy, namely time.
Sunlight is also captured by plants as ''chemical potential energy'' in photosynthesis, when carbon dioxide and water (two low-energy compounds) are converted into the high-energy compounds carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins.
Examples of energy transformation include generating electric energy from heat energy via a steam turbine, or lifting an object against gravity using electrical energy driving a crane motor.
In particle physics, this inequality permits a qualitative understanding of virtual particles which carry momentum, exchange by which and with real particles, is responsible for the creation of all known fundamental forces (more accurately known as fundamental interactions).
:Daily food intake of a normal adult: 6–8&nbsp;MJ
The total energy of a system can be subdivided and classified in various ways.
Energy is subject to a strict global conservation law; that is, whenever one measures (or calculates) the total energy of a system of particles whose interactions do not depend explicitly on time, it is found that the total energy of the system always remains constant.
However energy is also expressed in many other units not part of the SI, such as ergs, calories, British Thermal Units, kilowatt-hours and kilocalories, which require a conversion factor when expressed in SI units.
For example, with a sensitive enough scale, one could measure an increase in mass after heating an object.
Other energy units such as the electronvolt, food calorie or thermodynamic kcal (based on the temperature change of water in a heating process), and BTU are used in specific areas of science and commerce.
Any living organism relies on an external source of energy—radiation from the Sun in the case of green plants, chemical energy in some form in the case of animals—to be able to grow and reproduce.
Energy may be transformed between different forms at various efficiencies.
:gain in kinetic energy of a sprinter during a 100&nbsp;m race: 4&nbsp;kJ
Another energy-related concept is called the Lagrangian, after Joseph-Louis Lagrange.
This formalism is as fundamental as the Hamiltonian, and both can be used to derive the equations of motion or be derived from them.
and some of the energy is used to convert ADP into ATP.
There is also a global law of conservation of energy, stating that the total energy of the universe cannot change; this is a corollary of the local law, but not vice versa.
According to Noether's theorem, the conservation of energy is a consequence of the fact that the laws of physics do not change over time.
Common energy forms include the kinetic energy of a moving object, the potential energy stored by an object's position in a force field (gravitational, electric or magnetic), the elastic energy stored by stretching solid objects, the chemical energy released when a fuel burns, the radiant energy carried by light, and the thermal energy due to an object's temperature.
Energy is strictly conserved and is also locally conserved wherever it can be defined.
Prior to this, they represent release of energy that has been stored in heavy atoms since the collapse of long-destroyed supernova stars created these atoms.
An example is mechanical energy which is the sum of (usually macroscopic) kinetic and potential energy in a system.
::C6H12O6 + 6O2 &rarr; 6CO2 + 6H2O
The classical equations of motion can be written in terms of the Hamiltonian, even for highly complex or abstract systems.
Energy transfer can be considered for the special case of systems which are closed to transfers of matter.
The distinctions between different kinds of energy is not always clear-cut.
However, the total system mass and energy do not change during this interaction.
Energy transformations in the universe over time are characterized by various kinds of potential energy that has been available since the Big Bang later being "released" (transformed to more active types of energy such as kinetic or radiant energy) when a triggering mechanism is available.
:''m'' is the mass,
In the context of chemistry, energy is an attribute of a substance as a consequence of its atomic, molecular or aggregate structure.
Most kinds of energy (with gravitational energy being a notable exception) are subject to strict local conservation laws as well.
This equation is highly specific, ignoring all chemical, electrical, nuclear, and gravitational forces, effects such as advection of any form of energy other than heat and pV-work.
It is also equivalent to mass, and this mass is always associated with it.
Examples of energy transformation into matter (i.e., kinetic energy into particles with rest mass) are found in high-energy nuclear physics.
In this heat death the energy of the universe does not change, but the fraction of energy which is available to do work through a heat engine, or be transformed to other usable forms of energy (through the use of generators attached to heat engines), grows less and less.
According to conservation of energy, energy can neither be created (produced) nor destroyed by itself.
Heat and work are measured as positive or negative depending on which side of the transfer we view them from.
Wave energies (such as radiant or sound energy), kinetic energy, and rest energy are each greater than or equal to zero because they are measured in comparison to a base state of zero energy: "no wave", "no motion", and "no inertia", respectively.
This is referred to as conservation of energy.
At its highest points the kinetic energy is zero and the gravitational potential energy is at maximum.
For example, if our bodies run (on average) at 80 watts, then a light bulb running at 100 watts is running at 1.25 human equivalents (100 ÷ 80) i.e.
This mathematical result is called the second law of thermodynamics.
Internal energy is the sum of all microscopic forms of energy of a system.
It would appear that living organisms are remarkably inefficient (in the physical sense) in their use of the energy they receive (chemical energy or radiation), and it is true that most real machines manage higher efficiencies.
This mathematical entanglement of energy and time also results in the uncertainty principle - it is impossible to define the exact amount of energy during any definite time interval.
In quantum mechanics energy is expressed using the Hamiltonian operator.
Examples of transducers include a battery, from chemical energy to electric energy; a dam: gravitational potential energy to kinetic energy of moving water (and the blades of a turbine) and ultimately to electric energy through an electric generator; or a heat engine, from heat to work.
Richard Feynman said during a 1961 lecture:
This principle is vitally important to understanding the behaviour of a quantity closely related to energy, called entropy.
This meant that hydrogen represents a store of potential energy that can be released by fusion.
Similarly, in the case of a chemical explosion, chemical potential energy is transformed to kinetic energy and thermal energy in a very short time.
But, in the reference frame of the person swinging the bat, considerable work is done on the ball.
These classical equations have remarkably direct analogs in nonrelativistic quantum mechanics.
In this case, energy can only be exchanged between adjacent regions of space, and all observers agree as to the volumetric density of energy in any given space.
The general formulation of the first law (i.e., conservation of energy) is valid even in situations in which the system is not homogeneous.
Energy is also transferred from potential energy () to kinetic energy () and then back to potential energy constantly.
At that time, according to theory, space expanded and the universe cooled too rapidly for hydrogen to completely fuse into heavier elements.
in a heat engine, as described by Carnot's theorem and the second law of thermodynamics.
However, some energy transformations can be quite efficient.
Beyond the constraints of closed systems, open systems can gain or lose energy in association with matter transfer (both of these process are illustrated by fueling an auto, a system which gains in energy thereby, without addition of either work or heat).
Such a fusion process is triggered by heat and pressure generated from gravitational collapse of hydrogen clouds when they produce stars, and some of the fusion energy is then transformed into sunlight.
The nuclear fusion of hydrogen in the Sun also releases another store of potential energy which was created at the time of the Big Bang.
It is a derived unit.
Plants also release oxygen during photosynthesis, which is utilized by living organisms as an electron acceptor, to release the energy of carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins.
At two points in the oscillation cycle it is entirely kinetic, and alternatively at two other points it is entirely potential.
In the International System of Units (SI), the unit of energy is the joule, named after James Prescott Joule.
According to the theory of mass–energy equivalence, any object that has mass when stationary in a frame of reference (called rest mass) also has an equivalent amount of energy whose form is called rest energy in that frame, and any additional energy acquired by the object above that rest energy will increase an object's mass.
This says that the work () is equal to the line integral of the force '''F''' along a path ''C''; for details see the mechanical work article.
Then the total amount of energy can be found by adding .
In growing organisms the energy that is converted to heat serves a vital purpose, as it allows the organism tissue to be highly ordered with regard to the molecules it is built from.
For tasks lasting a few minutes, a fit human can generate perhaps 1,000 watts.
In general we cannot measure how much heat or work are present in an object, but rather only how much energy is transferred among objects in certain ways during the occurrence of a given process.
Thermodynamics is chiefly concerned with changes in internal energy and not its absolute value, which is impossible to determine with thermodynamics alone.
Its results can be considered as a definition of measurement of energy in quantum mechanics.
For "closed systems" with no external source or sink of energy, the first law of thermodynamics states that a system's energy is constant unless energy is transferred in or out by mechanical work or heat, and that no energy is lost in transfer.
It was invented in the context of classical mechanics, but is generally useful in modern physics.
It may also be convenient to distinguish gravitational energy, thermal energy, several types of nuclear energy (which utilize potentials from the nuclear force and the weak force), electric energy (from the electric field), and magnetic energy (from the magnetic field), among others.
In this case, the energy must partly stay as heat, and cannot be completely recovered as usable energy, except at the price of an increase in some other kind of heat-like increase in disorder in quantum states, in the universe (such as an expansion of matter, or a randomisation in a crystal).
On any time scales, the uncertainty in the energy is by
The second law of thermodynamics states that energy (and matter) tends to become more evenly spread out across the universe: to concentrate energy (or matter) in one specific place, it is necessary to spread out a greater amount of energy (as heat) across the remainder of the universe ("the surroundings").
This means that it is impossible to create or destroy energy.
In this system the matter (electrons and positrons) is destroyed and changed to non-matter energy (the photons).
::C57H110O6 + 81.5O2 &rarr; 57CO2 + 55H2O
Heat and work are special cases in that they are not properties of systems, but are instead properties of ''processes'' that transfer energy.
The "ability of a system to perform work" is a common description, but it is misleading because energy is not necessarily available to  do work.
All of the many forms of energy are convertible to other kinds of energy.
This simplified equation is the one used to define the joule, for example.
Only a tiny fraction of the original chemical energy is used for work:
In biology, energy is an attribute of all biological systems from the biosphere to the smallest living organism.
The daily 1500–2000&nbsp;Calories (6–8&nbsp;MJ) recommended for a human adult are taken as a combination of oxygen and food molecules, the latter mostly carbohydrates and fats, of which glucose (C6H12O6) and stearin (C57H110O6) are convenient examples.
It was argued for some years whether heat was a physical substance, dubbed the caloric, or merely a physical quantity, such as momentum.
Elastic energy in materials is also dependent upon electrical potential energy (among atoms and molecules), as is chemical energy, which is stored and released from a reservoir of electrical potential energy between electrons, and the molecules or atomic nuclei that attract them.
Some energy is transferred between the surroundings and the reactants of the reaction in the form of heat or light; thus the products of a reaction may have more or less energy than the reactants.
Energy can be transferred between systems in a variety of ways.
As a simplification, the heat term, , is sometimes ignored, especially when the thermal efficiency of the transfer is high.
Mass and energy are closely related.
::ADP + HPO42&minus; &rarr; ATP + H2O
It is the energy needed to create the system.
Work and thus energy is frame dependent.
This is a reversible process – the inverse process is called pair creation – in which the rest mass of particles is created from energy of two (or more) annihilating photons.
