Brittany was founded by Britons who fled Cornwall and Devon after Anglo-Saxon encroachment.
In exchange for his homage and fealty, Rollo legally gained the territory he and his Viking allies had previously conquered.
The cause of the breach is not known but may have been an earthquake or the build-up of water pressure in the lake.
In Brittany, there is a region known as "Cornouaille" (Cornwall) in French and "Kernev" in Breton In ancient times there was also a "Domnonia" (Devon) in Brittany as well.
The most significant failed invasion threats came when the Dutch and Belgian ports were held by a major continental power, e.g.
The Channel acts as a funnel that amplifies the tidal range from less than a metre as observed at sea to more than 6 metres as observed in the Channel Islands, the west coast of the Cotentin Peninsula and the north cost of Britanny.
There is no connection with the Spanish inland province of La Mancha.
There is a separation zone between the two lanes.
A much more ambitious attempt to improve the barrage, by installing eight massive concrete towers across the strait was called the Admiralty M-N Scheme but only two towers were nearing completion at the end of the war and the project was abandoned.
It is the smallest of the shallow seas around the continental shelf of Europe, covering an area of some .
After initial success, the Germans learned how to pass through the barrage, aided by the unreliability of British mines.
The cargo ship ''Nicola'' ran into the wreckage the next day.
By a combination of hard fighting and German indecision, the port of Dunkirk was kept open allowing 338,000 Allied troops to be evacuated in Operation Dynamo.
The cars went on to the Frankfurt Motor Show that year, where they were put on display.
Following an accident in January 1971 and a series of disastrous collisions with wreckage in February, the Dover TSS the world's first radar-controlled Traffic Separation Scheme was set up by the International Maritime Organization.
The Battle of Passchendaele in 1917 was fought to reduce the threat by capturing the submarine bases on the Belgian coast, though it was the introduction of convoys and not capture of the bases that averted defeat.
The Cotentin Peninsula in France juts out into the Channel, whilst on the English side there is a small parallel channel known as the Solent between the Isle of Wight and the mainland.
This includes 24 two-way crossings and three three-way crossings.
One was crewed by two British Army officers, Captain Mike Bailey REME and Captain Peter Tappenden RAOC, the other by Tim Dill-Russell and Sgt Joe Minto RASC.
French Normandy was occupied by English forces during the Hundred Years' War in 1346–1360 and again in 1415–1450.
The ships were maintaining a very precise automated course, one directly behind the other, rather than making use of the full width of the traffic lanes as a human navigator would.
The ''Daily Mail'' claimed that the BBC received criticism from a coastguard who claimed that they had not been told that the stunt was going to take place, and allegedly branded it "completely irresponsible"; however this was not reported by any other media sources and the aired episode showed the full co-operation of the coastguard.
Caen, Cherbourg, Carentan, Falaise and other Norman towns endured many casualties in the fight for the province, which continued until the closing of the so-called Falaise gap between Chambois and Montormel, then liberation of Le Havre.
He was more successful in 54 BC, but Britain was not fully established as part of the Roman Empire until completion of the invasion by Aulus Plautius in 43 AD.
The fastest crossing of the English Channel by a commercial car-carrying hovercraft was 22&nbsp;minutes, recorded by the ''Princess Anne'' MCH SR-N4 Mk3 on 14 September 1995,
Through the scoured channel passed a river which now drained the combined Rhine and Thames towards the Atlantic to the west.
In modern Dutch, however, it is known as  (with no reference to the word "English").
It states: "In exceptional cases the French Maritime Authorities may grant authority for unorthodox craft to cross French territorial waters within the Traffic Separation Scheme when these craft set off from the British coast, on condition that the request for authorisation is sent to them with the opinion of the British Maritime Authorities."
The eastern region along the French coast between Cherbourg and the mouth of the Seine river at Le Havre is frequently referred to as the ''Bay of the Seine ()''.
Many waterskiers have made this return crossing non stop since this time.
The Channel subsequently became the stage for an intensive coastal war, featuring submarines, minesweepers, and Fast Attack Craft.
The Strait of Dover (French: ''Pas de Calais''), at the Channel's eastern end is its narrowest point, while its widest point lies between Lyme Bay and the Gulf of Saint Malo near its midpoint.
Other languages also use this name, such as Greek (), Italian () and  Russian ().
Though the system is inherently incapable of reaching the levels of safety obtained from aviation systems such as the Traffic Collision Avoidance System, it has reduced accidents to one or two per year.
In Spain and most Spanish-speaking countries the Channel is referred to as .
It destroyed the isthmus that connected Britain to continental Europe, although a land bridge across the southern North Sea would have existed intermittently at later times after periods of glaciation resulted in lowering of sea levels.
During the Battle of France in May 1940, the Germans succeeded in capturing both Boulogne and Calais, thereby threatening the line of retreat for the British Expeditionary Force.
A failed attempt to cross the Channel by two Syrian refugees in October 2014 only came to light when their bodies were later discovered on the shores of the North Sea in Norway and the Netherlands.
Remnants of a mesolithic boatyard have been found on the Isle of Wight.
It was able to make the journey across the Straits of Dover in around three hours.
It is about  long and varies in width from  at its widest to  in the Strait of Dover.
In a study published in 2007 high-resolution sonar revealed the unexpectedly well-preserved scourmarks and the telltale lenticular island forms characteristic of torrential flood.
The Mountbatten class hovercraft (MCH) entered commercial service in August 1968, initially between Dover and Boulogne but later also Ramsgate (Pegwell Bay) to Calais.
Despite these early successes against shipping, the Germans did not win the air supremacy necessary for Operation Sealion, the projected cross-Channel invasion.
The crossing took 7 hours 20 minutes, with mid-Channel wind conditions reaching force 5 on the Beaufort scale.
Her climb to the pre-eminent sea power of the world began in 1588 as the attempted invasion of the Spanish Armada was defeated by the combination of outstanding naval tactics by the English and the Dutch under command of Charles Howard, 1st Earl of Nottingham with Sir Francis Drake second in command, and the following stormy weather.
In April 1918 the Dover Patrol carried out the famous Zeebrugge Raid against the U-boat bases.
The fastest verified swim of the Channel was by the Australian Trent Grimsey on 8 September 2012, in 6 hours 55 minutes, beating the previous record set in 2007 by Bulgarian swimmer Petar Stoychev.
To achieve this France needed to gain control of the Channel for several weeks, but was thwarted following the British naval victory at the Battle of Quiberon Bay in 1759.
Pierre Andriel crossed the English Channel aboard the ''Élise'', ex the Scottish p.s.
By the end of 2005, 811 people had completed 1,185 verified crossings under the rules of the CSA, the CSA (Ltd), the CSPF and Butlins.
The number of ratified swims to 2004 was 948 by 675 people (456 men, 214 women).
A four-man relay team from Scarborough, North Yorkshire, headed by Heath Samples, crossed from Shakespeare Beach to Wissant.
The exceptional strategic importance of the Channel as a tool for blockade was recognised by the First Sea Lord Admiral Fisher in the years before World War I.
The Channel Crossing Association was set up at about this time to cater for unorthodox crossings.
The scheme mandates that vessels travelling north must use the French side, travelling south the English side.
In 1927, at a time when fewer than ten swimmers (including the first woman, Gertrude Ederle in 1926) had managed to emulate the feat and many dubious claims were being made, the Channel Swimming Association (CSA) was founded to authenticate and ratify swimmers' claims to have swum the Channel and to verify crossing times.
The attack on Lindisfarne in 793 is generally considered the beginning of the Viking Age.
In February 1684, ice formed on the sea in a belt  wide off the coast of Kent and  wide on the French side.
This traffic continued until the end of Roman rule in Britain in 410 AD, after which the early Anglo-Saxons left less clear historical records.
There have been 16 two-way crossings (9 by men and 7 by women).
In June 1843, because of difficulties with Dover harbour, the South Eastern Railway company developed the Boulogne-sur-Mer-Folkestone route as an alternative to Calais-Dover.
The British monarch is understood to ''not'' be the Duke of Normandy in regards of the French region of Normandy described herein, by virtue of the Treaty of Paris of 1259, the surrender of French possessions in 1801, and the belief that the rights of succession to that title are subject to Salic Law which excludes inheritance through female heirs.
During 1917, the Dover Barrage was re-sited with improved mines and more effective nets, aided by regular patrols by small warships equipped with powerful searchlights.
The lake was fed by meltwater from the Baltic and from the Caledonian and Scandinavian ice sheets that joined to the north, blocking its exit.
In 2007, the presenters of the BBC programme ''Top Gear'' (Jeremy Clarkson, Richard Hammond and James May) "drove" across the Channel from England to France.
The paddle steamer ''Defiance'', Captain William Wager, was the first steamer to cross the Channel to Holland, arriving there on 9 May 1816.
For the UK Shipping Forecast the Channel is divided into the following areas, from the west:
The Channel Islands were the only part of the British Commonwealth occupied by Germany (excepting the part of Egypt occupied by the Afrika Korps at the time of the Second Battle of El Alamein, which was a protectorate and not part of the Commonwealth).
As a busy shipping lane, the Channel experiences environmental problems following accidents involving ships with toxic cargo and oil spills.
Blériot's crossing signalled the end of the Channel as a barrier-moat for England against foreign enemies.
Dieppe was the site of an ill-fated raid by Canadian and British armed forces.
In more peaceful times the Channel served as a link joining shared cultures and political structures, particularly the huge Angevin Empire from 1135 to 1217.
Although the British surrendered claims to mainland Normandy and other French possessions in 1801, the monarch of the United Kingdom retains the title Duke of Normandy in respect to the Channel Islands.
The name ''English Channel'' has been widely used since the early 18th century, possibly originating from the designation  in Dutch sea maps from the 16th century onwards.
Intense negotiations resulted in some Red Cross humanitarian aid, but there was considerable hunger and privation during the occupation, particularly in the final months, when the population was close to starvation.
The CSA was dissolved in 1999 and was succeeded by two separate organisations: CSA (Ltd) and the Channel Swimming and Piloting Federation (CSPF).
The race was from the Varne club in Greatstone on Sea to Cap Gris Nez / Boulogne (latter years) and back.
In December 2002 the MV ''Tricolor'', carrying £30m of luxury cars sank  northwest of Dunkirk after collision in fog with the container ship ''Kariba''.
More than 11,000 were evacuated from Le Havre during Operation Cycle and a further 192,000 were evacuated from ports further down the coast in Operation Ariel in June 1940.
The descendants of Rollo and his followers adopted the local Gallo-Romance language and intermarried with the area's inhabitants and became the Normans – a Norman French-speaking mixture of Scandinavians, Hiberno-Norse, Orcadians, Anglo-Danish, and indigenous Franks and Gauls.
It is thought to have been created between 450,000 and 180,000&nbsp;years ago by two catastrophic glacial lake outburst floods caused by the breaching of the Weald–Artois anticline, a ridge that held back a large proglacial lake in the Doggerland region, now submerged under the North Sea.
The Battle of Trafalgar took place off the coast of Spain against a combined French and Spanish fleet and was won by Admiral Horatio Nelson, ending Napoleon's plans for a cross-Channel invasion and securing British dominance of the seas for over a century.
Thus the Loyal toast in the Channel Islands is ''La Reine, notre Duc'' ("The Queen, our Duke").
It is relatively shallow, with an average depth of about  at its widest part, reducing to a depth of about  between Dover and Calais.
The fiefdom of Normandy was created for the Viking leader Rollo (also known as Robert of Normandy).
One of the  recent occurrences was the MSC ''Napoli'', which  on 18 January 2007 was beached with nearly 1700&nbsp;tonnes of dangerous cargo in Lyme Bay, a protected World Heritage Site coastline.
Rollo had besieged Paris but in 911 entered vassalage to the king of the West Franks Charles the Simple through the Treaty of St.-Claire-sur-Epte.
The journey was undertaken to demonstrate how the Bull Boats of the Mandan Indians of North Dakota could have been copied from coracles introduced by Prince Madog in the 12th century.
His successors, however, often fought to regain control of mainland Normandy.
A combination of radar difficulties in monitoring areas near cliffs, a failure of a CCTV system, incorrect operation of the anchor, the inability of the crew to follow standard procedures of using a GPS to provide early warning of the ship dragging the anchor and reluctance to admit the mistake and start the engine led to the MV ''Willy'' running aground in Cawsand bay, Cornwall in January 2002.
The Ferriby Boats, Hanson Log Boats and the later Dover Bronze Age Boat could carry a substantial cross-Channel cargo.
(It is unclear whether this last set of data is comprehensive or CSA only.)
The Channel, which delayed human reoccupation of Great Britain for more than 100,000 years, has in historic times been both an easy entry for seafaring people and a key natural defence, halting invading armies while in conjunction with control of the North Sea allowing Britain to blockade the continent.
An annual Cross Channel Ski Race was run from the Varne Boat Club from the 1960s onwards.
Rollo's descendant William, Duke of Normandy became king of England in 1066 in the Norman Conquest beginning with the Battle of Hastings, while retaining the fiefdom of Normandy for himself and his descendants.
The team with the most number of Channel swims to its credit is the Serpentine Swimming Club in London, followed by the International Sri Chinmoy Marathon Team.
In 1259, Henry III of England recognised the legality of French possession of mainland Normandy under the Treaty of Paris.
However, on 25 July 1909 Louis Blériot made the first Channel crossing from Calais to Dover in an aeroplane.
The flood carved a large bedrock-floored valley down the length of the Channel, leaving behind streamlined islands and longitudinal erosional grooves characteristic of catastrophic megaflood events.
Before the Devensian glaciation (the most recent ice age that ended around 10,000 years ago), Britain and Ireland were part of continental Europe, linked by an unbroken Weald-Artois Anticline, which acted as a natural dam that held back a large freshwater pro-glacial lake in the Doggerland region, now submerged under the North Sea.
There have been three three-way crossings (2 by men and 1 by a woman).
However, it is sometimes claimed to derive from a Celtic word meaning ''channel'' that is also the source of the name for the Minch in Scotland.
It is now routine to travel between Paris or Brussels and London on the Eurostar train.
The name in Breton (''Mor Breizh'') means "Breton Sea", and its Cornish name (''Mor Bretannek'') means "British Sea".
The German troops on the islands surrendered on 9 May 1945, a few days after the final surrender in mainland Europe.
The English Channel is far more densely populated on the English shore.
Over the centuries the Royal Navy slowly grew to be the most powerful in the world.
The Anglo-Saxon texts often call it ''Sūð-sǣ'' ("South Sea") as opposed to ''Norð-sǣ'' ("North Sea" = Bristol Channel).
According to the ''Anglo-Saxon Chronicle'' they began to settle in Britain in 851.
The same name is used on an Italian map of about 1450, which gives the alternative name of —possibly the first recorded use of the ''Channel'' designation.
A German attack on these vessels resulted in the Battle of Dover Strait in 1917.
On 10 June 1821, English-built paddle steamer ''Rob Roy'' was the first passenger ferry to cross channel.
They continued to settle in the British Isles and the continent until around 1050.
The sea level was about  lower than it is today.
In 55 BC Julius Caesar invaded, claiming that the Britons had aided the Veneti against him the previous year.
Most other languages tend towards variants of the French and English forms, but notably Welsh has "Môr Udd".
The flood would have lasted for several months, releasing as much as one million cubic metres of water per second.
"Margery" in March 1816, one of the earliest seagoing voyages by steam ship.
More successful was the later Operation Overlord (D-Day), a massive invasion of German-occupied France by Allied troops.
The building of the British Empire was possible only because the Royal Navy eventually managed to exercise unquestioned control over the seas around Europe, especially the Channel and the North Sea.
With the rise of William the Conqueror the North Sea and Channel began to lose some of their importance.
Channel naval battles include the Battle of the Downs (1639), Battle of Goodwin Sands (1652), the Battle of Portland (1653), the Battle of La Hougue (1692) and the engagement between USS ''Kearsarge'' and CSS ''Alabama'' (1864).
Pre-historic people sailed from the mainland to England for millennia.
The most significant towns and cities along both the English and French sides of the Channel (each with more than 20,000 inhabitants, ranked in descending order; populations are the urban area populations from the 1999 French census, 2001 UK census, and 2001 Jersey census) are as follows:
Because the ''Kaiserliche Marine'' surface fleet could not match the British Grand Fleet, the Germans developed submarine warfare, which was to become a far greater threat to Britain.
On land, the German army attempted to capture Channel ports in the Race to the Sea but although the trenches are often said to have stretched "from the frontier of Switzerland to the English Channel", they reached the coast at the North Sea.
The other two vehicles that attempted the crossing (a Triumph Herald with a sail and a Volkswagen Campervan with a propeller attached to the flywheel) both sank.
They did it by designing "amphibious cars" that could be driven on land and also operate in water.
During the Seven Years' War, France attempted to launch an invasion of Britain.
The village of Kingsand was evacuated for three days because of the risk of explosion, and the ship was stranded for 11 days.
Indeed, over 40% of the UK incidents threatening pollution occur in or very near the Channel.
In Danish it is ''kanalen'' (the channel or canal).
The coastal resorts of the Channel, such as Brighton and Deauville, inaugurated an era of aristocratic tourism in the early 19th century, which developed into the seaside tourism that has shaped resorts around the world.
The German occupation of 1940–1945 was harsh, with some island residents being taken for slave labour on the Continent; native Jews sent to concentration camps; partisan resistance and retribution; accusations of collaboration; and slave labour (primarily Russians and eastern Europeans) being brought to the islands to build fortifications.
The first ferry crossed under the command of Captain Hayward.
Short trips across the Channel for leisure purposes are often referred to as Channel Hopping.
Youngest known waterskier to cross the Channel was John Clements aged 10, from the Varne Boat Club on 22 August 1974 who made the crossing from Littlestone to Boulogne and back without falling.
As the meltwater could still not escape to the north (as the northern North Sea was still frozen) the outflow channel from the lake entered the Atlantic Ocean in the region of Dover and Calais.
The Dover Patrol was set up just before the war started to escort cross-Channel troopships and to prevent submarines from sailing in the Channel, obliging them to travel to the Atlantic via the much longer route around Scotland.
The time difference of about 6 hours between high water at the eastern and western limits of the Channel is indicative of the tidal range being amplified further by resonance.
Singapore, the Cape, Alexandria, Gibraltar, Dover."
Later, it has also been known as the ''British Channel'' or the ''British Sea'' having been called the  by the 2nd-century geographer Ptolemy.
The Channel is of geologically recent origins, having been dry land for most of the Pleistocene period.
The French name  has been in use since at least the 17th century.
After four attempts – twice failing to leave Dover Harbour – they reached the coast of France in a Nissan pick-up with an outboard motor and oil drums attached to the back to aid stability in open water.
In 1974 a Welsh coracle piloted by Bernard Thomas of Llechryd crossed the English Channel to France in 13½ hours.
Cars can also be carried on special trains between Folkestone and Calais.
It took 12 hours 26 minutes 39 seconds and set a new Guinness World Record.
Much of the British war effort in Flanders was a bloody but successful strategy to prevent the Germans reaching the Channel coast.
As the ice sheet melted, a large freshwater lake formed in the southern part of what is now the North Sea.
The name is usually said to refer to the Channel's sleeve () shape.
Then, more than 200,000 years ago a single catastrophic glacial lake outburst flood overtopped the Weald-Artois Anticline and scoured a channel through an expanse of low-lying tundra, right down to the underlying chalk bedrock.
For nearly a thousand years, the Channel also provided a link between the Modern Celtic regions and languages of Cornwall and Brittany.
The name "Normandy" reflects Rollo's Viking (i.e.
There are several major islands in the Channel, the most notable being the Isle of Wight off the English coast, and the Channel Islands, British Crown Dependencies off the coast of France.
First Crossing by Sea Scooters
At the end of the last Ice Age, lower sea levels even permitted walking across.
In Portuguese it is known as .
The ship had been damaged and was en route to Portland Harbour.
A brisk and regular trade began between ports in Roman Gaul and those in Britain.
The Royal Navy blockaded the islands from time to time, particularly following the liberation of mainland Normandy in 1944.
The CCA, CSA, and CS&PF are the organisations escorting channel swims, because their pilots have the experience, qualifications, and equipment to guarantee the safety of the swimmers they escort.
In the power vacuum left by the retreating Romans, the Germanic Angles, Saxons, and Jutes began the next great migration across the North Sea.
Wheat was traded across the Channel about 8,000 years ago.
The Celtic Sea is to the west of the Channel.
The naval blockade in the Channel and North Sea was one of the decisive factors in the German defeat in 1918.
Having already been used as mercenaries in Britain by the Romans, many people from these tribes crossed during the Migration Period, conquering and perhaps displacing the native Celtic populations.
By February 1915, this had been augmented by a  stretch of light steel netting called the Dover Barrage, which it was hoped would ensnare submerged submarines.
On 31 January 1917, the Germans restarted unrestricted submarine warfare leading to dire Admiralty predictions that submarines would defeat Britain by November, the most dangerous situation Britain faced in either world war.
The Channel has traffic on both the UK-Europe and North Sea-Atlantic routes, and is the world's busiest seaway, with over 500 ships per day.
"Five keys lock up the world!
This is not a translation from French: in Portuguese and Spanish,  means ''stain'', while the word for sleeve is  – which suggests either a phonetic borrowing from French or a common source.
Eastwards from there the adjoining North Sea reduces to about  in the Broad Fourteens where it lies over the watershed of the former land bridge between East Anglia and the Low Countries.
On 16 September 1965, two Amphicars crossed from Dover to Calais.
For the next 250&nbsp;years the Scandinavian raiders of Norway, Sweden, and Denmark dominated the North Sea, raiding monasteries, homes, and towns along the coast and along the rivers that ran inland.
Diodorus Siculus and Pliny both suggest trade between the rebel Celtic tribes of Armorica and Iron Age Britain flourished.
The Strait of Dover is the busiest stretch of water in the world.
During this period the North Sea and almost all of the British Isles were covered with ice.
It reaches a maximum depth of  in the submerged valley of Hurd's Deep,  west-northwest of Guernsey.
"Northman") origins.
In 1204, during the reign of King John, mainland Normandy was taken from England by France under Philip II, while insular Normandy (the Channel Islands) remained under English control.
The shore-based long range traffic control system was updated in 2003 and there is a series of Traffic Separation Systems in operation.
There may have been some unreported swims of the Channel, by people intent on entering Britain in circumvention of immigration controls.
During the Second World War, naval activity in the European theatre was primarily limited to the Atlantic.
Louis Blériot (France) piloted the first airplane to cross in 1909.
Successful invasions include the Roman conquest of Britain, the Norman Conquest in 1066 and the invasion by the Dutch in 1688, while the concentration of excellent harbours in the Western Channel on Britain's south coast made possible the largest invasion of all time, the Normandy Landings in 1944.
The German name is , literally ''sleeve-channel'', or more generally .
Marine GPS systems allow ships to be preprogrammed to follow navigational channels accurately and automatically, further avoiding risk of running aground, but following the fatal collision between Dutch Aquamarine and Ash in October 2001, Britain's Marine Accident Investigation Branch (MAIB) issued a safety bulletin saying it believed that in these most unusual circumstances GPS use had actually contributed to the collision.
The coastline, particularly on the French shore, is deeply indented; several small islands close to the coastline, including Chausey and Mont Saint-Michel, are within French jurisdiction.
Another significant challenge to British domination of the seas came during the Napoleonic Wars.
The early stages of the Battle of Britain featured air attacks on Channel shipping and ports, and until the Normandy Landings (with the exception of the Channel Dash) the narrow waters were too dangerous for major warships.
The journey time Dover to Boulogne was roughly 35&nbsp;minutes, with six trips per day at peak times.
Both observe and authenticate cross-Channel swims in the Strait of Dover.
The steamer was purchased subsequently by the French postal administration and renamed ''Henri IV'' and put into regular passenger service a year later.
At the outset of the war, an attempt was made to block the path of U-boats through the Dover Strait with naval minefields.
from the Spanish Armada in 1588, Napoleon during the Napoleonic Wars, and Nazi Germany during World War II.
The number of swims conducted under and ratified by the Channel Swimming Association to 2005 was 982 by 665 people.
"... Sophisticated social networks linked the Neolithic front in southern Europe to the Mesolithic peoples of northern Europe."
Many travellers cross beneath the Channel using the Channel Tunnel, first proposed in the early 19th century and finally opened in 1994, connecting the UK and France by rail.
