Factors in saddle fit for a rider include the following:
Unlike the western saddle or Australian Stock Saddle, there is no horn or other design elements that stick out above the main tree of the saddle.
The stuffing of the panels is often kept to a minimum in a dressage saddle, to allow a closer feel with the horse.
The traditional English showing saddle is not used by these riders, and instead a more modern dressage-like saddle is used, with a more vertically cut flap.
A saddle that is too big does not provide any support for the rider and allows the seat to slide around too much.
The flap often has supportive padded knee rolls, especially for show jumping and cross-country, less so for equitation.
The traditional position of the old style show rider was to ride with the feet placed forward, and the seat pushed back, which was once thought to encourage more action and to make the horse look as if it has a longer front end.
Cowhide is usually used, though pigskin and other leathers are also seen.
For the rider, the seat is often quilted or padded, and the stirrups are designed with a wide foot tread to reduce fatigue.
* General stiffness or one-sidedness, shown by a reluctance to take one lead over the other at the canter or reluctance to turn in one or both directions
* Reluctance to be saddled, exhibited by fidgeting, tooth grinding, biting or  kicking).
Evidence of a saddle with a poor fit include:
In addition, saddles used for working cattle in nations other than the United States, such as the Australian Stock Saddle and the Charro Saddles of South America, often share stock saddle features such as a deep seat and extra leather to protect horse and rider, but lack a horn.
* Intermittent or unexplained lameness
Finally, particularly with used saddles, the rider must verify that the safety release mechanism works properly to release a stirrup leather in the event a rider falls and is tangled in the stirrups.
For riders, spending long hours in a poorly fitting saddle may result in lower back pain as a consequence of incorrect pelvic angle.
The tree width, which dictates the width of the saddle and height of the gullet, is one of the most important factors when fitting the saddle, and can be tested easily by looking at the sweat pattern on the animal's back after work.
Therefore, it is best to find a model that is comfortable and allows the rider to easily maintain the correct position.
Uneven fit increases the pounds per square inch in a given area of the back, which can lead to soreness or even injury.
This saddle is still used today, most notably by the Spanish Riding School, and also in Iberia and eastern Europe.
The flat racing saddle is designed to not interfere with a running horse and to be as lightweight as possible (including the stirrup irons).
Quality and balance are very critical factors to consider when purchasing an all-purpose saddle.
On some saddles it is also specially padded to protect or support the rider's knee.
* Sore back or "cold" back
The stirrup bars were protruding, and placed more forward than modern saddles, which made it nearly impossible for the rider to keep his legs underneath his body.
There are many factors to consider when fitting a saddle, and a professional saddle maker may be consulted to fit a saddle properly to a horse's back.
This saddle was based on a model used for bull fighting, cattle work, long-distance travel, and mounted combat, as its high pommel and cantle helped to provide the rider with support.
The saddle seat was developed from two sources.
Horses may also lose muscle tone from traveling with a hollowed back, leading to increased risk of lordosis ("swayback"), kissing spines, or pinched nerves.
The seat places the rider's center of balance farther back on the horse than in other English riding disciplines, though correct saddle seat equitation still demands that the rider's legs and feet be balanced under the horse.
Distribution of flocking can be tested by running the hands down the panels while applying slight pressure.
They generally have only one billet to attach the girth, and so an overgirth is usually added to keep it secure.
Although there are some sidesaddles that lack a leaping horn, they are not considered safe by modern standards.
* Pinching and pain in the loins and hips.
As a rough rule of thumb, sizes 16½ and below (19" for Saddle Seat) are generally for youth riders and smaller women.
It often has a wider bearing surface than a jumping saddle.
18&nbsp;inch saddles are the most common size for adult men and larger women.
The saddle has many dee rings along the pommel and cantle that allow the rider to attach various items.
It is used most often on the high-action and gaited horses of the Americas.
* '''Seat''': the lowest part of the seat should also be the narrowest part of the saddle, the waist or twist, in order to balance the rider over the horse.
* The stirrup bars are placed forward of the natural drop of the stirrups, causing pressure from the rider's feet to push them to go too far forward, resulting in a "chair seat" " position, so that correct balance is very difficult.
It also has a flat pommel and cantle so nothing interferes with the rider.
* Rub marks under the saddle.
The bearing surface of the panels should be as large and even as possible, within the confines of the saddle design.
Some models also are too high in the cantle, which can hit a rider in the buttocks and push the seat too far forward when jumping all but the smallest fences.
* Lack of balance by the rider in the saddle, as the rider will be perpetually behind the motion of the horse.
Saddles that are too small may also cause discomfort if the rider's seat is pushed into contact with the pommel.
However, a saddle that is much too wide will not have adequate wither clearance, especially on a high-withered horse, causing pressure in this area.
Many top-level endurance riders find this design superior to an "endurance" style saddle for distance competition because it allows them to get off the horse's back and move quickly over rough or mountainous terrain, yet provides greater security to the rider.
This required a new type of riding, as horse and rider now had to tackle fences, hedges, ditches, and banks straight on if they wished to keep up with the hounds and witness the kill.
Thus most riders who wish to ride sidesaddle are often found hunting for older saddles at antique shops, estate sales, and in dusty barn lofts.
Flat-racing saddles are built on a half-tree to reduce weight; because the rider spends most of the time up over the horse's withers, there is no need for the protection to the horse's spine that a full tree provides.
Saddles used in steeplechases are generally slightly heavier and more substantial, usually being built on a full tree.
However, other styles (such as monoflap jumping saddles) have longer billets that mirror the dressage saddle, so that the rider no longer has to ride with extra bulk under the leg.
* Pressure on the horse's loins, which is not only uncomfortable for the animal, but may cause damage to the spinal column, particularly the lumbar vertebrae, which are not supported by the ribs.
The seat of this saddle is longer and flatter than that of a forward seat or dressage saddle.
Many modern trees are made with spring steel running from front to rear between the bars.
When the saddle is too far forward the pommel rises up, tilting the cantle down and moving the seat back, so it is impossible for the rider to maintain a correct balanced position.
While a polo saddle is constructed with a minimum of padding so as to allow the polo player great freedom to twist and reach for his shot, a saddle used for jumping or eventing may have more padding to help give the rider support over fences.
Sidesaddles may be used in almost every discipline, including show jumping.
Caprilli, Santini, and Toptani developed the "forward seat," in which the rider uses shorter stirrups and keeps his legs under him as he rode in two-point, with his seat bones hovering above the saddle.
Length of thigh often plays a greater role in selecting a proper seat size than does rider weight or hip width.
Another development is the monoflap saddle, in which both the sweat flap and saddle flap are made of lighter weight leather, stitched together around the edges leaving only a passgae point for the girth straps, thus reducing the thickness of leather between the rider and the horse, and giving a closer feel, while still protecting the horse's skin from straps.
The stirrups, instead of being looped over stirrup bars, are generally looped directly over the wooden bars of the half tree to prevent the loss of a stirrup during a race and to reduce bulk.
* Uneven wear on the hooves
The sides  of the tree that run horizontally along the horse's back are known as bars.
If the panels are stuffed unevenly (one panel higher than the other, or stuffing that is hard and lumpy rather than smooth), the saddle will have pressure points and could cause soreness.
The back panels should not rise off the horse's back when it is ridden.
The horse's barrel becomes wider and rounder the farther back it goes, and the withers also become lower before blending into the back altogether, leaving nothing to prevent the saddle from sliding.
To non-horsemen, the major distinguishing feature of an English saddle is its lack of a horn.
The English saddle is based on a solid tree, over which webbing, leather and padding materials are added.
Many have a small curved pommel and a long, raised cantle on the off side to support the offside thigh and to help riders keep their spine squared on the horse's back.
Many show horses are also presented in fatter condition than in more athletic disciplines, so the billets are placed to help keep the saddle properly placed on a rounder animal, with the foremost billet on show pony saddles frequently being attached directly to the point of the front arch of the tree; this is known as a "forward point".
In fact, it may be difficult for the rider to be thrown free should the horse fall.
The first was a flatter European saddle developed to sit the rider further back to show off the high front leg action of flashy horses, often seen quite literally during Sunday rides in city parks.
Traditionally, the tree of an English saddle is built of laminated layers of high quality wood, reinforced with steel underneath the front arch, and around the rear underside of the tree from quarter to quarter.
The pommel is always cut back to allow greater freedom of the front legs and shoulder, as well as to accommodate the higher set neck and higher withers typical of the saddle seat breeds.
A saddle that is too small is uncomfortable to ride in and does not allow the rider the security provided by sitting deep in the saddle.
The second source was the plantation saddle developed in the southern United States that allowed riders to sit back comfortably on a gaited horse as they covered large areas of land on a daily basis.
A properly fitting saddle will "find its own place" when put on over the withers, and then slid back until it will not easily slide further.
The discipline is not limited to England, the United Kingdom in general or other English-speaking countries.
This style of saddle is most commonly seen in amateur-owner or lower-level junior competition.
Some designs feature an exaggerated amount of padding in front of the knee, much more than in a jumping saddle, said to assist the rider in keeping the knee down and thigh back.
It is upon this hook that the rider hangs the ''stirrup leather'', which is a very strong leather or nylon loop supporting the stirrup.
The saddle must also fit the rider, as security on the horse can be compromised when a saddle is the wrong size.
Therefore, racing saddles are not suited for general equestrian riding.
The saddle seat saddle, also sometimes called a "Park," "Lane Fox" or "cutback," is a variation on the English show saddle.
* Interference with the horse's shoulder blades as it extends the forelegs, folds the legs over fences, or when the leading leg in canter or gallop is in the most rearward position (the top of the shoulder blade can move a full one and a half inches backwards from the standing position during canter and gallop).
The English hunting saddle is the predecessor of all English-type riding saddles.
The front panels should have pressure evenly distributed down their front, which can be tested by saddling the horse, tightening the girth,  running the hands down the front panels to feel for even pressure.
* '''Pommel/Cantle height''': the cantle should be slightly higher than the pommel, so the seat is not too far back (which would tip the rider backward and force the lower legs forward).
However, the usual practice was to ride with longer stirrups, and the feet pushed out in front, so this was not a problem.
The panels are stuffed with different types of material, all designed to spread pressure evenly and disperse sweat.
It is seen most often in the USA and Canada, but also on occasion in South Africa and other parts of the world.
* The pommel of the saddle will drop downwards, making the rider 'slide downhill' in the saddle and increasing the risk of a fall over the shoulder.
Some saddle twists are designed more for the pelvic structure of men than for women and thus may be uncomfortable for the other gender.
One of the defining features of the polo saddle is that there is very little or no padding under the leg, allowing the rider to have maximum freedom of movement.
Although some modern saddlers have developed alternative models, the English saddle is usually constructed on a framework known as a ''tree''.
On either side of the tree, a steel hook known as the "stirrup bar" is affixed.
The balance of the seat is further back and comparatively flat, with the cantle and pommel low so that they do not interfere with the rider's jumping position (and variations known as "two-point position" or "half-seat").
Many manufacturers create two models, one with a slightly straighter dressage-oriented flap that still allows a rider to jump low fences, and another with a more forward flap that allows a rider to jump somewhat more challenging fences, but still permit a deep seat for flat work.
Long term, poor saddle fit may cause multiple back problems for the horse.
The resulting saddle developed for foxhunting had a very low pommel and cantle with a flat seat, and no padding under the leg, therefore providing the rider with little, if any, support.
The near-side flap is commonly cut forward to keep the rider's right leg and foot from touching the horse's left shoulder.
Standard Saddle Seat sizes range from 19&nbsp;inches to 21&nbsp;inches.
More recently, saddle manufacturers are using various materials to replace wood and create a synthetic molded tree (some still using spring steel and a steel gullet plate).
In addition to the seat and panels, English saddles feature leather flaps on either side; the underside flap is called the sweat flap, and the upper flap is called the saddle flap (or, simply and appropriately, the "flap").
* Harmful pressure areas because the tree points are more likely to dig into the withers.
Others may have "floating" panels, which are particularly useful since endurance riders often ride with their seat out of the saddle (releasing pressure from the back, but increasing the amount felt on the stirrup bars where they attach near the point of the tree).
The racing saddle has a very long seat without a dip to it, combined with extremely forward flaps that accommodate the very short stirrups and extreme forward seat used by jockeys.
A saddle used for a discipline where the rider sits more upright with a longer leg, such as in dressage, has a flap that is longer to accommodate the leg, and less inclined forward (as the knee does not need to go forward).
However, flap size and length of the rider's thigh bone also influence the length of seat needed.
'''English saddles''' are used to ride horses in English riding disciplines throughout the world.
The sidesaddle has only one stirrup leather, and two pommels: the fixed pommel (sometimes called a "horn" or "head") and the "leaping horn" or "leaping head".
The sidesaddle was used by women from approximately the 14th through 19th centuries, when a combination of long skirts and social mores discouraged women from riding astride.
The gap between the panels should also be about three inches wide all the way down, pommel to cantle, though heavily built animals may need four or more inches of width here to avoid pressure on the ligament over the spine.
In spite of having both legs to the side of the horse, properly positioned riders sit on the horse facing forward, with their spine centered in the saddle perpendicular to that of the horse, with weight balanced equally on both buttocks.
This style of saddle is used in all of the Olympic and International Federation for Equestrian Sports (FEI) equestrian disciplines, except for the newly approved FEI events of equestrian vaulting and reining.
Both pommels allow the rider to stay in place, even when jumping.
Dry spots in the center of the back may indicate "bridging" of the saddle - no contact with the back in a location where the saddle should be in contact.
Most styles also manufacture proportionately smaller saddles for children.
However, in disciplines where the rider needs shorter stirrups for better balance and security, such as in the jumping disciplines, the saddle flap is moved proportionately forward and shortened, and the seat is moved further back.
To create this, an artist's flexicurve or a piece of coat hanger wire is placed up over the withers about two inches behind the horse's shoulder blade, then shaped to fit across the withers.
A tree that is too narrow is more of a threat than one too wide, as it pushes the points of the saddle tree into the horse's back.
On some designs, the seat of the sidesaddle is angled away from the side on which the legs lie to help the weight of the rider remain centered over the horse's back.
Modern competitors are starting a trend to a more classical position, with the leg placed underneath their body and their hips over their heel, a position more forgiving on the horse's back that encourages better movement.
17 and 17½&nbsp;inch saddles are usually suitable for adult women of average size, with the 17&nbsp;inch seat more suitable for shorter riders and the 17½ for those with a longer thigh (20" and 21" for Saddle Seat).
* Improper positioning of the girth too far forward, which can result in rubbing behind the elbows and lead to girth sores.
The panels need even pressure.
A racing saddle, where jockeys ride with incredibly short stirrups, will have an extremely forward and short saddle flap (almost more horizontal than vertical), and the seat will be extended well back from the pommel to keep the rider’s center of gravity correctly situated.
However, while eventing saddles usually do have better balance and higher quality materials and workmanship, a fundamental design difference is otherwise difficult to discern.
No two saddles are identical; there can be 1/4" variation between saddles of different brands with the same size designation.
It is important that the rider's leg fit appropriately into the flap of the jumping saddle when the stirrups are shortened.
The waist of the saddle was also made narrower.
Its cantle would get in the way of the riders as they tried to lean back over the fence (a practice that was common until Caprilli developed the "forward seat"), and the high pommel created pain as the rider went over jumps.
The saddle should provide adequate clearance for the spine and withers.
Leather is added on all sides of the tree to create the seat, flaps and panels.
Roughened hair may indicate either rubbing and instability due to poor fit, or it may be due to improper saddle placement (particularly putting the saddle on too far back and pushing it forward, pulling the hair the wrong direction).
The "all-purpose" or "eventing" saddle (also sometimes called a "general purpose" saddle) was developed to allow riders to use one saddle both over fences and on the flat.
* Misbehavior by the horse due to discomfort.
Often for accurate measurements, a professional saddle fitter may need to be consulted.
Non-gaited but action-oriented breeds such as the Morgan and the Arabian, are commonly shown in saddle seat style, though these breeds also have hunt seat divisions.
The hair may become sweaty, but shouldn't be roughed up to the point it lays sideways or backwards to its direction of growth.
More expensive models are usually labeled "eventing" saddles.
This not only makes it extremely difficult for the rider to stay balanced, as they are constantly trying to scramble "uphill," but also places the majority of weight close to the cantle, and hence on the horse's loins.
An average horse can be fitted with just this measurement by comparing the angle of the wither tracing to the angle of the piping at the front arch of the saddle.
Like the American Saddle Seat saddle, the English showing saddle has a stirrup bar set farther forward and a cutback pommel that falls behind rather than over the withers, though the seat is less flat and the rider's center of balance is closer to that of a dressage saddle.
The most important distinctions are the location and therefore the balance of the seat, and the flap length and shape.
(''See English Show Saddle, below.'')
A saddle fitter can check to make sure see if the panels are correctly stuffed for the horse.
If the saddle had thigh or calf blocks, the leg would not be allowed to swing forward or back as needed.
This causes extreme discomfort for the horse, and can produce bald spots and sores.
The seat is very flat, and there are no knee or thigh rolls, so the saddle offers little support to the rider.
The Endurance saddle, originally based on a military or police saddle, is used for the long-distance competition of endurance riding.
If either too wide or too narrow, considerable discomfort may result.
Even a well-fitting saddle will cause discomfort to the horse and position problems for the rider if it is placed too far forward, creating problems that include:
The shape is then traced onto heavy paper or cardboard.
Just as an athlete cannot perform their best if they have shoes that do not fit, even excellent riders have a difficult time riding well in a poorly balanced or ill-fitting saddle.
In England, foxhunting grew in popularity (as the usual quarry of deer had dwindled following the English Civil War, when they were hunted for food).
A smaller number of riders feel that sidesaddle riding is a skill and riding art worth preserving and thus continue to practice the style, working to achieve greater skill and refinement.
A traditional manufacturing centre is in Walsall, England.
This will often result in a hollowing if it persists for long periods of time.
The vast majority of sidesaddles are designed so riders sit with both legs on the near (left) side of the horse, though occasionally a sidesaddle is found that is reversed and allows the rider to sit with their legs to the off (right) side.
* Uneven sweat or dirt pattern under the saddle after a workout, particularly dry spots in an area that should normally be sweaty.
* Shortness of stride
Argentina produces many English saddles, particularly for the polo market, as well as a large number of brands that are in the mid-range of prices for other disciplines.
The old saddle was cumbersome while hunting.
Its most distinctive feature is a forward-cut flap that allows for a shorter stirrup length (although not as short as racing stirrups).
Modern endurance saddle manufacturers have been innovative in methods to lighten weight and provide additional comfort for the horse, and several of these techniques have gone on to influence other saddle types.
With the horse's heaviest rider sitting on the saddle, there should be at least three fingers width between the pommel and the withers, and when girthed up with a thin pad or no pad, it should be possible to look down the gullet and see light at the other end.
For this reason, some English riding instructors and coaches do not particularly encourage their riders to use these saddles.
Saddles that are placed too far back (a common error made by inexperienced riders first learning to saddle a horse), or saddles with a tree that is too long (for example, a horse-sized saddle placed on a pony) also cause problems for horse and rider, including:
A saddle must be measured for width, length, and front arch height (clearance over the withers).
This varies by age, weight and gender.
Most endurance saddles may have extended panels (called "fans" or "blazers"), which increase bearing area.
* '''Saddle flap''': with the stirrups at the appropriate riding length (which will differ according to experience and riding discipline), the knee should not come too far behind the flap (so the flaps do not provide any support), or too far in front (which will force the lower leg back and severely disrupt the balance of the rider.
The girthing of an English sidesaddle is usually a three-buckle system, with a usual full-length girth and an additional balancing girth.
Most flat racing saddles weigh less than 1½ pounds; the lightest saddles weigh as little as 8 ounces.
If the knee is too far forward or back, the rider's balance will be incorrect and the saddle becomes a hindrance rather than an advantage while jumping obstacles.
Like the All-Purpose saddle, the jumping saddle usually has three short billets.
The shorter stirrup required a more forward flap, to match the greater knee angle of the rider.
* '''Twist''' or '''Waist''': the narrowest part of the saddle needs to fit the rider's pelvic structure so that the seat bones properly support the rider.
One company manufactures a design with a flap that can be adjusted to be straighter or more forward, as the rider prefers.
Today the saddle is still widely used for specialty purposes in shows, parades, and other exhibitions.
All English saddles are measured from the nailhead below the pommel to the center of the cantle.
Riders use very long stirrups, usually at least as long as those of dressage riders.
Also, when the stirrups are adjusted correctly for jumping, the rider's knees are not always placed properly in relation to the flap.
When the rider is centered in the saddle, the length of the seat should allow about one hand's width both behind the rider's seat and in front of the pelvis.
Riding with a white cloth under the saddle is used as a diagnostic tool to make uneven patterns more visible.
More very strong leather or nylon straps known as ''billets'' (or ''girth points/straps'' - UK) are attached to stout webbing which is tacked across the top of the tree, to which will eventually buckle the ''girth''--the beltlike strap which holds the saddle onto the horse.
The term ''English saddle'' encompasses several types, including those used for show jumping and hunt seat, dressage, Saddle seat, horse racing and polo.
* High risk the saddle will slip sideways.
When saddle shopping, or if having a saddle custom-made, one method of sizing the horse is known as a "wither tracing."
The flaps usually have padding under the leg, for support while jumping.
The jumping saddle, sometimes called a "forward seat" or "close contact" saddle, is designed for show jumping, hunt seat equitation, foxhunting, and the show jumping and cross-country phases of eventing.
However, some dressage saddles come with shorter billets.
The fit of the saddle to the rider is also critical, as a poorly fitting or badly designed saddle will disrupt the rider's balance by either pushing the rider backwards, behind the horse's center of balance, or lead to incorrect form as a way to compensate for a lack of balance in the saddle.
Gaited breeds using this saddle include the American Saddlebred,  Tennessee Walking Horse, and Missouri Foxtrotter.
Saddles are also manufactured with different flap lengths to accommodate riders of different sizes.
Exercise saddles are usually larger and heavier, with a more prominent pommel and cantle to provide more security to the rider.
