Conversely, one of the leading drainage contractors, the Earl of Lindsey, was to die fighting for the King at the Battle of Edgehill.
Many areas attempted to remain neutral.
Charles and his supporters continued to resent Parliament's demands, while Parliamentarians continued to suspect Charles of wanting to impose episcopalianism and unfettered royal rule by military force.
First and foremost, to avoid Parliament, the King needed to avoid war.
Following these events of August, the representative of Venice in England reported to the doge that the London government took considerable measures to stifle dissent.
At the time, the Parliament of England did not have a large permanent role in the English system of government.
Putting these numbers into the context of other catastrophes helps to understand the devastation to Ireland in particular.
This attempt failed.
As King of Scots, James had become accustomed to Scotland's weak parliamentary tradition since assuming control of the Scottish government in 1583, so that upon assuming power south of the border, the new King of England was genuinely affronted by the constraints the English Parliament attempted to place on him in exchange for money.
The end of Charles's independent governance came when he attempted to apply the same religious policies in Scotland.
The first (1642–46) and second (1648–49) wars pitted the supporters of King Charles I against the supporters of the Long Parliament, while the third (1649–51) saw fighting between supporters of King Charles II and supporters of the Rump Parliament.
Almost the entirety of Northern England was occupied and Charles was forced to pay £850 per day to keep the Scots from advancing.
This group subsequently joined forces with Sir John Brereton to fight the inconclusive Battle of Hopton Heath (19 March 1643), where the Royalist commander, the Earl of Northampton, was killed.
Figures for Ireland are described as "miracles of conjecture".
In the remains of his English realm Charles attempted to recover a stable base of support by consolidating the Midlands.
Charles, meanwhile, decided to send an expeditionary force to relieve the French Huguenots whom French royal troops held besieged in La Rochelle.
These notes from the King's Privy Council contained evidence Strafford had told the King, "Sir, you have done your duty, and your subjects have failed in theirs; and therefore you are absolved from the rules of government, and may supply yourself by extraordinary ways; you have an army in Ireland, with which you may reduce the kingdom."
The Parliament began assembling a fleet to invade the Royalist colonies, but many of the English islands in the Caribbean were captured by the Dutch and French in 1651 during the Second Anglo-Dutch War.
The truce proved temporary, and a second war followed in the middle of 1640.
For example, a failure to attend and to receive knighthood at Charles's coronation was a finable offence with the fine paid to the Crown.
The essay illuminates a flaw shared by most of Hobbes's political philosophy as well, which is his lack of ability or willingness to empathize with perspectives that largely differed from his own.
One method was reviving certain conventions, often long-outdated.
It was no coincidence that the United Kingdom was spared the wave of revolutions that occurred in Europe in the 1840s.
Unable to raise revenue without Parliament and unwilling to convene it, Charles resorted to other means.
He arrived in Scotland on 22 July 1650 and proceeded to lay siege to Edinburgh.
Charles moved in a south-westerly direction, first to Stafford, and then on to Shrewsbury, because the support for his cause seemed particularly strong in the Severn valley area and in North Wales.
Gardiner, popularised the English Civil War as a 'Puritan Revolution': challenging the repressive Stuart Church, and preparing the way for religious toleration in the Restoration.
Resistance continued for a time in the Channel Islands, Ireland and Scotland, but with the pacification of England the resistance elsewhere did not threaten the military supremacy of the New Model Army and its parliamentary paymasters.
The colony made a separate peace that respected its internal status quo.
However, since the Rump Parliament acted as though nothing had changed since 1653 and as though it could treat the Army as it liked, military force shortly afterwards dissolved this, as well.
Cromwell's conduct in this battle proved decisive, and demonstrated his potential as both a political and an important military leader.
At first, Charles II encouraged Montrose to raise a Highland army to fight on the Royalist side.
If he did not, they would "take" the money by pillaging and burning the cities and towns of Northern England.
The new Parliament proved even more hostile to Charles than its predecessor.
Those who still supported Charles' place on the throne, such as the army leader and moderate Fairfax, tried once more to negotiate with him.
On 3 May, Parliament decreed The Protestation, attacking the 'wicked counsels' of Charles's government, whereby those who signed the petition undertook to defend 'the true reformed religion', parliament, and the king's person, honour and estate.
Prince Rupert could then take Bristol.
On 29 May 1660, the populace in London acclaimed him as king.
Many English Parliamentarians had suspicions regarding such a move because they feared that setting up a new kingdom might destroy the old English traditions which had bound the English monarchy.
In the Channel Islands, the island of Jersey and Castle Cornet in Guernsey supported the King until in December 1651 they surrendered with honour.
Certainly the devastation inflicted on Ireland was massive, with the best estimate provided by Sir William Petty, the father of English demography.
Even so, Virginia Puritan Richard Bennett was made Governor answering to Cromwell in 1652, followed by two more nominal "Commonwealth Governors".
In response to the threat, Cromwell left some of his lieutenants in Ireland to continue the suppression of the Irish Royalists and returned to England.
Cromwell's army then took Edinburgh, and by the end of the year his army had occupied much of southern Scotland.
In the spring of 1639, King Charles I accompanied his forces to the Scottish border to end the rebellion known as the Bishops' War.
Calvin's follower John Knox brought Presbyterianism to Scotland when the Scottish church was reformed in 1560.
They allowed only 75 Members in, and then only at the Army's bidding.
But, after an inconclusive military campaign, he accepted the offered Scottish truce: the Pacification of Berwick.
During the period of the English Civil War, the English overseas possessions were highly involved.
His means of raising English revenue without an English Parliament fell critically short of achieving this.
Sir Thomas Fairfax defeated a Royalist uprising in Kent at the Battle of Maidstone on 1 June.
Finally, the Parliament passed a law forbidding the King to dissolve it without its consent, even if the three years were up.
Charles II landed in Scotland at Garmouth in Morayshire on 23 June 1650 and signed the 1638 National Covenant and the 1643 Solemn League and Covenant shortly after coming ashore.
The Great Hunger of 1845–1852 resulted in a loss of 16% of the population, while during the Second World War the population of the Soviet Union fell by 16%.
It immediately began to discuss grievances against Charles and his government and with Pym and Hampden (of ship money fame) in the lead, took the opportunity presented by the King's troubles to force various reforming measures—including many with strong 'anti-Papist' themes—upon him.
However, even the most radical supporters of the Parliamentarian cause still favoured the retention of Charles on the throne.
The Lords Lieutenant, whom Parliament appointed, used the Militia Ordinance to order the militia to join Essex's army.
The term "English Civil War" appears most often in the singular form, although historians often divide the conflict into two or three separate wars.
However, this forced him to call an English Parliament to raise new taxes to pay for the army.
Many members of the bourgeoisie fought for the King, while many landed aristocrats supported Parliament.
However, Parliament did attempt to avert conflict by requiring all adults to sign The Protestation, an oath of allegiance to Charles.
John Calvin formulated a doctrine of Presbyterianism, which held that in the New Testament the offices of ''presbyter'' and ''episkopos'' were identical; he rejected the doctrine of apostolic succession.
Charles made peace with France and Spain, effectively ending England's involvement in the Thirty Years' War.
In the 1970s, revisionist historians challenged both the Whig and the Marxist theories, notably in the 1973 anthology ''The Origins of the English Civil War'' (Conrad Russell ed.).
When assembled along with the House of Lords, these elected representatives formed a Parliament.
In the early decades of the 20th century the Whig school was the dominant theoretical view.
In the North of England, Major-General John Lambert fought a very successful campaign against a number of Royalist uprisings—the largest that of Sir Marmaduke Langdale in Cumberland.
Hobbes offered a unique contribution to historical interpretation of the civil war through his Behemoth by connecting the civil war to the motivations of intellectuals who Hobbes reports caused it by trying to spread certain ideas throughout the nation, largely for the sake of displaying their own wisdom and learning.
Thanks to Lambert's successes, the Scottish commander, the Duke of Hamilton, had perforce to take the western route through Carlisle in his pro-Royalist Scottish invasion of England.
The war in all these countries are known as the Wars of the Three Kingdoms.
At the outset of the conflict, much of the country remained neutral, though the Royal Navy and most English cities favoured Parliament, while the King found considerable support in rural communities.
The democratic element introduced in the watermen's company in 1642, for example, survived, with vicissitudes, until 1827.
After the debacle at Hull, Charles moved on to Nottingham, where on 22 August 1642, he raised the royal standard.
This move, while saving Buckingham, reinforced the impression that Charles wanted to avoid Parliamentary scrutiny of his ministers.
Following the execution, Charles, the eldest son was in Jersey where, on 17 February 1649 in the Royal Square in St. Helier, he was publicly proclaimed King Charles II (following the first public proclamation in Edinburgh on 5 February 1649)
Accordingly, the army left Shrewsbury on 12 October, gaining two days' start on the enemy, and moved south-east.
Some communities improved their conditions of tenure on such estates.
In 1639, Charles had recalled Wentworth to England and in 1640 made him Earl of Strafford, attempting to have him achieve similar results in Scotland.
The execution of Charles I altered the dynamics of the Civil War in Scotland, which had raged between Royalists and Covenanters since 1644.
It passed the Self-denying Ordinance, by which all members of either House of Parliament laid down their commands, and re-organized its main forces into the New Model Army, under the command of Sir Thomas Fairfax, with Cromwell as his second-in-command and Lieutenant-General of Horse.
As Charles shared his father's position on the power of the crown (James had described kings as "little gods on Earth", chosen by God to rule in accordance with the doctrine of the "Divine Right of Kings"), the suspicions of the Parliamentarians had some justification.
After the Restoration in 1660, of the surviving regicides not living in exile, nine were executed and most of the rest sentenced to life imprisonment.
Subsequent fighting around Newbury (27 October 1644), though tactically indecisive, strategically gave another check to Parliament.
On the other hand, all the cathedral cities (except Chester and the royalist stronghold of Oxford) sided with Parliament.
The Whig view was challenged and largely superseded by the Marxist school, which became popular in the 1940s, and which interpreted the English Civil War as a bourgeois revolution.
Those towns had become fortresses and showed more reliable loyalty to him than to others.
Lenthall replied, "May it please your Majesty, I have neither eyes to see nor tongue to speak in this place but as the House is pleased to direct me, whose servant I am here."
Specifically, Hobbes analyses the following aspects of English thought during the war (listed in order of his discussions in Behemoth): the opinions of divinity and politics that spurred rebellion; rhetoric and doctrine used by the rebels against the king; and how opinions about "taxation, the conscription of soldiers, and military strategy" affected the outcomes of battles and shifts of sovereignty.
Puritans accused Laud of reintroducing Catholicism; when they complained, he had them arrested.
The most important Whig historian, S.R.
Counting in accidents and the two Bishops' wars, an estimate of 190,000 dead is achieved, out of a total population of about five million.
However, when the Scottish Covenanters (who did not agree with the execution of Charles I and who feared for the future of Presbyterianism under the new Commonwealth) offered him the crown of Scotland, Charles abandoned Montrose to his enemies.
During the period of the English Civil War, the role of bishops as wielders of political power and as upholders of the established church became a matter of heated political controversy.
The Act also authorised Parliamentary privateers to act against English vessels trading with the rebellious colonies: ''All Ships that Trade with the Rebels may be surprized.
Other factors that hindered its success include King Charles II's refusing its publication and Hobbes’ chiefly interpretive approach to the historical narrative.
In early January 1642, a few days after his failure to capture five members of the House of Commons, fearing for the safety of his family and retinue, Charles left the London area for the north of the country.
The main battle tactic came to be known as pike and shot infantry, in which the two sides would line up, facing each other, with infantry brigades of musketeers in the centre, carrying matchlock muskets; these muskets were inaccurate, but could be lethal at a range of up to 300 yards.
In two decisive engagements—the Battle of Naseby on 14 June and the Battle of Langport on 10 July—the Parliamentarians effectively destroyed Charles' armies.
Although Petty's figures are the best available, they are still acknowledged as being tentative; they do not include the estimate of 40,000 driven into exile, some of whom served as soldiers in European continental armies, while others were sold as indentured servants to New England and the West Indies.
At times there would be two groups of three lines allowing one group to reload while the other group arranged themselves and fired.
This Rump Parliament received orders to set up, in the name of the people of England, a High Court of Justice for the trial of Charles I for treason.
In practice, Presbyterianism meant that committees of lay elders had a substantial voice in church government, as opposed to merely being subjects to a ruling hierarchy.
Lacey Baldwin Smith says, "the words ''populist, rich, and rebellious'' seemed to go hand in hand".
Two weeks after the King had raised his standard at Nottingham, Essex led his army north towards Northampton, picking up support along the way (including a detachment of Cambridgeshire cavalry raised and commanded by Oliver Cromwell).
Many of those sold to landowners in New England eventually prospered, but many of those sold to landowners in the West Indies were worked to death.
The majority faction in the new Parliament, led by John Pym, took this appeal for money as an opportunity to discuss grievances against the Crown and opposed the idea of an English invasion of Scotland.
The Long Parliament then passed the Triennial Act, also known as the Dissolution Act in May 1641, to which the Royal Assent was readily granted.
Rumours circulated that the King supported the Irish, and Puritan members of the Commons soon started murmuring that this exemplified the fate that Charles had in store for them all.
Specifically, future monarchs became wary of pushing Parliament too hard, and Parliament effectively chose the line of royal succession in 1688 with the Glorious Revolution and in the 1701 Act of Settlement.
This time, a Scots army defeated Charles's forces in the north, then captured Newcastle.
This document took the form of a "loyal protest," rejecting all innovations not first having been tested by free parliaments and General Assemblies of the Church.
Charles needed to suppress the rebellion in Scotland.
By the early 1640s, Charles was left in a state of near permanent crisis management; often he was not willing to concede enough ground to any one faction to neutralise the threat, and in some circumstances to do so would only antagonise another faction.
At the end of the trial the 59 Commissioners (judges) found Charles I guilty of high treason, as a "tyrant, traitor, murderer and public enemy".
Other laws passed by the Parliament made it illegal for the king to impose taxes without Parliamentary consent and later gave Parliament control over the king's ministers.
Many regarded the King as indifferent to public welfare, and this played a role in bringing a large part of eastern England into Parliamentarian camp.
Charles, fearing for the safety of his family, signed on 10 May.
Nearly all the Royalists who had fought in the First Civil War had given their parole not to bear arms against the Parliament, and many of these, like Lord Astley, refused to break their word by taking any part in the second war.
Thomas Hobbes gives a much earlier historical account of the English Civil War in his essay Behemoth, written in 1668 and published in 1681.
The Triennial Act required that Parliament be summoned at least once every three years, and that when the King failed to issue proper summons, the members could assemble on their own.
During this period, Charles's lack of money determined policies.
During the "Personal Rule," Charles aroused most antagonism through his religious measures: he believed in High Anglicanism, a sacramental version of the Church of England, theologically based upon Arminianism, a creed shared with his main political advisor, Archbishop William Laud.
As his perspective was so much at odds with other views, Hobbes struggled to understand the thinking of most of his potential audience and people in general.
Once summoned, a parliament's continued existence was at the king's pleasure, since it was subject to dissolution by him at any time.
When he raised his standard, Charles had with him about 2,000 cavalry and a small number of Yorkshire infantry-men, and using the archaic system of a Commission of Array, Charles's supporters started to build a larger army around the standard.
As the summer progressed, cities and towns declared their sympathies for one faction or the other: for example, the garrison of Portsmouth under the command of Sir George Goring declared for the King, but when Charles tried to acquire arms for his cause from Kingston upon Hull, the depository for the weapons used in the previous Scottish campaigns, Sir John Hotham, the military governor appointed by Parliament in January, refused to let Charles enter Hull, and when Charles returned with more men later, Hotham drove them off.
; Two or three of the Officers of every ship to be examined upon oath.''
In 1633, Charles appointed Laud as Archbishop of Canterbury and started making the Church more ceremonial, replacing the wooden communion tables with stone altars.
Opposition to Charles also arose owing to many local grievances.
By the end of August disease and a shortage of supplies had reduced his army, and he had to order a retreat towards his base at Dunbar.
This vision of at least partial democracy in ecclesiology paralleled the struggles between Parliament and the King.
The old ''status quo'' began a retrenchment after the end of the First Civil War in 1646, and more especially after the restoration of monarchy in 1660.
Charles took exception to this ''lèse-majesté'' (offence against the ruler) and dissolved the Parliament after only a few weeks; hence the name "the Short Parliament".
The second field action of the war, the stand-off at Turnham Green, saw Charles forced to withdraw to Oxford.
Colonel Thomas Horton defeated the Royalist rebels at the Battle of St Fagans (8 May) and the rebel leaders surrendered to Cromwell on 11 July after the protracted two-month siege of Pembroke.
The Scots went on to invade England, occupying Northumberland and Durham.
By 1649, the struggle had left the Royalists there in disarray and their erstwhile leader, the Marquess of Montrose, had gone into exile.
Rural communities seized timber and other resources on the sequestrated estates of royalists and Catholics, and on the estates of the royal family and the church hierarchy.
Cromwell finally engaged and defeated the new king at Worcester on 3 September 1651.
With the size of both armies now in the tens of thousands, and only Worcestershire between them, it was inevitable that cavalry reconnaissance units would sooner or later meet.
On 8 May 1660, it declared that King Charles II had reigned as the lawful monarch since the execution of Charles I in January 1649.
The brigades would arrange themselves in lines of musketeers, three deep, where the first row would kneel, the second would crouch, and the third would stand, allowing all three to fire a volley simultaneously.
Charles was eventually handed over to the English Parliament by the Scots and was imprisoned.
Ordinary people took advantage of the dislocation of civil society during the 1640s to derive advantages for themselves.
While passing through Wellington, in what became known as the "Wellington Declaration," he declared that he would uphold the "Protestant religion, the laws of England, and the liberty of Parliament."
In the Midlands, a Parliamentary force under Sir John Gell besieged and captured the cathedral city of Lichfield, after the death of the original commander, Lord Brooke.
In 1645 Parliament reaffirmed its determination to fight the war to a finish.
However, Montrose, who had raised a mercenary force in Norway, had already landed and could not abandon the fight.
As the former Member of Parliament Admiral Robert Blake blockaded Prince Rupert's fleet in Kinsale, Oliver Cromwell could land at Dublin on 15 August 1649 with an army to quell the Royalist alliance in Ireland.
Other Parliamentarian forces won the Battle of Winceby, giving them control of Lincoln.
Parliament dissolved the Committee of Both Kingdoms when the alliance ended, but its English members continued to meet and became known as the Derby House Committee.
For example, the imposition of drainage-schemes in The Fens negatively affected the livelihood of thousands of people after the King awarded a number of drainage-contracts.
Throughout the summer months, tensions rose and there was brawling in a number of places, with the first death from the conflict taking place in Manchester.
The English Parliaments were not willing to grant Charles the revenue he needed to pay for the Scottish expeditionary army unless he addressed their grievances.
This evidence was obtained from Vane's father, Henry Vane the Elder, a member of the King's Privy council, who refused to confirm it in Parliament out of loyalty to Charles.
The King also tried to raise revenue through the ship money tax, by exploiting a naval-war scare in 1635, demanding that the inland English counties pay the tax for the Royal Navy.
The joint Royalist and Confederate forces under the Duke of Ormonde attempted to eliminate the Parliamentary army holding Dublin, but their opponents routed them at the Battle of Rathmines (2 August 1649).
Positioned on each side of the infantry were the cavalry, with a right-wing led by the lieutenant-general, and a left-wing by the commissary general; the main goal of the cavalry was to rout the opponent's cavalry and then turn and overpower their infantry.
Fairfax, a constitutional monarchist and moderate,  refused to participate whatsoever in the trial and resigned as head of the army, allowing Oliver Cromwell to ascend in power.
Amongst other things, the Petition referred to the Magna Carta.
On 21 April,  the Commons passed the Bill (204 in favour, 59 opposed, and 250 abstained), and the Lords acquiesced.
Pym immediately launched a Bill of Attainder, stating Strafford's guilt and demanding that the Earl be put to death.
The next year, 1652, saw the mopping up of the remnants of Royalist resistance, and under the terms of the "Tender of Union", the Scots received 30 seats in a united Parliament in London, with General Monck appointed as the military governor of Scotland.
Moreover, the Church authorities revived the statutes passed in the time of Elizabeth I about church attendance and fined Puritans for not attending Anglican church services.
Strafford himself, hoping to head off the war he saw looming, wrote to the king and asked him to reconsider.
Friction between royalists and Puritans in Maryland came to a head in the Battle of the Severn.
On one side, the King and his supporters fought for traditional government in Church and state.
In other words, the Speaker proclaimed himself a servant of Parliament, rather than of the King.
It was hoped by both Charles and Parliament that the execution of Strafford and the Protestation would end the drift towards war; in fact, they encouraged it.
The victors confiscated almost all Irish Catholic-owned land in the wake of the conquest and distributed it to the Parliament's creditors, to the Parliamentary soldiers who served in Ireland, and to English people who had settled there before the war.
By the middle of September Essex's forces had grown to 21,000 infantry and 4,200 cavalry and dragoons.
Several of the more active members of the opposition were imprisoned, which caused some outrage; one, John Eliot, subsequently died in prison, becoming regarded as a martyr for the rights of Parliament.
The war ended with the Parliamentarian victory at the Battle of Worcester on 3 September 1651.
Upon his death, Oliver Cromwell's son Richard became Lord Protector, but the Army had little confidence in him.
James' personal extravagance was tempered by his peaceful disposition, so that by the succession of his son Charles I to the English and Scottish thrones in 1625 the two kingdoms had both experienced relative peace, both internally and in their relations with each other, for as long as anyone could remember.
He had insufficient funds, however, and needed to seek money from a newly elected English Parliament in 1640.
Parliamentary authorities sentenced the leaders of the Welsh rebels, Major-General Rowland Laugharne, Colonel John Poyer and Colonel Rice Powel to death, but executed Poyer alone (25 April 1649), having selected him by lot.
Monopolies were cut back severely, and the Courts of Star Chamber and High Commission were abolished by the Habeas Corpus Act 1640 and the Triennial Act respectively.
The vestments controversy also related to this movement, seeking further reductions in church ceremony, and labelling the use of elaborate vestments as "unedifying" and even idolatrous.
Mixed in among the musketeers were pikemen carrying pikes that were between  and  long, whose primary purpose was to protect the musketeers from cavalry charges.
Without Parliament's support, Charles attacked Scotland again, breaking the truce at Berwick, and suffered a comprehensive defeat.
However, Charles's insistence on having his unpopular royal favourite George Villiers, the Duke of Buckingham, assume command of the English force undermined that support.
Charles, however, wanted one uniform Church throughout Britain and introduced a new, High Anglican version of the English Book of Common Prayer to Scotland in the middle of 1637.
On 14 September he moved his army to Coventry and then to the north of the Cotswolds, a strategy which placed his army between the Royalists and London.
For all of the Crown's legal authority, by any modern standard, its resources were limited to the extent that, if and when the gentry refused to collect the king's taxes on a national scale, the Crown lacked any practical means with which to compel them.
He received orders "to rescue His Majesty's person, and the persons of the Charles II of England|Prince of Wales and the Duke of York out of the hands of those desperate persons who were about them."
Further negotiations by frequent correspondence between the King and the Long Parliament through to early summer proved fruitless.
The views of the Members of Parliament ranged from unquestioning support of the King – at one point during the First Civil War, more members of the Commons and Lords gathered in the King's Oxford Parliament than at Westminster – through to radicals, who wanted major reforms in favour of religious independence and the redistribution of power at the national level.
All remaining forms of taxation were legalised and regulated by the Tonnage and Poundage Act.
This, it was claimed, demonstrated that factional war-allegiance patterns did not fit either Whig or Marxist history.
There are no figures to calculate how many died from war-related diseases, but if the same ratio of disease to battle deaths from English figures is applied to the Scottish figures, a not unreasonable estimate of 60,000 people is achieved, from a population of about one million.
Elizabeth's death had resulted in the accession of her first cousin twice-removed, King James VI of Scotland, to the English throne as James I of England, creating the first personal union of the Scottish and English kingdoms.
The controversy eventually led to Laud's impeachment for treason by a bill of attainder in 1645, and subsequent execution.
This marked the end of the First English Civil War.
Matters came to a head when King Charles I appointed William Laud as the Archbishop of Canterbury; Laud aggressively attacked the Presbyterian movement and sought to impose the full Anglican liturgy.
While philosophical dialogues are common, historical ones are not.
Hobbes held the belief that clerical pretensions had contributed significantly to the trouble during the civil war—"whether those of puritan fundamentalists, papal supremacists or divine right Episcopalians" (Sommerville).
While the Parliamentarian cavalry were slower than the cavaliers, they were also better disciplined.
In the meantime both Parliament and the King agreed to an independent investigation into the king's involvement in Strafford's plot.
Following the Anglo-Scottish alliance against the Royalists, the Committee of Both Kingdoms replaced the Committee of Safety between 1644 and 1648.
