Use of English is growing country-by-country internally and for international communication.
For example, in the phrase ''the woman walked quickly'' the adverb ''quickly'' derived from the adjective ''quick'' describes the woman's way of walking.
Some dialects have introduced innovative 2nd person plural pronouns such as ''y'all'' found in Southern American English and African American (Vernacular) English or ''youse'' and ''ye'' found in Irish English.
There are many more vowel phonemes in English than there are vowel letters (''a'', ''e'', ''i'', ''o'', ''u'', ''w'', ''y'').
Separate from GA are American accents with clearly distinct sound systems; this historically includes Southern American English, English of the coastal Northeast (famously including Eastern New England English and New York City English), and African American Vernacular English.
Australian English also has a contrast between long and short vowels, not found in most other varieties.
American listeners generally readily understand most British broadcasting, and British listeners readily understand most American broadcasting.
In the post-colonial period, some of the newly created nations that had multiple indigenous languages opted to continue using English as the official language to avoid the political difficulties inherent in promoting any one indigenous language above the others.
Through the use of these complex sentence constructions with informationally vacuous subjects, English is able to maintain both a topic comment sentence structure and a SVO syntax.
The major native dialects of English are often divided by linguists into the two general categories of the British dialects (BrE) and those of North America (AmE).
Irregular plural formation:
The purpose of punctuation is to mark meaningful grammatical relationships in sentences to aid readers in understanding a text and to indicate features important for reading a text aloud.
By the 12th century Middle English was fully developed, integrating both Norse and Norman features; it continued to be spoken until the transition to early Modern English around 1500.
English has replaced German as the dominant language of scientific research.
For example, in the Netherlands and some other countries of Europe, knowledge of English as a second language is nearly universal, with over 80 percent of the population able to use it, and thus English is routinely used to communicate with foreigners and often in higher education.
'', the word ''what'' appears as the first constituent despite being the grammatical object of the sentence.
New nouns can be formed through derivation or compounding.
Consonant differences include the tendency to pronounce /p, t, t͡ʃ, k/ without aspiration (e.g.
''red'', ''tall'', ''all'') and specifiers such as determiners (e.g.
Orthographically the possessive -s is separated from the noun root with an apostrophe.
The standard orthography of English is the most widely used writing system in the world.
Most people learn English for practical rather than ideological reasons.
At the discourse level English tends to use a topic-comment structure, where the known information (topic) precedes the new information (comment).
The use of progressive forms in ''-ing'', appears to be spreading to new constructions, and forms such as ''had been being built'' are becoming more common.
Those countries have millions of native speakers of dialect continua ranging from an English-based creole to a more standard version of English.
'''English''' is a West Germanic language that was first spoken in early medieval England and is now a global ''lingua franca''.
Instead they consider the construction simply to be a verb with a prepositional phrase as its syntactic complement, i.e.
:''Foxis han dennes, and briddis of heuene han nestis''
The example below demonstrates this double marking in a sentence where both object and subject is represented with a third person singular masculine pronoun:
Most count nouns are inflected for plural number through the use of the plural suffix -''s'', but a few nouns have irregular plural forms.
The secondary forms are a plain form used for the infinitive, a gerund–participle and a past participle.
English is unusual among world languages in how many of its users are not native speakers but speakers of English as a second or foreign language.
Regardless of length, an NP functions as a syntactic unit.
Most standard varieties are affected by the Great Vowel Shift, which changed the pronunciation of long vowels, but a few dialects have slightly different results.
In Central America, English based creoles are spoken in on the Caribbean coasts of Nicaragua and Panama.
The table below lists the vowel phonemes in Received Pronunciation (RP) and General American (GA), with examples of words in which they occur from lexical sets compiled by linguists.
Dialectologists distinguish between English dialects, regional varieties that differ from each other in terms of grammar and vocabulary, and regional accents, distinguished by different patterns of pronunciation.
In North America, a number of chain shifts such as the Northern Cities Vowel Shift and Canadian Shift have produced very different vowel landscapes in some regional accents.
The English system of grammatical person no longer has a distinction between formal and informal pronouns of address, and the forms for 2nd person plural and singular are identical except in the reflexive form.
Since the 15th century, Southeastern varieties centred around London, which has been the centre from which dialectal innovations have spread to other dialects.
The spelling system, or orthography, of English is multi-layered, with elements of French, Latin, and Greek spelling on top of the native Germanic system.
Most of those varieties of English include words little used by native speakers of English in the inner-circle countries, and they may have grammatical and phonological differences from inner-circle varieties as well.
At the time of the Survey of English Dialects, grammar and vocabulary differed across the country, but a process of lexical attrition has led most of this variation to disappear.
While already grammarians such as Henry Sweet and Otto Jespersen noted that the English cases did not correspond to the traditional Latin based system, some contemporary grammars, for example , retain traditional labels for the cases, calling them nominative and accusative cases respectively.
Varieties of English vary the most in pronunciation of vowels, and are categorised generally into two groups: British (BrE) and American (AmE).
A major feature in the early development of Modern English was the codification of explicit norms for standard usage, and their dissemination through official media such as public education and state sponsored publications.
The single letter ''x'' is generally pronounced as  in word-initial position and as  otherwise.
It was a chain shift, meaning that each shift triggered a subsequent shift in the vowel system.
(When the ''wh''-word is the subject or forms part of the subject, no inversion occurs: ''Who saw the cat?''.)
:With of: ''The child of the husband of the woman''
In Ireland, various forms of English have been spoken since the Norman invasions of the 11th century.
Most closely related to English are the Frisian languages, and English and Frisian form the Anglo-Frisian subgroup within West Germanic.
Auxiliary verbs differ from other verbs in that they can be followed by the negation, and in that they can occur as the first constituent in a question sentence.
Adjectives modify a noun by providing additional information about their referents.
The letters ''c'' and ''g'' normally represent  and , but there is also a soft ''c'' pronounced , and a soft ''g'' pronounced .
English does not belong to just one country, and it does not belong solely to descendants of English settlers.
Jamaican English differs from RP in its vowel inventory, which has a distinction between long and short vowels rather than tense and lax vowels as in Standard English.
(the idiomatic marker ''no way!''
An exception is found in sentences where one of the constituents is a pronoun, in which case it is doubly marked, both by word order and by case inflection, where the subject pronoun precedes the verb and takes the subjective case form, and the object pronoun follows the verb and takes the objective case form.
''the'', ''that'').
* English ''cheese'', Frisian ''tsiis'' (''ch'' and ''ts'' from palatalisation)
Several varieties of English are also spoken in the Caribbean Islands that were colonial possessions of Britain, including Jamaica, and the Leeward and Windward Islands and Trinidad and Tobago, Barbados, the Cayman Islands, and Belize.
Most phonological differences from RP are in the vowels.
Further complications have arisen through sound changes with which the orthography has not kept pace.
Historically the -s possessive has been used for animate nouns, whereas the ''of'' possessive has been reserved for inanimate nouns.
By the late 18th century, the British Empire had facilitated the spread of English through its colonies and geopolitical dominance.
:Plural: ''cats, dogs''
The norms of standard written English are maintained purely by the consensus of educated English-speakers around the world, without any oversight by any government or international organisation.
Noun phrases can be short, such as ''the man'', composed only of a determiner and a noun.
In a single-syllable word, a vowel before a fortis stop is shortened: thus ''nip'' has a noticeably shorter vowel (phonetically, but not phonemically) than ''nib''  (see below).
Norse influence was strongest in the Northeastern varieties of Old English spoken in the Danelaw area around York, which was the centre of Norse colonisation; today these features are still particularly present in Scots and Northern English.
An English syllable includes a syllable nucleus consisting of a vowel sound.
Accents like Cockney with "''h''-dropping" lack the glottal fricative , and dialects with ''th''-stopping and ''th''-fronting like African American Vernacular and Estuary English do not have the dental fricatives , but replace them with dental or alveolar stops  or labiodental fricatives .
: German ''Käse'' and Dutch ''kaas'' (''k'' without palatalisation)
Kachru bases his model on the history of how English spread in different countries, how users acquire English, and the range of uses English has in each country.
'', but not ''*I know him not'', although this construction may be found in older English.
Other changes affecting the phonology of local varieties are processes such as ''yod''-dropping, ''yod''-coalescence, and reduction of consonant clusters.
English is spoken by communities on every continent and on oceanic islands in all the major oceans.
Through the worldwide influence of the British Empire, modern English spread around the world from the 17th to mid-20th centuries.
Examples of phrasal verbs are ''to get up'', ''to ask out'', ''to back up'', ''to give up'', ''to get together'', ''to hang out'', ''to put up with'', etc.
Auxiliary verbs such as ''have'' and ''be'' are paired with verbs in the infinitive, past, or progressive forms.
A definite noun is assumed by the speaker to be already known by the interlocutor, whereas an indefinite noun is not specified as being previously known.
In most cases, interrogative words (''wh''-words; e.g.
The preterit is inflected by using the preterit form of the verb, which for the regular verbs includes the suffix ''-ed'', and for the strong verbs either the suffix ''-t'' or a change in the stem vowel.
By the Wycliffe Bible of the 1380s, the passage Matthew 8:20 was written
:''Foxas habbað holu and heofonan fuglas nest''
Possessive constructions:
In most sentences English only marks grammatical relations through word order.
In London, the Cockney dialect was traditionally used by the lower classes, and it was long a socially stigmatised variety.
It is the most widely learned second language and an official language of the United Nations, of the European Union, and of many other world and regional international organisations.
While the European Union (EU) allows member states to designate any of the national languages as an official language of the Union, in practice English is the main working language of EU organisations.
American English is generally considered fairly homogeneous compared to the British varieties.
The English of neighbouring New Zealand has to a lesser degree become an influential standard variety of the language.
However, in the negated and inverted clauses referred to above, it is used because the rules of English syntax permit these constructions only when an auxiliary is present.
Non-native varieties of English are widely used for international communication, and speakers of one such variety often encounter features of other varieties.
A syllable can start with up to three consonant sounds, as in ''sprint'' , and end with up to four, as in ''texts'' .
For example, ''That girl over there, she was stung by a bee'', emphasises the girl by preposition, but a similar effect could be achieved by postposition, ''she was stung by a bee, that girl over there'', where reference to the girl is established as an "afterthought".
General American and Received Pronunciation vary in their pronunciation of historical  after a vowel at the end of a syllable (in the syllable coda).
Fortis stops such as  have additional articulatory or acoustic features in most dialects: they are aspirated  when they occur alone at the beginning of a stressed syllable, often unaspirated in other cases, and often unreleased  or pre-glottalised  at the end of a syllable.
''one loaf of bread'', ''two loaves of bread''.
English forms new words from existing words or roots in its vocabulary through a variety of processes.
Focus constructions emphasise a particular piece of new or salient information within a sentence, generally through allocating the main sentence level stress on the focal constituent.
Modern English does not allow the addition of the negating adverb ''not'' to an ordinary finite lexical verb, as in ''*I know not''—it can only be added to an auxiliary (or copular) verb, hence if there is no other auxiliary present when negation is required, the auxiliary ''do'' is used, to produce a form like ''I do not (don't) know.''
Discourse markers such as ''oh'', ''so'' or ''well'', also signal the progression of ideas between sentences and help to create cohesion.
In these countries, although English is not used for government business, the widespread use of English in these countries puts them at the boundary between the "outer circle" and "expanding circle".
Some words, primarily short function words but also some modal verbs such as ''can'', have weak and strong forms depending on whether they occur in stressed or non-stressed position within a sentence.
Discourse markers are also used for stance taking in which speakers position themselves in a specific attitude towards what is being said, for example, ''no way is that true!''
The words in English learned first by children as they learn to speak, particularly the grammatical words that dominate the word count of both spoken and written texts, are the Germanic words inherited from the earliest periods of the development of Old English.
These situations have prompted proposals for spelling reform in English.
Literature from the Early Modern period includes the works of William Shakespeare and the translation of the Bible commissioned by King James I.
In spite of the idiomatic meaning, some grammarians, including , do not consider this type of construction to form a syntactic constituent and hence refrain from using the term "phrasal verb".
In contrast to many other Germanic languages there is no major differences between word order in main and subordinate clauses.
expressing disbelief), or ''boy!
Because of the strict SVO syntax, the topic of a sentence generally has to be the grammatical subject of the sentence.
Middle English literature includes Geoffrey Chaucer's ''The Canterbury Tales'', and Malory's ''Le Morte d'Arthur''.
Modern English has little inflection compared with many other languages, and relies more on auxiliary verbs and word order for the expression of complex tenses, aspect and mood, as well as passive constructions, interrogatives and some negation.
Noun Phrases, Verb Phrases, and Prepositional Phrases).
Modern English descends from Middle English, which in turn descends from Old English.
The non-past form is unmarked except in the third person singular, which takes the suffix ''-s''.
The consonants that may appear together in onsets or codas are restricted, as is the order in which they may appear.
Some adjectives are inflected for degree of comparison, with the positive degree unmarked, the suffix ''-er'' marking the comparative, and ''-est'' marking the superlative: ''a small boy'', ''the boy is smaller than the girl'', ''that boy is the smallest''.
Within the United Kingdom, the Received Pronunciation (RP), an educated dialect of South East England, is traditionally used as the broadcast standard, and is considered the most prestigious of the British dialects.
Regularisation of irregular forms also slowly continues (e.g.
The pronunciation of vowels varies a great deal between dialects and is one of the most detectable aspects of a speaker's accent.
GA does not have long vowels.
Many users of English in the expanding circle use it to communicate with other people from the expanding circle, so that interaction with native speakers of English plays no part in their decision to use English.
The same applies in clauses requiring inversion, including most questions—inversion must involve the subject and an auxiliary verb, so it is not possible to say ''*Know you him?
The personal pronouns retain a difference between subjective and objective case in most persons (''I/me, he/him, she/her, we/us, they/them'') as well as a gender and animateness distinction in the third person singular (distinguishing ''he/she/it'').
Through all types of printed and electronic media, as well as the emergence of the United States as a global superpower, English has become the leading language of international discourse and the lingua franca in many regions and in professional contexts such as science, navigation, and law.
The most prominent varieties are Jamaican English and Jamaican Creole.
Some languages, such as Chinese, write words borrowed from English mostly as calques, while others, such as Japanese, readily take in English loanwords written in sound-indicating script.
The consequence of this complex orthographic history is that learning to read can be challenging in English.
These four vowels are only distinguished in RP, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa.
The countries in which English is spoken can be grouped into different categories by how English is used in each country.
GA has an unstressed ''r''-coloured schwa , as in ''butter'' , which in RP has the same vowel as the word-final vowel in ''comma''.
English also facilitated worldwide international communication.
The phrasal verb frequently has a highly idiomatic meaning that is more specialised and restricted than what can be simply extrapolated from the combination of verb and preposition complement (e.g.
:Singular: ''man, woman, foot, fish, ox, knife, mouse''
Many of the words borrowed into English from Latin were earlier borrowed into Latin from Greek.
The inflectional system regularised many irregular inflectional forms, and gradually simplified the system of agreement, making word order less flexible.
It is one of six official languages of the United Nations.
Today Irish English is divided into Ulster English, a dialect with strong influence from Scots, and southern Hiberno-English.
They are used to describing movement, place, and other relations between different entities, but they also have many syntactic uses such as introducing complement clauses and oblique arguments of verbs.
English is used as the language for wider communication in countries around the world.
English is the world's most widely used language in newspaper publishing, book publishing, international telecommunications, scientific publishing, international trade, mass entertainment, and diplomacy.
Dubbed films and television programmes are an especially fruitful source of English influence on languages in Europe.
Scots itself has a number of regional dialects.
There are also systematic spelling differences between British and American English.
Through the educational reforms of King Alfred in the ninth century and the influence of the kingdom of Wessex, the West Saxon dialect became the standard written variety.
They have many more speakers of English who acquire English in the process of growing up through day by day use and listening to broadcasting, especially if they attend schools where English is the medium of instruction.
The seven word classes are exemplified in this sample sentence:
pronouncing the word "press" almost like "pray-us"), the pin–pen merger, and other distinctive features, many of which are actually recent developments of the 19th century or later.
Stressed syllables are pronounced longer and louder than unstressed syllables, and vowels in unstressed syllables are frequently reduced while vowels in stressed syllables are not.
Old Saxon and its descendent Low German languages are also closely related, and sometimes Low German, English, and Frisian are grouped together as the Ingvaeonic or North Sea Germanic languages.
The phonetics and phonology of English differ between dialects, usually without interfering with mutual communication.
articles), prepositions, and conjunctions.
Modern English, sometimes described as the first global lingua franca, is also regarded as the first world language.
Possession can be expressed either by the possessive enclitic -''s'' (also traditionally called a genitive suffix), or by the preposition ''of''.
In GA and Canadian English, rhoticity (or ''r''-fulness) is dominant, with non-rhoticity (''r''-dropping) becoming associated with lower prestige and social class especially after World War II; this contrasts with the situation in England, where non-rhoticity has become the standard.
''England'' and ''English'' (originally ''Englaland'' and ''Englisc'') are named after the Angles.
Old English developed from a set of North Sea Germanic dialects originally spoken along the coasts of Frisia, Lower Saxony, Jutland, and Southern Sweden by Germanic tribes known as the Angles, Saxons, and Jutes.
English in England can be divided into four major dialect regions, Southwest English, South East English, Midlands English, and Northern English.
The personal interrogative pronoun ''who'' is the only interrogative pronoun to still show inflection for case, with the variant ''whom'' serving as the objective case form, although this form may be going out of use in many contexts.
English is an Indo-European language, and belongs to the West Germanic group of the Germanic languages.
Formation of new words, called neologisms, based on Greek or Latin roots (for example ''television'' or ''optometry'') is a highly productive process in English and in most modern European languages, so much so that it is often difficult to determine in which language a neologism originated.
The "inner circle" countries with many native speakers of English share an international standard of written English and jointly influence speech norms of English around the world.
* English ''foot'', Dutch ''voet'', German ''Fuß'', Norwegian and Swedish ''fot'' (initial  derived from Proto-Indo-European  through Grimm's law)
There is some variation among speakers regarding which adjectives use inflected or periphrastic comparison, and some studies have shown a tendency for the periphrastic forms to become more common at the expense of the inflected form.
English has a strong influence on the vocabulary of other languages.
English is thus not mutually intelligible with any continental Germanic language, differing in vocabulary, syntax, and phonology, although some, such as Dutch, do show strong affinities with English, especially with its earlier stages.
The distinctions between English as a first language, as a second language, and as a foreign language are often debatable and may change in particular countries over time.
Further aspectual distinctions are encoded by the use of auxiliary verbs, primarily ''have'' and ''be'', which encode the contrast between a perfect and non-perfect past tense (''I have run'' vs. ''I was running''), and compound tenses such as preterite perfect (''I had been running'') and present perfect (''I have been running'').
The diphthongs /ei/ and /ou/ are monophthongs  and  or even the reverse diphthongs  and  (e.g.
Many statements published before the end of the 20th century about the growth of English vocabulary over time, the dates of first use of various words in English, and the sources of English vocabulary will have to be corrected as new computerised analysis of linguistic corpus data becomes available.
Questions are marked by do-support, wh-movement (fronting of question words beginning with ''wh''-) and word order inversion with some verbs.
In the Middle English period the use of regional dialects in writing proliferated, and dialect traits were even used for effect by authors such as Chaucer.
Auxiliary verbs mark constructions such as questions, negative polarity, the passive voice and progressive aspect.
As England continued to form new colonies, these in turn became independent and developed their own norms for how to speak and write the language.
The modern English alphabet contains 26 letters of the Latin script: a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, j, k, l, m, n, o, p, q, r, s, t, u, v, w, x, y, z (which also have capital forms: A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, M, N, O, P, Q, R, S, T, U, V, W, X, Y, Z).
Nonetheless this attrition has mostly affected dialectal variation in grammar and vocabulary, and in fact only 3 percent of the English population actually speak RP, the remainder speaking regional accents and dialects with varying degrees of RP influence.
but ''all men'' (pl.).
For example, in the question ''What did you see?
Indian English accents are marked by the pronunciation of phonemes such as /t/ and /d/ (often pronounced with retroflex articulation as  and ) and the replacement of  and  with dentals  and .
Many other worldwide international organisations, including the International Olympic Committee, specify English as a working language or official language of the organisation.
* syllabic sonorants: ''paddle'' , and ''button''
Linguist David Crystal estimates that non-native speakers now outnumber native speakers by a ratio of 3 to 1.
In a 2012 official Eurobarometer poll, 38 percent of the EU respondents outside the countries where English is an official language said they could speak English well enough to have a conversation in that language.
However, when combining native and non-native speakers it is probably the most commonly spoken language in the world.
The first person present tense form is ''am'', the third person singular form ''is'' and the form ''are'' is used second person singular and all three plurals.
''what'', ''who'', ''where'', ''when'', ''why'', ''how'') appear in a fronted position.
There are exceptions to these generalisations, often the result of loanwords being spelled according to the spelling patterns of their languages of origin or proposals by pedantic scholars in the early period of Modern English to mistakenly follow the spelling patterns of Latin for English words of Germanic origin.
Anaphorical pronouns such as ''that'' refer back to an entity already mentioned or assumed by the speaker to be known by the audience, for example in the sentence ''I already told you that''.
A working knowledge of English has become a requirement in a number of occupations and professions such as medicine and computing.
English syntax relies on auxiliary verbs for many functions including the expression of tense, aspect and mood.
Scots is today considered a separate language from English, but it has its origins in early Northern Middle English and developed and changed during its history with influence from other sources, particularly Scots Gaelic and Old Norse.
David Crystal claimed in 2004 that, combining native and non-native speakers, India now has more people who speak or understand English than any other country in the world, but the number of English speakers in India is very uncertain, with most scholars concluding that the United States still has more speakers of English than India.
The most commonly used words in English are West Germanic.
Subjective case is used when the pronoun is the subject of a finite clause, and otherwise the objective case is used.
Subject–auxiliary inversion is used in many constructions, including focus, negation, and interrogative constructions.
Within a sentence one clause is always the main clause (or matrix clause) whereas other clauses are subordinate to it.
