With over 53&nbsp;million inhabitants, England is by far the most populous country of the United Kingdom, accounting for 84% of the combined total.
More radical elements were later countered by Edmund Burke who is regarded as the founder of conservatism.
The political structure of the island changed in 1603, when the King of Scots, James VI, a kingdom which was a longtime rival to English interests, inherited the throne of England as James I — creating a personal union.
Also since that time, no British monarch has entered the House of Commons when it is sitting, which is annually commemorated at the State Opening of Parliament by the British monarch when the doors of the House of Commons are slammed in the face of the monarch's messenger, symbolising the rights of Parliament and its independence from the monarch.
The oldest proto-human bones discovered in England date from 500,000&nbsp;years ago.
Traditional examples of English food include the Sunday roast, featuring a roasted joint (usually beef, lamb, chicken or pork) served with assorted vegetables, Yorkshire pudding, and gravy.
The export part of the economy is dominated by pharmaceuticals, cars (although many English marques are now foreign-owned, such as Land Rover, Lotus, Jaguar and Bentley), crude oil and petroleum from the English parts of North Sea oil along with Wytch Farm, aircraft engines and alcoholic beverages.
Some of the characters and stories are present across England, but most belong to specific regions.
These lines are mostly standard gauge (single, double or quadruple track) though there are also a few narrow gauge lines.
The ports of London, Liverpool, and Newcastle lie on the tidal rivers Thames, Mersey and Tyne respectively.
State schools teach students a second language, usually French, German or Spanish.
Other English clubs have enjoyed success, Tottenham Hotspur, Ipswich Town, Chelsea, and Liverpool have won the UEFA Cup, renamed UEFA Europa League.
At the most localised level, much of England is divided into civil parishes with councils; they do not exist in Greater London.
Georgian architecture followed in a more refined style, evoking a simple Palladian form; the Royal Crescent at Bath is one of the best examples of this.
During the English Renaissance, many words were coined from Latin and Greek origins.
The same boundaries remain in use for electing Members of the European Parliament on a regional basis.
The Romans invaded Britain in 43 AD during the reign of Emperor Claudius, subsequently conquering much of Britain, and the area was incorporated into the Roman Empire as Britannia province.
The country covers much of the central and southern part of the island of Great Britain, which lies in the North Atlantic; and includes over 100 smaller islands such as the Isles of Scilly, and the Isle of Wight.
In response to the Industrial Revolution, agrarian writers sought a way between liberty and tradition; William Cobbett, G. K. Chesterton and Hilaire Belloc were main exponents, while the founder of guild socialism, Arthur Penty, and cooperative movement advocate G. D. H. Cole are somewhat related.
When the modern border between Wales and England was established by the Laws in Wales Acts 1535 and 1542, many Welsh-speaking communities found themselves on the English side of the border.
The ONS has projected that the population will grow by six million between 2004 and 2029.
The Tudor rose was adopted as a national emblem of England around the time of the Wars of the Roses as a symbol of peace.
Wessex under Alfred the Great was left as the only surviving English kingdom, and under his successors it steadily expanded at the expense of the kingdoms of the Danelaw.
Traditional English dessert dishes include apple pie or other fruit pies; spotted dick – all generally served with custard; and, more recently, sticky toffee pudding.
He also legally incorporated his ancestral land Wales into the Kingdom of England with the 1535–1542 acts.
In the field of popular music, many English bands and solo artists have been cited as the most influential and best-selling musicians of all time.
During the settlement period the lands ruled by the incomers seem to have been fragmented into numerous tribal territories, but by the 7th century, when substantial evidence of the situation again becomes available, these had coalesced into roughly a dozen kingdoms including Northumbria, Mercia, Wessex, East Anglia, Essex, Kent and Sussex.
England also has a rich heritage in Grand Prix motorcycle racing, the premier championship of motorcycle road racing, and produced several World Champions across all the various class of motorcycle: Mike Hailwood, John Surtees, Phil Read, Geoff Duke, and Barry Sheene.
The company builds the buses – the underlying structure onto which the payload and propulsion systems are built – for most of the European Space Agency's spacecraft, as well as commercial satellites.
Students are then able to work towards a postgraduate degree, which usually takes one year, or towards a doctorate, which takes three or more years.
Other contemporary English directors include Sam Mendes, Guy Ritchie and Steve McQueen.
There are High Church and Low Church traditions, and some Anglicans regard themselves as Anglo-Catholics, following the Tractarian movement.
There are numerous surviving artefacts, such as those at Lullingstone and Aldborough.
Marvell was the best-known poet of the Commonwealth, while John Milton authored ''Paradise Lost'' during the Restoration.
It is bordered by two other countries of the United Kingdom—to the north by Scotland and to the west by Wales.
However, other geneticists place the Germanic estimate up to half.
A dispute over the succession to Edward led to the Norman conquest of England in 1066, accomplished by an army led by Duke William of Normandy.
Sheffield Urban Area
The government has devolved responsibility to the bank's Monetary Policy Committee for managing the monetary policy of the country and setting interest rates.
There are plans to reopen lines such as the Varsity Line between Oxford and Cambridge.
One of his four Coronation Anthems, ''Zadok the Priest'', composed for the coronation of George II, has been performed at every subsequent British coronation, traditionally during the sovereign's anointing.
In contrast with much of European Protestantism, the roots of the split were more political than theological.
London has hosted the Summer Olympic Games three times, in 1908, 1948, and 2012.
The bank has a monopoly on the issue of banknotes in England and Wales, although not in other parts of the United Kingdom.
There are other non-conformist minorities, such as Baptists, Quakers, Congregationalists, Unitarians and The Salvation Army.
The coldest months are January and February, the latter particularly on the English coast, while July is normally the warmest month.
Other urban areas of considerable size and influence tend to be in northern England or the English Midlands.
England is a leader in the chemical and pharmaceutical sectors and in key technical industries, particularly aerospace, the arms industry, and the manufacturing side of the software industry.
In Scottish Gaelic, another language which developed on the island of Great Britain, the Saxon tribe gave their name to the word for England (''Sasunn''); similarly, the Welsh name for the English language is "''Saesneg''".
Geographically England includes the central and southern two-thirds of the island of Great Britain, plus such offshore islands as the Isle of Wight and the Isles of Scilly.
The Royal Oak symbol and Oak Apple Day commemorate the escape of King Charles II from the grasp of the parliamentarians after his father's execution: he hid in an oak tree to avoid detection before safely reaching exile.
The London Business School is considered one of the world's leading business schools and in 2010 its MBA programme was ranked best in the world by the ''Financial Times''.
Much of Britain's  of rail network lies in England, covering the country fairly extensively, although a high proportion of railway lines were closed in the second half of the 20th century.
The nature and progression of the Anglo-Saxon settlement of Britain is consequently subject to considerable disagreement.
Many nursery rhymes are of English origin such as ''Twinkle Twinkle Little Star'', ''Roses are red'', ''Jack and Jill'', ''London Bridge Is Falling Down, The Grand Old Duke of York, Hey Diddle Diddle'' and ''Humpty Dumpty''.
The English played a significant role in romanticism: Samuel Taylor Coleridge, Lord Byron, John Keats, Mary Shelley, Percy Bysshe Shelley, William Blake and William Wordsworth were major figures.
The earliest recorded use of the term, as "Engla londe", is in the late ninth century translation into Old English of Bede's ''Ecclesiastical History of the English People''.
However, when the proposal was rejected by the northern England devolution referendums, 2004 in the North East, further referendums were cancelled.
Fred Perry was the last Englishman to win Wimbledon in 1936.
The general essence of English law is that it is made by judges sitting in courts, applying their common sense and knowledge of legal precedent—''stare decisis''—to the facts before them.
The Conservative party, headed by the prime minister David Cameron, won 98 more seats than the Labour Party, whose leader Ed Miliband subsequently stood down.
West Yorkshire Urban Area
During the Iron Age, Celtic culture, deriving from the Hallstatt and La Tène cultures, arrived from Central Europe.
English women who have won Wimbledon include: Ann Haydon Jones won in 1969 and Virginia Wade in 1977.
The NHS is largely funded from general taxation including National Insurance payments, and it provides most of its services free at the point of use, although there are charges for some people for eye tests, dental care, prescriptions and aspects of personal care.
BAE Systems makes large sections of the Typhoon Eurofighter at its sub-assembly plant in Salmesbury and assembles the aircraft for the RAF at its Warton plant, near Preston.
Thomas Newcomen's steam engine helped spawn the Industrial Revolution.
England competes in the Commonwealth Games, held every four years.
There are many museums in England, but perhaps the most notable is London's British Museum.
The Thames is the major waterway in England, with imports and exports focused at the Port of Tilbury in the Thames Estuary, one of the United Kingdom's three major ports.
Since the 1970s there has been a large move away from manufacturing and an increasing emphasis on the service industry.
Since the late 1990s, many English people have migrated to Spain.
Filmer wrote on the Divine Right of Kings.
After Cromwell's death and the resignation of his son Richard as Lord Protector, Charles II was invited to return as monarch in 1660, in a move called the Restoration.
"), sung by jubilant fans towards the opposition fans who have gone silent (or left early).
There has been significant Irish migration.
In the modern day the Premier League is the world's most-watched football league, most lucrative, and amongst the elite.
Further education colleges (particularly sixth form colleges) often form part of a secondary school site.
London, home to the London Stock Exchange, the United Kingdom's main stock exchange and the largest in Europe, is England's financial centre—100 of Europe's 500&nbsp;largest corporations are based in London.
Originally the flag was used by the maritime Republic of Genoa.
There are both professional tours for men and women, in two main tours: the PGA and the European Tour.
The best-known of the native tribes who attempted to resist were the Catuvellauni led by Caratacus.
Many successful Hollywood films have been based on English people, stories or events.
The Irish Sea lies northwest of England and the Celtic Sea lies to the southwest.
England became a unified state in the 10th century, and since the Age of Discovery, which began during the 15th century, has had a significant cultural and legal impact on the wider world.
Like other regions on the edge of the Empire, Britain had long enjoyed trading links with the Romans.
In boxing, under the Marquess of Queensberry Rules, England has produced many world champions across the weight divisions internationally recognised by the governing bodies.
England (and the UK as a whole) has had a considerable influence on the history of the cinema, producing some of the greatest actors, directors and motion pictures of all time, including Alfred Hitchcock, Charlie Chaplin, David Lean, Laurence Olivier, Vivien Leigh, John Gielgud, Peter Sellers, Julie Andrews, Michael Caine, Gary Oldman, Helen Mirren, Kate Winslet and Daniel Day-Lewis.
William Penny Brookes was prominent in organising the format for the modern Olympic Games.
According to the Office for National Statistics the ten largest, continuous built-up urban areas are:
These are used primarily as a geographical frame of reference and have developed gradually since the Middle Ages, with some established as recently as 1974.
Nottingham Urban Area
An early book of English recipes is the ''Forme of Cury'' from the royal court of Richard II.
Since devolution, in which other countries of the United Kingdom—Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland—each have their own devolved parliament or assemblies for local issues, there has been debate about how to counterbalance this in England.
The poet Alexander Pope with his satirical verse became well regarded.
William Shakespeare, whose works include ''Hamlet'', ''Romeo and Juliet'', ''Macbeth'', and ''A Midsummer Night's Dream'', remains one of the most championed authors in English literature.
Ecclesiastical architecture ranged from a synthesis of Hiberno—Saxon monasticism, to Early Christian basilica and architecture characterised by pilaster-strips, blank arcading, baluster shafts and triangular headed openings.
Many Anglo-Indian hybrid dishes, curries, have been created such as chicken tikka masala and balti.
English Heritage is a governmental body with a broad remit of managing the historic sites, artefacts and environments of England.
Since 1606 the St George's Cross has formed part of the design of the Union Flag, a Pan-British flag designed by King James I.
However the native royal dynasty was restored with the accession of Edward the Confessor in 1042.
Sheffield, Rotherham, Rawmarsh, Killamarsh
The Principality of Wales became a Plantagenet fief during the 13th century and the Lordship of Ireland was given to the English monarchy by the Pope.
These were derived from Anglo-Norman, Welsh and French sources, featuring King Arthur, Camelot, Excalibur, Merlin and the Knights of the Round Table such as Lancelot.
The period of Old English literature provided the epic poem ''Beowulf'' and the secular prose of the ''Anglo-Saxon Chronicle'', along with Christian writings such as ''Judith'', Cædmon's ''Hymn'' and hagiographies.
The Angles came from the Angeln peninsula in the Bay of Kiel area of the Baltic Sea.
Two decades later, in World War II, the United Kingdom was again one of the Allies.
Developments in warfare technology saw many cities damaged by air-raids during the Blitz.
The most prominent opera house in England is the Royal Opera House at Covent Garden.
The first degree offered to undergraduates is the Bachelor's degree, which usually takes three years to complete.
This era saw a Greco-Roman culture prevail with the introduction of Roman law, Roman architecture, aqueducts, sewers, many agricultural items and silk.
There are around  of navigable waterways in England, half of which is owned by the Canal and River Trust, however water transport is very limited.
The economy of England is the largest part of the UK's economy, which has the 18th highest GDP PPP per capita in the world.
Its engines power more than 30 types of commercial aircraft, and it has more 30,000 engines currently in service across both the civil and defence sectors.
Some of the most commercially successful films of all time have been produced in England, including two of the highest-grossing film franchises (''Harry Potter'' and ''James Bond'').
These were created in 1994 as Government Offices, used by the UK government to deliver a wide range of policies and programmes regionally, but there are no elected bodies at this level, except in London, and in 2011 the regional government offices were abolished.
The Angles were one of the Germanic tribes that settled in Great Britain during the Early Middle Ages.
The 1950 British Grand Prix at Silverstone was the first race in the newly created Formula One World Championship.
They contain three national parks, the Yorkshire Dales, Northumberland, and the Peak District.
Two thirds of production is devoted to livestock, the other to arable crops.
The opening of Northwest England's Bridgewater Canal in 1761 ushered in the canal age in Britain.
The prison population doubled over the same period, giving it the highest incarceration rate in Western Europe at 147 per 100,000.
The visual effects company Framestore in London has produced some of the most critically acclaimed special effects in modern film.
Rugby League is most popular among towns in the northern English counties of Lancashire, Yorkshire and Cumbria.
Julian of Norwich, who wrote ''Revelations of Divine Love'', was a prominent Christian mystic.
In 1801, Great Britain was united with the Kingdom of Ireland through another Act of Union to become the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland.
There is debate about when Christianity was first introduced; it was no later than the 4th century, probably much earlier.
2.90% of the population are black, from both the Caribbean and countries in Africa itself, especially former British colonies.
English folklore developed over many centuries.
Hitchcock's first thriller, ''The Lodger: A Story of the London Fog'' (1926), helped shape the thriller genre in film, while his 1929 film, ''Blackmail'', is often regarded as the first British sound feature film.
Devolution has stimulated a greater emphasis on a more English-specific identity and patriotism.
The Department for Education is the government department responsible for issues affecting people in England up to the age of 19, including education.
As the United Kingdom is a member of the European Union, there are elections held regionally in England to decide who is sent as Members of the European Parliament.
The 2014 European Parliament election saw the regions of England elect the following MEPs: 22 UK Independence Party (UKIP), 17 Conservatives, 17 Labour, 3 Greens, and one Liberal Democrat.
Middle English literature emerged with Geoffrey Chaucer, author of ''The Canterbury Tales'', along with Gower, the Pearl Poet and Langland.
Hitchcock and Lean are among the most critically acclaimed of all-time.
Among the statutes set down were that the law could only be made by Parliament and could not be suspended by the King, also that the King could not impose taxes or raise an army without the prior approval of Parliament.
Most of the expenditure of the Department of Health is spent on the NHS—£98.6&nbsp;billion was spent in 2008–2009.
The capital is London, which is the largest metropolitan area in both the United Kingdom and the European Union.
It was during this time that major Neolithic monuments such as Stonehenge and Avebury were constructed.
The Supreme Court of the United Kingdom is the highest court for criminal and civil cases in England and Wales.
Rugby league was born in Huddersfield in 1895.
There is no devolved English government, but an attempt to create a similar system on a sub-regional basis was rejected by referendum.
London became the largest and most populous metropolitan area in the world during the Victorian era, and trade within the British Empire—as well as the standing of the British military and navy—was prestigious.
There has not been a government of England since 1707, when the Acts of Union 1707, putting into effect the terms of the Treaty of Union, joined England and Scotland to form the Kingdom of Great Britain.
It was the Romans who founded the first cities and towns such as London, Bath, York, Chester and St Albans.
This was established with the Bill of Rights in 1689.
Especially since the 1950s, religions from the former British colonies have grown in numbers, due to immigration.
During the Industrial Revolution, many workers moved from England's countryside to new and expanding urban industrial areas to work in factories, for instance at Manchester and Birmingham, dubbed "Warehouse City" and "Workshop of the World" respectively.
The highest tier of local government were the nine regions of England: North East, North West, Yorkshire and the Humber, East Midlands, West Midlands, East, South East, South West, and London.
There is a rapid rail network in two English cities: the London Underground; and the Tyne and Wear Metro in Newcastle, Gateshead and Sunderland.
As part of the United Kingdom, the basic political system in England is a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary system.
It is separated from France by a  sea gap, though the two countries are connected by the Channel Tunnel near Folkestone.
With a British television audience peak of 32.30&nbsp;million viewers, the final is the most watched television event ever in the UK.
It was created in 2009 after constitutional changes, taking over the judicial functions of the House of Lords.
In these areas the principal authorities are the councils of the subdivisions, the metropolitan boroughs.
Academic degrees in England are usually split into classes: first class (1st), upper second class (2:1), lower second class (2:2), third (3rd), and unclassified.
Modern English has extended this custom of flexibility, when it comes to incorporating words from different languages.
Standards in state schools are monitored by the Office for Standards in Education, and in private schools by the Independent Schools Inspectorate.
After the parliaments of England and Scotland agreed, the two countries joined in political union, to create the Kingdom of Great Britain in 1707.
According to the ''Oxford English Dictionary'', its modern spelling was first used in 1538.
Power shifts in east-central Europe led to World War I; hundreds of thousands of English soldiers died fighting for the United Kingdom as part of the Allies.
Traditional English Christmas carols include "We Wish You a Merry Christmas", "The First Noel" and "God Rest You Merry, Gentlemen".
England also has shores on the Irish Sea, North Sea and Atlantic Ocean.
Months with mild to warm weather are May, June, September and October.
They reigned for three centuries, some noted monarchs being Richard I, Edward I, Edward III and Henry V. The period saw changes in trade and legislation, including the signing of the ''Magna Carta'', an English legal charter used to limit the sovereign's powers by law and protect the privileges of freemen.
Jews have a history of a small minority on the island since 1070.
The Father of Railways, George Stephenson, built the first public inter-city railway line in the world, the Liverpool and Manchester Railway, which opened in 1830.
Roughly 11,000&nbsp;years ago, when the ice sheets began to recede, humans repopulated the area; genetic research suggests they came from the northern part of the Iberian Peninsula.
The name ''Albion'' originally referred to the entire island of Great Britain.
The traditional folk music of England is centuries old and has contributed to several genres prominently; mostly sea shanties, jigs, hornpipes and dance music.
There is an English diaspora in former parts of the British Empire; especially the United States, Canada, Australia, South Africa and New Zealand.
Their advance was contained for some decades after the Britons' victory at the Battle of Mount Badon, but subsequently resumed, over-running the fertile lowlands of Britain and reducing the area under Brythonic control to a series of separate enclaves in the more rugged country to the west by the end of the 6th century.
The world leader in compact satellite systems, Surrey Satellites, is also part of Astrium.
Originally it was planned that various regions of England would be devolved, but following the proposal's rejection by the North East in a referendum, this has not been carried out.
Some of the best-known of these are: Hadrian's Wall, Stonehenge, Avebury and Associated Sites, Tower of London, Jurassic Coast, Saltaire, Ironbridge Gorge, Studley Royal Park and various others.
Expanding on the Norman base there was also castles, palaces, great houses, universities and parish churches.
As well as English, England has two other indigenous languages, Cornish and Welsh.
He was the first player to win all four Grand Slam singles titles and helped lead the Great Britain team to victory over France in the Davis Cup in 1933.
The Normans themselves originated from Scandinavia and had settled in Normandy in the late 9th and early 10th centuries.
The climax of the 2005 Ashes was viewed by 7.4&nbsp;million as it was available on terrestrial television.
It is also known as the ''Rose of England''.
World champions include Bob Fitzsimmons, Ted "Kid" Lewis, Randolph Turpin, Nigel Benn, Chris Eubank, Frank Bruno, Lennox Lewis, Ricky Hatton, Naseem Hamed, Amir Khan, Carl Froch, and David Haye.
England does not have an official designated national anthem, as the United Kingdom as a whole has ''God Save the Queen''.
The sea level was lower than now and Britain was connected by land bridge to Ireland and Eurasia.
With a density of 407 people per square kilometre, it would be the second most densely populated country in the European Union after Malta.
In 2007, 22% of primary school children in England were from ethnic minority families, and in 2011 that figure was 26.5%.
Domestically it drove the Industrial Revolution, a period of profound change in the socioeconomic and cultural conditions of England, resulting in industrialised agriculture, manufacture, engineering and mining, as well as new and pioneering road, rail and water networks to facilitate their expansion and development.
Acts such as The Beatles, Led Zeppelin, Pink Floyd, Elton John, Queen, Rod Stewart and The Rolling Stones are among the highest selling recording artists in the world.
The church regards itself as both Catholic and Protestant.
There were internal religious conflicts during the reigns of Henry's daughters, Mary I and Elizabeth I.
Earlier divisions are unknown because the Britons were not literate.
The England rugby union team won the 2003 Rugby World Cup, the country was one of the host nations of the competition in the 1991 Rugby World Cup and is set to host the 2015 Rugby World Cup.
Referred to as the "home of football" by FIFA, England hosted the 1966 FIFA World Cup, and won the tournament by defeating West Germany 4–2 in the final, with Geoff Hurst scoring a hat-trick.
Greater London, divided into the City of London and 32 London boroughs including Croydon, Barnet, Ealing, Bromley
Tourism has become a significant industry, attracting millions of visitors to England each year.
After the Norman conquest in 1066 various Castles in England were created so law lords could uphold their authority and in the north to protect from invasion.
Bristol, Kingswood, Mangotsfield, Stoke Gifford
England's terrain mostly comprises low hills and plains, especially in central and southern England.
A-level examinations are sat by a large number of further education students, and often form the basis of an application to university.
