Caruso made an ultimately successful effort to flee the city, first by boat and then by train.
* ''Mariedda'' (Bucceri) – Napoli, June 23, 1896
This time, Marcella Sembrich sang opposite him as Gilda.
Called Errico in accordance with the Neapolitan language, he would later adopt the formal Italian version of his given name, Enrico (the equivalent of "Henry" in English).
* ''Lodoletta'' – Buenos Aires, July 29, 1917
During the final few years of the 19th century, Caruso performed at a succession of theaters throughout Italy until, in 1900, he was rewarded with a contract to sing at La Scala in Milan, the country's premier opera house.
While Caruso sang at such venues as La Scala in Milan, the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden, in London, the Mariinsky Theatre in Saint Petersburg, and the Teatro Colón in Buenos Aires, he appreared most often at the Metropolitan Opera in New York City where he was the leading tenor for 18 consecutive seasons.
Caruso's Met contract had been negotiated by his agent, the banker and impresario Pasquale Simonelli.
At his mother's insistence, he also attended school for a time, receiving a basic education under the tutelage of a local priest.
Caruso's final recording session took place at the Trinity Church studio in Camden on September 16, 1920 with the tenor singing the ''Domine Deus'' and ''Crucifixus'' from Rossini's ''Petite messe solennelle''.
* ''Adriana Lecouvreur'' – Milano, November 6, 1902**
Caruso also appeared in two motion pictures.
* ''Rigoletto'' – Napoli, July 21, 1895
At the age of 22, Caruso made his professional stage debut.
Among those appearing with him at the concert were two other leading Italian tenors of the day, Francesco Tamagno (the creator of the protagonist's role in Verdi's ''Otello'') and Giuseppe Borgatti (the creator of the protagonist's role in Giordano's ''Andrea Chénier'').
He was a client of the noted promoter Edward Bernays, during the latter's tenure as a press agent in the United States.
Longer selections were occasionally issued on two or more record sides.
Many of Caruso's recordings have remained continuously available since their original issue around a century ago, and every one of his surviving discs (including unissued takes) has been re-mastered and re-released several times over the years.
However, on the basis of genealogical research (amongst others conducted by Caruso family friend Guido D'Onoforio), biographers Pierre Key, Francis Robinson, and Enrico Caruso Jr. & Andrew Farkas, have proven this to be an urban legend.
Caruso's best-selling downloads at iTunes have been the familiar Italian songs "Santa Lucia" and "O Sole Mio".
At a notorious early performance in Naples, he was booed by a section of the audience because he failed to pay a claque to cheer for him.
Caruso possessed a phonogenic voice which was "manly and powerful, yet sweet and lyrical", to quote the singer/author John Potter (see bibliography, below).
The Bastianellis attributed the likely cause of death to peritonitis arising from a burst subphrenic abscess.
On September 16, 1920, Caruso concluded three days of recording sessions at Victor's Trinity Church studio in Camden, New Jersey.
A string of further engagements in provincial opera houses followed, and he received instruction from the conductor and voice teacher Vincenzo Lombardi that improved his high notes and polished his style.
Caruso's widow Dorothy also included the story in a memoir that she wrote about her husband.
Caruso's 12-inch acoustic recordings were limited to a maximum duration of around four and one half minutes.
The police accused him of pinching the buttocks of a married woman.
It appeared to be a severe episode of bronchitis.
Beverly Sills noted in an interview: "I was able to do it with television and radio and media and all kinds of assists.
His La Scala debut occurred on December 26 of that year in the part of Rodolfo in Giacomo Puccini's ''La bohème'' with Arturo Toscanini conducting.
* ''The Pearl Fishers'' – Genova, February 3, 1898
* ''Germania'' – Milano, March 11, 1902**
* ''Maria di Rohan'' – St. Petersburg, March 2, 1900
Caruso also made approximately 260 commercially released recordings from 1902 to 1920.
* ''Mefistofele'' – Fiume, March 4, 1898
* ''Aida'' – St. Petersburg, January 3, 1900
The following year Caruso played a character called Cosimo in another film, ''The Splendid Romance''.
* ''Un Dramma in vendemmia'' (Fornari) – Napoli, February 1, 1897
He was one of the first examples of a global media celebrity.
She was the daughter of a wealthy New York patent lawyer.
At times, his voice took on a dark, almost baritonal coloration.
He learned to write in a handsome script and studied technical draftsmanship.
Evans brought in three other doctors and Caruso finally received a correct diagnosis: purulent pleurisy and empyema.
* ''La bohème'' (Leoncavallo) – Genova, January 20, 1898
He also performed two German operas, Wagner's ''Lohengrin'' and Goldmark's ''Die Königin von Saba'', singing in Italian, early in his career.
All of his recordings were made using the acoustic process, which required the recording artist to sing into a metal horn or funnel which relayed sound directly to a master disc via a stylus.
To raise cash for his family, he found work as a street singer in Naples and performed at cafes and soirees.
Caruso died at the hotel shortly after 9:00&nbsp;a.m. local time, on August 2, 1921.
One of his first publicity photographs, taken on a visit to Sicily in 1896, depicts him wearing a bedspread draped like a toga since his sole dress shirt was away being laundered.
* ''Faust'' – Caserta, March 28, 1895
* ''Tosca'' – Treviso, October 23, 1900
Initially, Marcellino thought his son should adopt the same trade, and at the age of 11, the boy was apprenticed to a mechanical engineer named Palmieri who constructed public water fountains.
* ''Martha'' – New York, February 9, 1906
* ''La traviata'' – Napoli, August 25, 1895
(The gap between his London and New York engagements was filled by a series of performances in Italy, Portugal and South America.)
Toscanini, then the Met's principal conductor, presided in the orchestra pit.
Though already married, Giachetti bore Caruso four sons during their liaison, which lasted from 1897 to 1908.
He was also the recipient of Italian knighthoods.
This change came at the suggestion of a singing teacher, Guglielmo Vergine, with whom he began lessons at the age of 16.
Dorothy Caruso noted that her husband's health began a distinct downward spiral in late 1920 after he returned from a lengthy North American concert tour.
Following an appearance as Don Jose in ''Carmen'' at the city's Grand Opera House, a strong jolt awakened Caruso at 5:13 on the morning of the 18th in his suite at the Palace Hotel.
Caruso made more than 260 extant recordings in America for the Victor Talking Machine Company (later RCA Victor) from 1904 to 1920, and he and his heirs earned millions of dollars in royalties from the retail sales of these records.
* ''Hedda'' (Leborne) – Milano, April 2, 1898**
* ''Madama Butterfly'' – London, May 26, 1906
In 1917, he was elected an honorary member of the Phi Mu Alpha Sinfonia, the national fraternity for men involved in music, by the fraternity's Alpha chapter of the New England Conservatory of Music in Boston.
I am number nineteen boy."
Caruso's operatic repertoire consisted primarily of Italian works along with a few roles in French.
Caruso was encouraged in his early musical ambitions by his mother, who died in 1888.
* ''La Navarrese'' – Milano, November 3, 1897
This film included a sequence depicting him on stage performing the aria ''Vesti la giubba'' from Leoncavallo's opera ''Pagliacci''.
During a performance of ''L'elisir d'amore'' by Donizetti at the Brooklyn Academy of Music on December 11, 1920, he suffered a throat haemorrhage and the performance was canceled at the end of Act 1.
* ''L'arlesiana'' – Milano, November 27, 1897**
It was at the Met, in 1910, that he created the role of Dick Johnson in Giacomo Puccini's ''La fanciulla del West''.
Caruso commissioned the New York jewelers  Tiffany & Co. to strike a 24-carat-gold medal adorned with the tenor's profile.
Towards the end of the war, Caruso met and wooed a 25-year-old socialite, Dorothy Park Benjamin (1893–1955).
He returned to Naples to recuperate from the most serious of the operations, during which part of a rib had been removed.
Brief candid glimpses of Caruso offstage have been preserved in contemporary newsreel footage.
The 12-disc Naxos set was remastered by the noted American audio-restoration engineer Ward Marston.
The villa became his retreat away from the pressures of the operatic stage and the grind of travel.
With Caruso appeared two more of the Met's star singers, the Czech soprano Emmy Destinn and baritone Pasquale Amato.
They had a daughter, Gloria Caruso (1919–1999).
* ''Andrea Chénier'' – London, July 20, 1907
'''Enrico Caruso''' (; February 25, 1873 – August 2, 1921) was an Italian operatic tenor.
Caruso's first recordings were arranged by recording pioneer Fred Gaisberg and cut on disc in three separate sessions in Milan during April, November and December 1902.
Caruso's preferred address in New York City was a suite at Manhattan's Knickerbocker Hotel.
* ''La Juive'' – New York, November 22, 1919.
His progress as a paid entertainer was interrupted, however, by 45 days of compulsory military service.
Her relationship with Caruso broke down after 11 years and they separated.
Image:carusoR.jpg|'''Reverse:''' Muse of music with lyre over PER RICORDO (memento).
They would sing together often during the early 1900s.
* ''Le maschere'' (Mascagni) – Milano, January 17, 1901**
Several Caruso recordings were also released by RCA Victor on their 45-rpm format during the 1950s.
They were made with piano accompaniments for HMV/EMI's forerunner, the Gramophone & Typewriter Company.
A few days before a performance of ''Pagliacci'' at the Met (Pierre Key says it was December 4, the day after the ''Samson and Delilah'' injury) he suffered a chill and developed a cough and a "dull pain in his side".
(Whenever visiting Naples in future years, Caruso liked to point out a fountain that he had helped to install.)
These early digitised efforts were issued in part on LP, beginning in 1976 and  were issued complete by RCA Victor on compact disc (in 1990 and again in 2004).
Statements by Enrico Caruso, Jr. in his book tend to substantiate this.
He forged a particularly close bond with his Met and Covent Garden colleague Antonio Scotti&nbsp;– an amiable and stylish baritone from Naples.
In 1909, Melba asked him to participate in her forthcoming tour of Australia; but he declined the invitation because of the significant amount of travel time that such a trip would entail.
* ''L'Africana'' – New York, January 11, 1907
Money continued to be in short supply for the young Caruso.
As long-playing discs (LPs) became popular, many of his recordings were electronically enhanced with reverb and similar effects to make them sound "fuller" for release on the extended format.
* ''Manon'' – Buenos Aires, July 28, 1900
The King of Italy, Victor Emmanuel III, opened the Royal Basilica of the Church of San Francesco di Paola for Caruso's funeral, which was attended by thousands of people.
He recorded several discs  including the ''Domine Deus'' and ''Crucifixus'' from  the ''Petite messe solennelle'' by Rossini.
These ten discs swiftly became best-sellers.
Thanks in part to his tremendously popular phonograph records, Caruso was one of the most famous personalities of his day and his fame has endured to the present.
During his lifetime, Caruso received many orders, decorations, testimonials and other kinds of honors from monarchs, governments and miscellaneous cultural bodies of the various nations in which he sang.
A few months later, he began a lasting association with the Victor Talking Machine Company.
Caruso and the disc phonograph, known in the United Kingdom as the gramophone, did much to promote each other in the first two decades of the 20th century.
A falling pillar in ''Samson and Delilah'' on December 3 had hit him on the back, over the left kidney (and not on the chest as popularly reported).
Three other prominent Neapolitan singers taught by Lombardi were the baritones Antonio Scotti and Pasquale Amato, both of whom would go on to partner Caruso at the Met, and the tenor Fernando De Lucia, who would also appear at the Met and later sing at Caruso's funeral.
(The Knickerbocker was erected in 1906 on the corner of Broadway and 42nd Street.)
This process captured only a limited range of the overtones and nuances present in the singing voice.
He never appeared again on stage in his native city, stating later that he would return "only to eat spaghetti".
Charlie Olson, the broiler cook, made the tenor bacon and eggs.
He also continued to sing widely in Europe, appearing again at Covent Garden in 1904–07 and 1913–14; and undertaking a UK tour in 1909.
She quotes the tenor, speaking of his mother, Anna Caruso (''née'' Baldini): "She had twenty-one children.
Among other things, they helped to spread 29-year-old Caruso's fame throughout the English-speaking world.
* ''Carmen'' – Salerno, December 6, 1896
On February 1, 1904, Caruso began recording exclusively for the Victor Talking Machine Company in the United States.
* ''Fedora'' – Milano, November 17, 1898**
Audiences in Monte Carlo, Warsaw and Buenos Aires also heard Caruso sing during this pivotal phase of his career and, in 1899–1900, he appeared before the Tsar and the Russian aristocracy at the Mariinsky Theatre in Saint Petersburg and the Bolshoi Theatre in Moscow as part of a touring company of first-class Italian singers.
* ''L'amore dei tre re'' – New York, March 14, 1918
Caruso took part in a "grand concert" at La Scala in February 1901 that Toscanini organised to mark the recent death of Giuseppe Verdi.
His parents originally came from Piedimonte d'Alife (now Piedimonte Matese), in the Campania region of Southern Italy.
In the German repertoire, Caruso sang only two roles, Assad (in Karl Goldmark's ''The Queen of Sheba'') and Richard Wagner's Lohengrin, both of which he performed in Italian in Buenos Aires in 1899 and 1901, respectively.
* ''Un ballo in maschera'' – St. Petersburg, January 11, 1900
Dorothy wrote two biographies on Caruso, published in 1928 and 1945.
By Christmas Day, the pain in his side was so excruciating that he was screaming.
Thereafter, his recording career ran in tandem with his Met career, the one bolstering the other, until his death in 1921.
Apparently the quake had no effect on Caruso's appetite, as he cleaned his plate and tipped Olson $2.50.
His embalmed body was preserved in a glass sarcophagus at Del Pianto Cemetery in Naples for mourners to view.
* ''Cavalleria rusticana'' – Caserta, April 1895
Lower right: Salanto, medal maker's signature.
* ''I Capuleti e i Montecchi'' – Napoli, December 7, 1895
Caruso was a heavy smoker of strong Egyptian cigarettes, too.
Holding an autographed photo of President Theodore Roosevelt, Caruso ran from the hotel, but was composed enough to walk to the St. Francis Hotel for breakfast.
While most of Caruso's American recordings would be made in Victor's studios in New York and Camden, New Jersey, Caruso would later record in Camden's Trinity Church, which Victor acquired as a recording studio in 1917 for its acoustical properties and which could accommodate a large band of musicians.
* ''I puritani'' – Salerno, September 10, 1896
(Earlier experiments using this re-dubbing technique, carried out by Victor in 1927, had been considered unsatisfactory.)
Caruso was posthumously awarded a Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award in 1987.
The leaders of New York's opera-going high society were outraged initially by the incident, which received widespread newspaper coverage, but they soon forgot about it and continued to attend Caruso's Met performances.
His successful debut at Covent Garden occurred on May 14, 1902, as the Duke of Mantua in Verdi's ''Rigoletto''.
The popularity that Caruso enjoyed without any of this technological assistance is astonishing."
* ''Camoens'' (Musoni) – Caserta, May 1895
This incident hurt Caruso's pride.
He was voted into Gramophone Magazine's Hall of Fame in 2012.
He presented the medal in gratitude to Simonelli as a souvenir of his many well-remunerated performances at the Met (see illustration, above).
The regular conductors of these recording sessions with orchestra were Walter B. Rogers and, from 1916, Josef Pasternack.
Caruso claimed a monkey did the bottom-pinching.
They are also available over the internet as digital downloads.
Caruso created the role of Dick Johnson in the world premiere of Puccini's ''La fanciulla del West'' on December 10, 1910.
Enrico Caruso came from a poor but not destitute background.
The tenor had shown himself to be a shrewd businessman since arriving in America.
The United States had entered World War I in 1917, sending troops to Europe.
* ''Celeste'' (Marengo) – Napoli, March 6, 1897**
He found himself in the middle of the San Francisco earthquake, which led to a series of fires that destroyed most of the city.
He also amassed a valuable collection of rare postage stamps, coins, watches and antique snuffboxes.
In 1929, Dorothy Caruso had his remains sealed permanently in an ornate stone tomb.
Caruso was superstitious and habitually carried several good-luck charms with him when he sang.
The  work in which he appeared was a now-forgotten opera, ''L'Amico Francesco'', by the amateur composer Domenico Morelli.
The first major operatic role that Caruso was given the responsibility of creating was Loris in Umberto Giordano's ''Fedora'', at the Teatro Lirico, Milan, on November 17, 1898.
Born in Naples in the Via San Giovannello agli Ottocalli 7 on February 25, 1873, he was baptised the next day in the adjacent Church of San Giovanni e Paolo.
All of these recordings, which span most of his stage career, remain available today on CDs and as downloads and digital streams.
Prior to World War I, Caruso had been romantically tied to an Italian soprano, Ada Giachetti, who was a few years older than he was.
Caruso died before the introduction of higher fidelity, electrical recording technology in 1925.
He became one of the first major classical vocalists to make numerous recordings.
Three more Milan recordings for AICC followed in October 1903, released by Pathé Records on cylinders as well as on discs.
He experienced episodes of intense pain because of the infection and underwent seven surgical procedures to drain fluid from his chest and lungs.
These recordings were to be his last.
* ''La sonnambula'' – Trapani, March 24, 1896
He vowed never to return to San Francisco and kept his word.
* ''Le prophète'' – New York, February 7, 1918
* ''Samson et Dalila'' – New York, November 24, 1916
Others, including Adelina Patti, Francesco Tamagno and Nellie Melba, exploited the new technology once they became aware of the financial returns that Caruso was reaping from his initial recording sessions.
He completed this in 1894, resuming his voice lessons with Vergine upon discharge from the army.
Caruso's fan base at the Met was not restricted, however, to the wealthy.
* ''Sapho'' (Massenet) – Trento, June 3(?
According to Dorothy Caruso, he seemed to be recovering, but allowed himself to be examined by an unhygienic local doctor and his condition worsened dramatically after that.
They ranged from classical compositions to traditional Italian melodies and popular tunes of the day, including a few English-language titles such as George M. Cohan's "Over There", Henry Geehl's "For You Alone" and Arthur Sullivan's The Lost Chord.
(Puccini considered casting the young Caruso in the role of Cavaradossi in ''Tosca'' at its premiere in 1900, but ultimately chose the older, more established Emilio De Marchi instead.)
Below are the first performances by Caruso, in chronological order, of each of the operas that he undertook on the stage.
In 1950, RCA Victor reissued a number of  Caruso recordings on 78-rpm discs pressed on red vinylite instead of the usual shellac.
* ''La Gioconda'' – Cairo, November 9, 1895
Image:carusoO.jpg|The medal that Enrico Caruso gave to Pasquale Simonelli, his New York City impresario'''Obverse:''' Caruso facing left.
Caruso's 25-year career, stretching from 1895 to 1920, included 863 appearances at the New York Metropolitan Opera before he died at the age of 48.
Information provided in Scott's biography of Caruso suggests that she was his vocal coach as well as his lover.
In the 1970s, Thomas G. Stockham of the University of Utah developed an early digital reprocessing technique called "Soundstream" to remaster Caruso's recordings for RCA.
A month later, on April 11, he was engaged by the Gramophone & Typewriter Company to make his first group of acoustic recordings, in a Milan hotel room, for a fee of 100 pounds sterling.
* ''Julien'' – New York, December 26, 1914
Members of  America's middle classes also paid to hear him sing—or buy copies of his recordings—and he enjoyed a substantial following among New York's 500,000 Italian immigrants.
His wife, Dorothy said that by the time she knew him, her husband's favorite hobby was compiling scrapbooks.
Caruso toured widely both with the Metropolitan Opera touring company and on his own, giving hundreds of performances throughout Europe, and North and South America.
Caruso's father, Marcellino, was a mechanic and foundry worker.
The composer conceived the music for the tenor hero with Caruso's voice specifically in mind.
Many opera singers of Caruso's time rejected the phonograph (or gramophone) owing to the low fidelity of early discs.
Beyond records, Caruso's name became familiar to millions through newspapers, books, magazines, and the new media technology of the 20th century: cinema, the telephone and telegraph.
Around the rim:TIFFANY & Co. 24 CARAT GOLD Y (27&nbsp;mm).
