Many entertainments, including storytelling but especially music and drama, remain familiar but have developed into a wide variety of form to suit a very wide range of personal preferences and cultural expression.
In combination with products from the entertainment industry, all the traditional forms of entertainment became available personally.
Sometimes they also commemorate ('''5''', '''8''') or celebrate ('''1''', '''4''', '''8''', '''9''', '''10''').
Other activities, such as walking on stilts, are still seen in circus performances in the 21st century.
Cavalcades and the modern variant, the motorcade, are examples of public processions.
Court ceremonies, palace banquets and the spectacles associated with them, have been used not only to entertain but also to demonstrate wealth and power.
The "fire, sudden noise and smoke" of fireworks is still a significant part of public celebration and entertainment.
Since it combines many forms of entertainment – music, movement, storytelling, theatre – it provides a good example of the various ways that these forms can be combined to create entertainment for different purposes and audiences.
However, the distinctions become blurred when education seeks to be more "entertaining" and entertainment or marketing seek to be more "educational".
Some of the most powerful and long-lasting stories are the foundation stories, also called origin or creation myths such as the Dreamtime myths of the Australian aborigines, the Mesopotamian ''Epic of Gilgamesh'', or the Hawaiian stories of the origin of the world.
Other apparently usable buildings are really follies, deliberately constructed for a decorative purpose and never intended to be practical.
"Irish dance theatre, which sometimes features traditional Irish steps and music, has developed into a major dance form with an international reputation."
Others have unique authors who offer a more personal, philosophical view of the world and the problems people face.
It tends to gather a crowd, usually has a distinct beginning and end, and is done in conjunction with street theatre, puppeteering, magicians, comedians, acrobats, jugglers and sometimes musicians.
Whether their mood is sombre or festive, being public events that are designed to attract attention and activities that necessarily divert normal traffic, parades have a clear entertainment value to their audiences.
Sporting awards are made for the results and skill, rather than for the entertainment value.
One-liner jokes and satire are also used to comedic effect in literature.
Video games are played using a controller to create results on a screen.
In the 20th century, radio and television, often broadcast live, extended the theatrical tradition that continued to exist alongside the new forms.
'''Entertainment''' is a form of activity that holds the attention and interest of an audience, or gives pleasure and delight.
In Sudan, musical instruments such as the so-called "slit" or "talking" drums, once "part of the court orchestra of a powerful chief", had multiple purposes: they were used to make music; "speak" at ceremonies; mark community events; send long-distance messages; and call men to hunt or war.
The experience of being entertained has come to be strongly associated with amusement, so that one common understanding of the idea is fun and laughter, although many entertainments have a serious purpose.
The connections between the different types of entertainment are shown by the way that stories like this inspire a retelling in another medium, such as music, film or games.
Audiences began to gather to "appreciate creative achievement, to marvel at, and be entertained by, the prominent 'stars'."
Famous wizards such as Merlin in the Arthurian legends have been written about since the 5th and 6th centuries, while in the 21st century, the young wizard Harry Potter became a global entertainment phenomenon when the book series about him sold about 450 million copies (as at June 2011), making it the best-selling book series in history.
However, in the modern world, "merchandising has become entertainment: spinning signs, flashing signs, thumping music&nbsp;... video screens, interactive computer kiosks, day care .. cafés".
The Japanese Manga style differs from the western approach in that it encompasses a wide range of genres and themes for a readership of all ages.
The industry became so sophisticated that its economics became a separate area of academic study.
Many contests between animals are now regarded as sports – for example, horse racing is regarded as both a sport and an important source of entertainment.
Films also re-imagine entertainment from other forms, turning stories, books and plays, for example, into new entertainments.
In medieval times, all comic types – the buffoon, jester, hunchback, dwarf, jokester, were all "considered to be essentially of one comic type: the fool", who while not necessarily funny, represented "the shortcomings of the individual".
Some people watching the parade or procession may have made a special effort to attend, while others become part of the audience by happenstance.
Increasingly sophisticated techniques have been used in the film medium to delight and entertain audiences.
The so-called "digital revolution" has resulted in an increasingly transnational marketplace that has caused difficulties for governments, business, industries and individuals as they all try to keep up.
Storytelling, music, drama, dance, and different kinds of performance exist in all cultures, were supported in royal courts, developed into sophisticated forms and over time became available to all citizens.
Technological developments in the 20th century meant that entertainment could be produced independently of the audience, packaged and sold on a commercial basis by an entertainment industry.
The players may have an audience of non-players, such as when people are entertained by watching a chess championship.
For example, the 1878 Paris Exposition facilitated international cooperation about ideas, innovations and standards.
Cooking by professional chefs has also become a form of entertainment as part of global competitions such as the Bocuse d'Or.
People could not only select an entertainment product such as a piece of music, film or game, they could choose the time and place to use it.
Comedy is both a genre of entertainment and a component of it, providing laughter and amusement, whether the comedy is the sole purpose or used as a form of contrast in an otherwise serious piece.
Other audiences of live performances are entertained by the ambience and the chance to participate ('''7''', '''9''').
Physical games can develop agility and competence in motor skills.
For example, while some cultures regard any dancing by women as "the most shameful form of entertainment", other cultures have established venues such as strip clubs where deliberately erotic or sexually provocative dances such as striptease are performed in public by professional women dancers for mostly male audiences.
In farce, the comedy is a primary purpose.
Depending on the rhythm, instrument, performance and style, music is divided into many genres, such as classical, jazz, folk, ('''4''', '''5''', '''8'''), rock, pop music ('''6''', '''9''') or traditional ('''1''', '''3''').
Buildings such as Guggenheim Museum Bilbao, designed by Frank Gehry, are of this type, becoming a tourist attraction as well as a significant international museum.
On the other hand, sometimes architecture is entertainment, while pretending to be functional.
People find it entertaining to watch animals race competitively, whether they are trained, like horses, camels or dogs, or untrained, like cockroaches.
It is accepted that as well as being entertaining, playing games helps children's development.
No other results or measurable benefit are usually expected from it (except perhaps the final score in a sporting entertainment).
Globalisation and cultural imperialism are two of the cultural consequences of convergence.
This was the case with "masked dance-dramas" in Korea, which "originated in conjunction with village shaman rituals and eventually became largely an entertainment form for commoners".
Comics about superheroes such as Superman are of the first type.
Like horse racing, camel racing requires human riders, while greyhound racing does not.
While technology increases demand for entertainment products and offers increased speed of delivery, the forms that make up the content are in themselves, relatively stable.
Others maintain that pole vaulting was used in warfare to vault over fortress walls during battle."
The "greater diversity in the ways that signals may be received and packaged for the viewer, via terrestrial, satellite or cable television, and of course, via the Internet" also affects entertainment venues, such as sports stadia, which now need to be designed so that both live and remote audiences can interact in increasingly sophisticated ways – for example, audiences can "watch highlights, call up statistics", "order tickets and merchandise" and generally "tap into the stadium's resources at any time of the day or night".
Limericks, for example, use verse in a strict, predictable rhyme and rhythm to create humour and to amuse an audience of listeners or readers.
Imperial and royal courts have provided training grounds and support for professional entertainers, with different cultures using palaces, castles and forts in different ways.
Even when the primary purpose of the writing is to inform or instruct, reading is well known for its capacity to distract from everyday worries.
"; "What is the right thing to do?
Furthermore, as fonts were standardised and texts became clearer, "reading ceased being a painful process of decipherment and became an act of pure pleasure".
Sometimes, religious rituals have been adapted or evolved into secular entertainments, or like the Festa del Redentore in Venice, have managed to grow in popularity while holding both secular and sacred purposes in balance.
Card games, such as whist, poker and Bridge have long been played as evening entertainment among friends.
The advent of printing, the reduction in costs of books and an increasing literacy all served to enhance the mass appeal of reading.
Originally published in the early 19th century, this collection of folk stories had significant influence in modern popular culture which subsequently used its themes, images, symbols and structural elements to create new forms of entertainment.
Others include fandom and interactive storytelling as well as the way that single franchises are distributed through and affect a range of delivery methods.
Sometimes the climate offers a chance to adapt another sport such as in the case of ice hockey which is an important entertainment in Canada.
Sightlines and acoustics are also important design considerations in most theatrical venues.
In the US, various dances have been banned, either because like burlesque, they were suggestive, or because, like the Twist, they were associated with African Americans.
In royal courts, such as for example, in the Byzantine court, and presumably, also in its wealthy households, "mimes were the focus of orchestrated humour, expected or obliged to make fun of all at court, not even excepting the emperor and members of the imperial family.
In the court at the Palace of Versailles, "thousands of courtiers, including men and women who inhabited its apartments, acted as both performers and spectators in daily rituals that reinforced the status hierarchy".
Since World War II "well over 500 million visits have been recorded through world expo turnstiles".
Public punishment as entertainment lasted until the 19th century by which time "the awesome event of a public hanging aroused their loathing of writers and philosophers".
Singing is generally accompanied by instruments although some forms, notably a cappella and overtone singing, are unaccompanied.
Its economic impact means that it is also considered a global industry, one in which horses are carefully transported around the world to compete in races.
By the second half of the 20th century, developments in electronic media made possible the delivery of entertainment products to mass audiences across the globe.
Although kings, rulers and powerful people have always been able to pay for entertainment to be provided for them and in many cases have paid for public entertainment, people generally have made their own entertainment or when possible, attended a live performance.
For example, the possibility and popularity of user-generated content, as distinct from commercial product, creates a "networked audience model that makes programming obsolete".
"In the first decade of the 20th century cinematic programmes combined, at random, fictions and newsfilms."
One of the consequences of the development of the entertainment industry has been the creation of new types of employment.
Interactive books such as "choose your own adventure" can make literary entertainment more participatory.
For example, the modern sport of surfing is associated with Hawaii and that of snow skiing probably evolved in Scandinavia.
The sex industry is another component of the entertainment industry, applying the same forms and media (for example, film, books, dance and other performances) to the development, marketing and sale of sex products on a commercial basis.
As an example of speed of change driven by electronic media, over the course of one generation, television as a medium for receiving standardised entertainment products went from unknown, to novel, to ubiquitous and finally to superseded.
For example, during earlier centuries in Europe, watching or participating in the punishment of criminals or social outcasts was an accepted and popular form of entertainment.
The Romans subsequently developed the stadium in an oval form known as a circus.
Buildings, history and sacred spaces are thus made into commodities for purchase.
For these games, all that is needed is a deck of playing cards.
Most forms of entertainment have persisted over many centuries, evolving due to changes in culture, technology, and fashion.
Fairs and exhibitions have existed since ancient and medieval times, displaying wealth, innovations and objects for trade and offering specific entertainments as well as being places of entertainment in themselves.
Showing how stories are used to pass the time and entertain an audience of travellers, Chaucer used pilgrims in his literary work ''The Canterbury Tales'' in the 14th century, as did Wu Cheng'en in the 16th century in ''Journey to the West''.
Psychologists say the function of media entertainment is "the attainment of gratification".
Another evolution, similar to that from courtly entertainment to common practice, was the transition from religious ritual to secular entertainment, such as happened during the Goryeo dynasty with the Narye festival.
Fire and water were important aspects of court spectacles because the displays "inspired by means of fire, sudden noise, smoke and general magnificence the sentiments thought fitting for the subject to entertain of his sovereign: awe fear and a vicarious sense of glory in his might.
"; "What does it mean to be human?
However, as cultures become more sophisticated, national nuances appear in the style and references so that what is amusing in one culture may be unintelligible in another.
Efforts to prevent such incidents include appointing special officers, such as the medieval Lord of Misrule or, in modern times, security officers who control access; and also ongoing improvement of relevant standards such as those for building safety.
"A hanging was a carnival that diverted not merely the unemployed but the unemployable.
Part of the industry's adjustment is its release of new commercial product directly via video hosting services.
Today,&nbsp;... a series of exhibition 'windows', such as DVD, pay-per-view, and fibre-optic video-on-demand are used to maximise profits."
What is entertainment for one group or individual may be regarded as work by another.
Computerisation and the development of barcodes also made ticketing easier, faster and global.
Animals that perform trained routines or "acts" for human entertainment include fleas in flea circuses, dolphins in dolphinaria, and monkeys doing tricks for an audience on behalf of the player of a street organ.
Other contests involving animals remain controversial and have both supporters and detractors.
Julius Caesar chose to celebrate four triumphs held on different days extending for about one month."
The wide variety of musical performances, whether or not they are artificially amplified ('''6''', '''7''', '''9''', '''10'''), all provide entertainment irrespective of whether the performance is from soloists ('''6'''), choral ('''2''') or orchestral groups ('''5''', '''8'''), or ensemble ('''3''').
Philip Astley is regarded as the founder of the modern circus in the second half of the 18th century and Jules Léotard is the French performer credited with developing the art of the trapeze, considered synonymous with circuses.
For example, during the Indian Dashavatara Kala of Gomantaka "the temple deity is taken around in a procession with a lot of singing, dancing and display of fireworks".
However, pilgrimages, such as the Christian pilgrimage of the Way of St. James, the Muslim Hajj and the Hindu Kumbh Mela, which may appear to the outsider as an entertaining parade or procession, are not intended as entertainment: they are instead about an individual's spiritual journey.
Some may have evolved from serious or necessary activities (such as running and jumping) into competition and then become entertainment.
Some dances, such as the quadrille, a square dance that "emerged during the Napoleonic years in France" and other country dances were once popular at social gatherings like balls, but are now rarely performed.
Such mixtures are often known by the neologisms "edutainment" or "infotainment".
This is the case as much as for traditional courts as it is for contemporary ceremonials, such as the Hong Kong handover ceremony in 1997, at which an array of entertainments (including a banquet, a parade, fireworks, a festival performance and an art spectacle) were put to the service of highlighting a change in political power.
Beyond the very large numbers involved in playing these sports, they are notable for being a major source of entertainment for many millions of non-players worldwide.
The list of serious incidents at nightclubs includes those caused by stampede; overcrowding; terrorism, such as the 2002 Bali bombings that targeted a nightclub; and especially fire.
Even the sports stadium of the future will increasingly become a competitor with television viewing "in terms of comfort, safety and the constant flow of audio-visual information and entertainment available".
One of the oldest known board games is Senet, a game played in Ancient Egypt, enjoyed by the pharaoh Tutankhamun.
Examples include "the preservation of the Alcázar of Toledo, with its grim Civil War History, the conversion of slave dungeons into tourist attractions in Ghana, such as, for example, Cape Coast Castle and the presentation of indigenous culture in Libya".
In Korea, the "court entertainment dance" was "originally performed in the palace for entertainment at court banquets."
Whether the performance is given by vocalists or instrumentalists, the performers may be soloists or part of a small or large group, in turn entertaining an audience that might be individual ('''10'''), passing by ('''3'''), small ('''1''', '''2''') or large ('''6''', '''7''', '''8''', '''9''').
The evolution of an activity into a sport and then an entertainment is also affected by the local climate and conditions.
Court entertainments were typically performed for royalty and courtiers as well as "for the pleasure of local and visiting dignitaries".
While jobs such as writer, musician and composer exist as they always have, people doing this work are likely to be employed by a company rather than a patron as they once would have been.
One estimate was that by 2011 over 30 percent of households in the US would own a Wii console, "about the same percentage that owned a television in 1953".
Minstrels or troubadours are part of the tradition.
Japan's unique sumo wrestling contains ritual elements that derive from its long history.
Some contests between animals, once popular entertainment for the public, have become illegal because of the cruelty involved.
The advent of computer-generated imagery (CGI) in the 21st century made it "possible to do spectacle" more cheaply and "on a scale never dreamed of" by Cecil B. DeMille.
Fireworks, carefully planned and choreographed, were let off against the backdrop of many of the world's most famous buildings, including the Sydney Harbour Bridge, the Pyramids of Giza in Egypt, the Acropolis in Athens, Red Square in Moscow, Vatican City in Rome, the Brandenburg Gate in Berlin, the Eiffel Tower in Paris, and Elizabeth Tower in London.
From London 1851 to Paris 1900, "in excess of 200 million visitors had entered the turnstiles in London, Paris, Vienna, Philadelphia, Chicago and a myriad of smaller shows around the world."
For example, composers Rimsky-Korsakov, Ravel and Szymanowski have each been inspired by the Scheherazade story and turned it into an orchestral work; director Pasolini made a film adaptation; and there is an innovative video game based on the tale.
This is similar to the way that the nobility in earlier times could stage private musical performances or the use of domestic theatres in large homes to perform private plays in earlier centuries.
During the Chinese Cultural Revolution, for example, Revolutionary opera was sanctioned by the Communist party and World War I, the Great Depression and the Russian revolution all affected entertainment.
Films and video games, for example, although they use newer media, continue to tell stories, present drama, and play music.
Individuals and corporations use video hosting services to broadcast content that is equally accepted by the public as legitimate entertainment.
It demonstrates that while some films, particularly those in the Hollywood tradition that combines "realism and melodramatic romanticism", are intended as a form of escapism, others require a deeper engagement or more thoughtful response from their audiences.
Such intentional tourist attractions divorce buildings from the past so that "the difference between historical authenticity and contemporary entertainment venues/theme parks becomes hard to define".
Stories may be told wordlessly, in music, dance or puppetry for example, such as in the Javanese tradition of wayang, in which the performance is accompanied by a gamelan orchestra or the similarly traditional Punch and Judy show.
It depicts children playing a range of games which were presumably typical of the time.
Among these are blood sports such as bear-baiting, dog fighting and cockfighting.
Nationalism, authoritarianism and racism have played a part in banning dances or dancing.
Since dance is often "associated with the female body and women's experiences", female dancers, who dance to entertain, have in some cases been regarded as distinct from "decent" women because they "use their bodies to make a living instead of hiding them as much as possible".
This has ensured the continuity and longevity of many themes, images, and structures.
Fireworks are a part of many public entertainments and have retained an enduring popularity since they became a "crowning feature of elaborate celebrations" in the 17th century.
However, all performers run the risk of failing to hold their audience's attention and thus, failing to entertain.
The Americans first "contrived a way of producing an illusion of motion through successive images," but "the French were able to transform a scientific principle into a commercially lucrative spectacle".
As a form of spectacle and entertainment, expositions influenced "everything from architecture, to patterns of globalisation, to fundamental matters of human identity" and in the process established the close relationship between "fairs, the rise of department stores and art museums", the modern world of mass consumption and the entertainment industry.
For example, a story told in dramatic form can be presented in an open-air theatre, a music hall, a movie theatre, a multiplex, or as technological possibilities advanced, via a personal electronic device such as a tablet computer.
Astley brought together performances that were generally familiar in traditional British fairs "at least since the beginning of the 17th century": "tumbling, rope-dancing, juggling, animal tricks and so on".
Fantasy magicians have held an important place in literature for centuries, offering entertainment to millions of readers.
Courtly entertainments also demonstrate the complex relationship between entertainer and spectator: individuals may be either an entertainer or part of the audience, or they may swap roles even during the course of one entertainment.
The Bayreuth Festspielhaus in Germany is a theatre designed and built for performances of one specific musical composition.
Plays, musicals, monologues, pantomimes, and performance poetry are part of the very long history of theatre which is also the venue for the type of performance known as stand-up comedy.
Prestigious awards are given by the industry for excellence in the various types of entertainment.
However, "in many cases of animal advocacy groups versus organisations accused of animal abuse, both sides have cultural claims."
Some entertainments, such as at large festivals (whether religious or secular), concerts, clubs, parties and celebrations, involve big crowds.
In the Maya city states, for example, "spectacles often took place in large plazas in front of palaces; the crowds gathered either there or in designated places from which they could watch at a distance."
A comparable multi-stage, long-form sport with global appeal is the Tour de France, unusual in that it takes place outside of special stadia, being run instead in the countryside.
They can be played alone, in teams, or online; by amateurs or by professionals.
Ballet is an example of a highly developed Western form of dance that moved to the theatres from the French court during the time of Louis XIV, the dancers becoming professional theatrical performers.
Architects who push the boundaries of design or construction sometimes create buildings that are entertaining because they exceed the expectations of the public and the client and are aesthetically outstanding.
Fox hunting, which involves the use of horses as well as hounds, and bullfighting, which has a strong theatrical component, are two entertainments that have a long and significant cultural history.
Both Dickens and Thackeray wrote about a hanging in Newgate Prison in 1840, and "taught an even wider public that executions are obscene entertainments".
First used in China, classical antiquity and Europe for military purposes, fireworks were most popular in the 18th century and high prices were paid for pyrotechnists, especially the skilled Italian ones, who were summoned to other countries to organise displays.
For example, drama, stories and banqueting (or dining) are commonly enhanced by music; sport and games are incorporated into other activities to increase appeal.
The speed at which the venue can be emptied is important both for amenity and safety because large crowds take a very long time to disperse from a badly designed venue and this in turn creates a safety risk.
Charlie Chaplin's film ''The Great Dictator'' was a brave and innovative parody, also on a political theme.
Storytelling is an ancient form of entertainment that has influenced almost all other forms.
Some people are entertained by others' pain or the idea of their unhappiness (schadenfreude).
At the same time, commercial newspapers "began to carry theatre columns and reviews" which helped to make theatre "a legitimate subject of intellectual debate" in general discussions about art and culture.
Birthdays, name-days, weddings and anniversaries provided the occasion for celebration."
Dramatic examples include Shakespeare's influential play ''Hamlet'', whose hero articulates these concerns in poetry; and films, such as ''The Matrix'', which explores the nature of knowledge and was released world-wide.
They watched as "lions and bears danced to the music of pipes and cymbals; horses were trained to kneel, bow, dance and prance&nbsp;... acrobats turning handsprings over wild lions and vaulting over wild leopards."
Hence, architects now have to design "with two distinct functions in mind, as sports and entertainment centres playing host to live audiences, and as sports and entertainment studios serving the viewing and listening requirements of the remote audience".
As in other media, excellence and achievement in films is recognised through a range of awards, including ones from the  American Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, the British Academy of Film and Television Arts, the Cannes International Film Festival in France and the Asia Pacific Screen Awards.
Typically, the busker provides an entertaining ambience, often with an unusual instrument, and the audience may not stop to watch or form a crowd.
By the 19th century, "expos" which encourage arts, manufactures and commerce had become truly international and were not only hugely popular but were having an enormous effect on international ideas.
Gladiatorial combats, also known as "gladiatorial games", popular during Roman times, provide a good example of an activity that is a combination of sport, punishment, and entertainment.
It can be an idea or a task, but is more likely to be one of the activities or events that have developed over thousands of years specifically for the purpose of keeping an audience's attention.
Relatively minor changes to the form and venue of an entertainment continue to come and go as they are affected by the period, fashion, culture, technology, and economics.
"The earliest storytelling sequences we possess, now of course, committed to writing, were undoubtedly originally a speaking from mouth to ear and their force as entertainment derived from the very same elements we today enjoy in films and novels."
Like court entertainment, royal occasions such as coronations and weddings provided opportunities to entertain both the aristocracy and the people.
The art and practice of busking is still celebrated at annual busking festivals.
Caricature uses a kind of graphic entertainment for purposes ranging from merely putting a smile on the viewer's face, to raising social awareness, to highlighting the moral characteristics of a person being caricatured.
For example, there are awards for Music, Games (including video games), Comics, Comedy, Theatre, Television, Film, Dance and Magic.
Films are a major form of entertainment, although not all films have entertainment as their primary purpose: documentary film, for example, aims to create a record or inform, although the two purposes often work together.
Reading has been a source of entertainment for a very long time, especially when other forms, such as performance entertainments, were (or are) either unavailable or too costly.
Board games, such as Go, ''Monopoly'' or backgammon need a board and markers.
One of the earliest forms of parade were "triumphs" – grand and sensational displays of foreign treasures and spoils, given by triumphant Roman generals to celebrate their victories.
It is "not only entertainment, it is also thinking through human conflicts and contradictions".
Many of these games, such as marbles, hide-and-seek, blowing soap bubbles and piggyback riding continue to be played.
Occasionally, a parade takes place in an improvised theatre space (such as the Trooping the Colour in '''5''') and tickets are sold to the physical audience while the global audience participates via broadcast.
This highly structured role of jester consisted of verbal humour, including teasing, jests, insult, ridicule, and obscenity and non-verbal humour such as slapstick and horseplay in the presence of an audience."
The second form, the "walk-by act", has no distinct beginning or end.
Video games are popular in East Asian countries such as South Korea.
Street entertainment, street performance or "busking" are forms of performance that have been meeting the public's need for entertainment for centuries.
Parades generally impress and delight ('''5''', '''6''', '''7''', '''8'''), often by including unusual, colourful costumes ('''6''', '''7''').
For example, during the Nazi regime, American dances such as swing, regarded as "completely un-German", had "become a public offense and needed to be banned".
