The city prospered again under a new rule, producing a number of important historical figures such as the elegiac poet Callinus  and the iambic poet Hipponax, the philosopher Heraclitus, the great painter Parrhasius and later the grammarian Zenodotos and physicians Soranus and Rufus.
But the inhabitants of Ephesus demurred, claiming that it was not fitting for one god to build a temple to another.
It has a concave façade.
In 1954, a burial ground from the Mycenaean era (1500–1400&nbsp;BC) with ceramic pots was discovered close to the ruins of the basilica of St. John.
This would have been impossible at Ephesus because of the mountain ranges, coastline and quarries which surrounded the city.
Between 53 and 57&nbsp;AD Paul wrote the letter 1 Corinthians from Ephesus (possibly from the 'Paul tower' near the harbour, where he was imprisoned for a short time).
There are numerous sites to suggest the movement of a settlement between the Bronze Age and the Roman period, but the silting up of the natural harbours as well as the movement of the Kayster River meant that the location never remained the same.
The Persians then incorporated the Greek cities of Asia Minor into the Achaemenid Empire.
Following a revolt by the people, Ephesus was ruled by a council.
The city felt the Roman influence at once.
Ephesus is believed to be the city of the Seven Sleepers.
The Temple of Artemis, one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World, once stood 418' by 239' with over 100 marble pillars each 56' high.
This led to the Asiatic Vespers, the slaughter of 80,000 Roman citizens in Asia, or any person who spoke with a Latin accent.
Designed with an exaggerated entrance — so as to enhance its perceived size, speculate many historians — the building faces east so that the reading rooms could make best use of the morning light.
The theatre dominates the view down Harbour Street, which leads to the silted-up harbour.
Ephesus has intrigued archaeologists because for the Archaic Period there is no definite location for the settlement.
About 650&nbsp;BC, Ephesus was attacked by the Cimmerians who razed the city, including the temple of Artemis.
After a period of unrest, the region was again incorporated into the Ottoman Empire in 1425.
More recent scholarship regards these estimates as unrealistic.
Those cities were then ruled by satraps.
The city flourished after it came under the control of the Roman Republic in 129 BC.
After a series of battles, he was defeated by Scipio Asiaticus at the Battle of Magnesia in 190&nbsp;BC.
Shortly afterwards, Ephesus was ceded to the Aydinid principality that stationed a powerful navy in the harbour of Ayasuluğ (the present-day Selçuk, next to Ephesus).
When Mithridates was defeated in the First Mithridatic War by the Roman consul Lucius Cornelius Sulla, Ephesus came back under Roman rule in 86&nbsp;BC.
Pausanias mentions that the temple was built by Ephesus, son of the river god Caystrus, before the arrival of the Ionians.
After the death of Lysimachus the town again was named Ephesus.
Ephesus was founded as an Attic-Ionian colony in the 10th century BC on the Ayasuluk Hill, three kilometers () from the centre of ancient Ephesus (as attested by excavations at the Seljuk castle during the 1990s).
Ephesus did not contribute ships but gave financial support.
Some fragments of the frieze (which are insufficient to suggest the form of the original) and other small finds were removed – some to London and some to the Archaeological Museum, Istanbul.
The emperor Constantine I rebuilt much of the city and erected a new public bath.
After the Cimmerians had been driven away, the city was ruled by a series of tyrants.
The temple earned the city the title "Servant of the Goddess".
It is also the site of a large gladiators' graveyard.
The church at Ephesus had given their support for Ignatius, who was taken to Rome for execution.
In 88&nbsp;BC Ephesus welcomed Archelaus, a general of Mithridates the Great, king of Pontus, when he conquered Asia (the Roman name for western Asia Minor).
According to estimates, Ephesus had a population of 33,600 to 56,000 people in the Roman period, making it the third largest city of Roman Asia Minor after Sardis and Alexandria Troas.
name Κάϋστρος) silted up the harbor, the resulting marshes caused malaria and many deaths among the inhabitants.
Emperor Flavius Arcadius raised the level of the street between the theatre and the harbour.
During the Peloponnesian War, Ephesus was first allied to Athens but in a later phase, called the Decelean War, or the Ionian War, sided with Sparta, which also had received the support of the Persians.
Using an average population density of 400 to 500 per hectare, he calculates that Ephesus would have had a population between 138,000 and 172,500, with a preference for the higher figure.
The town surrendered, on October 24, 1304, to Sasa Bey, a Turkish warlord of the Menteşoğulları principality.
Nevertheless, contrary to the terms of the surrender the Turks pillaged the church of Saint John and deported most of the local population to Thyrea, Greece when a revolt seemed probable.
The city and temple were destroyed by the Goths in 263&nbsp;AD.
After the Persians defeated Croesus, the Ionians offered to make peace, but Cyrus insisted that they surrender and become part of the empire.
It was built in the 10th century BC on the site of the former Arzawan capital by Attic and Ionian Greek colonists.
Such a large estimate would require population densities only possible in modern times, or extensive settlement outside the city walls.
In 268 AD, the Temple was destroyed or damaged in a raid by the Goths.
Later, Greek historians such as Pausanias, Strabo and Herodotos and the poet Kallinos reassigned the city's mythological foundation to Ephos, queen of the Amazons.
Ephesus became, for a short time, self-governing.
Ephesus was an important centre for Early Christianity from the AD 50s.
Sackings by the Arabs first in the year 654–655 by caliph Muawiyah I, and later in 700 and 716 hastened the decline further.
A number of figures are depicted in the reliefs, including the emperor Theodosius I with his wife and eldest son.
Two decades later, the church at Ephesus was still important enough to be addressed by a letter written by Bishop Ignatius of Antioch to the Ephesians in the early 2nd century AD, that begins with, "Ignatius, who is also called Theophorus, to the Church which is at Ephesus, in Asia, deservedly most happy, being blessed in the greatness and fullness of God the Father, and predestinated before the beginning of time, that it should be always for an enduring and unchangeable glory" (''Letter to the Ephesians'').
Nearby Ayasuluğ was renamed Selçuk in 1914.
Ephesus remained the most important city of the Byzantine Empire in Asia after Constantinople in the 5th and 6th centuries.
The Temple of Hadrian dates from the 2nd century but underwent repairs in the 4th century and has been reerected from the surviving architectural fragments.
Ephesus came under Egyptian rule between 263 and 197&nbsp;BC.
Marble sculptures were ground to powder to make lime for plaster.
It came to be called the Robber Council of Ephesus or Robber Synod of Latrocinium by its opponents.
'''Ephesus''' (;  ''Ephesos''; ; ultimately from Hittite ''Apasa'') was an ancient Greek city on the coast of Ionia, three kilometres southwest of present-day Selçuk in İzmir Province, Turkey.
Ephesus was completely abandoned by the 15th century.
When the Seleucid king Antiochus III the Great tried to regain the Greek cities of Asia Minor, he came into conflict with Rome.
The Jamieson-Fausset-Brown Bible Commentary reminds readers that the unbelief of "some" () implies that "others, probably a large number, believed"  and therefore there must have been a community of Jewish Christians in Ephesus.
During these events many of the remaining inhabitants were massacred.
The city's importance as a commercial center declined as the harbor was slowly silted up by the Küçükmenderes River.
The city had one of the most advanced aqueduct systems in the ancient world, with at least six aqueducts of various sizes supplying different areas of the city.
The Ephesians were surprisingly modern in their social relations: they allowed strangers to integrate; education was valued; through the cult of Artemis, the city became a bastion of women's rights – Ephesus even had female artists.
Ephesians were incorporated as vassals into the Ottoman Empire for the first time in 1390.
Finds from the site are exhibited notably in the Ephesos Museum in Vienna, the Ephesus Archaeological Museum in Selçuk and in the British Museum.
In later times, Pliny the Elder mentioned having seen at Ephesus a representation of the goddess Diana by Timarata, the daughter of a painter.
In 478&nbsp;BC, the Ionian cities with Athens entered into the Delian League against the Persians.
Crusaders passing through were surprised that there was only a small village, called Ayasalouk, where they had expected a bustling city with a large seaport.
The wall of Lysimachus has been estimated to enclose an area of .
In 356&nbsp;BC the temple of Artemis was burnt down, according to legend, by a lunatic called Herostratus.
The loss of its harbour caused Ephesus to lose its access to the Aegean Sea, which was important for trade.
Announcement on the Withdrawal of E8 New Turkish Lira Banknotes from Circulation, 8 May 2007.
It may have been rebuilt or repaired but this is uncertain, as its later history is not clear.
This marked the decline of the city's splendour.
The ruins of Ephesus are a favourite international and local tourist attraction, partly owing to their easy access from Adnan Menderes Airport or from the cruise ship port of Kuşadası, some 30&nbsp;km to the South.
After the murder of king Antiochus II Theos and his Egyptian wife, pharaoh Ptolemy III invaded the Seleucid Empire and the Egyptian fleet swept the coast of Asia Minor.
When his grandson Attalus III died without male children of his own, he left his kingdom to the Roman Republic.
As the people expected nothing good of him, they threw him into prison and murdered him.
The Gospel of John may have been written here.
Later, Paul wrote the Epistle to the Ephesians while he was in prison in Rome (around 62&nbsp;AD).
During the Classical Greek era it was one of the twelve cities of the Ionian League.
Zenobius was invited into the city to visit Philopoemen, the father of Monime, the favorite wife of Mithridates, and the overseer of Ephesus.
Many had lived in Ephesus.
Until recently the population of Ephesus in Roman times was estimated to number up to 225,000 people.
The inhabitants of Ephesus at once set about restoring the temple and even planned a larger and grander one than the original.
Epiphanius, however, was keen to point out that, while the Bible says John was leaving for Asia, it does not say specifically that Mary went with him.
He argues that population densities of 150 or 250 people per hectare are more realistic, which gives a range of 33,600 to 56,000 inhabitants.
Taxes rose considerably, and the treasures of the city were systematically plundered.
The Temple of the Sebastoi (sometimes called the Temple of Domitian), dedicated to the Flavian dynasty, was one of the largest temples in the city.
It is now surrounded by Selçuk.
It was a small salon for plays and concerts, seating about 1,500 people.
Thus Ephesus became part of the Seleucid Empire.
As a result, rule over the cities of Ionia was ceded again to Persia.
The Odeon was a small roofed theater constructed by Vedius Antonius and his wife around 150&nbsp;AD.
The Greek goddess Artemis and the great Anatolian goddess Kybele were identified together as ''Artemis of Ephesus''.
The story of the Seven Sleepers, who are considered saints by Catholics and Orthodox Christians and whose story is also mentioned in the Qur'an, tells that they were persecuted because of their monotheistic belief in God and that they slept in a cave near Ephesus for centuries.
The library was mostly built by his son Gaius Julius Aquila and once held nearly 12,000 scrolls.
The Library of Celsus, the façade of which has been carefully reconstructed from original pieces, was originally built c. 125&nbsp;AD in memory of Tiberius Julius Celsus Polemaeanus, an Ancient Greek who served as governor of Roman Asia (105–107) in the Roman Empire.
Ephesus also had several major bath complexes, built at various times while the city was under Roman rule.
The Ephesians derived the argument from John's presence in the city, and Jesus’ instructions to John to take care of Mary after his death.
The upper part of the theatre was decorated with red granite pillars in the Corinthian style.
The history of archaeological research in Ephesus stretches back to 1863, when British architect John Turtle Wood, sponsored by the British Museum, began to search for the Artemision.
Initially, according to the Acts of the Apostles, Paul attended the Jewish synagogue in Ephesus, but after three months he became frustrated with the stubbornness or hardness of heart of some of the Jews, and moved his base to the school of Tyrannus ().
A part of the site, Basilica of St. John, was built in the 6th century AD, under emperor Justinian I, over the supposed site of the apostle's tomb.
The Central Asian warlord Tamerlane defeated the Ottomans in Anatolia in 1402, and the Ottoman sultan Bayezid I died in captivity.
(Today, the harbour is 5&nbsp;kilometres inland).
Androklos drove away most of the native Carian and Lelegian inhabitants of the city and united his people with the remainder.
As a result, Ephesus came under the rule of the Attalid king of Pergamon Eumenes II (197–133&nbsp;BC).
This open-air theatre was used initially for drama, but during later Roman times gladiatorial combats were also held on its stage; the first archaeological evidence of a gladiator graveyard was found in May 2007.
The importance of the city as a commercial centre declined as the harbour was slowly silted up by the river (today, Küçük Menderes) despite repeated dredging during the city's history.
Since the 19th century, The House of the Virgin Mary, about  from Selçuk, has been considered to have been the last home of Mary, mother of Jesus in the Roman Catholic tradition, based on the visions of Sister Anne Catherine Emmerich.
Of this structure, scarcely a trace remains.
The many-breasted "Lady of Ephesus", identified with Artemis, was venerated in the Temple of Artemis, one of the Seven Wonders of the World and the largest building of the ancient world according to Pausanias (4.31.8).
The town knew again a short period of prosperity during the 14th century under these new Seljuk rulers.
Paul introduced about twelve men to the 'baptism with the Holy Spirit' who had previously only experienced the baptism of John the Baptist (), and later became embroiled in a dispute with some artisans whose livelihood depended on selling statuettes of Artemis () in the Temple of Artemis ().
The city was famed for the Temple of Artemis (Diana), the Library of Celsus, and a theater which was capable of holding 25,000 spectators.
Ephesus was one of the seven cities addressed in the Book of Revelation (), indicating that the church at Ephesus was strong.
According to the legend, he founded Ephesus on the place where the oracle of Delphi became reality ("A fish and a boar will show you the way").
Emperor Constantine the Great rebuilt much of the city and erected new public baths.
The reliefs in the upper sections are casts, the originals now being exhibited in the Ephesus Archaeological Museum.
A legend, which was first mentioned by Epiphanius of Salamis in the 4th century AD, purported that Mary may have spent the last years of her life in Ephesus.
They added important architectural works such as the İsa Bey Mosque, caravansaries and Turkish bathhouses (hamam).
The area surrounding Ephesus was already inhabited during the Neolithic Age (about 6000&nbsp;BC), as was revealed by excavations at the nearby ''höyük'' (artificial mounds known as tells) of Arvalya and Cukurici.
The people of Ephesus were forced to move to a new settlement two kilometres () further on, when the king flooded the old city by blocking the sewers.
Even the temple of Artemis was completely forgotten by the local population.
Pliny tells us that the magnificent structure took 120 years to build but is now represented only by one inconspicuous column, revealed during an archaeological excavation by the British Museum in the 1870s.
The town was partially destroyed by an earthquake in 614&nbsp;AD.
Androklos and his dog are depicted on the Hadrian temple frieze, dating from the 2nd century.
When the Seljuk Turks conquered Ephesus in 1090, it was a small village.
During his reign the city began to prosper.
Ephesus revolted after the treacherous death of Agathocles, giving the Hellenistic king of Syria and Mesopotamia Seleucus I Nicator an opportunity for removing and killing Lysimachus, his last rival, at the Battle of Corupedium in 281&nbsp;BC.
From AD 52–54, the apostle Paul lived in Ephesus, working with the congregation and apparently organizing missionary activity into the hinterlands.
These wars did not greatly affect daily life in Ephesus.
In 1895 German archaeologist Otto Benndorf, financed by a 10,000 guilder donation made by Austrian Karl Mautner Ritter von Markhof, resumed excavations.
Ephesus continued to prosper, but when taxes were raised under Cambyses II and Darius, the Ephesians participated in the Ionian Revolt against Persian rule in the Battle of Ephesus (498&nbsp;BC), an event which instigated the Greco-Persian wars.
When Augustus became emperor in 27&nbsp;BC, he made Ephesus the capital of proconsular Asia (which covered western Asia Minor) instead of Pergamum.
But when they saw how badly the people of Chios had been treated by Zenobius, a general of Mithridates, they refused entry to his army.
According to Hittite sources, the capital of the Kingdom of Arzawa (another independent state in Western and Southern Anatolia/Asia Minor) was Apasa (or ''Abasa'').
He died in a battle against the Carians when he came to the aid of Priene, another city of the Ionian League.
However, the Greek cities were given freedom and several substantial rights.
He was a successful warrior, and as a king he was able to join the twelve cities of Ionia together into the Ionian League.
The city was famed for the Temple of Artemis (completed around 550&nbsp;BC), one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World.
The Crusaders of the Second Crusade fought the Seljuks just outside the town in December 1147.
After Lysimachus had destroyed the nearby cities of Lebedos and Colophon in 292&nbsp;BC, he relocated their inhabitants to the new city.
Jerome Murphy-O'Connor uses an estimate of  for the inhabited land.
Sulla imposed a huge indemnity, along with five years of back taxes, which left Asian cities heavily in debt for a long time to come.
When Alexander the Great defeated the Persian forces at the Battle of Granicus in 334&nbsp;BC, the Greek cities of Asia Minor were liberated.
As the river Cayster (Grk.
Ephesus was one of the seven churches of Asia that are cited in the Book of Revelation.
When Alexander saw that the temple of Artemis was not yet finished, he proposed to finance it and have his name inscribed on the front.
This settlement was officially called '''Arsinoea''' ( or Ἀρσινοΐα) after the king's second wife, Arsinoe II of Egypt.
Roman Asia was associated with John, one of the chief apostles, and the Gospel of John might have been written in Ephesus, ''c'' 90–100.
They were defeated by the Persian army commander Harpagos in 547&nbsp;BC.
At an estimated 24,000 seating capacity, the 'Theatre' is believed to be the largest outdoor theatre in the ancient world.
The Tomb/Fountain of Pollio was erected in 97&nbsp;AD in honour of C. Sextilius Pollio, who constructed the Marnas aqueduct, by Offilius Proculus.
Ephesus is one of the largest Roman archaeological sites in the eastern Mediterranean.
The basilica of St. John was built during the reign of emperor Justinian I in the 6th century.
Mithridates took revenge and inflicted terrible punishments.
The Byzantines resumed control in 1097 and changed the name of the town to Hagios Theologos.
According to Strabo, it was second in importance and size only to Rome.
Croesus made the populations of the different settlements around Ephesus regroup (''synoikismos'') in the vicinity of the Temple of Artemis, enlarging the city.
– Retrieved on 20 April 2009.
He later stated that she was buried in Jerusalem.
Celsus paid for the construction of the library with his own personal wealth and is buried in a sarcophagus beneath it.
Ayasoluk became an important harbour, from which the navy organised raids to the surrounding regions.
The ruins of the temples were used as building blocks for new homes.
Later in the same century, the Lydians under Croesus invaded Persia.
The pro-Persian tyrant Syrpax and his family were stoned to death, and Alexander was greeted warmly when he entered Ephesus in triumph.
Some scholars suggest that this is the later Greek Ephesus.
In 479&nbsp;BC, the Ionians, together with Athens, were able to oust the Persians from the shores of Asia Minor.
Following the Edict of Thessalonica from Emperor Theodosius I, what remained of the temple was destroyed in 401&nbsp;AD by a mob led by St. John Chrysostom.
This was the period of the Mycenaean Expansion when the ''Achaioi'' (as they were called by Homer) settled in Asia Minor during the 14th and 13th centuries BC.
They fed a number of water mills, one of which has been identified as a sawmill for marble.
There were 22 stairs in the theatre.
There were two agoras, one for commercial and one for state business.
People started leaving the lowland of the city for the surrounding hills.
The temple was depicted on the reverse of the Turkish 20&nbsp;million lira banknote of 2001–2005 and of the 20 new lira banknote of 2005–2009.
The visible ruins still give some idea of the city's original splendour, and the names associated with the ruins are evocative of its former life.
Excavations in recent years have unearthed settlements from the early Bronze Age at Ayasuluk Hill.
The entrances were at both sides of the stage and reached by a few steps.
J. W. Hanson estimates the inhabited space to be smaller at .
Ephesus then entered an era of prosperity, becoming both the seat of the governor and a major center of commerce.
It was erected on a pseudodipteral plan with 8 × 13 columns.
His signature has been found on the base of one of the columns of the temple (now on display in the British Museum).
Ephesus, a territory that was traditionally Greek to the core, became a subject of the Roman Republic.
It is a popular place of Catholic pilgrimage which has been visited by three recent popes.
The Church of Mary near the harbour of Ephesus was the setting for the Third Ecumenical Council in 431, which resulted in the condemnation of Nestorius.
About 560&nbsp;BC, Ephesus was conquered by the Lydians under king Croesus, who, though a harsh ruler, treated the inhabitants with respect and even became the main contributor to the reconstruction of the temple of Artemis.
The city was the site of several 5th century Christian Councils (see Council of Ephesus).
The temple and its statue are some of the few remains connected with Domitian.
Scholars believe that Ephesus was founded on the settlement of Apasa (or ''Abasa''), a Bronze Age city noted in 14th century BC Hittite sources as being under the rule of the  Ahhiyawans, most probably the name of the Achaeans used in Hittite sources.
In 1898 Benndorf founded the Austrian Archaeological Institute, which plays a leading role in Ephesus today.
The Ionians refused a peace offer from Cyrus the Great, siding with the Lydians instead.
The mythical founder of the city was a prince of Athens named Androklos, who had to leave his country after the death of his father, King Kadros.
In 1869 he discovered the pavement of the temple, but since further expected discoveries were not made the excavations stopped in 1874.
The region was restored to the Anatolian beyliks.
