Terracotta lamps also frequently have their makers' names and other information stamped upon them.
The history is Roman history in its largest sense, involving men and women in many of their affairs, such as life and death, government, law, religious worship — all as illustrated above.
Sometimes a fee to the priest had to be paid in cash; in some cases a priest or priestess was allowed to take up a collection on certain days.
such as widely used at all periods and places as owners' or masons' marks.
Among the most interesting of these is the ancient song and accompanying dance performed by the priests known as the Arval Brothers.
In Attic decrees, and some others, it was also usual to give the day of the month.
As regards the contents of inscriptions, there must evidently be a considerable difference between records of a number of independent city states and an empire including almost all the civilised world; but municipalities maintained much of their independent traditions in Roman times, and consequently their inscriptions often follow the old formulas.
Some great temples, such as that of Apollo on the island of Delos, held great amounts of property, both real and portable, the latter taking the form either of more or less precious offerings dedicated in the temple and its surrounding buildings, or of coined money.
Not only were public announcements of all sorts, such as we should make known by advertisements or posters, thus placed before the public, but all kinds of records and enactments — codes of law and political decrees; regulations for all matters, civil and religious; accounts and contracts, public and private; treaties between states; records of public and private benefactions and dedications, and all matters of administration; honours to the living and to the memory of the dead.
The simplest form of treaty is merely an alliance for a certain term of years, usually with some penalty for any breach of the conditions.
Buildings and repairs are also recorded, sometimes by the State, sometimes by individuals, whose piety and generosity are suitably honoured.
The decrees upon this matter frequently record the appointment of a ''proxenos'', and the conferring on him of certain benefits and privileges in return for his services; they also contain resolutions of thanks from the city served by the ''proxenos'', and record honours consequently conferred upon him.
''', ''sua pecunia'') and finally the appropriate verb for the work done, whether building, restoring, enlarging or otherwise improving.
(''hoc monumentum heredem non sequetur'', this monument is not to pass to the heir).
An important class of documents is the series of calendars that have been found in Rome and in the various Italian towns.
Naval and military expenditure is also fully accounted for; among other information there are records of the galley-slips at the different harbours of the Piraeus, and of the ships of the Athenian navy, with their names and condition.
The latest dated inscription in the ''Greek Corpus'' records the building of a bridge in Sicily in AD 1121.
On the other hand, the duties of a priest are often recorded; he had to see to the cleaning and care of the temple and its contents, to provide flowers and garlands for decorations and to supply the regular daily service.
Epigraphists are responsible for reconstructing, translating, and dating the trilingual inscription and finding any relevant circumstances.
But boundary stones were necessarily placed on the line which they defined.
Thus there are two well-known copies of a statue of Hercules by Lysippus, of which one is said to be the work of Lysippus, and the other states that it was made by Glycon (see images).
The person who has erected the monument and his relation to the deceased are often stated; or if a man has prepared the tomb in his lifetime, this also may be stated, '''V.S.F.'''
Often the same initial may have many different meanings according to the context.
The great majority of these fall into one of the classes already referred to.
In Egypt, inscriptions were often inscribed or painted upon inner walls of tombs, whether they referred to religious belief or ritual, or to the honours and possessions of the deceased; they were intended for his benefit and convenience rather than for the information of others, so as to perpetuate his familiar surroundings, not to make him live in the memory of his successors.
Many of these inscriptions might well be assigned to one of the categories already considered.
But in the case of owners' marks or names cut on vases or other objects, or of the dedication of such objects, the inscription is not necessarily contemporary; it may indeed be misleading, as in the case, mentioned with disapproval by Cicero, of using again old Greek statues and placing new dedicatory inscriptions on them in Roman times, a sort of "recycling": for instance, one of the statues of Athenian knights of the 5th century BC placed at the entrance of the Acropolis, had a later inscription cut on its base to make it serve as an equestrian statue of Germanicus, probably in 18 AD when he visited Athens.
Often an oath was prescribed, to be taken by representatives on each side; it was also not unusual to appeal to the god in whose temple the treaty was exhibited.
Greek epigraphy has unfolded in the hands of a different team, with different corpora.
Some were regarded as offices of high distinction and were open only to men of senatorial rank; among these were the Augurs, the Fetiales, the Salii; also the Sodales Divorum Augustorum in imperial times.
Sometimes they were cut on convenient rock faces, sometimes upon the walls of temples or other buildings.
In Greek inscriptions a vertical line or a dot, or dots, sometimes indicates the separation between sentences or words, but words are seldom separated by spaces as in modern printing, so that the text is continuous and no division of words exists.This is particularly the case with Greek inscriptions of the best period.
But later it was usual to give more detail as to the motive of the building, the name of the emperor or a magistrate giving the date, the authority for the building and the names and distinctions of the builders; then follows a description of the building, the source of the expenditure (e.g., '''S.P.
Typically the material is durable, but the durability might be an accident of circumstance, such as the baking of a clay tablet in a conflagration.
The media and the forms of the graphemes are diverse: engravings in stone or metal, scratches on rock, impressions in wax, embossing on cast metal, cameo or intaglio on precious stones, painting on ceramic or in fresco.
A special form of prayer consists of curses, which were often buried in the ground, probably with the intent to reach the infernal gods.
The ''tools'' used for making inscriptions varied with the material; most of them were some kind of chisel, usually with a square blade; early inscriptions were sometimes made on hard rock by successive blows with a punch or pointed hammer.
Informal inscribed texts are "graffiti" in its original sense.
Almost all legislative and many administrative measures take this form; often a decree prescribes how and where the inscription should be set up.
In the Eastern Empire the date from the creation of the world (5509 BC) is sometimes given; but the date of the Christian era is hardly ever used.
From the various Greek alphabets the different local Italian alphabets, including the Etruscan, were derived with various modifications.
Other precincts were protected in a more general manner from any invasion or violation.
Latin inscriptions may be classified on much the same lines as Greek; but certain broad distinctions may be drawn at the outset.
The detailed care that was taken in this last case, to ensure that the full weight of these objects was preserved, whether made into a new vessel or not, is recorded in other inscriptions.
In most alphabetic systems there are also found in inscriptions certain symbols which are not strictly alphabetic or phonetic in character.
In form, these are often hardly to be distinguished from public works of a secular character, which must be mentioned later.
The tendency of linear forms to become wedge-shaped is most conspicuous in cuneiform, but as has been noticed, the same tendency occurs in Greek inscriptions incised on bronze.
But there are some instances in which an inscription is set up merely as a record.
It follows that when only a portion of an inscription has been found, it is often possible to restore the whole in accordance with the accepted order.
It is the largest and most extensive collection of Latin inscriptions.
The cures are of the most varied kinds, from painful diseases or surgical cases to a lost boy and a broken cup.
Often, epigraphy and history are competences practiced by the same person.
But in later copies of well-known works, it has to be considered whether the name is that of the original artist or of the copyist who reproduced his work.
Arms, and especially shields, sometimes bear the name and corps of their owners.
Consequently, a priesthood was an office well paid and much sought after; and we actually find in later Greek times, especially in Asia Minor, that priesthoods were frequently sold, under proper guarantees and with due sureties as to the duties being carried out.
In Egypt, for instance, the hieroglyphs are carefully and delicately cut in early times, and in later periods become more careless and conventional.
Another kind of artist's or artificer's signature that is commoner in Roman times is to be found in the signatures of potters upon lamps and various kinds of vessels; they are usually impressed on the mould and stand out in relief on the terracotta or other material.
These are arts of expression or composition, writing in the strictly physical sense, and design or arrangement.
A very large class of inscriptions deals with the institution of ''proxenia''.
In many cases there is a detailed specification of building work which makes it possible, not only to realise all the technical details and processes employed, but also the whole plan and structure of a building.
Those of Athens are by far the most exactly known, owing to the immense number that have been discovered; and they are so strictly stereotyped that can be classified with the precision of algebraical formulae, and often dated to within a few years by this test alone.
But there are some which were expressly made to commemorate an important event, or to preserve a record.
dating methodologies in archaeology.)
The same applies to leaden water pipes which frequently bear dates and names of officials.
Such systems appear to have originated independently in different parts of the world — in Egypt, Mesopotamia, Crete, among the Hittites and in China and America.
A case where both statue and pedestal are preserved is offered by the ''Victory'', signed on its pedestal by Paeonius at Olympia.
Inscriptions vary greatly in size according to the position where they were intended to be read, their purpose, and the skill of the cutter.
(''vivus sibi fecit'').
Inscribed tombstones were set up over graves, which were usually placed along the chief roads leading out of a town, the most familiar example being the sacred way from Athens to Eleusis.
It follows that many inscriptions relating to religious matters take the form of political decrees or state documents, and therefore might, especially as far as form is concerned, be included in either category; but it is usually possible to classify them according to their contents and intention.
Other associations were more social in character and served as clubs, or as burial societies.
The ''Corpus'' is arranged geographically: all inscriptions from Rome are contained in volume 6.
It is recorded, for instance, what portions of a victim at any sacrifice were to be received by the priest.
These are described as being on the floor, on the walls, on shelves or in cases; they consisted of vases and other objects suitable for use in the temple service; ornaments and jewels; statuettes, mostly in gold and silver; weapons and tools; coined money; and bullion, mostly melted down from old offerings.
The formulae and preambles of such decrees vary considerably from place to place, and from period to period.
Sometimes a circular punch was used for '''''O''''' or a letter of which ''O'' formed a part.
The ''Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum'', begun by Mommsen and other scholars, has been published in Berlin since 1863, with wartime interruptions.
Such inscriptions may be classified as ''(a) Religious'' and ''(b) Political and Social''.
A special class of artists' signatures is offered by the names signed by Attic and other vase painters upon their vases.
The evidence for all of these is mainly to be found in inscriptions.
The other Greek system followed that derived from the Phoenicians, using the letters of the alphabet in their conventional order from one to nine, 10 to 90 and 100 to 900; in this arrangement obsolete letters were retained in their original places so as to give the requisite number of 27 symbols.
When they have a direct relation to the sculptures, reliefs or paintings with which they are associated, they often form a kind of pattern to fill the background or vacant spaces between the figures; but sometimes, especially in Mesopotamian statues or reliefs, they are cut right across the figures without any regard to the artistic effect.
The ritual appropriate to different divinities and temples varied greatly from place to place; and it was, therefore, necessary or desirable to set up notices in all public places of worship for the information and guidance of worshippers.
(''Hic iacet''), or some similar formula, and also, frequently, with a statement of boundaries and a prohibition of violation or further use — for instance, '''H.M.H.N.S.'''
Inscriptions on metal were nearly always incised, not cast.
Another interesting phase of Greek religion known to us mainly from inscriptions is offered by the shrines of healing.
Individual contributions have been made by epigraphers such as Georg Fabricius (1516–1571); August Wilhelm Zumpt (1815–1877); Theodor Mommsen (1817–1903); Emil Hübner (1834–1901); Franz Cumont (1868–1947); Louis Robert (1904–1985).
In later days, especially in the time of the Hellenistic kings, treaties tend to become more complicated and detailed in their provisions.
There are a few very early Roman inscriptions; but they do not become common until the 3rd century BC; from that time the letters took much the same forms as they preserve to the present day.
Often the only way to determine the meaning is to search through a list of initials, such as those given by modern Latin epigraphists, until a formula is found which fits the context.
These associations had each its own regulations, which were duly recorded in inscriptions; they varied greatly both in purpose and in character.
The individual letters or symbols usually face in the same direction as the writing, as a whole.
Later it became usual to give, in some detail, the reasons for the honours awarded; and in Hellenistic and Roman times, these became more and more detailed and fulsome in laudatory detail.
Some believe this  was modified and adopted by the Greeks at an uncertain date; the earliest Greek inscriptions are generally dated in the 7th century BC.
The office has been compared to the modern appointment of consuls, with the essential difference that the ''proxenos'' is always a citizen of the state in which he resides, not of that whose citizens and interests he assists.
Many other kinds of stone, both hard and soft, were often used, especially crystalline limestones, which do not easily take a smooth surface, and which, therefore, are often difficult to decipher, owing to accidental marks or roughness of the material.
These are very numerous; and the custom of placing the name of the dedicator in a conspicuous place on the building was prevalent, especially in the case of dedications by emperors or officials, or by public bodies.
In later times, the dating is commonly by "Indiction"; but as this only gives the number of the year within the 15-year period, but leaves that period undefined, such dating is very inconvenient except for merely temporary use.
Inscriptions were also often impressed from a mould upon wet clay before firing, in the case of tiles, amphora handles, etc., and in these cases often supply valuable information as to the buildings to which they belong or the place from which they took their origin.
The second, modern corpus is ''Inscriptiones Graecae'' arranged geographically under categories: decrees, catalogues, honorary titles, funeral inscriptions, various., all presented in Latin, to preserve the international neutrality of the field of classics.
Principles of epigraphy vary culture by culture, and the infant science in European hands concentrated on Latin inscriptions at first.
For us, accustomed as we are to a vast mass of books, newspapers and other printed or digital documents, it is difficult to realise the extensive use and great convenience assigned to inscriptions in ancient times.
Thus, in a frontier dispute between Corinth and Epidaurus, 151 citizens of Megara were appointed by name to arbitrate, and when the decision was disputed, 31 from among them revised and confirmed it.
In the north of Europe the Ogham inscriptions are alphabetic, and are apparently an independent invention on arbitrary lines, like the Morse code; but Runes, which were extensively used in the same region, are derived from the Greek or the Latin alphabets.
The first is ''Corpus Inscriptionum Graecarum'' of which four volumes came out, again at Berlin, 1825-1877.
It seems, therefore, the more remarkable that they should have been incised on permanent material such as bronze, marble or stone — and incised in the first instance, with a care and perfection of technique which have led to their survival to the present day, so as to preserve for us invaluable evidence as to the life and institutions of the people who made them.
In later times, when such faith-healing had probably become less efficacious, elaborate prescriptions of diet and hygiene are recorded.
It is therefore, best to consider all together under the heading of public decrees.
(''votum solvit libens merito''), or '''H.M.H.N.S.'''
In late Greek or Roman work it is usual to cut any inscription relative to a statue or relief upon the basis on which this is mounted; but short inscriptions such as dedications or artists' signatures are often placed in some inconspicuous position upon the work itself.
The Roman alphabet was among these, being based on the alphabet of Caere, a Chalcidian colony.
Laws all follow a fixed formula, according to the body which has passed them.
On the carved wooden chest of Cypselus, of about 600 BC hexameter verses were written, curving about among figures, and giving a description of each scene.
The regulation of athletic festivals, and the records of victors in their contests, also form a numerous class of inscriptions.
To the Graces it is not permissible to offer a goat or a pig."
There are not only records of lists of ephebi and of their guardians and instructors, but also decrees in honour of their services, especially in taking their due part in religious and other ceremonies, and resolutions of the ephebi themselves in honour of their officials.
(''Dis Manibus sacrum''), thus consecrating the tomb to the deceased as having become members of the body of ghosts or spirits of the dead.
Some are inscribed on the bases of statues set up to the recipient.
This class of inscription is in form not unlike the last, except that honours recorded are given for all sorts of services, private and public, to the State and to individuals.
This was the method of publication of all laws, decrees and official notices, of treaties and contracts, of honours to officials or private citizens, of religious dedications and prescriptions of ritual.
The custom of dating by Olympiads, which is familiar to us from later Greek and Roman writers, was rarely used in early Greece, except in connection with athletic victories.
Early inscriptions, which are often amateur work, are frequently very irregular in their cutting.
This volume has the greatest number of inscriptions; volume 6, part 8, fascicle 3 was just recently published (2000).
Most of them are based upon a decimal system, doubtless owing to the habit of counting on the fingers.
Clay was very extensively used for inscriptions in Mesopotamia and in Crete.
The US Library of Congress classifies epigraphy as one of the auxiliary sciences of history.
The series of Byzantine inscriptions continues practically without interruption to the present day; and Latin retains its use as a universal language in religious, public and private inscriptions.
One of the earliest relates to the prohibition of bacchanalian orgies in Italy; it takes the form of a message from the magistrates, stating the authority on which they acted.
A special form of contest was that in dramatic performances, of which many records have survived, both from Athens and from many other parts of the Greek world.
The bases of statues and reliefs often had inscriptions cut upon them for identification and record.
Sometimes they are placed on the bases of statues, sometimes in documents set up to record some particular benefaction or the construction of some public work.
A bronze tablet records in some detail the arrangements of this sort made when Locrians established a colony in Naupactus; another inscription relates to the Athenian colonisation of Salamis, in the 6th century BC.
In early times there is often no record beyond the name of the deceased in Athens, often with the name of his father and his deme.
"They are numerous and of all sorts — tombstones of every degree, lists of soldiers' burial clubs, certificates of discharge from service, schedules of time-expired men, dedications of altars, records of building or of engineering works accomplished.
An epigraph is any sort of text, from a single grapheme (such as marks on a pot that abbreviate the name of the merchant who shipped commodities in the pot) to a lengthy document (such as a treatise, a work of literature, or a hagiographic prescription).
On the other hand, the word ''lex'' (law) is usually applied to all decrees of the senate or other bodies, whether of legislative or of administrative character.
(''dedit, donavit'') often with additions such as '''L.M.'''
Inscriptions commemorative of victories or other great events were only in exceptional cases erected upon the spot; more often such memorials were set up in some great religious centre such as Delphi or Olympia.
It is not permissible to offer a sheep or a pig.
On the other hand, inscriptions which were intended to be seen by the public and to perpetuate a record of events, or to supply useful information, were usually placed in places of common resort, above all in temples and sacred precincts.
Egyptian hieroglyphs were solved using the Rosetta Stone, which was a multilingual stele in Classical Greek, Demotic Egyptian and Classical Egyptian hieroglyphs.
A well-known instance is offered by those set up by the commissioners called '''III.
A priesthood was frequently a political office and consequently is mentioned along with political honours in the list of a man's distinctions.
Such inscriptions are not common in Greek or Roman work; but frequently, especially in early Greek times, and on vases, the names of persons and even of objects are written beside them for the purpose of identification, and sometimes a speech issues from the mouth of the figure.
As regards mysteries, though there are numerous regulations affecting the arrangement of celebrations and the conduct of those participating, there is, as was to be expected, very little concerning the actual performances.
In the 3rd century and later it becomes common to introduce ''apices'' or ornamental ends to the strokes, a custom which prevails to the present day in our ordinary capital letters.
Again, the lists of offerings dedicated in the temple and other buildings enable us to realise almost visually the appearance of their contents.
It was prohibited to cut wood or to remove earth and stones, or to drive any beasts into some precincts; the right of erecting booths was either restricted or denied altogether.
(see for example, the ''"statue of Hercules/Heracles"'' below)
Most Semitic alphabets, including Phoenician, read from right to left; and the earliest Greek inscriptions follow the same direction.
Its date is 195 BC.
Such prohibitions are frequent, and often relate to the need of ceremonial purity in all worshippers entering a sacred precinct.
These might be exercised either in Rome itself, or in the verious municipalities of the empire.
But the direction from left to right became regular in Greece after the 6th century BC, and consequently is adopted by the Romans and in all European systems.
But when the information from hundreds of such inscriptions is collected together, "you can trace the whole policy of the Imperial Government in the matter of recruiting, to what extent and till what date legionaries were raised in Italy; what contingents for various branches of the service were drawn from the provinces, and which provinces provided most; how far provincials garrisoned their own countries, and which of them, like the British recruits, were sent as a measure of precaution to serve elsewhere; or, finally, at what epoch the empire grew weak enough to require the enlistment of barbarians from beyond its frontiers."
Some other cities followed Athens in the form of their decrees, with such local variations as were required; others were more independent in their development, and different magistracies or forms of government had various results.
In all these cases the figures and the inscription are part of a common design, whether carried out by the same hand or not.
Doubtless similar inscriptions were set up in many places in Greece.
The metal most commonly used for inscriptions was bronze: flat tablets of this were often made for affixing to the walls of temples and other buildings.
For example, the Behistun inscription is an official document of the Achaemenid Empire engraved on native rock at a location in Iran.
In Greece, the best work was done in the 5th and 4th centuries BC in Athens; the letters were all exact and regular in shape, with no adventitious ornaments, and were, especially in the 5th century, usually exactly aligned with the letters above and below, as well as those on each side.
Many of them had a definitely religious purpose, in the worship of certain gods; sometimes an alien community was given special permission to worship its own god or gods in its own way.
But it is obvious that there is an immense variety in the information that either a man himself or his friend may wish to record.
These elaborate inventories were checked and revised by each successive board of administrators, and gave the best possible security against any robbery or peculation.
Similar accounts have been preserved of the building of the Parthenon, spread over 15 years; in the case of both the Parthenon and the Erechtheum, there are included the payments made to those who made the sculptures.
There are in the first place lists of priests, some of them covering long periods and even going back to mythical times; there are also lists of treasures and administrators, who were usually lay officials appointed for the purpose, either by election or by lot.
There were also many more menial offices in the service of temples which were carried out by slaves.
Here have been found, on large slabs of inscription, compiled, in all probability, from earlier documents, lists of the cures effected by Apollo and Asclepius.
In any important temple this must evidently have been far more than the priest or his family could consume, and accordingly it must have been sold, and so constituted a considerable source of income.
Apart from numerals, the use of initials in the place of complete words was not common in early times.
However, recent work by Maya epigraphers and linguists has yielded a considerable amount of information on this complex writing system.
These throw much light on her relations with them at verious periods.(Cf.
In addition to inscriptions which are concerned with the internal affairs of various cities, there are many others recording treaties or other agreements of an international character between various cities and states.
When these are attached to statues, it is sometimes doubtful whether the name is that of the man who actually made the statue, or of the master whose work it reproduces.
A similar custom in Mesopotamia gave rise to the so-called ''cuneiform'' system.
An institution as to which our knowledge is mainly derived from inscriptions is the ephebic system at Athens.
The commonest and most essential act of worship was sacrifice; an example of the simplest for of prescription is to be seen in the inscription on the relief from Thasos in the Louvre:— "To the Nymphs and to Apollo the leader of the Nymphs, the worshipper may, if he so choose, sacrifice a male and a female victim.
A remarkable feature about such associations is that the lists of members of many of them include the names of women and of slaves, thus contrasting with the civic basis of established religion in Greece, and anticipating a religion in which "there can be neither Jew nor Greek, there can be neither bond nor free, there can be no male and female."
This is by far the most numerous class of inscriptions, both Greek and Latin.
In other cases a list of gods by whom the two parties must swear is prescribed.
But in the case of most independent cities, the date is given by the name of an annual magistrate, and thus the year is precisely indicated.
A certain number of these dating from republican times are of considerable interest.
Some common formulae such as '''V.S.L.M.'''
A notable instance is the arsenal of Philon at the Peiraeus which has been completely reconstructed on paper by architects from the building specification.
In cases of dispute it was not uncommon for the two disputants to appoint a third party as arbitrator.
In all such cases it was the custom for a full record to be preserved on stone and set up in the places concerned.
The facts directly commemorated are rarely important."
In early times each Greek State had its own alphabet; but in the year 403 BC (the archonship of Eucleides) the Ionian alphabet, which is the one used now for Greek capital letters, was officially adopted by Athens, and soon became universal in Greece.
In Roman inscriptions it was usual to separate the words by dots.
Occasionally such tablets were made of silver or gold; and inscriptions were often incised on vessels made of any of these metals.
There was also a distinction drawn between offices that might be held only by persons of senatorial rank, those that were assigned to persons of equestrian rank, and those of a less distinguished kind.
These were incised on bronze or stone, and set up in places of public resort in the cities concerned, or in common religious centres such as Olympia and Delphi.
The offices held by the person commemorated, and the distinctions conferred upon him are enumerated in a regularly established order (''cursus honorum''), either beginning with the lower and proceeding step by step to the higher, or in reverse order with the highest first.
The most notable of these is the precinct of Asclepius at Epidaurus.
In certain inscriptions a cross () was used to indicate the beginning of an inscription, especially when its direction was erratic.
The Mesopotamian linear symbols developed mainly for technical reasons, into a wedge-shaped or cuneiform system, which was adopted in modified forms and applied to different languages through some thousands of years, Sumerian, Babylonian, Assyrian and Persian, until it was superseded, after the conquests of Alexander, by Greek.
A person using the methods of epigraphy is called an ''epigrapher'' or ''epigraphist''.
In addition to the dedication of temples, we find inscriptions recording the construction of aqueducts, roads, especially on milestones, baths, basilicas, porticos and many other works of public utility.
Another elements in Greek religion which is known to us almost exclusively by means of inscriptions, is to be found in the religious associations that existed in many Greek cities, apart from the organisation of state religion, though sometimes recognised by it.
Sometimes more detailed prescriptions are given for the whole organisation of a festival; thus, at Andania, in Messenia, the arrangements for the celebration of the local Eleusinia, the dress of the participants, the officials and policing, are very fully described.
