A ketogenic diet (high-fat, low-carbohydrate, adequate-protein) appears to decrease the number of seizures and eliminate seizures in some.
In those with absence seizures, ethosuximide or valproate are recommended; valproate is particularly effective in myoclonic seizures and tonic or atonic seizures.
###Neurocutaneous syndromes
Video and EEG monitoring may be useful in difficult cases.
The tongue may be bitten at either the tip or on the sides during a seizure.
They all involve loss of consciousness and typically happen without warning.
There appears to be a specific syndrome which includes coeliac disease, epilepsy and calcifications in the brain.
In the developing world, many deaths are due to untreated epilepsy leading to falls or status epilepticus.
Adverse effects from medications are reported in 10 to 90% of people, depending on how and from whom the data is collected.
Phenytoin, carbamazepine and valproate appear to be equally effective in both partial and generalized seizures.
Of these, one-third begin as generalized seizures from the start, affecting both hemispheres of the brain.
There is evidence that epileptic seizures are usually not a random event.
Localized weakness, known as Todd's paralysis, may also occur after a partial seizure.
Of those with generalized seizures, more than 80% can be well controlled with medications while this is true in only 50% of people with partial seizures.
Researchers, statistically-minded epidemiologists, and other specialized groups may choose to use the older definition or a definition of their own devising.
Gene therapy is being studied in some types of epilepsy.
Psychological methods should not, however, be used to replace medications.
##Unknown cause (e.g.
Efforts in one part of Central America to decrease rates of pork tapeworm resulted in a 50% decrease in new cases of epilepsy.
Nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy, often misdiagnosed as nightmares, was considered to be a parasomnia but later identified to be an epilepsy syndrome.
Normally, after an excitatory neuron fires it becomes more resistant to firing for a period of time.
Diagnostic imaging by CT scan and MRI is recommended after a first non-febrile seizure to detect structural problems in and around the brain.
In the developing world its onset is more common in older children and young adults due to the higher rates of trauma and infectious diseases.
A little, however, is known about both the cellular and network mechanisms of epilepsy.
In some places physicians are required by law to report if a person has had a seizure to the licensing body while in others the requirement is only that they encourage the person in question to report it themselves.
In the United Kingdom, a full national private pilot license requires the same standards as a professional driver's license.
Those with epilepsy or seizures are typically denied a pilot license.
If a seizure lasts longer than 5&nbsp;minutes or if there are more than two seizures in an hour without a return to a normal level of consciousness between them, it is considered a medical emergency known as status epilepticus.
The mainstay treatment of epilepsy is anticonvulsant medications, possibly for the person's entire life.
Up to a quarter of people stop treatment due to adverse effects.
In the developing world, 75% of people are either untreated or not appropriately treated.
##Cryptogenic or symptomatic (e.g.
The risk of suicide is increased between two and six times in those with epilepsy.
Classification of epilepsies and particularly of epilepsy syndromes will change with advances in research.
The oldest known detailed record of the disease itself is in the ''Sakikku'', a Babylonian cuneiform medical text from 10671046 BC.
This classification was widely accepted but has also been criticized mainly because the underlying causes of epilepsy (which are a major determinant of clinical course and prognosis) were not covered in detail.
The choice of anticonvulsant is based on seizure type, epilepsy syndrome, other medications used, other health problems, and the person's age and lifestyle.
Some evidence links epilepsy and coeliac disease and non-celiac gluten sensitivity, while other evidence does not.
Medications that alter immune function, such as intravenous immunoglobulins, are poorly supported by evidence.
The risk is greatest for tumors in the temporal lobe and those that grow slowly.
Attacks of the movement disorder paroxysmal dyskinesia may be taken for epileptic seizures.
In the United States the time needed without a seizure is determined by each state and is between three months and one year.
Not all cases of epilepsy are lifelong, and many people improve to the point that treatment is no longer needed.
One predictor of long-term outcome is the number of seizures that occur in the first six months.
#Crytogenic (presumed symptomatic nature in which the cause has not been identified)
A single medication is recommended initially; if this is not effective, switching to a single other medication is recommended.
People of the time would spit on their chest believing that this would keep the problem from affected them.
The notable exception to this divine and spiritual view was that of the school of Hippocrates.
Less radical diets are easier to tolerate and may be effective.
When a person is admitted to hospital after an epileptic seizure the diagnostic workup results preferably in the seizure itself being classified (e.g.
Other mass lesions such as cerebral cavernous malformations and arteriovenous malformations have risks as high as 4060%.
###Cerebrovascular disorders
The cause of this is unclear.
Epilepsy can have adverse effects on social and psychological well-being.
The Epilepsy Foundation, some hospitals, and some individuals also run support groups in the United States.
These include depression, anxiety, obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD), and migraine.
In Africa, 90% do not get treatment.
Categorization for these cases was made somewhat arbitrarily.
About 6% of those with epilepsy have seizures that are often triggered by specific events and are known as reflex seizures.
The ability to categorize a case of epilepsy into a specific syndrome occurs more often with children since the onset of seizures is commonly early.
Instead of referring to it as the ''sacred disease'', he used the term ''great disease'', giving rise to the modern term ''grand mal'', used for tonic–clonic seizures.
In the definition, epilepsy is now called a disease, rather than a disorder.
While generalized seizures in horses are fairly easy to diagnose, it may be more difficult in non-generalized seizures and EEGs may be useful.
Those with epilepsy are at about twice the risk of being involved in a motor vehicular collision and thus in many areas of the world are not allowed to drive or only able to drive if certain conditions are met.
In Ancient Rome people did not eat or drink with the same pottery as that used by someone who was affected.
Many countries require one to three years without seizures.
Nearly 80% of cases occur in the developing world.
#Provoked (a specific systemic or environmental factor is the predominant cause of the seizures)
Epilepsy cannot usually be cured, but medication can control seizures effectively in about 70% of cases.
Loss of bowel or bladder control may occur during a seizure.
They thought of epilepsy as a form of spiritual possession, but also associated the condition with genius and the divine.
Genetics is believed to be involved in the majority of cases, either directly or indirectly.
The estimated prevalence of active epilepsy (as of 2012) is in the range 3–10 per 1,000, with active epilepsy defined as someone with epilepsy who has had a least one unprovoked seizure in the last five years.
Often people do not remember what happened during this time.
Despite his work detailing the physical origins of the disease, his view was not accepted at the time.
In developed countries the number of cases a year has decreased in children and increased among the elderly between the 1970s and 2003.
In those whose seizures do not respond to medication, then surgery, neurostimulation, or dietary changes may be considered.
Epilepsy resulted in economic costs in Europe of around 15.5 billion Euros in 2004.
##Provoking factors
Spinal precautions are generally not needed.
Countries that require physician reporting include Sweden, Austria, Denmark and Spain.
Some types of seizures may change brain structure, while others appear to have little effect.
Resolution of epilepsy, unfortunately, does not guarantee that it will not return.
Known genetic mutations are directly linked to a small proportion of cases.
###Other neurologic single gene disorders
The ''idiopathic'' (unknown cause) category of the 2011 classification includes syndromes in which the general clinical features and/or age specificity strongly point to a presumed genetic cause.
Gastroesophageal reflux may cause arching of the back and twisting of the head to the side in infants, which may be mistaken for tonic-clonic seizures.
Failure of the blood–brain barrier may also be a causal mechanism as it would allow substances in the blood to enter the brain.
Mild brain injury increases the risk about two-fold while severe brain injury increases the risk seven-fold.
This may be partly done by imaging the brain and performing blood tests.
In epilepsy, the resistance of excitatory neurons to fire during this period is decreased.
Partial seizures are often preceded by certain experiences, known as auras.
In India and China, epilepsy may be used as justification to deny marriage.
If a person has a previous diagnosis of epilepsy with previous imaging, repeating the imaging is usually not needed even if there are subsequent seizures.
##Mostly acquired causes
This may occur due to changes in ion channels or inhibitory neurons not functioning properly.
tonic-clonic) and in the underlying disease being identified (e.g.
In clonic seizures there is shaking of the limbs in unison.
Psychosis after a seizure is relatively common, occurring in 6–10% of people.
childhood absence epilepsy)
In people with coeliac disease or non-celiac gluten sensitivity and occipital calcifications, a gluten-free diet may decrease the frequency of seizures.
Evil spirits continued to be blamed until at least the 17th century.
Countries that require the individual to report include the UK and New Zealand and the physician may report if they believe the individual has not already.
##Symptomatic/cryptogenic (e.g.
In epilepsy, seizures tend to recur, and have no immediate underlying cause.
Different studies showed that in many cases seizure-like attacks in apparent treatment-resistant epilepsy have a cardiovascular cause.
Neurostimulation may be another option in those who are not candidates for surgery.
Some procedures such as a corpus callosotomy are attempted in an effort to decrease the number of seizures rather than cure the condition.
Other risks include Alzheimer's disease, multiple sclerosis, tuberous sclerosis, and autoimmune encephalitis.
In about half, the first agent is effective; a second single agent helps in about 13% and a third or two agents at the same time may help an additional 4%.
hippocampal sclerosis).
In India epilepsy is estimated to result in costs of 1.7&nbsp;billion USD or 0.5% of the GDP.
Between 6 and 20% of epilepsy is believed to be due to head trauma.
Epilepsy can often be confirmed with an electroencephalogram (EEG), but a normal test does not rule out the condition.
In his landmark work ''On the Sacred Disease'', he proposed that epilepsy was not divine in origin and instead was a medically treatable problem originating in the brain.
Epilepsy is characterized by a long-term risk of recurrent seizures.
While figuring out a specific epileptic syndrome is often attempted, it is not always possible.
Three types have been shown to be effective in those who do not respond to medications: vagus nerve stimulation, anterior thalamic stimulation, and closed-loop responsive stimulation.
These include genes for ion channels themselves, enzymes, GABA, and G protein-coupled receptors.
If both twins are affected, most of the time they have the same epileptic syndrome (70–90%).
Throughout ancient history, the disease was thought to be a spiritual condition.
The risk of epilepsy following meningitis is less than 10%; that disease more commonly causes seizures during the infection itself.
Around 900 BC, Punarvasu Atreya described epilepsy as loss of consciousness; this definition was carried forward into the Ayurvedic text of Charaka Samhita (about 400 BC).
People with epilepsy in some areas of the world experience stigma due to the condition.
In tonic-clonic seizure, bites to the sides are more common.
Lennox-Gastaut syndrome)
SUDEP appears to be partly related to the frequency of generalized tonic-clonic seizures and accounts for about 15% of epilepsy related deaths.
Common procedures include cutting out the hippocampus via an anterior temporal lobe resection, removal of tumors, and removing parts of the neocortex.
It is not recommended as a routine part of the diagnosis of epilepsy.
Cases of epilepsy may be organized into epilepsy syndromes by the specific features that are present.
The first modern treatment, phenobarbital, was developed in 1912, with phenytoin coming into use in 1938.
The goal of surgery is total control of seizures and this may be achieved in 60–70% of cases.
For example, in those who are sensitive to light, using a small television, avoiding video games, or wearing dark glasses may be useful.
In children it is typically only needed after a second seizure.
Occasionally a spinning potter's wheel was used, perhaps a reference to photosensitive epilepsy.
##Symptomatic (e.g.
According to Apuleius and other ancient physicians, in order detect epilepsy it was common to lit a piece of ''gagates'', whose smoke's would trigger the seizure.
This is partly related to appropriate medications not being available or being too expensive.
Tongue bites are also relatively common in psychogenic non-epileptic seizures.
People with cerebral palsy have an increased risk of epilepsy, with half of people with spastic quadriplegia and spastic hemiplegia having the disease.
Stigma is commonly experienced, around the world, by those with epilepsy.
This is due in part to the effect of inhibitory neurons, electrical changes within the excitatory neuron, and the negative effects of adenosine.
However, it is unknown under which circumstances the brain shifts into the activity of a seizure with its excessive synchronization.
As of 2011, no effective mechanism to predict seizures has been developed.
This has been attributed partly to better survival following strokes in the elderly.
While many cases are not preventable, efforts to reduce head injuries, provide good care around the time of birth, and reduce environmental parasites such as the pork tapeworm may be effective.
Melatonin, as of 2016, is insufficiently supported by evidence.
These features include the age that seizure begin, the seizure types, EEG findings, among others.
The stigma may result in some people with epilepsy denying that they have ever had seizures.
In children additional tests may be required such as urine biochemistry and blood testing looking for metabolic disorders.
This requires a period of ten years without seizures while off medications.
Epilepsy becomes more common as people age.
Epilepsy may occur as a result of a number of other conditions including tumors, strokes, head trauma, previous infections of the central nervous system, genetic abnormalities, and as a result of brain damage around the time of birth.
In contrast to the classification of seizures which focuses on what happens during a seizure, the classification of epilepsies focuses on the underlying causes.
Two-thirds begin as partial seizures (which affect one hemisphere of the brain) which may then progress to generalized seizures.
There are a number of medications available.
Most of those with the disorder (80%) are in the developing world.
Syndromes in which causes are not clearly identified are difficult to match with categories of the current classification of epilepsy.
###Degenerative and other neurologic conditions
Epilepsy that occurs as a result of other issues can be prevented.
Learning disabilities are common in those with the condition, and especially among children with epilepsy.
If someone attends the emergency room with a seizure but returns to normal quickly, imaging tests may be done at a later point.
When it occurs it typically lasts for seconds to minutes but may rarely last for a day or two.
Other factors increasing the risk of a poor outcome include little response to the initial treatment, generalized seizures, a family history of epilepsy, psychiatric problems, and waves on the EEG representing generalized epileptiform activity.
This increase is between 1.6 and 4.1 fold greater than that of the general population and is often related to: the underlying cause of the seizures, status epilepticus, suicide, trauma, and sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP).
Noninvasive stereotactic radiosurgery is, as of 2012, being compared to standard surgery for certain types of epilepsy.
Approximately 20% of the people seen at epilepsy clinics have PNES and of those who have PNES about 10% also have epilepsy; separating the two based on the seizure episode alone without further testing is often difficult.
###Developmental anomalies of cerebral structure
However, extensive screening have failed to identify many single gene variants of large effect.
In ancient Rome, epilepsy was known as the ''morbus comitialis'' ('disease of the assembly hall') and was seen as a curse from the gods.
Epileptic seizures are episodes that can vary from brief and nearly undetectable to long periods of vigorous shaking.
In the United States, the Federal Aviation Administration does not allow those with epilepsy to get a commercial pilot license.
It can affect people economically, socially and culturally.
Following surgery, medications may be slowly withdrawn in many cases.
This typically occurs on both sides of the body.
In particular, it aims to clarify when an "enduring predisposition" according to the 2005 conceptual definition is present.
Common locations for the start of seizures and neural networks have been found to be affected in the majority of epilepsy.
Imepitoin is also used in dogs.
##Mostly genetic or developmental causation
It is unclear how to decrease its risk.
In northern Italy, epilepsy was once traditionally known as Saint Valentine's malady.
Partial seizures begin in one hemisphere of the brain while generalized seizures begin in both hemispheres.
###Perinatal and infantile causes
Of those who have had a stroke, 2–4% develop epilepsy.
In the United Kingdom strokes account for 15% of cases and it is believed to be the cause in 30% of the elderly.
In Canada if an individual has had no more than one seizure, they may be considered after five years for a limited license if all other testing is normal.
Operant-based biofeedback based on the EEG waves has some support in those who do not respond to medications.
In the United Kingdom, it is estimated that 40–60% of deaths are possibly preventable.
People with epilepsy are at an increased risk of death.
This then results in a specific area from which seizures may develop, known as a "seizure focus".
This may require medical help to keep the airway open and protected; a nasopharyngeal airway may be useful for this.
The diagnosis involves ruling out other conditions that might cause similar symptoms such as fainting and determining if another cause of seizures is present such as alcohol withdrawal or electrolyte problems.
Tonic seizures produce constant contractions of the muscles.
The term seizure threshold is used to indicate the amount of stimulus necessary to bring about a seizure.
Some childhood epilepsy syndromes are included in the unknown cause category in which the cause is presumed genetic, for instance benign rolandic epilepsy.
Factors around the neuron include ion concentrations, synaptic plasticity and regulation of transmitter breakdown by glial cells.
Avoidance therapy consists of minimizing or eliminating triggers.
Seizure threshold is lowered in epilepsy.
It is the cause of about 1% of emergency department visits (2% for emergency departments for children) in the United States.
Some medications are associated with birth defects when used in pregnancy.
