Obiang answered he refused to step aside because the new constitution was not retroactive and the two term limit would only become applicable from 2016.
In addition, the nation has been told it has to adopt political reforms allowing for effective democracy and the respect for human rights.
The economy was based on large cacao and coffee plantations and logging concessions and the workforce was mostly immigrant contract labour from Liberia, Nigeria, and Cameroun.
The MPP called for a peaceful protest at the Plaza de la Mujer square on 15 May.
Most African ethnic groups speak Bantu languages."
The Fang constitute 80% of the population and comprise around 67 clans.
Television Nacional, the television network, is state operated.
In addition to that, and despite the repeated attempts of the state media to link Enrique to an illegal political party, he firmly stated that he was not affiliated with any political parties in the country.
Bantu migrations between the 18th and 19th centuries brought the coastal ethno-linguistic groups as well as the Fang.
This proved a feeble instrument, and, with growing pressure for change from the UN, Madrid gave way to the currents of nationalism.
According to the World Bank, Equatorial Guinea has the highest GNI (Gross National Income) per capita of any Sub-Saharan country.
Education is free and compulsory for children between the ages of 6 and 14.
The insular region consists of the islands of Bioko (formerly ''Fernando Pó'') in the Gulf of Guinea and Annobón, a small volcanic island south of the equator.
There was also a trickle of immigration from the neighbouring Portuguese islands, in the form of escaped slaves and prospective planters.
Fa d’Ambô, a Portuguese creole, has vigorous use in Annobón Province, in Malabo (the capital), and among some speakers in Equatorial Guinea's mainland.
After independence, thousands of Equatorial Guineans went to Spain.
The 26 May 2013 elections combined the senate, lower house and mayoral contests all in a single package.
The US Agency for International Development entered into a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with Obiang, in April 2006, to establish a Social Development Fund in the country, implementing projects in the areas of health, education, women's affairs and the environment.
Obiang was re-elected to serve an additional term in 2009 in an election deemed by the African Union as "in line with electoral law".
Equatorial Guinea lies between latitudes 4°N and 2°S, and longitudes 5° and 12°E.
In their censorship efforts, they would redirect all the searches performed online to the official government website.
The new constitution also introduced the figure of a vice president and it also called for the creation of a 70-member senate with 55 elected by the people and the 15 remaining designated by the president.
The Annobón population, native to Angola, was introduced by the Portuguese via São Tomé island.
Obiang re-appointed Prime Minister Ignacio Milam Tang in 2010.
Under President Obiang, the illiteracy rate dropped from 73% to 13%, and the number of primary school students has risen from 65,000 in 1986 to more than 100,000 in 1994.
Since August 1979 some 12 real and perceived unsuccessful coup attempts have occurred.
Rio Muni also includes several small offshore islands, such as Corisco, Elobey Grande, and Elobey Chico.
There is one GSM mobile telephone operator, with coverage of Malabo, Bata, and several mainland cities.
Equatorial Guinea spans several ecoregions.
In 2009 the university produced the first 110 national doctors.
Pygmies likely formerly lived in the continental region that is now Equatorial Guinea, but only isolated pockets in southern Río Muni now remain of this people.
A November 2004 report named Mark Thatcher as a financial backer of the 2004 Equatorial Guinea coup d'état attempt organized by Simon Mann.
Equatorial Guinea consists of two parts, an insular and a mainland region.
The MPP coordinator Enrique Nsolo Nzo was arrested and the official state media portrayed him as an individual who was planning to destabilize the country and depose the president.
Pre-independence Equatorial Guinea exported cocoa, coffee and timber mostly to its colonial ruler, Spain, but also to Germany and the UK.
Many residents of Bioko can also speak Spanish, particularly in the capital, and the local trade language Pichinglis, an English-based creole.
Towards the middle 1970s the Macias regime came under grave accusations of being guilty of mass killings.
Equatorial Guinea has also been a destination for fortune-seeking European settlers from Britain, France and Germany.
In February 2012, Equatorial Guinea's foreign minister signed an agreement with the IILP on the promotion of Portuguese in the country.
It really permitted Fernando Po to become one of Africa's most productive agricultural areas after the Second World War.
However, when a British parliamentary and press entourage toured the country as guests of the president in 2011, the ''The Guardian'' newspaper reported that very few of Equatorial Guinea's citizens seem to be benefiting from improvements, with reports of empty three-lane highways and many empty buildings.
However, when Equatorial Guinea applied to extend the deadline for completing EITI validation, the EITI Board did not agree to the extension.
Under the regime of dictator Francisco Macias, education had been significantly neglected, with few children receiving any type of education.
Bioko, the site of the capital, Malabo, lies about  off the coast of Cameroon.
China and Cuba also gave different forms on financial, military, and technical assistance to Equatorial Guinea, which gave them a measure of influence in Equatorial Guinea.
In November 2011, a new constitution was approved.
The treaty of Paris in 1900 left Spain with the continental enclave of Rio Muni, a mere 26,000&nbsp;km2 out of the 300,000 stretching east to the Ubangi river which the Spaniards had initially claimed.
In June 1984, the First Hispanic-African Cultural Congress was convened to explore the cultural identity of Equatorial Guinea.
Bioko Island is the northernmost part of Equatorial Guinea and is the site of the country's capital, Malabo.
On 1 January 1985, the country became the first non-Francophone African member of the franc zone, adopting the CFA franc as its currency.
The British had settled some 2,000 Sierra Leoneans and freed slaves during their brief occupation of the island in the early nineteenth century, and a small current of immigration from West Africa and the West Indies continued after the departure of the British.
Equatorial Guinea is famous for the swimmers Eric Moussambani, nicknamed "Eric the Eel", and Paula Barila Bolopa, "Paula the Crawler", who had astoundingly slow times at the 2000 Summer Olympics.
2% of the population follows Islam (mainly Sunni).
It was then required to meet a number of obligations to do so, including committing to working with civil society and companies on EITI implementation, appointing a senior individual to lead on EITI implementation, and publishing a fully costed Work Plan with measurable targets, a timetable for implementation and an assessment of capacity constraints.
The remaining 5% practise Animism, Bahá'í Faith, and other beliefs.
The country is a member of the African Union, Francophonie and the CPLP.
New land regulations in 1904-1905 favoured Spaniards, and most of the big planters of later years arrived in the islands from Spain following these new regulations.
While the country is nominally a multiparty democracy, elections have generally been considered a sham.
The current president of Equatorial Guinea is Teodoro Obiang.
Their program consists of twice-yearly indoor residual spraying (IRS), the introduction of artemisinin combination treatment (ACTs), the use of intermittent preventive treatment in pregnant women (IPTp), and the introduction of very high coverage with long-lasting insecticide-treated mosquito nets (LLINs).
The Annobonese ethnic community tried to gain membership in the Community of Portuguese Language Countries (CPLP).
In July 1970, Macias Nguema created a single-party state and made himself president for life in 1972.
The country also has no documented heritage listed in the Memory of the World Programme of UNESCO nor any intangible cultural heritage listed in the UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage List.
Simon Mann was released from prison on 3 November 2009 for humanitarian reasons.
Spain had neglected to occupy the large area in the Bight of Biafra to which it had Treaty rights, and the French had been busily expanding their occupation at the expense of the area claimed by Spain.
Spain thereby tried to gain access to a source of slaves controlled by British merchants.
The Bata Medical School is supported principally by the government of Cuba and staffed by Cuban medical educators and physicians.
, Equatorial Guinea is the third-largest oil producer in Sub-Saharan Africa.
The 1982 constitution of Equatorial Guinea, written with help from the UN, gives him extensive powers, including naming and dismissing members of the cabinet, making laws by decree, dissolving the Chamber of Representatives, negotiating and ratifying treaties and serving as commander in chief of the armed forces.
Most of the Asian population is Chinese, with small numbers of Indians.
In June 2014 four cases of polio were reported, the country's first outbreak of the disease.
In Río Muni, the average temperature is about .
From 1827 to 1843, the United Kingdom had a base on Bioko to combat the slave trade that was moved to Sierra Leone upon agreement with Spain in 1843.
The USSR was in return to supply fish to Equatorial Guinea.
The international TV programme RTVGE is available via satellites in Africa, Europa, and the Americas and worldwide via Internet.
Río Muni region lies within the Atlantic Equatorial coastal forests ecoregion except for patches of Central African mangroves on the coast, especially in the Muni River estuary.
Equatorial Guinea has a tropical climate with distinct wet and dry seasons.
Spanish is not spoken much in Annobón.
According to the ''Encyclopedia of the Stateless Nations'' (2002) 7% of Bioko islanders were Igbo, an ethnic group from southeastern Nigeria.
Between 1914 and 1930, an estimated 10,000 Liberians went to Fernando Po under a Labour Treaty that was stopped altogether in 1930.
The same body claimed that a quarter of the whole population had fled abroad, while 'the prisons are overflowing and to all intents and purposes form one vast concentration camp'.
Most of the media companies practice heavy self-censorship, and are banned by law from criticising public figures.
1/1998 January 21).
Fernando Po thus continued to suffer from labour shortages.
At the turn of the century, the plantations of Fernando Po were largely in the hands of a black Creole elite, later known as Fernandinos.
Reporters Without Borders ranks President Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo among its "predators" of press freedom.
President Barack Obama posed for an official photograph with President Obiang at a New York reception.
Rio Muni had a small population, officially put at a little over 100,000 in the 1930s, and escape over the frontiers into Cameroun or Gabon was very easy.
Their efforts resulted in a reduction in all-cause under-five mortality from 152 to 55 deaths per 1,000 live births (down 64%).
For years, the official languages were Spanish (the local variant is Equatoguinean Spanish) and French, Portuguese was also adopted as an official language later in 2010.
The anti-corruption lobby Transparency International has put Equatorial Guinea in the top 12 of its list of most corrupt states.
The country ranks 144th on the UN's 2014 Human Development Index.
Indigenous languages include Fang, Bube, Benga, Ndowe, Balengue, Bujeba, Bissio, Gumu, Pichinglis, Fa d’Ambô and the nearly extinct Baseke.
It is still the language of education and administration.
, approximately 40% of the population subscribed to mobile telephone services.
Another 100,000 Equatorial Guineans went to Cameroon, Gabon, and Nigeria because of the dictatorship of Francisco Macías Nguema.
In between there is gradual transition.
There are now 51 Model Schools.
Freedom House, a pro-democracy and human rights NGO, described Obiang as one of the world’s “most kleptocratic living autocrats,” and complained about the US government welcoming his administration and buying oil from it.
The Obiang regime is an ally of the USA.
He called it ''Formosa'' ("Beautiful"), but it quickly took on the name of its European discoverer.
Despite its name, no part of the country's territory lies on the equator—it is in the northern hemisphere, except for the insular Annobón Province, which is about 155&nbsp;km south of the equator.
Some Equatorial Guinean communities are also found in Latin America, the United States, Portugal, and France.
'''Equatorial Guinea''' (, , ), officially the '''Republic of Equatorial Guinea''' (, , ), is a country located in Central Africa, with an area of .
The advocacy group Global Witness has been lobbying the United States to act against Obiang's son, Teodorin, who is vice-president and a government minister.
Politically, one can divide the post-war colonial history into three fairly distinct phases: up to 1959, when its status was raised from 'colonial' to 'provincial', taking a leaf out of the approach of the Portuguese Empire; between 1960 and 1968, when Madrid attempted a partial decolonisation which should, as it was hoped, conserve the territory as an integral segment of the Spanish system; and onwards from 1968, when the territory became an independent Republic.
From the opening years of the twentieth century, the Fernandinos were put on the defensive by a new generation of Spanish immigrants.
In 2008 the country became a candidate of the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative – an international project meant to promote openness about government oil revenues – but failed to qualify by an April 2010 deadline.
The country has one university, the Universidad Nacional de Guinea Ecuatorial (UNGE), with a campus in Malabo and a Faculty of Medicine located in Bata on the mainland.
Apart from allegedly committing genocide against the ethnic minority Bubi people, he ordered the deaths of thousands of suspected opponents, closed down churches and presided over the economy's collapse as skilled citizens and foreigners left the country.
Their pressures were weak, but the general trend in West Africa was not.
The mainland region, Río Muni, is bordered by Cameroon on the north and Gabon on the south and east.
Equatorial Guinea is the only sovereign African state in which Spanish is an official language.
67.6% of Equatorial Guineans can speak it, especially those living in the capital, Malabo.
During the electoral contest, the ruling party decided to have their own internal elections which were later scrapped as none of the president's favorite candidates was leading the internal lists.
There is little popular music coming out of Equatorial Guinea.
Asphalt now covers more than 80% of the national roads and ports and airports are being built by Chinese, Moroccan and French contractors across much of the country.
At the end, the ruling party and its satellites of the ruling coalition decided to run not based on the candidates but based on the party.
He signed a preferential trade agreement and a shipping treaty with the Soviet Union.
Human trafficking is a significant problem, with the US Trafficking in Persons Report, 2012, stating that "Equatorial Guinea is a source and destination for women and children subjected to forced labor and sex trafficking."
It documented strong links with the Portuguese creole populations in São Tomé and Príncipe, Cape Verde and Guinea-Bissau.
The May 2013 elections were marked by a series of events including the popular protest planned by a group of activists from the MPP (Movement of Popular Protest) which included several social and political groups.
Shortly after the elections, the opposition party CPDS announced that they were going to protest peacefully against the 26 May elections on 25 June.
Nevertheless, the earnings from the country's oil wealth have not been distributed amongst the population and the country ranks low on the UN human development index, 20% of children die before age 5 and more than 50% of the population lack access to clean drinking water.
Between 1778 and 1810, the territory of Equatorial Guinea was administered by the Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata, based in Buenos Aires.
There are also five shortwave radio stations.
In 2011, the government announced it was planning a new capital in the country, named ''Oyala''.
The Liberian labour agreement of 1914 favoured wealthy men with ready access to the state, and the shift in labour supplies from Liberia to Rio Muni increased this advantage.
For the USSR, despite the unsavoury background of Macias Nguema, there was an advantage to be gained in the War in Angola by having access to Luba base and later on to Malabo International Airport.
Every airline registered in Equatorial Guinea appears on the list of air carriers prohibited in the European Union (EU) which means that they are banned from operating services of any kind within the EU.
This was an effort by the government to improve its communications, trade, and bilateral relations with Portuguese-speaking countries.
The adoption of Portuguese was one requirement to apply for CPLP acceptance.
Equatorial Guinea tried to become validated as an Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI)–compliant country, working toward transparency in reporting of oil revenues and the prudent use of natural resource wealth.
The Cross-Sanaga-Bioko coastal forests ecoregion covers most of Bioko and the adjacent portions of Cameroon and Nigeria on the African mainland, and the Mount Cameroon and Bioko montane forests ecoregion covers the highlands of Bioko and nearby Mount Cameroon.
Surprisingly, during the following cabinet reshuffle it was announced that there would be two vice-presidents in clear violation of the constitution that was just taking effect.
Since the mid-1990s, Equatorial Guinea has become one of sub-Saharan Africa's largest oil producers.
The Senate report, as to Equatorial Guinea, showed that at least $35 million were siphoned off by Obiang, his family and senior officials of his regime.
There were more than 42,000 internet users by December 2011.
A decision of 9 August 1963, approved by a referendum of 15 December 1963, introduced the territory to a measure of autonomy and the administrative promotion of a 'moderate' grouping, the Movimiento de Unión Nacional de la Guinea Ecuatorial (MUNGE).
In 1844, on restoration of Spanish sovereignty, the area became known as the "Territorios Españoles del Golfo de Guinea."
The greatest constraint to economic development was a chronic shortage of labour.
The Soviets also granted loans to Equatorial Guinea.
The national currency, the ekwele, was previously linked to the Spanish peseta.
Catholic penetration was furthered by two small insurrections protesting the conscription of forced labour for the plantations, in 1898 and 1910, which led to the Bubi being disarmed in 1917 and left them dependent on the missionaries.
Israelis and Moroccans also live and work here.
Most ethnic Spaniards left after independence.
The interior minister Clemente Engonga refused to authorize the protest on the grounds that such an event could "destabilize" the country and CPDS decided to go forward with the peaceful protest claiming it was a constitutional right.
The tension may be rooted in a power shift arising from the dramatic increase in oil production which has occurred since 1997.
Equatorial Guinea predicts that it will have enough national doctors in the country to be self-sufficient within the next five years.
The report rates Equatorial Guinea as a "Tier 3" country, the lowest (worst) ranking: "Countries whose governments do not fully comply with the minimum standards and are not making significant efforts to do so."
In spite of his condemnation of Marxism, which he deemed "neo-colonialist", Equatorial Guinea maintained very special relations with socialist countries, notably China, Cuba, and the USSR.
They formed two bodies: the Movimiento Nacional de Liberación de la Guinea (MONALIGE), and the Idea Popular de la Guinea Ecuatorial (IPGE).
Pushed into the interior of the island and decimated by alcohol addiction, venereal disease, smallpox, and sleeping sickness, the indigenous Bubi population of Bioko refused to work on plantations.
In July 2004, the United States Senate published an investigation into Riggs Bank, a Washington-based bank into which most of Equatorial Guinea's oil revenues were paid until recently, and which also banked for Chile's Augusto Pinochet.
However freight carriers provide service from European cities to the capital.
Dialects of Fang are also spoken in parts of neighboring Cameroon (Bulu) and Gabon.
BBC World Service, Radio France Internationale and Gabon-based Africa No 1 broadcast on FM in Malabo.
It also recognizes long historical ties with Portugal, and with Portuguese-speaking peoples of Brazil, São Tomé and Principe, and Cape Verde.
These dialects, while still intelligible, are more distinct.
Nevertheless, the Amnesty International report released in June 2005
A 2004 US Senate investigation into the Washington-based Riggs Bank found that President Obiang's family had received huge payments from US oil companies such as Exxon Mobil and Amerada Hess.
Equatorial Guinea is in west central Africa.
Formerly the colony of Spanish Guinea, its post-independence name evokes its location near both the Equator and the Gulf of Guinea.
This created a situation where during the election the ruling party's coalition did not provide the names of their candidates so effectively individuals were not running for office, instead the party was the one running for office.
Moreover, the timber companies needed growing amounts of labour, and the spread of coffee cultivation offered an alternative means of paying taxes.
Equatorial Guinea hit the headlines in 2004 when a plane load of suspected mercenaries was intercepted in Zimbabwe while allegedly on the way to overthrow Obiang.
Malabo International Airport is the only international one in the country.
The principal religion in Equatorial Guinea is Christianity, the faith of 93% of the population.
The drop occurred rapidly and timed directly with the beginning of the program.
The island nation of São Tomé and Príncipe is located between Bioko and Annobón.
Teodoro Obiang deposed Macías Nguema on 3 August 1979, in a bloody coup d'état.
If accepted into the Community of Portuguese Language Countries (CPLP), Equatorial Guinea would be able to  access several professional and academic exchange programs and the facilitate cross-border circulation of citizens.
To this core of settlers were added Cubans, Filipinos and Spaniards of various colours deported for political or other crimes, as well as some assisted settlers.
With the ending of Liberian imports, the cocoa planters of Fernando Po turned to Rio Muni.
The deterioration of the rural economy under successive brutal regimes has diminished any potential for agriculture-led growth.
Forestry, farming, and fishing are also major components of GDP.
It was no coincidence that campaigns were mounted to subdue the Fang people in the 1920s, at the time that Liberia was beginning to cut back on recruitment.
According to Human Rights Watch, the dictatorship of President Obiang has used an oil boom to entrench and enrich itself further at the expense of the country's people.
The São Tomé, Príncipe, and Annobón moist lowland forests ecoregion covers all of Annobón, as well as São Tomé and Príncipe.
On the night of 24 June, the CPDS headquarters in Malabo were surrounded by heavily armed police officers in order to keep those inside from leaving and thus effectively blocking the protest.
The UN says that less than half of the population has access to clean drinking water and that 20% of children die before reaching the age of five.
The Sierra Leoneans were particularly well placed as planters while labour recruitment on the Windward coast continued, for they kept family and other connections there and could easily arrange labour supplies.
Although a few of the Fernandinos were Catholic and Spanish-speaking, about nine-tenths of them were Protestant and English-speaking on the eve of the First World War, and pidgin English was the lingua franca of the island.
Pan-African styles like soukous and makossa are popular, as are reggae and rock and roll.
The provinces are further divided into districts.
The state-owned media and the main private radio station are under the directorship of the president's son, Teodor Obiang.
According to a March 2004 BBC profile, politics within the country are currently dominated by tensions between Obiang's son, Teodoro Nguema Obiang Mangue, and other close relatives with powerful positions in the security forces.
The traditional demarcation line between Fang and 'Beach' (inland) ethnic groups was the village of Niefang (limit of the Fang), east of Bata.
In government and education Spanish is used.
The government financed an Instituto Internacional da Língua Portuguesa (IILP) sociolinguistic study in Annobón.
There were garrisons of the colonial guard throughout the enclave by 1926, and the whole colony was considered 'pacified' by 1929.
Out of a population of 300,000, an estimated 80,000 were killed.
In 1778, Queen Maria I of Portugal and King Charles III of Spain signed the Treaty of El Pardo which ceded Bioko, adjacent islets, and commercial rights to the Bight of Biafra between the Niger and Ogoue rivers to Spain.
The discovery of large oil reserves in 1996 and its subsequent exploitation have contributed to a dramatic increase in government revenue.
The government responded by legalizing political parties, declaring a moratorium on the death penalty, and starting a dialog with all political forces.
While Riggs Bank in February 2005 paid $9 million as restitution for its banking for Chile's Augusto Pinochet, no restitution was made with regard to Equatorial Guinea, as reported in detail in an Anti-Money Laundering Report from Inner City Press.
In recent years, with change in economic/political climate and government social agendas, several cultural dispersion and literacy organizations have been founded in the country, chiefly with the financial support of the Spanish government.
Due to the large oil industry in the country, internationally recognized carriers fly to Malabo International Airport which, as of May 2014, had several direct connections to Europe and West Africa.
The national parliament discussed this law in October 2011.
On Christmas 1975, Macías Nguema had 150 alleged coup plotters executed.
