These included the Cayuga-Seneca Canal south to the Finger Lakes, the Oswego Canal from Three Rivers north to Lake Ontario at Oswego, and the Champlain Canal from Troy north to Lake Champlain.
The Erie Canal was thus completed in eight years at a cost of $7,143,000.
A 36‑mile (58&nbsp;km) stretch of the old canal from the town of DeWitt, New York, east of Syracuse, to just outside Rome, New York, is preserved as the Old Erie Canal State Historic Park.
In 1800, it typically took 2.5 weeks to travel overland from New York to Cleveland, Ohio ; 4 weeks to Detroit .
The Erie Canal is a destination for tourists from all over the world.
The growth of railroads and highways across the state, and the opening of the Saint Lawrence Seaway, caused commercial traffic on the canal to decline dramatically during the second half of the 20th century.
An ambitious program to improve the canal began in 1834.
The remaining problem was finding labor, and increased immigration helped fill the need.
Engineering techniques developed during its construction included the building of aqueducts to redirect water; one aqueduct was  long to span  of river.
The Genesee Valley Canal was run along the Genesee River to connect with the Allegheny River at Olean, but the Allegheny section, which would have connected to the Ohio and Mississippi rivers, was never built.
Its impact went much further, increasing trade throughout the nation by opening eastern and overseas markets to Midwestern farm products and by enabling migration to the West.
The Canal also helped bind the still-new nation closer to Britain and Europe.
Geddes had only used a surveying instrument for a few hours before his work on the Canal.
As the railroad served the same general route as the canal, but provided for faster travel, passengers soon switched to it.
The sides of the canal were lined with stone set in clay, and the bottom was also lined with clay.
At Three Rivers the Oneida River turns northwest, and was deepened for the Oswego Canal to Lake Ontario.
Consisting of a massive stone aqueduct which carried boats over incredible cascades Little Falls was one of the most popular stops for American and foreign tourists as depicted in Scene 4 of William Dunlap's play ''A Trip to Niagara'' where he depicts the general preference of tourists to travel by canal so that they could see a combination of artificial and natural sites.
The canal system is operated using money generated by Thruway tolls.
The canal's peak year was 1855, when 33,000 commercial shipments took place.
Those 1827–1829 passenger lists survive today in the New York State Archives, and other sources of traveler information are sometimes available.
Work continued on the downhill side towards the Hudson, and when the marsh froze in winter, the crews worked to complete the section across the swamps.
Much of that section was blasted with black powder, and the inexperience of the crews often led to accidents, and sometimes rocks falling on nearby homes.
This expensive project was politically unpopular in parts of the state not served by the canal, and failed to save it from becoming obsolete for commercial shipping.
It runs southwest to Tonawanda, where the new alignment discharges into the Niagara River, which is navigable upstream to the New York Barge Canal's Black Rock Lock and thence to the Canal's original "Western Terminus" at Buffalo's Inner Harbor.
The Mohawk River (a tributary of the Hudson) rises near Lake Ontario and runs in a glacial meltwater channel just north of the Catskill range of the Appalachian Mountains, separating them from the geologically distinct Adirondacks to the north.
The cruise goes through the history of the canal and also takes passengers through Lock 18.
The canal has 36 locks and an elevation differential of about .
This reach of 64.2&nbsp;miles from Henrietta to Lockport is called "the 60‑mile level" since there are no locks and the water level rises only two feet over the entire segment.
Those cities and their states started projects to compete with the Erie Canal.
From Canastota west, it ran roughly along the north (lower) edge of the Onondaga Escarpment, passing through Syracuse and Rochester.
It was built to create a navigable water route from New York City and the Atlantic Ocean to the Great Lakes.
The  lift-locks had a total lift of , exiting into a deeply cut channel.
It was acclaimed as an engineering marvel that united the country and helped New York City become a financial capital.
From Tonawanda south toward Buffalo, it ran just east of the Niagara River, where it reached its ''"Western Terminus"'' at Little Buffalo Creek (later it became the Commercial Slip), which discharged into the Buffalo River just above its confluence with Lake Erie.
At that rate the canal would not be finished for 30 years.
This led to an increased public esteem for practical education.
Concern that erosion caused by logging in the Adirondacks could silt up the canal contributed to the creation of another New York National Historic Landmark, the Adirondack Park, in 1885.
Today, the reconfiguration of the canal created during the First Enlargement is commonly referred to as the ''Improved Erie Canal'' or the ''Old Erie Canal'', to distinguish it from the canal's modern-day course.
The new Erie Canal turned south there along the Seneca River, which turns west near Syracuse and continues west to a point in the Montezuma Marsh ().
There were some 42 commercial shipments on the canal in 2008, compared to 15 such shipments in 2007 and more than 33,000 shipments in 1855, the canal's peak year.
The original design planned for an annual tonnage of 1.5&nbsp;million tons (1.36 million metric tons), but this was exceeded immediately.
This new canal replaced much of the original route, leaving many abandoned sections (most notably between Syracuse and Rome).
Passengers and freight had to travel overland, a journey made more difficult by the rough condition of the roads.
This was a factor leading to farmers in the west turning their grains into whiskey for easier transport and higher sales, and later the Whiskey Rebellion.
The first ultimately required building the  long "Great Embankment" which carried the canal at a height of  above the level of the creek, which was carried through a  culvert underneath.
The New York, West Shore and Buffalo Railway was completed in 1884, as a route running closely parallel to both the canal and the New York Central Railroad.
In 1918, the Canal was replaced by the larger New York State Barge Canal.
Also, the many technical hurdles that had to be overcome made heroes of those whose innovations made the canal possible.
Although it had been envisioned as primarily a commercial channel for freight boats, passengers also traveled on the canal's packet boats.
Soil to be moved was shoveled into large wheelbarrows that were dumped into mule-pulled carts.
After Montezuma Marsh, the next difficulties were crossing Irondequoit Creek and the Genesee River near Rochester.
There the Cayuga and Seneca Canal continued south with the Seneca River, and the new Erie Canal again ran parallel to the old canal along the bottom of the Niagara Escarpment, in some places running along the Clyde River, and in some places replacing the old canal.
In Syracuse, the location of the old canal is represented by a reflecting pool in downtown's Clinton Square and the downtown hosts a canal barge and weigh lock structure, now dry.
President Thomas Jefferson called it "a little short of madness" and rejected it; however, Hawley interested New York Governor DeWitt Clinton in the project.
The Chenango and Chemung canals linked the Erie with the Susquehanna River system.
Ellicott realized that a canal would add value to the land he was selling in the western part of the state.
Chicago, among other Great Lakes cities, recognized the commercial importance of the canal to its economy, and two West Loop streets are named ''Canal'' and ''Clinton'' (for canal proponent DeWitt Clinton).
In 1960 the Schoharie Crossing State Historic Site, a section of the canal in Montgomery County, was one of the first sites recognized as a National Historic Landmark.
It allowed for east-west navigation from the coast to the Great Lakes within US&nbsp;territory.
However, recent research has revealed the death toll was likely much lower, as no contemporary reports mention significant worker mortality, and mass graves from the period have never been found in the area.
However, Irish immigrants were often assumed to be Catholic, a religion that raised much suspicion in early America due to its hierarchic structure, and many laborers on the canal suffered violent assault as the result of misjudgment and xenophobia.
The best examples furnished with carpeted floors, stuffed chairs, and mahogany tables stocked with current newspapers and books served as sitting rooms during the days.
The port of New York became essentially the Atlantic home port for all of the Midwest&nbsp;– because of this vital connection and others to follow, such as the railroads, New York would become known as the "Empire State" or "the great Empire State".
In 1824, before the canal was completed, a detailed ''Pocket Guide for the Tourist and Traveler, Along the Line of the Canals, and the Interior Commerce of the State of New York'', was published for the benefit of travelers and land speculators.
Efficiently, the nonstop smooth method of transportation cut nearly in half the travel time between Albany and Buffalo moving day and night.
An equally ancient solution was implemented in many cultures &mdash; things in the water weighed far less and took less effort to move since friction became negligible.
In 1903 the New York State legislature authorized construction of the New York State Barge Canal as the "Improvement of the Erie, the Oswego, the Champlain, and the Cayuga and Seneca Canals".
A large wheel, barely smaller than the others, was fixed to the center of the axle.
First proposed in the 1780s, re-proposed in 1807, a survey was authorized and, funded executed in 1808.
The middle section from Utica to Salina (Syracuse) was completed in 1820, and traffic on that section started up immediately.
Because so many immigrants traveled on the canal, many genealogists have sought copies of canal passenger lists.
Its construction, through limestone and mountains, proved a daunting task.
Tourists were carried along the "northern tour", which ultimately led to the popular honeymoon destination Niagara Falls, just north of Buffalo.
The Erie Canal was an immediate success.
Additional feeder canals soon extended the Erie Canal into a system.
Some captains hired musicians and held dances.
In a time when bulk goods were limited to pack animals (an eighth-ton  maximumquotation page 87: "There was little experience moving bulk loads by carts, while a packhorse would sic, meaning 'could' or 'can only' carry only an eighth of a ton (.
Expansion to the east and west proceeded, and the whole eastern section,  from Brockport to Albany, opened on September 10, 1823 to great fanfare.
The Mohawk and Hudson valleys form the only cut across the Appalachians north of Alabama, allowing an almost complete water route from New York City in the south to Lakes Ontario and Erie in the west.
Packet boats serving passengers exclusively reached speeds of up to five miles an hour and ran at much more frequent intervals than cramped, bumpy stages.
There were no civil engineers in the United States.
The New York State Legislature debated closing the locks of the Erie Canal on Sundays when they convened in 1858.
Many notable authors wrote about the canal, including Herman Melville, Frances Trollope, Nathaniel Hawthorne, Harriet Beecher Stowe, Mark Twain, Samuel Hopkins Adams and the Marquis de&nbsp;Lafayette, and many tales and songs were written about life on the canal.
A flotilla of boats, led by Governor Dewitt Clinton aboard the ''Seneca Chief'', sailed from Buffalo to New York City in ten days.
The men who planned and oversaw construction were novices as surveyors and as engineers.
The river was crossed on a stone aqueduct  long and  wide, with 11 arches.
(Bernstein, p.&nbsp;381)
An Erie Canal Cruise company, based in Herkimer, operates from mid-May until mid-October with daily cruises.
In 1817, though, Clinton received approval from the legislature for $7&nbsp;million for construction.
From the first days of the expansion of the British colonies from the coast of North America into the heartland of the continent, a recurring problem was that of transportation between the coastal ports and the interior.
In Pennsylvania, the Main Line of Public Works was a combined canal and railroad running west from Philadelphia to Pittsburgh on the Ohio River, opened in 1834.
Diversions from and to adjacent natural streams along the way are used to maintain the canal's level.
The canal's steady flow of tourists, businessmen and settlers lent it to uses never imagined by its initial sponsors.
The canal at its inception had been imagined as an extension of nature.
As the canal brought travelers to New York City, it took business away from other ports such as Philadelphia and Baltimore.
After the Genesee, the next obstacle was crossing the Niagara Escarpment, an  wall of hard dolomitic limestone, to rise to the level of Lake Erie.
Canal travel was, for many, an opportunity to take in the sublime and commune with nature.
Other competition was more direct.
A rope was wrapped around the center wheel and hooked to a team of oxen.
Existing remains of the 1825 canal abandoned during the Enlargement are sometimes referred to today as ''Clinton's Ditch'' (which was also the popular nickname for the entire Erie Canal project during its original 1817–1825 construction).
Some municipalities have preserved sections as town or county canal parks, or have plans to do so.
However, as late as 1852, the canal carried thirteen times more freight tonnage than all the railroads in New York State combined; it continued to compete well with the railroads through 1902, when tolls were abolished.
Frequently it was not worth the cost of transporting it to far-away population centers.
All labor on the canal depended upon human (and animal) power or the force of water.
In 2012, the New York State Canal System (which consists of the Erie Canal and a few smaller canals) were used to ship 42,000 tons of cargo.
Originally, it ran about  from Albany, on the Hudson River, to Buffalo, at Lake Erie.
However, it went bankrupt and was acquired the next year by the New York Central.
This canal has one towpath generally on the north side.
Buffalo won over Black Rock, and grew into a large city, eventually encompassing its former competitor.
In 2004, the administration of New York Governor George Pataki was criticized when officials of New York State Canal Corporation attempted to sell private development rights to large stretches of the Old Erie Canal to a single developer for $30,000, far less than the land was worth on the open market.
Pulled by teams of horses canal boats still moved slowly but methodically shrinking time and distance.
The Erie Canal is open to small craft and some larger vessels from May through November each year.
At mealtimes crews transformed the cabin into dining rooms.
Construction began July 4, 1817, at Rome, New York.
Such a canal would be expensive to build even with modern technology; in 1800, the expense was barely imaginable.
At Pittsford, southeast of Rochester, the canal turned west to run around the south side of Rochester, rather than through downtown.
At Rome, the canal continued west parallel to Wood Creek, which flows westward into Oneida Lake, and turned southwest and west cross-country to avoid the lake.
Erosion on the clay bottom proved to be a problem and the speed was limited to 4&nbsp;mph (6&nbsp;km/h).
Buffalo's Commercial Slip is the restored and re-watered segment of the canal which formed its "Western Terminus".
The original canal was  long, from Albany on the Hudson to Buffalo on Lake Erie.
The expansion allowed barges up to  to use the Canal.
From 1833 to 1877, the short Crooked Lake Canal connected Keuka Lake and Seneca Lake.
Vendors moved from boat to boat peddling items such as books, watches and fruit while less scrupulous "confidence men" sold remedies for foot corns or passed off counterfeit bills.
To move earth, animals pulled a "slip scraper" (similar to a bulldozer).
Emigrants took passage on freight boats camping on deck or on top of crates.
With several miles of the Canal inland of this location still lying under 20th-century fill and urban construction, the effective western navigable terminus of the Erie Canal is found at Tonawanda.
The canal crosses the Genesee River at the Genesee Valley Park (), then rejoins the old path near North Gates.
The problem was that the land rises about  from the Hudson to Lake Erie.
Canal boats up to  in draft were pulled by horses and mules on the towpath.
There was much opposition, and the project was ridiculed as "Clinton's folly" and "Clinton's ditch."
Locks were widened and/or rebuilt in new locations, and many new navigable aqueducts were constructed.
The Hudson is tidal to Troy, and Albany is west of the Appalachians.
James Geddes and Benjamin Wright, who laid out the route, were judges whose experience in surveying was in settling boundary disputes.
He later became the first canal commissioner.
But if the load were carried by a barge on a waterway, then up to 30 tons ( or ) or 240x could be drawn by the same horse.
His towline would be unravelled from the horses, go slack, fall into the water and sink to the bottom while his boat decelerated on with its remaining momentum.
The '''Erie Canal''' is a canal in New York that is part of the east-west, cross-state route of the New York State Canal System (After a later conversion, became known as the New York State Barge Canal).
Canvass White was a 27-year-old amateur engineer who persuaded Clinton to let him go to Britain at his own expense to study the canal system there.
Proponents of the project gradually wore down opponents; its construction began in 1817.
The canal fostered a population surge in western New York and opened regions farther west to settlement.
In some communities, the old canal has refilled with overgrowth and debris.
The entire canal was officially completed on October 26, 1825.
In 1825 more than forty thousand passengers took advantage of the convenience and beauty of canal travel.
Packet boats measuring up to seventy-eight feet in length and fourteen and a half feet across made ingenious use of space in order to accommodate up to forty passengers at night and up to three times as many in the daytime.
Venturing West men and women boarded packets to visit relatives or solely for a relaxing excursion.
At Cohoes, it climbed the escarpment on the west side of the Hudson River and then turned west along the south shore of the Mohawk River, crossing to the north side at Crescent and again to the south at Rexford.
The stonework required hundreds of German masons, who later built many of New York's buildings.
The new alignment began on the Hudson River at the border between Cohoes and Waterford, where it ran northwest with five locks (the so-called "Waterford Flight"), running into the Mohawk River east of Crescent.
Yet these men "carried the Erie Canal up the Niagara escarpment at Lockport, maneuvered it onto a towering embankment to cross over Irondequoit Creek, spanned the Genesee River on an awesome aqueduct, and carved a route for it out of the solid rock between Little Falls and Schenectady—and all of those venturesome designs worked precisely as planned".
In 2006 recreational boating fees were eliminated to attract more visitors.
In sections that did not consist of canalized rivers (particularly between Rochester and Buffalo), the original Erie Canal channel was enlarged to  wide and  deep.
After an investigation by the ''Syracuse Post-Standard'' newspaper, the Pataki administration nullified the deal.
Construction continued at an increased rate as new workers arrived.
Today, the system is served by several commercial towing companies.
Along its course and from these lakes, other Great Lakes, and to a lesser degree, related rivers, a large part of the continent's interior (and many settlements) would be made well connected to the Eastern seaboard.
Close to the seacoast, rivers often provided adequate waterways, but the Appalachian Mountains,  inland, running over  long as a barrier range with ''just five places'' where mule trains or wagon roads could be routed,The five east-west crossings of the Appalachians are South to North: Plains of Georgia, Alabama, and Mississippi (around the bottom),  the Cumberland Gap pass connecting North Carolina/Southern Virginia with Kentucky/Tennessee,  the Cumberland Narrows pass connecting  Western Maryland/Northern Virginia with West Virginia and Western Pennsylvania via Brownsville, Pennsylvania and the Monongahela River or the Youghiogheny River valley (both of the Ohio & Mississippi river system),  the gaps of the Allegheny connecting the Susquehanna River Valley in central Pennsylvania with the Allegheny River valley (and again the Ohio Country),  and lastly, the Mohawk River water gap and valley tributary of the Hudson River, creating what later advertising would call the level water route westwards.
Except for two years (1827–1829), the State of New York did not require canal boat operators to maintain or submit passenger lists.
From Oneida Lake, the new canal ran west along the Oneida River, with cutoffs to shorten the route.
As the canal progressed, the crews and engineers working on the project developed expertise and became a skilled labor force.
Many stretches of the old canal have been filled in to create roads such as Erie Boulevard in Syracuse and Schenectady, and Broad Street and the Rochester Subway in Rochester.
In Maryland, the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad ran west to Wheeling, West Virginia, also on the Ohio River, and was completed in 1853.
Problems developed but were quickly solved.
The main hold-ups were felling trees to clear a path through virgin forest and moving excavated soil, which took longer than expected, but the builders devised ways to solve these problems.
Its success also prompted imitation: a rash of canal-building followed.
The route followed the channel of a creek that had cut a ravine steeply down the escarpment, with two sets of five locks in a series, soon giving rise to the community of Lockport.
Buffalo expended great energy to widen and deepen Buffalo Creek to make it navigable and to create a harbor at its mouth.
The canal was straightened and slightly re-routed in some stretches, resulting in the abandonment of short segments of the original 1825 canal.
The Champlain Canal, a separate but interconnected  north-south route from Watervliet on the Hudson to Lake Champlain, opened on the same date.
The Genesee Valley Canal was later abandoned and became the route of the Genesee Valley Canal Railroad.
It opened on October 26, 1825.
Apart from the years 1827–1829, canal boat operators were not required to record or report passenger names to the government, which, in this case, was the state of New York.
From Rome, the new route continued almost due west, merging with Fish Creek just east of its entry into Oneida Lake.
The final leg had to be cut  through another limestone layer, the Onondaga ridge.
The canal system thus gave New York a competitive advantage, helped New York City develop as an international trade center, and allowed Buffalo to grow from just 200&nbsp;settlers in 1820 to more than 18,000 people by 1840.
Mainly used by recreational watercraft since the retirement of the last large commercial ship (rather than boat), the ''Day Peckinpaugh'' in 1994, the canal saw a recovery in commercial traffic in 2008.
The other boat steered toward the berm (or heelpath) side of the canal.
Canal barges can carry loads up to , and are used to transport objects that would be too large for road or rail shipment.
From there it was again roughly an upgrade to the original canal, running west to Lockport.
"), and there were no railways, water was the most cost-effective way to ship bulk goods.
Canal barges can carry a short ton of cargo  on one gallon of diesel fuel, while a gallon allows a train to haul the same amount of cargo  and a truck .
Other railroads were soon chartered and built to continue the line west to Buffalo, and in 1842 a continuous line (which later became the New York Central Railroad and its Auburn Road in 1853) was open the whole way to Buffalo.
The first , from Rome to Utica, opened in 1819.
With Buffalo's re-excavation of Commercial Slip, completed in 2008, the Canal's original terminus is now re-watered and again accessible by boats.
At Lockport the canal turned southwest to rise to the top of the Niagara Escarpment, using the ravine of Eighteen Mile Creek.
Using a scraper and a plow, a three-man team with oxen, horses, and mules could build a mile in a year.
However, he went bankrupt trying to ship grain to the coast.
The Chemung Canal connected the south end of Seneca Lake to Elmira in 1833, and was an important route for Pennsylvania coal and timber into the canal system.
An artificial river where there was none.
The event was marked by a statewide "Grand Celebration," culminating in successive cannon shots along the length of the canal and the Hudson, a 90-minute cannonade from Buffalo to New York City.
The Black River Canal connected the Black River to the Erie Canal at Rome and remained in operation until the 1920s.
The mechanical advantage (torque) obtained ripped the stumps out of the soil.
Locks at the time could handle up to , so even with the heftiest cuttings and viaducts, fifty locks would be required along the  canal.
Travel on the canal's middle section (particularly in the Mohawk Valley) was severely hampered by flooding in late June and early July 2006.
It was faster than carts pulled by draft animals, and cut transport costs by about 95%.
Leaks developed along the entire length of the canal, but these were sealed using cement that hardened underwater (hydraulic cement).
In 2000, the United States Congress designated the Erie Canalway National Heritage Corridor to recognize the national significance of the canal system as the most successful and influential human-built waterway and one of the most important works of civil engineering and construction in North America.
During this massive series of construction projects, known as the First Enlargement, the canal was widened to  and deepened to .
The canal had brought civilization into the wilderness.
New ethnic Irish communities formed in some towns along its route after completion, as Irish immigrants were a large portion of the construction labor force.
Trade between the United States and Canada also increased as a result of the Corn Law and a reciprocity (free-trade) agreement signed in 1854; much of this trade flowed along the Erie.
