Other political groups are not allowed to organize, although the unimplemented Constitution of 1997 provides for the existence of multi-party politics.
Several countries also disputed the report's language and accuracy, including the US and China.
Furthermore, they implore rural peoples to cast away this ancient cultural practice.
In addition, there are a number of Nilo-Saharan-speaking Nilotic ethnic minorities.
Traditional instruments of Eritrean folk music include the stringed krar, kebero, begena, masenqo and the wata (a distant/rudimentary cousin of the violin).
Malaria and tuberculosis are common in Eritrea.
The fertility rate is at about 5 births per woman.
Local variability in rainfall patterns and/or reduced precipitation is known to occur, which may precipitate soil erosion, floods, droughts, land degradation and desertification.
In 1734, the Afar leader Kedafu, head of the Mudaito clan, seized power and established the Mudaito Dynasty.
Puff adder and red spitting cobra are widespread and can be found even in the highlands.
In 1869 or ’70, the ruling Sultan of Raheita sold lands surrounding the Bay of Assab to the Rubattino Shipping Company.
Eritrea was annexed by Ethiopia in 1953 (nominally within a federation until 1962) and an Eritrean Liberation Front formed in 1960.
Eritrea maintains diplomatic ties with a number of other countries, including China, Denmark, Djibouti, Israel, the United States and Yemen.
There are an average 63 students per classroom at the elementary level and 97 per classroom at the secondary level.
According to Human Rights Watch, the Eritrean government's human rights record is considered among the worst in the world.
They likewise tend to employ less seasoned butter and spices and more tomatoes, as in the ''tsebhi dorho'' delicacy.
The Kingdom of Aksum, covering much of modern-day Eritrea and northern Ethiopia, rose somewhere around the first or second centuries and adopted Christianity around the time Islam had spread through Egypt and the Levant.
320–360), Aksum later adopted Christianity.
To the east of the highlands are the hot, arid coastal plains stretching down to the southeast of the country.
In the United Nations, the debate over the fate of the former Italian colonies continued.
The first Italian settlers arrived in 1880.
A major cause of death in neonates is by severe infection.
After regular service, reservists with skills, such as teachers, may be forced to work as professionals anywhere.
There is also a small population of African bush elephants that roam in some parts of the country.
In 1996, these were consolidated into six regions (zobas).
The Aksumites erected a number of large stelae, which served a religious purpose in pre-Christian times.
Dʿmt was a kingdom that encompassed most of Eritrea and the northern frontier of Ethiopia.
As of 1999, there was a total of 317 kilometres of 950&nbsp;mm (3&nbsp;ft 1 3⁄8 in) (narrow gauge) rail line in Eritrea.
Eritrea is a one-party state in which national legislative elections have been repeatedly postponed.
In the vacuum that followed the 1889 death of Emperor Yohannes&nbsp;IV, Gen. Oreste Baratieri occupied the highlands along the Eritrean coast and Italy proclaimed the establishment of the new colony of Italian Eritrea, a colony of the Kingdom of Italy.
With its capital at Debarwa, the state's main provinces were Hamasien, Serae and Akele Guzai.
The organization mainly consisted of Eritrean students, professionals and intellectuals.
This marked the start of a new and more sophisticated polity that would last into the colonial period.
The endangered African wild ass can be seen in Denakalia Region.
Italian, the former colonial language, is spoken by a few monolinguals and is still taught in primary and secondary schools.
Those who practice "unregistered" religions, try to flee the nation, or escape military duty are arrested and put into prison.
The Soviet Union, anticipating a communist victory in the Italian polls, initially supported returning Eritrea to Italy under trusteeship or as a colony.
Eritrea is a member of the United Nations, the African Union, and is an observing member of the Arab League  alongside Brazil, Venezuela, India and Turkey.
The area served as a coaling station along the shipping lanes introduced by the recently completed Suez Canal.
In 2013, the women's team won the gold medal in the African Continental Cycling Championships for the first time, and for the second time in 2015.
Eritrea is part of a 14 nation constituency within the Global Environment Facility, which partners with international institutions, civil society organizations, and the private sector to address global environmental issues while supporting national sustainable development initiatives.
He laid claim to both territories in a letter to Franklin D. Roosevelt at the Paris Peace Conference and at the First Session of the United Nations.
Other major national languages include Afar, Beja, Bilen, Kunama, Nara, Saho and Tigre.
The polity had come into existence in 1577, when Muhammed Jasa moved his capital from Harar to Aussa (Asaita) with the split of the Adal Sultanate into Aussa and the Sultanate of Harar.
Rehabilitation of the remainder and of the rolling stock has occurred in recent years.
Six Eritrean riders have been signed to international cycling teams, including Natnael Berhane and Daniel Teklehaimanot.
Tigrinya serves as the de facto language of national identity.
Eritrea is a multilingual country.
The name ''Eritrea'' is derived from the ancient Greek name for Red Sea (, based on the adjective  "red").
The Aksumite rulers facilitated trade by minting their own Aksumite currency.
This lasted until the rise of one of these polities during the first century, the Kingdom of Aksum, which was able to reunite the area.
In theory, Eritrea has a national carrier, Eritrean Airlines, but services are intermittent.
During the coffee ceremony, there are traditions that are upheld.
The G-15 are a prominent group of fifteen Eritreans, including three cabinet members, who were arrested in September 2001 after publishing an open letter to the government and President Isaias Afewerki calling for democratic dialogue.
Neither is generally given citizenship unless through marriage or, more rarely, by having it conferred upon them by the State.
The British and Americans preferred to cede all of Eritrea except the Western province to the Ethiopians as a reward for their support during World War II.
The tools are believed to have been used by early humans to harvest marine resources like clams and oysters.
The state also established its hegemony over the declining Kingdom of Kush and regularly entered the politics of the kingdoms on the Arabian peninsula, eventually extending its rule over the region with the conquest of the Himyarite Kingdom.
They brought the use of "pasta" to Italian Eritrea, and it is one of the main food eaten in present-day Asmara.
The People's Front for Democracy and Justice (PFDJ) is the ruling party in Eritrea.
Life expectancy at birth has increased from 39.1 in 1960 to 59.5 years in 2008, maternal and child mortality rates have dropped dramatically and the health infrastructure has been expanded.
In medieval times much of Eritrea fell under the Medri Bahri kingdom, with a smaller region being part of Hamasien.
): $4.4 billion, and the annual growth rate (2011 est.
(see Government and Politics)
Eritrea, at the southern end of the Red Sea, is the home of the fork in the rift.
In 1578 they tried to expand into the highlands with the help of Bahr Negash Yisehaq who had switched alliances due to power struggle, and by 1589 once again they were apparently compelled to withdraw their forces to the coast.
The literacy rate in Eritrea is high.
Additionally, a new movement called Citizens for Democratic Rights in Eritrea aimed at bringing about dialogue between the government and opposition was formed in early 2009.
Other scholars propose that the Afroasiatic family developed in situ in the Horn, with its speakers subsequently dispersing from there.
All Eritreans between the ages of 18–40 must complete a mandatory national service, which includes military service.
The ensuing Eritrean War for Independence went on for 30 years against successive Ethiopian governments until 1991, when the Eritrean People's Liberation Front (EPLF), a successor of the ELF, defeated the Ethiopian forces in Eritrea and helped a coalition of Ethiopian rebel forces take control of the Ethiopian Capital Addis Ababa.
The Afar Triangle or Danakil Depression of Eritrea is the probable location of a triple junction where three tectonic plates are pulling away from one another.
The Eritrean government is against reformed or radical versions of its established religions.
Education in Eritrea is officially compulsory between seven and 13 years of age.
In June 2016, a 500-page United Nations Human Rights Council report accused Eritrea's government of extrajudicial executions, torture, indefinitely prolonged national service and forced labour, and indicated that sexual harassment, rape and sexual servitude by state officials are also widespread.
In 1958, a group of Eritreans founded the Eritrean Liberation Movement (ELM).
Due to Eritrea's relative isolation, information and resources are extremely limited and according to the World Health Organisation (WHO) found in 2008 average life expectancy to be slightly less than 63 years.
The Ottomans were eventually driven out in the last quarter of the 16th century.
The Eritrean economy has undergone extreme changes due to the War of Independence.
The Eritrean–Ethiopian War severely hurt Eritrea's economy.
There are nearly 238,000 students in the primary, middle, and secondary levels of education.
The Rashaida first came to Eritrea in the 19th century from the Hejaz region.
Steam locomotives are sometimes used for groups of enthusiasts.
Despite number of physicians increasing from only 0.2 in 1993 to 0.5 in 2004 per 1000 population, this is still very low.
The rail line has been restored between the port of Massawa and the capital Asmara, although services are sporadic.
The Bahre-Nagassi ("Kings of the Sea") alternately fought with or against the Abyssinians and the neighbouring Muslim Adal Sultanate depending on the geopolitical circumstances.
The state-owned news agency censors news about external events.
According to a study made by Pew Research Center, 63% adheres to Christianity and 36% adheres to Islam.
It is estimated that there are around 100 African bush elephant left in Eritrea, the most northerly of East Africa's elephants.
Medri Bahri was thus part of the Christian resistance against Imam Ahmad ibn Ibrahim al-Ghazi of Adal's forces, but later joined the Adalite states and the Ottoman Empire front against Abyssinia in 1572.
Eritrea has achieved significant improvements in health care and is one of the few countries to be on target to meet its Millennium Development Goal (MDG) targets in health, in particular child health.
... Not a single foreign correspondent now lives in Asmara."
The Eritrean government previously withdrew its representative to the African Union to protest the AU's alleged lack of leadership in facilitating the implementation of a binding border decision demarcating the border between Eritrea and Ethiopia.
At the end of the 16th century, the Aussa Sultanate was established in the Denkel lowlands of Eritrea.
80% of the Eritrean workforce are employed in agriculture.
The northeastern and eastern parts of Eritrea have an extensive coastline along the Red Sea.
The National Assembly has 150 seats, of which 75 are occupied by the PFDJ.
Since May 2002, the government of Eritrea has officially recognized the Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church (Oriental Orthodox), Sunni Islam, the Eritrean Catholic Church (a Metropolitanate sui juris) and the Evangelical Lutheran church.
Worker remittances from abroad are estimated to account for 32 percent of gross domestic product.
Eritrean National elections were set for 2001 but it was then decided that because 20% of Eritrea's land was under occupation, elections would be postponed until the resolution of the conflict with Ethiopia.
Aksum was at the time ruled by Zoskales, who also governed the port of Adulis.
Eritrea is a one-party state in which national legislative elections have been repeatedly postponed.
The highlands  have temperate climate throughout out the year.
During the wet seasons these roads typically become impassable.
According to the medieval ''Liber Axumae'' (Book of Aksum), Aksum's first capital, Mazaber, was built by Itiyopis, son of Cush.
Besides convergent culinary tastes, Eritreans share an appreciation for similar music and lyrics, jewelry and fragrances, and tapestry and fabrics as many other populations in the Horn region.
Traditional Eritrean attire is quite varied among the ethnic groups of Eritrea.
In 1947 Eritrea became part of a federation with Ethiopia, the Federation of Ethiopia and Eritrea.
The elephants seemed to have formed a symbiotic relationship with olive baboons, with the baboons using the water holes dug by the elephants, while the elephants use the tree-top baboons as an early warning system.
In 2006, Eritrea also announced that it would become the first country in the world to turn its entire coast into an environmentally protected zone.
Some sources dating back to 3500 BC.
The boundaries of the present-day Eritrea nation state were established during the Scramble for Africa.
According to linguists, the first Afroasiatic-speaking populations arrived in the region during the ensuing Neolithic era from the family's proposed urheimat ("original homeland") in the Nile Valley.
Lions are said to inhabit the mountains of the Gash-Barka Region.
The Eritrean government has since January 2011 appointed an envoy, Tesfa-Alem Tekle, to the AU.
These provinces were similar to the nine provinces operating during the colonial period.
Immunisation and child nutrition has been tackled by working closely with schools in a multi-sectoral approach; the number of children vaccinated against measles almost doubled in seven years, from 40.7% to 78.5% and the underweight prevalence among children decreased by 12% in 1995–2002 (severe underweight prevalence by 28%).
In 2011, Ethiopia accused Eritrea of planting bombs at an African Union summit in Addis Ababa, which was later supported by a UN report.
The distribution of rainfall and vegetation types varies markedly throughout the
In an attempt at reform, Eritrean government officials and NGO representatives have participated in numerous public meetings and dialogues.
Student-teacher ratios are high: 45 to 1 at the elementary level and 54 to 1 at the secondary level.
In the coastal areas marine species that are common include dolphin, dugong, whale shark, turtles, marlin, swordfish, and manta ray.
According to recent estimates, 50% of the population adheres to Christianity, 48% to Islam, and 2% of the population follows other religions including traditional faiths and animism.
Since all local media is state-owned, Eritrea was also ranked as having the least press freedom in the global Press Freedom Index.
In 2011, Eritrea's GDP grew by 8.7 percent making it one of the fastest growing economies in the world.
The main cities of the country are the capital city of Asmara and the port town of Asseb in the southeast, as well as the towns of Massawa to the east, the northern town of Keren, and the central town Mendefera.
The president, Isaias Afwerki, has been in office since independence in 1993.
Even during the war, Eritrea developed its transportation infrastructure by asphalting new roads, improving its ports, and repairing war-damaged roads and bridges as a part of the Warsay Yika'alo Program.
In addition, there exist Italian Eritrean (concentrated in Asmara) and Ethiopian Tigrayan communities.
The federal government, which for all intents and purposes was the existing imperial government, was to control foreign affairs (including commerce), defense, finance, and transportation.
Habitats here vary from the sub-tropical rainforest at Filfil Solomona to the precipitous cliffs and canyons of the southern highlands.
The Kingdom used the name "Ethiopia" as early as the 4th century.
In December 2001 a herd of about 30, including 10 juveniles, was observed in the vicinity of the Gash River.
The Eritrean Foreign Ministry responded by describing the Commission's report as "wild allegations" which were "totally unfounded and devoid of all merit".
In 2010, a genetic study was conducted on the mummified remains of baboons that were brought back as gifts from Punt by the ancient Egyptians.
After that Ottomans abandoned their ambitions to establish themselves on the highlands and remained in the lowlands until they left the region by 1872.
Smaller groups also speak other Afroasiatic languages, such as the newly recognized Dahlik and Arabic (the Hejazi and Hadhrami dialects spoken by the Rashaida and Hadhrami, respectively).
The highest point of the country, Emba Soira, is located in the center of Eritrea, at  above sea level.
According to the BBC, "Eritrea is the only African country to have no privately owned news media", and Reporters Without Borders said of the public media, "they do nothing but relay the regime's belligerent and ultra-nationalist discourse.
The polity existed during the 10th to 5th centuries BC.
There are five levels of education in Eritrea: pre-primary, primary, middle, secondary, and post-secondary.
''Mies'' is another popular local alcoholic beverage, made out of honey.
In the absence of agreement amongst the Allies concerning the status of Eritrea, British administration continued for the remainder of World War II and until 1950.
These group and other thousands who were alleged to be affiliated with them are imprisoned without legal charges, hearing, trial and judgment.
In a tomb in Thebes (Luxor) dated to the 18th dynasty reign of Pharaoh Amenophis II (Amenhotep II), long-necked pots similar to those made by the Ona people are depicted as part of the cargo in a ship from Punt.
Other prominent local musicians include the Kunama singer Dehab Faytinga, Ruth Abraha, Bereket Mengisteab, the late Yemane Baria, and the late Abraham Afewerki.
Among these communities, the Tigrinya make up about 55% of the population, with the Tigre people constituting around 30% of inhabitants.
The group consists of ordinary citizens and some people close to the government.
Statistics vary at the elementary level, suggesting that between 65 and 70% of school-aged children attend primary school; Approximately 61% attend secondary school.
According to Peter Behrens (1981) and Marianne Bechaus-Gerst (2000), linguistic evidence indicates that the C-Group and Kerma peoples spoke Afroasiatic languages of the Berber and Cushitic branches, respectively.
There are also a number of Nilotic ethnic minorities, who are represented in Eritrea by the Kunama and Nara.
The Eritrean government has banned female genital mutilation (FGM), saying the practice was painful and put women at risk of life-threatening health problems.
GDP growth in 1999 fell to less than 1%, and GDP decreased by 8.2% in 2000.
It had long been part of the Ottoman Habesh Eyalet centered in Egypt.
Thousands of Eritreans were concurrently enlisted in the army, serving during the Italo-Turkish War in Libya as well as the First and second Italo-Abyssinian Wars.
The nation has no official language, as the Constitution establishes the "equality of all Eritrean languages".
In Regional Assemblies and religious circles, Eritreans themselves speak out continuously against the use of female circumcision.
The establishment of industries also made an increase in the number of both Italians and Eritreans residing in the cities.
The Eritrea national cycling team has experienced a lot of success, winning the continental cycling championship several years in a row.
However, the Eritrean government has continually dismissed the accusations as politically motivated.
The nation has a total area of approximately , and includes the Dahlak Archipelago and several of the Hanish Islands.
All other faiths and denominations are required to undergo a registration process.
The Independence Bloc of Eritrean parties consistently requested from the UN General Assembly that a referendum be held immediately to settle the Eritrean question of sovereignty.
Eritrea was chosen by the Italian government to be the industrial center of Italian East Africa.
Therefore, radical forms of Islam and Christianity, Jehovah's Witnesses, the Bahá'í Faith (though the Bahá'í Faith is neither Islamic nor Christian), the Seventh-day Adventist Church, and numerous other non-Protestant Evangelical denominations are not registered and cannot worship freely.
, there was only one native adherent of Judaism, Sami Cohen, remaining in Eritrea.
The border conflict cost hundreds of millions of dollars.
At some point after 1672, Aussa declined in conjunction with Imam Umar Din bin Adam's recorded ascension to the throne.
However, they retained control over the seaboard until the establishment of Italian Eritrea in the late 1800s.
An independent census has yet to be conducted, but the Tigrinya people make up about 55% and Tigre people make up about 30% of the population.
His subsequent victory over his rival kings and enthronement as Emperor Menelek&nbsp;II (r.&nbsp;1889–1913) made the treaty formally binding upon the entire territory.
In the 1950s, the Ethiopian feudal administration under Emperor Haile Selassie sought to annex Eritrea and Italian Somaliland.
That 16th century also marked the arrival of the Ottomans, who began making inroads in the Red Sea area.
Overall, Eritrean cuisine strongly resembles those of neighboring Ethiopia, Eritrean cooking tend to feature more seafood than Ethiopian cuisine on account of their coastal location.
Barbara Lochbihler of the European Parliament Subcommittee on Human Rights said the report detailed 'very serious human rights violations', and asserted that EU funding for development would not continue as at present without change in Eritrea.
Each ethnicity speaks a different native tongue but, typically, many of the minorities speak more than one language.
Football and cycling are the most popular sports in Eritrea.
Eritrea's ethnic groups each have their own styles of music and accompanying dances.
Berhane was named African Sportsman of the Year in 2013, while Teklehaimanot became the first Eritrean to ride the Vuelta a España in 2012.
Eritrea's main agricultural products include sorghum, millet, barley, wheat, legumes, vegetables, fruits, sesame, linseed, cattle, sheep, goats and camels.
It is bordered to the northeast and east by the Red Sea, Sudan to the west, Ethiopia to the south, and Djibouti to the southeast.
Compulsory military service was instituted in 1995.
It also oversaw the provision of urban amenities in Asmara and Massawa, and employed many Eritreans in public service, particularly in the police and public works departments.
Amongst the Tigrinya, the best known traditional musical genre is the guaila.
Alongside ''sowa'', people in Eritrea also tend to drink coffee.
In May 2000, the war resulted in some $600 million in property damage and loss, including losses of $225 million in livestock and 55,000 homes.
When Emperor Haile Selassie unilaterally dissolved the Eritrean parliament and annexed the country in 1962, the Eritrean Liberation Front (ELF) waged an armed struggle for independence.
They cite health concerns and individual freedom as being of primary concern when they say this.
The most significant of these projects was the construction of a coastal highway of more than 500&nbsp;km connecting Massawa with Asseb, as well as the rehabilitation of the Eritrean Railway.
Given the presence of a massive temple complex, its capital was most likely at Yeha.
In 1999, the Eritrean Research Project Team composed of Eritrean, Canadian, American, Dutch and French scientists discovered a Paleolithic site with stone and obsidian tools dated to over 125,000 years old near the Bay of Zula south of Massawa, along the Red Sea littoral.
The Eritrean government has dismissed these allegations as politically motivated.
The situation has been further escalated by the continued efforts of the Eritrean and Ethiopian leaders in supporting opposition in one another's countries.
In 1888, the Italian administration launched its first development projects in the new colony.
The EPLF seized power, established a one-party state along nationalist lines and banned further political activity.
Dated to over 1 million years old, it is the oldest skeletal find of its kind and provides a link between hominids and the earliest anatomically modern humans.
This national service was implemented after Eritrea gained its independence from Ethiopia, as a precautionary means to be protected against any threats on Eritrea’s sovereignty, to instill national pride, and to create a disciplined populace.
Most Italians left after Eritrea became independent from Italy.
Eritrean climate varies on the basis of seasonal and altitudinal differences.
Bruce also located Tigré between Red Sea and the river Tekezé and stated many large governments, such as Enderta and Antalow, and the great part of Baharhagash were on the eastern side of Tigré province.
