He avoided complicated syntax.
Late in July, he attached himself to "the 22nd Infantry Regiment commanded by Col. Charles 'Buck' Lanham, as it drove toward Paris", and Hemingway became de facto leader to a small band of village militia in Rambouillet outside of Paris.
While recuperating, he fell in love, for the first time, with Agnes von Kurowsky, a Red Cross nurse seven years his senior.
The incident changed Dos Passos' opinion of the leftist republicans, creating a rift between him and Hemingway, who later spread a rumor that Dos Passos left Spain out of cowardice.
Pauline's uncle bought the couple a house in Key West with a carriage house, the second floor of which was converted into a writing studio.
He could not say how scared he was in another country with surgeons who could not tell him in English if his leg was coming off or not."
In Chicago, he worked as an associate editor of the monthly journal ''Cooperative Commonwealth'', where he met novelist Sherwood Anderson.
Her character supports the theme not only because the idea was presented early on in the novel but also the impact she had on Cohn in the start of the book while only appearing a small number of times.
Use vigorous English.
The last three were stored in a safe deposit box in Havana, as he focused on the finishing touches for ''A Moveable Feast''.
Hemingway's injuries included a head wound, while Mary broke two ribs.
They wanted to visit Rome, but Sherwood Anderson convinced them to visit Paris instead, writing letters of introduction for the young couple.
As an adult, Hemingway professed to hate his mother, although biographer Michael S. Reynolds points out that Hemingway mirrored her energy and enthusiasm.
Stoltzfus considers Hemingway's work to be more complex with a representation of the truth inherent in existentialism: if "nothingness" is embraced, then redemption is achieved at the moment of death.
On July 25, 1960, Hemingway and Mary left Cuba, never to return.
As soon as he arrived, however, Lanham handed him to the doctors, who hospitalized him with pneumonia; by the time that he recovered a week later, most of the fighting in this battle was over.
If you leave or skip something because you do not know it, the story will be worthless.
Despite his injuries, Hemingway accompanied Patrick and his wife on a planned fishing expedition in February, but pain caused him to be irascible and difficult to get along with.
They returned to Cuba before the declaration of war by the United States that December, when he convinced the Cuban government to help him refit the ''Pilar'', which he intended to use to ambush German submarines off the coast of Cuba.
Stein, who was the bastion of modernism in Paris, became Hemingway's mentor and godmother to his son Jack; she introduced him to the expatriate artists and writers of the Montparnasse Quarter, whom she referred to as the "Lost Generation"—a term Hemingway popularized with the publication of ''The Sun Also Rises''.
Henry Louis Gates believes Hemingway's style was fundamentally shaped "in reaction to his experience of world war".
Zoe Trodd believes Hemingway crafted skeletal sentences in response to Henry James's observation that World War&nbsp;I had "used up words".
Those who face death with dignity and courage live an authentic life.
During their absence, Hemingway's first book, ''Three Stories and Ten Poems'', was published.
According to Stoltzfus and Fiedler, in Hemingway's work, nature is a place for rebirth and rest; and it is where the hunter or fisherman might experience a moment of transcendence at the moment they kill their prey.
He missed Paris, considered Toronto boring, and wanted to return to the life of a writer, rather than live the life of a journalist.
After World War&nbsp;I, he and other modernists "lost faith in the central institutions of Western civilization" by reacting against the elaborate style of 19th-century writers and by creating a style "in which meaning is established through dialogue, through action, and silences—a fiction in which nothing crucial—or at least very little—is stated explicitly."
In the spring of 1939, Hemingway crossed to Cuba in his boat to live in the Hotel Ambos Mundos in Havana.
Hemingway's marriage to Hadley deteriorated as he was working on ''The Sun Also Rises''.
The popularity of Hemingway's work depends on its themes of love, war, wilderness and loss, all of which are strongly evident in the body of work.
Hemingway was devastated on learning that Hadley had lost a suitcase filled with his manuscripts at the Gare de Lyon as she was traveling to Geneva to meet him in December 1922.
His father, Clarence Edmonds Hemingway, was a physician, and his mother, Grace Hall-Hemingway, was a musician.
Added to Hemingway's physical ailments was the additional problem that he had been a heavy drinker for most of his life.
Its location across the street from the lighthouse made it easy for Hemingway to find after a long night of drinking.
On their way to photograph Murchison Falls from the air, the plane struck an abandoned utility pole and "crash landed in heavy brush".
''For Whom the Bell Tolls'' became a Book-of-the-Month Club choice, sold half a million copies within months, was nominated for a Pulitzer Prize, and as Meyers describes it, "triumphantly re-established Hemingway's literary reputation".
Of the funeral (during which an altar boy fainted at the head of the casket), Hemingway's brother Leicester wrote: "It seemed to me Ernest would have approved of it all."
Hemingway's mother frequently performed in concerts around the village.
In January 1941, Martha was sent to China on assignment for ''Collier's'' magazine.
Hemingway's polysyndetonic sentence—or in later works his use of subordinate clauses—uses conjunctions to juxtapose startling visions and images; Jackson Benson compares them to haikus.
''Cosmopolitan'' magazine editor-in-chief Ray Long praised "Fifty Grand", calling it, "one of the best short stories that ever came to my hands&nbsp;... the best prize-fight story I ever read&nbsp;... a remarkable piece of realism."
The test of any story is how very good the stuff that you, not your editors, omit."
Hemingway believed the writer could describe one thing (such as Nick Adams fishing in "The Big Two-Hearted River") though an entirely different thing occurs below the surface (Nick Adams concentrating on fishing to the extent that he does not have to think about anything else).
Hemingway's legacy to American literature is his style: writers who came after him emulated it or avoided it.
Nonetheless, in January 1946, he began work on ''The Garden of Eden'', finishing 800 pages by June.
In the late spring, Hemingway and Pauline traveled to Kansas City, where their son Patrick was born on June 28, 1928.
Medical records made available in 1991 confirm that Hemingway had also been diagnosed with hemochromatosis in early 1961.
Benson believes the details of Hemingway's life have become a "prime vehicle for exploitation", resulting in a Hemingway industry.
To Hotchner’s surprise, in 1980, when the FBI was forced to release some of its least-damning Hemingway files, it turned out Hemingway was right.
On Hemingway's return to Key West in early 1934, he began work on ''Green Hills of Africa'', which he published in 1935 to mixed reviews.
Later that year, he was present at heavy fighting in the Battle of Hürtgen Forest.
The accidents may have precipitated the physical deterioration that was to follow.
In Spain during the summer of 1929, Hemingway researched his next work, ''Death in the Afternoon''.
In 1980, a group of Hemingway scholars gathered to assess the donated papers, subsequently forming the Hemingway Society, "committed to supporting and fostering Hemingway scholarship."
On his first day in Milan, he was sent to the scene of a munitions factory explosion, where rescuers retrieved the shredded remains of female workers.
In October 1954, Hemingway received the Nobel Prize in Literature.
Hemingway sets the events in "Indian Camp" that shape the Adams persona.
However, both projects stalled, and Mellow says that Hemingway's inability to continue was "a symptom of his troubles" during these years.
The last time that Hemingway saw Martha was in March 1945 as he was preparing to return to Cuba, and their divorce was finalized later that same year.
During this period, he suffered from severe headaches, high blood pressure, weight problems, and eventually diabetes—much of which was the result of previous accidents and many years of heavy drinking.
He also uses other cinematic techniques of "cutting" quickly from one scene to the next; or of "splicing" a scene into another.
Many of Hemingway's followers misinterpreted his lead and frowned upon all expression of emotion; Saul Bellow satirized this style as "Do you have emotions?
During this period he also worked on ''To Have and Have Not'', published in 1937 while he was in Spain, the only novel he wrote during the 1930s.
By June, he was at the Italian Front.
Hemingway was raised in Oak Park, Illinois.
In an overall assessment of Hemingway's work Beegel has written: "Throughout his remarkable body of fiction, he tells the truth about human fear, guilt, betrayal, violence, cruelty, drunkenness, hunger, greed, apathy, ecstasy, tenderness, love and lust."
Despite being older than Hemingway, Hadley, who had grown up with an overprotective mother, seemed less mature than usual for a young woman her age.
The FBI had, in fact, opened a file on him during World War II, when he used the ''Pilar'' to patrol the waters off Cuba, and J. Edgar Hoover had an agent in Havana watch Hemingway during the 1950s.
The syntax, which lacks subordinating conjunctions, creates static sentences.
While there, Hemingway fell in love with the then 19-year-old Adriana Ivancich.
Author Michael Reynolds claims it was during this period that Hemingway slid into depression, from which he was unable to recover.
From 1913 until 1917, Hemingway attended Oak Park and River Forest High School where he took part in a number of sports, namely boxing, track and field, water polo, and football.
Hemingway, who had been disgusted when a Parisian friend allowed his cats to eat from the table, became enamored of cats in Cuba, keeping dozens of them on the property.
In 1921, he married Hadley Richardson, the first of his four wives.
He continued to contribute to and to edit the ''Trapeze'' and the ''Tabula'' (the school's newspaper and yearbook), for which he imitated the language of sportswriters, and used the pen name Ring Lardner, Jr.—a nod to Ring Lardner of the ''Chicago Tribune'' whose byline was "Line O'Type".
Although Hemingway does write about sports, such as fishing, Carlos Baker notes the emphasis is more on the athlete than the sport.
Hemingway, Hadley and their son (nicknamed Bumby) returned to Paris in January 1924 and moved into a new apartment on the rue Notre-Dame des Champs.
For the first time in his life unable to organize his writing, he asked A. E. Hotchner to travel to Cuba to help.
The theme of emasculation is prevalent in Hemingway's work, most notably in ''The Sun Also Rises''.
Both were well-educated and well-respected in the conservative community of Oak Park, a community about which resident  Frank Lloyd Wright said, "So many churches for so many good people to go to".
This left him with a prominent forehead scar, which he carried for the rest of his life.
During the post–war years, he also began work on a trilogy tentatively titled "The Land", "The Sea" and "The Air", which he wanted to combine in one novel titled ''The Sea Book''.
A 1947 car accident left Patrick with a head wound and severely ill. Hemingway sank into depression as his literary friends began to die: in 1939 William Butler Yeats and Ford Madox Ford; in 1940 Scott Fitzgerald; in 1941 Sherwood Anderson and James Joyce; in 1946 Gertrude Stein; and the following year in 1947, Max Perkins, Hemingway's long-time Scribner's editor and friend.
The better writers in class submitted pieces to ''The Trapeze,'' the school newspaper.
When St. Louis native Hadley Richardson came to Chicago to visit the sister of Hemingway's roommate, he became infatuated and later claimed, "I knew she was the girl I was going to marry".
However, Hemingway's intent was not to eliminate emotion, but to portray it more scientifically.
Mellow explains that, on that first day, none of the correspondents were allowed to land and Hemingway was returned to the ''Dorothea Dix''.
Use short first paragraphs.
The Hemingway of the early Paris years was a "tall, handsome, muscular, broad-shouldered, brown-eyed, rosy-cheeked, square-jawed, soft-voiced young man."
From May 1944 to March 1945, Hemingway was in London and Europe.
He published seven novels, six short story collections, and two non-fiction works.
Within months a second volume, ''in our time'' (without capitals), was published.
The couple moved to Paris, where he worked as a foreign correspondent and fell under the influence of the modernist writers and artists of the 1920s "Lost Generation" expatriate community.
Hemingway produced most of his work between the mid-1920s and the mid-1950s, and won the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1954.
Robert Scholes admits that early Hemingway stories, such as "A Very Short Story", present "a male character favorably and a female unfavorably".
Unsympathetic to his plight, she accused him of being a bully and told him that she was "through, absolutely finished".
Benson compares them to haikus.
In July 1960, the Hemingways left Cuba for the last time, leaving art and manuscripts in a bank vault in Havana.
In a letter to Hemingway, Salinger claimed their talks "had given him his only hopeful minutes of the entire war" and jokingly "named himself national chairman of the Hemingway Fan Clubs."
Their guide was the noted "white hunter" Philip Hope Percival who had guided Theodore Roosevelt on his 1909 safari.
These are recurring themes in American literature, and quite are clearly evident in Hemingway's work.
For a short period after their marriage, Clarence and Grace Hemingway lived with Grace's father, Ernest Hall, who eventually became their first son's namesake.
Upon re-claiming and opening the trunks, Hemingway discovered that the trunks were filled with notebooks and writing from his Paris years.
He and Hadley lived in a small walk-up at 74 rue du Cardinal Lemoine  in the Latin Quarter, and he worked in a rented room in a nearby building.
Intentional omissions allow the reader to fill the gap, as though responding to instructions from the author, and create three-dimensional prose.
Through the end of the 1950s, Hemingway continued to rework the material that would be published as ''A Moveable Feast''.
''The Old Man and the Sea'' became a book-of-the-month selection, made Hemingway an international celebrity, and won the Pulitzer Prize in May 1952, a month before he left for his second trip to Africa.
Six months earlier, Hemingway had met F. Scott Fitzgerald, and the pair formed a friendship of "admiration and hostility".
This use of an image as an objective correlative is characteristic of Ezra Pound, T. S. Eliot, James Joyce, and Proust.
Hemingway scholar Hallengren believes the "hard boiled style" and the machismo must be separated from the author himself.
A few days later, he was reported in the news to be seriously ill and on the verge of dying, which panicked Mary until she received a cable from him telling her, "Reports false.
Pfeiffer, who was from a wealthy Catholic Arkansas family, had moved to  Paris to work for ''Vogue'' magazine.
When Hemingway was asked about the scar, he was reluctant to answer.
He wanted to write a comprehensive treatise on bullfighting, explaining the ''toreros'' and ''corridas'' complete with glossaries and appendices, because he believed bullfighting was "of great tragic interest, being literally of life and death."
After the 1961 Bay of Pigs Invasion, the Finca Vigia was expropriated by the Cuban government, complete with Hemingway's collection of "four to six thousand books".
He spent six months at the hospital, where he met and formed a strong friendship with "Chink" Dorman-Smith that lasted for decades and shared a room with future American foreign service officer, ambassador, and author Henry Serrano Villard.
Her death was later ruled a suicide, making her "the fifth person in four generations of her family to commit suicide."
In 1959 he bought a home overlooking the Big Wood River, outside Ketchum, and left Cuba—although he apparently remained on easy terms with the Castro government, telling ''The New York Times'' he was "delighted" with Castro's overthrow of Batista.
The American poet Ezra Pound met Hemingway by chance at Sylvia Beach's bookshop Shakespeare and Company in 1922.
Later Ernest Hemingway would say that he disliked his name, which he "associated with the naive, even foolish hero of Oscar Wilde's play ''The Importance of Being Earnest''".
By the end of the year Pauline, who was pregnant, wanted to move back to America.
While in Key West, Hemingway frequented the local bar Sloppy Joe's.
In 1954, when Hemingway was awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature, it was for "his mastery of the art of narrative, most recently demonstrated in ''The Old Man and the Sea'', and for the influence that he has exerted on contemporary style."
Mary called the Sun Valley Hospital, and a doctor quickly arrived at the house.
His third son, Gregory Hancock Hemingway, was born a year later on November 12, 1931, in Kansas City.
Excited about the discovery, when he returned to Cuba in 1957, he began to shape the recovered work into his memoir ''A Moveable Feast''.
Young believes "Indian Camp" holds the "master key" to "what its author was up to for some thirty-five years of his writing career".
Francis Macomber dies happy because the last hours of his life are authentic; the bullfighter in the corrida represents the pinnacle of a life lived with authenticity.
In 1947, Hemingway was awarded a Bronze Star for his bravery during World War&nbsp;II.
According to Rena Sanderson, early Hemingway critics lauded his male-centric world of masculine pursuits, and the fiction divided women into "castrators or love-slaves".
Jackson Benson believes Hemingway used autobiographical details as framing devices about life in general—not only about his life.
Hemingway thought it would be easy, and pointless, to describe emotions; he sculpted collages of images in order to grasp "the real thing, the sequence of motion and fact which made the emotion and which would be as valid in a year or in ten years or, with luck and if you stated it purely enough, always".
Martha soon joined him in Cuba, and they almost immediately rented "Finca Vigia" ("Lookout Farm"), a  property  from Havana.
In October 1956, he returned to Europe and met Basque writer Pio Baroja, who was seriously ill and died weeks later.
In the spring of 1926, Hadley became aware of his affair with Pfeiffer, who came to Pamplona with them that July.
The American West is given a symbolic nod with the naming of the "Hotel Montana" in ''The Sun Also Rises'' and ''For Whom the Bell Tolls''.
It was published in October 1940.
Typical, according to Beegel, is an analysis of Hemingway's 1926 novel, ''The Sun Also Rises'', in which a critic contended: "Hemingway never lets the reader forget that Cohn is a Jew, not an unattractive character who happens to be a Jew but a character who is unattractive because he is a Jew."
In November 1956, while staying in Paris, he was reminded of trunks he had stored in the Ritz Hotel in 1928 and never retrieved.
From the end of the year in 1955 to early 1956, Hemingway was bedridden.
Pauline had a difficult delivery, which Hemingway fictionalized in ''A Farewell to Arms''.
Both his sister Ursula, and his brother Leicester also committed suicide.
In 1937, Hemingway agreed to report on the Spanish Civil War for the North American Newspaper Alliance (NANA), arriving in Spain in March with Dutch filmmaker Joris Ivens.
Pauline and the children left Hemingway that summer, after the family was reunited during a visit to Wyoming, and when Hemingway's divorce from Pauline was finalized, he and Martha were married November 20, 1940, in Cheyenne, Wyoming.
In Paris, he visited Sylvia Beach and Pablo Picasso with Mary Welsh, who joined him there; in a spirit of happiness, he forgave Gertrude Stein.
Gellhorn inspired him to write his most famous novel, ''For Whom the Bell Tolls,'' which he started in March 1939 and finished in July 1940.
Although he stayed there for only six months, he relied on the ''Star'''s style guide as a foundation for his writing: "Use short sentences.
For example, Benson postulates that Hemingway used his experiences and drew them out with "what if" scenarios: "what if I were wounded in such a way that I could not sleep at night?
Montblanc offers a Hemingway fountain pen, and a line of Hemingway safari clothes has been created.
A family friend offered him a job in Toronto, and with nothing else to do, he accepted.
Shortly after the publication of ''The Old Man and the Sea'' (1952), Hemingway went on safari to Africa, where he was almost killed in two successive plane crashes that left him in pain or ill health for much of his remaining life.
Other people get killed; not you&nbsp;... Then when you are badly wounded the first time you lose that illusion and you know it can happen to you."
The completed novel was published on September 27.
A few days after the fiesta ended, on his birthday (July 21), he began to write the draft of what would become ''The Sun Also Rises'', finishing eight weeks later.
The serialization in ''Scribner's Magazine'' was scheduled to begin in May, but as late as April, Hemingway was still working on the ending, which he may have rewritten as many as seventeen times.
About 70 percent of the sentences are simple sentences—a childlike syntax without subordination.
He left New York in May and arrived in Paris as the city was under bombardment from German artillery.
Hemingway was present at the Normandy Landings wearing a large head bandage but, according to Meyers, he was considered "precious cargo" and not allowed ashore.
Benson agrees, describing him as introverted and private as J. D. Salinger, although Hemingway masked his nature with braggadocio.
In 1918, he was seriously wounded and returned home.
In his junior year, he took a journalism class, taught by Fannie Biggs, which was structured "as though the classroom were a newspaper office".
Not yet 20 years old, he had gained from the war a maturity that was at odds with living at home without a job and with the need for recuperation.
Hotchner found Hemingway to be "unusually hesitant, disorganized, and confused", and suffering badly from failing eyesight.
Entrants are encouraged to submit one "really good page of really bad Hemingway" and winners are flown to Italy to Harry's Bar.
Reynolds was able to access Hemingway's records at the Mayo, which indicated that the combination of medications given to Hemingway may have created the depressive state for which he was treated.
He returned to Key West for a few months, then back to Spain twice in 1938, where he was present at the Battle of the Ebro, the last republican stand, and he was among the British and American journalists who were some of the last to leave the battle as they crossed the river.
A few months later, in December 1925, the Hemingways left to spend the winter in Schruns, Austria, where Hemingway began revising the manuscript extensively.
Early in 1918, Hemingway responded to a Red Cross recruitment effort in Kansas City and signed on to become an ambulance driver in Italy.
After the plane crashes, Hemingway, who had been "a thinly controlled alcoholic throughout much of his life, drank more heavily than usual to combat the pain of his injuries."
Emasculation, according to Fiedler, is a result of a generation of wounded soldiers; and of a generation in which women such as Brett gained emancipation.
Hemingway returned home early in 1919 to a time of readjustment.
Biographer Jeffrey Meyers states in his book ''Hemingway: A Biography'' that Hemingway was devastated by Agnes' rejection, and in future relationships, he followed a pattern of abandoning a wife before she abandoned him.
He left Austria for a quick trip to New York to meet with the publishers, and on his return, during a stop in Paris, began an affair with Pfeiffer, before returning to Schruns to finish the revisions in March.
She called Saviers who sedated him and admitted him to the Sun Valley hospital; from there he was returned to the Mayo Clinic for more electro shock treatments.
Hadley was red-haired, with a "nurturing instinct", and eight years older than Hemingway.
A line of Hemingway furniture, promoted by Hemingway's son Jack (Bumby), has pieces such as the "Kilimanjaro" bedside table, and a "Catherine" slip-covered sofa.
He had finished it in August but delayed the revision.
His iceberg theory of omission is the foundation on which he builds.
He excelled in English classes and performed in the school orchestra with his sister Marcelline for two years.
Critic Leslie Fiedler sees the theme he defines as "The Sacred Land"—the American West—extended in Hemingway's work to include mountains in Spain, Switzerland and Africa, and to the streams of Michigan.
During his first 20 months in Paris, Hemingway filed 88 stories for the ''Toronto Star'' newspaper.
A few days later, he was stationed at Fossalta di Piave.
He had unlocked the basement storeroom where his guns were kept, gone upstairs to the front entrance foyer of their Ketchum home, and according to Mellow, with the "double-barreled shotgun that he had used so often it might have been a friend", he shot himself.
Family and friends flew to Ketchum for the funeral, officiated by the local Catholic priest who believed Hemingway's death accidental.
Like Mark Twain, Stephen Crane, Theodore Dreiser and Sinclair Lewis, Hemingway was a journalist before becoming a novelist; after leaving high school he went to work for ''The Kansas City Star'' as a cub reporter.
Many types of internal punctuation (colons, semicolons, dashes, parentheses) are omitted in favor of short declarative sentences.
The International Imitation Hemingway Competition was created in 1977 to publicly acknowledge his influence and the comically misplaced efforts of lesser authors to imitate his style.
A 2009 book suggests during that period he may have been recruited to work for Soviet intelligence agents under the name "Agent Argo".
As Reynolds explains, "Hemingway could not really tell his parents what he thought when he saw his bloody knee.
On July 8, he was seriously wounded by mortar fire, having just returned from the canteen bringing chocolate and cigarettes for the men at the front line.
He eventually withdrew from Stein's influence and their relationship deteriorated into a literary quarrel that spanned decades.
He was recognized for his valor, having been "under fire in combat areas in order to obtain an accurate picture of conditions", with the commendation that "through his talent of expression, Mr. Hemingway enabled readers to obtain a vivid picture of the difficulties and triumphs of the front-line soldier and his organization in combat".
Hemingway himself later wrote to his editor Max Perkins that the "point of the book" was not so much about a generation being lost, but that "the earth abideth forever"; he believed the characters in ''The Sun Also Rises'' may have been "battered" but were not lost.
Fitzgerald had published ''The Great Gatsby'' the same year: Hemingway read it, liked it, and decided his next work had to be a novel.
He sustained severe shrapnel wounds to both legs, underwent an immediate operation at a distribution center, and spent five days at a field hospital before he was transferred for recuperation to the Red Cross hospital in Milan.
They split their possessions while Hadley accepted Hemingway's offer of the proceeds from ''The Sun Also Rises''.
Hemingway later wrote in ''Collier's'' that he could see "the first, second, third, fourth and fifth waves of landing troops lay where they had fallen, looking like so many heavily laden bundles on the flat pebbly stretch between the sea and first cover."
Hotchner believes that FBI's surveillance "substantially contributed to his friend's anguish and .
After his reputation was established with the publication of ''The Sun Also Rises'', he became the spokesperson for the post–World War&nbsp;I generation, having established a style to follow.
He returned to Michigan the following June and then moved to Chicago in September 1920 to live with friends, while still filing stories for the ''Toronto Star''.
