Rommel's counterattack at 11:00 inflicted severe casualties on the Commonwealth troops, but by 20:00, with only 35 tanks remaining, he ordered his forces to disengage and begin to withdraw.
Improved decoding by British intelligence meant that the Allies had advance knowledge of virtually every Mediterranean convoy, and only 30 per cent of shipments were getting through.
After the war, his widow—among others—maintained that Rommel believed an assassination attempt would spark civil war in Germany and Austria, and Hitler would have become a martyr for a lasting cause.
In North Africa, Rommel received help in cultivating his image from , a senior official at the Reich Propaganda Ministry who had volunteered for military service.
When Rommel lost faith in the final victory and Hitler's leadership, Hitler and Goebbels tried to find an alternative in Manstein to remedy the fighting will and "political direction" of other generals but did not succeed.
The German 37&nbsp;mm anti-tank gun proved ineffective against the heavily-armoured Matildas.
Hilter replied "Dear Rommel, you understand nothing about my thinking at all".
He argued that the German armour should be held in reserve well inland near Paris where they could be used to counter-attack in force in a more traditional military doctrine.
The 7 June counterattack did not take place as the 12th SS did not arrive on time due to the Allied air bombardments.
The role that Rommel played in the military's resistance against Hitler or the 20 July plot is difficult to ascertain, as people most directly involved did not survive and limited documentation on the conspirators' plans and preparations exists.
Rommel supported the Nazi seizure of power and Adolf Hitler, although his attitude towards Nazi ideology and level of knowledge in the regime's crimes remain a matter of debate among scholars.
By mid-July the German position was crumbling.
Those parts of Panzerarmee Africa that were motorized slipped away from El Alamein, but were under pressure from the pursuing Eighth Army.
French historian  states the number of victims by 7th Panzer Division in Airaines at 109 mostly French-African soldiers from Senegal.
The defeat resulted in Churchill replacing Wavell with General Claude Auchinleck as theatre commander.
Some authors like Sadkovich blame Rommel for abandoning his Italian units, refusing cooperation, rarely acknowledging their achievements and other erroneous behaviours towards his Italian allies, while others point out that the Italians under Rommel, in comparison with many of their compatriots in other areas, were better led, supplied and trained, and fought well as a result, with a ratio of wounded and killed Italians similar to that of the Germans.
Rommel insisted on a defensive line north of Rome, while Kesselring was more optimistic and advocated holding a line south of Rome.
Goebbels supported the decision, noting in his diary that Rommel was "undoubtedly the suitable man" for the task.
When Rommel's alleged involvement in the plot to kill Hitler became known after the war, his stature was enhanced in the eyes of his former adversaries.
On one hand, he wanted personal promotion and the realization of his ideals.
The Allies pushed ashore and expanded their beachhead despite strong German resistance.
By now, Rommel's remaining forces fought in reduced strength combat groups, whereas the Allied forces had great numerical superiority and control of the air.
When Rommel learned about the atrocities ''SS Division Leibstandarte'' committed in Italy in September 1943, he allegedly forbade his son to join the Waffen-SS.
Rommel placed a thin screen of mobile forces before them, and held the main force of the Panzerarmee well back near Antela and Mersa Brega.
Maurice Remy concludes that, unwillingly and probably without ever realising, Rommel was part of a murderous regime, although he never actually grasped the core of National Socialism.
He memorized logarithm tables in his spare time, and enjoyed skiing and other outdoor sports.
General Siegfried F. Storbeck, Deputy Inspector General of the Bundeswehr (1987–1991), remarks that, Rommel's leadership style and offensive thinking, although carrying inherent risks like losing the overview of the situation and creating overlapping of authority, have been proved effective, and have been analysed and incorporated in the training of officers by "us, our Western allies, the Warsaw Pact, and even the Israel Defense Forces."
On 22 June, Hitler promoted Rommel to Generalfeldmarschall for this victory.
Telp remarks that, "For all his craftiness, Rommel was chivalrous by nature and not prone to order or condone acts of needless violence&nbsp;...
Others point out that through his career, he frequently fought while out-numbered and out-gunned, sometimes overwhelmingly so, while having to deal with internal opponents in Germany who hoped that he would fail.
To ensure that the inevitable defeat in Africa would not be associated with Rommel's name, Goebbels had the Supreme High Command announce in May 1943 that Rommel was on a two-month leave for health reasons.
Engaging the Allied tanks located there became Rommel's primary objective.
Rommel moved those armoured formations under his command as far forward as possible, ordering General Erich Marcks, commanding the 84th Corps defending the Normandy section, to move his reserves into the frontline.
This effort resulted only in partial success, with Kesselring's own relationship with the Italian being unsteady and Kesselring claiming Rommel ignored him as easily as he ignored the Italians.
Unknown to Rommel, his troops passed within  of a major British supply dump.
By nightfall, Rundstedt, Rommel and Speidel continued to believe that the Normandy landing might have been a diversionary attack, as the Allied deception measures still pointed towards Calais.
In the wake of the successful British offensive in November 1942 and other military reverses, the Propaganda Ministry directed the media to emphasize Rommel's invincibility.
Rommel would have known this, having commanded Hitler's army protection detail in 1939.
While at Cadet School in 1911, Rommel met and became engaged to 17-year-old Lucia (Lucie) Maria Mollin (1894–1971).
He learned that taking initiative and not letting the enemy forces to regroup led to victory.
Rommel's experiences on the Italian front in the First World War which gained successes against opponents shaped Rommel's subsequent style as a military commander.
After the failed bomb attack of 20 July, many conspirators were arrested and the dragnet expanded to thousands.
Command was handed over to General Hans-Jürgen von Arnim.
Rommel for his part was highly critical of Himmler, Halder, the High Command and particularly Goering who Rommel at one point called his "bitterest enemy".
Hitler displayed the same emotions.
Following his success in Battleaxe, Rommel returned his attention to the capture of Tobruk.
Von Rundstedt encouraged Rommel to carry out his plans but refused to do anything himself, remarking that it had to be a man who was still young and loved by the people, while von Manstein was also approached by Rommel but categorically refused, although he did not report them to Hitler either.
Despite this, French civilians and Italian prisoners of war held by the Germans were forced by officials under the Vichy government, the Todt Organization and the SS forces to work on building some of the defences Rommel ordered constructed, in appalling conditions according to historian Will Fowler.
On the 28th, Montgomery shifted his focus to the coast, ordering his 1st and 10th Armoured Divisions to attempt to swing around and cut off Rommel's line of retreat.
Auchinleck had 770 tanks and double the number of Axis aircraft.
Threatened with being completely cut off, the British began a retreat eastward toward Egypt on 14 June, the so-called "Gazala Gallop."
By this time it was impossible for Rommel to save his non-motorized units.
Five minutes later Burgdorf gestured to the two men to return to the car, and Doose noticed that Rommel was slumped over, having taken the cyanide.
Under torture, Hofacker named Rommel as one of the participants.
Here he first met Hitler, who inspected his troops on 30 September 1934.
However, in view of the Axis' deteriorating situation in Africa, they returned to Germany in September.
The High Command and Hitler had been extremely nervous about his disappearance, although they awarded him the Knight's Cross.
Before going to his death, Rommel denied involvement in the plot, declared his love for Hitler and that he would gladly serve his "Fatherland" again.
In May 1944 the German newsreels reported on Rommel's speech at a Wehrmacht conference, where he stated his conviction that "every single German soldier will make his contribution against the Anglo-American spirit that it deserves for its criminal and bestial air war campaign against our homeland".
The British had retaken almost all of Cyrenaica, but Rommel's retreat dramatically shortened his supply lines.
While awaiting further reinforcements and a shipment of 300 tanks that were already on their way, Wavell launched a limited offensive code named Operation Brevity on 15 May.
Eric Dorman-Smith claimed that it was a "pity we could not have combined with Rommel to clean up the whole mess on both sides".
Rommel's Panzer Army Africa had a force of 320 German tanks; 50 of these were the light Panzer II model.
Trying to fulfill a mission assigned to him by the Ministry of War, Rommel had proposed a plan (twice) that would have effectively subordinated Hitler Youth to the army, removing it from the NSDAP control.
The arrest plan would have been highly improbable, as Hitler's security was extremely tight.
The other foundational text was the influential and laudatory 1950 biography ''Rommel: The Desert Fox'' by Brigadier Desmond Young.
Rommel's relationship with the Italian High Command in North Africa was generally poor.
Rommel continued his pursuit of the Eighth Army, which had fallen back to heavily prepared defensive positions at El Alamein.
Meanwhile, Rommel concentrated his attack on the Allied salient at Kidney Ridge, inflicting heavy losses.
Rommel ordered the 5th Light Division to unload all their lorries and return to El Agheila to collect fuel and ammunition.
This was followed by another bloodless defence of Schwäbisch Gmünd.
This conversation happened about a month before Rommel had to commit suicide.
On 17 July 1944, Rommel was returning from visiting the headquarters of the I SS Panzer Corps.
Rommel realised that the tide was turning.
The seeds of the myth can be found first in Rommel's drive for success as a young officer in World War I, and then in his popular 1937 book ''Infantry Attacks'', which was written in a style that diverged from the German military literature of the time and became a bestseller.
Toward the end of the year, the Reich propaganda machine also used Rommel's successes in Africa as a diversion from the Wehrmacht's challenging situation in the Soviet Union with the stall of Operation Barbarossa.
The fact that his state funeral was held in Ulm instead of Berlin had, according to his son, been stipulated by Rommel.
He expected his subordinate commanders to do the same.
A series of short delaying actions were fought over the coastal highway, but no line could be held for any length of time, as Rommel lacked the armour and fuel to defend his open southern flank.
On 30 May Rommel resumed the offensive, attacking westwards to link with elements of Italian X Corps, which had cleared a path through the Allied minefields to establish a supply line.
He ordered the 5th Panzer Division to move to the west and 7th Panzer Division to the east, flanked by the 3rd SS Panzer Division ''Totenkopf''.
The German news magazine ''Der Spiegel'' described the myth in 2007 as "Gentleman warrior, military genius".
Some historians, such as Zabecki and , take issue with Rommel's absence from Normandy on the day of the Allied invasion, 6 June 1944.
On the other hand, Watson comments that, regarding the Afrika Korps, any Nazi indoctrination was minimised, allowing Rommel the freedom to reinvent his army in his own style.
Meanwhile, earlier in the day, Rundstedt had requested the reserves be transferred to his command.
The Commander-in-Chief West, Gerd von Rundstedt, believed there was no way to stop the invasion near the beaches due to the firepower possessed by the Allied navies, as had been experienced at Salerno.
While at Dresden, he wrote a manual on infantry training, published in 1934, and his book ''Infanterie Greift An'' (''Infantry Attacks''), a description of his wartime experiences along with his analysis, published in 1937.
The strongest evidence that points to the possibility that Rommel came to support the assassination plan was General Eberbach's confession to his son (eavesdropped by British agencies) while in British captivity, which stated that Rommel explicitly said to him that Hitler and his close associates had to be killed because this would be the only way out for Germany.
The airfield at Sidi Rezegh was retaken by 21st Panzer on 22 November.
Caught by surprise by the Afrika Korps, the Allies lost over 110 tanks and other heavy equipment.
In addition to the Afrika Korps, Rommel's Panzer Group had the 90th Light Division and four Italian divisions, three infantry divisions investing Tobruk, and one holding Bardia.
The 2nd New Zealand Division and 50th (Northumbrian) Infantry Division were almost caught, with 50th Division fleeing on the 27th and 2nd Division escaping after a short engagement during the pre-dawn hours of 28 June.
Under heavy fire from British artillery and aircraft, and in the face of well prepared positions that Rommel could not hope to outflank due to lack of fuel, the attack stalled.
The Siege of Lille continued until 31 May, when the French garrison of 40,000 men surrendered.
The Allies staged elaborate deceptions for D-Day (see Operation Fortitude), giving the impression that the landings would be at Calais.
Robin Neillands and Roderick De Normann report that German soldiers as well as Russian and Polish renegades were used to avoid forced labour.
Heavy rains slowed movements and grounded the Desert Air Force, which aided the withdrawal.
Burgdorf informed him of the charges and offered him a choice: he could choose to defend himself personally to Hitler in Berlin, or if he refused to do so (which would be taken as an admission of guilt), he would either face the People's Court—which would have been tantamount to a death sentence—or choose a quiet suicide.
As Rommel attempted to withdraw his forces before the British could cut off his retreat, he fought a series of delaying actions.
Telp criticised Rommel for not extending the benevolence he showed in promoting his own officers' careers to his peers, who he ignored or slighted in his reports.
Knowing Gariboldi could not speak German, Rommel told him the message gave him complete freedom of action.
Meanwhile, Italian infantry cleared a path through the mines to provide supplies.
Rommel knew that delay would only benefit the British, who continued to receive supplies at a faster rate than Rommel could hope to achieve.
Rommel and his troops were technically subordinate to Italian commander-in-chief General Italo Gariboldi.
Rommel's grave is located in Herrlingen, a short distance west of Ulm.
The American press soon began to take notice of Rommel as well, following the country's entry into the war on 11 December 1941, writing that "The British (...) admire him because he beat them and were surprised to have beaten in turn such a capable general".
While he had much indignation towards German's contemporary class problem, this self-association with the Common Men went along well with his desire to simulate the knights of the past, who also led from the front.
Seconded by Goebbels, Berndt was assigned to Rommel's staff and became one of his closest aides.
Following his success at Gazala and Tobruk, Rommel wanted to seize the moment and not allow 8th Army a chance to regroup.
Conversely, as the Italian command had control over the supplies of the forces in Africa, they resupplied Italian units preferentially, which was a source of resentment for Rommel and his staff.
Ten minutes later the group telephoned Rommel's wife to inform her of Rommel's death.
The fortress fell on 29 June.
Many authors describe him as having a reputation of being chivalrous, humane, and professional officer and that he earned the respect of both his own troops and his enemies.
On 4 May Paulus ordered that no further attempts should be made to take Tobruk via a direct assault.
Historian Martin Kitchen states that the reputation of the Afrika Korps was preserved due to circumstances: the sparsely populated desert areas did not lend themselves to ethnic cleansing; the German forces never reached Egypt and Palestine that had large Jewish populations; and in the urban areas of Tunisia and Tripolitania, the Italian government constrained the German efforts to discriminate against or eliminate Jews who were Italian citizens.
In August, Rommel was appointed commander of the newly created Panzer Group Africa, with Fritz Bayerlein as his chief of staff.
The same had most likely been done in North Africa, however this is disputed by historian Szymon Datner who wrote that  Rommel might have been simply trying to conceal atrocities of Nazi Germany from the Allies  Other authors argue that generosity to opponents was a natural trait of the man, like Claus Telp who states that Rommel by nature was chivalrous and not prone to order needless violence, or Robert Forczyk who considers Rommel a true great captain with chivalry.
This invasion was later cancelled as Germany was not able to acquire the air superiority deemed a necessity for a successful outcome.
On 4 April Rommel was advised by his supply officers that fuel was running short, which could result in a delay of up to four days.
Himmler, who played a decisive role in Rommel's death, tried to blame Keitel and Jodl for the deed, which indeed was initiated by Keitel and Jodl, who deeply resented Rommel's meteoric rise and had long feared that he would become the Commander-in-Chief.
He has even thought and brought out practical suggestions for each program and subject."
Despite this, Peter Lieb finds it hard to believe that a man of Rommel's position could have known nothing about atrocities, although Lieb accepted that locally he was separated from places these atrocities happened, while Der Spiegel comments that Rommel was simply in denial about what happened around him.
Rommel even began to think that it was lucky that his Afrika Korps was now safe as POWs and could escape Hitler's Wagnerian ending.
Rommel was active in the forward areas, directing the efforts to make a crossing, which were initially unsuccessful due to suppressive fire by the French on the other side of the river.
Upon arrival, Rommel concurred with the plan.
Rommel continued to attempt to advance for two more days, but repeated sorties by the RAF meant he could make no progress.
In four days of fighting, the Eighth Army lost 530 tanks and Rommel only 100.
Young's biography was another step in the development of the Rommel myth – with Rommel emerging as an active, if not a leading, plotter.
Compounding the problem was the Wehrmacht's institutional tendency to discount logistics, industrial output and their opponents' capacity to learn from past mistakes.
In one instance, the Italian forces, taken by surprise and believing that their lines had collapsed, surrendered after a brief firefight.
Gariboldi, who had ordered Rommel to stay in Mersa El Brega, was furious.
When Rommel came to North Africa, it was picked up and disseminated in the West by the British press as the Allies sought to explain their continued inability to defeat the Axis forces in North Africa.
Very different, however, was the perception of Rommel by Italian common soldiers and NCOs, who, like the German field troops, had the deepest trust and respect for him.
Hansen counters that Rommel was hardly naive, always judged military and political situations with cold objectivity, and shared a lot of characteristics with Hitler, an opinion shared by psychoanalyst and historian Geoffrey Cocks, who writes that Rommel "embodies the modern synergy of technical expertise and self-promotion&nbsp;... arriviste,&nbsp;... professionally ambitious, adept at cultivating a mass media image&nbsp;... like Hitler."
Wanting to exploit the British halt and their apparent disorganisation, on 24 November Rommel counterattacked near the Egyptian border in an operation that became known as the "dash to the wire".
Renewing the attack on the morning of 28 May, Rommel concentrated on encircling and destroying separate units of the British armour.
He sent infantry across in rubber boats, appropriated the bridging tackle of the 5th Panzer Division, personally grabbed a light machine gun to fight off a French counterattack supported by tanks, and went into the water himself, encouraging the sappers and helping lash together the pontoons.
In 1918, Rommel refused an invitation to a prestigious officer training course, and with it, the chance to be promoted to General.
The attention of the Western and especially the British press thrilled Goebbels, who wrote in his diary in early 1942: "Rommel continues to be the recognized darling of even the enemies' news agencies."
He knew the British were planning offensive operations as well, and he hoped to pre-empt them.
Rommel had around 100 available tanks.
According to Mallmann and Cüppers, on July 20, Walther Rauff, who was responsible for the unit, was sent to Tobruk to report to Rommel, however Rommel was 500&nbsp;km away from Tobruk conducting the First El Alamein, so Mallmann and Cüppers found that the chance for a meeting between Rommel and Rauff (in which Rommel reportedly was disgusted after learning about the plan from Rauff and sent Rauff on his way), as described by a post-war CIA report, was hardly possible.
In 1944, after visiting Rommel in France and reading his proposals on counteracting Allied propaganda, Alfred-Ingemar Berndt remarked: "He is also interested in this propaganda business and wants to develop it by all means.
Rommel soon forced them to withdraw.
However, Rommel had only 150 operational tanks remaining, and Montgomery had 800, many of them Shermans.
The Eighth Army had initially been assigned to General William Gott, but he was killed when his plane was shot down on 7 August.
Rommel's reputation for conducting a clean war was used in the interest of the West German rearmament and reconciliation between the former enemies – Britain and the United States on one side and the new Federal Republic of Germany on the other.
General Georg Stumme was left in command in Rommel's absence.
He was assigned as an instructor at the Dresden Infantry School from 1929 to 1933, and was promoted to major in April 1932.
Maurice Remy states that due to the man's personality and some special circumstances, he was only really confronted with the reality of atrocities in 1944 (although he had heard rumours about massacres while fighting in Africa).
Only at the fall of Singapore, earlier that year, had more British Commonwealth troops been captured at one time.
Running low on fuel, Rommel assumed a defensive posture, forming "the Cauldron".
Rommel's victories in France were featured in the German press and in the February 1941 film ''Victory in the West'', in which Rommel personally helped direct a segment reenacting the crossing of the Somme River.
Physically exhausted and suffering from a liver infection and low blood pressure, Rommel flew home to Germany to recover his health.
He urged Axis authorities to treat the Arab with the utmost respect to prevent uprisings behind the front.
Rommel's political inclinations was a controversial matter even among the contemporary Nazi elites.
During this period he indulged his interest in engineering and mechanics by learning about the inner workings and maintenance of internal combustion engines and heavy machine guns.
While he (like all members of the Wehrmacht) had pledged an oath of absolute obedience to Hitler, he thought this order was pointless, even madness, and had to be disobeyed.
Rommel brought north the 21st Panzer and Ariete Divisions on 26 October to bolster the sector.
The British briefly seized Sollum, Fort Capuzzo, and the important Halfaya Pass, a bottleneck along the coast near the border between Libya and Egypt.
He decided to launch an attack at the end of August with the 15th and 21st Panzer Division, 90th Light Division, and the Italian XX Motorized Corps in a drive through the southern flank of the El Alamein lines.
Young extensively interviewed Rommel's widow and collaborated with several individuals who had been close to Rommel, including Hans Speidel.
He had left France on 5 June and was at home on the 6th celebrating his wife's birthday.
Gariboldi backed down.
Simon Ball describes how various elements in the German and British armies and governments extensively used Rommel's image in dealing with their inner struggles, promoting aspects of his that each group associated with themselves.
(According to Rommel, he planned to proceed to see Hitler the next day to discuss the situation in Normandy).
The manner of Rommel's death had led to the assumption that he had not been a supporter of Nazism, to which Young subscribed.
It took much longer than anticipated to get through the minefields in the southern sector, and the tanks got bogged down in unexpected patches of quicksand (Montgomery had arranged for Rommel to acquire a falsified map of the terrain).
The propaganda minister expected the move to reassure the German public and at the same time to have a negative impact on the Allied forces' morale.
Hitler, though, remarked that, "Unfortunately Field-Marshal Rommel is a very great leader full of drive in times of success, but an absolute pessimist when he meets the slightest problems."
His compatriot Moshe Dayan likewise considered Rommel a model and icon.
While at Cadet School, Rommel met his future wife, 17-year-old Lucia (Lucie) Maria Mollin (1894–1971).
While Rommel was at Kasserine at the end of January 1943, the Italian General Giovanni Messe was appointed commander of Panzer Army Africa, renamed the Italo-German Panzer Army in recognition of the fact that it consisted of one German and three Italian corps.
The historian  points out Rommel's playing the German and Italian command structures against each other to his advantage.
On 1 June, Rommel accepted the surrender of some 3,000 soldiers of the 150th Brigade.
Rommel's (and Guderian's) successes and the new possibilities offered by the new tank arm were welcomed by a small number of generals, but worried and paralysed the rest.
Rommel was direct, unbending, tough in his manners, to superiors and subordinates alike, disobedient even to Hitler whenever he saw fit, although he was gentle and diplomatic to the lower ranks (German and Italian alike) and POWs.
Rommel saw the propaganda and education values in his and his nation's deeds (He also did value justice itself: According to Admiral Ruge's diary, Rommel told Ruge: "Justice is the indispensable foundation of a nation.
It became a bestseller, which, according to Raffael Scheck, later "enormously influenced" many armies of the world; Adolf Hitler was one of many people who owned a copy.
By 7 December Rommel fell back to a defensive line at Gazala, just west of Tobruk, all the while under heavy attack from the Desert Air Force.
Going against military protocol, this promotion added to Rommel's growing reputation as one of Hitler's favoured commanders, although his later outstanding leadership in France quelled complaints about his self-promotion and political scheming.
General Friedrich Paulus, head of the Operations Branch of OKH, arrived on 25 April to review the situation.
According to Marshall, he sharply protested the Jewish policies, other immoral activities and was an opponent of the Gestapo.
Some elements of the 7th Armoured Division were stopped on the 19th by the Italian ''Ariete'' Armoured Division at Bir el Gobi, but they also managed to capture the airfields at Sidi Rezegh,  from Tobruk.
During recent years, historians' opinions on Rommel have become more diversified, with some aspects of his image being the target of revisionism more frequently than the others.
Rommel returned briefly to Warsaw on 5 October to organise the German victory parade.
On 4 June the chief meteorologist of the 3 Air Fleet reported that weather in the channel was so poor there could be no landing attempted for two weeks.
Modern historians who agree with the image of the apolitical, chivalrous genius also have different opinions regarding details.
(while Hitler also played innocent by trying to erect a monument for the national hero, on 7 March 1945) Franz Halder, after concocting several schemes to rein in Rommel through people like Paulus and Gause to no avail (even willing to undermine German operations and strategy in the process for the sole purpose of embarrassing him), concluded that Rommel was a madman with whom no one dared to cross swords because of "his brutal methods and his backing from the highest levels".
Although he was nominally subordinate to the Italians, he enjoyed a certain degree of autonomy from them; since he was directing their troops in battle as well as his own, this was bound to cause hostility among Italian commanders.
Rommel, with his innate abilities as a military commander and love of the spotlight, was a perfect fit for the role Goebbels designed for him.
The Battle of Alam el Halfa was launched on 30 August.
The expected breakout from Tobruk, which took place on 20 November, was stopped by the Italians.
Rommel was a successful tactician in a rapidly developing, mobile battle.
while Remy suggests that Rommel was trying in some way to apologize to Hitler, towards whom he had conflicting emotions, which Ernst Maisel ) realized and found "disgusting" and "a hypocrisy", because Maisel (a loyal, unapologetic Hitler supporter, even after the war) could not understand how someone could try to kill someone he loved (Rommel's previous replies about his role in the attempt made Maisei believe that he was part of the plot).
(His own Afrika Korps was known among soldiers of Jewish descent as a refuge, safe from racial laws and discrimination) At his 17 June 1944 meeting with Hitler at Margival, he protested against the atrocity committed by the 2nd SS Panzer division ''Das Reich'', which had massacred the citizens of the French town of Oradour-sur-Glane.
This order was not open to interpretation, and Rommel had no choice but to comply.
Speidel contributed as well, starting, from the early 1950s, to bring up Rommel's and his own role in the plot, boosting his Speidel's suitability for a future role in the new military force of the Federal Republic, the Bundeswehr, and then in NATO.
He graduated in November 1911 and was commissioned as a lieutenant in January 1912 and was assigned to the 124th Infantry in Weingarten.
In spite of these problems, Cyrenaica was captured by 8 April, except for the port city of Tobruk, which was surrounded on the landward sides on 11 April.
