Magic seems to be activated via the linguistic medium of blue.
It featured a white background with two stylised curved "E"s facing each other.
Historically, much Esperanto music, such as '''', has been in various folk traditions.
The phonology, grammar, vocabulary, and semantics are based on the Indo-European languages spoken in Europe.
The 15th edition of ''Ethnologue'' cited estimates that there were 200 to 2,000 native speakers in 1996, but these figures were removed from the 16th and 17th editions.
The name of Esperanto derives from '''' ("" translates as "one who hopes"), the pseudonym under which Zamenhof published Unua Libro.
Philip, Martin's teacher, explains that this is because "no one really speaks Esperanto and it's easy to learn".
Esperanto is used as the universal language in the far future of Harry Harrison's ''Stainless Steel Rat'' and ''Deathworld'' stories.
Up to 2,000,000 people worldwide, to varying degrees, speak Esperanto, including about 1,000 to 2,000 native speakers who learned Esperanto from birth.
Adjectives may precede or follow nouns; subjects, verbs and objects may occur in any order.
In his biography on Joseph Stalin, Leon Trotsky mentions that Stalin had studied Esperanto.
The situation was especially pronounced in Nazi Germany, Francoist Spain up until the 1950s, and in the Soviet Union from 1937 to 1956.
However, during the recent decades, specially after the establishment of the Sabzandishan (Green-Thinkers) Institute in 1996, the first official Esperanto institute in Iran ever, and publication of its 56-page organ, called Payame Sabzandishan (Message of Green-Thinkers), a seasonal (quarterly) magazine in Esperanto and Persian from the autumn of 2002 till now, and recognition of the Iranian Esperanto-Association by the Universal Esperanto-Association (which enjoys official relations with UN and UNESCO) as its Iranian official branch in 2005, a new era started in Iran for spreading of Esperanto Movement as vastly as possible.
Poul Anderson's story "High Treason" takes place in a future where Earth became united politically but was still divided into many languages and cultures, and Esperanto became the language of its space armed forces, fighting wars with various extraterrestrial races.
Assuming that this figure is accurate, that means that about 0.03% of the world's population speak the language.
The Bahá'í Faith encourages the use of an auxiliary international language.
Every year, Esperantists meet for the World Congress of Esperanto ''()''.
''Ĝ'' is the ''g'' in '''''g'''em'', ''ĵ'' a ''zh'' sound, as in ''fu'''s'''ion'' or French '''''J'''acques'', and the rare ''ĥ'' is like the German , Scottish Gaelic, Scots and Scottish Standard English ''lo'''ch''''', or how Scouse people sometimes pronounce the 'k' in ''boo'''k''''' and 'ck' in ''chi'''ck'''en''.
The second aims to act from above ("desupre"), beginning with politicians.
In 1996 the Prague Manifesto was adopted at the annual congress of the World Esperanto Association (UEA); it was subscribed by individual participants and later by other Esperanto speakers.
Tone is not used to distinguish meanings of words.
As in English, ''li'' "he" may be used generically, whereas ''ŝi'' "she" is always female.
Finnish linguist Jouko Lindstedt, an expert on native-born Esperanto speakers, presented the following scheme to show the overall proportions of language capabilities within the Esperanto community:
In modern times, attempts have been made to eliminate perceived sexism in the language, such as Riism.
The results of these studies were favorable and demonstrated that studying Esperanto before another foreign language expedites the acquisition of the other, natural language.
In 1987, a second flag design was chosen in a contest organized by the UEA celebrating the first centennial of the language.
The different parts of speech are marked by their own suffixes: all common nouns end in '''', all adjectives in '''', all derived adverbs in '''', and all verbs in one of six tense and mood suffixes, such as the present tense ''''.
In addition, nouns that denote persons and whose definitions are not explicitly male are often assumed to be male unless explicitly made female, such as ''doktoro,'' a PhD doctor (male or unspecified) versus ''doktorino,'' a female PhD.
The Baha'i's believe that it will not be the language of the future, although it has great potential in this role, as it has not been chosen by the people.
The translation was reviewed and compared with other languages' translations by a group of British clergy and scholars before its publication at the British and Foreign Bible Society in 1910.
Esperantists use the language for free accommodations with Esperantists in 92 countries using the  or to develop pen pals through ''''.
For this reason, many people see the 1920s as the heyday of the Esperanto movement.
Zamenhof, the inventor of Esperanto, created an "h-convention", which replaces ''ĉ, ĝ, ĥ, ĵ, ŝ,'' and ''ŭ'' with ''ch, gh, hh, jh, sh,'' and ''u,'' respectively.
Those who focus on the intrinsic value of the language are commonly called '''', from Rauma, Finland, where a declaration on the near-term unlikelihood of the "" and the value of Esperanto culture was made at the International Youth Congress in 1980.
In Nazi Germany, there was a motivation to forbid Esperanto because Zamenhof was Jewish, and due to the internationalist nature of Esperanto, which was perceived as "Bolshevist".
His feelings and the situation in Białystok may be gleaned from an extract from his letter to Nikolai Borovko:
The six verb inflections consist of three tenses and three moods.
The sound  is usually trilled , but may be tapped .
Grin's Report, published in 2005 by François Grin found that the use of English as the lingua franca within the European Union costs billions annually and significantly benefits English-speaking countries financially.
In 1926 this was published along with a New Testament translation, in an edition commonly called the "".
On 22 February 2012, Google Translate added Esperanto as its 64th language.
The Hungarian Academy of Sciences has found that Esperanto fulfills all the requirements of a living language.
Van Dijk finds only 30 fluent speakers in that city, and similarly smaller-than-expected figures in several other places thought to have a larger-than-average concentration of Esperanto speakers.
Esperanto is particularly prevalent in the northern and central countries of Europe; in China, Korea, Japan, and Iran within Asia; in Brazil, Argentina, and Mexico in the Americas; and in Togo in Africa.
Esperanto speakers often debate about whether a particular borrowing is justified or whether meaning can be expressed by deriving from or extending the meaning of existing words.
Additionally many of the signs around the ship ''Red Dwarf'' are written in both English and Esperanto.
A number of mainstream films in national languages have used Esperanto in some way.
Esperanto was recommended by the French Academy of Sciences in 1921 and recognized by UNESCO in 1954, which recommended in 1985 that international non-governmental organizations use Esperanto.
In his speech at the World Esperanto Congress in Cambridge in 1907 he said that "(...) we hope that earlier or later, maybe after many centuries, on a neutral language foundation, understanding one each other, the nations will build (...) a big family circle."
However, two years later, the League recommended that its member states include Esperanto in their educational curricula.
The emperor claimed to be the son of the dragon.
New words are formed through extensive prefixing and suffixing.
Similarly, the negative '''' "not" and conjunctions such as '''' "and" and '''' "that" must precede the phrase or clause that they introduce.
However, the article '''' "the", demonstratives such as '''' "that" and prepositions (such as '''' "at") must come before their related nouns.
Speakers are most numerous in Europe and East Asia, especially in urban areas, where they often form Esperanto clubs.
Culbert concluded that between one and two million people speak Esperanto at Foreign Service Level 3, "professionally proficient" (able to communicate moderately complex ideas without hesitation, and to follow speeches, radio broadcasts, etc.).
The Oomoto religion encourages the use of Esperanto among its followers and includes Zamenhof as one of its deified spirits.
Zamenhof's name for the language was simply '''' ("International Language").
Pragmatics and other aspects of the language not specified by Zamenhof's original documents were influenced by the native languages of early authors, primarily Russian, Polish, German, and French.
The vocabulary, for example, draws about two-thirds from Romance and one-third from Germanic languages; the syntax is Romance; and the phonology and semantics are Slavic.
* ''10,000,000 have studied it to some extent at some time.''
The sound inventory is essentially Slavic, as is much of the semantics, whereas the vocabulary derives primarily from the Romance languages, with a lesser contribution from Germanic languages and minor contributions from Slavic languages and Greek.
The late Scottish Esperanto author William Auld wrote extensively on the subject, arguing that Esperanto is "the expression of a common human culture, unencumbered by national frontiers.
The first translation of the Bible into Esperanto was a translation of the Tanakh or Old Testament done by L. L. Zamenhof.
Thus it is considered a culture on its own."
, over 525,000 users had signed up, with around 30 users completing the course every day.
In this regard it has to be noted that Zamenhof was well aware that it may take much time, maybe even ''many centuries'', to get this hope into reality.
David Gaines used Esperanto poems as well as an excerpt from a speech by Dr. Zamenhof for his ''Symphony No.
Frank and Selten were among the founders of the International Academy of Sciences in San Marino, sometimes called the "Esperanto University", where Esperanto is the primary language of teaching and administration.
A large number of consonant clusters can occur, up to three in initial position (as in '''', "strange") and four in medial position (as in '''', "teach").
Chick Publications, publisher of Protestant fundamentalist themed evangelistic tracts, has published a number of comic book style tracts by Jack T. Chick translated into Esperanto, including "This Was Your Life!"
Esperanto is also the first language of teaching and administration of one university, the International Academy of Sciences San Marino.
Esperanto attracted the suspicion of many states.
In the Almanac, his estimates for numbers of language speakers were rounded to the nearest million, thus the number for Esperanto speakers is shown as two million.
Esperanto is the working language of several non-profit international organizations such as the '''', a left-wing cultural association, or Education@Internet, which has developed from an Esperanto organization; most others are specifically Esperanto organizations.
Lou Harrison, who incorporated styles and instruments from many world cultures in his music, used Esperanto titles and/or texts in several of his works, most notably '''' (1973).
The opening song to the popular video game ''Final Fantasy XI'', "", was written in Esperanto.
Esperanto has been used in a number of films and novels.
It was the first game in the series that was played online, and would have players from both Japan and North America (official European support was added after the North American launch) playing together on the same servers, using an auto-translate tool to communicate.
The suffix '''', besides indicating the direct object, is used to indicate movement and a few other things as well.
Later, Esperanto speakers began to see the language and the culture that had grown up around it as ends in themselves, even if Esperanto is never adopted by the United Nations or other international organizations.
In the television show ''Red Dwarf'', which begins in the late 22nd century, crewman Arnold Rimmer constantly spends his time trying to learn Esperanto and failing, even compared to his bunkmate Dave Lister who only maintains a casual interest.
Stress is always on the second-last vowel in fully Esperanto words unless a final vowel '''' is elided, which occurs mostly in poetry.
Zamenhof considered the first way to have a better perspective, as "for such affairs as ours, governments come with their approval and help usually only, when everything is already completely finished".
:Numbers of textbooks sold and membership of local societies put "the number of people with some knowledge of the language in the hundreds of thousands and possibly millions".
These have been published in various separate booklets, or serialized in '''', but the Deuterocanonical books have appeared in recent editions of the Londona Biblio.
There are also shared traditions, such as Zamenhof Day, and shared behaviour patterns.
Typologically, Esperanto has prepositions and a pragmatic word order that by default is ''subject–verb–object.''
In ''Stamboul Train'', Greene used Esperanto as the language on signs at the main train station in Budapest.
During times of drought, people would pray in the temples that the dragon-king would give rain to the human world.
There is also a variety of classical and semi-classical choral music, both original and translated, as well as large ensemble music that includes voices singing Esperanto texts.
This process is regular, so that people can create new words as they speak and be understood.
Later on, it became the ancestor of the highest rulers and symbolised the absolute authority of a feudal emperor.
It is rendered in blue-colored text.
# "To find some means of overcoming the natural indifference of mankind, and disposing them, in the quickest manner possible, and en masse, to learn and use the proposed language as a living one, and not only in last extremities, and with the key at hand."
At that time the dragon was a symbol of the supernatural creature.
Studies have been conducted in New Zealand, United States, Germany, Italy and Australia.
He wrote original Esperanto text for his '''' (''I Can Cry No Longer'') for unaccompanied SATB choir (1994).
They are present tense '''', future tense '''', past tense '''', infinitive mood '''', conditional mood '''' and jussive mood '''' (used for wishes and commands).
I am a beginner in Esperanto.
Another Esperanto writer Vladimir Varankin was executed on 3 October 1938.
This latter figure appears in ''Ethnologue''.
The World Esperanto Association has members in 120 countries.
Esperantists can access an international culture, including a large body of original as well as translated literature.
After the October Revolution of 1917, Esperanto was given a measure of government support by the new workers' states in the former Russian Empire and later by the Soviet Union government, with the Soviet Esperanto Association being established as an officially recognized organization.
For example, the word '''' "mouse" has acquired the meaning of a computer mouse from its usage in English.
The same neuropsychological law —called by Jean Piaget ''generalizing assimilation''—applies to word formation as well as to grammar."
There are a couple dozen masculine nouns, primarily titles and kin terms, such as ''sinjoro'' "Mr, sir" vs. ''sinjorino'' "Mrs, lady" and ''patro'' "father" vs. ''patrino'' "mother".
A semivowel  normally occurs only in diphthongs after the vowels  and , not as a consonant .
Instead of derivations of Esperanto roots, new roots are taken from European languages in the endeavor to create an international language.
Since there are only five vowels, a good deal of variation in pronunciation is tolerated.
Some Wreath inhabitants use translator rings to communicate with those who don't speak Blue.
In 2013 a museum about Esperanto opened in China.
It was the First World War, however, that was the catalyst that brought about the end of neutrality.
Marcus Sikosek (now Ziko van Dijk) has challenged this figure of 1.6 million as exaggerated.
Esperanto is currently the language of instruction of the International Academy of Sciences in San Marino.
Final clusters are uncommon except in foreign names, poetic elision of final '','' and a very few basic words such as '''' "hundred" and '''' "after".
Although it is not Zamenhof's goal of a universal language, it still represents a level of popularity unmatched by any other constructed language.
(The consonant  and semivowel  are both written ''j'', and the uncommon consonant  is written with the digraph ''dz'', which is the only consonant that doesn't have its own letter.)
Two full-length feature films have been produced with dialogue entirely in Esperanto: '','' in 1964, and ''Incubus,'' a 1965 B-movie horror film.
Esperanto instruction is occasionally available at schools, including four primary schools in a pilot project under the supervision of the University of Manchester, and by one count at 69 universities.
There are some geographical and astronomical features named after Esperanto, or after its creator L. L. Zamenhof.
During this new era, i.a.
Russian Esperanto writer Nikolai Nekrasov was arrested during the Stalinist repressions of the late 1930s, accused of being "an organizer and leader of a fascist, espionage, terrorist organization of Esperantists", which never existed, and executed on 4 October 1938.
The number of speakers grew rapidly over the next few decades, at first primarily in the Russian Empire and Central Europe, then in other parts of Europe, the Americas, China, and Japan.
, the most popular online learning platform for Esperanto, reported 150,000 registered users in 2013, and sees between 150,000 and 200,000 visitors each month.
Claude Piron, a psychologist formerly at the University of Geneva and Chinese–English–Russian–Spanish translator for the United Nations, argued that Esperanto is far more intuitive than many ethnic languages.
If used in a database, a program in principle could not determine whether to render, for example, ''ch'' as ''c'' followed by ''h'' or as ''ĉ'', and would fail to render, for example, the word '''' properly.
In 1894, Zamenhof published the first Esperanto dictionary, '''', which had a larger set of roots.
In 1921 the French Academy of Sciences recommended using Esperanto for international scientific communication.
An Esperanto translation of the Qur'an was published by the state shortly thereafter.
"), plural subject '''' (pronounced "eye"), singular object '''', and plural object '''' (rhymes with "fine").
The  is normally pronounced like English ''v,'' but may be pronounced  (between English ''v'' and ''w'') or , depending on the language background of the speaker.
Since Culbert never published detailed intermediate results for particular countries and regions, it is difficult to independently gauge the accuracy of his results.
Esperanto pronouns are similar.
There are computer keyboard layouts that support the Esperanto alphabet, and some systems use software that automatically replaces x- or h-convention digraphs with the corresponding diacritic letters ( for Microsoft Windows, Mac OS X and Linux and  for Windows Phone and Google Keyboard for Android are examples).
The novel ''Infinity Welcomes Careful Drivers'' states that, although not required, it is widely expected that officers in the Space Corps be fluent in the language, hence Rimmer's interest.
However, in 1937, at the height of the Great Purge, Stalin completely reversed the Soviet government's policies on Esperanto; many Esperanto speakers were executed, exiled or held in captivity in the Gulag labour camps.
A message in Esperanto was recorded and included in ''Voyager 1''s Golden Record.
in the Persian translation of William Auld's book, called The Phenomenon Esperanto, 14 annexes were added to show more the history and neutrality of Esperanto language: as example, in the first annex, called The Views of World Celebrities on Esperanto, the Persian readers can read the positive views and opinions of 15 acclaimed and famous leaders and writers on Esperanto from different countries, religions, political backgrounds, languages and races, like Mahatma Gandhi, Leo Tolstoy, Romain Rolland, Umberto Eco, Rudolf Diesel, Rabindranath Tagore, Helen Keller, Lu Xun, J. R. R. Tolkien, ... (William Auld was nominated for the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1999, 2004, and 2006 making him the first person to be nominated for works in Esperanto.)
Fascist Italy allowed the use of Esperanto, finding its phonology similar to that of Italian and publishing some tourist material in the language.
In 1981, its usage became less popular when it became apparent that followers of the Bahá'í Faith were interested in it.
Culbert's estimate was not made for Esperanto alone, but formed part of his listing of estimates for all languages of more than one million speakers, published annually in the World Almanac and Book of Facts.
Esperanto is by far the most widely spoken constructed language in the world.
The Senate of Brazil passed a bill in 2009 that would make Esperanto an optional part of the curriculum in public schools, although mandatory if there is demand for it.
However the "Manifesto de Raŭmo" clearly mentions the intention to further spread the language: "We want to spread Esperanto to put into effect its positive values more and more, step by step (...)"
Facebook has about 350,000 users who indicated Esperanto as one of their languages.
Common, if debated, assimilation includes the pronunciation of '''' as  and '''' as .
Now dragon decorations can be seen everywhere in China and legends about dragons circulate.''
The composer, Nobuo Uematsu, felt that Esperanto was a good language to symbolize worldwide unity.
The accented letters are a bit like ''h''-digraphs in English: ''Ĉ'' is pronounced like English ''ch'', and ''ŝ'' like ''sh''.
Paul Wexler proposes that Esperanto is relexified Yiddish, which he claims is in turn a relexified Slavic language, though this model is not accepted by mainstream academics.
The core vocabulary of Esperanto was defined by '''', published by Zamenhof in 1887.
Esperantists speak primarily in Esperanto at international Esperanto meetings.
Adjectives agree with their nouns; their endings are singular subject '''' (rhymes with "ha!
However, outside China and Hungary, these mostly involve informal arrangements rather than dedicated departments or state sponsorship.
In 1915, the territory was annexed by the Kingdom of Prussia, without international recognition.
Although no country has adopted Esperanto officially, “Esperantujo” is the name given to places where it is spoken worldwide.
Other variants include that for Christian Esperantists, with a white Christian cross superimposed upon the green star, and that for Leftists, with the color of the field changed from green to red.
This usually happens when Esperanto is the chief or only common language in an international family, but sometimes occurs in a family of devoted Esperantists.
Verbs are not marked for person or number.
* '''2000''' hours studying German = '''1500''' hours studying English = '''1000''' hours studying Italian (or any other Romance language) = '''150''' hours studying Esperanto.
* ''1,000,000 understand a large amount passively.
Esperanto speakers who want to see Esperanto adopted officially or on a large scale worldwide are commonly called '''', from '''', meaning "final victory".
A more recent "x-convention" has gained ground since the advent of computing.
Native Esperanto speakers, '','' have learned the language from birth from Esperanto-speaking parents.
Since then, congresses have been held in various countries every year, with the exceptions of years during the world wars.
The Institute of Cybernetic Pedagogy at Paderborn (Germany) has compared the length of study time it takes natively French-speaking high-school students to obtain comparable 'standard' levels in Esperanto, English, German, and Italian.
However, neither Belgium nor Prussia (now within Germany) had ever surrendered its original claim to it.
Esperanto was to serve as an international auxiliary language, that is, as a universal second language, not to replace ethnic languages.
Esperantists were killed during the Holocaust, with Zamenhof's family in particular singled out for being killed.
* ''10,000 speak it fluently.
Compound words are formed with a modifier-first, head-final order, as in English (compare "birdsong" and "songbird," and likewise, '''' and '''').
In the summer of 1924, the American Radio Relay League adopted Esperanto as its official international auxiliary language, and hoped that the language would be used by radio amateurs in international communications, but its actual use for radio communications was negligible.
Esperanto is seen by many of its speakers as an alternative or addition to the growing use of English throughout the world, offering a language that is easier to learn than English.
This is most often noted in regard to the vocabulary, but applies equally to the orthography, phonology, and semantics, all of which are thoroughly European.
Other amateur productions have been made, such as a dramatization of the novel '''' (Gerda Has Disappeared).
This system replaces each diacritic with an ''x'' (not part of the Esperanto alphabet) after the letter, producing the six digraphs ''cx, gx, hx, jx, sx,'' and ''ux.''
In his work, ''Mein Kampf'', Adolf Hitler specifically mentioned Esperanto as an example of a language that could be used by an international Jewish conspiracy once they achieved world domination.
Word order is comparatively free.
Eötvös Loránd University in Budapest had a department of Interlinguistics and Esperanto from 1966 to 2004, after which time instruction moved to vocational colleges; there are state examinations for Esperanto instructors.
Esperanto ''j'' and ''c'' are used in a way familiar to speakers of many European languages, but which is largely unfamiliar to English speakers: ''j'' has a ''y'' sound, as in '''''y'''ellow'' and ''bo'''y''','' and ''c'' has a ''ts'' sound, as in ''hi'''ts''''' or the ''zz'' in ''pi'''zz'''a''.
For example, '''' "family" is , with the stress on the second ''i'', but when the word is used without the final '' (),'' the stress remains on the second '''': .
In one study, a group of European secondary school students studied Esperanto for one year, then French for three years, and ended up with a significantly better command of French than a control group, who studied French for all four years.
The goal for Esperanto to become a general world language was not the only goal of Zamenhof; he also wanted to "enable the learner to make direct use of his knowledge with persons of any nationality, whether the language be universally accepted or not; in other words, the language is to be directly a means of international communication."
Thus, '''' means "to sing", '''' means "I sing", '''' means "you sing", and '''' means "they sing".
there have been speeches, lectures, seminars and courses in different cultural centers, universities and schools; publication of original and translated books and articles on Esperanto and specially its neutrality (politically, religiously, nationally, racially, etc.)
In addition, the suffix ''-um-'' has no defined meaning; words using the suffix must be learned separately (such as '''' "to the right" and '''' "clockwise").
It is still in use, though to a lesser degree than the traditional symbol, known as the "" (green star).
In Imperial Japan, the left-wing of the Japanese Esperanto movement was forbidden, but its leaders were careful enough not to give the impression to the government that the Esperantists were socialist revolutionaries, which proved a successful strategy.
Hanotaux did not like how the French language was losing its position as the international language and saw Esperanto as a threat, effectively wielding his veto power to block the decision.
* ''100,000 can use it actively.
He also notes that there are a total of about 20,000 members of the various Esperanto organizations (other estimates are higher).
The rules of the language allowed speakers to borrow new roots as needed; it was recommended, however, that speakers use most international forms and then derive related meanings from these.
Since then world congresses have been held in different countries every year, except during the two World Wars.
The earliest flag, and the one most commonly used today, features a green five-pointed star against a white canton, upon a field of green.
The most popular of these is the Europe—Democracy—Esperanto, which aims to establish Esperanto as the official language of the European Union.
According to the website of the World Esperanto Association:
It was proposed to Zamenhof by Irishman Richard Geoghegan, author of the first Esperanto textbook for English speakers, in 1887.
Esperantists in German concentration camps taught the language to fellow prisoners, telling guards they were teaching Italian, the language of one of Germany's Axis allies.
