Another pivotal figure was Sir Paul Dukes, arguably the first professional spy of the modern age.
The British economic blockade of Germany was made effective through the support of spy networks operating out of neutral Netherlands.
These agents can be moles (who are recruited before they get access to secrets), defectors (who are recruited after they get access to secrets and leave their country) or defectors in place (who get access but do not leave).
In 1585, Mary, Queen of Scots was placed in the custody of Sir Amias Paulet, who was instructed to open and read all of Mary's clandestine correspondence.
This is because governments want to retrieve information that they can use to be proactive in protecting their nation from potential terrorist attacks.
It was possible to build up a precise picture of the normal operation of the High Seas Fleet, indeed to infer from the routes they chose where defensive minefields had been place and where it was safe for ships to operate.
Instead of a system whereby rival departments and military services would work on their own priorities with little to no consultation or cooperation with each other, the newly established Secret Intelligence Service was interdepartmental, and submitted its intelligence reports to all relevant government departments.
While foreign intelligence was a normal part of the principal secretary's activities, Walsingham brought to it flair and ambition, and large sums of his own money.
The US lacked a specific agency at the start of the war, but quickly formed the Office of Strategic Services (OSS).
The use of the media to print a story to mislead a foreign service into action, exposing their operations while under surveillance.
As an immediate consequence, there was a significant increase in cable messages sent via cables belonging to other countries, and cables sent by wireless.
Espionage laws are also used to prosecute non-spies.
In 1916, she was arrested and brought to London where she was interrogated at length by Sir Basil Thomson, Assistant Commissioner at New Scotland Yard.
A ''legend'' is also employed for an individual who ''is not'' an illegal agent, but is an ordinary citizen who is "relocated", for example, a "protected witness".
British and French intelligence services recruited Belgian or French refugees and infiltrated these agents behind enemy lines via the Netherlands – a neutral country.
However, Article 31 provides that if a spy successfully rejoined his own military and is then captured by the enemy as a lawful combatant, he cannot be punished for his previous acts of espionage and must be treated as a prisoner of war.
Soldiers who are wearing enemy uniforms or civilian clothes simply for the sake of warmth along with other purposes rather than engaging in espionage or similar military operations while so attired is also excluded from being treated as unlawful combatants.
Treason and espionage have graduated punishment levels.
Espionage is a crime under the legal code of many nations.
In times of crisis, spies can also be used to steal technology and to sabotage the enemy in various ways.
This is the job of the spy (espionage agent).
Jumping on the spy bandwagon, other writers also started writing about spy fiction featuring female spies as protagonists, such as  ''The Baroness'', which has more graphic action and sex, as compared to other novels featuring male protagonists.
***Unwitting double agent, an agent who offers or is forced to recruit as a double or re-doubled agent and in the process is recruited by either a third party intelligence service or his own government without the knowledge of the intended target intelligence service or the agent.
A sophisticated interception system (known as 'Y' service), together with the post office and Marconi stationsgrew rapidly to the point it could intercept almost all official German messages.
A pioneering cryptographic unit was established as early as 1844 in India, which achieved some important successes in decrypting Russian communications in the area.
The BBC reported in 2012 on one such case, that of Mohammed Idrees, who was held under Indian police control for approximately 13 years for overstaying his 15-day visa by 2–3 days after seeing his ill parents in 1999.
Spying involving corporations is known as industrial espionage.
A key background to this development was the Great Game, a period denoting the strategic rivalry and conflict that existed between the British Empire and the Russian Empire throughout Central Asia.
German intelligence was only ever able to recruit a very small number of spies.
However, installations belonging to the Post Office and the Marconi Company, as well as private individuals who had access to radio equipment, began recording messages from Germany.
Feudal Japan often used ninjas to gather intelligence.
Originally the CIA spearheaded the US-IC.
At the start of the war, the navy had only one wireless station for intercepting messages, at Stockton.
French intelligence agents intercepted the messages and, from the information it contained, identified H-21 as Mata Hari.
Home Secretary, Reginald McKenna, announced that "within the last twenty-four hours no fewer than twenty-one spies, or suspected spies, have been arrested in various places all over the country, chiefly in important military or naval centres, some of them long known to the authorities to be spies",
Taylor, a true "Double 0 agent", worked alone and would travel as an American or Canadian tourist or businessman throughout Europe and Asia, he was used extensively in the Middle East toward the end of his career.
Many governments routinely spy on their allies as well as their enemies, although they typically maintain a policy of not commenting on this.
'Intelligence' is considered legally as "information of all sorts gathered by a government or organisation to guide its decisions.
Their participation in Organization and Radio Operation was also vital to the success of many operations, including the main network between Paris and London.
'''Espionage''' (colloquially, '''spying''') is the obtaining of information considered secret or confidential without the permission of the holder of the information.
During the Crimean War, the Topographical & Statistic Department T&SD was established within the British War Office as an embryonic military intelligence organization.
The navies of Italy, Russia and Austria-Hungary set up similar services as well.
Counterintelligence operatives can feed false information to enemy spies, protecting important domestic secrets, and preventing attempts at subversion.
Espionage is the disclosure of sensitive information (classified) to people who are not cleared for that information or access to that sensitive information.
In a successful attempt to entrap her, Walsingham arranged a single exception: a covert means for Mary's letters to be smuggled in and out of Chartley in a beer keg.
The UK law under this legislation considers espionage as actions "intend to help an enemy and deliberately harm the security of the nation".
Many modern espionage methods were established by Francis Walsingham in Elizabethan England.
Recruited personally by Mansfield Smith-Cumming to act as a secret agent in Imperial Russia, he set up elaborate plans to help prominent White Russians escape from Soviet prisons after the Revolution and smuggled hundreds of them into Finland.
Espionage can be committed by an individual or a '''spy ring''' (a cooperating group of spies), in the service of a government or a company, or operating independently.
This was followed a year later by the creation of a military counter-espionage service.
He succeeded in intercepting letters that indicated a conspiracy to displace Elizabeth I with Mary, Queen of Scots.
Different intelligence services value certain intelligence collection techniques over others.
At a time of widespread and growing anti-German feeling and fear, plans were drawn up for an extensive offensive intelligence system to be used an instrument in the event of a European war.
Due to its success, the Government Committee on Intelligence, with support from Richard Haldane and Winston Churchill, established the Secret Service Bureau in 1909.
Spies can bring back all sorts of information concerning the size and strength of enemy forces.
In the United States, there are seventeen (taking military intelligence into consideration, it's 22 agencies) federal agencies that form the United States Intelligence Community.
To obtain high-level information on the enemy's strategic intentions, its military capabilities and deployment required undercover spy rings operating deep in enemy territory.
Peddlers, fabricators, and others who work for themselves rather than a service are not double agents because they are not agents.
This effectively demonstrated how the course of a war could be changed by effective intelligence operations.
This helped to convince the government of the importance of a well-funded secret intelligence service in peace time as a key component in formulating foreign policy.
Reportedly Canada is losing $12 billion and German companies are estimated to be losing about €50 billion ($87 billion) and 30,000 jobs to industrial espionage every year.
Although the techniques originally used were distinctly amateurish – British agents would often pose unconvincingly as botanists or archaeologists – more professional tactics and systems were slowly put in place.
The US defines espionage towards itself as "The act of obtaining, delivering, transmitting, communicating, or receiving information about the national defense with an intent, or reason to believe, that the information may be used to the injury of the United States or to the advantage of any foreign nation".
The Indian People's Union for Civil Liberties and Human Rights Law Network both decried his treatment.
The ancient Egyptians had a thoroughly developed system for the acquisition of intelligence, and the Hebrews used spies as well, as in the story of Rahab.
The National Security Agency collects Signals Intelligence.
Soldiers who penetrates enemy lines in proper uniforms for the purpose of acquiring intelligence are not considered spies but are lawful combatants entitled to be treated as prisoners of war upon capture by the enemy.
Fanya Kaplan shot and wounded Lenin triggering the "Red Terror" - the Cheka implicated all malcontents in a grand conspiracy that warranted a full-scale campaign.
The most effective such ring in German-occupied Belgium, was the Dame Blanche ("White Lady") network, founded in 1916 by Walthère Dewé as an underground intelligence network.
While the more common practice is to recruit a person already trusted with access to sensitive information, sometimes a person with a well-prepared synthetic identity (cover background), called a ''legend'' in tradecraft, may attempt to infiltrate a target organization.
It was first used in the 1859 Austro-Sardinian war and the 1866 campaign against Prussia, albeit with little success.
**Re-doubled agent, an agent who gets caught as a double agent and is forced to mislead the foreign intelligence service.
In the course of a few months, Dukes, Hill and Reilly succeeded in infiltrating Lenin’s inner circle, and gaining access to the activities of the Cheka and the Communist International at the highest level.
The knowledge of operational techniques can also affect the relationship between the Operations Officer (or case officer) and the agent if the case is transferred by an Operational Targeting Officer to a new Operations Officer, leaving the new officer vulnerable to attack.
After Russia's defeat in the Russo-Japanese War of 1904-05, Russian military intelligence was reorganized under the 7th Section of the 2nd Executive Board of the great imperial headquarters.
The '''double agent''' usually has knowledge of both intelligence services and can identify operational techniques of both, thus making third party recruitment difficult or impossible.
No attempts were made by the German fleet to restrict its use of wireless until 1917, and then only in response to perceived British use of direction finding, not because it believed messages were being decoded.
Espionage activity in France was consciously refrained from, so as not to jeopardize the burgeoning alliance between the two nations.
Many collaborators were then recruited from the local population, who were mainly driven by patriotism and hatred of the harsh German occupation.
The figure and mystique of the spy had also developed considerably in the public eye.
The United States, like most nations, conducts espionage against other nations, under the control of the National Clandestine Service.
It created an antenna in Paris run by Pyotr Rachkovsky to monitor their activities.
Many HUMINT activities, such as prisoner interrogation, reports from military reconnaissance patrols and from diplomats, etc., are not considered espionage.
Two weeks later, all were arrested in civilian clothes by the FBI thanks to two German agents betraying the mission to the U.S.
The Okhrana became notorious for its use of agents provocateurs who often succeeded in penetrating the activities of revolutionary groups including the Bolsheviks.
*Agent of influence: Someone who may provide political influence in an area of interest or may even provide publications needed to further an intelligence service agenda.
A spy breaking the host country's laws may be deported, imprisoned, or even executed.
The United States in World War I passed the Espionage Act of 1917.
Most post-Vietnam era characters were modeled after the American, C.C.
These agents were generally isolated and unable to rely on a large support network for the relaying of information.
The blockade led to severe food deprivation in Germany and was a major cause in the collapse of the Central Powers war effort in 1918.
However, the demand for male soldiers, an increase in women's rights, and the tactical advantages of female spies led the British Special Operations Executive (SOE) to set aside any lingering Victorian Era prejudices and begin employing them in April 1942.
In espionage jargon, an "agent" is the person who does the spying; a citizen of one country who is recruited by a second country to spy on or work against his own country or a third country.
Silber was regularly promoted and ended up in the position of chief censor, which enabled him to analyze all suspect documents.
In the United States, the Espionage Act of 1917 was used against socialist politician Eugene V. Debs (at that time the act had much stricter guidelines and amongst other things banned speech against military recruiting).
In the telegram's plaintext, Nigel de Grey and William Montgomery learned of the German Foreign Minister Arthur Zimmermann's offer to Mexico of United States' territories of Arizona, New Mexico, and Texas as an enticement to join the war as a German ally.
The Central Intelligence Agency operates the National Clandestine Service (NCS) to collect human intelligence and perform Covert operations.
This type of transfer ''may'' occur when an officer has completed his term of service or when his ''cover'' is blown.
Its first director was Captain Sir George Mansfield Smith-Cumming.
Government intelligence is very much distinct from espionage, and is not illegal in the UK, providing that the organisations of individuals are registered, often with the ICO, and are acting within the restrictions of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act (RIPA).
However, the term is generally associated with state spying on potential or actual enemies primarily for military purposes.
By the end of the war, over 250 networks had been created, comprising more than 6,400 Belgian and French citizens.
An early source of military intelligence was the diplomatic system of military attachés (an officer attached to the diplomatic service operating through the embassy in a foreign country), that became widespread in Europe after the Crimean War.
Round working for Marconi had been carrying out experiments for the army in France and Hall instructed him to build a direction finding system for the navy.
The outbreak of revolution in Russia and the subsequent seizure of power by the Bolsheviks, a party deeply hostile towards the capitalist powers, was an important catalyst for the development of modern international espionage techniques.
Under the Hague Convention of 1907, these Germans were classified as spies and tried by a military tribunal in Washington D.C. On August 3, 1942, all eight were found guilty and sentenced to death.
However, on the eve of the coup, unexpected events thwarted the operation.
Governments also employ private companies to collect information on their behalf such as SCG International Risk, International Intelligence Limited and others.
So far as it is known, Ames compromised the second-largest number of CIA agents, second only to Robert Hanssen, who is also serving a prison sentence.
The ancient writings of Chinese and Indian military strategists such as Sun-Tzu and Chanakya contain information on deception and subversion.
Communications both are necessary to espionage and clandestine operations, and also a great vulnerability when the adversary has sophisticated SIGINT detection and interception capability.
Many organizations, both national and non-national, conduct espionage operations.
Sections of the Evidenzbureau were assigned different regions, the most important one was aimed against Russia.
The risks of espionage vary.
The Hague Convention of 1907 addresses the status of wartime spies, specifically within "Laws and Customs of War on Land" (Hague IV); October 18, 1907: CHAPTER II Spies".
German spies in Britain did not meet with much success – the German spy ring operating in Britain was successfully disrupted by MI5 under Vernon Kell on the day after the declaration of the war.
If used in ''corporate intelligence'' gathering, this may include gathering information of a corporate business venture or stock portfolio.
Agents must also transfer money securely.
When Ames was arrested by the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), he faced life in prison; his contact, who had diplomatic immunity, was declared ''persona non grata'' and taken to the airport.
Spies often seek to obtain secret information from another source.
The Secret Service initially focused its resources on gathering intelligence on German shipbuilding plans and operations.
They agreed the coup would occur the first week of September during a meeting of the Council of People's Commissars and the Moscow Soviet at the Bolshoi Theatre.
''Black's Law Dictionary'' (1990) defines espionage as: "...&nbsp;gathering, transmitting, or losing&nbsp;... information related to the national defense".
Field Marshal Helmuth von Moltke established a military intelligence unit, Abteilung (Section) IIIb, to the German General Staff in 1889 which steadily expanded its operations into France and Russia.
Using lists supplied by undercover agents, the Cheka arrested those involved in Reilly's pending coup, raided the British Embassy in Petrograd and killed Francis Cromie and arrested Lockhart.
Mary was misled into thinking these secret letters were secure, while in reality they were deciphered and read by Walsingham's agents.
Although officially restricted to a role of transmitting openly received information, they were soon being used to clandestinely gather confidential information and in some cases even to recruit spies and to operate de facto spy rings.
The Okhrana was initially formed in 1880 to combat political terrorism and left-wing revolutionary activity throughout the Russian Empire, but was also tasked with countering enemy espionage.
In June, disillusioned members of the Latvian Riflemen began appearing in anti-Bolshevik circles in Petrograd and were eventually directed to Captain Cromie, a British naval attaché, and Mr. Constantine, a Turkish merchant who was actually Reilly.
A spy is a person employed to seek out top secret information from a source.
This can be useful in capturing important information from an agent that is attempting to seek allegiance with another country.
For example, when Aldrich Ames handed a stack of dossiers of U.S. Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) agents in the Eastern Bloc to his KGB-officer "handler", the KGB "rolled up" several networks, and at least ten people were secretly shot.
Along with the pochteca, before a battle or war, secret agents, ''quimitchin'', were sent to spy amongst enemies usually wearing the local costume and speaking the local language, techniques similar to modern secret agents.
She was executed by firing squad on 15 October 1917.
Reilly's remarkable and varied career culminated in an audiacious attempt to depose the Bolshevik Government and assassinate Vladimir Ilyich Lenin.
However, there are spy equipment laws and legal requirements around intelligence methods that vary for each form of intelligence enacted.
It also made its way into the videogame world, hence the famous creation of Hideo Kojima, the ''Metal Gear Solid'' Series.
She eventually claimed to be working for French intelligence.
However its most important contribution was probably in decrypting the Zimmermann Telegram, a telegram from the German Foreign Office sent via Washington to its ambassador Heinrich von Eckardt in Mexico.
Hugh Francis Redmond, a CIA officer in China, spent nineteen years in a Chinese prison for espionage—and died there—as he was operating without diplomatic cover and immunity.
Much of the 13 years was spent in prison waiting for a hearing, and more time was spent homeless or living with generous families.
Taylor, reportedly the last sanctioned "asset" of the U.S. government.
Case officers are stationed in foreign countries to recruit and to supervise intelligence agents, who in turn spy on targets in their countries where they are assigned.
Espionage is often part of an institutional effort by a government or commercial concern.
Modern tactics of espionage and dedicated government intelligence agencies were developed over the course of the late 19th century.
In 1911, a committee of the Committee of Imperial Defence on cable communications concluded that in the event of war with Germany, German-owned submarine cables should be destroyed.
As the Service was not authorized with police powers, Kell liaised extensively with the Special Branch of Scotland Yard (headed by Basil Thomson), and succeeded in disrupting the work of Indian revolutionaries collaborating with the Germans during the war.
The U.S. codification of enemy spies is Article 106 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice.
Stations were built along the coast, and by May 1915 the Admiralty was able to track German submarines crossing the North Sea.
*Sleeper agent: A sleeper agent is a person who is recruited to an intelligence service to ''wake up'' and perform a specific set of tasks or functions while living under cover in an area of interest.
Using mailed window envelopes that had already been stamped and cleared he was able to forward microfilm to Germany that contained increasingly important information.
The illegality of espionage also includes any action which may be considered 'preparatory to' spying, or encouraging or aiding another to spy.
In 1900, the Imperial German Navy established the Nachrichten-Abteilung, which was devoted to gathering intelligence on Britain.
Espionage has also made its way into comedy depictions.
The German fleet was in the habit each day of wirelessing the exact position of each ship and giving regular position reports when at sea.
An individual convicted of espionage can be imprisoned for up to 14 years in the UK, although multiple sentences can be issued.
Spying has sometimes been considered a gentlemanly pursuit, with recruiting focused on military officers, or at least on persons of the class from whom officers are recruited.
National and terrorist organizations and other groups are also targets.
Article 29 states that a person is considered a spy who, acts clandestinely or on false pretenses, infiltrates enemy lines with the intention of acquiring intelligence about the enemy and communicate it to the belligerent during times of war.
The ones that are excluded from being treated as spies while behind enemy lines are escaping prisoners of war and downed airmen as international law distinguishes between a disguised spy and a disguised escaper.
In modern times, many people convicted of espionage have been given penal sentences rather than execution.
For example, Aldrich Hazen Ames is an American CIA analyst, turned KGB mole, who was convicted of espionage in 1994; he is serving a life sentence without the possibility of parole in the high-security Allenwood U.S. Penitentiary.
In Britain, the Secret Service Bureau was split into a foreign and counter intelligence domestic service in 1910.
Known as the "Man of a Hundred Faces," Dukes continued his use of disguises, which aided him in assuming a number of identities and gained him access to numerous Bolshevik organizations.
According to the MI5 website, "foreign intelligence officers acting in the UK under diplomatic cover may enjoy immunity from prosecution.
Unlike other forms of intelligence collection disciplines, espionage usually involves accessing the place where the desired information is stored or accessing the people who know the information and will divulge it through some kind of subterfuge.
On the Western Front the advantage lay with the Western Allies, as throughout most of the war German armies occupied Belgium and parts of northern France, thereby providing a large and dissaffected population that could be organized into collecting and transmitting vital intelligence.
Chanakya's student Chandragupta Maurya, founder of the Maurya Empire in India, made use of assassinations, spies and secret agents, which are described in Chanakya's ''Arthasastra''.
According to MI5, a person will be charged with the crime of espionage if they, "for any purpose prejudicial to the safety or interests of the State": approaches, enters or inspects a prohibited area; makes documents such as plans that are intended, calculated, or could directly or indirectly be of use to an enemy; or "obtains, collects, records, or publishes, or communicates to any other person any secret official code word, or pass word, or any sketch, plan, model, article, or note, or other document which is calculated to be or might be or is intended to be directly or indirectly useful to an enemy".
It was this latter service that was discredited through its actions over the notorious Dreyfus Affair, where a French Jewish officer was falsely accused of handing over military secrets to the Germans.
As the number of intercepted messages increased it became necessary to decide which were unimportant and should just be logged, and which should be passed on outside Room 40.
Loner spy personalities may have been a stereotype of convenience for authors who already knew how to write loner private investigator characters that sold well from the 1920s to the present.
By the outbreak of the First World War all the major powers had highly sophisticated structures in place for the training and handling of spies and for the processing of the intelligence information obtained through espionage.
For example, during World War II, eight German agents entered the U.S. in June 1942 as part of Operation Pastorius, a sabotage mission against U.S. economic targets.
In January 1917, the German military attaché in Madrid transmitted radio messages to Berlin describing the helpful activities of a German spy code-named H-21.
As the progress of the war became static and armies dug down in trenches the utility of cavaly reconnaissance became of very limited effectiveness.
Reilly believed their participation in the pending coup to be vital and arranged their meeting with Lockhart at the British mission in Moscow.
It could consist entirely of information from either publicly available or secret sources, or be a combination of the two."
Detailed information about submarine movements was available.
Counterespionage included the use of turned Double Cross agents to misinform Nazi Germany of impact points during the Blitz and internment of Japanese in the US against "Japan's wartime spy program".
To counter Russian ambitions in the region and the potential threat it posed to the British position in India, a system of surveillance, intelligence and counterintelligence was built up in the Indian Civil Service.
Both Soviet political (KGB) and military intelligence (GRU) officers were judged by the number of agents they recruited.
These could now be intercepted, but codes and ciphers were naturally used to hide the meaning of the messages, and neither Britain nor Germany had any established organisations to decode and interpret the messages.
As in most, if not all synthetic identity schemes, for whatever purpose (illegal or legal), the assistance of a controller is required.
*Double agent, "is a person who engages in clandestine activity for two intelligence or security services (or more in joint operations), who provides information about one or about each to the other, and who wittingly withholds significant information from one on the instructions of the other or is unwittingly manipulated by one so that significant facts are withheld from the adversary.
A spy need not be a citizen of the target country—hence does not automatically commit treason when operating within it.
In fact, she had entered German service from 1915, and sent her reports to the mission in the German embassy in Madrid.
One of the most effective ways to gather data and information about the enemy (or potential enemy) is by infiltrating the enemy's ranks.
The law was later used to suppress publication of periodicals, for example of Father Coughlin in World War II.
This may also include information of trade or tariff.
In the early 21st century, the act was used to prosecute whistleblowers such as Thomas Andrews Drake, John Kiriakou, and Edward Snowden, as well as officials who communicated with journalists for innocuous reasons, such as Stephen Jin-Woo Kim.
Walsingham's staff in England included the cryptographer Thomas Phelippes, who was an expert in deciphering letters and forgery, and Arthur Gregory, who was skilled at breaking and repairing seals without detection.
The latter was headed by Sir Vernon Kell and was originally aimed at calming public fears of large scale German espionage.
Although the news media may speak of "spy satellites" and the like, espionage is not a synonym for all intelligence-gathering disciplines.
Codebreaking (cryptanalysis or COMINT), aircraft or satellite photography, (IMINT) and research in open publications (OSINT) are all intelligence gathering disciplines, but none of them are considered espionage.
of foreign armies... to keep themselves acquainted with the progress made by foreign countries in military art and science..."
The establishment of dedicated intelligence organizations was directly linked to the colonial rivalries between the major European powers and the accelerating development of military technology.
Room 40, under Director of Naval Education Alfred Ewing and formed in October 1914, was the section in the British Admiralty most identified with the British cryptoanalysis effort during the First World War.
Within the United States Intelligence Community, "asset" is a more common usage.
**** Triple agent, an agent that is working for three intelligence services.
