This strongly suggests that Estonia was an important transit country during the Viking era.
According to the census of 2000 (data in table to the right), there were about 1,000 adherents of the Taara faith or Maausk in Estonia (see Maavalla Koda).
It is bordered to the north by the Gulf of Finland, to the west by the Baltic Sea, to the south by Latvia (343&nbsp;km), and to the east by Lake Peipus and Russia (338.6&nbsp;km).
Nordic-Baltic Eight ''(NB-8)'' is the joint co-operation of the governments of Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Iceland, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway and Sweden.
The first primer in the Estonian language was published in 1575.
The Oeselians were known in the Old Norse Icelandic Sagas and in Heimskringla as ''Víkingr frá Esthland'' (Vikings from Estonia).
Although the rights of peasants were initially weakened, serfdom was abolished in 1816 in the province of Estonia and in 1819 in Livonia.
The county government ''(Maavalitsus)'' of each county is led by a county governor ''(Maavanem)'', who represents the national government at the regional level.
This situation is similar to other countries in Northern Europe.
The President, however, does not use these rights very often, having a largely ceremonial role.
Half the deported perished, and the other half were not allowed to return until the early 1960s (years after Stalin's death).
Estonia has been the first post-soviet republic that has recognized and given some civil rights to families formed by same-sex couples.
Church services were now conducted in the vernacular instead of in Latin, previously used.
The Parliament of Estonia () or the legislative branch is elected by people for a four-year term by proportional representation.
However, there are vast disparities in GDP between different areas of Estonia; currently, over half of the country's GDP is created in Tallinn.
After Germany invaded the Soviet Union on 22 June 1941, the Wehrmacht crossed the Estonian southern border on 7 July.
The activities of Soviet forces in 1940–41 and after reoccupation sparked a guerrilla war against Soviet authorities in Estonia by the Forest Brothers, who consisted mostly of Estonian veterans of the German and Finnish armies and some civilians.
Among the most popular writers of the late 20th and early 21st centuries are Tõnu Õnnepalu and Andrus Kivirähk, who uses elements of Estonian folklore and mythology, deforming them into absurd and grotesque.
The first licenses for private TV broadcasters were issued in 1992.
Estonia is a parliamentary representative democratic republic in which the Prime Minister of Estonia is the head of government and which includes a multi-party system.
Estonia was a member of the League of Nations from 22 September 1921, has been a member of the United Nations since 17 September 1991, and of NATO since 29 March 2004, as well as the European Union since 1 May 2004.
In recent years the numbers of Coastal Swedes has risen again, numbering in 2008 almost 500 people, owing to the property reforms in the beginning of the 1990s.
, there are 12 public holidays (which come with a day off) and 12 national holidays celebrated annually.
Material damage caused by the world war and the following Soviet era significantly slowed Estonia's economic growth, resulting in a wide wealth gap in comparison with neighbouring Finland and Sweden.
There are two types of municipalities: an urban municipality&nbsp;– ''linn'' (town), and a rural municipality&nbsp;– ''vald'' (parish).
In addition to organising the academic life of the university, universities can create new curricula, establish admission terms and conditions, approve the budget, approve the development plan, elect the rector, and make restricted decisions in matters concerning assets.
The Eurobarometer Poll 2005 found that only 16% of Estonians profess a belief in a god, the lowest belief of all countries studied.
Today, it includes many typical international foods.
The organisation operates on security issues in local networks.
''Originates Livoniae'' in Chronicle of Henry of Livonia contains Estonian place names, words and fragments of sentences.
Another major group, inhabitants who follow Eastern Orthodox Christianity, practised chiefly by the Russian minority, and the Russian Orthodox Church is the second largest denomination with 150,000 members.
As over two-thirds of the municipalities have a population of under 3,000, many of them have found it advantageous to co-operate in providing services and carrying out administrative functions.
The Law on Cultural Autonomy for National Minorities was reinstated in 1993.
Despite some overlaps in the vocabulary due to borrowings, in terms of its origin, Estonian and Finnish are not related to their nearest geographical neighbours, Swedish, Latvian, and Russian, which are all Indo-European languages.
The Prime Minister has the right to appoint a maximum of three such ministers, as the limit of ministers in one government is fifteen.
It was hoped that by engaging in such a war Estonia would be able to attract Western support for Estonian independence.
Immigration was another effect of Soviet occupation.
Cultural autonomies could be granted to minorities numbering more than 3,000 people with longstanding ties to the Republic of Estonia.
At the 2016 Bandy World Championship the national team will play in Division A for the first time.
Saaremaa has the richest finds of Viking treasures after Gotland in Sweden.
Because of the rising prices of rare earths, extraction of these oxides has become economically viable.
During the Livonian War in 1561, northern Estonia submitted to Swedish control.
The domination of Estonia after the Northern Crusades, from the 13th century to 1918 by Germany, Sweden, and Russia resulted in few early written literary works in the Estonian language.
The architectural history of Estonia mainly reflects its contemporary development in northern Europe.
Due to this point, the Aestii are generally considered the ancestors of the later Baltic peoples.
The largest public universities are the University of Tartu, Tallinn University of Technology, Tallinn University, Estonian University of Life Sciences, Estonian Academy of Arts; the largest private university is Estonian Business School.
In some specialties (basic medical studies, veterinary, pharmacy, dentistry, architect-engineer, and a classroom teacher programme) the bachelor's and master's levels are integrated into one unit.
In 2008, annual military spending reached 1.85% of GDP, or 5&nbsp;billion kroons, and was expected to continue to increase until 2010, when a 2.0% level was anticipated.
This caused the Estonian War of Independence which was to last 14 months.
The Estonian Academy of Arts (Estonian: ''Eesti Kunstiakadeemia'', EKA) is providing higher education in art, design, architecture, media, art history and conservation while Viljandi Culture Academy of University of Tartu has an approach to popularise native culture through such curricula as native construction, native blacksmithing, native textile design, traditional handicraft and traditional music, but also jazz and church music.
It is even claimed that Estonia has the most startups per person in world.
Danish fleets attacked Estonia in 1170, 1194 and 1197.
Worth mentioning is especially the architectural ensemble that makes out the medieval old town of Tallinn, which is on the UNESCO World Heritage List.
If the candidate does not gain the amount of votes required, the right to elect the President goes over to an electoral body, consisting of the 101 members of Riigikogu and representatives from local councils.
Some of the best known scientists related to Estonia include astronomers Friedrich Georg Wilhelm von Struve, Ernst Öpik and Jaan Einasto, biologist Karl Ernst von Baer, Jakob von Uexküll, chemists Wilhelm Ostwald and Carl Schmidt, economist Ragnar Nurkse, matematician Edgar Krahn, medical researchers Ludvig Puusepp and Nikolay Pirogov, physicist Thomas Johann Seebeck, political scientist Rein Taagepera, psychologist Endel Tulving and Risto Näätänen, semiotician Yuri Lotman.
The cinema of Estonia started in 1908 with the production of a newsreel about Swedish King Gustav V's visit to Tallinn.
Hundreds of thousands of migrants were relocated to Estonia from other parts of the Soviet Union to assist industrialisation and militarisation, contributing an increase of about half a million people within 45&nbsp;years.
When comparing the result with a survey from 2000, then Russians' attitude toward the future is much more positive.
The one largest religious denomination in the country is Lutheranism, adhered to by 160,000 Estonians (or 13% of the population), principally ethnic Estonians.
People not actually residing there were restricted from travelling to them without a permit.
The Livonian Confederation ceased to exist during the Livonian War (1558–82).
At the end of July the Germans resumed their advance in Estonia working in tandem with the Estonian Forest Brothers.
The city remained occupied for some time, contributing to its decline as a center of commerce in the 13th century and the rise of Uppsala, Visby, Kalmar and Stockholm.
In 2014, Arvo Pärt was the world's most performed living composer for the fourth year in a row.
However, the historic ''Aesti'' appear to have been a Baltic people, whereas the modern Estonians have Finno-Ugric origins.
In response to a period of Russification initiated by the Russian Empire in the 1890s, Estonian nationalism took on more political tones, with intellectuals first calling for greater autonomy and, later, complete independence from the Russian Empire.
Following the capitulation of Estonia and Livonia during the Great Northern War (1700–21), the Swedish empire lost Estonia to Russia by the Treaty of Nystad.
A more troubled and war-ridden middle Iron Age followed with external threats coming both from the Baltic tribes, who attacked across the southern land border, and from overseas.
The country has large oil shale and limestone deposits, along with forests that cover 48% of the land.
Estonia imports petroleum products from western Europe and Russia.
On 16 June, the Soviet Union invaded Estonia.
In 2010, the economic situation stabilized and started a growth based on strong exports.
However, by 2010, 64.1% of non-ethnic Estonians spoke Estonian.
The Red Army exited from their military bases in Estonia on 17 June.
The country currently exports around 3000 tonnes per annum, representing around 2% of world production.
This is in contrast to large urban centres like Tallinn, where Estonians account for 60% of the population, and the remainder is composed mostly of Russian and other Slavic inhabitants, who arrived in Estonia during the Soviet period.
Nearly all provinces had at least one fortress.
There are currently 589 schools in Estonia.
Estonia is situated in the northern part of the temperate climate zone and in the transition zone between maritime and continental climate.
These include the Soviet deportations in 1941, the German deportations and Holocaust victims.
Proximity to the Scandinavian markets, its location between the East and West, competitive cost structure and a highly skilled labour force have been the major Estonian comparative advantages in the beginning of the 2000s (decade).
Paul Keres, Estonian and Soviet chess grandmaster, was among the world's top players from the mid-1930s to the mid-1960s.
In 1559 during the Livonian War the Bishop of Ösel-Wiek in Old Livonia sold his lands to King Frederick II of Denmark for 30,000 thalers.
The history of formal education in Estonia dates back to the 13th and 14th centuries when the first monastic and cathedral schools were founded.
Oskar Luts was the most prominent prose writer of the early Estonian literature, who is still widely read today, especially his lyrical school novel ''Kevade'' (Spring).
There are many rivers in the country.
University of Tartu team has won the league a record 26 times.
The Germans and their collaborators also carried out The Holocaust in Estonia in which they established a network of concentration camps and murdered thousands of Estonian Jews and Estonian Gypsies, other Estonians, non-Estonian Jews, and Soviet prisoners of war.
The capital of Danish Estonia () was Reval (Tallinn), founded at the place of Lyndanisse after the invasion of 1219.
According to new polls about religiosity in the European Union in 2012 by Eurobarometer found that Christianity is the largest religion in Estonia accounting 28.06% of Estonians.
Together with Lithuania, Poland, and Latvia, the country considered participating in constructing the Visaginas nuclear power plant in Lithuania to replace the Ignalina.
Renewable wind energy was about 6% of total consumption in 2009.
On 12 June 1940, the order for a total military blockade on Estonia was given to the Soviet Baltic Fleet.
In total, there are 47 ''linn''a, with "linn" in English meaning both "cities" and "towns".
Another important industrial sector is the machinery and chemical industry, which is mainly located in Ida-Viru County and around Tallinn.
The territory of Estonia has been inhabited since at least 6,500 BCE, with Finno-Ugric speakers – the linguistic ancestors of modern Estonians – arriving no later than around 1800 BCE.
Because of its rapid growth, Estonia has often been described as a Baltic Tiger beside Lithuania and Latvia.
The current Estonian Prime Minister is Taavi Rõivas, who is the former Minister of Social Affairs and the head of the Estonian Reform Party.
Estonia's best results were being ranked 13th in the medal table at the 1936 Summer Olympics, and 12th at the 2006 Winter Olympics.
Anti-communist partisans of 1944–1976 are labelled "bandits" or "Nazis", though the Russian position is not recognised internationally.
According to the Lutheran World Federation, the historic Lutheran denomination has a large presence with 180,000 registered members.
Estonia has had very good success at the Olympic games given the country's small population.
The Prime Minister also has the right to appoint other ministers and assign them a subject to deal with.
The territory of Estonia consists of a mainland and 2,222 islands and islets in the Baltic Sea, covering  of land, and is influenced by a humid continental climate.
Average temperatures range from  on the Baltic islands to  inland in July, the warmest month, and from  on the Baltic islands to  inland in February, the coldest month.
Before the Soviet occupation, the Germans and Jewish minorities managed to elect a cultural council.
Estonia has also signed the Kyoto Protocol.
After the decline of the Teutonic Order following its defeat in the Battle of Grunwald in 1410, and the defeat of the Livonian Order in the Battle of Swienta on 1 September 1435, the Livonian Confederation Agreement was signed on 4 December 1435.
Whereas in 1992 Russia accounted for 92% of Estonia's international trade, today there is extensive economic interdependence between Estonia and its Nordic neighbours: three quarters of foreign investment in Estonia originates in the Nordic countries (principally Finland and Sweden), to which Estonia sends 42% of its exports (as compared to 6.5% going to Russia, 8.8% to Latvia, and 4.7% to Lithuania).
After the Second World War, as part of the goal to more fully integrate Baltic countries into the Soviet Union, mass deportations were conducted in the Baltic countries and the policy of encouraging Soviet immigration to the Baltic states continued.
More than 10% of the entire adult Baltic population was deported or sent to Soviet labour camps.
In addition to oil shale and limestone, Estonia also has large reserves of phosphorite, pitchblende, and granite that currently are not mined, or not mined extensively.
The following day, some 90,000 additional troops entered the country.
Most are very small, with the largest, Lake Peipus, being .
The southern parts of the country were conquered by Livonian Brothers of the Sword who joined the Teutonic Order in 1237 and became its branch known as the Livonian Order.
The tax has contributed to a high rate (~90%) of owner-occupied residences within Estonia, compared to a rate of 67.4% in the United States.
The Estonian parliament has 101 members and influences the governing of the state primarily by determining the income and the expenses of the state (establishing taxes and adopting the budget).
In January 2011 the Baltic states were invited to join NORDEFCO, the defence framework of the Nordic countries.
Alternative energy sources such as wood, peat, and biomass make up approximately 9% of primary energy production.
Both German troops and Estonian partisans took Narva on 17 August and the Estonian capital Tallinn on 28 August.
A Land Value Tax is levied which is used to fund local municipalities.
Other organizations, such as the World Council of Churches, report that there are as many as 265,700 Estonian Lutherans.
The repressions followed with the mass deportations carried out by the Soviets in Estonia on 14 June 1941.
The unemployment rate in March 2016 was 6.4%, which is below the EU average, while real GDP growth in 2011 was 8.0%, five times the euro-zone average.
The Chronicle of Henry of Livonia mentions Tharapita as the superior god of Oeselians (inhabitants of Saaremaa island).
With assistance from the European Union, the World Bank and the Nordic Investment Bank, Estonia completed most of its preparations for European Union membership by the end of 2002 and now has one of the strongest economies of the new member states of the European Union.
In 1631, the Swedish king Gustaf II Adolf forced the nobility to grant the peasantry greater rights, although serfdom was retained.
Estonia national basketball team previously participated in 1936 Summer Olympics, appeared in EuroBasket four times.
In 1994, based on the economic theories of Milton Friedman, Estonia became one of the first countries to adopt a flat tax, with a uniform rate of 26% regardless of personal income.
Estonia celebrated its 90th anniversary over the period 28 November 2007 to 28 November 2008.
A balanced budget, almost non-existent public debt, flat-rate income tax, free trade regime, competitive commercial banking sector, innovative e-Services and even mobile-based services are all hallmarks of Estonia's market economy.
Joint Nordic-Baltic projects include the education programme Nordplus and mobility programmes for business and industry and for public administration.
World War II casualties of Estonia are estimated as around 25% of the population.
Catholics have their Latin Apostolic Administration of Estonia.
In 1988, during the Singing Revolution, the Estonian SSR issued the Estonian Sovereignty Declaration in defiance of the Soviet rule, and independence was restored on the night of 20 August 1991, during the 1991 attempted coup by the Soviets.
After signing a treaty on 16 April 2003, Estonia was among the group of ten countries admitted to the European Union on 1 May 2004.
Estonia was administratively divided between the provinces of Estonia in the north and Livonia in southern Estonia and northern Latvia.
The law was approved in October 2014 and came into effect 1 January 2016.
The latter, mostly Russian-speaking ethnic minorities, reside predominantly in the capital city of Tallinn and the industrial urban areas in Ida-Virumaa.
Municipalities range in size from Tallinn with 400,000 inhabitants to Ruhnu with as few as sixty.
The Ministry of Defence and the Defence Forces have been working on a cyberwarfare and defence formation for some years now.
When the German Operation Barbarossa started against the Soviet Union, about 34,000 young Estonian men were forcibly drafted into the Red Army, fewer than 30% of whom survived the war.
Other notable tech startups include GrabCAD, Fortumo and TransferWise.
Estonia imports 200&nbsp;million kilowatt hours of electricity annually.
The longest of them are Võhandu (), Pärnu (), and Põltsamaa ().
This is primarily because the Estonian language has borrowed nearly one third of its vocabulary from Germanic languages, mainly from Low Saxon (Middle Low German) during the period of German rule, and High German (including standard German).
However, due to the slow pace of the project and problems with the sector (like Fukushima disaster and bad example of Olkiluoto plant), Eesti Energia has shifted its main focus to shale oil production that is seen as much more profitable business.
Around 68,000 people consider themselves atheists.
After initial success the revolt was ended by the invasion of the Teutonic Order.
A Native Music Preserving Centre was opened in 2008 in Viljandi.
As the 1980s progressed, a movement for Estonian autonomy started.
Although the amount of pollutants emitted to the air have been falling since the 1980s, the air is still polluted with sulphur dioxide from the mining industry that the Soviet Union rapidly developed in the early 1950s.
Thirteen of Estonia's 15 counties are over 80% ethnic Estonian, the most homogeneous being Hiiumaa, where Estonians account for 98.4% of the population.
In January 2008, the Estonian military had almost 300 troops stationed in foreign countries as part of various international peacekeeping forces, including 35 Defence League troops stationed in Kosovo; 120 Ground Forces soldiers in the NATO-led ISAF force in Afghanistan; 80 soldiers stationed as a part of MNF in Iraq; and 2 Estonian officers in Bosnia-Herzegovina and 2 Estonian military agents in Israeli occupied Golan Heights.
Although Estonia is in general resource-poor, the land still offers a large variety of smaller resources.
The unsuccessful rebellion led to a consolidation of power for the Baltic German minority.
The Land Value Tax is levied on the value of the land only with improvements and buildings not considered.
Estonian Russians have developed their own identity – more than half of the respondents recognised that Estonian Russians differ noticeably from the Russians in Russia.
Tacitus mentions their term for amber in an apparently Latinised form, ''glesum'' (cf.
In 1919, university courses were first taught in the Estonian language.
The two most important policy objectives in this regard have been accession into NATO and the European Union, achieved in March and May 2004 respectively.
The Red Army retreated behind the Pärnu River&nbsp;– Emajõgi line on 12 July.
Food, construction, and electronic industries are currently among the most important branches of Estonia's industry.
The CCDCOE started its operations in November 2008.
In the 1950s, Estonian baritone Georg Ots rose to worldwide prominence as an opera singer.
Forests cover 61% of Estonia.
The military of Estonia is based upon the Estonian Defence Forces (), which is the name of the unified armed forces of the republic with ''Maavägi'' (Army), ''Merevägi'' (Navy), ''Õhuvägi'' (Air Force) and a paramilitary national guard organisation ''Kaitseliit'' (Defence League).
The registered unemployment rate in January 2012 was 7.7%.
A municipality may contain one or more populated places.
The call resulted in around 38,000 new enlistments and several thousand Estonians who had joined the Finnish Army came back to join the newly formed Territorial Defense Force, assigned to defend Estonia against the Soviet advance.
The last festival took place in July 2014.
The municipalities in Estonia cover the entire territory of the country.
Human settlement in Estonia became possible 11,000 to 13,000&nbsp;years ago, when the ice from the last glacial era melted.
According to radiocarbon dating it was settled around 11,000&nbsp;years ago at the beginning of the ninth millennium&nbsp;BC.
The Estonian education system consists of state, municipal, public, and private institutions.
At age 13, she became the youngest gold medalist to date at a Winter X Games event, and the first person to win a Winter X Games medal for Estonia.
The Jewish community has an estimated population of about 1,900 (see History of the Jews in Estonia).
A small, recent cluster of meteorite craters, the largest of which is called Kaali is found on Saaremaa, Estonia.
Estonia joined the OECD in 2010.
Skype was written by Estonia-based developers Ahti Heinla, Priit Kasesalu, and Jaan Tallinn, who had also originally developed Kazaa.
According to the Programme for International Student Assessment, the performance levels of gymnasium-age pupils in Estonia is among the highest in the world: in 2010, the country was ranked 13th for the quality of its education system, well above the OECD average.
There were two dead Estonian servicemen, Aleksei Männikus and Johannes Mandre, and several wounded on the Estonian side and about ten killed and more wounded on the Soviet side.
BC Kalev/Cramo are the most recent champions, having won the league in the 2015–16 season.
The country has been experiencing economic growth ever since.
The Oeselians or Osilians (Estonian ''saarlased''; singular: ''saarlane'') were a historical subdivision of Estonians inhabiting Saaremaa (; ; ), an Estonian island in the Baltic Sea.
Estonia has numerous fens and bogs.
Its ideas came quickly to the Livonian Confederation and by the 1520s were widespread.
The electricity market as whole will be liberalised by 2013.
Viking-age treasures from Estonia mostly contain silver coins and bars.
The Finnish Infantry Regiment 200 (Estonian: ''soomepoisid'') was formed out of Estonian volunteers in Finland.
Oil shale energy, telecommunications, textiles, chemical products, banking, services, food and fishing, timber, shipbuilding, electronics, and transportation are key sectors of the economy.
In 2007, the construction industry employed more than 80,000 people, around 12% of the entire country's workforce.
In March 2016, the average monthly gross salary in Estonia was €1105.
However, the upper classes and the higher middle class remained primarily Baltic German.
Kiiking involves a modified swing in which the rider of the swing tries to go around 360&nbsp;degrees.
At a professional level, traditional folk song reached its new heyday during the last quarter of the 20th century, primarily thanks to the work of composer Veljo Tormis.
According to the legend in the chronicle Tharapita was born on a forested mountain in Virumaa (), mainland Estonia from where he flew to Oesel, Saaremaa The name Taarapita has been interpreted as "Taara, help!
Saxo speaks of Estonian warriors who sang at night while waiting for a battle.
The Paldiski reactors building passed into Estonian control in 1994 after the last Russian troops left the country.
The Estonian Sovereignty Declaration was issued on 16 November 1988.
