Although not very much is known about Allen's childhood, the town of Cornwall was frontier territory in the 1740s.
This essay was less polemic than many of his earlier writings.
In a private discussion, Allen and Arnold reached an accommodation, the essence of which was that Arnold and Allen would both be at the front of the troops when the attack on the fort was made.
The rejection likely had several causes.
It is likely that his first visits to the New Hampshire Grants occurred during these years.
Allen was appointed to be one of the judges responsible for deciding whose property was subject to seizure under the law.
Allen died at home several hours later, without ever regaining consciousness.
In late April, following the battles of Lexington and Concord, Allen received a message from members of an irregular Connecticut militia that they were planning to capture Fort Ticonderoga, requesting his assistance in the effort.
In spite of these differences the marriage survived until Mary's death in 1783.
After selling off some of his Connecticut properties, he began buying wild lands further north in the territory, which he sold at a profit as the southern settlements grew and people began to move further north.
When he moved to Salisbury, Allen met Thomas Young, a doctor living and practicing just across the provincial boundary in New York.
Stalling for time, he demanded to know by what authority the fort was being entered.
Alexander Graydon, with whom Allen was paroled during his captivity in New York, described him like this:
While Sheffield would be the family home for ten years, Allen was often absent for extended periods.
This action was somewhat surprising, as Levi had not only attempted to purchase Allen's release while he was in Halifax, but he had also traveled to New York while Allen was on parole there, and furnished him with goods and money.
There he learned that his brother Heman had died just the previous week, and that his brother Zimri, who had been caring for Allen's family and farm, had died in the spring following his capture.
To that end, he and about 100 Boys climbed into four bateaux, and began rowing north.
Less than a week after the Westminster convention ended, while Allen and the committee worked on their petition, the American Revolutionary War began.
It was not until many years later, after Young's death, that Allen was able to recover the manuscript.
Brothers Ira and Heman were also given command positions, but Allen was not given any position at all in the regiment.
Both Allen and Arnold protested these measures, pointing out that doing so would leave the northern border wide open.
In October 1775, the ''Gaspée'' went downriver, and her prisoners were transferred to the ''Adamant'', which then sailed for England.
The ''Bennington Gazette'' wrote of the local hero, "the patriotism and strong attachment which ever appeared uniform in the breast of this ''Great Man'', was worth of his exalted character; the public have to lament the loss of a man who has rendered them great service".
A few of the holders of Wentworth grants were originally from northwestern Connecticut; and some of them, including Remember Baker and Seth Warner, were relatives of Allen.
Allen personally escorted some of those convicted under the law to Albany, where he turned them over to General John Stark for transportation to the British lines.
When the American Revolutionary War broke out, Allen and the Boys seized the initiative and captured Fort Ticonderoga in May 1775.
Allen went directly to the fort commander's quarters, seeking to force his surrender.
The prisoners were eventually transported to West Point, where they remained in "easy imprisonment".
In contrast, Allen's behavior was sometimes quite flamboyant; and he maintained an interest in learning.
Following his visit to Valley Forge, Allen traveled to Salisbury, arriving on May 25, 1778.
There he learned that the Vermont Republic had declared independence in 1777, that a constitution had been drawn up, and that elections had been held.
While largely accurate, it notably omits Benedict Arnold from the capture of Ticonderoga, and Seth Warner as the leader of the Green Mountain Boys.
The exact location within the cemetery of his remains is unknown.
Between May 1770, when he first began working on the defense, and the trial in July, he acquired, for the price of $50, grants from Wentworth to about  of land in Poultney and Castleton.
When the settlers protested his language Allen continued the tirade, threatening to send any troops from New York to Hell.
While Allen's service as a judge in Vermont was brief, he continued to ferret out Tories and report them to local Boards of Confiscation for action.
By the time Allen reached his teens, the area, while still a difficult area in which to make a living, began to resemble a town, with wood-frame houses beginning to replace the rough cabins of the early settlers.
Its provisions included the penalty of death for interfering with a magistrate, and the criminalization of meetings of more than three people "for unlawful purposes" in the Grants.
The move to Cornwall grew out of Allen's father's quest for freedom of religion during a time of turmoil: the Great Awakening, when Puritans were separating into churches with differing dogmas, in particular about the proper form of conversion: by works or by grace.
Fanny had a settling effect on Allen; for the remainder of his years he did not embark on many great adventures.
The next day he went to Arlington to see his family and his brother Ira, whose prominence in Vermont politics had risen considerably during Allen's captivity.
In his later years, independent Vermont continued to experience rapid population growth, and Allen sold a great deal of his land, but also reinvested much the proceeds in more land.
When he returned from that expedition eight days later, Brigadier General Richard Montgomery had assumed command of the invasion due to Schuyler's illness.
While there is a vault beneath the 1858 cenotaph, it contains a time capsule from the time of the monument's erection.
He was twice married, fathering eight children.
Efforts by members of the Vermont Historical Society and other historical groups through the years have followed up on rumored likenesses, only to come up empty.
(This law was so successful at collecting revenue that Vermont did not impose any taxes until 1781.)
They had three children: Fanny (1784–1819), Hannibal Montresor (1786–1813), and Ethan Alphonso (1789–1855).
Allen and Levi engaged in a war of words, many of which were printed in the ''Connecticut Courant'', even after Levi crossed British lines.
A detachment of the boys under Seth Warner's command went to nearby Fort Crown Point and captured the small garrison there.
While accounts of the return journey are not entirely consistent, Allen apparently suffered an apoplectic fit en route, and was unconscious by the time they returned home.
He then briefly returned to Salisbury before settling in nearby Sheffield, Massachusetts with his younger brother Zimri.
I always dreaded his impatience and imprudence."
Eventually the dispute made its way to George Washington, who essentially agreed with Stark since he desperately needed the general's services.
Early in 1779, Governor Clinton issued a proclamation stating that the state of New York would honor the Wentworth grants, if the settlers would recognize New York's political jurisdiction over the Vermont territory.
Allen denied taking any money; even if he did, none of his actions appeared to honor Duane's request.
No likenesses of Allen made from life have been found, in spite of numerous attempts to locate them.
In one incident, he and his brother Heman went to the farm of a neighbor, some of whose pigs had escaped onto their land, and seized the pigs.
Much of the following year was spent on prison ships off the American coast.
Allen stayed there for two days and was treated politely.
Arnold then began asserting his authority over Allen for control of Ticonderoga and Crown Point.
His lifelong interest in philosophy and ideas emerged against the backdrop of his father's involvement in these Puritan debates and his father's refusal to convert to the covenant by grace.
He then learned of the death of his young son Joseph due to smallpox.
The work was not published until long after his death, and is primarily of interest to students of Transcendentalism, a movement the work foreshadows.
At first his treatment was poor, but Allen wrote a letter, ostensibly to the Continental Congress, describing his conditions and suggesting that Congress treat the prisoners it held the same way.
Unknown to Allen, British prisoners now included General Prescott, captured trying to escape from Montreal, and the letter came into the hands of the British cabinet.
On February 11, 1789, Allen traveled to South Hero, Vermont with one of his workers to visit his cousin, Ebenezer Allen, and to collect a load of hay.
Allen, likely both stubborn in his determination, and envious of Arnold, persisted.
The neighbor sued to have the animals returned to him; Allen pleaded his own case, and lost.
In 1770, a group of Wentworth grant holders asked Allen to defend their case before New York's Supreme Court, a move that presented Allen with his first big stage.
The book was a complete financial and critical failure.
Warner was viewed as a more stable and quieter choice, and was someone that also commanded respect.
The Ethan Allen School was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1988.
On May 14, following the arrival of 100 men recruited by Arnold's captains, and the arrival of a schooner and some bateaux that had been taken at Skenesboro, Arnold and 50 of his men sailed north to raid Fort St. John, on the Richelieu River downstream from the lake, where a small British warship was reported by the prisoners to be anchored.
His capture ended his participation in the revolution until 1778, as he was imprisoned by the British.
At one point, while aboard HMS ''Mercury'', she anchored off New York, where, among other visitors, the captain entertained William Tryon; Allen reports that Tryon glanced at him without any sign of recognition, although it is likely the New York governor knew who he was.
The trial was brief, and the outcome unsurprising, as the court, citing their fraudulently issued nature, refused to allow the introduction of Wentworth's grants as evidence.
Allen went to Ticonderoga to join Schuyler, while Warner and others raised the regiment.
A lack of cash, complicated by Vermont's currency problems, placed a strain on Fanny's relatively free hand on spending, which was further exacerbated by the cost of publishing ''Reason'', and of the construction of a new home near the mouth of the Onion River.
Allen's pamphlet circulated widely, including among members of Congress, and was successful in casting the Vermonters' case in a positive light.
Around 2:00&nbsp;a.m., a few boats were finally procured for the crossing.
I have seldom met with a man, possessing, in my opinion, a stronger mind, or whose mode of expression was more vehement and oratorical.
Notwithstanding that Allen might have had something of the insubordinate, lawless frontier spirit in his composition ... he appeared to me to be a man of generosity and honor."
Two small companies were detached to procure boats, and Allen took the main contingent north to Hand's Cove in Shoreham to prepare for the crossing.
The trial, for which Allen hired Jared Ingersoll to represent the grantholder interest, began in July 1770, pitting Allen against politically powerful New York grant-holders, including New York's Lieutenant Governor Colden, James Duane (who was prosecuting the case), and Robert Livingston, the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court (who was presiding over the case).
Allen, who later claimed that he said it to Captain Delaplace, said, "In the name of the Great Jehovah and the Continental Congress!"
Delaplace finally emerged from his chambers, fully dressed, and surrendered his sword.
The Boys, in a panic, piled into their bateaux and rowed with all speed upriver.
Arnold generously opened his stores to Allen's hungry men, and tried to dissuade Allen from his objective, noting that it was likely the alarm had been raised and troops were on their way to St. John.
On September 8, Schuyler sent Allen and Massachusetts Major John Brown, who had also been involved in the capture of Ticonderoga, into the countryside between St. John and Montreal to spread the word of their arrival to the habitants and the Indians.
Allen was named their Colonel Commandant, and cousins Seth Warner and Remember Baker were captains of two of the companies.
While he volunteered for militia service in 1757 in response to French movements resulting in the siege of Fort William Henry, his unit received word while en route that the fort had fallen, and turned back.
On the afternoon of May 9, Benedict Arnold quite unexpectedly arrived on the scene.
She eventually remarried.
On May 14, he was breveted a colonel in the Continental Army in "reward of his fortitude, firmness and zeal in the cause of his country, manifested during his long and cruel captivity, as well as on former occasions," and given military pay of $75 per month.
On arrival at Falmouth, England, after a crossing under filthy conditions, Allen and the other prisoners were imprisoned in Pendennis Castle, Cornwall.
By a wide margin, Seth Warner was elected to lead the regiment.
They would eventually reconcile in 1783.
Governor Tryon and the Boys exchanged threats, truce offers, and other writings, which were frequently written by Allen in florid and didactic language, while the Boys continued to drive surveyors and incoming tenants on New York-granted lands away.
As early as 1749, Benning Wentworth, New Hampshire's governor, was selling land grants in the area west of the Connecticut River, to which New Hampshire had always laid somewhat dubious claim.
Written by Himself and now published for the Information of the Curious in all Nations''.
In that year, he became part owner of an iron furnace in Salisbury.
The family moved to the town of Cornwall shortly after his birth.
In 1772 he, his cousin Remember Baker; and his brothers Ira, Heman, and Zimri formed the Onion River Company, which was basically a land-speculation organization devoted to purchasing land in and around the Winooski River (known then as the Onion River).
Land purchased by Allen and his brothers included tracts of land that eventually became Burlington, Vermont.
Allen, shortly after Arnold's departure on the raid, decided, after his successes at the southern end of the lake, to take and hold Fort St. John himself.
These discussions resulted in the formation of the Green Mountain Boys, with local militia companies in each of the surrounding towns.
When Allen and his men landed above St. John and scouted the situation, they learned that a column of 200 or more regulars was approaching.
Following a brief visit to their families, they returned to Bennington to spread the news.
There he remained while Vermont declared independence, and John Burgoyne's campaign for the Hudson River met a stumbling block near Bennington in August 1777.
Allen spent the next several years involved in Vermont's political and military matters.
Joseph Allen died in 1755; at the time of his death he was one of the wealthier landowners in the area, ran a successful farm, and had previously served as town selectman.
The negotiations, once details of them were published, were often described by opponents of Vermont statehood as treasonous, but no such formal charges were ever laid against anyone involved.
General Carleton, alerted to Allen's presence, mustered every man he could, and, in the Battle of Longue-Pointe, scattered most of Allen's force, and captured him and about 30 men.
The American invasion of Quebec departed from Ticonderoga on August 28.
Many of these grants were sold at relatively low prices to land speculators, with some land kicked back to Wentworth.
Vermont historian Samuel Williams called it "an act which for its savage barbarity is probably without parallel in the legislation of any civilized country".
In addition to continuing resistance to New York's attempts to assert control over the territory, Allen was active in efforts by Vermont's leadership for recognition by Congress, and he participated in controversial negotiations with the British over the possibility of Vermont becoming a separate British province.
Accompanied by a small number of Americans, he again set out, traveling through the countryside to Sorel, before turning to follow the Saint Lawrence River up toward Montreal, recruiting upwards of 200 men.
In typical style, he castigated the governor for issuing "romantic proclamations ... calculated to deceive woods people", and for his "folly and stupidity".
His business dealings included successful farming operations, one of Connecticut's early iron works, and land speculation in the Vermont territory.
However, only 83 men made it to the other side of the lake before Allen and Arnold, concerned that dawn was approaching, decided to attack.
Allen's wife Mary died in June 1783 of consumption, to be followed several months later by their first-born daughter Loraine.
Rather than attempt an ambush on those troops, which significantly outnumbered his tired company, Allen withdrew to the other side of the river, where the men collapsed with exhaustion and slept without sentries through the night.
The ''Spirit of Ethan Allen III'' is a tour boat operating on Lake Champlain.
In 1779 Allen published the account of his time in captivity, ''A Narrative of Colonel Ethan Allen's Captivity ...
The history of Warner's later actions in the revolution (notably at Hubbardton and Bennington) may be seen as a confirmation of the choice made by the Dorset meeting.
The death of Heman, with whom Allen had been quite close, hit him quite hard.
Allen and Mary had five children together, only two of whom reached adulthood.
Allen's publisher had forced him to pay the publication costs up front, and only 200 of the 1,500 volumes printed were sold.
General Schuyler, upon learning of Allen's capture, wrote, "I am very apprehensive of disagreeable consequences arising from Mr. Allen's imprudence.
Flourishing a commission from the Massachusetts Committee of Safety, he asserted his right to command the expedition.
While many historians have believed that Allen took these actions because he already held Wentworth grants of his own, there is no evidence that he was issued any such grants until after he had been asked to take up the defense of grants held by others.
When the expedition returned to Ticonderoga two days later, some of the men were greatly disappointed that they had nothing to show for the effort and risks they took.
Allen, after being promised land, traveled to the area and began stirring up not just Pennsylvania authorities but also his long-time nemesis, Governor Clinton of New York, by proposing that a new state be carved out of the disputed area and several counties of New York.
The Ethan Allen Express, an Amtrak train line running from New York City to Rutland, Vermont, is also named after him.
He was so zealous in these efforts that they also included naming his own brother Levi, who was apparently trying to swindle Allen and Ira out of land at the time.
He was threatened with debtors' prison on at least one occasion, and was at times reduced to borrowing money and calling in old debts to make ends meet.
The people of Cork, when they learned that the famous Ethan Allen was in port, took up a collection to provide him and his men with clothing and other supplies.
Undoubtedly, we shall be rewarded according to our merit".
His grandson, Ethan Allen Hitchcock, served as a Union Army general in the American Civil War, and was claimed by his mother to bear a strong resemblance to her father.
Allen's exploits in those years introduced him to the wrong side of the justice system, which would become a recurring feature of his life.
Further meetings resulted in the creation of committees of safety, and laid down rules by which to resist attempts by the New York provincial government to establish its authority.
They were successful enough in gaining support from the habitants that Quebec's governor, General Guy Carleton, reported that "they have injured us very much".
Allen had the work, which historian Charles Jellison describes as "rebellion in print", printed in Connecticut, and began selling and giving away copies in early 1775.
His daughter Fanny achieved notice when she converted to Roman Catholicism and entered a convent.
On September 4, the army had occupied the Île aux Noix in the Richelieu River, a few miles above Fort St. John, which they then prepared to besiege.
Allen, in one instance, wrote that "I will lay my life on it, that with fifteen hundred men, and a proper artillery, I will take Montreal".
Sometime in the early 1850s, the original plaque marking Allen's grave disappeared; its original text was preserved by early war historian Benson Lossing in the 1840s.
On May 2, 60 men from Massachusetts and Connecticut met with Allen in Bennington, where they discussed the logistics of the expedition.
Containing His Voyages and Travels, With the most remarkable Occurrences respecting him and many other Continental Prisoners of Observations.
"His figure was that of a robust, large-framed man, worn down by confinement and hard fare; but he was now recovering his flesh and spirits; and a suit of blue clothes, with a gold laced hat that had been presented to him by the gentlement of Cork, enabled him to make a very passable appearance for a rebel colonel ...
Allen wrote of this homecoming that "we passed the flowing bowl, and rural felicity, sweetened with friendship, glowed in every countenance".
They both also made proposals to Congress and other provincial bodies for carrying out an invasion of Quebec.
The thorough rejection stung; Allen wrote to Connecticut Governor Jonathan Trumbull, "How the old men came to reject me I cannot conceive inasmuch as I saved them from the incroachments of New York."
He was kept in solitary confinement and chains, and General Richard Prescott had, according to Allen, ordered him to be treated "with much severity".
Lieutenant Jocelyn Feltham, the assistant to the fort's commander, Captain William Delaplace, was awakened by the noise, and called to wake the captain.
Before departing for Bennington with the news, Allen was visited by Duane, who offered Allen payments which Duane described in his diary as payment "for going among the people to quiet them".
Allen and his comrades countered by issuing offers of their own.
The theologically conservative future president of Yale, Timothy Dwight, opined that "the style was crude and vulgar, and the sentiments were coarser than the style.
The doctor, only five years older than Allen, taught the younger Allen a great deal about philosophy and political theory, while Allen was able to bring to Young his appreciation of nature and life on the frontier.
Although most obituaries were positive, a number of clergymen expressed different sentiments.
In 1858, the Vermont Legislature authorized the placement of a 42-foot (13 m) column of Vermont granite in the cemetery, with the following inscription:
The arguments were flimsy and unmeaning, and the conclusions were fastened upon the premises by mere force."
Over the next few years the situation deteriorated further.
Some of these supposed Tories protested to New York Governor George Clinton that they were actually dispossessed Yorkers.
Yale's Timothy Dwight expressed satisfaction that the world no longer had to deal with a man of "peremptoriness and effrontery, rudeness and ribaldry".
Legal setbacks led to the formation of the Green Mountain Boys, whom Allen led in a campaign of intimidation and property destruction to drive New York settlers from the Grants.
Montgomery, likely not wanting the troublemaker in his camp, again sent him out, this time to raise a regiment of French-speaking Canadiens.
This move to leadership was not unusual; he was known among his contemporaries to be willing to step forward and take control.
Allen met his second wife, a young widow named Frances "Fanny" Montresor Brush Buchanan, early in 1784; and after a brief courtship, they wed on February 16, 1784.
Allen wrote of the voyage that he "was put under the power of an English Merchant from London, whose name was Brook Watson: a man of malicious and cruel disposition".
;Disappearance of his grave marker
He then ordered them to leave, saying, "Go your way now, and complain to that damned scoundrel your Governor, God damn your Governor, Laws, King, Council, and Assembly".
Following the exchange, Allen reported to Washington at Valley Forge.
Allen bought a small farm and proceeded to develop the iron works.
He is known to have been living in Northampton, Massachusetts in the spring of 1766, where his son Joseph was born, and where he invested in a lead mine.
The people of the Grants were tired of the disputes with New York, and they were tired of Allen's posturing and egotistic behavior, which the success at Ticonderoga had enhanced.
The next morning, Allen was elected to lead the expedition, and a dawn raid was planned for May 10.
Clinton, who considered Vermont to still be a part of New York, did not want to honor the actions of the Vermont tribunals; Stark, who had custody of the men, disagreed with Clinton.
Ethan Allen was born in Litchfield, Connecticut, the first-born child of Joseph and Mary Baker Allen, both of English and Puritan descent.
His wife was rigidly religious, prone to criticizing him, and barely able to read and write.
He was also called to court in Salisbury for inoculating himself against smallpox, a procedure that at the time required the sanction of the town selectmen.
He then set out for Bennington, where news of his impending return preceded him, and he was met with all of the honor due a military war hero.
While Allen participated in some of the actions to drive surveyors away, he also spent much time exploring the entire territory, probably ranging as far north as the site of Burlington in his wanderings.
Allen spent much of the summer of 1774 writing a "pamphlet" entitled ''A Brief Narrative of the Proceedings of the Government of New York Relative to Their Obtaining the Jurisdiction of that Large District of Land to the Westward of the Connecticut River''.
The expansion of the iron works was apparently costly to Allen; he was forced to sell off portions of the Cornwall property to raise funds, and eventually sold half of his interest in the works to his brother Heman.
Allen, whether motivated by patriotic impulses (as he describes in his account of the events), or by the realization that the action might improve the political position of his side in the grants disputes, agreed to help, and began rounding up the Green Mountain Boys.
In 1782, Allen's brother Heber died at the relatively young age of 38.
First imprisoned aboard Royal Navy ships, he was paroled in New York City, and finally released in a prisoner exchange in 1778.
The success of this business depended on the successful defense of the Wentworth grants.
By 1769 the situation in the Grants had deteriorated to the point where surveyors and other figures of New York authority were being physically threatened and driven from the area.
Between 1780 and 1783 Allen participated, along with his brother Ira, Vermont Governor Thomas Chittenden, and others, in negotiations with Frederick Haldimand, the governor of Quebec, that were ostensibly about prisoner exchanges, but were really about establishing Vermont as a new British province and gaining military protection for its residents.
A poem he wrote memorializing Mary was published in the ''Bennington Gazette''.
While they had not always been close, and Allen's marriage had often been strained, Allen felt these losses deeply.
He was arrested for violating his parole, and placed in solitary confinement.
By most accounts Allen's first marriage was an unhappy one.
Allen appeared before the Continental Congress as early as September 1778 on behalf of Vermont, seeking recognition as an independent state.
Allen's brother Ira recalled that, even at a young age, Allen was curious and interested in learning.
Young and Allen eventually decided to collaborate on a book intended to be an attack on organized religion, as Young had convinced Allen to become a Deist.
