Frumentius became the first bishop of Aksum.
The population is forecast to grow to over 210 million by 2060, which would be an increase from 2011 estimates by a factor of about 2.5.
When Emperor Susenyos I converted to Roman Catholicism in 1624, years of revolt and civil unrest followed, resulting in thousands of deaths.
According to Ethnologue, there are ninety individual languages spoken in Ethiopia.
Approximately 3 million people were in primary school in 1994/95, and by 2008/09, primary enrollment had risen to 15.5 million – an increase of over 500%.
The best-known Ethiopian cuisine consists of various types of thick meat stews, known as ''wat'' in Ethiopian culture, and vegetable side dishes served atop injera, a large sourdough flatbread made of teff flour.
Production is overwhelmingly by small-scale farmers and enterprises, and a large part of commodity exports are provided by the small agricultural cash-crop sector.
The Greek historian Herodotus specifically uses it for all the lands south of Egypt, including Sudan and modern Ethiopia.
All the defendants denied the charges and claimed that they were merely protesting in defence of their rights.
"People are fed up with what the regime has been doing for a quarter of a century.
Ethiopia, despite Egypt's initial protest, is also in the process of constructing a 6000 MW and Africa's largest hydroelectric dam ( GERD dam) on the Nile river.
English is the most widely spoken foreign language and is the medium of instruction in secondary schools.
Urbanization has steadily been increasing in Ethiopia, with two periods of significantly rapid growth.
After Tewodros' death, Tekle Giyorgis II was proclaimed Emperor.
The threatened species in Ethiopia can be broken down into three categories (based on IUCN ratings): critically endangered, endangered, and vulnerable.
Emperor Tewodros II was born in Begemder from a nobleman of Qwara, where the Qwara dialect of Agaw language is spoken.
In 1994, a constitution was adopted that led to Ethiopia's first multiparty election the following year.
It is today part of the Unicode standard as Ethiopic, Ethiopic Extended, Ethiopic Supplement and Ethiopic Extended-A.
Another prominent calendrical system was developed around 300 BC by the Oromo.
Ethiopia is the place of origin for the coffee bean which originated from the place called Kefa (which was one of the 14 provinces in the old Ethiopian administration).
The sequence of general education in Ethiopia is six years of primary school, four years of lower secondary school and two years of higher secondary school.
This is in direct contravention of Ethiopia’s obligations under international law.
In May 1991, EPRDF forces advanced on Addis Ababa and the Soviet Union did not intervene to save the government side.
These languages include Nuer, Anuak, Nyangatom, Majang, Suri, Me'en and Mursi.
Red-fronted gazelle
Scott's mouse-eared bat
FGC is least prevalent in the regions of Tigray and Gambela, where 29% and 27% of girls and women, respectively, are affected.
Lesser horseshoe bat
A spokesperson for the Ethiopian embassy in London has denied that the country engages in land grabbing.
From 1270 AD until the ''Zemene Mesafint'' (Age of Princes), the Solomonic dynasty governed the Ethiopian Empire.
Most poor families (75%) share their sleeping quarters with livestock, and 40% of children sleep on the floor, where nighttime temperatures average 5 degrees Celsius in the cold season.
This trade helps lower food prices, increase food security, relieve border tensions, and promote regional integration.
Human impact threatens many species, with greater threats expected as a result of climate change induced by greenhouse gases.
In 1977, Somalia, which had been receiving assistance and arms from the USSR invaded Ethiopia in the Ogaden War, capturing part of the Ogaden region.
Those who are expected to give birth at home have elderly women serve as midwives who assist with the delivery (Kater, 2000).
They're protesting against land grabs, reparations, stolen elections, the rising cost of living, many things.
This contributes to the spread of illness through unhealthy water.
The country is the site of the Migration to Abyssinia and the oldest Muslim settlement in Africa at Negash.
The name ''Ethiopia'' also occurs in many translations of the Old Testament, but the Hebrew texts have '''Kush''', which refers principally to Nubia.
Exports are almost entirely agricultural commodities, and coffee is the largest foreign exchange earner.
Ethiopia in its roughly current form began under the reign of Menelik II, who was Emperor from 1889 until his death in 1913.
Zenawi's government was elected in 2000 in Ethiopia's first-ever multiparty elections; however, the results were heavily criticized by international observers and denounced by the opposition as fraudulent.
In addition, ''Doro wot'' is another popular food, and it originated from the Amhara people of north western Ethiopia.
The Transitional Government of Ethiopia, composed of an 87-member Council of Representatives and guided by a national charter that functioned as a transitional constitution, was set up.
A report by UNDP in 2011 showed that the literacy rate in Ethiopia was 46.7%.
Traditional Ethiopian cuisine employs no pork or shellfish of any kind, as they are forbidden in the Islamic, Jewish, and Ethiopian Orthodox Christian faiths.
Sunnis form the majority of Muslims with non-denominational Muslims being the second largest group of Muslims, and the Shia and Ahmadiyyas are a minority.
Employed as an abugida for several of the country's languages, it first came into usage in the 6th and 5th centuries BC as an abjad to transcribe the Semitic Ge'ez language.
In official situations, the prefixes ''Ato'' ('''ኣቶ''') is used for men; ''Weyzero'' ('''ወይዘሮ''') for married women; and ''Weyzerīt'' ('''ወይዘሪት''') for unmarried women.
The Ethiopian Highlands are Africa's largest continuous mountain ranges, and Sof Omar Caves contain Africa's largest cave.
Although the opposition vote increased in the election, both the opposition and observers from the European Union and elsewhere stated that the vote did not meet international standards for fair and free elections.
About 16% of the population in Ethiopia are living on less than 1 dollar per day (2008).
The Land Reform Act was meant to increase agriculture since food production was not keeping up with population growth over the period of 1970–1983.
This was followed by British recognition of Ethiopia's full sovereignty, (''i.e.''
This proved to be an important development, for when the Empire was subjected to the attacks of the Adal Sultanate's general and imam, Ahmad ibn Ibrahim al-Ghazi (called "''Grañ''" "the Left-handed"), Portugal assisted the Ethiopian emperor by sending weapons and four hundred men, who helped his son Gelawdewos defeat Ahmad and re-establish his rule.
Noted players include captain Adane Girma and top scorer Saladin Said.
Sabaean influence is now thought to have been minor, limited to a few localities, and disappearing after a few decades or a century.
Ethiopia's main health problems are said to be communicable (contagious) diseases worsened by poor sanitation and malnutrition.
Additionally, skeletal remains of ''Homo sapiens idaltu'' were found at a site in the Middle Awash in Ethiopia.
Ethiopia is one of the seven fundamental and independent centers of origin of cultivated plants of the world.
The population was only about 9 million in the 19th century.
In a few languages, Ethiopia is still referred to by names cognate with "Abyssinia", e.g., modern Arabic ''al-Ḥabashah''.
Inflation surged to 40% in August 2011 because of loose monetary policy, large civil service wage increase in early 2011, and high food prices.
At some point after 1672, the Sultanate of Aussa declined and temporarily came to an end in conjunction with Imam Umar Din bin Adam's recorded ascension to the throne.
Languages from the Nilo-Saharan family are also spoken by ethnic minorities concentrated in the southwestern parts of the country.
During the 1980s, the Ethiopic character set was computerized.
A slight majority of the population adheres to Christianity (mainly the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church and P'ent'ay), while around a third follows Islam (primarily Sunni Islam).
Only a minority of Ethiopians are born in hospitals, while most are born in rural households.
The Ethiopian constitution defines the right to own land as belonging only to "the state and the people", but citizens may lease land (up to 99 years), and are unable to mortgage or sell.
Political instability in those regions, however, has inhibited development.
FGM is a pre-marital custom mainly endemic to Northeast Africa and parts of the Near East that has its ultimate origins in Ancient Egypt.
The large Muslim population in the northern Afar region has resulted in a Muslim separatist movement called the "Islamic State of Afaria" seeking a sharia-compliant constitution.
Land distribution and administration is considered an area where corruption is institutionalized, and facilitation payments as well as bribes are often demanded when dealing with land-related issues.
Prime Minister Meles Zenawi died on 20 August 2012 in Brussels, where he was being treated for an unspecified illness.
Additionally, Omotic languages are spoken by ethnic minority groups inhabiting the southern regions.
Organizations such as SOS and Farm Africa are working with the federal government and local governments to create a system of forest management.
The Italians used the time between the signing of the treaty and its ratification by the Italian government to expand their territorial claims.
Most people in the country speak Afroasiatic languages of the Cushitic or Semitic branches.
With nearly 100 million inhabitants, Ethiopia is the most populous landlocked country in the world, as well as the second-most populous nation on the African continent after Nigeria.
This included around 15,000 Cuban combat troops.
Most of the country's major cities are located at elevations of around  above sea level, including historic capitals such as Gondar and Axum.
Ethiopia has a large number of species listed as critically endangered, endangered, and vulnerable to global extinction.
In less elevated regions, particularly the lower lying Ethiopian xeric grasslands and shrublands in the east of the country, the climate can be significantly hotter and drier.
Between 1990 and 2005 the country lost approximately 21,000&nbsp;km2 of forests.
Recent development of the floriculture sector means Ethiopia is poised to become one of the top flower and plant exporters in the world.
The unofficial trade of live cattle, camels, sheep, and goats from Ethiopia sold to Somalia, Djibouti, and Kenya generates an estimated total value of between 250 and 300 million USD annually (100 times more than the official figure).
Federal legislative power is vested in both the government and the two chambers of parliament.
The government of Ethiopia and many private organizations like World Health Organization (WHO), and the United Nations, are launching campaigns and are working aggressively to improve Ethiopia's health conditions and promote health awareness on AIDS and other communicable diseases (Dugassa, 2005).
"Ethiopia is often ironically referred to as the 'water tower' of Eastern Africa because of the many (14 majors) rivers that pour off the high tableland", including the Nile.
The country also has large mineral resources and oil potential in some of the less inhabited regions.
Until the 1980s, a substantial population of Beta Israel (Ethiopian Jews) resided in Ethiopia.
Northern Oromo militias, Tigrayan rebellion, and the constant incursion of Ottoman Empire and Egyptian forces near the Red Sea brought the weakening and the final downfall of Tewodros II.
The second period of growth was from 1967 to 1975 when rural populations migrated to urban centers seeking work and better living conditions.
The Persian religious figure Mani listed Aksum with Rome, Persia, and China as one of the four great powers of his time, during the 3rd century.
The wide range of altitude has given the country a variety of ecologically distinct areas, and this has helped to encourage the evolution of endemic species in ecological isolation.
According to Global Fire Power, Ethiopia has the 42nd most powerful military in the world, and the third most powerful in Africa.
The "WHO estimates that a majority of maternal fatalities and disabilities could be prevented if deliveries were to take place at well-equipped health centers, with adequately trained staff" (Dorman et al., 2009, p.&nbsp;622).
It is based on the older Alexandrian or Coptic calendar, which in turn derives from the Egyptian calendar.
The literacy rate is 82%.
A 2014 UNICEF report found that only 24% of girls under 14 had undergone FGM.
Sixteen species are endangered or critically endangered.
Ethiopia derived prestige with its uniquely successful military resistance during the late 19th-century Scramble for Africa, becoming the only African country to defeat a European colonial power and retain its sovereignty.
In the 70's and 80's, Ethiopia suffered from civil wars and communist purges which devastated its economy.
Gold bars from the National Bank of Ethiopia were found by police to be gilded metal, costing the state around 17 million USD, according to the Science and Development Network website.
Infant mortality rates are relatively high, as 41 infants die per 1000 live births.
Currently, the maternal mortality rate stands at 420 per 100,000 live births.
Four chemists and geologists from the Ethiopian Geological Survey were arrested in connection with a fake gold scandal, following complaints from buyers in South Africa.
Thus the first day of the Ethiopian year, 1 Mäskäräm, for years between 1901 and 2099 (inclusive), is usually 11 September (Gregorian), but falls on 12 September in years before the Gregorian leap year.
Renting of land for a maximum of twenty years is allowed and this is expected to ensure that land goes to the most productive user.
The government has been engaged in a conflict with rebels in the Ogaden region since 2007.
He did this with the help of ''Ras'' Gobana Dacche's Shewan Oromo militia, which occupied lands that had not been held since Ahmad ibn Ibrahim al-Ghazi's war, as well as other areas that had never been under Ethiopian sovereignty.
The protesters demanded an end to human rights abuses, the release of political prisoners, a fairer redistribution of the wealth generated by over a decade of economic growth, and a return of Wolqayt District to the Amhara Region.
Kitfo (ክትፎ), which originated from the Gurage is one of the widely accepted and favorite foods in Ethiopia.
These problems are exacerbated by the shortage of trained doctors and nurses and health facilities.
The current system follows school expansion schemes which are very similar to the system in the rural areas during the 1980s, with an addition of deeper regionalization, providing rural education in students' own languages starting at the elementary level, and with more budget finances allocated to the education sector.
Education in Ethiopia was dominated by the Tewahedo Church for many centuries until secular education was adopted in the early 1900s.
But Tewodros suffered several rebellions inside his empire.
There is also a substantial Muslim demographic, representing around a third of the population.
In terms of writing systems, Ethiopia's principal orthography is the Ge'ez script.
Other writing systems have also been used over the years by different Ethiopian communities.
European Union election observers continued to accuse the ruling party of vote rigging.
As with many other aspects of Ethiopian culture and tradition, tastes in music and lyrics are strongly linked with those in neighboring Eritrea, Somalia, Djibouti, and Sudan.
Since the community burns livestock manure as fuel, rather than plowing the nutrients back into the land, the crop production is reduced.
The earliest known modern human bones were found in Southwestern Ethiopia and are called the Omo remains.
He dissolved this in 1962 and annexed Eritrea, which resisted and finally won its war of independence.
Aksum would later at times extend its rule into Yemen on the other side of the Red Sea.
Mengistu fled the country to asylum in Zimbabwe, where he still resides.
It is also a common custom to feed others in your group with your own hands – a tradition referred to as "gursha."
Coffee remains its most important export product, and with new trademark deals around the world (including recent deals with Starbucks) the country plans to increase its revenue from coffee.
"It also has the greatest water reserves in Africa, but few irrigation systems in place to use it.
The ensuing regime suffered several coups, uprisings, wide-scale drought, and a huge refugee problem.
The EPRDF-led government of Prime Minister Meles Zenawi promoted a policy of ethnic federalism, devolving significant powers to regional, ethnically based authorities.
Other prominent ethnic groups are as follows: Sidama 4.00%, Gurage 2.52%, Welayta 2.27%, Afar 1.73%, Hadiya 1.72%, Gamo 1.49% and others 12.6%.
Birth rates, infant mortality rates, and death rates are lower in cities than in rural areas due to better access to education, medicines, and hospitals.
Traditionally, lyricism in Ethiopian song writing is strongly associated with views of patriotism or national pride, romance, friendship, and a most unique type of memoire known as 'Tizita'.
The Government of the Federal Republic of Ethiopia is signatory to various international conventions and treaties that protect the rights of women and children.
In spite of fast growth in recent years, GDP per capita is one of the lowest in the world, and the economy faces a number of serious structural problems.
According to the IMF, Ethiopia was one of the fastest growing economies in the world, registering over 10% economic growth from 2004 through 2009.
In rural areas the government also provides non-timber fuel sources and access to non-forested land to promote agriculture without destroying forest habitat.
Ethiopian isolationism ended following a British mission that concluded an alliance between the two nations; but, it was not until 1855 that Ethiopia was completely united and the power in the Emperor restored, beginning with the reign of Tewodros II.
According to linguists, the first Afroasiatic-speaking populations arrived in the region during the ensuing Neolithic era from the family's proposed urheimat ("original homeland") in the Nile Valley, or the Near East.
Urban populations have continued to grow with an 8.1% increase from 1975 to 2000.
Like the Coptic calendar, the Ethiopian calendar has twelve months of exactly 30 days each plus five or six epagomenal days, which comprise a thirteenth month.
Habitat destruction is a factor that leads to endangerment.
Afroasiatic-speaking communities make up the majority of the population.
Current human rights violations include the killing of 100 peaceful protestors by direct government gunfire in the Oromo and Amhara region.
After the fall of Dʿmt during the fourth century BC, the plateau came to be dominated by smaller successor kingdoms.
A 17-year-long civil war, along with severe drought, negatively impacted Ethiopia's environmental conditions, leading to even greater habitat degradation.
Ethiopia's population has grown from 33.5 million in 1983 to 87.9 million in 2014.
Soemmerring's gazelle
When the vessel stopped at a Red Sea port, the natives killed all the travelers except the two brothers, who were taken to the court as slaves.
Additional small-scale export products include cereals, pulses, cotton, sugarcane, potatoes, and hides.
Only 65% of rural households in Ethiopia consume the World Health Organization's minimum standard of food per day (2,200 kilocalories), with 42% of children under 5 years old being underweight.
At present the railway is under joint control of Djibouti and Ethiopia, but negotiations are underway to privatize this transport utility.
Sunnis are largely Shafi'is or Salafis, and there are also many Sufi Muslims there.
The UN has called for UN observers on the ground in Ethiopia.
Ethiopia has 31 endemic species of mammals.
Over 44 million people (more than half the population) do not have access to clean water.
A coin dated to 324 shows that Ethiopia was the second country to officially adopt Christianity (after Armenia), although the religion may have been at first confined to court circles; it was the first major power to do so.
Critically endangered mammals
As a result,  Ethiopia has a total (Federal and Regional) of 100,000&nbsp;km of roads, both paved and gravel.
Practitioners of traditional religions mainly reside in the nation's far southwestern and western rural borderlands, in the SNNP, Benishangul-Gumuz and Gambela regions.
Chechebsa (ጨጨብሣ), marqa, chukko, michirra and dhanga are the most popular dishes from the Oromo.
For 2011/12, end-year inflation was projected to be about 22%, and single digit inflation is projected in 2012/13 with the implementation of tight monetary and fiscal policies.
The same report indicated that the life expectancy had improved substantially in recent years.
In the 4th century, the region was one of the first in the world to officially adopt Christianity as the state religion.
Ethiopia loses an estimated 1,410&nbsp;km2 of natural forests each year.
The Karo officially banned the practice in July 2012.
The politics of Ethiopia takes place in a framework of a federal parliamentary republic, whereby the Prime Minister is the head of government.
For example, 2 AM local Addis Ababa time is called "8 at night" in Ethiopia, while 8 PM is called "2 in the evening".
Ethiopia is a global center of avian diversity.
In July 2015, during a trip that President Obama took to Kenya, he highlighted the role of Ethiopia in the fight against Islamic terrorism.
He expelled the Jesuit missionaries and other Europeans.
The HIV AIDS prevalence rate in Ethiopia stood at 1.1% in 2014, a dramatic decrease from 4.5% 15 years ago  The most affected are poor communities and women, due to lack of health education, empowerment, awareness and lack of social well-being.
Haile Selassie I was born to parents from three of Ethiopia's Afroasiatic-speaking populations: the Oromo and Amhara, the country's two largest ethnic groups, as well as the Gurage..
Christians predominantly live in the northern Amhara and Tigray regions, and are largely members of the non-Chalcedonian Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church.
Haile Selassie fled into exile in London and Mussolini was able to proclaim the Empire of Ethiopia and the assumption of the imperial title by the Italian king Vittorio Emanuele III, recognized by the countries belonging to the international organization of the League of Nations.
At the beginning of the 20th century, around 420,000&nbsp;km2 (or 35%) of Ethiopia's land was covered by trees, but recent research indicates that forest cover is now approximately 11.9% of the area.
Ethiopia recovered it after it began receiving massive military aid from the USSR, Cuba, South Yemen, East Germany, and North Korea.
Other scholars propose that the Afroasiatic family developed in situ in the Horn, with its speakers subsequently dispersing from there.
In East Africa, over 95% of cross-border trade is through unofficial channels.
On 26 August 1942, Haile Selassie issued a proclamation abolishing slavery.
In English, and generally outside of Ethiopia, the country was also once historically known as Abyssinia, derived from ''Habesh'', an early Arabic form of the Ethiopian Semitic name "Ḥabaśāt" (unvocalized "ḤBŚT").
From 1885 to 1889, Ethiopia joined the Mahdist War allied to Britain, Turkey, and Egypt against the Sudanese Mahdist State.
They were charged with trying to create an Islamic state in the majority Christian country.
Chief among these was the Yejju dynasty, which included Aligaz of Yejju and his brother Ali I of Yejju.
Deputy Prime Minister Hailemariam Desalegn was appointed as a new prime minister until the 2015 elections, and remained so afterwards with his party in control of every parliamentary seat.
In 1974, at the end of Haile Selassie's reign, power fell to a communist military dictatorship known as the Derg, backed by the Soviet Union, until it was defeated by the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front, which has ruled since about the time of the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991.
While no longer distinguished as a state religion, the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church remains the majority Christian denomination.
He had been born at Angolala in an Oromo area and had lived his first twelve years with Shewan Oromos with whom he thus had much in common.
On the basis of Article 78 of the 1994 Ethiopian Constitution, the Judiciary is completely independent of the executive and the legislature.
There are 119 hospitals (12 in Addis Ababa alone) and 412 health centers in Ethiopia.
In 1989, the Tigrayan People's Liberation Front (TPLF) merged with other ethnically based opposition movements to form the coalition known as the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF).
Despite sanitation being a problem, use of improved water sources is also on the rise; 81% in cities compared to 11% in rural areas.
The TPLF-dominated EPRDF won 100% in an election marked by fraud which has resulted in Ethiopian civilians protesting on scale unseen in prior post-election protests.
Historically, throughout the African continent, wildlife populations have been rapidly declining due to logging, civil wars, pollution, poaching, and other human factors.
Haile Gebrselassie is a world-renowned long distance runner with several world records under his belt.
Lengthy prison terms were handed to 17 Muslim activists on 3 August 2015 ranging from seven to 22 years.
Ethiopian athletes have won many Olympic gold medals in track and field, most of them in long distance running.
These unhealthy farmers have a hard time working the land and the productivity drops further.
