Their duties included cleaning, cooking, and running errands.
About 20% of pupils at Eton receive financial support, through a range of bursaries and scholarships.
Eton has recently fostered a relationship with the Roxbury Latin School, a traditional all-boys private school in Boston, US.
Eton College offers its sincere apologies to those boys concerned and their families.
The rowing lake at Dorney was developed and is owned by the College.
Under the provisions of the Charities Act 2006, it is now an ''excepted charity'', and fully registered with the Charities Commission, and is now one of the 100 largest charities in the UK.
The old term, Library, survives in the name of the room set aside for the oldest year's use, where boys have their own kitchen.
It is generally known by the boys by the initials or surname of the House Master, the teacher who lives in the house and manages the pupils in it.
The Head Master is a member of the Headmasters' and Headmistresses' Conference and the school is a member of the Eton Group of independent schools in the United Kingdom.
Early in the 20th century, a historian of Eton wrote, "No other school can claim to have sent forth such a cohort of distinguished figures to make their mark on the world."
They champion the talent of the individual and that's what's special about it".
The giving of a Georgic is now extremely rare, but still occasionally occurs.
Captains of House and Games still sometimes give tasks to first-year boys, such as collecting the mail from School Office.
Prizes are awarded too for excellence in such activities as painting, sculpture, ceramics, playing musical instruments, musical composition, declamation, silverwork, and design.
have a higher value than the tax breaks it receives as a result of its charitable status.
Many instruments are taught, including obscure ones such as the didgeridoo.
The long-standing claim that the present uniform was first worn as mourning for the death of George III is unfounded.
The house is looked after by the Master in College.
''The Junior Chronicle'' and ''The Chronicle'' are the official School magazines, the latter having been founded in 1863.
We take this type of incident very seriously indeed and so a thorough investigation, overseen by the headmaster Tony Little and led by the tutor for admissions, is being carried out to find out exactly what went wrong and ensure it cannot happen again.
Eton's first Headmaster, William Waynflete, founder of Magdalen College, Oxford and previously Head Master of Winchester College, built the ante-chapel that finishes the Chapel today.
Every year, Eton employs a 'Director-in-Residence', an external professional director on a one-year contract who normally directs one house play and the Lower Boy play (a school play open solely to the first two-year groups), as well as teaching Drama and Theatre Studies to most year groups.
The headmasters' close friendship spawned the Hennessy Scholarship, an annual prize established in 2005 and awarded to a graduating RL senior for a year of study at Eton.
In February 2013, Eton's Head Master Tony Little visited the Doon School in India to hold talks with Peter McLaughlin, headmaster of Doon, on further collaboration between the two schools.
There is a running track at the Thames Valley Athletics Centre and an annual steeplechase.
A Library member was entitled to yell at any time and without notice, "Boy, Up!"
Also of note are the Gladstone Memorial Prize and the Coutts Prize, awarded on the results of trials and AS-level examinations in C; and the Huxley Prize, awarded for a project on a scientific subject.
Eton also observes St. Andrew's Day, on which the Eton wall game is played.
Among past guest speakers are Andrew Lloyd Webber, J. K. Rowling, Vivienne Westwood, Ian McKellen, Kevin Warwick, Boris Johnson, Rowan Atkinson, Ralph Fiennes, Terry Wogan, King Constantine II of Greece, Katie Price, Zoe Wanamaker, Boris Berezovsky and Kit Hesketh-Harvey.
Chenevix-Trench also abolished corporal punishment administered by senior boys.
It's an extraordinary place.
King's Scholars are entitled to use the letters "KS" after their name and they can be identified by a black gown worn over the top of their tailcoats, giving them the nickname ''tugs'' (Latin: ''togati'', wearers of gowns); and occasionally by a surplice in Chapel.
Until 1964, offending boys could be summoned to the Head Master or the Lower Master, as appropriate, to receive a birching on the bare posterior, in a semi-public ceremony held in the Library, where there was a special wooden birching block over which the offender was held.
The Oppidan Houses are named Godolphin House, Jourdelay's, (both built as such c. 1720), Hawtrey House, Durnford House, (the first two built as such by the Provost and Fellows, 1845, when the school was increasing in numbers and needed more centralised control), The Hopgarden, South Lawn, Waynflete, Evans's, Keate House, Warre House, Villiers House, Common Lane House, Penn House, Walpole House, Cotton Hall, Wotton House, Holland House, Mustians, Angelo's, Manor House, Farrer House, Baldwin's Bec, The Timbralls, and Westbury.
This was the most severe form of physical punishment at Eton.
An employment tribunal in July 2005 found that she had been unfairly dismissed and criticised Burke for bullying her and for repeatedly changing his story.
This is less formal, with boys being allowed to visit each other's rooms to socialise if neither boy has work outstanding.
The ISSP's aims are "to raise pupil achievement, improve pupil self-esteem, raise pupil aspirations and improve professional practice across the schools".
A spokesperson from Clarence House said, "We are delighted that Harry has been totally cleared of cheating."
Members of the teaching staff (known as ''Beaks'') are required to wear a form of school dress when teaching.
Productions also take place in varying locations around the School, varying from the sports fields to more historic buildings such as Upper School and College Chapel.
Among headmasters of the 20th century were Cyril Alington, Robert Birley and Anthony Chenevix-Trench.
John Keate, Head Master from 1809 to 1834, took over at a time when discipline was poor.
He designed New Buildings (1844–46), Provost Francis Hodgson's addition to provide better accommodation for Collegers, who until then had mostly lived in Long Chamber, a long first floor room where conditions were inhumane.
Although classes are organised on a School basis, most boys spend a large proportion of their time in their House.
The College paid £200,000 and contributed 4.5 hectares of land in return for exclusive use of the facilities during the daytime only.
It also criticised the school for failing to produce its capability procedures and criticised the Head Master for not reviewing the case independently.
She also claimed she was instructed to do some of Prince Harry's coursework to enable him to pass AS Art.
The School participates in many national competitions; many pupils are part of the National Youth Orchestra, and the School gives scholarships for dedicated and talented musicians.
In recent years, the School has put on a musical version of ''The Bacchae'' (October 2009) as well as productions of ''A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum'' (May 2010), ''The Cherry Orchard'' (February 2011), ''Joseph K'' (October 2011), ''Cyrano de Bergerac'' (May 2012), ''Macbeth'' (October 2012), ''London Assurance'' (May 2013) and ''Jerusalem'' (October 2013).
The school is a member of the G20 Schools Group.
In addition, the schools together agreed to contribute another £3m to a new charitable educational fund.
The most serious misdeeds may result in expulsion, or rustication (suspension).
Many tablets in the cloisters and chapel commemorate the large number of dead Etonians of the Great War.
During this half, Collegers also play the Eton wall game; this game received national publicity when it was taken up by Prince Harry.
In 1995 the National Lottery granted money for a £4.6m sports complex, to add to Eton's existing facilities of two swimming pools, 30 cricket squares, 24 football, rugby and hockey pitches and a gym.
These students became known as Oppidans, from the Latin word ''oppidum'', meaning town.
It is not part of this tribunal's function to determine whether or not it was legitimate."
Peter Lawrence was one of the first few masters to go to Doon.
Eton is one of ten English HMC schools, commonly referred to as "public schools", regulated by the Public Schools Act of 1868.
In 2005, the School was one of fifty of the country's leading independent schools found to have breached the Competition Act (see below under "Controversy").
The college commissioned replacements by Evie Hone (1949–52) and by John Piper and Patrick Reyntiens (1959 onward).
A traditional form of punishment took the form of being made to copy, by hand, Latin hexameters.
The film followed an Etonian, Alex Stobbs, a musician with cystic fibrosis, as he worked toward conducting the difficult ''Magnificat'' by Johann Sebastian Bach.
The very large and ornate School Hall and School Library (by L. K. Hall) were erected in 1906–08 across the road from Upper School as the school's memorial to the Etonians who had died in the Boer War.
Less common but more severe were the canings administered by Pop (see Eton Society below) in the form of a "Pop-Tanning", in which a large number of hard strokes were inflicted by the President of Pop in the presence of all Pop members (or, in earlier times, each member of Pop took it in turns to inflict a stroke).
It has the facilities and the excellence of teaching and it will find what you’re good at and nurture it", while the actor Tom Hiddleston says there are widespread misconceptions about Eton, and that "People think it's just full of braying toffs.
A boy who is late for any division or other appointment may be required to sign "Tardy Book", a register kept in the School Office, between 7:35am and 7:45am, every morning for the duration of his sentence (typically three days).
In Doon's early years, faculty from Eton travelled to India to fill up the academic posts.
If, in any particular term, a pupil makes a particularly good effort in any subject, he may be "Commended for Good Effort" to the Head Master (or Lower Master).
Chenevix-Trench's successor from 1970, Michael McCrum, retained private corporal punishment by masters, but ended the practice of requiring boys to take their trousers and underwear down when bending over to be caned by the Head Master.
To gain an Oppidan Scholarship, a boy must have either three distinctions in a row or four throughout his career.
In addition to the House Master, each house has a House Captain and a House Captain of Games.
The House Master and boys have an opportunity to make announcements, and sometimes the boys provide light entertainment.
Miscreants were frequently set 100 hexameters by Library members, or, for more serious offences, Georgics (more than 500 hexameters) by their House Masters or the Head Master.
Eton's best-known holiday takes place on the so-called "Fourth of June", a celebration of the birthday of King George III, Eton's greatest patron.
Until 18 December 2010, Eton College was an ''exempt charity'' under English law (Charities Act 1993, Schedule 2).
Only the Quire of the intended building was completed.
They are called halves because the school year was once split into two halves, between which the boys went home.
These practices, known as fagging, were partially phased out of most houses in the 1970s.
Both are edited by boys at the School.
", and all first-year boys had to come running.
The fee for the academic year 2010–2011 was £29,862 (approximately US$48,600 or €35,100 as of March 2011), although the sum is considerably lower for those pupils on bursaries and scholarships.
There are some variations in the school dress worn by boys in authority, see School Prefects and King's Scholars sections.
Building resumed when Roger Lupton was Provost, around 1517.
These comparatively new developments will run alongside long-established courses that Eton has provided for pupils from state schools, most of them in the summer holidays (July and August).
It used paper tape to store programs.
In 2011, plans to attack Eton were found on the body of a senior al-Qaeda leader shot dead in Somalia.
First, the master wishing to Send Up For Good must gain the permission of the relevant Head of Department.
Former Eton headmaster and provost Sir Eric Anderson shares a close friendship with Roxbury Latin Headmaster emeritus F. Washington Jarvis; Anderson has visited Roxbury Latin on numerous occasions, while Jarvis briefly taught theology at Eton after retiring from his headmaster post at Roxbury Latin.
The primary responsibility for a boy's studies lies with his House Master, but he is assisted by an additional director of studies, known as a tutor.
As the school suffered reduced income while still under construction, the completion and further development of the school has since depended to some extent on wealthy benefactors.
Often girls from surrounding schools, such as St George's, Ascot, St Mary's School Ascot, Windsor Girls' School and Heathfield St Mary's School, are cast in female roles.
Today, all boys must have laptop computers, and the school fibre-optic network connects all classrooms and all boys' bedrooms to the internet.
Questioned by the Commission in 1862, head master Edward Balston came under attack for his view that in the classroom little time could be spared for subjects other than classical studies.
Steve Osborn, director of the Safe Neighbourhoods Unit, described the decision as "staggering" given the background of a substantial reduction in youth services by councils across the country, a matter over which, however, neither the College nor the UK Sports Council, had any control.
It educates more than 1,300 pupils, aged  13 to 18 years.
The school is located in Holyport, Berkshire and Eton College acts as the main educational sponsor of the school.
Eton College has links with some private schools in India today, maintained from the days of the British Raj, such as The Doon School and Mayo College.
For a time, new admissions were called 'Jews' by their fellow Collegers.
As the School grew, more students were allowed to attend provided that they paid their own fees and lived in the town, outside the College's original buildings.
As evidence, Forsyth provided secretly recorded conversations with both Prince Harry and her Head of Department, Ian Burke.
The last boy to arrive was given the task.
The most prestigious is the Newcastle Scholarship, awarded on the strength of an examination, consisting of two papers in philosophical theology, moral theory and applied ethics.
It contains 25 boys' houses, each headed by a House Master, selected from the more senior members of the teaching staff, who number some 160.
Little said that, in the short term, he wanted to ensure that around 320 pupils per year receive bursaries, and that 70 were educated free of charge, with the intention that the number of pupils receiving financial assistance would continue to increase.
For more serious misdeeds, a boy is summoned from his lessons to the Head Master, or Lower Master if the boy is in the lower two years, to talk personally about his misdeeds.
Following complaints about the finances, buildings and management of Eton, the Clarendon Commission was set up in 1861 as a Royal Commission to investigate the state of nine schools in England, including Eton.
As a charity, it benefits from substantial tax breaks.
This was a routine occurrence, carried out privately with the boy bending over with his head under the edge of a table.
However, Jean Scott, the head of the Independent Schools Council, said the schools were following a long-established procedure in sharing the information with each other because independent schools were previously exempt from anti-cartel rules applied to business and that they were unaware of the change to the law (on which they had not been consulted).
An excellent piece of work may be rewarded with a "Show Up", to be shown to the boy's tutors as evidence of progress.
His name is borne by the big gate-house in the west range of the cloisters, fronting School Yard, perhaps the most famous image of the school.
Previously, House Captains were permitted to cane miscreants over the seat of the trousers.
The Doon School, founded in 1935, was the first all-boys' public school in India modelled along the lines of Eton.
The project of establishing an 'Eton Mission' in the crowded district of Hackney Wick in east London was started at the beginning of 1880, and lasted until 1971 when it was decided that a more local project (at Dorney) would be more realistic.
Although the School has often been cited as 'Eton of India' by media outlets such as BBC, ''The Guardian'', ''Financial Times'', ''The Economist'', ''The Daily Telegraph'' and ''Forbes'', it strongly eschews the label.
Similar to the Queen's Official Birthday, the "Fourth of June" is no longer celebrated on 4 June, but on the Wednesday before the first weekend of June.
Elite rowers prepare for the Schools' Head of the River Race in late March.
Upon receiving his or her approval, the piece of work will be marked with Sent Up For Good and the student will receive a card to be signed by House Master, tutor and division master.
The School offers GCSE drama as well as A-level "English with Theatre Studies."
This range includes the important interiors of the Parlour, Election Hall, and Election Chamber, where most of the 18th century "leaving portraits" are kept.
It was the venue for the rowing and canoeing events at the 2012 Summer Olympics and the World Junior Rowing Championships.
This day is celebrated with the Procession of Boats, in which the top rowing crews from the top four years row past in vintage wooden rowing boats.
In 2009, the School's musical protégés came to wider notice when featured in a TV documentary ''A Boy Called Alex''.
In early 2014, this figure had risen to 263 pupils receiving the equivalent of around 60% of school fee assistance, whilst a further 63 received their education free of charge.
Both schools participate in an exchange programme which sees boys from either school visiting the other for one academic term.
There are many inter-house competitions, mostly in sports.
In October 2004, Sarah Forsyth claimed that she had been dismissed unfairly by Eton College and had been bullied by senior staff.
Some Houses, at the discretion of the House Master, may observe a second Quiet Hour after prayers in the evening.
''Panorama'' revealed in March 2012 that farming subsidies were granted to Eton for 'environmental improvements', in effect 'being paid without having to do any farming at all'.
It's actually one of the most broadminded places I've ever been.
Within the school, an Oppidan Scholar is entitled to use the letters OS after his name.
The film director Sebastian Doggart claims to have been the last boy caned at Eton, in 1984.
However over the years much money was raised for the Eton Mission, a fine church by G. F. Bodley was erected, many Etonians visited, and stimulated among other things the Eton Manor Boys' Club, a notable rowing club which has survived the Mission itself, and the 59 Club for motorcyclists.
In response, the school issued the following statement: "This error was discovered within minutes and each family was immediately contacted to notify them that it should be disregarded and to apologise.
These are known as ''Prayers'', due to their original nature.
Each House has a formal name, mainly used for post and people outside the Eton community.
Aided by AstroTurf facilities on Masters' field, field hockey has become a major Lent Half sport along with Rugby 7's.
Among the other sports played at Eton is Eton Fives.
Not all boys who pass the College election examination choose to become King's Scholars.
The Brent-Eton Summer School, started in 1994, offers 40–50 young people from the London Borough of Brent, an area of inner-city deprivation, an intensive one-week residential course, free of charge, designed to help bridge the gap between GCSE and A-level.
* During the Summer Half, sporting boys divide into ''dry bobs'', who play cricket, tennis or athletics, and ''wet bobs'', who row on the River Thames and the rowing lake in preparation for The National Schools Regatta and the Princess Elizabeth Challenge Cup at Henley Royal Regatta.
Legend has it that Edward's mistress, Jane Shore, intervened on the school's behalf.
Anthony Chenevix-Trench, Head Master from 1964 to 1970, abolished the birch and replaced it with caning, also applied to the bare posterior, which he administered privately in his office.
Boys from the School are also responsible for the lighting, sound and stage management of all the productions, under the guidance of several professional full-time theatre staff.
The opposite of a Show Up is a "Rip".
The name "King's Scholars" is because the school was founded by King Henry VI in 1440.
Registration at birth has been consigned to the past, and by the mid-1990s, Eton ranked among Britain's top three schools in getting its pupils into Oxford and Cambridge.
The school is headed by a Provost and Fellows (Board of Governors), who appoint the head master.
This subsidy has declined since the 2001 abolition by the Labour Government of state-funded scholarships (formerly known as "assisted places") to independent schools.
Almost all of the school's pupils go on to universities, about a third of them to Oxford or Cambridge.
From 1820 until 1967, boys under the height of 5'4" (1.63 m) were required to wear the 'Eton suit', which replaced the tailcoat with the cropped 'Eton jacket' (known colloquially as a "bum-freezer") and included an 'Eton collar', a large, stiff-starched, white collar.
It was calculated by the late David Jewell, former Master of Haileybury, that in 1992 such tax breaks saved the School about £1,945 per pupil per year, although he had no direct connection with the School.
The ''Good Schools Guide'' called the school "the number one boys' public school", adding that "The teaching and facilities are second to none."
These include the Busk Fund, which supports individual ventures that show particular initiative; the C. M. Wells Memorial Trust Fund, for the promotion of visits to classical lands; the Sadler Fund, which supports, among others, those intending to enter the Foreign Service; and the Marsden Fund, for travel in countries where the principal language is not English.
Eton has a well-established system for encouraging boys to produce high-standard work.
The culprit was summoned to appear in a pair of old trousers, as the caning would cut the cloth to shreds.
As Sending Up For Good is fairly infrequent, the process is rather mysterious to many of Eton's boys.
''The Oppidan'', founded in 1828, was published once a Half; it covered all sport in Eton and some professional events as well, but no longer exists.
The facility, which became the Thames Valley Athletics Centre, opened in April 1999.
A Freedom of Information request in 2005 revealed that Eton had received £2,652 in farming subsidies in 2004 under the Common Agricultural Policy.
It was intended to have formidable buildings (Henry intended the nave of the College Chapel to be the longest in Europe) and several religious relics, supposedly including a part of the True Cross and the Crown of Thorns.
In the 19th century, the architect John Shaw Jr (1803–1870) became surveyor to Eton.
If any boy produces an outstanding piece of work, it may be "Sent Up For Good", storing the effort in the College Archives for posterity.
Similarly, boys in their penultimate year have a room known as Debate.
Eton's retiring Head Master, Tony Little, has claimed that the benefits that Eton provides to the local community free of charge (use of its facilities, etc.)
The email was intended for nine students, but an IT glitch caused the email to be sent to 400 additional families, who didn't necessarily have a place.
Launched in 1982, the Universities Summer School is an intensive residential course open to boys and girls throughout the UK who attend state schools, are at the end of their first year in the Sixth Form, and are about to begin their final year of schooling.
The School's first headmaster was an Englishman, Arthur E. Foot, who had spent nine years as a science master at Eton College, before joining Doon.
It has a very important collection of books and manuscripts.
In the 1970s, there was just one school computer, in a small room attached to the science buildings.
The facility is now used for storage.
Numerous plays are put on every year at Eton College; there is one main theatre, called the Farrer (seating 400) and 2 Studio theatres, called the Caccia Studio and Empty Space (seating 90 and 80 respectively).
Conversely, should a master be more than 15 minutes late for a class, traditionally the pupils might claim it as a "run" and absent themselves for the rest of its duration.
In recent times, a milder form of the rip, 'sign for information', colloquially known as an "info", has been introduced, which must also be signed by the boy's housemaster and tutor.
As stated above, King's Scholars wear a black gown over the top of their tailcoats, and occasionally a surplice in Chapel.
* During the Lent Half it is dominated by the field game, a code of football, but this is unique to Eton and cannot be played against other schools.
They typically contain about fifty boys.
There are entire house gatherings every evening, usually around 8:05–8:30&nbsp;p.m.
The UK Sports Council defended the deal on the grounds that the whole community would benefit, while the bursar claimed that Windsor, Slough and Eton Athletic Club was "deprived" because local people (who were not pupils at the College) did not have a world-class running track and facilities to train with.
In September 2014 Eton College helped establish Holyport College, a state-funded free school with boarding facilities.
Oppidan scholarships may also be awarded for consistently performing with distinction in School and external examinations.
This is known as the "Bill".
The last important addition to the central college buildings was the College Library, in the south range of the cloister, 1725–29, by Thomas Rowland.
Most pupils wear a white tie that is effectively a strip of cloth folded over into a starched, detachable collar, but some senior boys are entitled to wear a white bow tie and winged collar ("Stick-Ups").
A former Precentor of the college, Ralph Allwood set up and organised Eton Choral Courses, which run at the School every summer.
In the late 18th century, there were about 300, while today, the total has risen to over 1,300.
Every evening, about an hour and a quarter, known as Quiet Hour, is set aside, during which boys are expected to study or prepare work for their teachers if not otherwise engaged.
In September 2014, Eton opened, and became the sole educational sponsor for, a new purpose-built co-educational state boarding and day school for around 500 pupils, Holyport College, in Maidenhead in Berkshire, with construction costing around £15 million, in which a fifth of places for day pupils will be set aside for children from poor homes, 21 boarding places will go to youngsters on the verge of being taken into care, and a further 28 boarders will be funded or part-funded through bursaries.
Despite the introduction of modern technology, the external appearance and locations of many of the classrooms have remained unchanged for a long time.
Upcoming in May 2014 was a production of ''A Midsummer Night's Dream'' .
Beating was phased out in the 1980s.
According to ''The Economist'', Oxford and Cambridge admit more Etonians each year than applicants from the whole country who qualify for free school meals.
In 1945, the school introduced a nationality statute conditioning entry on the applicant's father being British by birth.
Following the investigation by the OFT, each school was required to pay around £70,000, totalling around £3.5 million, significantly less than the maximum possible fine.
In July 2015, Eton accidentally sent emails to 400 prospective students, offering them conditional entrance to the school in September 2017.
Eton has a long list of distinguished former pupils.
The School Plays have such good reputations that they are normally fully booked every night.
Although liable to censorship, the latter has a tradition of satirising and attacking School policies, as well as documenting recent events.
