In some species, the outermost layer dies and is annually deciduous, either in long strips (as in ''E.
The current area under commercial forest plantation is 6% of the total.
David Buxton, writing of central Ethiopia in the mid-1940s, observed that eucalyptus trees "have become an integral -- and a pleasing -- element in the Shoan landscape and has largely displaced the slow-growing native 'cedar' ''Juniperus procera'')."
(Lussich also introduced many other trees, particularly ''Acacia'' and pines, but they have not expanded so massively.)
In some species in this category, for example ''E.
Plantations of eucalypts spread from the capital to other growing urban centres such as Debre Marqos.
The microscopic leaf-bound "nuggets" are not worth collecting themselves, but may provide an environmentally benign way of locating subsurface mineral deposits.
Eucalyptus trees show allelopathic effects; they release compounds which inhibit other plant species from growing nearby.
'''South Africa'''.
Brazil's plantations have world-record rates of growth, typically over 40 cubic metres per hectare per year, and commercial harvesting occurs after years 5.
All parts of ''Eucalyptus'' may be used to make dyes that are substantive on protein fibres (such as silk and wool), simply by processing the plant part with water.
Eucalyptus oil is readily steam distilled from the leaves and can be used for cleaning and as an industrial solvent, as an antiseptic, for deodorising, and in very small quantities in food supplements, especially sweets, cough drops, toothpaste and decongestants.
''Eucalyptus'' was introduced to Ethiopia in either 1894 or 1895, either by Emperor Menelik II's French advisor Mondon-Vidailhet or by the Englishman Captain O'Brian.
Most eucalypts are not tolerant of severe cold.
plantations could have negative effects on soil chemistry; for example: soil acidification, iron leaching, allelopathic activities and a high C:N ratio of litter.
Different commonly recognised types of bark include:
In India, the Institute of Forest Genetics and Tree Breeding, Coimbatore started a eucalyptus breeding program in the 1990s.
rhodantha'', and ''E.
As the stamens expand, the operculum is forced off, splitting away from the cup-like base of the flower; this is one of the features that unites the genus.
Much of Madagascar's original native forest has been replaced with ''Eucalyptus'', threatening biodiversity by isolating remaining natural areas such as Andasibe-Mantadia National Park.
The copious oils produced are an important feature of the genus.
As in other members of the myrtle family, eucalyptus leaves are covered with oil glands.
lansdowneana'', have shiny green leaves throughout their life cycle.
The older trees didn't split or warp as the infant California crop did.
They usually grow in more or less pure stands.
erythrandra'' is believed to be ''E.
Overall, South America is expected to produce 55% of the world's ''Eucalyptus'' round-wood by 2010.
The main uses of the wood produced are elemental chlorine free pulp mill production (for cellulose and paper), sawlogs, plywood and bioenergy (thermoelectric generation).
perriniana'' are notable exceptions.
It is now used mainly for ''E.
Many species, though by no means all, are known as '''gum trees''' because they exude copious kino from any break in the bark (e.g., scribbly gum).
sepulcralis'') and ''E.''
Consequently, dense eucalypt plantings may be subject to catastrophic firestorms.
It is expected that the radical and durable substitution of vegetation cover leads to changes in the quantity and quality of soil organic matter.
It has been estimated that 70% of the energy released through the combustion of vegetation in the Oakland fire was due to eucalyptus.
The term "morrell" is somewhat obscure in origin and appears to apply to trees of the western Australian wheatbelt and  goldfields which have a long, straight trunk, completely rough-barked.
There had been no trees in the area because it consisted of dry sand dunes and stones.
Bentham divided it into five series whose distinctions were based on characteristics of the stamens, particularly the anthers (Mueller, 1879–84), work elaborated by Joseph Henry Maiden (1903–33) and still further by William Faris Blakely (1934).
forrestiana'', ''E.
The fibre length of Eucalyptus is relatively short and uniform with low coarseness compared with other hardwoods commonly used as pulpwood.
Eucalypts remain a defining feature of Addis Ababa.
The oldest reliably dated macrofossil of ''Eucalyptus'' is  a 21-million-year-old tree-stump encased in basalt in the upper Lachlan Valley in New South Wales.
This specimen was taken to the British Museum in London, and was named ''Eucalyptus obliqua'' by the French botanist L'Héritier, who was working in London at the time.
This gives uniform paper formation and high opacity that are important for all types of fine papers.
It was hoped that they would provide a renewable source of timber for construction, furniture making and railroad ties.
In those species with opposite adult foliage the leaf pairs, which have been formed opposite at the stem apex, become separated at their bases by unequal elongation of the stem to produce the apparently alternate adult leaves.
''Eucalyptus'' seedlings are usually unable to compete with the indigenous grasses, but after a fire when the grass cover has been removed, a seed-bed may be created.
Much of California has a similar climate to parts of Australia.
The soil quality effects associated with ''Eucalyptus'' sp.
Other fossils have been found, but many are either unreliably dated or else unreliably identified.
The following ''Eucalyptus'' species have been able to become naturalised in South Africa: ''E.
The name ''obliqua'' was derived from the Latin ''obliquus'', meaning "oblique", which is the botanical term describing a leaf base where the two sides of the leaf blade are of unequal length and do not meet the petiole at the same place.
In 1777, on Cook's third expedition, David Nelson collected a eucalypt on Bruny Island in southern Tasmania.
delegatensis'' and Australian mountain ash ''E.
Collected by Sir Joseph Banks, botanist on the expedition, it was subsequently introduced to many parts of the world, notably California, Brazil, Ecuador, Colombia, Ethiopia, Morocco, Portugal, South Africa, Uganda, Israel, Galicia and Chile.
These are the gums or smooth-barked species.
However, no definite transitional point occurs between the phases.
They are also admired as shade and ornamental trees in many cities and gardens.
The low coarseness is important for high quality coated papers.
The eusocial beetle ''Austroplatypus incompertus'' makes and defends its galleries exclusively inside ''Eucalyptus'' plants.
Thus, flowers have no petals, but instead decorate themselves with the many showy stamens.
From the monsoonal 'cradle', fire-promoting species expanded into higher rainfall environments, where lightning was less frequent, gradually displacing the Gondwanan rainforest from all but the most fire-sheltered habitats.
* Small: to  in height
Some species of gum trees drop branches unexpectedly.
This, their rapid growth in the Italian climate and excellent function as windbreaks, has made them a common sight in the south of the country, including the islands of Sardinia and Sicily.
Fast growth also makes eucalypts suitable as windbreaks and to reduce erosion.
With the progressive drying out of the continent since the Miocene, eucalypts were displaced to the continental margins, and much of the mesic and rainforest vegetation that was once there was eliminated entirely.
The principal species is ''Eucalyptus globulus''.
Eucalyptus trees were introduced to Sri Lanka in the late 19th century by tea and coffee planters, for wind protection, shade and fuel.
melliodora'' and ''E.
In these situations, many species appear to grade into one another, and intermediate forms are common.
A former Australian National Botanic Gardens director and consulting arborist, Robert Boden, has been quoted referring to "summer branch drop".
It is usually thick with a spongy texture.
They can be chopped off at the root and grow back again.
Drainage removes swamps which provide a habitat for mosquito larvae, but can also destroy ecologically productive areas.
Many species such as ''E.
Eucalyptus is the most common short fibre source for pulpwood to make pulp.
In Italy, the eucalyptus only arrived at the turn of the 19th century and large scale plantations were started at the beginning of the 20th century with the aim of drying up swampy ground to defeat malaria.
Antonio Lussich introduced ''Eucalyptus'' into Uruguay in approximately 1896, throughout what is now Maldonado Department, and it has spread all over the south-eastern and eastern coast.
They are popular with beekeepers for the honey they provide.
Of the 15 species found outside Australia, just nine are exclusively non-Australian.
''Eucalyptus'' was introduced to Brazil in 1910, for timber substitution and the charcoal industry.
The fibres are slender, yet relatively thick walled.
The most readily recognisable characteristics of eucalyptus species are the distinctive flowers and fruit (capsules or "gumnuts").
are depauperate in eucalyptus groves because the decay-resistant wood of these trees prevents cavity formation by decay or excavation.
In some parts of California, eucalypt plantations are being removed and native trees and plants restored.
In contrast, the leaves of seedlings are often opposite, sessile and glaucous, but many exceptions to this pattern exist.
The nectar of some eucalypts produces high-quality monofloral honey.
The 1991 Oakland Hills firestorm which destroyed almost 3,000 homes and killed 25 people was partly fuelled by large numbers of eucalypts close to the houses.
It reacted differently to harvest.
globulus'', proved valuable in California was in providing windbreaks for highways, orange groves, and other farms in the mostly treeless central part of the state.
Monarch butterflies use eucalyptus in California for over-wintering, but in some locations have a preference for Monterey pines.
They are associated with another invasive species, the eucalyptus gall wasp, ''Leptocybe invasa''.
They went on to note that the promise of eucalyptus in California was based on the old virgin forests of Australia.
Some species, such as ''E.
In contrast a eucalyptus forest tends to promote fire because of the volatile and highly combustible oils produced by the leaves, as well as the production of large amounts of litter which is high in phenolics, preventing its breakdown by fungi and thus accumulates as large amounts of dry, combustible fuel.
Eucalyptus trees also grow in parts of the Pacific Northwest:  Washington, Oregon and parts of British Columbia.
Pankhurst reports, "The proclamation however remained a dead letter; there is no evidence of eucalypts being uprooted, still less of mulberry trees being planted."
Eucalypt wood is also commonly used to make didgeridoos, a traditional Australian Aboriginal wind instrument.
occidentalis'' — or only in a thick, black accumulation at the base, as in ''E.
Hybrid combinations are not particularly common in the field, but some other published species frequently seen in Australia have been suggested to be hybrid combinations.
Most species do not flower until adult foliage starts to appear; ''E.
Additionally, as most scientific understanding of land cover change effects is related to ecosystems where forests were replaced by grasslands or crops, or grassland was replaced by crops, the environmental effects of the current Uruguayan land cover changes are not well understood.
Due to their fast growth, the foremost benefit of these trees is their wood.
Coast Douglas-fir is about the same height; only coast redwood is taller, and they are conifers (gymnosperms).
It has insect repellent properties (Jahn 1991 a, b; 1992), and is an active ingredient in some commercial mosquito repellents (Fradin & Day 2002).
Members of the genus dominate the tree flora of Australia.
For koalas, these compounds are the most important factor in leaf choice.
The fossils are from the early Eocene (51.9 Mya), and were found in the Laguna del Hunco deposit in Chubut province in Argentina.
crucis'', are sought-after ornamentals due to this lifelong juvenile leaf form.
regnans'', are killed by fire and only regenerate from seed.
''Eucalyptus globulus'' is the principal source of eucalyptus oil worldwide.
Eucalyptus flowers produce a great abundance of nectar, providing food for many pollinators including insects, birds, bats and possums.
viminalis'', the rough basal bark is very ribbony at the top, where it gives way to the smooth upper stems.
The gum bark may be dull, shiny, or satiny (as in ''E.
Today, eucalyptus is the most widely planted type of tree in plantations around the world, in South America (mainly in Brazil, Argentina, Paraguay and Uruguay), South Africa,  Australia, India, Galicia,  and many more.
However, the range over which many eucalypts can be planted in the temperate zone is constrained by their limited cold tolerance.
Fossil leaves also occur in the Miocene of New Zealand, where the genus is not native today, but again have been introduced from Australia.
Such changes may also influence soil fertility and soil physical and chemical properties.
tereticornis'' have been recorded as having become naturalised there.
The name ''Eucalyptus'', from the Greek words ''eu-'', well, and ''kaluptos'', cover, meaning "well-covered", describes the operculum.
The aridification of Australia during the mid-tertiary period (25-40 million years ago), combined with the annual penetration of tropical convection storms, and associated lightning, deep into the continental interior stimulated the gradual evolution, diversification and geographic expansion of the flammable biota.
''Eucalyptus globulus'' (in temperate climates) and the hybrid of ''Eucalyptus urophylla'' x ''Eucalyptus grandis'' (in tropical climates) are the most used varieties in papermaking.
''Eucalyptus'' is one of three similar genera that are commonly referred to as "eucalypts", the others being ''Corymbia'' and ''Angophora''.
longicornis'' (red morrell) and ''E.
diversicolor'', ''E.
In Portugal and also Spain, ''eucalypts'' have been planted in pulpwood plantations.
A Maia detector for x-ray elemental imaging at the Australian Synchrotron clearly showed deposits of gold and other metals in the structure of Eucalyptus leaves from the Kalgoorlie region of Western Australia that would have been untraceable using other methods.
The generic name is derived from the Greek words ευ (''eu'') "well" and καλύπτω (''kalýpto'') "to cover", referring to the operculum on the calyx that initially conceals the flower.
Though this occurs at different rates throughout Australia, it is compelling evidence for a relationship between the artificial increase of fire frequency with the arrival of Aboriginals and increased prevalence of this exceptionally fire-tolerant genus.
debeuzevillei'' in particular are even hardier and can tolerate even quite severe winters.
Brazil has become the top exporter and producer of ''Eucalyptus'' round wood and pulp, and has played an important role in developing the Australian market through the country's committed research in this area.
In the 20th century, scientists around the world experimented with eucalyptus species.
Eucalypts have many uses which have made them economically important trees, and have become a cash crop in poor areas such as Timbuktu, Africa and the Peruvian Andes, despite concerns that the trees are invasive in some countries like South Africa.
Several eucalypt species are among the tallest trees in the world.
Several marsupial herbivores, notably koalas and some possums, are relatively tolerant of it.
'''Hawaii''' Some 90 species of eucalyptus have been introduced to the islands, where they have displaced some native species due to their higher maximum height, fast growth and lower water needs.
''Eucalyptus'' plantations in California have been criticised because they compete with native plants and do not support native animals.
has been criticised because of concerns that soil would be degraded by nutrient depletion and other biological changes.
rostrata'' in significant numbers.
platyphylla''; neither of these species was named as such at the time.
setosa'' retain the juvenile leaf form even when the plant is reproductively mature.
It is also used in a number of industries, from fence posts and charcoal to cellulose extraction for biofuels.
This shows that the genus had a Gondwanan distribution.
The account is the most important early systematic treatment of the genus.
As the main landscape of Uruguay is grassland (140,000&nbsp;km2, 87% of the national territory), most of the forestry plantations would be established in prairie regions.
preissiana'' × ''E.
Outside their natural ranges, eucalypts are both lauded for their beneficial economic impact on poor populations and criticised for being "water-guzzling" aliens, leading to controversy over their total impact.
Colours to be achieved range from yellow and orange through green, tan, chocolate and deep rust red.
An essential oil extracted from eucalyptus leaves contains compounds that are powerful natural disinfectants and can be toxic in large quantities.
In 1995 new evidence, largely genetic, indicated that some prominent eucalyptus species were actually more closely related to ''Angophora'' than to the other eucalypts; they were split off into the new genus ''Corymbia''.
The tree proved successful from the onset".
Nearly all eucalyptus are evergreen, but some tropical species lose their leaves at the end of the dry season.
There has been some debate as to whether to leave the stands or attempt to harvest the mostly undamaged timber, which is increasingly recognised as a damaging practice.
The short rotation allows a larger wood production and supplies wood for several other activities, helping to preserve the native forests from logging.
Two subspecies, ''E.
globulus'', although he also found ''E.
Although mature eucalyptus trees may be towering and fully leafed, their shade is characteristically patchy because the leaves usually hang downwards.
'''''Eucalyptus'''''  L'Heritier 1789 is a diverse genus of flowering trees and shrubs (including a distinct group with a multiple-stem mallee growth habit) in the myrtle family, Myrtaceae.
They also release a chemical into the surrounding soil which kills native competitors.
The variety of eucalyptus most commonly found in Italy is ''E.
* Ribbon —  has the bark coming off in long, thin pieces, but is still loosely attached in some places.
The trunk of the tree is hollowed out by termites, and then cut down if the bore is of the correct size and shape.
It was most likely an accident that L'Heritier chose a feature common to all eucalypts.
A study of the relationship between birds and eucalyptus in the San Francisco Bay Area found that bird diversity was similar in native forest vs. eucalyptus forest but the species were different.
sheathiana'') or in variably sized flakes (''E.
The first scientific publication on soil studies in western zone tree plantations (focused on pulp production) appeared in 2004 and described soil acidification and soil carbon changes, similar to a podzolisation process, and destruction of clay (illite-like minerals), which is the main reservoir of potassium in the soil.
Menelik II endorsed its planting around his new capital city of Addis Ababa because of the massive deforestation around the city for firewood.
brachycalyx'', ''E.
The first endemic Western Australian ''Eucalyptus'' to be collected and subsequently named was the Yate (''E.
They provide railway sleepers, utility poles, sawn timber and fuelwood, but are controversial because of their adverse effect on biodiversity, hydrology and soil fertility.
Also those bird species that glean insects from foliage, such as warblers and vireos, have population declines when eucalyptus replace oak forest.
* Ironbark — is hard, rough, and deeply furrowed.
Clearly recognisable examples are stands of ''E.
Fire is also a problem.
The oldest definitive ''Eucalyptus'' fossils are surprisingly from South America, where eucalypts are no longer endemic, though have been introduced from Australia.
Eucalyptus seeds of the species ''E.
Several Australian botanists were active during the 19th century, particularly Ferdinand von Mueller, whose work on ''eucalypts'' contributed greatly to the first comprehensive account of the genus in George Bentham's ''Flora Australiensis'' in 1867.
Due to continual development and governmental funding, year-on-year growth is consistently being improved.
In all except a few species, the leaves form in pairs on opposite sides of a square stem, consecutive pairs being at right angles to each other (decussate).
One species, ''Eucalyptus deglupta,'' ranges as far north as the Philippines.
They have been planted (or re-planted) in some places to lower the water table and reduce soil salination.
plantations have reached annual forestation rates of 300%.
Although these studies were carried out in an important zone for forest cultivation, they cannot define the current situation in the rest of the land area under eucalyptus cultivation.
In other words, some species are relatively fixed genetically, as expressed in their morphology, while others have not diverged completely from their nearest relatives.
In a National Park Service study, it was found that the fuel load (in tons per acre) of non-native eucalyptus woods is almost three times as great as native oak woodland.
In some narrow-leaved species, for example ''E.
The absence of great rivers or mountain chains meant that there were no geographic barriers to check the spread of fires.
Some also show tessellation.
This has raised the income of this sector with respect to traditional products from other sectors.
''Eucalyptus'' are the basis for several industries, such as sawmilling, pulp, charcoal and others.
Most, however, may be regarded as belonging to large or small groups of related species, which are often in geographical contact with each other and between which gene exchange still occurs.
Due to similar favourable climatic conditions, ''Eucalyptus'' plantations have often replaced oak woodlands, for example in California, Spain and Portugal.
''Eucalyptus'' can produce up to 100 cubic metres per hectare per year.
During the last ten years, in the northwestern regions of Uruguay the ''Eucalyptus'' sp.
Its outermost layer gradually fragments with weathering and sheds without altering the essentially rough-barked nature of the trunks or stems — for example ''E.
It is useful to consider where ''Eucalyptus'' fossils have not been found.
Although separate, the three groups are allied and it remains acceptable to refer to the members of all three genera, ''Angophora'', ''Corymbia'' and ''Eucalyptus'', as "eucalypts".
Eucalyptus trees in the Australian outback draw up gold from tens of meters underground through their root system and deposit it as particles in their leaves and branches.
In more recent sediments, numerous findings of a dramatic increase in the abundance of ''Eucalyptus'' pollen are associated with increased charcoal levels.
