(2007) suggest that, along with evidence that there was never a mitochondrion-less eukaryote, eukaryotes evolved from a syntrophy between an archaea closely related to Thermoplasmatales and an α-proteobacterium, likely a symbiosis driven by sulfur or hydrogen.
These form a primary component of the cytoskeletal structure, and are often assembled over the course of several cell divisions, with one flagellum retained from the parent and the other derived from it.
Animals, fungi, choanoflagellates, etc.
The origins of the endomembrane system and mitochondria are also unclear.
Others are involved in storing food.
For instance, there are approximately 210 distinct cell types in the adult human body.
The significance of cytoskeletal structures is underlined in the determination of shape of the cells, as well as their being essential components of migratory responses like chemotaxis and chemokinesis.
Overall, it seems that, although progress has been made, there are still very significant uncertainties in the evolutionary history and classification of eukaryotes.
In the hydrogen hypothesis, the symbiotic linkage of an anaerobic and autotrophic methanogenic archaeon (host) with an alpha-proteobacterium (the symbiont) gave rise to the eukaryotes.
They are composed mainly of tubulin.
The disentanglement of the deep splits in the tree of life only really got going with DNA sequencing, leading to a system of domains rather than kingdoms as top level rank being put forward by Carl Woese, uniting all the eukaryote kingdoms under the eukaryote domain.
It is not recovered in Goloboff et al.
Three main explanations for this have been proposed:
The '''phagotrophic hypothesis''' proposes that eukaryotic-type membranes lacking a cell wall originated first, with the development of endocytosis, whereas mitochondria were acquired by ingestion as endosymbionts.
Laura Parfrey et al.
These act as sex cells (gametes – each gamete has just one complement of chromosomes, each a unique mix of the corresponding pair of parental chromosomes) resulting from genetic recombination during meiosis.
However, due to their much larger size, eukaryotes' collective worldwide biomass is estimated at about equal to that of prokaryotes.
There are many other types of cell.
The two other domains, Bacteria and Archaea, are prokaryotes and have none of the above features.
In higher plants, most of a cell's volume is taken up by a central vacuole, which primarily maintains its osmotic pressure.
Cell division generally takes place asexually by mitosis, a process that allows each daughter nucleus to receive one copy of each chromosome.
They have a variety of internal membrane-bound structures, called organelles, and a cytoskeleton composed of microtubules, microfilaments, and intermediate filaments, which play an important role in defining the cell's organization and shape.
Gene transfer from a delta-proteobacterium to an archaeon led to the methanogenic archaeon developing into a nucleus.
A revised classification in 2012 recognizes five supergroups.
Plants and various groups of algae also have plastids.
* Eukaryotes developed from Archaea, and acquired their eubacterial characteristics from the proto-mitochondrion.
Eukaryotic cells are typically much larger than those of prokaryotes.
This theory incorporates two selective forces that were needed to be considered during the time of nucleus evolution – (a) presence of metabolic partitioning in order to avoid the harmful effects of the co-existence of anabolic and catabolic cellular pathways, and (b) prevention of abnormal biosynthesis of proteins that occur due to a vast spread of introns in the archaeal genes after acquiring the mitochondrion and the loss of methanogenesis.
They were given the taxonomic rank of Kingdom by Linnaeus.
The defining feature that sets eukaryotic cells apart from prokaryotic cells (Bacteria and Archaea) is that they have membrane-bound organelles, especially the nucleus, which contains the genetic material and is enclosed by the nuclear envelope.
Due to the lack of a cell wall, animal cells can adopt a variety of shapes.
The host's methanogenic environment worked as a sink for H2, which resulted in heightened bacterial fermentation.
This syntrophic symbiosis was initially facilitated by H2 transfer between different species under anaerobic environments.
Only eukaryotes form multicellular organisms consisting of many kinds of tissue made up of different cell types.
There is considerable variation in this pattern.
Many protozoa have contractile vacuoles, which collect and expel excess water, and extrusomes, which expel material used to deflect predators or capture prey.
Flagella and cilia are sometimes referred to as undulipodia, and are variously involved in movement, feeding, and sensation.
However, several recent studies have concluded that Haptophyta and Cryptophyta do not form a monophyletic group..
Sources of potential phylogenetic artifact should be investigated routinely, not just when obvious 'long-branch attraction' is encountered."
It has the most primitive chloroplast, only 1 mitochondrion, no vacuoles, no trienoic acids, and the smallest eukaryotic genome at 8 Mbp.
''Monocercomonoides'' obtains its energy by enzymatic action on nutrients absorbed from the environment.
In microaerophilic conditions, oxygen was reduced to water thereby creating a mutual benefit platform.
Based on a phylogenetic analysis, Dacks and Roger proposed that facultative sex was present in the common ancestor of all eukaryotes.
Also there is no evidence of archaeans and spirochetes adapting to intense acid-based environments.
Rhizaria are only moderately supported (65.5% of the studies, i.e., 19 of 29), statistical support for them is inconsistent in multigene genealogies with larger taxon sampling and the group is ambiguously supported in Goloboff et al.
Since these two species are descendants of lineages that diverged early from the eukaryotic evolutionary tree, it was inferred that core meiotic genes, and hence sex, were likely present in a common ancestor of all eukaryotes.
A core set of genes that function in meiosis is present in both ''Trichomonas vaginalis'' and ''Giardia intestinalis'', two organisms previously thought to be asexual.
Alternatively some products produced by the cell can leave in a vesicle through exocytosis.
point out that Archeoplastida support comes primarily from phylogenomic analyses and these may be picking up misleading endosymbiotic gene transfer signal of genes independently transferred from the plastid to the host nucleus in the 3 archeoplastid clades.
* Eukaryotes resulted from the complete fusion of two or more cells, wherein the cytoplasm formed from a eubacterium, and the nucleus from an archaeon, from a virus, or from a pre-cell.
A 2012 study produced a somewhat similar division, although noting that the terms "unikonts" and "bikonts" were not used in the original sense.
Also, evidence now indicates that amoeba, that were previously regarded as asexual, are anciently sexual and that the majority of present-day asexual groups likely arose recently and independently.
Eukaryotes first developed approximately 1.6–2.1 billion years ago (during the Proterozoic eon).
The known eukaryote genome sizes vary from 8.2 megabases (Mb) in ''Babesia bovis'' to 112,000–220,050 Mb in the dinoflagellate ''Prorocentrum micans'', suggesting that the genome of the ancestral eukaryote has undergone considerable variation during its evolution.
Endosymbiotic gene transfer (EGT) acted as a catalyst for the host to acquire the symbionts' carbohydrate metabolism and turn heterotrophic in nature.
Instead, some eukaryotes have obtained them from others through secondary endosymbiosis or ingestion.
In an article published in ''Nature Microbiology'' in April 2016 the authors, "reinforced once again that the life we see around us – plants, animals, humans and other so-called eukaryotes – represent a tiny percentage of the world’s biodiversity."
it is recovered in only 42.6% of the molecular analyses that include it, that is, 26 out of 61.
However, there still remains a greater need in assessing the question of how much eukaryotic complexity is being originated via an implementation of these symbiogenetic theories.
Some protists have various other microtubule-supported organelles.
Other structures, such as pseudopods, are found in various eukaryote groups in different forms, such as the lobose amoebozoans or the reticulose foraminiferans.
Their interior is continuous with the cell's cytoplasm.
Cavalier-Smith 2010, 2013, and 2014 places the eukaryotic tree’s root between Excavata (with ventral feeding groove supported by a microtubular root) and the grooveless Euglenozoa:
Chloroplasts came about from another endosymbiotic event involving cyanobacteria.
Endosymbiotic unifications of the ancestors of alpha-proteobacteria and cyanobacteria, led to the origin of mitochondria and plastids respectively.
Eukaryotes represent a tiny minority of all living things.
's combined analysis, and is mostly weakly supported in other molecular analyses.
Centrioles are often present even in cells and groups that do not have flagella, but conifers and flowering plants have neither.
The protists were understood to be "primitive forms", and thus an evolutionary grade, united by their primitive unicellular nature.
These are entirely distinct from prokaryotic flagellae.
Plastids have their own DNA and are developed from endosymbionts, in this case cyanobacteria.
The major polysaccharides making up the primary cell wall of land plants are cellulose, hemicellulose, and pectin.
Subsequently, they generally enter vesicles, which bud off from the smooth ER.
From a consortium of bacterial and archaeal DNA originated the nuclear genome of eukaryotic cells.
The ''Geosiphon''-like fossil fungus ''Diskagma'' has been found in paleosols 2.2 billion years old
Eukaryotes are more closely related to Archaea than Bacteria, at least in terms of nuclear DNA and genetic machinery, and one controversial idea is to place them with Archaea in the clade Neomura.
In 2016, ''Monocercomonoides'', a metamonad flagellate which resides in the intestines of the chinchilla, has been found to lack mitochondria entirely.
There are also the cladistic analyses of Diana Lipscomb based on classical data  which have red algae as basal and Archeoplastida as paraphyletic.
The eukaryotes thus came to be composed of four kingdoms:
Oxygen is known to cause toxicity to organisms that lack the required metabolic machinery.
The domain Eukaryota appears to be monophyletic, and so makes up one of the three domains of life.
Subsequently, the host's methane forming capability was lost.
The nucleus is surrounded by a double membrane (commonly referred to as a nuclear envelope), with pores that allow material to move in and out.
A paper published in 2009, which re-examined the data used in some of the analyses presented above as well as performing new ones, strongly suggested that the Archaeplastida are polyphyletic.
In earlier stages, an alpha-proteobacterium became a member of this integration, and later developed into the mitochondrion.
Animal cells are distinct from those of other eukaryotes, most notably plants, as they lack cell walls and chloroplasts and have smaller vacuoles.
For instance, parasitic protozoa of the genus Leishmania have recently been shown to have a sexual cycle.
Eukaryote cells include a variety of membrane-bound structures, collectively referred to as the endomembrane system.
Based on the process of mutualistic symbiosis, the hypotheses can be categorized as – the serial endosymbiotic theory (SET), the hydrogen hypothesis (mostly a process of symbiosis where hydrogen transfer takes place among different species), and the syntrophy hypothesis.
Thus, the origin of eukaryotes by endosymbiotic processes has been broadly recognized and accepted so far.
Some acritarchs are known from at least 1.65 billion years ago, and the possible alga ''Grypania'' has been found as far back as 2.1 billion years ago.
Mitochondria and plastids have been known to originate from a bacterial ancestor during parallel adaptation to anaerobiosis.
Within these chimeric models, some studies further claim that mitochondria originated from a bacterial ancestor while others emphasize the role of endosymbiotic processes behind the origin of mitochondria.
Although plastids probably had a single origin, not all plastid-containing groups are closely related.
In the survey by Parfrey et al.
Vesicles may be specialized for various purposes.
There are also smaller groups of eukaryotes whose position is uncertain or seems to fall outside the major groups.
The origin of the eukaryotic cell is considered a milestone in the evolution of life, since eukaryotes include all complex cells and almost all multicellular organisms.
Several alternative classifications have been forwarded, though there is no consensus in the field.
All animals consist of eukaryotic cells.
Eukaryotic organisms may be unicellular or multicellular.
Many have cell walls; many do not.
The normal mitochondrial iron-sulphur cluster pathway is considered to have been lost secondarily.
Eukaryotes are a very diverse group, and their cell structures are equally diverse.
Eukaryotes have a smaller surface area to volume ratio than prokaryotes, and thus have lower metabolic rates and longer generation times.
Fungi and many protists have some substantial differences, however.
Archaeplastida (or Primoplantae)
The evolution of sexual reproduction may be a primordial and fundamental characteristic of eukaryotes.
The archaeon constituted the genetic apparatus while the delta-proteobacterium contributed towards the cytoplasmic features.
Here the membranes originated after the engulfment of the mitochondrion, in part thanks to mitochondrial genes (the hydrogen hypothesis is one particular version).
The timing of this series of events is hard to determine; Knoll (2006) suggests they developed approximately 1.6–2.1 billion years ago.
This is the serial endosymbiosis theory.
Since all eukaryotes have mitochondria, but not all have chloroplasts, mitochondria are thought to have come first.
As Roger & Simpson said in 2009 "with the current pace of change in our understanding of the eukaryote tree of life, we should proceed with caution."
* Eukaryotes and Archaea developed separately from a modified eubacterium.
In addition, plants and algae contain chloroplasts.
The syntrophy hypothesis was developed in contrast to the hydrogen hypothesis and proposes the existence of two symbiotic events.
The presence of a nucleus gives eukaryotes their name, which comes from the Greek εὖ (''eu'', "well" or "true") and κάρυον (''karyon'', "nut" or "kernel").
Eukaryotes belong to the taxon '''Eukarya''' or '''Eukaryota'''.
The presence of steranes in Australian shales indicates that eukaryotes were present in these rocks dated at 2.7 billion years old.
Organized living structures have been found in the black shales of the Palaeoproterozoic Francevillian B Formation in Gabon, dated at 2.1 billion years old.
Various tube- and sheet-like extensions of the nuclear membrane form what is called the endoplasmic reticulum or ER, which is involved in protein transport and maturation.
Land plants, green algae, red algae, and glaucophytes
It includes the rough ER where ribosomes are attached to synthesize proteins, which enter the interior space or lumen.
Thus, the archaeon provided the bacterium with a highly beneficial reduced environment (sulfur and sulfate were reduced to sulfide).
In most eukaryotes, these protein-carrying vesicles are released and further modified in stacks of flattened vesicles, called Golgi bodies or dictyosomes.
Other studies on eukaryotic species once thought to be asexual have revealed evidence for a sexual cycle.
And Stiller and Harrell  emphasize that the group can be explained by "short-branch exclusion" and "subtle and easily overlooked biases can dominate the overall results of molecular phylogenetic analyses of ancient eukaryotic relationships.
At the same time, work on the protist tree intensified, and is still actively going on today.
They classified eukaryote "based on the inheritance of their information systems as opposed to lipid or other cellular structures."
A phagocytic cell can even engulf other structures.
Spirochetes gave rise to the motile features of eukaryotic cells.
Different hypotheses have been proposed as to how eukaryotic cells came into existence.
In 1830, the German biologist Georg A. Goldfuss coined the word ''protozoa'' to refer to organisms such as ciliates, and this group was expanded until it encompassed all single-celled eukaryotes, and given their own kingdom, the Protista, by Ernst Haeckel in 1866.
Most lobose amoeboids and slime molds
Various flagellate protozoa
Eukaryotic DNA is divided into several linear bundles called chromosomes, which are separated by a microtubular spindle during nuclear division.
This union established a motile organism capable of living in the already existing acidic and sulfurous waters.
Later endosymbiosis led to the spread of plastids in some lineages.
The host utilized hydrogen (H2) and carbon dioxide () to produce methane while the symbiont, capable of aerobic respiration, expelled H2 and  as byproducts of anaerobic fermentation process.
The bacterium on the other hand, contributed the necessary fermentation products and electron acceptors along with its motility feature to the archaeon thereby gaining a swimming motility for the organism.
However, in the same year (2005), doubts were expressed as to whether some of these supergroups were monophyletic, particularly the Chromalveolata, and a review in 2006 noted the lack of evidence for several of the supposed six supergroups.
It is probable that most other membrane-bound organelles are ultimately derived from such vesicles.
The division of the eukaryotes into two primary clades, bikonts (Archaeplastida + SAR + Excavata) and unikonts (Amoebozoa + Opisthokonta), derived from an ancestral biflagellar organism and an ancestral uniflagellar organism, respectively, had been suggested earlier.
Thus, the origins of the heterotrophic organelle (symbiont) are identical to the origins of the eukaryotic lineage.
Some models propose that the origins of double layered organelles, such as mitochondria and chloroplasts, in the proto-eukaryotic cell is due to the compartmentalization of DNA vesicles that were formed from the secondary invaginations or more detailed infoldings of cellular membrane.
Eukaryotic life could have evolved at that time.
Other analyses place the SAR supergroup within an expanded Chromalveolata, although they differ on the placement of the resulting five groups.
Endosymbiotic origins have also been proposed for the nucleus, for which see below, and for eukaryotic flagella, supposed to have developed from spirochaetes.
As the capacity to sequence DNA became easier, Banfield and team were able to do metagenomic sequencing—"sequencing whole communities of organisms at once and picking out the individual groups based on their genes alone."
Many have chloroplasts, derived from primary, secondary, or even tertiary endosymbiosis; and many do not.
Flagella also may have hairs, or mastigonemes, and scales connecting membranes and internal rods.
In most eukaryotes, there is also a process of sexual reproduction, typically involving an alternation between haploid generations, wherein only one copy of each chromosome is present, and diploid generations, wherein two copies of each chromosome are present, occurring through meiosis.
In some analyses, the Hacrobia group (Haptophyta + Cryptophyta) is placed next to Archaeplastida, but in other ones it is nested inside the Archaeplastida.
The last common ancestor of all eukaryotes is believed to have been a phagotrophic protist with a nucleus, at least one centriole and cilium, facultatively aerobic mitochondria, sex (meiosis and syngamy), a dormant cyst with a cell wall of chitin and/or cellulose and peroxisomes.
Stramenopiles (brown algae, diatoms, etc.
Centrioles may also be associated in the formation of a spindle during nuclear division.
Eukaryotic cells also contain other membrane-bound organelles such as mitochondria and the Golgi apparatus.
In antiquity, the two clades of animals and plants were recognized.
These hypotheses can be classified into two distinct classes – autogenous models and chimeric models.
Simple compartments, called vesicles or vacuoles, can form by budding off other membranes.
In a study using genomes to construct supertrees, Pisani ''et al.''
The mitochondrion and its genome is a remnant of the α-proteobacterial endosymbiont.
Red algae as basal is also supported by molecular evidence.
However, such an association based on motile symbiosis have never been observed practically.
The various single-cell eukaryotes were originally placed with plants or animals when they became known.
Motor proteins of microtubules, e.g., dynein or kinesin and actin, e.g., myosins provide dynamic character of the network.
According to serial endosymbiotic theory (championed by Dr. Lynn Margulis), a union between a motile anaerobic bacterium (like ''Spirochaeta'') and a thermoacidophilic crenarchaeon (like ''Thermoplasma'' which is sulfidogenic in nature) gave rise to the present day eukaryotes.
, it remains unclear whether the Hacrobia forms a monophyletic group.
Jillian F. Banfield of the University of California, Berkeley and fellow scientists used a super computer to generate a diagram of a new tree of life based on DNA from 3000 species including 2,072 known species and 1,011 newly reported microbial organisms, whose DNA they had gathered from diverse environments.
The cellulose microfibrils are linked via hemicellulosic tethers to form the cellulose-hemicellulose network, which is embedded in the pectin matrix.
For instance, lysosomes contain digestive enzymes that break down the contents of food vacuoles, and peroxisomes are used to break down peroxide, which is toxic otherwise.
Some groups have unique structures, such as the cyanelles of the glaucophytes, the haptonema of the haptophytes, or the ejectisomes of the cryptomonads.
In mitosis, one cell divides to produce two genetically identical cells.
in 2009 produced the tree shown below, where the primary division is between the Archaeplastida and all other eukaryotes.
Many cells ingest food and other materials through a process of endocytosis, where the outer membrane invaginates and then pinches off to form a vesicle.
These include the radiolaria and heliozoa, which produce axopodia used in flotation or to capture prey, and the haptophytes, which have a peculiar flagellum-like organelle called the haptonema.
This is not generally accepted, both from a lack of cytological evidence and difficulty in reconciling this with cellular reproduction.
Eukaryotes can reproduce both asexually through mitosis and sexually through meiosis and gamete fusion.
Microfilamental structures composed of actin and actin binding proteins, e.g., α-actinin, fimbrin, filamin are present in submembraneous cortical layers and bundles, as well.
Fossils that are clearly related to modern groups start appearing an estimated 1.2 billion years ago, in the form of a red alga, though recent work suggests the existence of fossilized filamentous algae in the Vindhya basin dating back perhaps to 1.6 to 1.7 billion years ago.
A classification produced in 2005 for the International Society of Protistologists, which reflected the consensus of the time, divided the eukaryotes into six supposedly monophyletic 'supergroups'.
It has also acquired, by lateral gene transfer, a cytosolic sulphur mobilisation system which provides the clusters of iron and sulfur required for protein synthesis.
''Cyanidioschyzon'', a red alga, is considered basal (sister group to the rest of eukaryotes) by Nagashima et al.
The chronocyte hypothesis for the origin of the eukaryotic cell postulates that a primitive eukaryotic cell was formed by the endosymbiosis of both archaea and bacteria by a third type of cell, termed a chronocyte.
According to this theory, eukaryogenesis (i.e.
They are supported by a bundle of microtubules arising from a basal body, also called a kinetosome or centriole, characteristically arranged as nine doublets surrounding two singlets.
These cells underwent a merging process, either by a physical fusion or by endosymbiosis, thereby leading to the formation of a eukaryotic cell.
Chimeric models claim that two prokaryotic cells existed initially – an archaeon and a bacterium.
origin of eukaryotic cells) occurred based on metabolic symbiosis (syntrophy) between a methanogenic archaeon and a delta-proteobacterium.
For example, ''Thiodendron'' has been known to have originated via an ectosymbiotic process based on a similar syntrophy of sulfur existing between the two types of bacteria – ''Desulphobacter'' and ''Spirochaeta''.
Though he included the fungi with plants with some reservations, it was later realized that they are quite distinct and warrant a separate kingdom, the composition of which was not entirely clear until the 1980s.
However, in other respects, such as membrane composition, eukaryotes are similar to Bacteria.
Many eukaryotes have long slender motile cytoplasmic projections, called flagella, or similar structures called cilia.
), Alveolata, and Rhizaria (Foraminifera, Radiolaria, and various other amoeboid protozoa).
In this hypothesis, the presence of H2 represents the selective force that forged eukaryotes out of prokaryotes.
The '''syntrophic hypothesis''' proposes that the proto-eukaryote relied on the proto-mitochondrion for food, and so ultimately grew to surround it.
In some multicellular organisms, cells specialized for metabolism will have enlarged surface areas, such as intestinal vili.
There are many different types of eukaryotic cells, though animals and plants are the most familiar eukaryotes, and thus provide an excellent starting point for understanding eukaryotic structure.
The phylogeny finally proposed in the paper is shown below.
