Young Chinese men were selected by the Vietnamese for castration to become eunuch slaves to the Vietnamese.
They also perform certain ceremonies for the couple in Hindu tradition.
This enabled eunuchs to serve as messengers, watchmen, attendants and guards for palaces.
The boys were all under ten years old and were selected for their good looks.
Let anyone accept this who can."
Vietnamese were among the many eunuchs of different origins found at the Yongle Emperor's court.
The early 17th century scholar and theologian Gerardus Vossius therefore explains that the word originally designated an office, and he affirms the view that it was derived from ''eunē'' and ''ekhein'' (i.e.
The clash between them would thus have been a clash of ideologies or political agenda.
Still, Vossius notes the alternate etymologies offered by Eustathius ("deprived of mating") and others ("having the mind in a good state"), calling these analyses "quite subtle".
A tube would be then inserted into the urethra to allow urination during healing.
He says the word only came to be applied to castrated men in general because such men were the usual holders of that office.
The practice of religious castration continued into the Christian era, with members of the early church practising celibacy (including castration) for religious purposes, although the extent and even the existence of this practice among Christians is subject to debate.
Eunuchs sometimes were used as regents for underage heirs to the throne, as it seems to be the case for the Neo-Hittite state of Carchemish.
In cultures that had both harems and eunuchs, eunuchs were sometimes used as harem servants (compare the female odalisque) or seraglio guards.
Remondino's claims were repeated in similar form by Henry G. Spooner in 1919, in the ''American Journal of Urology and Sexology''.
The Naesi system included two ranks, those of ''Sangseon'' (상선, 尙膳, "Chief of Naesi"), who held the official title of senior second rank, and ''Naegwan'' (내관, 內官, "Common official naesi"), both of which held rank as officers.
Eunuchs are mentioned many times in the Bible such as in the Book of Isaiah (56:4) using the word סריס (''saris'').
Zhu Shuang 朱樉 (Prince Min of Qin 秦愍王), while he was high on drugs, had some Tibetan boys castrated and Tibetan women seized after a war against minority Tibetan peoples and as a result was reprimanded after he died from overdose.
The White Eunuchs were Europeans from the Balkans or the Caucasus, either purchased in the slave markets or were boys taken from Christian families in the Balkans who were unable to pay the ''Jizya'' tax.
Korean eunuchs and Korean virigins were delivered from Korea to the Ming Xuanzong Emperor.
There were Korean, Jurchen, Mongol, and Vietnamese eunuchs under the Yongle Emperor.
On the other hand, as Julius Paulus pointed out, "if someone is a eunuch in such a way that he is missing a necessary part of his body" (D 21.1.7), then he would be deemed diseased.
The broad sense of the term "eunuch" is reflected in the compendium of ancient Roman laws collected by Justinian I in the 6th century known as the Digest or Pandects.
During the Fourth Chinese domination of Vietnam, the Ming Chinese under the Yongle Emperor castrated many young Vietnamese boys, choosing them for their handsomeness and ability, and brought them to Nanjing to serve as eunuchs.
Only adult men of high social rank could be castrated.
They typically live in the margins of society and face discrimination.
The Vietnamese enslaved and castrated the young from among the captured.
Under Justinian in the 6th century, the eunuch Narses functioned as a successful general in a number of campaigns.
He refers to the "Abou-Gerghè" monastery in a place he calls "Mount Ghebel-Eter".
The position of eunuch at the Forbidden City offered such opportunities for theft and corruption and China was such a poor country that countless men willingly become eunuchs in order to live a better life.
A large amount of trade between Guangdong and Vietnam happened during his reign.
The eunuchs served as slaves to the Vietnamese palace women in the harem- like the consorts, concubines, maids, Queen, and Princesses- doing most of the work.
For there are eunuchs who have been so from birth, and there are eunuchs who have been made eunuchs by others, and there are eunuchs who have made themselves eunuchs for the sake of the kingdom of heaven.
In Han dynasty China castration continued to be used as a punishment for various offences.
Similar phenomena are exemplified by some modern Indian communities of the Hijra, which are associated with a deity and with certain rituals and festivals – notably the devotees of Yellammadevi, or ''jogappa''s, who are not castrated and the Ali of southern India, of whom at least some are.
Sir Henry Yule saw many Muslims serving as eunuchs in Konbaung Dynasty Burma (modern Myanmar) while on a diplomatic mission.
In these Roman legal texts, ''spadones (eunuchs)'' are eligible to marry women (D 23.3.39.1), institute posthumous heirs (D 28.2.6), and adopt children (Institutions of Justinian 1.11.9), ''unless'' they are ''castrati''.
In translations of the Bible into modern European languages, such as the Luther Bible or the King James Bible, the word ''eunuchus'' as found in the Latin Vulgate is usually rendered as officer, official or chamberlain, consistent with the idea that the original meaning of eunuch was bed-keeper (Orion's first option).
The eunuchs were assigned to do work for the palace women, like massaging and applying make up to the women, preparing them for sex with the Emperor.
Eunuchs castrated before puberty were also valued and trained in several cultures for their exceptional voices, which retained a childlike and other-worldly flexibility and treble pitch (a high-pitched voice).
The genitals would be sterilized with pepper water and then cut off.
A '''eunuch''' (; ) is a man who has been castrated, typically early enough in his life for this change to have major hormonal consequences.
The eunuch Bagoas (not to be confused with Alexander's Bagoas) was the Vizier of Artaxerxes III and IV, and was the primary power behind the throne during their reigns, until he was killed by Darius III.
Modern etymologists have followed Orion's first option.
The Vietnamese adopted the eunuch system and castration techniques from China.
During the Yuan Dynasty, eunuchs became a desirable commodity for tributes, and dog bites were replaced by more sophisticated surgical techniques.
Indigenous tribals from southern China were used as eunuchs during the Sui and Tang dynasties.
2.7), or was eventually deprived of the anatomical parts necessary for procreation met the definition of a eunuch.
Because their condition usually lowered their social status, they could also be easily replaced or killed without repercussion.
The sons and grandsons of the Tajik rebel, Yaqub Beg, in China were all castrated.
They served the recruits at the Palace School and were from 1582 prohibited from entering the Harem.
Any man who either lacked the faculty of procreation from birth, even with a full set of genitals (Gen.An.
The procedure was agonizing since the entire penis was cut off.
Among them were the architect-engineer Nguyễn An and Nguyen Lang (阮浪).
But he said to them, "Not everyone can accept this teaching, but only those to whom it is given.
And in fact, other words that have the same ending ''-oukhos'' feature a stem-vowel ''o'' in the first word of the compound, such as ''skēptoukhos'', ''rabdoukhos'', ''lampadoukhos'', ''ofioukhos'' and ''kleidoukhos''.
Some of these attained high-status positions in society.
There, a soldier told him of an escape route back to China and Wu Rui escaped to Longzhou.
The only man allowed in the Palace was the Emperor, the only others allowed were his women and the eunuchs since they were not able to have sexual relations with the women.
Men sentenced to castration were turned into eunuch slaves of the Qin dynasty state to perform forced labor for projects such as the Terracotta Army.
Consequently, the rules of Greek vowel contraction at any rate favor the derivation from ''eunoos'' and ''ekhein'' ("having a well-disposed state of mind").
Eunuch priests have served various goddesses from India for many centuries.
The Empress Dowager Chengtian played a large role in the raids to capture and emasculate the boys.
Unfortunately the choice had to be made at an age when the boy would not yet be able to consciously choose whether to sacrifice his reproductive capabilities, and there was no guarantee that the voice would remain of musical excellence after the operation.
Modern religious scholars have been disinclined to assume that the courts of Israel and Judah included castrated men, even though the original translation of the Bible into Greek used the word ''eunoukhos''.
Later Roman followers of Cybele were called Galli, who practiced ritual self-castration, known as ''sanguinaria''.
The earliest surviving etymology of the word is from late antiquity.
Lý Thường Kiệt was a prominent eunuch general during the Lý Dynasty (1009-1225).
The acerbic poet describes a certain lover of fine food having "consumed his estate dining lavishly and at leisure every day on tuna and garlic-honey cheese paté like a Lampsacene ''eunoukhos''".
Muslim eunuchs and Mongol eunuchs were present in the Ming court.
Eunuchs supposedly did not generally have loyalties to the military, the aristocracy, or to a family of their own (having neither offspring nor in-laws, at the very least), and were thus seen as more trustworthy and less interested in establishing a private 'dynasty'.
850 until 622 BC) and in the court of the Egyptian Pharaohs (down to the Lagid dynasty known as Ptolemies, ending with Cleopatra),(30 BC).
The number of eunuchs in Imperial employ fell to 470 by 1912, when the practice of using them ceased.
With the average life expectancy after castration, there are approximately a half million chemically or surgically castrated prostate cancer patients at any time in the U.S. alone.
There were instances of very capable eunuchs who were valuable advisers to their emperor, and the resistance of the "virtuous" officials often stemmed from jealousy on their part.
This incident may be the same one where Wu Rui was captured.
such as the Korean eunuch Bak Bulhwa and Korean Empress Gi.
The guard was Yu Yung and the women were Uighur.
Goryeo incurred negative consequences as a result of the eunuch Bak Bulhwa's actions.
Theophylact of Ohrid in a dialogue ''In Defence of Eunuchs'' also stated that the origin of the word was from ''eunoein'' and ''ekhein'', "to have, hold", since they were always "well-disposed" toward the master who "held" or owned them.
Recently, hijras have started to found organizations to improve their social condition and fight discrimination, such as the Shemale Foundation Pakistan.
One of the earliest converts to Christianity was an Ethiopian eunuch who was a high court official of Candace the Queen of Ethiopia.
Even if the form ''okhos'' ("carrier" or "holder") were compounded with ''eunē'', as many dictionaries suggest, the stem-vowel ''a'' from ''eunē'' combined with the initial ''o'' from ''okhos'' would combine to form an ''omega'', and the resulting word ("bed-carrier") would be expected to come out as ''eunōkhos'', with the English word becoming "eunoch".
They are a part of dance programs (sometimes Adult) in marriage ceremonies.
A 1472 entry in the Ming Shilu, reported that some Chinese from Nanhai county escaped back to China after their ship had been blown off course into Vietnam, where they had been forced to serve as soldiers in Vietnam's military.
Court records going back to 1392 indicate that the average lifespan of eunuchs was 70.0 ± 1.76 years, which was 14.4–19.1 years longer than the lifespan of non-castrated men of similar socio-economic status.
Political eunuchism became a fully established institution among the Achamenide Persians.
In an influential 1925 essay on the word eunuch and related terms, Ernst Maass suggested that Eustathius's derivation "can or must be laid to rest", and he affirmed the derivation from ''eunē'' and ''ekhein'' ("guardian of the bed"), without mentioning the other derivation from ''eunoos'' and ''ekhein'' ("having a well-disposed state of mind").
The 5th century (AD) ''Etymologicon'' by Orion of Thebes offers two alternative origins for the word eunuch: first, ''to tēn eunēn ekhein'', "guarding the bed", a derivation inferred from eunuchs' established role at the time as "bedchamber attendants" in the imperial palace, and second, ''to eu tou nou ekhein'', "being good with respect to the mind", which Orion explains based on their "being deprived of male-female intercourse (''esterēmenou tou misgesthai''), the things that the ancients used to call irrational (''anoēta'', literally: 'mindless')".
Caelia wants the flowers of marriage – not the fruits."
It is said that the justification for the employment of eunuchs as high-ranking civil servants was that, since they were incapable of having children, they would not be tempted to seize power and start a dynasty.
The Ottoman court harem—within the Topkapı Palace (1465–1853) and later the Dolmabahçe Palace (1853–1909) in Istanbul—was under the administration of the eunuchs.
The tribute payment brought much harm to Korea.
In Latin, the words ''eunuchus'', ''spado'' (Greek:  ''spadon''), and ''castratus'' were used to denote eunuchs.
An early example of such a high-ranking eunuch was Malik Kafur, a Hindu boy captured and enslaved (along with tens of thousands of other Hindus who were typically captured during such raids), during the raids of the Delhi Sultanate into Gujarat.
As an ''alpha''-declension noun, ''eunē'' features the stem-vowel ''-a-'', but an ''a''-sound will not combine with any other vowels to produce the ''ou'' that occurs in ''eunoukhos''.
The practice, known as ''castratism'', remained popular until the 18th century and was known into the 19th century.
Korean eunuchs and Korean girl concubines were sent as tribute to the Ming dynasty, in imitation of the previous dynasty's precedent, as were Vietnamese women and eunuchs.
It is estimated that over 80,000 of these men will be surgically or chemically castrated within six months of diagnosis.
Black Eunuchs were African slaves who served the concubines and officials in the Harem together with chamber maidens of low rank.
In control of both the Harem and a net of spies in the Black Eunuchs, the Chief Eunuch was involved in almost every palace intrigue and could thereby gain power over either the sultan or one of his viziers, ministers, or other court officials.
Eunuchs were the only males outside the royal family allowed to stay inside the palace overnight.
On the other hand, the etymology offered by Eustathius (''eunis'' + ''okheuein'') would work only if ''eunis'' contributes an ''e''-sound or ''o''-sound to the compound.
Edmund Andrews of the Northwestern University, in an 1898 article called "Oriental Eunuchs" in the American Journal of Medicine, refers to Coptic priests in "Abou Gerhè in Upper Egypt" castrating slave boys., in his book ''History of Circumcision from the Earliest Times to the Present'', published in 1900.
A study on eunuchs has found that they live 13.5 years longer than non-eunuch men as a result of a lack of testosterone, which reduces the likelihood of participation in risky behaviors, such as violence.
All words (other than ''eunoukhos'' anyway) that are formed by adding onto ''eunē'' have an ''a''-sound or long ''e''-sound in the combined syllable, as in ''eunater'' or ''eunēter'' ("bed-fellow"), ''eunaios'' ("in one's bed") or ''eunēthen'' ("from or out of bed").
They either died in prison in Lanzhou, Gansu, or were killed by the Chinese.
An important figure in the Ottoman court was the Chief Black Eunuch (''Kızlar Ağası'' or ''Dar al-Saada Ağası'').
Several Malay envoys from the Malacca sultanate were attacked and captured in 1469 by the Lê Dynasty of Annam (Vietnam) as they were returning to Malacca from China.
The Chinese Ministry of Revenue responded by ordering Chinese civilians and soldiers to stop going abroad to foreign countries.
It has been speculated by modern historians that the Chinese who were captured and castrated by the Vietnamese were involved in trade between China and Vietnam instead of actually being blown off course by the wind and they were punished as part of a crackdown on foreign trade by Vietnam.
The young man's thighs and abdomen would be tied and others would pin him down on a table.
There were 100,000 eunuchs at the height of their numbers during the Ming.
The boy would have the option of serving as a eunuch official or serving the palace women when he became ten years old.
In the United States alone there are more than 200,000 new cases of prostate cancer diagnosed each year.
The earliest records for intentional castration to produce eunuchs are from the Sumerian city of Lagash in the 21st century BC.
However, the first option was cited by the late 9th century Byzantine emperor Leo VI in his New Constitution 98 banning the marriage of eunuchs, in which he noted eunuchs' reputation as trustworthy guardians of the marriage bed (''eunē'') and claimed that the very word eunuch attested to this kind of employment.
Unfortunately, there are no known compounds of ''eunis'' to use for comparison.
''Eunuch'' comes from the Greek word ''eunoukhos'', first attested in a fragment of Hipponax, the 6th century BC comic poet and prolific inventor of compound words.
Be that as it may, virtually all modern reference works cite the derivation from ''eunē'' and ''ekhein'' ("keeper of the bed").
At the Byzantine imperial court, there were a great number of eunuchs employed in domestic and administrative functions, actually organized as a separate hierarchy, following a parallel career of their own.
Some of them undergo ritual castration, but the majority do not.
The Khitan Empress Dowager Xiao Chuo (Chengtian) of the Khitan Liao state took power at age 30 in 982 as a regent for her son.
After years of service, he was promoted at the death of the Vietnamese ruler in 1497, to a military position in northern Vietnam.
The local chief planned to sell him back to the Vietnamese, but Wu was rescued by the Pingxiang Magistrate, then was sent to Beijing to work as a eunuch in the palace.
There is some confusion regarding eunuchs in Old Testament passages, since the Hebrew word for eunuch, ''saris'' (סריס), could also refer to other servants and officials who had not been castrated but served in similar capacities.
Bamboo was used with Chinese eunuchs.
Commoners were banned from undergoing castration in Vietnam.
Other means to earn their living are: by coming, uninvited at weddings, births, new shop openings and other major family events, singing until they are paid or given gifts to go away.
It is up for debate whether this passage is representative of any sort of widely practiced behavior, however.
He adds details not mentioned by Andrews such as the insertion of bamboo into the victim.
The 12th century Etymologicum Magnum (s.v.
People who performed massages and eunuchs were solicited by Hongwu from Vietnam.
However, they are integral to several Hindu ceremonies which is the primary form of their livelihood.
She personally led her own army against the Song Chinese in 986 and defeated them in battle, fighting the retreating Chinese army.
It is unknown who really was behind the anti-pig slaughter edict.
A similar system existed in Vietnam.
Muslim eunuchs contributed money in 1496 to repairing Niujie Mosque.
From ancient times until the Sui Dynasty, castration was both a traditional punishment (one of the Five Punishments) and a means of gaining employment in the Imperial service.
Ray Huang argues that in reality, eunuchs represented the personal will of the Emperor, while the officials represented the alternate political will of the bureaucracy.
While most of these men would deny the term "eunuch," they meet all physiological characteristics of post-pubertal eunuchs.
During the operation, the Coptic clergyman chained the boys to tables, then, after slicing off their sexual organs, stuck a piece of bamboo into the genital area, and then submerged them in neck-high sand to burn.
These Muslim eunuchs came from Arakan.
In some ancient texts, "eunuch" may refer to a man who is not castrated but who is impotent, celibate, or otherwise not inclined to marry and procreate.
They were all underage children, and put on trial, sentenced to an agonizing death if they were complicit in their father's rebellious "sedition", or if they were innocent of their fathers' crimes, were to be sentenced to castration and serve as eunuch slaves to Chinese troops, when they reached 11 years old, and were handed over to the Imperial Household to be executed or castrated.
Zheng He was a eunuch who worked for Yongle (Zhu Di).
One major problem, however, with the derivation from ''eunē'' ("bed") is that, according to the rules of Greek vowel contractions (see crasis), the ''ou'' in ''eunoukhos'' requires an ''o''-sound between the contracted words, specifically ''e''+''o'', ''e''+''ou'', ''o''+''e'', ''o''+''ei'', ''o''+''o'' or ''o''+''ou'', and cannot feature an ''a''-sound there.
Certain eunuchs gained immense power that occasionally superseded that of even the Grand Secretaries.
Massive numbers of Korean boy eunuchs, Korean girl concubines, falcons, ginseng, grain, cloth, silver, and gold were sent as tribute to the Mongol Yuan dynasty.
Andrews states his information is derived from an earlier work, "''Les Femmes, les eunuques, et les guerriers du Soudan''" published by a French explorer, Count de Bisson, in 1868, though the place does not appear in de Bisson's book.
The presence of eunuchs in Vietnam was used by the French colonizers to degrade the Vietnamese.
The first recorded appearance of a Korean eunuch was in Goryeosa ("History of Goryeo"), a compilation about the Goryeo period.
Such eunuchs were known as castrati.
The Egyptian royal servant Potiphar is described as a ''saris'' in  Genesis 39:1, although he was married and hence unlikely to have been a castrated eunuch.
In Siam (modern Thailand) Indian Muslims from the Coromandel Coast served as eunuchs in the Thai palace and court.
In the Lê Dynasty the Vietnamese Emperor Lê Thánh Tông was aggressive in his relations with foreign countries including China.
Sima Qian, the famous Chinese historian, was castrated by order of the Han Emperor of China for dissent.
When the Ming army finally captured Yunnan from Mongols in 1382, thousands of prisoners were killed and, according to the custom in times of war, their young sons – including Zheng He – were castrated.
The act (emasculation) made Ottoman rule much hated by Christians in the Balkans.
Quoting from the cited book: "...&nbsp;Tertullian takes 'spado' to mean virgin&nbsp;...".
The Qing like all dynasties that ruled China made much use of eunuchs.
Foreign origin Uighur and Mongol women were favored by the Zhengde emperor.
The boys were captured from Abyssinia and other areas in Sudan like Darfur and Kordofan, then brought into Sudan and Egypt.
Some Indian provincial officials have used the assistance of hijras to collect taxes in the same fashion- they knock on the doors of shopkeepers, while dancing and singing- embarrassing them into paying.
One of the most powerful Chief Eunuchs was Beshir Agha in the 1730s, who played a crucial role in establishing the Ottoman version of Hanafi Islam throughout the Empire by founding libraries and schools.
The Thai at times asked eunuchs from China to visit the court in Thailand and advise them on court ritual since they held them in high regard.
Eunuchs were highly valued for their strength- an ability to provide protection for ladies' palaces and trustworthiness- allowing eunuchs to live amongst women with fewer worries.
The ceremony is supposed to bring good luck and fertility, while the curse of an unappeased hijra is feared by many.
Archieunuchs—each in charge of a group of eunuchs—were among the principal officers in Constantinople, under the emperors.
The Trần Dynasty sent Vietnamese boy eunuchs as tribute to Ming Dynasty China several times, in 1383, 1384 and 1385 Nguyen Dao, Nguyen Toan, Tru Ca, and Ngo Tin were among several Vietnamese eunuchs sent to China.
The only males allowed inside the Forbidden City at Huế were the Emperor and his eunuchs.
The Vietnamese government mandated that boys born with defective genitalia were to be reported to officials, in exchange for the town being freed from mandatory labor requirements.
The early theologian Origen found evidence of the practice in ,: "His disciples said to him, "If such is the case of a man with his wife, it is better not to marry."
During the Miao Rebellions, the Ming Governor castrated thousands of Miao boys when their tribes revolted, and then gave them as slaves to various officials.
All of the eunuchs that lived in the Forbidden City had to carry their severed genitals in a glass jar full of vinegar around their necks at all times.
The most commonly castrated men are advanced prostate cancer patients.
These were of two categories: Black Eunuchs and White Eunuchs.
In another incident multiple people, including a chief scribe and his underlings, were subjected to castration.
Although the Ancient Hebrews did not practice castration, eunuchs were common in other cultures featured in the Bible, such as Ancient Egypt, Babylonia, the Persian Empire and Ancient Rome.
Surviving members of Yaqub Beg's family included his 4 sons, 4 grandchildren (2 grandsons and 2 granddaughters), and 4 wives.
Eunuchs would usually be servants or slaves who had been castrated in order to make them reliable servants of a royal court where physical access to the ruler could wield great influence.
''eunoukhos'') essentially repeats the entry from Orion, but stands by the first option, while attributing the second option to what "some say".
The begging is accompanied by singing and dancing and the hijras usually get the money easily.
The naesi system was repealed in 1894 following Gabo reform.
A Korean King and Korean officials were publicly disparaged in 1398 by the Ming Korean eunuch Sin Kwi-saeng and many Korean girl concubines were delivered to the Ming.
Zheng He, who lived during the Ming Dynasty, is an example of such a eunuch.
There were Korean, Jurchen, Central Asian, and Mongol eunuchs under Yongle.
At the beginning of the 20th century, there were about 2,000 eunuchs working in the Forbidden City.
The eunuchs were not Khitan and they came from two sources, all of their eunuchs were captured ethnic Chinese from the Central Plains.
A Uighur concubine was kept by Zhengde.
By the last centuries of the Empire the number of roles reserved for eunuchs had reduced, and their use may have been all but over.
Hijra, a Hindi and Urdu term traditionally translated into English as "eunuch", actually refers to what modern Westerners would call transgender women and effeminate homosexual men (although some of them reportedly identify as belonging to a third sex).
The emperor Puyi recalled in his memoirs that growing up in the Forbidden City that: "By the age of 11, flogging eunuchs was part of my daily routine.
Men punished with castration during the Han dynasty were also used as slave labor.
Records of eunuchs in China date to the Shang Dynasty, when the Shang kings castrated prisoners of war.
Eunuchs were frequently employed in Imperial palaces by Muslim rulers as servants for female royalty, as guards of the royal harem, and as sexual mates for the nobles.
In the late 12th century, Eustathius of Thessalonica (Commentaries on Homer 1256.30, 1643.16) offered an original derivation of the word from ''eunis'' + ''okheuein'', "deprived of mating".
'', chancellor originally denoted a servant guarding the entrance to an official's study).
The resulting eunuchs fetched large profits in contrast to eunuchs from other areas.
Eunuchs held powerful positions in the Achaemenide court.
