The Council of Europe Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities and the Council of Europe's European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages set up a legal framework for language rights in Europe.
The primary source of culture in this period came from the Roman Catholic Church.
In some countries, such as Ireland and Poland, access to abortion is limited.
Conversely, Europe has also been used in a very expansive way by the Council of Europe which has 47 member countries, some of which territorially over-reach the Ural and Bosphorus lines to include all of Russia and Turkey.
Today wolves (carnivores) and bears (omnivores) are endangered.
European ancestry predominates in North America, and to a lesser degree in South America (particularly in Uruguay, Argentina, Chile and Brazil, while most of the other Latin American countries also have a considerable population of European origins).
A struggle for influence between the nobility and the monarchy in England led to the writing of the Magna Carta and the establishment of a parliament.
Economic growth, together with the lack of safety on the mainland trading routes, made possible the development of major commercial routes along the coast of the Mediterranean and Baltic Seas.
''Broad'' has been an epithet of Earth herself in the reconstructed Proto-Indo-European religion.
For Homer, Europe (, ''Eurṓpē''; see also List of Greek place names) was a mythological queen of Crete, not a geographical designation.
European integration led to the formation of the European Union, a political entity that lies between a confederation and a federation.
In Spain, the Reconquista concluded with the fall of Granada in 1492, ending over seven centuries of Islamic rule in the Iberian Peninsula.
The conditions for growth are very favourable.
Later that year, following the Munich Agreement signed by Germany, France, the United Kingdom and Italy, Germany annexed the Sudetenland, which was a part of Czechoslovakia inhabited by ethnic Germans, and in early 1939, the remainder of Czechoslovakia was split into the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia, controlled by Germany, and the Slovak Republic.
Biodiversity is protected in Europe through the Council of Europe's Bern Convention, which has also been signed by the European Community as well as non-European states.
Meanwhile, the Serbian revolution (1804) and Greek War of Independence (1821) marked the beginning of the end of Ottoman rule in the Balkans, which ended with the Balkan Wars in 1912-1913.
Stalin was also responsible for the Great Purge of 1937–38 in which the NKVD executed 681,692 people; millions of people were deported and exiled to remote areas of the Soviet Union.
Through monasteries and cathedral schools, the Church was responsible for education in much of Europe.
The ''Book of Jubilees'' described the continents as the lands given by Noah to his three sons; Europe was defined as stretching from the Pillars of Hercules at the Strait of Gibraltar, separating it from North Africa, to the Don, separating it from Asia.
In Britain, the Public Health Act of 1875 was passed, which significantly improved living conditions in many British cities.
As a result, attempts to organise Europe along political or economic lines have resulted in uses of the name in a geopolitically limiting way to refer only to the 28 member states of the European Union.
Germany was reunited, after the symbolic fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989, and the maps of Central and Eastern Europe were redrawn once more.
In Western Europe the Neolithic period was characterised not by large agricultural settlements but by field monuments, such as causewayed enclosures, burial mounds and megalithic tombs.
In 1944, British and American forces invaded France in the D-Day landings, opening a new front against Germany.
Greece also generated many cultural contributions: in philosophy, humanism and rationalism under Aristotle, Socrates and Plato; in history with Herodotus and Thucydides; in dramatic and narrative verse, starting with the epic poems of Homer; in drama with Sophocles and Euripides, in medicine with Hippocrates and Galen; and in science with Pythagoras, Euclid and Archimedes.
The Renaissance was a period of cultural change originating in Florence and later spreading to the rest of Europe.
The Industrial Revolution, which began in the United Kingdom at the end of the 18th century, gave rise to radical economic, cultural, and social change in Western Europe, and eventually the wider world.
European wild cat, foxes (especially the red fox), jackal and different species of martens, hedgehogs, different species of reptiles (like snakes such as vipers and grass snakes) and amphibians, different birds (owls, hawks and other birds of prey).
Similarly, northern parts of Scotland have a tempertate marine climate.
This division—as much cultural as geographical—was used until the Late Middle Ages, when it was challenged by the Age of Discovery.
Europe is now generally defined by geographers as the western part of Eurasia, with its boundaries marked by large bodies of water to the north, west and south; Europe's limits to the far east are usually taken to be the Urals, the Ural River, and the Caspian Sea; to the southeast, including the Caucasus Mountains, the Black Sea and the waterways connecting the Black Sea to the Mediterranean Sea.
Probably 80 to 90 percent of Europe was once covered by forest.
Scholar Andreas Kaplan describes Europe as "embracing maximum cultural diversity at minimal geographical distances".
In the Battle of Lepanto in 1571, the Holy League checked Ottoman power in the Mediterranean.
Until 1990, the European Community was expanded from 6 founding members to 12.
Approximately 70 million Europeans died through war, violence and famine between 1914 and 1945.
The European Union is now the largest economy in the world.
Between 4500 and 3000 BC, these central European neolithic cultures developed further to the west and the north, transmitting newly acquired skills in producing copper artefacts.
This balance would remain in place until the Revolutions of 1848, during which liberal uprisings affected all of Europe except for Russia and the UK.
In Europe itself, the Church organised the Inquisition against heretics.
Europe is the third-most populous continent after Asia and Africa, with a population of 739–743&nbsp;million or about 11% of the world's population.
In the north, the taiga is a mixed spruce–pine–birch forest; further north within Russia and extreme northern Scandinavia, the taiga gives way to tundra as the Arctic is approached.
The Industrial Revolution started in Great Britain in the last part of the 18th century and spread throughout Europe.
In addition, people in the British Isles may refer to "continental" or "mainland" Europe as Europe.
One theory suggests that it is derived from the Greek εὐρύς (''eurus''), meaning "wide, broad" and ὤψ/ὠπ-/ὀπτ- (''ōps''/''ōp''-/''opt-''), meaning "eye, face, countenance", hence ''Eurṓpē'', "wide-gazing", "broad of aspect" (compare with ''glauk'''ōp'''is'' (γλαυκῶπις 'grey-eyed') Athena or ''bo'''ōp'''is'' (βοὠπις 'ox-eyed') Hera).
The Ottomans again laid siege to Vienna in 1683, but the Battle of Vienna permanently ended their advance into Europe, and marked the political hegemony of the Habsburg dynasty in central Europe.
The Congress of Vienna, convened after Napoleon's downfall, established a new balance of power in Europe centred on the five "Great Powers": the UK, France, Prussia, Austria, and Russia.
France, the Netherlands and England soon followed in building large colonial empires with vast holdings in Africa, the Americas, and Asia.
Chinese, for example, uses the word ''Ōuzhōu'' (歐洲/欧洲); a similar Chinese-derived term  is also sometimes used in Japanese such as in the Japanese name of the European Union, , despite the katakana  being more commonly used.
Nevertheless, there are some exceptions based on sociopolitical and cultural differences.
Finally, and very soon afterwards, Laurasia itself split up again, into Laurentia (North America) and the Eurasian continent.
An East-West Schism in 1054 split the former Roman Empire religiously, with the Eastern Orthodox Church in the Byzantine Empire and the Roman Catholic Church in the former Western Roman Empire.
In 2004 and 2007, more Central and Eastern European countries began joining, expanding the EU to its current size of 28 European countries, and once more making Europe a major economical and political centre of power.
established the NATO alliance and later the Soviet Union and Central Europe established the Warsaw Pact.
Few corners of mainland Europe have not been grazed by livestock at some point in time, and the cutting down of the pre-agricultural forest habitat caused disruption to the original plant and animal ecosystems.
This eventually led to the Thirty Years War (1618–1648), which crippled the Holy Roman Empire and devastated much of Germany, killing between 25 and 40 percent of its population.
Europe makes up the western fifth of the Eurasian landmass.
There are a particularly high number of self-described non-religious people in the Czech Republic, Estonia, Sweden, former East Germany, and France.
In 1941, Germany invaded the Soviet Union in the Operation Barbarossa.
After the staggering Battle of Stalingrad in 1943, the German offensive in the Soviet Union turned into a continual fallback.
In 1095 Pope Urban II called for a crusade against Muslims occupying Jerusalem and the Holy Land.
This helped them to enjoy rapidly improving economies, while those states in COMECON were struggling in a large part due to the cost of the Cold War.
This and the Wall Street Crash of 1929 brought about the worldwide Great Depression.
The sea flora is mainly phytoplankton.
Slavic languages are most spoken by the number of native speakers in Europe, they are spoken in Central, Eastern, and Southeastern Europe.
It was a serious blow to the Roman Catholic Church and led to increased persecution of Jews, foreigners, beggars and lepers.
The Gulf Stream is nicknamed "Europe's central heating", because it makes Europe's climate warmer and wetter than it would otherwise be.
The problem of redefining Europe was finally resolved in 1730 when, instead of waterways, the Swedish geographer and cartographer von Strahlenberg proposed the Ural Mountains as the most significant eastern boundary, a suggestion that found favour in Russia and throughout Europe.
Over the next centuries Muslim forces took Cyprus, Malta, Crete, Sicily and parts of southern Italy.
Iron Age colonisation by the Greeks and Phoenicians gave rise to early Mediterranean cities.
Over 60&nbsp;million European soldiers were mobilised from 1914 to 1918.
Turkic languages include Azerbaijani and Turkish, in addition to the languages of minority nations in Russia.
From the 15th to 18th centuries, when the disintegrating khanates of the Golden Horde were conquered by Russia, Tatars from the Crimean Khanate frequently raided Eastern Slavic lands to capture slaves.
In the north, the Gulf Stream and North Atlantic Drift warm the continent.
The Roman Republic ended in 27 BC, when Augustus proclaimed the Roman Empire.
Europe's eastern frontier was defined in the 1st century by geographer Strabo at the River Don.
Medieval Britain was afflicted by 95 famines, and France suffered the effects of 75 or more in the same period.
Martin Litchfield West states that "phonologically, the match between Europa's name and any form of the Semitic word is very poor".
Anaximander placed the boundary between Asia and Europe along the Phasis River (the modern Rioni) in the Caucasus, a convention still followed by Herodotus in the 5th century BC.
The Renaissance spread across Europe between the 14th and 16th centuries: it saw the flowering of art, philosophy, music, and the sciences, under the joint patronage of royalty, the nobility, the Roman Catholic Church, and an emerging merchant class.
The modern convention, enlarging the area of "Europe" somewhat to the east and the southeast, develops in the 19th century.
During the decline of the Roman Empire, Europe entered a long period of change arising from what historians call the "Age of Migrations".
It started when Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria was assassinated by the Yugoslav nationalist Gavrilo Princip.
Christopher Columbus reached the New World in 1492 and Vasco da Gama opened the ocean route to the East in 1498, and soon after the Spanish and Portuguese began establishing colonial empires in the Americas and Asia.
World War I was fought between 1914 and 1918.
The concept is one of the lasting legacies of the Carolingian Renaissance: "Europa" often figures in the letters of Charlemagne's court scholar, Alcuin.
During this period, more than 100 plague epidemics swept across Europe.
Europe is home to the highest number of migrants of all global regions at 70.6 million people, the IOM's report said.
Although the schism was eventually healed in 1417, the papacy's spiritual authority had suffered greatly.
The Umayyads were then defeated by the Frankish leader Charles Martel at the Battle of Poitiers in 732, which ended their northward advance.
Today, large populations of European descent are found on every continent.
Further east, the Nogai Horde and Kazakh Khanate frequently raided the Slavic-speaking areas of Russia, Ukraine and Poland for hundreds of years, until the Russian expansion and conquest of most of northern Eurasia (i.e.
These revolutions were eventually put down by conservative elements and few reforms resulted.
Major shallow water bodies submerging parts of the northern plains are the Celtic Sea, the North Sea, the Baltic Sea complex and Barents Sea.
Capitalism has been dominant in the Western world since the end of feudalism.
Within this context, significant disparities exist between regions in relation to fertility rates.
The Neanderthals were supplanted by modern humans (Cro-Magnons), who appeared in Europe around 43 to 40 thousand years ago.
Russia was plunged into the Russian Revolution, which threw down the Tsarist monarchy and replaced it with the communist Soviet Union.
The rise of a new humanism was accompanied by the recovery of forgotten classical Greek and Arabic knowledge from monastic libraries, often translated from Arabic into Latin.
In addition, polar bears may be found on Svalbard, a Norwegian archipelago far north of Scandinavia.
However, deforestation and hunting caused these animals to withdraw further and further.
Emigration from Europe began with Spanish and Portuguese settlers in the 16th century, and French and English settlers in the 17th century.
Other hominid remains, dating back roughly 1&nbsp;million years, have been discovered in Atapuerca, Spain.
Many other languages outside the three main groups exist in Europe.
28 European states are members of the politico-economic European Union, 26 of the border-free Schengen Area and 19 of the monetary union Eurozone.
The second most popular religion is Islam (6%) concentrated mainly in the Balkans and eastern Europe (Bosnia and Herzegovina, Albania, Kosovo, Kazakhstan, North Cyprus, Turkey, Azerbaijan, North Caucasus, and the Volga-Ural region).
The Germanic and Slav tribes established their domains over Western and Eastern Europe respectively.
The last major famine recorded in Western Europe, the Irish Potato Famine, caused death and mass emigration of millions of Irish people.
Sea creatures are also an important part of European flora and fauna.
Christian culture was the predominant force in western civilization, guiding the course of philosophy, art, and science.
By August Germany began a bombing offensive on Britain, but failed to convince the Britons to give up.
The Russian Empire stood to benefit from the decline, whereas the Habsburg Empire and Britain perceived the preservation of the Ottoman Empire to be in their best interests.
The Treaty of Versailles, which officially ended World War I in 1919, was harsh towards Germany, upon whom it placed full responsibility for the war and imposed heavy sanctions.
The two new superpowers, the United States and the Soviet Union, became locked in a fifty-year-long Cold War, centred on nuclear proliferation.
The Phoney War continued.
who took the Tanais (the modern Don River) as the boundary.
Europe has a climate heavily affected by warm Atlantic currents that temper winters and summers on much of the continent, even at latitudes along which the climate in Asia and North America is severe.
This description is simplified.
;Cold War (1945–1991)
Islands are generally grouped with the nearest continental landmass, hence Iceland is generally considered to be part of Europe, while the nearby island of Greenland is usually assigned to North America.
Therefore, the average temperature throughout the year of Naples is 16&nbsp;°C (60.8&nbsp;°F), while it is only 12&nbsp;°C (53.6&nbsp;°F) in New York City which is almost on the same latitude.
The notion of "Europe" and the "Western World" has been intimately connected with the concept of "Christianity and Christendom"; many even attribute Christianity for being the link that created a unified European identity.
''Homo erectus georgicus'', which lived roughly 1.8&nbsp;million years ago in Georgia, is the earliest hominid to have been discovered in Europe.
Glaciation during the most recent ice age and the presence of man affected the distribution of European fauna.
In 2005, the EU had an overall net gain from immigration of 1.8&nbsp;million people.
Between 711 and 720, most of the Iberian Peninsula was brought under Muslim rule&nbsp;— save for small areas in the northwest (Asturias) and largely Basque regions in the Pyrenees.
Europe lies mainly in the temperate climate zones, being subjected to prevailing westerlies.
To the East, the Kievan Rus expanded from its capital in Kiev to become the largest state in Europe by the 10th century.
The Papacy reached the height of its power during the High Middle Ages.
A century ago, Europe had nearly a quarter of the world's population.
Like many other parts of Eurasia, these territories were overrun by the Mongols.
The period between 1348 and 1420 witnessed the heaviest loss.
They established the state of the Golden Horde with headquarters in Crimea, which later adopted Islam as a religion and ruled over modern-day southern and central Russia for more than three centuries.
Previously, these territories were under the successive control of Pechenegs and Cumans.
According to UN population projection, Europe's population may fall to about 7% of world population by 2050, or 653&nbsp;million people (medium variant, 556 to 777&nbsp;million in low and high variants, respectively).
The Treaty of Rome in 1957 established the European Economic Community between six Western European states with the goal of a unified economic policy and common market.
Some current and past issues in European demographics have included religious emigration, race relations, economic immigration, a declining birth rate and an ageing population.
In the mid 7th century AD, following the Muslim conquest of Persia, Islam penetrated into the Caucasus region.
Italy was also in a poor economic condition but regained a high level of growth by the 1950s.
The states which retained a free-market system were given a large amount of aid by the United States under the Marshall Plan.
In 988, Vladimir the Great adopted Orthodox Christianity as the religion of state.
Sub-regions such as the Iberian Peninsula and the Italian Peninsula contain their own complex features, as does mainland Central Europe itself, where the relief contains many plateaus, river valleys and basins that complicate the general trend.
By the Middle Ages the bears' habitats were limited to more or less inaccessible mountains with sufficient forest cover.
According to Peter Barrett, "It is widely accepted that 'modern science' arose in the Europe of the 17th century (towards the end of the Renaissance), introducing a new understanding of the natural world."
The most significant inventions had their origins in the Western world, primarily Europe and the United States.
Further south, the first South Slavic states emerged in the late 7th and 8th century and adopted Christianity: the First Bulgarian Empire, the Serbian Principality (later Kingdom and Empire), and the Duchy of Croatia (later Kingdom of Croatia).
In antiquity, the Greek historian Herodotus mentioned that the world had been divided by unknown persons into three parts, Europe, Asia, and Libya (Africa), with the Nile and the River Phasis forming their boundaries—though he also states that some considered the River Don, rather than the Phasis, as the boundary between Europe and Asia.
Its maritime borders consist of the Arctic Ocean to the north, the Atlantic Ocean to the west, and the Mediterranean, Black, and Caspian Seas to the south.
Europe, in particular ancient Greece, is the birthplace of Western civilization.
Ancient Greece was the founding culture of Western civilisation.
Mountain ridges also affect the conditions.
The most densely populated country in Europe (and in the world) is Monaco.
Around 440&nbsp;million years ago Euramerica was formed from Baltica and Laurentia; a further joining with Gondwana then leading to the formation of Pangea.
Germanic languages are spoken in Northern Europe, the British Isles and some parts of Central Europe.
Multilingualism and the protection of regional and minority languages are recognised political goals in Europe today.
Once they were found in most parts of Europe.
The yearly average temperature in city of Inverness is 9.05 degrees Celsius (48.3 degrees Fahrenheit).
Patrons in Italy, including the Medici family of Florentine bankers and the Popes in Rome, funded prolific quattrocento and cinquecento artists such as Raphael, Michelangelo, and Leonardo da Vinci.
Others are oriented south-north (Scandinavian Mountains, Dinarides, Carpathians, Apennines) and because the rain falls primarily on the side of mountains that is oriented towards the sea, forests grow well on this side, while on the other side, the conditions are much less favourable.
European integration is the process of political, legal, economic (and in some cases social and cultural) integration of states wholly or partially in Europe.
Around the same time, Germany moved troops into Denmark.
The southern regions are more mountainous, while moving north the terrain descends from the high Alps, Pyrenees, and Carpathians, through hilly uplands, into broad, low northern plains, which are vast in the east.
Australia and New Zealand have large European derived populations.
Reforms in social and economic spheres followed, including the first laws on child labour, the legalisation of trade unions, and the abolition of slavery.
Emperor Justinian I presided over Constantinople's first golden age: he established a legal code that forms the basis of many modern legal systems, funded the construction of the Hagia Sophia, and brought the Christian church under state control.
In addition, a distinct non-Indo-European family of Uralic languages (Estonian, Finnish, and Hungarian) is spoken mainly in Estonia, Finland, and Hungary, while Kartvelian languages (Georgian, Mingrelian, and Svan), are spoken primarily in Georgia, and two other language families reside in the North Caucasus (termed Northeast Caucasian, most notably including Chechen, Avar and Lezgin and Northwest Caucasian, notably including Adyghe).
Christianity became the sole official religion of the empire in 380 AD, and in 391-392 AD, the emperor Theodosius outlawed pagan religions.
The war left more than 16&nbsp;million civilians and military dead.
The amount of natural forest in Western Europe is just 2–3% or less, in European Russia 5–10%.
The largest religion in Europe is Christianity, with 76.2% of Europeans considering themselves Christians, including Catholic, Eastern Orthodox and various Protestant denominations (especially historically state-supported European ones such as Lutheranism, Anglicanism and the Reformed faith).
However, Michael A. Barry, professor in Princeton University's Near Eastern Studies Department, finds the mention of the word ''Ereb'' on an Assyrian stele with the meaning of "night", "the country of sunset", in opposition to ''Asu'' "the country of sunrise", i.e.
The period between the year 1000 and 1300 is known as the High Middle Ages, during which the population of Europe experienced significant growth, culminating in the Renaissance of the 12th century.
Africa has no countries with European-derived majorities (or with the exception of Cape Verde and probably São Tomé and Príncipe, depending on context), but there are significant minorities, such as the White South Africans.
In 1967 the EEC, European Coal and Steel Community and Euratom formed the European Community, which in 1993 became the European Union.
In the 11th and 12th centuries, constant incursions by nomadic Turkic tribes, such as the Pechenegs and the Cuman-Kipchaks, caused a massive migration of Slavic populations to the safer, heavily forested regions of the north and temporarily halted the expansion of the Rus' state to the south and east.
After World War II the economy of the UK was in a state of ruin, and continued to suffer relative economic decline in the following decades.
The country with the smallest percentage of forested area is Iceland (1%), while the most forested country is Finland (77%).
The wolf, the second largest predator in Europe after the brown bear, can be found primarily in Central and Eastern Europe and in the Balkans, with a handful of packs in pockets of Western Europe (Scandinavia, Spain, etc.
Around 1.1&nbsp;billion years ago, Baltica and Arctica (as part of the Laurentia block) became joined to Rodinia, later resplitting around 550&nbsp;million years ago to reform as Baltica.
In 2005, the population of Europe was estimated to be 731&nbsp;million according to the United Nations, which is slightly more than one-ninth of the world's population.
On 24 September, the Soviet Union attacked the Baltic countries and later, Finland.
The EU originated in Western Europe but has been expanding eastward since the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991.
The UN predicts a steady population decline in Central and Eastern Europe as a result of emigration and low birth rates.
In the east a resurgent Byzantine Empire recaptured Crete and Cyprus from the Muslims and reconquered the Balkans.
Meanwhile, in the south, the Ottomans had conquered the Balkans by the 15th century, laying siege to Vienna in 1529.
Both world wars were largely focused upon Europe, contributing to a decline in Western European dominance in world affairs by the mid-20th century as the United States and Soviet Union took prominence.
It remains illegal on the island of Malta.
Feudalism developed in France in the Early Middle Ages and soon spread throughout Europe.
The EU-27 unemployment rate was 10.3% in 2012.
Political intrigue within the Church in the mid-14th century caused the Western Schism.
Austria-Hungary and the Ottoman Empire collapsed and broke up into separate nations, and many other nations had their borders redrawn.
Helped by the economic crisis, social instability and the threat of communism, fascist movements developed throughout Europe placing Adolf Hitler of Nazi Germany, Francisco Franco of Spain and Benito Mussolini of Italy in power.
Land relief in Europe shows great variation within relatively small areas.
As for the animals, in many parts of Europe most large animals and top predator species have been hunted to extinction.
Other Indo-European languages include the Baltic group (that is, Latvian and Lithuanian), the Celtic group (that is, Irish, Scottish Gaelic, Manx, Welsh, Cornish, and Breton), Greek, Armenian, and Albanian.
The invaders, who became known as Tatars, were mostly Turkic-speaking peoples under Mongol suzerainty.
Europe was devastated in the mid-14th century by the Black Death, one of the most deadly pandemics in human history which killed an estimated 25&nbsp;million people in Europe alone—a third of the European population at the time.
During this forty-year period, two popes—one in Avignon and one in Rome—claimed rulership over the Church.
Further from the Atlantic, seasonal differences are mildly greater than close to the coast.
Western democratic and rationalist culture are often attributed to Ancient Greece.
