Pamphlets and printed sermons crisscrossed the Atlantic, encouraging the revivalists.
Evangelical preachers emphasized personal salvation and piety more than ritual and tradition.
These groups are not mutually exclusive.
''Activism'' describes the tendency towards active expression and sharing of the gospel in diverse ways that include preaching and social action.
The closing years of the 20th century saw controversial postmodern influences entering some parts of Evangelicalism, particularly with the emerging church movement.
In the 1730s, Evangelicalism emerged as a distinct phenomenon out of religious revivals that began in Britain and New England.
Cyrus Scofield further promoted the influence of dispensationalism through the explanatory notes to his Scofield Reference Bible.
The Half-Way Covenant of 1662 allowed parents who had not testified to a conversion experience to have their children baptized, while reserving Holy Communion for converted church members alone.
For Presbyterians, celebrations of Holy Communion were infrequent but popular events preceded by several Sundays of preparatory preaching and accompanied with preaching, singing, and prayers.
The World Evangelical Alliance is "a network of churches in 129 nations that have each formed an evangelical alliance and over 100 international organizations joining together to give a world-wide identity, voice, and platform to more than 600 million evangelical Christians".
The stress on conversion is further differentiated from other forms of Protestantism by the belief that an assurance of salvation will accompany conversion.
There are 8.6 million adherents to Protestant Christianity (approximately 19% of the Korean population) in which many identify themselves as Evangelicals.
With an emphasis on personal salvation, on God's healing power, and on strict moral codes these groups have developed broad appeal, particularly among the booming urban migrant communities.
The spring of 1735 also marked important events in England and Wales.
Evangelicalism is a minor Christian denominations in the Philippines.
At about the same time that Harris experienced conversion in Wales, George Whitefield was converted at Oxford University after his own prolonged spiritual crisis.
In the words of Albert Mohler, president of the Southern Baptist Theological Seminary, confessional Evangelicalism refers to "that movement of Christian believers who seek a constant convictional continuity with the theological formulas of the Protestant Reformation".
In the fall of 1734, Edwards preached a sermon series on "Justification By Faith Alone", and the community's response was extraordinary.
As Kenneth Kantzer put it at the time, the name ''fundamentalist'' had become "an embarrassment instead of a badge of honor".
In New Jersey, Gilbert Tennent, another Presbyterian minister, was preaching the evangelical message and urging the Presbyterian Church to stress the necessity of converted ministers.
It reached people who were already church members.
Tomlinson argues that "linguistically, the distinction ''between evangelical and post-evangelical'' resembles the one that sociologists make between the modern and postmodern eras".
Howell Harris, a Welsh schoolteacher, had a conversion experience on May 25 during a communion service.
The confrontation has radicalized and politicized the Christians.
The term may also occur outside any religious context to characterize a generic missionary, reforming, or redeeming impulse or purpose.
By the English Middle Ages the term had expanded semantically to include not only the message, but also the New Testament which contained the message, as well as more specifically the Gospels which portray the life, death and resurrection of Jesus.
John Nelson Darby was a 19th-century Irish Anglican minister who devised modern dispensationalism, an innovative Protestant theological interpretation of the Bible that was incorporated in the development of modern Evangelicalism.
The word ''evangelical'' has its etymological roots in the Greek word for "gospel" or "good news": ε'υαγγέλιον (''evangelion''), from ''eu-'' "good" and ''angelion'' "message".
As a protest against "cold orthodoxy" or an overly formal and rational Christianity, Pietists advocated for an experiential religion that stressed high moral standards for both clergy and lay people.
While religious revivals had occurred within Protestant churches in the past, the evangelical revivals that marked the 18th century were more intense and radical.
Violence has been escalating.
According to a Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life study, Evangelicals can be broadly divided into three camps: traditionalist, centrist, and modernist.
It now has a presence in many countries, and claims millions of members worldwide.
There have been serious confrontations since 1999 between Muslims and Evangelical Christians standing in opposition to the expansion of Sharia law in northern Nigeria.
Evangelicalism picked up the peculiar characteristics from each strain – warmhearted spirituality from the Pietists (for instance), doctrinal precisionism from the Presbyterians, and individualistic introspection from the Puritans".
The largest concentration of Evangelicals can be found in the United States, with 26.8% of the U.S. population or 94.38 million, the latter being roughly one third of the world's Evangelicals.
The charismatic movement began in the 1960s and resulted in Pentecostal theology and practice being introduced into many mainline denominations.
They have grown especially since independence came in the 1960s, the strongest movements are based on Pentecostal-charismatic beliefs, and comprise a way of life that has led to upward social mobility and demands for democracy.
In 1887 Protestants in Rio de Janeiro formed a hospital.
''Biblicism'' is defined as having a reverence for the Bible and a high regard for biblical authority.
Both men began preaching the evangelical message to large audiences, becoming leaders of the Welsh Methodist revival.
They are politically and socially conservative, and emphasize that God's favor translates into business success.
The Evangelicals in the Clapham Sect included figures such as William Wilberforce who successfully campaigned for the abolition of slavery.
It changed their rituals, their piety and their self-awareness.
Today, Evangelicals may be found in many of the Protestant branches, as well as in Protestant denominations not subsumed to a specific branch.
From 1960 to 2000, the global growth of the number of reported Evangelicals grew three times the world's population rate, and twice that of Islam.
He escalated the war against leftist guerilla insurgents as a holy war against atheistic forces of evil.
Since the Korean War (1950–53), many Korean Christians have migrated to the U.S., while those who remained behind have risen sharply in social and economic status.
The Seventh-day Adventists arrived in 1894, and the YMCA was organized in 1896.
These "generic Evangelicals" are usually theologically and socially conservative, but their churches often present themselves as nondenominational within the broader Evangelical movement.
In addition, they saw the efforts of evangelist Billy Graham, who worked with non-Evangelical denominations, such as the Roman Catholics (which they claimed to be heretical), as a mistake.
''Crucicentrism'' refers to the attention that Evangelicals give to the Atonement, the saving death and resurrection of Jesus, that offers forgiveness of sins and new life.
It has worked to support its members to work together globally.
It described the mood of positivism and non-militancy that characterized that generation.
In general, these missionaries were more successful than they had been in Mexico, Argentina or elsewhere in Latin America.
Protestant missionary activity in Asia was most successful in Korea.
In the late 19th century, the revivalist Holiness movement, based on the doctrine of "entire sanctification," took a more extreme form in rural America and Canada, where it ultimately broke away from institutional Methodism.
Sometime later, Daniel Rowland, the Anglican curate of Llangeitho, Wales, experienced conversion as well.
The post-war period also saw growth of the ecumenical movement and the founding of the World Council of Churches, which was generally regarded with suspicion by the Evangelical community.
Between 1907 and 1945, when Korea was a Japanese colony, Christianity became in part an expression of nationalism in opposition to Japan's efforts to promote the Japanese language and the Shinto religion.
It sponsors two seminaries and eight Bible colleges, and 1600 missionaries who serve in Nigeria and other countries with the Evangelical Missionary Society (EMS).
This concern over declining religious commitment led many people to support evangelical revival.
A conversion experience can be emotional, including grief and sorrow for sin followed by great relief at receiving forgiveness.
There was a great expansion of Evangelical activity within the United States, "a revival of revivalism."
According to professor of world Christianity Brian Stanley, this new postwar consensus is termed "Neo-Evangelicalism", the "New Evangelicalism", or simply "Evangelicalism" in the United States, while in the United Kingdom and in other English-speaking countries it is commonly termed conservative Evangelicalism.
General Montt, an Evangelical from the Pentecostal tradition, came to power through a coup.
Many Protestants came from a large German immigrant community, but they were seldom engaged in proselytism and grew mostly by natural increase.
It took root in New England, where the Congregational church was an established religion.
The term ''neo-evangelicalism'' was coined by Harold Ockenga in 1947 to identify a distinct movement within self-identified fundamentalist Christianity at the time, especially in the English-speaking world.
According to religion scholar, social activist, and politician Randall Balmer, Evangelicalism resulted "from the confluence of Pietism, Presbyterianism, and the vestiges of Puritanism.
Evangelicals believed activism in government and the social sphere was an essential method in reaching the goal of eliminating sin in a world drenched in wickedness.
Numerous German Pietist hymns became part of the English Evangelical repertoire.
It emerged from the German tradition of Pietism after 1815 and sent its first missionaries to South Africa in 1834.
All Evangelicals believe in biblical inspiration, though they disagree over how this inspiration should be defined.
Evangelicalism did not take recognizable form until the 18th century, first in Britain and its North American colonies.
At the same time, students at Yale University (at that time Yale College) in New Haven, Connecticut, were also experiencing revival.
Protestants were largely from a working-class, but their religious networks help speed their upward social mobility.
Progressive Evangelicals commonly advocate for women's equality, pacifism and social justice.
During and after World War II, Evangelicals became increasingly organized.
The Reformed, Baptist, Wesleyan, and Pentecostal traditions have all had strong influence within modern Evangelicalism.
It proved unable to speak and act decisively against injustice and racial discrimination and was disbanded in 1972.
Fundamentalism regards biblical inerrancy, the virgin birth of Jesus, penal substitutionary atonement, the literal resurrection of Christ and the Second Coming of Christ as fundamental Christian doctrines.
Revivals encapsulated those hallmarks and forwarded the newly created Evangelicalism into the early republic.
The World War cut off contact with Germany, but the missions continued at a reduced pace.
Christian historian David Bebbington writes that, "Although 'evangelical', with a lower-case initial, is occasionally used to mean 'of the gospel', the term 'Evangelical', with a capital letter, is applied to any aspect of the movement beginning in the 1730s."
Whitefield later remarked, "About this time God was pleased to enlighten my soul, and bring me into the knowledge of His free grace, and the necessity of being justified in His sight by ''faith only''".
Pietism continued to influence Wesley, who had translated 33 Pietist hymns from German to English.
Mainstream Evangelicalism is historically divided between two main orientations: confessionalism and revivalism.
In modern Latin America, the term "Evangelical" is often simply a synonym for "Protestant".
The fundamentalists saw the Evangelicals as often being too concerned about social acceptance and intellectual respectability, and being too accommodating to a perverse generation that needed correction.
The term "Open Evangelical" refers to a particular Christian school of thought or churchmanship, primarily in the United Kingdom (especially in the Church of England).
This aspect of Evangelicalism continues to be seen today in the proliferation of Evangelical voluntary religious groups and parachurch organizations.
In Mozambique, Evangelical Protestant Christianity emerged around 1900 from black migrants whose converted previously in South Africa.
According to Olson, post-conservatives believe that doctrine and propositional truth is secondary to spiritual experience shaped by Scripture.
In urban Britain the Holiness message was less exclusive and censorious.
Into the 21st century, ''evangelical'' has continued in use as a synonym for (mainline) Protestant in continental Europe, and elsewhere.
It was especially strong in the Boer republics.
During its time as a colonial power in Mozambique, the Catholic Portuguese government tried to counter the spread of Evangelical Protestantism.
Confessional Evangelicals have been suspicious of unguarded religious experience, while revivalist Evangelicals have been critical of overly intellectual teaching that (they suspect) stifles vibrant spirituality.
Two of the most prominent were the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, which distributed Bibles and other literature and built schools, and the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts, which was created to facilitate missionary work in British colonies.
"Christian conscience" was used by the British Evangelical movement to promote social activism.
Among Evangelicals, individuals have testified to both sudden and gradual conversions.
Edwards was heavily influenced by Pietism, so much so that one historian has stressed his "American Pietism."
After 1945 the missionaries had to deal with decolonisation across Africa and especially with the apartheid government.
In Nigeria the Evangelical Church Winning All (formerly "Evangelical Church of West Africa") is the largest church organization with five thousand congregations and over three million members.
Progressive Evangelicals, also known as the Evangelical left, share theological or social views with other progressive Christians, while also identifying with Evangelicalism.
However, a large number of black Evangelicals and a small proportion of liberal white Evangelicals gravitate towards the Christian left.
Sukman argues that since 1945, Protestantism has been widely seen by Koreans as the religion of the middle class, youth, intellectuals, urbanites, and modernists.
Many Evangelicals urged that Christians must engage the culture directly and constructively, and they began to express reservations about being known to the world as ''fundamentalists''.
There are an estimated 285 million Evangelicals, comprising 13.1% of the total Christian population and 4.1% of the total world population.
In 1914, out of 16 million people, there were 86,000 Protestants and 79,000 Catholics; by 1934, the numbers were 168,000 and 147,000.
The first published use of ''evangelical'' in English came in 1531 when William Tyndale wrote "He exhorteth them to proceed constantly in the evangelical truth."
The first local revival occurred in Northampton, Massachusetts, under the leadership of Congregationalist minister Jonathan Edwards.
The origins of Evangelicalism are usually traced back to English Methodism, the Moravian Church (in particular the theology of its bishop Nicolaus Zinzendorf), and German Lutheran Pietism.
Some Open Evangelicals aim to take a middle position between conservative and charismatic Evangelicals, while others would combine conservative theological emphases with more liberal social positions.
It was developments in the doctrine of assurance that differentiated Evangelicalism from what went before.
Notable figures of the latter half of the 19th century include Charles Spurgeon in London and Dwight L. Moody in Chicago.
An earlier survey conducted in 2012 found that 92% of evangelicals agree it is a Christian's duty to help those in poverty and 45% attend a church which has a fund or scheme that helps people in immediate need, and 42% go to a church that supports or runs a foodbank.
The World Christian Database estimates the number of Evangelicals at 300 million, Pentecostals and Charismatics at 600 million and "Great Commission" Christians at 700 million.
In the 21st century, there are Evangelical churches active in Sudan, Angola, Mozambique, Zimbabwe, Malawi, Rwanda, Uganda, Ghana, Kenya, Zambia, South Africa, and Nigeria.
63% believe a tithing, and so give around 10% of their income to their church, Christian organisations and various charities 83% of UK evangelicals believe that the Bible has supreme authority in guiding their beliefs, views and behaviour and 52% read or listen to the Bible daily.
Among them was Aaron Burr, Sr., who would become a prominent Presbyterian minister and future president of Princeton University.
''Conversionism'', or belief in the necessity of being "born again", has been a constant theme of Evangelicalism since its beginnings.
According to a 2011 Pew Forum study on global Christianity, 285,480,000 or 13.1 percent of all Christians are Evangelicals.
The National Association of Evangelicals formed in 1942 as a counterpoise to the mainline Federal Council of Churches.
American Presbyterians and Methodists arrived in the 1880s and were well received.
This is understood most commonly in terms of a substitutionary atonement, in which Christ died as a substitute for sinful humanity by taking on himself the guilt and punishment for sin.
The movement gained great momentum in the 18th and 19th centuries with the Great Awakenings in the United Kingdom and North America.
This protection, according to confessional Evangelicals, is found in subscription to the ecumenical creeds and to the Reformation-era confessions of faith (such as the confessions of the Reformed churches).
Chesnut argues that Pentecostalism has become "one of the principal organizations of the poor," for these churches provide the sort of social network that teach members the skills they need to thrive in a rapidly developing meritocratic society.
The Americas, Africa and Asia are home to the majority of Evangelicals.
The Alliance was formed in 1951 by Evangelicals from 21 countries.
By 1914, Protestant churches founded by American missionaries had 47,000 communicants, served by 282 missionaries.
The Presbyterian schools in particular later became the nucleus of the governmental system.
In 1942–43, the Old-Fashioned Revival Hour had a record-setting national radio audience.
Among leaders and major figures of the Evangelical Protestant movement were John Wesley, George Whitefield, Jonathan Edwards, Billy Graham, Harold John Ockenga, John Stott and Martyn Lloyd-Jones.
Evangelicalism was a major force in the Anglican Church from about 1800 to the 1860s.
In 1930, the Methodist Church of Brazil became independent of the missionary societies and elected its own bishop.
They further called for an increased application of the gospel to the sociological, political, and economic areas.
The Moravians' faith and piety deeply impressed Wesley, especially their belief that it was a normal part of Christian life to have an assurance of one's salvation.
Pentecostals and charismatic groups account for the vast majority of this expansion.
Some post-conservative Evangelicals also support open theism and the possibility of near universal salvation.
There were few positive reports in the early years, but it was especially active 1859–1914.
Two former Guatemalan heads of state, General Efraín Ríos Montt and Jorge Serrano Elías have been practicing Evangelical Protestants, as is Guatemala's current President, Jimmy Morales.
In Brazil, since the mid-1990's, groups committed to uniting black identity, antiracism, and Evangelical theology have rapidly proliferated.
They claimed major credit for the election of Fernando Collor de Mello as president of Brazil in 1990.
John Wesley (1703-1791) was an Anglican cleric and theologian who, with his brother Charles Wesley (1707-1788) and fellow cleric George Whitefield (1714 – 1770), founded Methodism.
According to the 2000 Census, 15.4% of the Brazilian population was Protestant.
Two years before his conversion, Wesley had traveled to the newly established colony of Georgia as a missionary for the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge.
Methodists were active along with Presbyterians and Baptists.
It has been a powerful force supporting South Korea's pursuit of modernity and emulation of the United States, and opposition to the old Japanese colonialism and to the authoritarianism of North Korea.
It was organized according to the Congregational policy as the Igreja Evangélica Fluminense; it became the mother church of Congregationalism in Brazil.
As a trans-denominational movement, Evangelicalism occurs in nearly every Protestant denomination and tradition.
Evangelicals dissatisfied with the movement's conservative mainstream have been variously described as progressive Evangelicals, post-conservative Evangelicals, Open Evangelicals and Post-evangelicals.
Their powerful preaching reached very large audiences.
One practice clearly copied from European Pietists was the use of small groups divided by age and gender, which met in private homes to conserve and promote the fruits of revival.
During the 17th century, Pietism emerged in Europe as a movement for the revival of piety and devotion within the Lutheran church.
Pulling away from ritual and ceremony, the Great Awakening made Christianity intensely personal to the average person by fostering a deep sense of spiritual conviction and redemption, and by encouraging introspection and a commitment to a new standard of personal morality.
In the English-speaking world, ''evangelical'' became a common label used to describe the series of revival movements that occurred in Britain and North America during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
During the Reformation, Protestant theologians embraced the label as referring to "gospel truth".
John Newton (1725-1807) was the founder.
At all times the BMS emphasized spiritual inwardness, and values such as morality, hard work and self-discipline.
Wesley finally received the assurance he had been searching for at a meeting of a religious society in London.
In the 21st century there are an estimated 2 million Evangelicals in the UK.
Pentecostalism arrived in Brazil with Swedish and American missionaries in 1911. it grew rapidly, but endured numerous schisms and splits.
British author Dave Tomlinson coined the phrase "post-evangelical" to describe a movement comprising various trends of dissatisfaction among Evangelicals.
Confessional Evangelicals are represented by conservative Presbyterian churches (emphasizing the Westminster Confession), certain Baptist churches that emphasize historic Baptist confessions like the Second London Confession, Anglicans who emphasize the Thirty-Nine Articles (such as in the Anglican Diocese of Sydney, Australia), and some confessional Lutherans with pietistic convictions.
Evangelicalism, a major part of popular Protestantism, is among the most dynamic religious movements in the contemporary world, alongside resurgent Islam.
In some areas the Evangelical Assemblies of God churches have taken a leadership role in politics since the 1960s.
Youth for Christ was formed; it later became the base for Billy Graham's revivals.
Revivalist Evangelicals tend to place greater emphasis on religious experience than their confessional counterparts.
Bebbington says, "The dynamism of the Evangelical movement was possible only because its adherents were assured in their faith."
The Awakening resulted from powerful preaching that gave listeners a sense of deep personal revelation of their need of salvation by Jesus Christ.
Failing to reform the mainline churches, fundamentalists separated from them and established their own churches, refusing to participate in ecumenical organizations such as the National Council of Churches.
Most churches sponsor revival meetings once or twice a year.
Others use the term with comparable intent, often to distinguish Evangelicals in the so-called emerging church movement from post-evangelicals and anti-Evangelicals.
He shared his voyage with a group of Moravian Brethren led by August Gottlieb Spangenberg.
There is a wide range of theology and organizations, including some sponsored by European missionaries and others that have emerged from African culture such as the Apostolic and Zionist Churches which enlist 40% of black South Africans, and their Aladura counterparts in western Africa.
High Churchmen were also enthusiastic organizers of voluntary religious societies.
In an effort to broaden their appeal, many contemporary Evangelical congregations intentionally avoid identifying with any single form of Evangelicalism.
According to research performed by the Evangelical Alliance in 2013, 87% of UK evangelicals attend Sunday morning church services every week and 63% attend weekly or fortnightly small groups.
In the same week, Charles' brother and future founder of Methodism, John Wesley was also converted after a long period of inward struggle.
Most Korean Protestant churches in the 21st century emphasize their Evangelical heritage.
Instead, they would pursue dialogue, intellectualism, non-judgmentalism, and appeasement.
While on the rise globally, the developing world is particularly influenced by its spread.
According to historian George Marsden, most fundamentalists are Baptists and dispensationalist.
The next most populous is Brazil, with 26.3% or 51.33 million.
It became a force in its own right, especially among the working class.
The rich and the poor remained traditional Catholics, while most Evangelical Protestants were in the new lower-middle class–known as the "C class" (in a A–E classification system).
Whitefield's fellow Holy Club member and spiritual mentor, Charles Wesley, reported an evangelical conversion in 1738.
There were 700,000 Protestants by 1930, and increasingly they were in charge of their own affairs.
A recent research conducted by the Datafolha institute shows that 25% of Brazilians are Protestants, of which 19% are followers of Pentecostal denominations.
The new generation of Evangelicals set as their goal to abandon a militant Bible stance.
During this spiritual crisis, John Wesley was directly influenced by Pietism.
While approving of the Evangelical distinctives proposed by Bebbington, confessional Evangelicals believe that authentic Evangelicalism requires more concrete definition in order to protect the movement from theological liberalism and from heresy.
An advanced theological perspective came from the Princeton theologians from the 1850s to the 1920s, such as Charles Hodge, Archibald Alexander and B.B.
This desire included imitating the faith and ascetic practices of early Christians as well as regularly partaking of Holy Communion.
Daniel arap Moi was president 1978 to 2002 and claimed to be an Evangelical; he proved intolerant of dissent or pluralism or decentralization of power.
They also made separatism (rigid separation from non-fundamentalist churches and culture) a true test of faith.
The Catholic Church in Brazil was de-established in 1890, and responded by increasing the number of dioceses and the efficiency of its clergy.
