On 10 October 1930, Waugh, representing several newspapers, departed for Abyssinia to cover the coronation of Haile Selassie.
''Brideshead'', which questions the meaning of human existence without God, is the first novel in which Evelyn Waugh clearly presents his conservative religious and political views.
He described himself as "toothless, deaf, melancholic, shaky on my pins, unable to eat, full of dope, quite idle" and expressed the belief that "all fates were worse than death".
In 1902 he became managing director of Chapman and Hall, publishers of the works of Charles Dickens.
In September 1928, ''Decline and Fall'' was published to almost unanimous praise.
Waugh's first fiction with a Catholic theme was the short story "Out of Depth" (1933) about the immutability of the Mass.
Its perceived snobbery and its deference to the aristocracy were attacked by, among others, Conor Cruise O'Brien who, in the Irish literary magazine ''The Bell'', wrote of Waugh's "almost mystical veneration" for the upper classes.
Waugh maintained his reputation in 1942, with ''Put Out More Flags'', which sold well despite wartime restrictions on paper and printing.
There was general relief among critics when ''Scoop'', in 1938, indicated a return to Waugh's earlier comic style.
As a schoolboy, Waugh had praised the art of Cubism but soon abandoned his interest in artistic Modernism.
Waugh's final work of fiction, "Basil Seal Rides Again" (1962), features characters from the prewar novels; Waugh admitted that the work was a ″senile attempt to recapture the manner of my youth″.
That shocked his family and surprised some of his friends, but he had contemplated the step for some time.
The pro-fascist tone in parts of ''Waugh in Abyssinia'' offended readers and critics and prevented its publication in America.
Research and writing extended over two years during which Waugh did little other work, delaying the third volume of his war trilogy.
The couple apparently met again only once, during the process for the annulment of their marriage a few years later.
Soon after his return to duty he was recruited by Randolph Churchill to serve in a military mission to Yugoslavia, and, early in July, flew with Churchill from Bari, Italy, to the Croatian island of Vis.
The book did not sell well—"like warm cakes", according to Waugh.
A short story, "The Balance", written in an experimental modernist style, became his first commercially published fiction, when it was included by Chapman and Hall in a 1926 anthology, ''Georgian Stories''.
In 1959, at the request of publishers Chapman and Hall and in some deference to his critics, Waugh revised the book and wrote in a preface: "I have modified the grosser passages but not obliterated them because they are an essential part of the book".
A Requiem Mass, in Latin, was celebrated in Westminster Cathedral on 21 April 1966.
His money was running out and progress on the second book of his war trilogy, ''Officers and Gentlemen'', had stalled.
The first months of the marriage were overshadowed by a lack of money, and by Gardner's poor health, which persisted into the autumn.
Among ancestors bearing the Waugh name, the Rev.
In 1951 he visited the Holy Land with his future biographer, Christopher Sykes, and in 1953, he travelled to Goa to witness the final exhibition before burial of the remains of the 16th century Jesuit missionary-priest Francis Xavier.
Naipaul, he was scornful of the 1950s writers' group known as ''″The Movement″''.
As his talent developed and matured, he maintained what literary critic Andrew Michael Roberts called "an exquisite sense of the ludicrous, and a fine aptitude for exposing false attitudes".
His diary entry for 30 August 1946 records a visit to Gloucester, where he bought "a lion of wood, finely carved for £25, also a bookcase £35... a charming Chinese painting £10, a Regency easel £7".
When Cruttwell advised him to mend his ways, Waugh responded in a manner, he admitted later, was "fatuously haughty", from then on, relations between the two descended into mutual hatred.
In the first stages of his 40-year writing career, before his conversion to Catholicism in 1930, Waugh was the novelist of the Bright Young People generation.
A letter written that year to a Lancing friend, Dudley Carew, hints at severe emotional pressures: "I have been living very intensely these last three weeks.
Happy though he was with this outcome, Waugh's principal concern as the war ended was the fate of the large populations of Eastern European Catholics, betrayed (as he saw it) into the hands of Stalin's Soviet Union by the Allies.
During his first two terms, he generally followed convention; he smoked a pipe, bought a bicycle, and gave his maiden speech at the Oxford Union, opposing the motion that "This House would welcome Prohibition".
Back from South America, Waugh faced accusations of obscenity and blasphemy from the Catholic journal ''The Tablet'', which objected to passages in ''Black Mischief''.
Two more children, James (born 1946) and Septimus (born 1950), completed his family.
Throughout the period, Waugh was influenced by his friend Olivia Plunket-Greene, who had converted in 1925 and of whom Waugh later wrote, "She bullied me into the Church".
In September, he produced his final travel book, ''A Tourist in Africa'', based on a visit made in January–March 1959.
The critic Cyril Connolly called it "the thinnest piece of book-making that Mr Waugh has undertaken".
In April 1940, he was temporarily promoted to captain and given command of a company of marines, but he proved an unpopular officer, being haughty and curt with his men.
Although Waugh tended to regard his scholarship as a reward for past efforts rather than a stepping-stone to future academic success, he did sufficient work in his first two terms to pass his "History Previous", an essential preliminary examination.
In the summer of 1925, Waugh's outlook briefly improved, with the prospect of a job in Pisa, Italy, as secretary to the Scottish writer Charles Kenneth Scott Moncrieff, who was engaged on the English translations of Marcel Proust's works.
Late in 1956, the family moved to the manor house in the Somerset village of Combe Florey.
Waugh had welcomed the accession in 1958 of Pope John XXIII and wrote an appreciative tribute on the pope's death in 1963.
In the latter 1930s, Waugh's inclination to Catholic and conservative polemics affected his standing with the general reading public.
Waugh's conversion to Catholicism did not noticeably change the nature of his next two novels, ''Black Mischief'' (1934) and ''A Handful of Dust'' (1934), but, in the latter novel, the elements of farce are subdued, and the protagonist, Tony Last, is recognisably a person rather than a comic cipher.
Its plainly autobiographical content, Hastings suggests, gave the public a fixed image of Waugh: "stout, splenetic, red-faced and reactionary, a figure from burlesque complete with cigar, bowler hat and loud checked suit."
Waugh's detachment was such that he fictionalised his own mental breakdown, which occurred in the early 1950s.
Philip Larkin, reviewing the collection in ''The Guardian'', thought that it demonstrated Waugh's elitism; to receive a letter from him, it seemed, "one would have to have a nursery nickname and be a member of White's, a Roman Catholic, a high-born lady or an Old Etonian novelist".
The publication of the diaries and letters promoted increased interest in Waugh and his works and caused publication of much new material.
Waugh's first biographer, Christopher Sykes, records that after the divorce friends "saw, or believed they saw, a new hardness and bitterness" in Waugh's outlook.
From 1945 onwards, Waugh became an avid collector of objects, particularly Victorian paintings and furniture.
Its nostalgic depiction of a vanished form of Englishness appealed to the American mass market; ''Time'' magazine's TV critic described the series as "a novel... made into a poem", and listed it among the "100 Best TV Shows of All Time".
Waugh wrote up his Abyssinian experiences in a book, ''Waugh in Abyssinia'' (1936), which Rose Macaulay dismissed as a "fascist tract" on account of its pro-Italian tone.
He did just enough work to pass his final examinations in the summer of 1924 with a third-class degree.
He never completed the novel: fragments were eventually published as ''Work Suspended and Other Stories'' (1943).
Waugh saw the pair off and wrote a wry account for ''The Spectator'', but he was troubled by the incident and decided to sell Piers Court: "I felt it was polluted", he told Nancy Mitford.
Laura Waugh died in 1973 of pneumonia after a short illness and was interred next to her husband in Combe Florey.
That's what none of the people who wrote about him seem to have taken into account at all".
In the course of doing so, Newman learned that Waugh hated the modern world and wished that he had been born two or three centuries sooner.
The book done, he worked on the last of the war trilogy, which was published in 1961 as ''Unconditional Surrender''.
When, in 1980, a selection of his letters was published, his reputation became the subject of further discussion.
During the following two years Waugh taught at schools in Aston Clinton (from which he was dismissed for the attempted drunken seduction of a school matron) and Notting Hill in London.
Almost at once, he secured a post at Arnold House, a boys' preparatory school in North Wales, beginning in January 1925.
He had married Catherine Raban (1870–1954) in 1893; their first son Alexander Raban Waugh (always known as Alec) was born on 8 July 1898.
As an admirer of Waugh's writing, Orwell said that Evelyn Waugh was "almost as good a novelist as it is possible to be... while holding untenable opinions".
In the afterglow of his success, Waugh was commissioned to write travel articles in return for a free Mediterranean cruise, which he and Gardner began in February 1929, as an extended, delayed honeymoon.
The case was heard by an ecclesiastical tribunal in London, but a delay in the submission of the papers to Rome meant that the annulment was not granted until 4 July 1936.
In the ''LIFE'' magazine article, "Fan Fare" (1946), Waugh said that "you can only leave God out of fiction by making your characters pure abstractions" and that his future novels shall be "the attempt to represent man more fully which, to me, means only one thing, man in his relation to God."
Waugh's elation at his transfer soon descended into disillusion as he failed to find opportunities for active service.
He left the ship in Egypt and flew on to Colombo, but, he wrote to Laura, the voices followed him.
Waugh had little sympathy with the Communist-led Partisans and despised Tito.
On 29 September 1930, Waugh was received into the Catholic Church.
Waugh's physical and mental deterioration prevented any work on these projects, and the contracts were cancelled.
Operation Menace failed, hampered by fog and misinformation about the extent of the town's defences, and the British forces withdrew on 26 September.
The public sensation caused by Alec's novel so offended the school that it became impossible for Evelyn to go there.
In a ''Spectator'' article of 23 November 1962, he argued the case against change in a manner described by a later commentator as "sharp-edged reasonableness".
As a best-selling author Waugh could now command larger fees for his journalism.
Even after the German invasion of the Low Countries (10 May–22 June 1940), his battalion was not called into action.
In December 1927, Waugh and Evelyn Gardner became engaged, despite the opposition of Lady Burghclere, who felt that Waugh lacked moral fibre and kept unsuitable company.
The son of a publisher, Waugh was educated at Lancing College and then at Hertford College, Oxford, and briefly worked as a schoolmaster before he became a full-time writer.
The revelations on his private life, thoughts and attitudes created controversy.
He considered alternative careers in printing or cabinet-making, and attended evening classes in carpentry at Holborn Polytechnic while continuing to write.
On the basis of the xenophobia fostered by the genre books of Invasion literature, that the Germans were about to invade Britain, Waugh organised his friends into the "Pistol Troop", who built a fort, went on manœuvres and paraded in makeshift uniforms.
On Easter Day, 10 April 1966, after attending a Latin Mass in a neighbouring village with members of his family, Waugh died of heart failure at his Combe Florey home, at 62.
However, in the face of imminent Italian air attacks, Deedes found Waugh's courage "deeply reassuring".
Alexander Waugh (1754–1827) was a minister in the Secession Church of Scotland who helped found the London Missionary Society and was one of the leading Nonconformist preachers of his day.
Nearing 50, Waugh was old for his years, "selectively deaf, rheumatic, irascible" and increasingly dependent on alcohol and on drugs to relieve his insomnia and depression.
He finished his second novel, ''Vile Bodies'', and wrote articles including (ironically, he thought) one for the ''Daily Mail'' on the meaning of the marriage ceremony.
Outside school, he and other neighbourhood children performed plays, usually written by Waugh.
In 1907, the Waugh family left Hillfield Road for Underhill, a house which Arthur had built in North End Road, Hampstead, close to Golders Green, then a semi-rural area of dairy farms, market gardens and bluebell woods.
In 1962 Waugh began work on his autobiography, and that same year wrote his final fiction, the long short story ''Basil Seal Rides Again''.
Physically pugnacious, Evelyn was inclined to bully weaker boys; among his victims was the future society photographer Cecil Beaton, who never forgot the experience.
Waugh left Piers Court on 1 September 1939, at the outbreak of the Second World War/and moved his young family to Pixton Park, Somerset, the country seat of the Herbert family.while he sought military employment.
In 1949, Waugh explained that his conversion followed his realisation that life was "unintelligible and unendurable without God".
Its public reception, however, did not compare with that accorded to ''Brideshead Revisited'' three years later, on both sides of the Atlantic Ocean.
Despite his undoubted courage, his unmilitary and insubordinate character were rendering him effectively unemployable as a soldier.
He spent weeks partying in London and Oxford before the over-riding need for money led him to apply through an agency for a teaching job.
On 22 December 1925, Waugh wrote: "Claud and I took Audrey to supper and sat up until 7 in the morning arguing about the Roman Church".
Waugh began at Heatherley's in late September 1924, but became bored with the routine and quickly abandoned his course.
He also shed most of his religious beliefs.
A month later, without warning, Gardner confessed that their mutual friend, John Heygate, had become her lover.
Conversely, the book was praised by Yorke, Graham Greene and, in glowing terms, by Harold Acton who was particularly impressed by its evocation of 1920s Oxford.
Despite some family hostility the marriage took place on 17 April 1937 at the Church of the Assumption in Warwick Street, London.
A collection of Waugh's journalism and reviews was published in 1983, revealing a fuller range of his ideas and beliefs.
Waugh spent six relatively contented years at Heath Mount; on his own assertion he was "quite a clever little boy", who was seldom distressed or overawed by his lessons.
In 1945, Waugh said that Pablo Picasso's artistic standing was the result of a "mesmeric trick" and that his paintings "could not be intelligently discussed in the terms used of the civilised masters".
By December, the book was into its third printing, and the American publishing rights were sold for $500.
Waugh's next extended trip, in the winter of 1932–1933, was to British Guiana (now Guyana) in South America, possibly taken to distract him from a long and unrequited passion for the socialite Teresa Jungman.
Waugh's dissipated lifestyle continued into his final Oxford year, 1924.
When Nancy Mitford asked him how he reconciled his often objectionable conduct with being a Christian, Waugh replied that ″were he not a Christian he would be even more horrible″.
The end of the war saw the return to the school of younger masters such as J. F. Roxburgh, who encouraged Waugh to write and predicted a great future for him.
After an attempted reconciliation failed, a shocked and dismayed Waugh filed for divorce on 3 September 1929.
The extent to which the story is self-mockery, rather than true autobiography, became a subject of critical debate.
During his successful 1957 lawsuit against the ''Daily Express'', Waugh's counsel produced figures showing total sales to that time of over four million books, two thirds in Britain and the rest in America.
He took with him the notes for his novel, ''The Temple at Thatch'', intending to work on it in his spare time.
By 1953, Waugh's popularity as a writer was declining.
Waugh arrived in Oxford in January 1922.
He was able to augment his personal finances by charging household items to the trust or selling his own possessions to it.
Several have been listed among various  compiled lists of the world's greatest novels.
There had been earlier television treatment of Waugh's fiction, as ''Sword of Honour'' had been serialised by the BBC in 1967, but the impact of Granada's ''Brideshead'' was much wider.
Nonetheless, by 1960, shortage of money led him to agree to an interview on BBC Television, in the ''Face to Face'' series conducted by John Freeman.
'''Arthur Evelyn St. John Waugh''' (; 28 October 1903&nbsp;– 10 April 1966) was an English writer of novels, biographies and travel books.
The mission eventually arrived at Topusko, where it established itself in a deserted farmhouse.
''Brideshead's'' Catholic standpoint offended some critics who had greeted Waugh's earlier novels with warm praise.
Strictly observant, Waugh admitted to Diana Cooper that his most difficult task was how to square the obligations of his faith with his indifference to his fellow men.
His grandson Alexander Waugh (1840–1906) was a country medical practitioner, who bullied his wife and children and became known in the Waugh family as "the Brute".
His generosity to individual persons and causes, especially Catholic causes, extended to small gestures; after his libel-court victory over Nancy Spain, he sent her a bottle of champagne.
When ''Decline and Fall'' was completed, Duckworths objected to its "obscenity", but Chapman and Hall agreed to publish it.
A better-known account is his novel ''Scoop'' (1938) in which the protagonist, William Boot, is loosely based on Deedes.
Between these events, ''Scoop'' was published in May 1938 to wide critical acclaim.
On 7 January 1904 the boy was christened Arthur Evelyn St John Waugh but was known in the family and in the wider world as Evelyn.
Deedes remarks on the older writer's snobbery: "None of us quite measured up to the company he liked to keep back at home".
Wykes said that anti-semitism is Waugh's "most persistent nastiness", adding that Waugh's racism was "an illogical extension of his views on the naturalness and rightness of hierarchy as the main principle of social organisation".
Despite its quasi-biblical title, the book is dark, bitter, "a manifesto of disillusionment", according to biographer Martin Stannard.
The Campion biography is said by David Wykes to be "so rigidly biased that it has no claims to make as history".
The group's liaison duties, between the British Army and the Communist Partisans, were light.
He travelled on via several staging-posts to Boa Vista in Brazil, and then took a convoluted overland journey back to Georgetown.
Waugh's conservatism was aesthetic as well as political and religious.
The trip was disrupted when Gardner contracted pneumonia and was carried ashore to the British hospital in Port Said.
Despite their political differences, Waugh came to admire George Orwell, because of their shared patriotism and sense of morality.
In September 1945, after he was released by the army, he returned to Piers Court with his family (another daughter, Harriet, had been born at Pixton in 1944) but spent much of the next seven years either in London, or travelling.
Despite the gloomy ambience of the school, Waugh did his best to fulfil the requirements of his position, but a brief return to London and Oxford during the Easter holiday only exacerbated his sense of isolation.
Alec departed Sherborne for military training as an officer, and, while awaiting confirmation of his commission, wrote ''The Loom of Youth'' (1917), a novel of school life, which alluded to homosexual friendships at a school that was recognisably Sherborne.
As an instinctive conservative, Waugh believed that class divisions, with inequalities of wealth and position, were natural and that "no form of government was ordained by God as being better than any other".
Waugh's comment on the affair was this: ″Bloodshed has been avoided at the cost of honour.″
The couple returned home in June, after her recovery.
A typical Waugh trademark evident in the early novels is rapid, unattributed dialogue in which the participants can be readily identified.
Although most of Waugh's books had sold well, and he had been well-rewarded for his journalism, his levels of expenditure meant that money problems and tax bills were a recurrent feature in his life.
In 1914, after the First World War began, Waugh and other boys from the Boy Scout Troop of Heath Mount School were sometimes employed as messengers at the War Office; Evelyn loitered about the War Office in hope of glimpsing Lord Kitchener, but never did.
The twin blows were sufficient for him to consider suicide.
He had lost his Anglicanism at Lancing and had led an irreligious life at Oxford, but there are references in his diaries from the mid-1920s to religious discussion and regular churchgoing.
He enjoyed the trip but "despised" the book.
In fact, Waugh made his own way back, now believing that he was being possessed by devils.
Among their friends, they quickly became known as "He-Evelyn" and "She-Evelyn".
A subsequent journey through the British East Africa colonies and the Belgian Congo formed the basis of two books; the travelogue ''Remote People'' (1931) and the comic novel ''Black Mischief'' (1932).
He reported the event as "an elaborate propaganda effort" to convince the world that Abyssinia was a civilised nation that concealed that the emperor had achieved power through barbarous means.
Distinguished forebears include Lord Cockburn (1779–1854), a leading Scottish advocate and judge, William Morgan (1750–1833), a pioneer of actuarial science who served the Equitable Life Assurance Society for 56 years, and Philip Henry Gosse (1810–1888), a natural scientist who became notorious through his depiction as a religious fanatic in his son Edmund's memoir ''Father and Son''.
Otherwise, Waugh's prediction proved unfounded; all his fiction remained in print and sales stayed healthy.
In 1933, on a Greek islands cruise, he was introduced by Father D'Arcy to Gabriel Herbert, eldest daughter of the late explorer Aubrey Herbert.
Partly because of his dependency on drugs, his health was steadily deteriorating.
In his later years at Lancing, Waugh achieved success as a house captain, editor of the school magazine and president of the debating society, and won numerous art and literature prizes.
Hastings said that Waugh's outward personal belligerence to strangers was not entirely serious but an attempt at "finding a sparring partner worthy of his own wit and ingenuity".
Stylistically this final story begins in the same fashion as the first story, ″The Balance" of 1926, with a "fusillade of unattributed dialogue".
Other books published during this period included ''When The Going Was Good'' (1946), an anthology of his pre-war travel writing, ''The Holy Places'' (published by the Ian Fleming-managed Queen Anne Press, 1952) and ''Love Among the Ruins'' (1953), a dystopian tale in which Waugh displays his contempt for the modern world.
At the time of his birth the family were living in North London, at Hillfield Road, West Hampstead where, on 28 October 1903, the couple's second son was born, "in great haste before Dr Andrews could arrive", Catherine recorded.
He was buried, by special arrangement, in a consecrated plot outside the Anglican churchyard in Combe Florey.
Pritchett said that Waugh's anti-semitism, ″like Mount Everest, is there, nonviolent, but undeniable″.
Waugh was delighted, informing all of his friends that he had been mad: "Clean off my onion!".
Amid regular work for ''The Graphic'', ''Town and Country'' and ''Harper's Bazaar'', he quickly wrote ''Labels'', a detached account of his honeymoon cruise with She-Evelyn.
He defended himself in an open letter to the Archbishop of Westminster, Cardinal Francis Bourne, which remained unpublished until 1980.
In the biographic ''Mad World'' (2009), Paula Byrne said that the common view of Evelyn Waugh as a "snobbish misanthrope" is a caricature; he asks: "Why would a man, who was so unpleasant, be so beloved by such a wide circle of friends?"
In July, during the roundabout journey home by troop ship, he wrote ''Put Out More Flags'' (1942), a novel of the war's early months in which he returned to the literary style he had used in the 1930s.
An extended essay on the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood was printed privately by Alastair Graham, using by agreement the press of the Shakespeare Head Press in Stratford-upon-Avon, where he was undergoing training as a printer.
Waugh also expressed the view that American news reporters could not function without frequent infusions of whisky and that every American had been divorced at least once.
That year he met (possibly through his brother Alec) and fell in love with Evelyn Gardner, the daughter of Lord and Lady Burghclere.
At Midsomer Norton, Evelyn became deeply interested in high Anglican church rituals, the initial stirrings of the spiritual dimension that later dominated his perspective of life, and he served as an altar boy at the local Anglican church.
Alec Waugh later became a novelist of note.
Waugh, a staunch opponent of Church reform, was particularly distressed by the replacement of the universal Latin Mass with the vernacular.
In the post-war "Age of the Common Man", he attacked socialism (the "Cripps–Attlee terror") and complained, after Churchill's election in 1951, that "the Conservative Party have never put the clock back a single second".
In May, Layforce was required to assist in the evacuation of Crete: Waugh was shocked by the disorder and its loss of discipline and, as he saw it, the cowardice of the departing troops.
The elder of his two sons, born in 1866, was Arthur Waugh.
This led to a contract from the publishers Duckworths for a full-length biography of Dante Gabriel Rossetti, which Waugh wrote during 1927.
Recovering at Windsor, he applied for three months' unpaid leave to write the novel that had been forming in his mind.
In the meantime, following their initial encounter in Portofino, Waugh had fallen in love with Laura Herbert.
His various adventures and encounters found their way into two further books: his travel account ''Ninety-two Days'', and the novel ''A Handful of Dust'', both published in 1934.
During this period Waugh began the practice of staying at the various houses of his friends; he was to have no settled home for the next eight years.
Nevertheless, despite a letter to Acton in which he wrote that he "did not know it was possible to be so miserable and live", he soon resumed his professional and social life.
The death of his father, on 26 June 1943, and the need to deal with family affairs prevented him from departing with his brigade for North Africa as part of Operation Husky (9 July–17 August 1943), the Allied invasion of Sicily.
Christopher Sykes's biography had appeared in 1975, between 1980 and 1998 three more full biographies were issued and other biographical and critical studies have continued to be produced.
In 1973, Waugh's diaries were serialised in ''The Observer'' prior to publication in book form in 1976.
There have been further cinematic Waugh adaptations: ''A Handful of Dust'' in 1988, ''Vile Bodies'' (filmed as ''Bright Young Things'') in 2003 and ''Brideshead'' again in 2008.
The result was ''Brideshead Revisited: The Sacred & Profane Memories of Captain Charles Ryder'' (1945), the first of his explicitly Catholic novels of which the biographer Douglas Lane Patey commented that it was "the book that seemed to confirm his new sense of his writerly vocation".
Among Waugh's growing circle of friends were Diana Guinness and Bryan Guinness (dedicatees of ''Vile Bodies''), Lady Diana Cooper and her husband Duff Cooper, Nancy Mitford who was originally a friend of Evelyn Gardner's, and the Lygon sisters.
At the same time Waugh was writing serious essays, such as "The War and the Younger Generation" in which he castigates his own generation as "crazy and sterile" people.
Waugh wrote up his experiences of the frustrations of postwar European travel in a novella, ''Scott-King's Modern Europe''.
Stannard concludes that beneath his public mask, Waugh was "a dedicated artist and a man of earnest faith, struggling against the dryness of his soul".
The experience was  fictionalised a few years later, in ''The Ordeal of Gilbert Pinfold'' (1957).
Nevertheless, a popular conception developed of Waugh as a monster.
On 10 June 1942, Laura gave birth to Margaret, the couple's fourth child.
Waugh had been convinced of the book's qualities, "my first novel rather than my last".
In the book he spelled out clearly his conservative credo; he later described the book as dealing "little with travel and much with political questions".
