Tall cypress trees provide excellent nesting areas for birds including wild turkeys (''Meleagris gallopavo''), ibis, herons, egrets, anhingas (''Anhinga anhinga''), and belted kingfishers (''Megaceryle alcyon'').
They grow in compact structures called cypress domes and in long strands over limestone.
Freshwater marl prairies are similar to sloughs, but lack the slow movement of surface water; instead, water seeps through a calcitic mud called marl.
Also, the leatherback sea turtle (''Dermochelys coriacea'') is threatened.
Many of the biological controls like weather, disease, and consumers that naturally limit plants in their native environments do not exist in the Everglades, causing many to grow larger and multiply far beyond their average numbers in their native habitats.
The entry fee for vehicles in 2006 ranged from $10 to $200 for bus tours.
Prescribed burns in these areas take place every three to seven years; without regular fires, hardwood trees begin to grow in this region and pinelands become recategorized as mixed swamp forests.
However, many trails allow kayaks and canoes.
Alligator holes also attract other animals who congregate to feed on smaller prey.
They rise several inches above the grass-covered river, and are dominated by diverse plant life consisting of subtropical and tropical trees, such as large southern live oaks (''Quercus virginiana'').
The introduction of non-native species into South Florida is a considerable problem for the park.
Since water levels are low at that time, animals congregate at central water locations, providing popular opportunities for viewing the wildlife.
The 1926 Miami Hurricane caused Lake Okeechobee levees to fail; hundreds of people who had just moved in south of the lake drowned.
Chokoloskee Island is a shell mound, a midden built roughly 20&nbsp;feet (6&nbsp;m) high over thousands of years of occupation by the Calusa.
On November 10, 1978, most of the park was declared a wilderness area.
The Everglades are a network of wetlands and forests fed by a river flowing  per day out of Lake Okeechobee, southwest into Florida Bay.
Water also flows into the park after falling as rain to the north onto the watersheds of the Kissimmee River and other sources of Lake Okeechobee, to appear in the Everglades days later.
Similarly, animals often do not find the predators or natural barriers to reproduction in the Everglades as they do where they originate, thus they often reproduce more quickly and efficiently.
Jet skis, airboats, and other motorized personal watercraft are prohibited.
The bay also has its own resident population of bottlenose dolphins (''Tursiops truncatus'').
Royal Palm State Park was created in 1916; it included several trails and a visitor's center several miles from Homestead.
As the 20th century progressed, water flow from Lake Okeechobee was increasingly controlled and diverted to enable explosive growth of the South Florida metropolitan area.
Most plants in the area bloom about 16 weeks after a fire.
Most of the central region has a savanna climate while regions closer to shore, especially the eastern quarter of the park has a monsoonal climate.
Most of the water arrives in the form of rainfall, and a significant amount is stored in the limestone.
It was a controversial plan; detractors worried that it "relies on uncertain technologies, overlooks water quality, subsidizes damaging growth and delays its environmental benefits".
She wrote and spoke about the importance of the Everglades until her death at age 108 in 1998.
A variety of animal species meet their needs for food, shelter, nesting, and rooking in pine rocklands.
Politicians who declared the Everglades uninhabitable were silenced when a four-story wall, named the Herbert Hoover Dike, was built around Lake Okeechobee.
Although most U.S. national parks preserve unique geographic features, Everglades National Park was the first created to protect a fragile ecosystem.
The U.S. House of Representatives authorized the creation of the new national park on May 30, 1934, but it passed only with a rider that ensured no money would be allotted to the project for at least five years.
A few hundred Seminole hunters and scouts settled within what is today Big Cypress National Preserve, to escape the forced emigration to the west.
Everglades National Park reported in 2005 a budget of over $28&nbsp;million.
The State of Florida has invested more than $2 billion into restoring the Everglades, but the funds have not been matched by the U.S. government.
Shell mounds still exist today within the park, giving archaeologists and anthropologists evidence of the raw materials available to the indigenous people for tool construction.
Florida still attracts nearly a thousand new residents every day, and building residential, commercial and industrial zones near Everglades National Park stresses the water balance and ecosystems within the park.
Various other interests, including land developers and sport hunters, demanded some of the land be trimmed.
Successful in that confrontation, the organization has grown to over 4,000 members, committed to the preservation of the Everglades.
The mangroves also support 24&nbsp;species of amphibians and reptiles, and 18&nbsp;species of mammals, including the endangered green turtle (''Chelonia mydas''), hawksbill turtle (''Eretmochelys imbricata''), and West Indian manatee (''Trichechus manatus'').
It loops through a canopy of hardwood hammocks that include gumbo limbo, royal palms (''Roystonea''), strangler figs (''Ficus aurea''), and a variety of epiphytes.
Trees in the Everglades, including wild tamarind (''Lysiloma latisiliquum'') and gumbo-limbo (''Bursera simaruba''), rarely grow higher than  due to wind, cold weather, and lightning strikes.
Two tribes of Native Americans developed on the peninsula's southern tip: the Tequesta lived on the eastern side and the Calusa, greater in numbers, on the western side.
Within the Florida mangrove systems live 220&nbsp;species of fish, and a variety of crabs, crayfish, shrimp, mollusks, and other invertebrates, which serve as the main source of food for many birds.
Several walking trails in the park vary in hiking difficulty on Pine Island, where visitors can cross hardwood hammocks, pinelands, and freshwater sloughs.
The ecosystems in Everglades National Park have suffered significantly from human activity, and restoration of the Everglades is a politically charged issue in South Florida.
Floods occur during hurricane and tropical storm surges when ocean water can rise several feet over the land.
Closer to Flamingo, more rugged trails take visitors through mangrove swamps, along Florida Bay.
such as bromeliads, Spanish moss (''Tillandsia usneoides''), orchids and ferns grow on the branches and trunks of cypress trees.
Water evaporating from the Everglades becomes rain over metropolitan areas, providing the fresh water supply for the region.
Due to their high tolerance of salt water, winds, extreme tides, high temperatures, and muddy soils, mangrove trees are uniquely adapted to extreme conditions.
South Florida slash pines are uniquely adapted to promote fire by dropping a large amount of dried pine needles and shedding dry bark.
Peat built up over centuries in the marsh can cause fires to burn deep scars in the soil.
The Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission (FWC) listed eight "Reptiles of Concern", including the Burmese python (''Python molurus bivittatus''), focusing on them for their large sizes and aggressive natures, allowing licensed hunters to kill any listed animals in protected areas and sell their meat and hides.
Backcountry permits are required for campsites along the Wilderness Waterway, Gulf Coast sites, and sites in the various keys.
It is the third-largest national park in the lower 48&nbsp;states after Death Valley and Yellowstone.
Senator Spessard Holland's politicking helped to fully establish the park, after Holland was able to negotiate  of the park, leaving out Big Cypress, Key Largo, the Turner River area, and a  tract of land called "The Hole in the Donut" that was too highly valued for agriculture.
Lake Okeechobee began to flood and convection thunderstorms were created.
Mangrove trees on the coasts were taken down for better views and replaced with shallow rooted palm trees.
She wrote: "What had been a river of grass and sweet water that had given meaning and life and uniqueness to this enormous geography through centuries in which man had no place here was made, in one chaotic gesture of greed and ignorance and folly, a river of fire."
Marl prairies may go dry in some parts of the year; alligators play a vital role in maintaining life in remote parts of the Everglades by burrowing in the mud during the dry season, creating pools of water where fish and amphibians survive from one year to the next.
''Miami Herald'' editor John Pennekamp was instrumental in pushing the Florida Legislature to raise $2&nbsp;million to purchase the private land inside the park boundaries.
Approximately  of man-made wetlands are to be constructed to confine contaminated water before it is released to the Everglades, and  of canals that divert water away from the Everglades are to be destroyed.
The terrain of South Florida is relatively and consistently flat.
Low levels of water leave fish vulnerable to reptiles and birds, and as sawgrass dries it can burn or die off, which in turn kills apple snails and other animals that wading birds feed upon.
Approximately 26&nbsp;percent of all fish, reptiles, birds, and mammal species in South Florida are exotic—more than in any other part of the U.S.—and the region hosts one of the highest numbers of exotic plant species in the world.
Low-powered motorboats are allowed in the park, although the majority of salt water areas are no-wake zones to protect manatees and other marine animals from harm.
Lobate lac scale insects (''Paratachardina pseudolobata'') kill shrubs and other plants in hardwood hammocks.
The National Park Service recognizes nine distinct interdependent ecosystems within the park that constantly shift in size owing to the amount of water present and other environmental factors.
Coastal lowlands, or wet prairies, are salt water marshes that absorb marine water when it gets high or fresh water when rains are heavy.
U.S. Secretary of the Interior Ken Salazar announced the inclusion of these reptiles at Everglades National Park.
Crocodiles populations in South Florida have increased as has the number of alligators.
Management of the park includes approval of new policies and procedures by tribal representatives "in such a manner that they do not conflict with the park purpose".
The commission was also tasked with proposing a method to raise the money to purchase the land.
The only evidence of their existence within the park boundaries is a series of shell mounds that were built by the Calusa.
The Florida peninsula appeared above sea level between 100,000 and 150,000&nbsp;years ago.
The park features four visitor centers: on the Tamiami Trail (part of U.S. Route 41) directly west of Miami is the Shark Valley Visitor Center.
Although rock formations are not a central draw to Everglades National Park, the limestone that underlies the Everglades is integral to the formation of the diverse ecosystems within the park.
Bromeliad beetles (''Metamasius callizona'') destroy bromeliads and the ecosystems they host.
However, it was listed again on the List of World Heritage in Danger in 2010.
Thousands of exotic plant species have been observed in South Florida, usually introduced as ornamental landscaping, but park staff must eradicate such invasive plants as melaleuca tree (''Melaleuca quinquenervia''), Brazilian pepper (''Schinus terebinthifolius''), and Old World climbing fern (''Lygodium microphyllum'').
The search coincided with the arrival of the Great Depression in the United States, and money for land purchase was scarce.
The range of the Cape Sable seaside sparrow is restricted to Everglades National Park and the Big Cypress Swamp.
An underground reservoir called the Floridan Aquifer lies about  below the surface of South Florida.
When it dries it turns into a gray mud.
However, following three years of higher numbers, ''The Miami Herald'' reported the same year that populations of wading birds within the park decreased by 29&nbsp;percent.
Cypress trees are conifers that are adapted to live in standing fresh water.
Trees in this ecosystem grow in solution holes, where the soft limestone has worn away and filled with soil, allowing plants to take hold.
Vast peat deposits south of Lake Okeechobee indicate that regular flooding had occurred about 5,000 years ago.
Burmese pythons, two subspecies of African rock pythons (''Python sebae''; northern and southern), and yellow anacondas (''Eunectes notaeus'') were banned from import into the U.S. in 2012.
As of June 2008, the U.S. government has spent only $400 million of the $7.8 billion legislated.
She founded and served as president for an organization called Friends of the Everglades, initially intended to protest the construction of a proposed Big Cypress jetport in 1968.
Since 1932, ocean levels at Key West have steadily risen over , which could have disastrous consequences for land so close to the ocean.
Exotic species control falls under the management of the U.S.
Control of invasive species costs $500&nbsp;million a year, but  of land in South Florida remains infested.
Within the park,  of pineland are protected.
In 1981 6,656 Cape Sable seaside sparrows were reported in park boundaries, but surveys over 10 years documented a decline to an estimated 2,624 birds by 2002.
Wilderness designations covered  in 2003—about 86&nbsp;percent of the park.
Attempts to return natural levels of water to the park have been controversial; Cape Sable seaside sparrows nest about a foot off the ground, and rising water levels may harm future populations, as well as threaten the endangered snail kite.
Humans have lived for thousands of years in or around the Everglades until plans arose in 1882, to drain the wetlands and develop the recovered land for agricultural and residential use.
In the 1950s and 1960s,  of canals and levees, 150&nbsp;gates and spillways, and 16&nbsp;pumping stations were constructed to direct water toward cities and away from the Everglades.
Of that, $14.8&nbsp;million is granted from the National Park Service, and $13.5&nbsp;million from various sources including CERP, donations, and other grants.
In 2007, Fred Sklar of the South Florida Water Management District said: "An extreme drought can be viewed (as) almost as catastrophic as a volcano.
Freshwater sloughs are perhaps the most common ecosystem associated with Everglades National Park.
Cost estimates for raising or replacing the Tamiami Trail and Alligator Alley with bridges are in the hundreds of millions of dollars.
Humans likely first inhabited the South Florida region 10,000 to 20,000&nbsp;years ago.
Water overflows Lake Okeechobee into a river 40 to  wide, which moves almost imperceptibly.
Pine cones require heat from fires to open, allowing seeds to disperse and take hold.
Spanish explorers estimated the number of Tequesta at first contact to be around 800, and Calusa at 2,000, although the National Park Service reports there were probably about 20,000 natives living in or near the Everglades when the Spanish established contact in the late 16th century.
Both settlements and the more isolated homesteads could only be reached by boat until well into the 20th century.
The Calusa society was more advanced, as they lived in social strata, and were able to create canals, earthworks, and shellworks.
Nevertheless, Lake Okeechobee continued to rise and fall, the region was covered with rain, and city planners continued to battle the water.
About 1,000 crocodiles live in Florida and there are roughly 50 nests in the Everglades and Biscayne National Parks.
As Florida's population began to grow significantly and urban areas near the Everglades were developed, proponents of the park's establishment faced difficulty in persuading the federal government and the people of Florida that the subtle and constantly shifting ecosystems in the Everglades were just as worthy of protection.
Miami-based naturalists first proposed that the area become a national park in 1923.
The diversion of water to South Florida's still-growing metropolitan areas is the Everglades National Park's number one threat.
Black bears and Florida panthers also live in this habitat.
CERP projects are designed to capture  of fresh water every day, store it in underground reservoirs and release the water to areas within 16&nbsp;counties in South Florida.
After it separated, conditions allowed a shallow marine environment to deposit calcium carbonate in sand, shells, and coral to be converted into limestone.
Sawgrass and other water plants grow shorter in freshwater marl than they do in peat, the other type of soil in the Everglades which is found where water remains present longer throughout the year.
The National Research Council reported in September 2008 that no CERP projects had been completed, and the lack of progress on water deliveries to Everglades National Park "is one of the most discouraging stories in Everglades restoration".
The book has sold 500,000 copies since its publication, and Douglas' continued dedication to ecology conservation earned her the nicknames "Grand Dame of the Everglades", "Grandmother of the Everglades" and "the anti-Christ" for her singular focus at the expense of some political interests.
The plant growth around the hammock base is nearly impenetrable; however, beneath the canopy hammocks are an ideal habitat for animals.
More than 900&nbsp;jobs were sustained or created within or by the park, and the park added value of $35&nbsp;million to local economies.
Populations of birds fluctuate; in 2009, the South Florida Water Management District claimed wading birds across South Florida increased by 335&nbsp;percent.
Rising sea levels caused by global warming are another threat to the future of the park.
Coe's passion and U.S.
Frontcountry camping, with some services, is available at Long Pine Key, close to the Ernest F. Coe Visitor Center, where 108&nbsp;sites are accessible by car.
The Gulf Coast Visitor Center gives canoers access to the Wilderness Waterway, a 99-mile (160&nbsp;km) canoe trail that extends to the Flamingo Visitor Center.
Coral, sponges, and seagrasses serve as shelter and food for crustaceans and mollusks, which in turn are the primary food source for larger marine animals.
Marl prairies are usually under water from three to seven months of the year, whereas sloughs may remain submerged for longer than nine months and sometimes remain under water from one year to the next.
The Calusa were also able to resist Spanish attempts at conquest.
In the same year, several tropical storms struck South Florida, prompting the construction of  of canals, sending water unwanted by farmers and residents to the ocean.
Five years later, the Florida state legislature established the Tropical Everglades National Park Commission to study the formation of a protected area.
A proposed airport that would have dire environment effects on Everglades National Park became the center of a battle that helped to initiate the environmental movement into local and national politics.
When the region floods again during the wet season, the fish and amphibians who were sustained in the alligator holes then repopulate freshwater marl prairies.
During dryer years when less fresh water flows to the coast, mangroves will appear among fresh water plants.
Excellent feeding locations for birds, sloughs in the Everglades attract a great variety of waders such as herons, egrets, roseate spoonbills (''Platalea ajaja''), ibises and brown pelicans (''Pelecanus occidentalis''), as well as limpkins (''Aramus guarauna'') and snail kites that eat apple snails, which in turn feed on the sawgrass.
Swimming is not recommended within the park boundaries; water moccasins, snapping turtles (''Chelydra serpentina''), alligators and crocodiles thrive in fresh water.
A fifteen-mile (24&nbsp;km) round trip path leads from this center to a two-story observation tower.
It was dedicated by President Harry Truman on December 6, 1947, one month after Douglas' book was released.
The West Indian manatee has been upgraded from endangered to threatened.
Everglades National Park has a tropical savanna climate (Köppen climate classification: ''Aw'') and tropical monsoon climate (Köppen climate classification: ''Am''), depending on location.
On the park's western border, Fort Myers, Naples and Cape Coral are expanding, but no system of levees exists to mark that border.
''National Geographic'' rated both Everglades National Park and Big Cypress National Preserve the lowest-scoring parks in North America, at 32 out of 100.
Recreational vehicle camping is available at these sites, although not with all necessary services.
Two years later, the 1928 Okeechobee Hurricane claimed 2,500&nbsp;lives when Lake Okeechobee once again surged over its levees.
New landowners, eager to make good on their investments, hastily constructed homes and small towns on recently drained land.
Pineland ecosystems (or pine rocklands) are characterized by shallow, dry sandy loam over a limestone substrate covered almost exclusively by slash pines (''Pinus elliottii var.
Over  of marine ecosystem lies in this range.
Such storms are a natural part of the park's ecosystem; 1960's Hurricane Donna left nothing in the mangroves but "standing dead snags" several miles wide, but 30&nbsp;years later the area had completely recovered.
Algae and other microscopic organisms form periphyton, which attaches to limestone.
Christian Point Trail, Snake Bight Trail, Rowdy Bend Trail and Coastal Prairie Trail allow viewing of shorebirds and wading birds among the mangroves.
The majority of South Florida's fresh water, which is stored in the Biscayne Aquifer, is recharged in the park.
Although the C&SF was directed to provide enough water to sustain the park, it did not follow through.
Both climates are characterized by two seasons: wet and dry.
It can take 1,000 years to produce two inches of peat, and you can lose those couple of inches in a week."
About 50 live in the wild, primarily in the Everglades and the Big Cypress Swamp.
It can reshape the entire landscape.
The commission was led by a land developer turned conservationist named Ernest F. Coe, who was eventually nicknamed Father of Everglades National Park.
The biggest threats to the panther include habitat destruction from human development, vehicle collisions, inbreeding due to their limited gene pool, parasites, diseases, and mercury poisoning.
Salt water replaced fresh water in the canals, and by 1997 scientists noticed that salt water was seeping into the Biscayne Aquifer, South Florida's water source.
In spite of this, Everglades National Park was removed in 2007 from the List of World Heritage in Danger.
Both groups traveled through the Everglades, but rarely lived within them, remaining mostly along the coast.
The park's dry season lasts from December to April, when temperatures vary from 53&nbsp;°F (12&nbsp;°C) to 77&nbsp;°F (25&nbsp;°C) and humidity is low.
The settlements in Chokoloskee and Flamingo served as trading centers for small populations of farmers, fishermen and charcoal burners settled in the Ten Thousand Islands.
In 1928, surveying and construction began on the Tamiami Trail, along the northern border of Everglades National Park.
Walking catfish (''Clarias batrachus'') can deplete aquaculture stocks and carry enteric septicemia.
The Florida panther is one of the most endangered mammals on earth.
Mangrove trees cover the coastlines of South Florida, sometimes growing inland depending on the amount of salt water present within the Everglades ecosystems.
Some members of the Miccosukee and Seminole tribes continue to live within park boundaries.
Everglades National Park was designated an International Biosphere Reserve on October 26, 1976.
However, the Everglades has an immense capacity for water storage, owing to the sponge-like permeable limestone beneath the exposed land.
President George H. W. Bush signed the Everglades National Park Protection and Expansion Act on December 13, 1989 that added  to the eastern side of the park, closed the park to airboats, directed the Department of the Army to restore water to improve the ecosystems within Everglades National Park, and "Direct(ed) the Secretary of the Interior to manage the Park in order to maintain the natural abundance, diversity, and ecological integrity of native plants and animals, as well as the behavior of native animals, as part of their ecosystem."
The sloughs' availability of fish, amphibians, and young birds attract a variety of freshwater turtles, alligators (''Alligator mississippiensis''), water moccasins (''Agkistrodon piscivorus conanti''), and eastern diamondback rattlesnakes (''Crotalus adamanteus'').
Fish and Wildlife Service, which has been compiling and disseminating information about invasive species since 1994.
South of these manmade regions was Everglades National Park, which had been effectively cut off from its water supply.
Hammocks are often the only dry land within the park.
Species that adapt the most aggressively to conditions in the Everglades, by spreading quickly or competing with native species that are sometimes threatened or endangered, are called "invasive".
Visitors spent $2.6 million within the park and $48&nbsp;million in local economies.
The nearby Gumbo Limbo Trail is also self-guided, at half a mile long.
Having access only to soft limestone, most of the tools fashioned by Native Americans in the region were made of shell, bone, wood, and animal teeth; shark teeth were used as cutting blades, and sharpened reeds became arrows and spears.
Land was sold before any homes or structures were built on it, and in some cases before any plans for construction were in place.
The busiest season for visitors is from December to March, when temperatures are lowest and mosquitoes are least active.
The mangrove system in Everglades National Park is the largest continuous system of mangroves in the world.
The region's timber was devastated for lumber supplies.
Canals were deepened and widened, and water levels fell dramatically, causing chaos in food webs.
Portions of the Everglades that remain flooded for more than nine months out of the year are usually covered by peat.
Near Flamingo, 234&nbsp;campsites with some services are also available.
Everglades City, on the mainland near Chokoloskee, enjoyed a brief period of prosperity when, beginning in 1920, it served as the headquarters for construction of the Tamiami Trail.
Bush remarked in his statement when signing the act, "Through this legislation that river of grass may now be restored to its natural flow of water".
After the park was established, residents of Flamingo were bought out, and the site was incorporated into the park as a visitor center.
Nearly all pinelands have an understory of palm shrubs, and a diverse ground covering of wild herbs.
Initiatives that could aid Everglades restoration include the U.S. Sugar Land Corp transaction, the C-111 spreader canal and the Tamiami Trail bridging.
Collisions with boats and habitat loss are still its biggest threats.
Sharks, barracuda, and sharp dangerous coral are plentiful in salt water.
The diets of both groups consisted mostly of shellfish and fish, small mammals, game, and wild plants.
Nitrates in the underground water system and high levels of mercury also impact the quality of fresh water the park receives.
By the 1960s, the park was visibly suffering.
Increased occurrences of algal blooms and red tide in Biscayne Bay and Florida Bay have been traced to the amounts of controlled water released from Lake Okeechobee.
Woodpeckers, eastern meadowlarks (''Sturnella magna''), loggerhead shrikes (''Lanius ludovicianus''), grackles, and northern mockingbirds (''Mimus polyglottos'') are commonly found in pinelands.
