In some places, homes had to be moved to stilts and  of soil was lost.
Evapotranspiration—the sum of evaporation and plant transpiration from the Earth's land surface to atmosphere—associated with thunderstorms, is the key mechanism by which water leaves the region.
The WCAs took up approximately 37&nbsp;percent of the original Everglades.
The Miami Limestone was formerly named the Miami Oolite, which comprises facies of ooids and fossilized bryozoan organisms.
The Comprehensive Everglades Restoration Plan (CERP) proposed more than 60&nbsp;construction projects over 30&nbsp;years to store water that was being flushed into the ocean, in reservoirs, underground aquifers, and abandoned quarries; add more Stormwater Treatment Areas to filter water that flowed into the lower Everglades; regulate water released from pumping stations into local waterways and improve water released to Everglades National Park and Water Conservation Areas; remove barriers to sheetflow by raising the Tamiami Trail and destroying the Miami Canal, and reuse wastewater for urban areas.
In 2000 the Comprehensive Everglades Restoration Plan was approved by Congress to combat these problems.
The system begins near Orlando with the Kissimmee River, which discharges into the vast but shallow Lake Okeechobee.
Sugarcane became the primary crop grown in South Florida.
A plan to hasten the construction and funding of projects was put into place, named "Acceler8", spurring the start of six of eight large construction projects, including that of three large reservoirs.
The Calusa were hunter-gatherers who lived on small game, fish, turtles, alligators, shellfish, and various plants.
The report also assessed the future trajectory of each ecosystem attribute under three restoration scenarios: improved water quality, improved hydrology, and improvements to both water quality and hydrology, which helped highlight the urgency of restoration actions to benefit a wide range of ecosystem attributes and demonstrate the cost of inaction.
The plumes, or aigrettes, as they were called in the millinery business, sold for $32 an ounce in 1915— the price of gold.
During the Second Seminole War an army surgeon wrote, "It is in fact a most hideous region to live in, a perfect paradise for Indians, alligators, serpents, frogs, and every other kind of loathsome reptile."
Slower runoff also created an accumulation of almost 18 feet (5.5 m) of peat in the area.
Waterfront property was the most highly valued.
The resulting permeable limestone formations that developed between 25&nbsp;million and 70&nbsp;million years ago created the Floridan Aquifer, which serves as the main source of fresh water for the northern portion of Florida.
Willoughby described the water as healthy and wholesome, with numerous springs, and 10,000&nbsp;alligators "more or less" in Lake Okeechobee.
Solution holes, or deep pits where the limestone has worn away, may remain flooded even when the prairies are dry, and they support aquatic invertebrates such as crayfish and snails, and larval amphibians which feed young wading birds.
These plants contain tubers and other mechanisms that allow them to sprout quickly after being charred.
When water levels became so low that peat and muck were at the surface, the bacteria interacted with much higher levels of oxygen in the air, rapidly breaking down the soil.
Plumes from Everglades wading birds could be found in Havana, New York City, London, and Paris.
According to historians, "From the middle of the nineteenth century to the middle of the twentieth century, the United States went through a period in which wetland removal was not questioned.
In the wet season fresh water pours out into Florida Bay, and sawgrass begins to grow closer to the coastline.
As a result of the stimulus package, a mile-long (1.6&nbsp;km) bridge to replace the Tamiami Trail, a road that borders Everglades National Park to the north and has blocked water from reaching the southern Everglades, was begun by the Army Corps of Engineers in December 2009.
They earned money by wrestling alligators and selling craftworks.
By 1913, the Seminole in the Everglades numbered no more than 325.
In 2008, the State of Florida agreed to buy U.S. Sugar and all of its manufacturing and production facilities for an estimated $1.7&nbsp;billion.
Longer hydroperiods are possible in areas that were submerged beneath seawater for longer periods of time, while the geology of Florida was forming.
The iconic water and sawgrass combination in the shallow river  long and  wide that spans from Lake Okeechobee to Florida Bay is often referred to as the "true Everglades" or just "the Glades".
Some tried burning off the sawgrass or other vegetation, only to learn that the peat continued to burn.
Some find the conditions quite favorable and have established self-sustaining populations, competing for food and space with native animals.
The fertilizers used on vegetables, along with high concentrations of nitrogen and phosphorus that are the byproduct of decayed soil necessary for sugarcane production, were pumped into WCAs south of the EAA.
Like most regions with this climate type, there are two basic seasons - a "dry season " (winter) which runs from November through April, and a "wet season" (summer) which runs from May through October.
The Old World climbing fern (''Lygodium microphyllum'') may be causing the most harm to restoration as it blankets areas thickly, making it impossible for animals to pass through.
The Swamp and Overflowed Lands Act ensured that the state would be responsible for funding the attempts at developing wetlands into farmlands.
During a year unaffected by drought, the rate may reach  a year.
The increasing population in towns near the Everglades hunted in the area.
The region was labeled "'''''Pa-hai-okee'''''" on an American military map from 1839, although it had earlier been called "Ever Glades" throughout the Second Seminole War.
Hunters could collect plumes from a hundred birds on a good day.
Five geologic formations make up the southern portion of Florida: the Tamiami Formation, Caloosahatchee Formation, Anastasia Formation, Miami Limestone (or Miami Oolite), and the Fort Thompson Formation.
It is one of the most sparsely populated areas of the state.
The surface is covered in water only three to seven months of the year, and the water is, on average, shallow at only  deep.
The cost estimate for the entire plan was $7.8&nbsp;billion, and in a bipartisan show of cooperation, CERP was voted through Congress with an overwhelming margin.
When studies indicated the proposed jetport would create  of raw sewage a day and  of jet engine pollutants a year, the project met staunch opposition.
Major sloughs in the Everglades system include the Shark River Slough flowing out to Florida Bay, Lostmans River Slough bordering The Big Cypress, and Taylor Slough in the eastern Everglades.
The Kissimmee River is a broad floodplain that empties directly into Lake Okeechobee, which at  with an average depth of , is a vast but shallow lake.
These were their bases for reorganizing their government and they became federally recognized in 1957 as the Seminole Tribe of Florida.
Red mangroves have the farthest-reaching roots, trapping sediments that help build coastlines after and between storms.
Canoe trips to Cuba were also common.
After researching the region for five years, she described the history and ecology of the South Florida in great detail.
Governor Charlie Crist announced the same month that $50 million of state funds would be earmarked for Everglades restoration.
The Restudy came with a plan to stop the declining environmental quality, and this proposal was to be the most expensive and comprehensive ecological repair project in history.
Migrants to the region who wanted to develop plantations first proposed draining the Everglades in 1848, but no work of this type was attempted until 1882.
In May 2010,  of bridges were proposed to be added to the Tamiami Trail.
The report noted past environmental abuses that brought the state to a position to make a decision.
People who kept more traditional ways had settlements along the Tamiami Trail and tended to speak the Mikasuki language.
The limestone shelf is wide and slightly angled instead of having a narrow, deep channel characteristic of most rivers.
Indeed, it was considered the proper thing to do."
The abundance of fresh water allowed new vegetation to take root, and formed convective thunderstorms over the land through evaporation.
This slight rise in elevation on both sides of the Everglades creates a basin, and forces water that overflows Lake Okeechobee to creep toward the southwest.
Water shortages would become common and some cities would have annual water restrictions.
The name "Everglades" first appeared on a map in 1823, although it was also spelled as "Ever Glades" as late as 1851.
It took another 13&nbsp;years to be dedicated on December 6, 1947.
Within Everglades National Park,  of pine forests are protected, but outside the park,  of pine communities remained as of 1990, averaging  in area.
The Tamiami Formation is a compression of highly permeable light colored fossiliferous sands and pockets of quartz,  thick.
The land bordering the rail lines was developed as citrus farms.
They later were federally recognized in 1962 as the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida.
Broward was paid by land developer Richard J. Bolles to tour the state to promote drainage.
This species can grow up to  long, and they compete with alligators for the top of the food chain.
Alligators have created a niche in wet prairies.
Raccoons and otters were the most widely hunted for their skins.
Stricter emissions standards helped lower mercury coming from power plants and incinerators, which in turn lowered mercury levels found in animals, though they continue to be a concern.
It also climbs up trees and creates "fire ladders", allowing parts of the trees to burn that would otherwise remain unharmed.
Most of The Big Cypress sits atop a bedrock covered by a thinner layer of limestone.
Geologic factors, climate, and the frequency of fire help to create, maintain, or replace the ecosystems in the Everglades.
More than  of Florida Bay is protected by Everglades National Park, representing the largest body of water in the park boundaries.
The arrival of phosphorus allowed cattails to spread quickly.
Salt ocean water intruded into Miami's wells; when the city brought in an expert to explain why, he discovered that the water in the Everglades was the area's groundwater—here, it appeared on the surface.
Land developers sold 20,000&nbsp;lots in a few months in 1912.
From the Glades peoples, two major nations emerged in the area: the Calusa and the Tequesta.
Sloughs, or free-flowing channels of water, develop in between sawgrass prairies.
Both Marjory Stoneman Douglas and linguist Wallace McMullen suggest that cartographers substituted "Ever" for "River".
Many others died in the war.
Fires are confined by existing water and rainfall.
Mangrove trees were cut down and replaced with palm trees to improve the view.
In 1939, a million acres (4,000&nbsp;km²) of Everglades burned, and the black clouds of peat and sawgrass fires hung over Miami.
Developed areas between the mid-1950s and the late 1960s quadrupled.
The land seemed to inspire extreme reactions of both wonder or hatred.
These systems shift, grow and shrink, die, or reappear within years or decades.
Most Calusa villages were located at the mouths of rivers or on key islands.
Strong winds from these storms disperse plant seeds and replenish mangrove forests, coral reefs, and other ecosystems.
President Herbert Hoover toured the towns affected by the 1928 Okeechobee Hurricane and ordered the Army Corps of Engineers to assist the communities surrounding the lake.
The dry season can be severe at times, as wildfires and water restrictions are often in place.
Where there is more room, periphyton grows.
An 1840 expedition into the Everglades  offered the first printed account for the general public to read about the Everglades.
Though some ecosystems are maintained and promoted by fire, hammocks may take decades or centuries to recover.
She characterized the Everglades as a river instead of a stagnant swamp.
Willoughby pointed out that much of the rest of the country had been explored and mapped except for this part of Florida, writing, "(w)e have a tract of land one hundred and thirty miles long and seventy miles wide that is as much unknown to the white man as the heart of Africa."
In 1995, Chiles published the commission's findings in a report that related the degradation of the Everglades ecosystems to the lower quality of life in urban areas.
Governor Broward ran for the U.S. Senate in 1908 but lost.
Some began to work in local farms, ranches, and souvenir stands.
The estuarine ecosystem of the Ten Thousand Islands, which is comprised almost completely of mangrove forests, covers almost .
Female sea turtles return annually to nest on the shore, and manatees spend the winter months in the warmer water of the bay.
A 2007 survey by geographers Ary J. Lamme and Raymond K. Oldakowski found that the "Glades" has emerged as a distinct vernacular region of Florida.
It takes approximately 225&nbsp;years for one foot (.30 m) of peat to develop, but in some locations the peat is less dense than it should be for the 5,000&nbsp;years of the Everglades' existence.
Sea grasses also serve to stabilize the sea beds and protect shorelines from erosion by absorbing energy from waves.
More than  of Stormwater Treatment Areas have been constructed to filter  of phosphorus from Everglades waters.
Estimated numbers of Calusa at the beginning of the Spanish occupation ranged from 4,000 to 7,000.
The new jetport was planned to be larger than O'Hare, Dulles, JFK, and LAX airports combined, and the chosen location was  north of Everglades National Park.
The military penetration of southern Florida offered the opportunity to map a poorly understood and largely unknown part of the country.
The metropolitan areas of Miami, Fort Lauderdale, and West Palm Beach are located on a rise in elevation along the eastern coast of Florida, called the Eastern Coastal Ridge, that was formed as waves compressed ooids into a single formation.
Peat turned to dust.
Hammocks are slightly elevated on limestone plateaus risen several inches above the surrounding peat, or they may grow on land that has been unharmed by deep peat fires.
Fifty-five percent of the land necessary to acquire for restoration has been purchased by the State of Florida, totaling .
Microorganisms degraded the peat into carbon dioxide and water.
The climate of South Florida is located across the broad transition zone between subtropical and tropical climates (Koppen Cf and Aw).
The party encountered thousands of birds near the Shark River, "killing hundreds, but they continued to return".
Calcium deposits are present where more limestone is exposed.
There are approximately 100 keys in Florida Bay, many of which are mangrove forests.
Though scientists made headway in decreasing mercury and phosphorus levels in water, the natural environment of South Florida continued to decline in the 1990s, and life in nearby cities reflected this downturn.
Whereas in the wet season, dead plant matter and the tips of grasses and trees are burned, in the dry season the fire may be fed by organic peat and burn deeply, destroying root systems.
Miami became a prime destination for extremely wealthy people after the Royal Palm Hotel was opened.
With the rise of sea levels that occurred during the Pleistocene approximately 17,000&nbsp;years ago, the runoff of water from Lake Okeechobee slowed and created the vast marshland that is now known as the Everglades.
Humans arrived in the Florida peninsula approximately 15,000&nbsp;years ago.
One of the defining characteristics of natural Everglades ecology is its ability to support itself in a nutrient-poor environment, and the introduction of fertilizers began to alter the plant life in the region.
A Florida panther was found dead with levels of mercury high enough to kill a human.
It is named for the Tamiami Trail that follows the upper bedrock of the Big Cypress Swamp, and underlies the southern portion of the Everglades.
Initial attempts at developing agriculture near Lake Okeechobee were successful, but the nutrients in the peat were rapidly removed.
Though initially crops sprouted quickly and lushly, they just as quickly wilted and died, seemingly without reason.
As rain continued to fall, the slightly acidic rainwater dissolved the limestone.
It controlled fifty villages located on Florida's west coast, around Lake Okeechobee, and on the Florida Keys.
Approximately 26% of all species of fish, reptiles, birds, and mammals in South Florida are exotic—more than in any other part of the U.S.—and the region hosts one of the highest numbers of exotic plant species in the world.
They were shot usually in the spring, when their feathers were colored for mating and nesting.
Layers of charcoal have been detected in the peat in portions of the Everglades that indicate the region endured severe fires for years at a time, although this trend seems to have abated since the last occurrence in 940 BCE.
Rain water is less likely to erode the limestone to form ''solution holes''—smaller versions of sinkholes that do not intersect with the water table.
The same year cattails were discovered overtaking sawgrass marshes in Loxahatchee National Wildlife Refuge.
With their claws and snouts they dig at low spots and create ponds free of vegetation that remain submerged throughout the dry season.
Under both the Miami Limestone formation and the Fort Thompson limestone lies the Biscayne Aquifer, a surface aquifer that serves as the Miami metropolitan area's fresh water source.
Intense daytime heating of the ground causes the warm moist tropical air to rise, creating the afternoon thundershowers typical of tropical climates.
They occupied the southeastern portion of the lower peninsula in modern-day Dade and Broward counties.
Surrounding the southern part of Lake Okeechobee is the Fort Thompson Formation, made of dense, hard limestone, shells, and sand.
Governor Claude Kirk withdrew his support for the project, and Marjory Stoneman Douglas was persuaded at 79&nbsp;years old to go on tour to give hundreds of speeches against it.
Florida officials indicated they intended to allow U.S. Sugar to process for six more years before dismissing its employees and dismantling the plant.
The properties of the rock underneath the Everglades can be explained by the geologic history of the state.
The invasive species that causes the most damage to bird populations is the cat ''(Felis catus)'', both domestic and feral.
Nixon instead established Big Cypress National Preserve, announcing it in the Special Message to the Congress Outlining the 1972 Environmental Program .
The geologic formations that have the most influence on the Everglades are the Miami Limestone and the Fort Thompson Formation.
It had enough support to be declared a national park by Congress in 1934.
Everglades mangroves also serve as nurseries for crustaceans and fish, and rookeries for birds.
The idea of a national park for the Everglades was pitched in 1928, when a Miami land developer named Ernest F. Coe established the Everglades Tropical National Park Association.
It also dissolved oxygen in the peat, promoted algae, and prohibited growth of native invertebrates on the bottom of the food chain.
Wet prairies are slightly elevated like sawgrass marshes, but with greater plant diversity.
Writer Marjory Stoneman Douglas popularized the term "'''River of Grass'''" to describe the sawgrass marshes, part of a complex system of interdependent ecosystems that include cypress swamps, the estuarine mangrove forests of the Ten Thousand Islands, tropical hardwood hammocks, pine rockland, and the marine environment of Florida Bay.
The populations of the small towns surrounding the lake jumped from 3,000 to 9,000 after World War II.
Along the western border of the Big Cypress Swamp is the Immokolee Ridge (or Immokolee Rise), a slight rise of compressed sand that divides the runoff between the Caloosahatchee River and The Big Cypress.
The unique structure was some of the first material used in housing in early 20th-century South Florida.
The dry season sees little rainfall and dew points and humidity are often quite low.
Naturally occurring bacteria in Everglades peat and muck assist with the process of decomposition under water, which is generally very slow, partially due to the low levels of dissolved oxygen.
Water in sloughs flows around the islands, creating moats.
The Seminole originally settled in the northern portion of the territory.
The underlying bedrock or limestone of the Everglades basin affects the ''hydroperiod'', or how long an area within the region stays flooded throughout the year.
Melaleucas grow taller and more densely in the Everglades than in their native Australia, making them unsuitable as nesting areas for birds with wide wingspans.
He sent his observations to the ''New Orleans Times-Democrat''.
As water leaves an area through evaporation from groundwater or from plant matter, activated primarily by solar energy, it is then moved by wind patterns to other areas that border or flow into the Everglades watershed system.
Small islands of trees growing on land raised between  and  above sloughs and prairies are called tropical hardwood hammocks.
An extended drought occurred in the 1930s; with the wall preventing water from leaving Lake Okeechobee and canals and ditches removing other water, the Everglades became parched.
The region supports Tortugas pink shrimp (''Farfantepenaeus duorarum'') and stone crab (''Menippe mercenaria'') industries; between 80 and 90 percent of commercially harvested crustacean species in Florida's salt waters are born or spend time near the Everglades.
The Calusa was the largest and most powerful nation in South Florida.
Along the way he built resort hotels, transforming territorial outposts into tourist destinations.
The misunderstanding of the role of fire also played a part in the disappearance of pine forests in the area, as natural fires were put out and pine rocklands transitioned into hardwood hammocks.
Fire is an important element in the natural maintenance of the Everglades.
However, federal funds have not been forthcoming; CERP was signed when the U.S. government had a budget surplus, but since then deficits have renewed, and two of CERP's major supporters in Congress retired.
As metropolitan areas in South Florida began to grow, the two groups were closely associated with the Everglades.
Fields in the EAA are typically , bordered by canals on two sides, that are connected to larger canals where water is pumped in or out depending on the needs of the crops.
The government began to focus on the control of floods rather than drainage.
Overall, the report concluded that substantial near-term progress to address both water quality and hydrology in the central Everglades is needed to reverse ongoing degradation before it is too late.
In 1948 Congress approved the Central and Southern Florida Project for Flood Control and Other Purposes (C&SF), which divided the Everglades into basins.
The fresh water coming into Florida Bay from the Everglades creates perfect conditions for vast beds of turtle grass and algae formations that are the foundation for animal life in the bay.
Control of the Hoover Dike and the waters of Lake Okeechobee were delegated to federal powers: the United States declared legal limits of the lake to between .
In November 2008, the agreement was revised to offer $1.34&nbsp;billion, allowing sugar mills in Clewiston to remain in production.
The '''Everglades''' (or  '''Pa-hay-okee''') are a natural region of tropical wetlands in the southern portion of the U.S. state of Florida, comprising the southern half of a large drainage basin and part of the neotropic ecozone.
Further problems with the environment arose when a vast algal bloom appeared in one-fifth of Lake Okeechobee in 1986.
When rainfall exceeded the capacity of Lake Okeechobee and the Kissimmee River floodplain, it spilled over and flowed in a southwestern direction to empty into Florida Bay.
The sheetflow travels so slowly that water is typically stored from one wet season to the next in the porous limestone substrate.
In the northern Everglades were Water Conservation Areas (WCAs), and the Everglades Agricultural Area (EAA) bordering to the south of Lake Okeechobee.
Two catastrophic hurricanes in 1926 and 1928 caused Lake Okeechobee to breach its levees, killing thousands of people.
When droughts take place, the rate may peak at over , and exceed the amount of rainfall.
Draining the Everglades was suggested as early as 1837, and a resolution in Congress was passed in 1842 that prompted Secretary of Treasury Robert J. Walker to request those with experience in the Everglades to give their opinion on the possibility of drainage.
All three types of trees absorb the energy of waves and storm surges.
South Florida slash pines are insulated by their bark to protect them from heat.
When flooded, the marl can support a variety of water plants.
+ Average, maximum, and minimum levels of rainfall for the lower east coast of Florida, from 1918 to 1985
Urban areas had grown beyond their capacities to sustain themselves.
A turning point came for development in the Everglades at the proposition of an expanded airport after Miami International Airport outgrew its capacities.
A national push for expansion and progress in the United States occurred in the later part of the 19th century, which stimulated interest in draining the Everglades for agricultural use.
Sugarcane production soared after the dike and canal were built.
They were effective in lowering the groundwater, but it became apparent that their capacity was insufficient for the wet season.
These plateaus rise and fall only a few inches, but on the subtle South Florida topography these small variations affect both the flow of water and the types of vegetation that can take hold.
Some of the peat was burned by settlers to clear the land.
As the peat thins out, cypresses grow smaller and thinner, giving the small forest the appearance of a dome from the outside.
