The success of this promotion has yet to be revealed.
The process is taxing on a god, and can destroy it in the process.
In the game's history, the Solars eventually grew decadent and corrupt from this influence.
First Edition Exalted hints at a sixth magical material, but it is not presented in full until the Second Edition release of Dreams of the First Age.
In addition to their self-inflicted distinguishing marks, each Lunar has a "Tell," a characteristic that remains constant across all forms, further setting them apart from mortals.
With these, she first beat back the Balorian Crusade, and then asserted her rulership over much of the world, dubbing herself the Scarlet Empress.
They shaped Creation &ndash; a flat world of finite extent &ndash; from the primordial chaos, and placed the gods (numberless immortal spirits resembling the Kami of Shinto) to watch over it.
''Nephwracks'' are ghosts who have been corrupted by the Neverborn.
The writers of the third edition have indicated that stunts will no longer regenerate Essence, but that combat will automatically cause Essence stores to refill quickly.
Within the game's history, they were very tightly bound to the First Age Solars; while the first edition of the game claimed that it was very common in the First Age for the Solar and Lunar Exalted to marry each other, the second edition took this a step further: each Lunar Exaltation is bound to a singular corresponding Solar one in such a way that that Lunar instantly feels a connection to the Lawgiver, though how they act upon this bond depends on the inclinations of the Exalts involved.
It is by ''not using'' these weapons and being perfectly, imperturbably at peace that Nishkriya defines the concept of conflict.
In practice, Terrestrial courts are largely independent.
Jade weapons are unnaturally fast, and jade armor doesn't tire the wearer.
Initially, a hungry ghost includes both the higher soul and the ''po'', or lower soul, but the ''hun'' soon moves on, leaving the hungry ghost largely mindless.
The sixth, yellow jade, is something of a mystery, in that it should not exist and only comes about through alchemical mistakes.
Rules for Akuma were first introduced in the 1st edition '''Exalted Player's Guide''' (April 2004).
The shinma themselves are quite impossible for a Creation-born mortal to comprehend in their nativity, and are generally viewed by mortal savants as metaphysical axioms &ndash; though the Raksha apparently consider them to be interesting characters of some sort, and base their Graces (and thus their mimicry of mortal personalities) on transformations performed with the help of the shinma.
:: '''Nirvikalpa''', shinma of communication.
The third edition of the game is currently in development.
The majority of the remaining Dragon Kings are in Rathess, an ancient home filled with a variety of powerful artifacts made by the Dragon Kings in the glory days of the First Age.
In the history of Exalted, they were the elite infantry and servants to the rest of the Exalted in the First Age.
Each material is associated with a type of Exalted, as well as one of the castes of Alchemical Exalted, who are partially constructed from that material.
Sensing that these other, native intelligences of Chaos had been snuffed out in the Creation of inanimate elements, Autochthon took posthumous pity on them, and, salvaging whatever it could discern of their prior selves, resurrected them &ndash; still formed of the earthen materials they had calcified into, but ''alive'', and with at least a glimmering memory of the intelligent entities they had once been.
In this case, this flaw is represented by a "Great Curse", uttered upon the dying breaths of the slain Primordials.
Within the last five years of the game's fictional history, they and their Deathlord masters have begun to corrupt Creation with the power of the Underworld.
The Green Sun Princes' disadvantage is that they are few in number; only 50 infernal essences are controlled by the Yozis, and they do not yet have the ability to corrupt further Solar Essences as the Deathlords can.
The prominent Dragon-Blooded families of the rival city-state of Lookshy, across the Inner Sea, are known as Gentes.
The surrendered Primordials were banished to/became the Hell known as Malfeas, the Demon City.
In their initial introduction at the end of Second Edition, it was mentioned that they possess an interest in severed limbs and body parts, but the full explanation for this has yet to be given.
Various sourcebooks for ''Exalted'' state that Solars lack the specialized abilities of the other Exalted: the shapeshifting magic of the Lunars, the raw entropic and destructive force of the Abyssals, the elemental manipulation of the Terrestrial Exalted, or the Fate-manipulation of the Sidereals.
They were the viziers, prophets and cunning advisers of the First Age.
The most powerful elementals are the Lesser and Greater Elemental Dragons.
Among others, they also created a race of '''Minikin''', miniature people with the ability to use Essence so that they could work on and repair the advanced Essence-machinery of the age, but they merged with their relatives, the Djala people, since the end of the First Age and are no longer distinguishable as a race.
They are natives of the Wyld, which they call '''Rakshastan''' &ndash; the place that exists between Creation and the Unshaped Chaos.
Gods can generally only significantly increase their power by getting promoted or expanding their purview.
There are two types of Infernal Exalted, the '''Akuma''' and the '''Green Sun Princes'''.
The power struggle by the great Dragon-Blooded houses to fill the resulting power vacuum has destabilized the Scarlet Empire and allowed the Solar Exalted to escape the purges of the Wyld Hunt and rise in Creation once more.
In order of least powerful and influential to most, there are least gods, minor gods, gods, major gods and Celestial Incarnae.
The Exalted of Creation can be divided into two categories: Terrestrial Exalted and Celestial Exalted.
They still exist in the Second Age, though the once great Dragon Kings remain hidden in the farthest corners of Creation.
A Raksha passes through Nirakara when she assumes shape in Creation and enters it, while a mortal passes through Nirakara when he enters the Wyld and undergoes destabilizing mutations.
With the aid of magic and selective breeding they succeeded in creating several new mortal races with unique talents and abilities.
Because of this, the Realm organizes the Wyld Hunt, which actively seeks out newly Exalted Celestials (Solars and Lunars, although they also hunt Abyssals and fair folk as well) and overwhelms them before they can master their new powers.
Swords made of Moonsilver are more accurate and deflect strikes more easily, bows shoot farther and armor does not impede the wearer's mobility.
However, per the commentary of multiple developers, the connections are deliberately tenuous, allowing players to be free to treat it as a prehistory or as its own world as it may suit their individual game.
According to the core sourcebooks and the supplementary materials, the history of the setting begins with the Primordials: vast entities akin to Greek primordial deities or the Outer Gods of H.P.
For each Yozi, there are at least a dozen Third Circle demons including the Fetich, each third circle demon rivals the most powerful gods and elementals in power and embodies and defines an aspect of the Yozi, which will change if the demon is permanently slain, with more dramatic changes including a new name and identity resulting from the death of a Fetich.
Willing non-Alchemical Exalted can become "Akuma" of Autochthon, gaining the ability to have Alchemical charms installed and gaining a Clarity track.
Green Sun Princes of any caste can learn the charms of all five castes, as well as the charms of any other Yozis who have opened up access to their charms to the Green Sun Princes; in the default setting, Kimbery is the only other Yozi who has done so.
Other influences include Glen Cook's ''The Black Company''; Sean Stewart's ''Resurrection Man'', ''The Night Watch'', and ''Galveston''; Homer's ''Odyssey'', the Bible, and Wu Cheng'en's ''Journey to the West''.
Surrounding Creation is the infinite ocean of Pure Chaos known as the Wyld.
The '''Fae-Blooded''' are the children of a union between the Raksha and mortals.
Most types of Exalted have certain collective predispositions toward or against other Exalt types, and may be viewed differently by the various mortals of Creation; while the Dragon-Blooded and their world-spanning empire are often seen as demigods and heroes, for instance, the Lunar Exalted are often seen as monstrous and dangerous; this is in part owing to their abilities to take the shapes of animals and monsters and other humans by killing them, but also due to the concerted efforts of Terrestrial propaganda.
''Hungry ghosts'' generally come into existence due to betrayal, vengeance or a traumatic death.
:: '''Nirvishesha''', shinma of identity.
The setting is strongly influenced by Tanith Lee's ''Tales from the Flat Earth'', Michael Moorcock's ''Hawkmoon'', Lord Dunsany's ''The Gods of Pegana'' and Yoshiaki Kawajiri's ''Ninja Scroll''.
The Dragon Kings are large dinosaur-like beings of great power.
These ghosts are much weaker than Exalted, and they can only respire Essence in the Underworld and Shadowlands.
: Behemoths are unique, immortal monsters.
The similarities between Exalted and the new edition of the World of Darkness are even weaker.
'''''Exalted''''' is a role-playing game published by White Wolf Publishing.
The Getimian Exalted are described as "drawn from stillborn destinies to serve as agents in one man’s war against Heaven".
Most gods are members of the Celestial Order, which is stratified into two divisions: the Celestial Court, composed of gods of concepts, and the Terrestrial Bureaucracy, made up of the gods of physical objects and locations.
It is largely present within the body of the Primordial Autochthon, but was also known in Creation during the First Age.
First Circle demons are the descendants of greater demons rather than aspects of them, generally divided into various demonic species, with individuality and uniqueness quite rare among them.
A small minority of Workers and Warriors--as well as the entire Artisan Caste--are Enlightened, with much greater creativity as well as both mundane and supernatural potential, and all of these Enlightened are Essence-wielders.
Despite this, the Getimians have their own will, and at least one works as a special consultant to Heaven rather than opposing it.
They prey upon the interiority of mortals and do a brisk slave trade with The Guild, a powerful economic organization in Creation.
The promotion was called "Graduate your Game" and has received mixed reviews from fans of both games.
Of the 13 former Great Houses, only two, Jerah and Manosque, have been named.
It cannot even observe others nor be observed by them, preventing the most basic forms of communication, thereby defining the concept.
Unlike uncorrupted ghosts, they are capable of using necromancy.
It also gives the Exalt access to the powers of any hearthstone mounted on the item.
There are five major or great Gentes: Amilar (Air), Karal (Fire), Maheka (Earth), Teresu (Water) and Yushoto (Wood), as well as approximately a dozen minor Gentes.
; '''Orichalcum''' : is used primarily by the Solar Exalted.
The category of ''Hekatonkhire'' includes the ghosts of demons, devas and Primordial behemoths, as well as the manifested nightmares of the Neverborn.
Lunars follow at best a loose tribal hierarchy and ritually tattoo each other to protect themselves from the warping effects of the Wyld.
Unlike Abyssals, Infernals rarely regret their state, and instead revel in their mission to overthrow the upstart gods and return creation to its original rulers.
IV: The Roll of Glorious Divinity I: Gods & Elementals''.
Second edition materials detailed the Lunar Exalted's subversive influence on Creation's societies and revealed the Thousand Streams River Project, a complicated system of social engineering designed to create self-sufficient human societies that do not require Exalted leadership to function.
The elemental poles of Creation color the directions of the map:  the frigid North, near the pole of Air, is divided by the White Sea; The element of Wood influences the heavily forested East, the most densely populated region of Creation other than the Blessed Isle; the Scavenger Lands, formally named the Confederation of Rivers, is an organization of allied nations within the East; the South, drawing from the Pole of Fire, is a hot, arid region; the influence of the Pole of Water upon the West shows itself in the Great Western Ocean encompassing various major and minor island nations; finally, the Elemental Pole of Earth, the least dangerous of the five, is located at the top of the towering Imperial Mountain in the centre of the Blessed Isle.
First Edition was originally created by Robert Hatch, Justin Achilli and Stephan Wieck.
The Liminals "stand at the border between life and death, humanity and monstrosity".
With the exception of elementals, spirits are naturally immaterial, generally require Charms to materialize in Creation, and will reform when killed unless some supernatural effect prevents them from doing so.
This further serves to mark them as different from the rest of humanity, as the tattoos are made of moonsilver, and are often visible over much of the Lunar's body.
Willing Solar Exalted can be converted to Abyssal Exalted with a powerful necromantic spell.
The most powerful kin of the Fair Folk are the Unshaped.
The new Liminal possesses the memories of the body that she wears, but does not possess the same soul, and thus does not have the same personality.
The Sidereals, possibly under the effects of the Great Curse laid upon them by the Neverborn, elected the path that offered a guaranteed future for Creation.
After the Usurpation, the majority of the Exaltations of the Solar Exalted were locked away, and an organization known as the Wyld Hunt was organized by agents of the Sidereals and Terrestrials to kill all the others, and drive the Lunar Exalted from the civilised lands of Creation.
It is jet black, and agonized faces of the souls it contains can be seen moving and screaming in the metal.
Those who remind Nirvishesha of its existence by speaking its given name, or those of the aspects it defines invite its wrath.
Gaia's devas are known as kami, five of her third circle kami, the Five Elemental Dragons, have been detailed.
Most of the time, it fails, but on occasion it draws the attention of some other power that raises the corpse to life again.
The vast majority of the Mountain Folk are Unenlightened &ndash; limited in intelligence, creativity, and supernatural power.
They retain access to their native charm set and gain the ability to learn and use their patron Yozi's Infernal charms.
After a cataclysmic struggle, the Exalted finally triumphed over the Primordials, slaying many and then forcing the others to surrender.
Now they are half-remembered only as the Yozis: ill-understood and impersonal cosmic deities whose continued worship is reckoned among the highest of heresies.
The aspects of Nishkriya, however, are extremely lethal and violent.
V: The Roll of Glorious Divinity II: Ghosts & Demons''.
Those with awakened Essence can purchase the same types of Charms as their supernatural parent, though their power is limited by a low Permanent Essence trait and a small Essence pool.
However, as the chosen champions of greater powers, each Exalt possesses Charms, which may either enhance their natural capabilities or manifest as shows of great power.
The ''Neverborn'' are the ghosts of slain Primordials.
While less powerful, Terrestrial Exalted (commonly known as the Dragon-Blooded) can pass on their Exaltation to their children, much like one would pass on other genetic features.
Unlike the Celestial Exalted, there is no hard cap on the number of Alchemicals, the main limiting factor on their numbers being the immense resource investment required for their construction.
A god may petition the Unconquered Sun for the power to Exalt their own champion.
Most houses were founded by and named after one of the Scarlet Empress's Exalted offspring, though at least two are descended from the Empress' late husbands, and three unspecified houses are descended from adopted children of the Empress.
The state-sanctioned faith known as the Immaculate Order paints the Solar and Lunar Exalted as dangerous Anathema who will bring ruin to the world if allowed to exist.
Essence is the mystical force which the Exalted and gods manipulate to gain their supernatural powers, as well as the energy that forms all things.
Lunar castes are not predetermined and inflexible, but rather are associations with phases of the moon chosen by individuals before their ritual tattooing brings them fully into Lunar society under these associations.
The Mountain Folk can also produce God-Blooded offspring, but there is no specific term for them.
They are created when someone attempts to bring another person back from death; resurrection is explicitly impossible in Exalted, but some will still try.
While normally their Essence recovered slowly through rest, in the first two editions they could also regain it more quickly by performing ''stunts'', actions given special description and embellishment by the players.
Within the game, the mystical force "Essence" is always capitalized to distinguish from other uses of the word.
Nirakara is formless, and is also the gateway all beings must pass through to cross between Creation and the Wyld.
There are five elemental aspects to the Dragon-Blooded: '''Air''' (the Azure Children of Mela), '''Earth''' (the Ivory Children of Pasiap), '''Fire''' (the Scarlet Offspring of Hesiesh), '''Water''' (the Ebon Offspring of Daana'd) and '''Wood''' (the Verdant Children of Sextes Jylis).
Mountain Folk society is ruled by the Artisan Caste, who make up the nobility, with Unenlightened Warriors and Workers making up the commoners and Enlightened Warriors and Workers occupying an intermediate position.
However, stunts continue to exist, and their primary benefit—adding extra dice to the actions they describe, thus enhancing the possibility of success—remains.
Terrestrial Exalted are the chosen of the Elemental Dragons, children of the primordial Gaia, who govern the elemental underpinnings of Creation.
:;Demons, Yozis, Primordials and Devas
If successful, then the God receives the Exigence, which they may use to create their own champion.
They are inhuman and beautiful beguiling monsters that subsist on elements of human subjectivity, devouring dreams, imbibing hopes and fears, and assuming narrative personalities stolen piecemeal from the Creation-born.
The Green Sun Princes are made with the fifty Essences of Solar Exalts which the Yozis took in payment from the Neverborn and altered to emulate themselves in exchange for teaching the Neverborn to corrupt Solar Essences to create the Abyssals.
''Spectres'', also known as ''plasmics'', are bizarre creatures spawned by the nightmares of the Neverborn.
The resulting offspring bears traces of its mystical parentage.
Deathknights are described as finding themselves bound to their dark fate; holding onto the trappings of life inevitably spells disaster for those who rebel.
While the core rulebook mentions and discusses the other Exalted to the extent necessary for them to appear as supporting characters in Solar-themed games, additional sourcebooks provide the depth of detail necessary to stage other Exalted as playable characters.
Technically, all members of the Celestial Court outrank all members of the Terrestrial Bureaucracy.
From the Sanskrit word Nirvikalpa, meaning "not admitting an alternative".
Due to the terms of the Yozis' surrender, all demons can be summoned and bound through sorcery, and the Unconquered Sun and the Maiden of Endings can summon Yozis.
At the core of the setting, there are several different types of Exalted, any type of which could play the role of protagonist or antagonist of the game.
Sidereals, in addition to their mastery of martial arts, evidenced by their access to the highest forms of martial-arts magical abilities (known as Sidereal martial arts), excel at foreseeing and manipulating fate.
Unlike the Raksha, the Unshaped lack the means to stabilize themselves by assimilating the personhood of mortals and as such are incapable of existing in Creation for any great duration.
Abyssal Exalted are exceptionally powerful in the necromantic school of sorcery, which represents the arcane knowledge of death and the Void, knowledge which was originally brought into Creation by a coterie of First Age Exalted who stole it by plundering the crypt-worlds of the Neverborn beneath the Underworld.
The influence of the shinma is relative rather than absolute, and the existences of alien shinma who define categories that have no influence on Creation have been mentioned, as have areas of the Wyld which are Beyond the influence of the various shinma salient to Creation.
The original core rulebook was published in July 2001.
Examples of least gods include gods of a single pebble, whereas major gods include gods of concepts such as wealth or war.
These entities were never trapped in the structural orbit of Creation, but are truly native to the pure Chaos beyond the Wyld.
Like the protean Lunars, Moonsilver can shift into new forms easily.
In March 2008, White Wolf Publishing unveiled a promotion that would allow 2,500 Dungeons & Dragons players to exchange their copy of their Edition 3.5 Player's Handbook for a copy of the Exalted Second Edition Core Rulebook.
There is also a fifth Grace, the Heart Grace, which is associated with identity and the trait of Willpower.
Soulsteel weapons inflict heavy damage on living beings and frequently drain small quantities of Essence as well.
: During the First Age, the Solar deliberative began a series of experiments on human volunteers with the aim of creating specialised subspecies of humanity.
The Dragon-Blooded are not limited by a set amount of "Exalted essences" like Celestial Exalted.
The Crafted Folk that survived include the winged '''Airfolk''' in the North, the savage and cannibalistic '''Dunefolk''' in the south, the subterranean '''Earthfolk''' who have assimilated into Mountain Folk society, the Amphibious '''Seafolk''' in the West and the slave race of '''Treefolk''' in the far East.
The Second Edition seems to imply that its story is the prehistory of our ''own'' world on its back cover, but this idea is not explored in any depth past that book; while the last book of Second Edition would posit a modernized world with the Exalted, it was clearly a technologically advanced version of Creation &ndash; the world of Exalted &ndash; rather than Earth.
Presented as most anarchistic and chaotic of the Exalted.
:: '''Nirakara''', shinma of shape.
; '''Moonsilver''' : is considered by the Lunar Exalted to be a gift from their patron, Luna.
The Getimian Exalted have Essence split into two pools, but unlike the other Exalted types, their charms interact with their separate pools in different ways;  their personal pool is akin to Yin essence, while their peripheral pool is Yang.
Members of the Crafted Races are mortal and are therefore capable of Exalting into one of the Celestial Exalted types.
Nearly eight hundred years later—in the present day of the game—there are eleven Great Houses of the Realm, nearly all of whom claim direct descent from the Empress.
Development of Exalted 3rd Edition was officially announced in October 2012.
This Great Curse manifests itself in a variety of ways and causes the "heroes" of the setting to be fatally flawed.
In the sourcebooks, they are often referred to as cunning shapeshifters, skilled fighters, and capable generals.
The easiest way for an Abyssal to restore Essence away from the Underworld is by feeding on the living.
Immensely powerful, they are difficult to rouse from their slumber, and their power seems largely constrained to the Labyrinth.
Many of the crafted races were classified as blessed races and given special status and privileges, however some of the other crafted races, known informally as the slave races, had low status and limited rights.
These Celestial Exalted are the least numerous of all the Exalted types (with the exception of the newly created Infernals), yet are described as major players in the fate of Creation.
Alchemicals serve the Great Maker Autochthon, a primordial who assisted the Gods by sharing the secret of Exaltation with them.
Like the Wyld environment they inhabit, Fair Folk are partially and provisionally confined and defined by their proximity to the structure of Creation, temporarily taking on aspects of the created world by interacting with it.
From the Indian word Dharma, this shinma is pure, wise, and all-knowing: the opposite of what it defines.
Akuma are Exalted of another type who have given themselves over to the cause of the Yozis and have been remade according to their masters' desires.
As such, they  orchestrated the end of the First Age, known as the Great Usurpation.
Sidereals slip from the minds of those who meet them, mortal and Exalt alike, which can be beneficial to Sidereal characters or harmful, depending on their intended goals as player characters and non-player characters.
One such aspect, "Ishiika, the grass-cutter scythe", was a particularly deadly participant in the Balorian Crusade.
Unlike true demons, these beings cannot be summoned through sorcery.
The Terrestrial Bureaucracy is nominally ruled by the Five Elemental Dragons, and is divided into various spirit courts.
Common to all of White Wolf Publishing's games, the primary character archetype, the Exalted, suffer from a systemic character flaw.
This material is used primarily by the Alchemical Exalted, though the Exalted of the First Age occasionally made items out of the material.
Orichalcum is rarely found in pure deposits; usually, it is created out of gold that has been heated by lava and sunlight reflected from mirrors of occult design.
There are six different colors of jade, five of which correspond to one of the Elemental Dragons.
Rules for playing Fair Folk are presented in ''Exalted: The Fair Folk'' in 1st edition, 2nd edition rules are included in ''Graceful Wicked Masques: The Fair Folk'', released in early 2009.
The developers describe four types of Dragon Kings, each living in a quadrant of Creation; the graceful flying '''Pterok''' (North), the nimble and lithe '''Raptok''' (East), the powerful and loyal '''Anklok''' (South), and the clever amphibious '''Mosok''' (West).
These materials are all easily enchanted, and each one resonates with a particular type of Exalted.
The Abyssal, Alchemical, and Infernal Exalted technically fall outside of the two categories, though their power level is comparable to that of Celestial Exalted.
The Alchemicals are not subject to the Great Curse, as they did not fight in the Primordial War.
; '''Adamant''' : a super-solid crystal that is refined down to the sharpest substance known.
Due to their overwhelming numbers in comparison with the Celestial Exalted (Terrestrial Exalted numbering around ten thousand as compared to the hundreds of Celestial Exalted), they were able to overthrow the Solar Exalted at the height of their power with the help and guidance of the Sidereal Exalted, thus ending the First Age.
There are also Hekatonkheires, Primordial Behemoths killed during the war, who now serve the Neverborn in the Underworld.
:: Gods represent objects, locations and concepts, but they are separate from them.
With the emergence of the Deathlords (who, as the authors describe them, are inscrutable to their power of prediction), the return of the Solars, and a growing rift between the Bronze Faction and the Gold Faction, who are now gathering their power and directing it into an organization known as the Cult of the Illuminated, the Sidereal Exalted are uncertain of their future.
Blue jade resonates with Air, white with Earth, black with Water, green with Wood, and red with Fire.
According to the authors, they stand somewhere between divinity and mortality, less than Exalted, but more than human.
which seems to suggest that hunters carry fragments of Solar Essences.
Nishkriya possesses many weapons with which it could fight.
Characters may be frequently presented with challenges that normal human beings, even within the context of the game, would find difficult, deadly, or simply impossible.
Finally, some even revel in the unaccountable warping effects of the Wyld and, forgoing the characteristic silvered tattoos, become increasingly unstable until ending up as inhuman beings known as "chimera" with no unifying form, akin to both Fair Folk and Creation-born.
Seeking to save the world, the Sidereals looked into the future and saw two options: attempt an reform of their maddening kings, or destroy the Solar Exalted and raise up the Dragon-blooded in their place.
The majority of the Dragon-Blooded in Creation make up the ruling class of the Realm, currently the most powerful empire in Creation, although the Old Realm ruled over by the Solars was far more advanced and successful than the current Realm ruled over by the Dragon-Blooded.
It must be harvested by moonlight, using no crafted tools, forged at night and cooled only with water that has never seen the sun.
The cosmology of Exalted also includes the Underworld, the celestial city of Yu-Shan, the demon realm of Malfeas, the machine world of Autochthonia, and Elsewhere.
A brief tour of the world of Autochthonia can be found on the game's website.
Elementals are naturally material, requiring charms to dematerialize, and with a few exceptions, cannot reform when slain.
: The Mountain Folk are divided along two lines, Caste and Enlightenment.
They are less powerful than other types of Exalted, but most of their strength lies in their inheritance &ndash; rather than being chosen by a god, the Dragon-Blooded have the potential to pass their Exaltation on to their children; although most Dragon-Blooded are easily able to trace their heritage back through generations, some Dragon-Blooded—called the "Lost Eggs"—Exalt into families that have no Dragon-Blooded in their recent genealogy.
The Raksha are divided into castes: Diplomats, who favor the Staff Grace and the virtue of Conviction; Entertainers, who favor the Cup Grace and the virtue of Compassion; Warriors, who favor the Sword Grace and the virtue of Valor; and Workers, who favor the Ring Grace and the virtue of Temperance.
Like its wielders, the Sidereal Exalted, Starmetal re-weaves fate, causing weapons to strike especially lethal blows and armor to turn aside all but the mightiest attacks.
While many stood and died beside their Solar mates in the Usurpation, those that were not killed along with their companions fled to the edges of Creation.
Instead, they imbued exceptional humans with their power (the titular Exalted) to fight for them.
