In 2012 Matthew Feldman wrote that the more than 1,500 documents in the "Pound files" held by the FBI have been ignored by scholars, and almost certainly contain evidence that "Pound was politically cannier, was more bureaucratically involved with Italian Fascism, and was more involved with Mussolini's regime than has been posited".
What obfuscated me was not the Italian but the crust of dead English, the sediment present in my own available vocabulary&nbsp;... You can't go round this sort of thing.
and Richard Aldington living next door.
Michael Alexander writes that, as a translator, Pound was a pioneer with a great gift of language and an incisive intelligence.
It functions as a contemporary memoir, in which "personal history and lyrical retrospection mingle"—most clearly represented in the ''Pisan Cantos''.
Pound helped advance the careers of some of the best-known modernist writers of the early 20th century.
Eliot had sent "Prufrock" to almost every editor in England, but was rejected.
Kasper and another follower of Pound's, David Horton, set up a publishing imprint, Square Dollar Series, which Pound used as a vehicle for his tracts about economic reform.
After two and a half weeks he began to break down under the strain.
He would wear trousers made of green billiard cloth, a pink coat, a blue shirt, a tie hand-painted by a Japanese friend, an immense sombrero, a flaming beard cut to a point, and a single, large blue earring."
After a few days in London he went to Paris, where he worked on a new collection of poetry, ''Canzoni'' (1911), panned by the ''Westminster Gazette'' as a "medley of pretension".
Between 1905 and 1907 Pound wrote several poems for her, 25 of which he hand-bound and called ''Hilda's Book''.
Upset at Lowell, he began to call ''Imagisme'' "Amygism", and in July 1914 he declared it dead, asking only that the term be preserved, although Lowell eventually Anglicized it.
In 1922 Eliot sent him the manuscript of ''The Waste Land'', then arrived in Paris to edit it with Pound, who blue-inked the manuscript with comments like "make up yr. mind&nbsp;..." and "georgian".
Macha Rosenthal wrote that it was "as if all the beautiful vitality and all the brilliant rottenness of our heritage in its luxuriant variety were both at once made manifest" in Ezra Pound.
10, Doolittle at no.
After war broke out in September that year, he began a furious letter-writing campaign to the politicians he had petitioned six months earlier, arguing that the war was the result of an international banking conspiracy and that the United States should keep out of it.
He translated and championed Greek, Latin and Anglo-Saxon classics, and helped keep them alive at a time when poets no longer considered translations central to their craft.
Citing Pound's first seven cantos, Wilson dubbed the writing "unsatisfactory".
His translation from the Italian of ''Sonnets and ballate of Guido Cavalcanti'' was also published in 1912.
Pound graduated from Hamilton College with a BPhil in 1905, then studied Romance languages under Hugo A. Rennert at the University of Pennsylvania, where he obtained an MA in the spring of 1906 and registered to write a PhD thesis on the jesters in Lope de Vega's plays.
The idea was that the Justice Department would be placed in an untenable position if Pound won a major award and was not released.
Both parents' ancestors had emigrated from England in the 17th century.
He asked the publisher for a raise to hire 23-year-old Iseult Gonne as a typist, causing rumors that Pound was having an affair with her, but he was turned down.
Hemingway wrote in 1925: "He defends his friends when they are attacked, he gets them into magazines and out of jail.&nbsp;...
She may also have been discouraged by Pound's engagement to Dorothy.
He found ''The Cantos'' disjointed and its contents reflecting a too-obvious reliance on the literary works of other authors, and an awkward use of Latin and Chinese translations as a device inserted among reminiscences of Pound's own life.
He was at last provided for, and was allowed to read, write and receive visitors, including Dorothy for several hours a day.
Pound thought writing the cantos meant writing an epic about history and economics, and he wove his economic theories throughout; neither can be understood without the other.
In the epic poem, Pound disregards literary genres, mixing satire, hymns, elegies, essays and memoirs.
He began work on his translation of Sophocles's ''Women of Trachis'' and ''Electra'', and continued work on ''The Cantos''.
The first was in January 1935, and by February 1940 he was broadcasting regularly; he traveled to Rome one week a month to pre-record the 10-minute broadcasts, for which he was paid around $17, and they were broadcast every three days.
That year his parents Homer and Isabel visited him in Rapallo, seeing him for the first time since 1914.
Pound's antisemitism has soured evaluation of his poetry.
Orage wrote in the same issue:
Direct treatment of the "thing" whether subjective or objective.
Pound was 36 when he met the 26-year-old American violinist Olga Rudge in Paris in the fall of 1922, beginning a love affair that lasted 50 years.
Eliot's ''Literary Essays'' in 1954 "initiated the recuperation of Ezra Pound".
His fellowship was not renewed.
On 24&nbsp;May he was transferred to the United States Army Disciplinary Training Center north of Pisa, where he was placed in one of the camp's "death cells", a series of six-by-six-foot outdoor steel cages lit up at night by floodlights; engineers reinforced his cage with heavier steel for fear the fascists would try to break him out.
Homer and Isabel married the following year, and Homer built a home in Hailey.
Kasper had come to admire Pound during literature classes at university, and after he wrote to Pound in 1950 the two had become friends.
'''Ezra Weston Loomis Pound''' (30 October 1885&nbsp;– 1 November 1972) was an expatriate American poet and critic,  and a major figure in the early modernist movement.
He published ''Gaudier-Brzeska: A Memoir'' the following year, in reaction to what he saw as an unnecessary loss.
Kenner wrote that there was no great contemporary writer less read than Pound, adding that there is also no one to appeal more through "sheer beauty of language".
Mary, then 19 and finished with convent school, was quickly sent back to Gais in Switzerland, leaving Pound, as she would later write, "pent up with two women who loved him, whom he loved, and who coldly hated each other."
Like Wyndham Lewis, Pound reacted against decorative flourishes found in Edwardian writing, saying poetry required a precise and economic use of language and that the poet should always use the "exact" word, stripping the writing down to the "barest essence".
'Any good I've done has been spoiled by bad intentions—the preoccupation with irrelevant and stupid things,' he replied.
Tytell wrote that Pound's voice had assumed a "rasping, buzzing quality like the sound of a hornet stuck in a jar".
He wrote pieces for solo violin, which Olga performed.
Around the same time Pound moved into new rooms at Church Walk, off Kensington High Street, where he lived most of the time until 1914.
It was the first of three winters they spent together at Stone Cottage, including two with Dorothy after she and Pound married on 20 April 1914.
They spent the following summer in the south of France, where Pound worked with George Antheil to apply the concept of Vorticism to music, and managed to write two operas, including ''Le Testament de Villon''.
He continued to work on Fenollosa's manuscripts, and in 1928 won ''The Dial'''s poetry award for his translation of the Confucian classic ''Great Learning'' (''Dà Xué'', transliterated as ''Ta Hio'').
Nadel writes that imagism was to change Pound's poetry.
The leitmotifs in Pound's literary criticism are recurrent patterns found in historical events, which, he believed, through the use of judicious juxtapositions illuminate truth; and in them he reveals forgotten writers and cultures.
He was working at the time on the poems that became ''Ripostes'' (1912), trying to move away from his earlier work; he wrote that the "stilted language" of ''Canzoni'' had reduced Ford Madox Ford to rolling on the floor with laughter.
''Ripostes'', published in October 1912, begins Pound's shift toward minimalist language.
He wrote in ''The Japan Times'' that "Democracy is now currently defined in Europe as a 'country run by Jews,'" and told Oswald Mosley's newspaper that the English were a slave race governed since Waterloo by the Rothschilds.
On 22 February 1911 he sailed from New York on the R.M.S.
Glad to be free of the place, he left for Europe soon after, sailing from New York in March 1908.
Poets should "go in fear of abstractions", and should not re-tell in mediocre verse what has already been told in good prose.
Pound published ''Cantos XVII–XIX'' in the winter editions.
The  ''London Evening Standard'' called it "wild and haunting stuff, absolutely poetic, original, imaginative, passionate, and spiritual."
The title was from the third canto of Dante's ''Purgatorio'', which alluded to the death of Manfred, King of Sicily.
Shortly before his death in 1972 it was proposed he be awarded the Emerson-Thoreau Medal of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, but after a storm of protest the academy's council opposed it by 13 to 9.
He goes on to write that Pound's use of counterpoint is integral to the structure and cohesion of ''The Cantos'', which show multi-voiced counterpoint and, with the juxtaposition of images, non-linear themes.
Olga Rudge, pregnant with Pound's child, followed them to Italy.
He feared he was wasting his time writing outside poetry, exclaiming that he "MUST stop writing so much prose".
The Pounds were unhappy in Paris; Dorothy complained about the winters and Ezra's health was poor.
They were accompanied by a teacher Pound had met in hospital, Marcella Spann, 40 years his junior, ostensibly acting as his secretary and collecting poems for an anthology.
Whether the poems are valuable as translations continues to be a source of controversy.
When she was discovered the next morning by the landladies, Ida and Belle Hall, his insistence that he had slept on the floor was met with disbelief.
Mary had a single pair of shoes, and books about Jesus and the saints, while Omar was raised in Kensington as an English gentleman by his sophisticated grandmother.
The charges included broadcasting for the enemy, attempting to persuade American citizens to undermine government support of the war, and strengthening morale in Italy against the United States.
Pound said he had "never met anyone who seemed to GET my ideas so quickly as the boss".
He was arraigned in Washington D.C. on the 25th of that month on charges of treason.
Olga lost possession of her house in Venice and took a small house with Mary above Rapallo at Sant' Ambrogio.
Homer followed them, and in 1889 he found a job as an assayer at the Philadelphia Mint.
He continued to broadcast and write under pseudonyms until April 1945, shortly before his arrest.
The 1980s saw three significant biographies: John Tytell's "neutral" account in 1987, followed by Wilhelm's multi-volume biography.
The Wadsworths married into the Westons of New York.
Pound edited and published Fenellosa's ''The Chinese Written Character as a Medium for Poetry'' in 1918.
The boys wore Civil War-style uniforms and besides Latin were taught English, history, arithmetic, marksmanship, military drilling and the importance of submitting to authority.
Most of the swine have done neither."
The marriage had proceeded despite opposition from her parents, who worried about Pound's meager income, earned from contributions to literary magazines and probably less than £300 a year.
During World War II, he was paid by the Italian government to make hundreds of radio broadcasts criticizing the United States, Franklin D. Roosevelt and Jews, as a result of which he was arrested in 1945 by American forces in Italy on charges of treason.
Kasper was eventually jailed for the 1957 bombing of the Hattie Cotton School in Nashville, targeted because a black girl had registered as a student.
The next night he was admitted to the Civil Hospital of Venice, where he died in his sleep of an intestinal blockage on 1 November, with Olga at his side.
On his father's side, the immigrant ancestor was John Pound, a Quaker, who arrived from England around 1650.
Pound persuaded the bookseller Elkin Mathews to display ''A Lume Spento'', and by October 1908 he was being discussed by the literati.
I have always blundered&nbsp;... All my life I believed I knew nothing, yes, knew nothing.
I hadn't in 1910 made a language, I don't mean a language to use, but even a language to think in.
He spent months in detention in a U.S. military camp in Pisa, including three weeks in a six-by-six-foot outdoor steel cage, which he said triggered a mental breakdown: "when the raft broke and the waters went over me".
''The New Republic'', ''Esquire'' and ''The Nation'' followed suit; ''The Nation'' argued that Pound was a sick and vicious old man, but that he had rights.
Although Pound repudiated his antisemitism in public, he maintained his views in private.
By then Homer had retired, so they decided to move to Rapallo themselves.
A Harrison fellowship covered his tuition fees and gave him a travel grant of $500, which he used to return to Europe.
Hemingway wrote: "The best of Pound's writing—and it is in the ''Cantos''—will last as long as there is any literature."
He and Dorothy went to live with Mary at Castle Brunnenburg, near Merano in the Province of South Tyrol, where he met his grandson, Walter, and his granddaughter, Patrizia, for the first time, then returned to Rapallo, where Olga Rudge was waiting to join them.
In a letter to his parents in October, Pound wrote, "next generation (male) arrived.
He returned home to Rapallo, where on 3 May 1945, four days after Mussolini was shot, armed partisans arrived at the house to find Pound alone.
6, and Aldington at no.
Pound asked to send a cable to President Truman to offer to help negotiate peace with Japan.
Dorothy was unable to travel to the funeral.
Or he may be classed as filling a niche today like that of Keats in a preceding epoch.
The awards committee consisted of 15 fellows of the Library of Congress, including several of Pound's supporters, such as Eliot, Tate, Conrad Aiken, Amy Lowell, Katherine Anne Porter and Theodore Spencer.
Tytell writes that, by the 1940s, no American or English poet had been so active politically since William Blake.
During the meeting Pound tried to present Mussolini with a digest of his economic ideas, but Mussolini brushed them aside, though he called the ''Cantos'' "''divertente''" (entertaining).
Although Hemingway was 14 years younger, the two forged what would become a lifelong relationship of mutual respect and friendship, living on the same street for a time, and touring Italy together in 1923.
Along with Donald Davie, Kenner brought a new appreciation to Pound's work in the 1960s and 1970s.
Fenollosa had studied Chinese poetry under Japanese scholars; in 1913 his widow, Mary McNeil Fenollosa, decided to give his unpublished notes to Pound after seeing his work; she was looking for someone who cared about poetry rather than philology.
His contribution to poetry began with his development of Imagism, a movement derived from classical Chinese and Japanese poetry, stressing clarity, precision and economy of language.
He has been an exhilarating influence for culture in England; he has left his mark upon more than one of the arts, upon literature, music, poetry and sculpture, and quite a number of men and movements owe their initiation to his self-sacrificing stimulus&nbsp;... With all this, however, Mr.
The motion was heard on 18 April 1958 by the judge who had committed Pound to St Elizabeths.
Pound was fascinated by the translations of Japanese poetry and Noh plays which he discovered in the papers of Ernest Fenollosa, an American professor who had taught in Japan.
Pound took the opportunity to extend the definition of Imagisme to art, naming it Vorticism: "The image is a radiant node or cluster; it is&nbsp;... a VORTEX, from which, and through which, and into which, ideas are constantly rushing."
About a year later, in January 1917, he had the first three trial cantos, distilled to one, published as Canto I in ''Poetry''.
Robert Graves recalled "I once asked Arthur Waley how much Chinese Pound knew; Waley shook his head despondently."
In 1925 the literary magazine ''This Quarter'' dedicated its first issue to Pound, including tributes from Hemingway and Joyce.
Dorothy died in England the following year.
Ira Nadel says ''The Cantos'' is an epic, that is "a poem including history", and that the "historical figures lend referentiality to the text".
Pound scholar Ming Xie explains that Pound's use of language in his translation of "The Seafarer" is deliberate, in that he avoids merely "trying to assimilate the original into contemporary language".
He read George Santayana and ''The Law of Civilization and Decay'' by Brooks Adams, finding confirmation of the danger of the capitalist and usurer becoming dominant.
The ''Malatesta Cantos'' appeared in ''The Criterion'' in July 1923, and two further cantos were published in ''The Transatlantic Review'' in January 1924.
He also asked to be allowed a final broadcast, a script called "Ashes of Europe Calling", in which he recommended peace with Japan, American management of Italy, the establishment of a Jewish state in Palestine, and leniency toward Germany.
It was the last time the prize was administered by the Library of Congress.
8—and worked daily in the British Museum Reading Room.
An advertisement in ''The Egoist'' promised it would cover "Cubism, Futurism, Imagisme and all Vital Forms of Modern Art".
Four gondoliers dressed in black rowed the body to the island cemetery, Isola di San Michele, where he was buried near Diaghilev and Stravinsky.
Isabel was unhappy in Hailey and took Ezra with her to New York in 1887, when he was 18 months old.
In form his criticism and essays are direct, repetitive and reductionist, his rhetoric minimalist, filled with "strident impatience", according to Pound scholar Jason Coats, and frequently failing to make a coherent claim.
Scholarship in the 1990s turned toward in-depth investigations of his antisemitism and Rome years.
Biographer John Tytell believes Pound had always felt that his creativity and ability to seduce women were linked, something Dorothy had turned a blind eye to over the years.
When he included this in his next poetry collection in 1921, he had renamed it ''Homage to Sextus Propertius'' in response to criticism of his translation skills.
The point is, he will be mentioned."
Toward the end of 1920 he and Dorothy decided their time in London was over and resolved to move to Paris.
Pound used Fenollosa's work as a starting point for what he called the ideogrammic method, which proceeded on Fenellosa's entirely mistaken but fruitful idea that each character represented an image or pictograph, based on sight rather than sound.
He worked on the poem for a year, reducing it to its essence in the style of a Japanese haiku.
The critic F. R. Leavis saw the poem as Pound's major achievement.
These were published as ''The Pisan Cantos'' (1948), for which he was awarded the Bollingen Prize in 1949 by the Library of Congress, triggering enormous controversy.
Ginsberg reassured Pound that he "had shown us the way", but Pound refused to be mollified:
He wrote about her in ''Canto CXIII'': "The long flank, the firm breast / and to know beauty and death and despair / And to think that what has been shall be, / flowing, ever unstill."
Dorothy's annual income was £50, aided by £150 from her family.
Before that the three of them lived in Church Walk, Kensington—Pound at no.
Cummings, Margaret Anderson, George Oppen and Charles Olson.
Her parents eventually consented, perhaps out of fear that she was getting older with no other suitor in sight.
''Mauretania'', arriving in Southampton six days later.
He argues that Pound was incapable of sustained thought and "at the mercy of random flights of 'angelic insight,' an Icarian self-indulgence of prejudice which is not checked by a total view to which it could be subordinated".
At the museum Pound met regularly with the curator and poet Laurence Binyon, who introduced him to the East Asian artistic and literary concepts that inspired the imagery and technique of his later poetry.
He may be named only to be cursed as wanton and mocker, poseur, trifler and vagrant.
The New York Society for the Suppression of Vice applied the Comstock Laws against an article Lewis wrote, describing it as lewd and indecent.
Kasper opened a bookstore in Greenwich Village in 1953 called "Make it New", reflecting his commitment to Pound's ideas; the store specialized in far-right material, including Nazi literature, and Pound's poetry and translations were displayed on the window front.
From the fall of 1907 Pound taught Romance languages at Wabash College in Crawfordsville, Indiana, a conservative town that he called the sixth circle of hell.
Hall said it was clear that he "doubted the value of everything he had done in his life."
In 1958 MacLeish hired Thurman Arnold, a prestigious lawyer who ended up charging no fee, to file a motion to dismiss the 1945 indictment.
In the 1960s William O'Connor described ''The Cantos'' as filled with "cryptic and gnomic utterances, dirty jokes, obscenities of various sorts".
He paced up and down during the three days it took to complete the interview, never finishing a sentence, bursting with energy one minute, then suddenly sagging, and at one point seemed about to collapse.
His study of troubadour poetry—words written to be sung (''motz et son'')—led him to think modern poetry should be written similarly.
Robert Hillyer, a Pulitzer Prize winner and president of the Poetry Society of America, attacked the committee in ''The Saturday Review of Literature'', telling journalists that he "never saw anything to admire in Pound, not one line".
He told her everything about his other family; she later admitted she felt more pity than anger.
The existence of a few sheets of toilet paper showing the beginning of ''Canto LXXXIV'' suggests he started it while in the cage.
Kutler believes that Overholser protected Pound from the criminal justice system because he was fascinated by him.
When Lowell agreed to finance an anthology of Imagist poets, Pound's work was not included.
These ostensible translations of ancient Eastern texts, Kenner argues, are actually experiments in English poetics and compelling elegies for a warring West.
In 1915 he persuaded ''Poetry'' to publish T. S. Eliot's "The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock".
In July he returned to the United States, where in September his first essay, "Raphaelite Latin", was published in ''Book News Monthly''.
Smoking was forbidden, but he would smoke cigarillos in his office down the corridor from the president's.
He took courses in the English department in 1907, where he fell out with several lecturers; during lectures on Shakespeare by Felix Schelling, the department head, he would wind an enormous tin watch very slowly while Schelling spoke.
Mary almost failed to recognize him when he arrived, he was so dirty and tired.
She placed her with a German-speaking peasant woman whose own child had died, and who agreed to raise Mary for 200 lire a month.
Visitors were admitted for only 15 minutes at a time, while patients wandered around screaming and frothing at the mouth.
Tim Redman writes about Pound's fascism and his relationship with Mussolini, and Leon Surrette about Pound's economic theories, especially during the Italian period, investigating how Pound the poet became Pound the fascist.
The politics apart, Pound needed the money; his father's pension payments had stopped—his father died in February 1942—and Pound had his mother and Dorothy to look after.
Cravens committed suicide in 1912, after the pianist Walter Rummel, long the object of her affection, married someone else.
The four women soon fell out, vying for control over him; ''Canto CXIII'': alluded to it: "Pride, jealousy and possessiveness / 3 pains of hell."
The two moved in different social circles: Olga was the daughter of a wealthy Youngstown, Ohio, steel family, living in her mother's Parisian apartment on the Right Bank, socializing with aristocrats, while his friends were mostly impoverished writers of the Left Bank.
Pound had sent Yeats a copy of ''A Lume Spento'' the previous year, before he left for Venice, and Yeats had apparently found it charming.
It begins with a satirical analysis of the London literary scene, before turning to social criticism, economics, and an attack on the causes of the war; here the word ''usury'' appears in his work for the first time.
The museum's visitors' books show that Pound was often found during 1912 and 1913 in the Print Room examining Japanese ukiyo-e, some inscribed with Japanese ''waka'' verse, a genre of poetry whose economy and strict conventions likely contributed to Imagist techniques of composition.
The poems concern good and evil, a descent into hell followed by redemption and paradise.
He would spend his mornings in the British Museum Reading Room, then lunch at the Vienna Café on Oxford Street.
The broadcasts were monitored by the United States Foreign Broadcast Monitoring Service listening station at Princeton University, and in July 1943 Pound was indicted ''in absentia'' for treason.
Olga Rudge played for Mussolini and told him about Pound, who had earlier sent him a copy of ''Cantos XXX''.
Pound persuaded his parents to finance his passage back to Europe.
Laughlin published ''The Pisan Cantos'' on 30 July 1948, and the following year the prize went to Pound.
In 1999 Surrette wrote about the state of Pound criticism, that "the effort to uncover coherence in a&nbsp;... crazy quilt of verse styles, critical principles, crankish economic theories and distasteful political affiliations has made it difficult to perceive the genesis and development of any of these components."
On 8 May, the day Germany surrendered, Pound told an American reporter, Ed Johnston, that Hitler was "a Jeanne d'Arc, a saint", and that Mussolini was an "imperfect character who lost his head".
He stuffed a copy of Confucius and a Chinese dictionary in his pocket before he was taken to their headquarters in Chiavari.
He was introduced to Olga at a musical salon hosted by American heiress Natalie Barney in her home at 20 Rue Jacob, near the Boulevard Saint-Germain.
The fullness of the achievement for the modernists is that they renewed interest in multiculturalism, multilingualism, and, perhaps of greater importance, they treated translations not in a strict sense of the word but instead saw a translation as the creation of an original work.
He began his career with translations of Occitan ballads and ended with translations of Egyptian poetry.
The collection includes five poems by Hulme and a translation of the 8th-century Old English poem ''The Seafarer'', although not a literal translation.
Pound was deeply affected by the war.
Pound's translations represent a substantial part of his work.
Pound introduced her to his friends, including the poet Richard Aldington, whom she would marry in 1913.
Hilda Doolittle arrived in London from Philadelphia in May 1911 with the poet Frances Gregg and Gregg's mother; when they returned in September, Doolittle decided to stay on.
In November 1913 Yeats, whose eyesight was failing, rented Stone Cottage in Coleman's Hatch, Sussex, and invited Pound to accompany him as his secretary.
Pound introduced Hemingway to Lewis, Ford, and Joyce, while Hemingway in turn tried to teach Pound to box, but as he told Sherwood Anderson, "Ezra habitually leads with his chin and has the general grace of a crayfish or crawfish".
The American heiress Margaret Lanier Cravens (1881–1912) became a patron; after knowing him a short time she offered a large annual sum to allow him to focus on his work.
