They cannot choose the buyer who offers the best price, or switch when their cooperative is going bankrupt if they wish to retain fairtrade status.
It is often difficult for women to balance textile production, domestic responsibilities, and agricultural work.
Fundación Solidaridad was created in Chile to increase the earnings and social participation of handicraft producers.
India, Pakistan and West Africa are the primary exporters of fair trade cotton, although many countries grow fair trade cotton.
The labeling initiative also allowed customers and distributors alike to track the origin of the goods to confirm that the products were really benefiting the producers at the end of the supply chain.
All actors are committed to the principle of alternative trade, the need for advocacy in their working relations and the importance of awareness-raising and advocacy work.
The crops must be grown and harvested in accordance with the international Fair trade standards set by FLO International.
They have to learn and educate about Fair Trade issues.
French author and RFI correspondent Jean-Pierre Boris championed this view in his 2005 book ''Commerce inéquitable''.
Worldshops or fair trade shops are specialized retail outlets offering and promoting fair trade products.
In April 2000, Starbucks began offering fair trade coffee in all of their stores.
Values-driven Organizations
The products, almost exclusively handicrafts ranging from jute goods to cross-stitch work, were mostly sold in churches or fairs.
Brilliant Earth has committed itself to using fair-trade-certified gold.
Showing African cocoa producers in this way is problematic because it is reminiscent of the imperialistic view that Africans cannot live happily without the help of westerners.
In 1998, the first four federations listed above joined together as FINE, an informal association whose goal is to harmonize fair trade standards and guidelines, increase the quality and efficiency of fair trade monitoring systems, and advocate fair trade politically.
Jacquiau also supports significantly higher fair trade prices in order to maximize the effect, as most producers only sell a portion of their crop under fair trade terms.
French author Christian Jacquiau, in his book ''Les coulisses du commerce équitable'', calls for stricter fair trade standards and criticizes the fair trade movement for working within the current system (i.e., partnerships with mass retailers, multinational corporations, etc.)
A web movement has begun in the 2000s to provide fair trade items at fair prices to the consumers.
This practice is spreading globally for example with efforts by the Plastic Bank in South America and social companies like Protoprint in India.
Anecdotes state that farmers were paid more or less by traders than by Fairtrade cooperatives.
Large transnational companies have begun to use fair trade commodities in their products.
Although hundreds of independent student organizations are active worldwide, most groups in North America are either affiliated with United Students for Fair Trade (USA, the Canadian Student Fair Trade Network (Canada), or Fair Trade Campaigns (USA), which also houses Fair Trade Universities and Fair Trade Schools.
There are several recognized Fairtrade certifiers, including Fairtrade International (formerly called FLO, Fairtrade Labelling Organizations International), IMO and Eco-Social.
Small growers who put themselves at economic risk by not having diverse farming practices could lose money and resources due to fluctuating coffee prices, pest problems, or policy shifts.
The company maintains that increasing its fair trade purchases would require an unprofitable reconstruction of the supply chain.
For instance, Fairtrade encouraged Nicaraguan farmers to switch to organic coffee, which resulted in a higher price per pound, but a lower net income because of higher costs and lower yields.
In the nineteenth century in Latin America, coffee plantations slowly began replacing sugarcane and subsistence crops.
In an effort to complement the Fairtrade product certification system and allow most notably handcraft producers to also sell their products outside worldshops, the World Fair Trade Organization (WFTO) launched in 2004 a new Mark to identify fair trade organizations (as opposed to products in the case of FLO International and Fairtrade).
This supports the notion of fair trade practices as "moral economies."
The parties involved agreed to a six-article plan:
He also points to the failure to disclose when ‘the primary commercial intent’ is to make money for retailers and distributors in rich countries.
Unshaded plantations allow for a higher density of Coffea trees, but negative effects include less protection from wind and more easily eroded soil.
Recycled filament production also offers an alternative income source for waste pickers in the developing world and the Ethical Filament Foundation was started to address this opportunity or as a form of "fair trade filament".
In the early 1980s, Alternative Trading Organizations faced major challenges: the novelty of some fair trade products began to wear off, demand reached a plateau, and some handicrafts began to look "tired and old fashioned" in the marketplace.
The first is the Australia and New Zealand member of FLO International, which unites Fairtrade producer and labelling initiatives across Europe, Asia, Latin America, North America, Africa, Australia and New Zealand.
and thereby causes or is likely to cause the average consumer to take a transactional decision that he would not have taken otherwise’ or (c) ‘fails to identify the commercial intent of the commercial practice .
The most successful cooperatives appear to spend a third of the extra price received on this: some less successful cooperatives spend more than they gain.
Côte d'Ivoire exports over a third of the world's cocoa beans.
FLO figures are that 40% of the money reaching the developing world is spent on ‘business and production’ which would include these costs, as well as costs incurred by any inefficiency and corruption in the cooperative or the marketing system.
Coen de Ruiter, director of the Max Havelaar Foundation, called the victory a landmark event: "it provides governmental institutions the freedom in their purchasing policy to require suppliers to provide coffee that bears the fair trade criteria, so that a substantial and meaningful contribution is made in the fight against poverty through the daily cup of coffee".
* Catholic Relief Services has their own Fair Trade mission in CRS Fair Trade
Charges of use of sweatshop labor are endemic in the United States.
Additionally, Fair Trade USA, formerly a licensing agency for the Fairtrade International label, broke from the system and is implementing its own fair trade labelling scheme, which has resulted in controversy due to its inclusion of independent smallholders and estates for all crops.
For fair trade textiles and other crafts to be successful in western markets, World Fair Trade Organizations require a flexible workforce of artisans in need of stable income, links from consumers to artisans, and a market for quality ethnic products.
Operating a profitable business allows growers to think about their future, rather than worrying about how they are going to survive in poverty.
Defensive Socially Responsible Businesses
A year later, in 1997, the document was followed by a resolution adopted by the European Parliament, calling on the Commission to support Fair Trade banana operators.
In four cases it has been possible to find out.
The initiative aimed at bringing the principles of fair trade to the retail sector by selling almost exclusively goods produced under fair trade terms in "underdeveloped regions".
Despite not empowering farmers, the change to fair trade cotton has positive effects including female participation in cultivation.
The solution is an easy one for college students to handle, just paying about five cents more for a cup of coffee or tea can make a real difference.
Making DIY 3D printer filament at home is both less costly and better for the environment than purchasing conventional 3D printer filament.
When growers feel like they have control over their own lives within the network of their cooperative, it can be very empowering.
There are a large number of fair trade and ethical marketing organizations employing different marketing strategies.
They may make transparent corporate vulnerabilities that activists can exploit.
Most Fair Trade coffee is ''Coffea arabica,'' a type of coffee known to be grown at high altitudes.
A solution was found in 1988, when the first Fairtrade certification initiative, Max Havelaar, was created in the Netherlands under the initiative of Nico Roozen, Frans Van Der Hoff, and Dutch development NGO Solidaridad.
Fairtrade labelling (usually simply Fairtrade or Fair Trade Certified in the United States) is a certification system designed to allow consumers to identify goods which meet agreed standards.
The slogan at the time, "Trade not Aid", gained international recognition in 1968 when it was adopted by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) to put the emphasis on the establishment of fair trade relations with the developing world.
Nestlé, the world's biggest coffee trader, began selling a blend of fair trade coffee in 2005.
"This resolution responds to the impressive growth of Fair Trade, showing the increasing interest of European consumers in responsible purchasing," said Green MEP Frithjof Schmidt during the plenary debate.
Between the years of 2004 and 2006 Africa quickly expanded their number of FLO certified producer groups, rising from 78 to 171; nearly half of which reside in Kenya, following closely behind are Tanzania and South Africa.
In the subsequent years, fair trade agricultural commodities played an important role in the growth of many ATOs: successful on the market, they offered a much-needed, renewable source of income for producers and provided Alternative Trading Organizations a complement to the handicrafts market.
Unsustainable farming practices can harm plantation owners and laborers.
In 1997, a process of convergence among labelling organizations – or "LIs" (for "Labeling Initiatives") – led to the creation of Fairtrade Labelling Organizations International (FLO).
One issue pertaining to cocoa plantation sustainability is the amount of time it takes for a cocoa tree to produce pods.
In 2006, Italian lawmakers started debating how to introduce a law on fair trade in Parliament.
The involvement of church organizations has been and continues to be an integral part of the Fair Trade movement:
One solution for fair labor practices is for farmers to become part of an Agricultural cooperative.
* The Fair Trade Federation (FTF), created in 1994, is an association of Canadian and American fair trade wholesalers, importers, and retailers.
The Fair Trade movement fixated on coffee first because it is a highly traded commodity for most producing countries and almost half the world's coffee is produced by smallholder farmers.
The Harkin-Engel Protocol, also commonly known as the Cocoa Protocol, is an international agreement that was created to end some of the world's worst forms of child labor, as well as forced labor in the cocoa industry.
Usually, this means a producer in a developing country and consumers in industrialized countries.
Most fair trade import organizations are members of, or certified by one of several national or international federations.
When it comes to the intentions to buy Fair Trade products, gender had no direct effect.
Student groups have also been increasingly active in the past years promoting fair trade products.
After several months of discussions and legal challenges, the province of Groningen prevailed in a well-publicized judgement.
Consumers often aren't willing to pay the extra price for fair trade cocoa because they do not know what fair trade is.
The new Certification Mark is currently used worldwide (with the exception of the United States).
Activist groups are vital in educating consumers about the unethical aspects of unfair trade and promoting demand for fairly traded commodities.
The report was followed the same year by a law, proposing to establish a commission to recognize fair trade Organisations (article 60 of law no.
Segments of the trade justice movement have also criticized fair trade in the past years for allegedly focusing too much on individual small producer groups while stopping short of advocating immediate trade policy changes that would have a larger effect on disadvantaged producers' lives.
In addition many of the failures of Fairtrade derive from these political views, such as the unorthodox marketing system imposed.
In the case of coffee, sales grow nearly 50% per year in certain countries.
The supply chain must also have been monitored by FLO-CERT, to ensure the integrity of the labelled product.
Southeast Asia accounts for about 14% of the world's cocoa production.
* The European Fair Trade Association (EFTA), created in 1990, is a network of European alternative trading organizations which import products from some 400 economically disadvantaged producer groups in Africa, Asia, and Latin America.
In 2004, the European Union adopted the "Agricultural Commodity Chains, Dependence and Poverty – A proposal for an EU Action Plan", with a specific reference to the Fair Trade movement which has "been setting the trend for a more socio-economically responsible trade."
Many farmers around the world are unaware of Fair Trade practices that they could be implementing to earn a higher wage.
Of those thirty-four growers, twenty-two had an understanding of Fair Trade based on internationally recognized definitions, for example, describing Fair Trade in market and economical terms or knowing what the social premium is and how their cooperative has used it.
Fairtrade (one word) refers to FLO certified commodity and associated products.
The coffee has to come from a certified Fairtrade cooperative, and there is a minimum price when the world market is oversupplied.
Lack of sustainability can be due to pests, diseases that attack cocoa trees, lack of farming supplies, and lack of knowledge about modern farming techniques.
Many countries that export cocoa rely on cocoa as their single export crop.
It has been suggested by Shima Baradaran of Brigham Young University that fair trade techniques could be productively applied to products which might involve child labor.
Some meet other costs.
It also makes it impossible to argue that any positive or negative changes in the living standards of farmers are due to Fairtrade rather than to one of the other donors.
EFTA's goal is to promote fair trade and to make fair trade importing more efficient and effective.
Packers in developed countries pay a fee to The Fairtrade Foundation for the right to use the brand and logo, and nearly all the fee goes to marketing.
A recyclebot is an open-source hardware device for converting waste plastic into filament for open-source 3D printers like the RepRap.
Coffee crops became more managed; they were put into rows and unshaded, meaning diversity of the forest was decreased and Coffea trees were shorter.
When asked, overall, farmers cited that Fair Trade has had a positive effect on their lives and communities.
In 2002, FLO launched for the first time an International Fairtrade Certification Mark.
All fair trade products must meet standards such as these.
Starbucks is still only 3% fair trade – enough to appease consumers, but not enough to make a real difference to small farmers, according to some activists.
In 2008, global sales of fairtrade products exceeded US$ 3.5 billion."
Countries in Latin America are also large exporters of fair trade bananas.
Engagement with fair trade products
Fair trade during that period was often seen as a political gesture against neo-imperialism: radical student movements began targeting multinational corporations and concerns that traditional business models were fundamentally flawed started to emerge.
In Africa there are smallholder cooperatives and plantations which produce Fair Trade certified tea.
Forced or unfair labor in textile production is not limited to developing countries.
Fairtrade claims that its farmers are paid higher prices and are given special advice on increasing yields and quality.
Fair Trade is grounded in three core beliefs; first, producers have the power to express unity with consumers.
Fair trade textiles must not be confused with the sweat-free movement although the two movements intersect at the worker level.
Members of the movement advocate the payment of higher prices to exporters, as well as improved social and environmental standards.
Such organizations are typically overseen by Fairtrade International.
These federations coordinate, promote, and facilitate the work of fair trade organizations.
Or they may encourage ordinary people to get involved with broader projects of social change.
These principles include adherence to ILO agreements such as those banning child and slave labour, guaranteeing a safe workplace and the right to unionise, adherence to the United Nations charter of human rights, a fair price that covers the cost of production and facilitates social development, and protection and conservation of the environment.
The concept of a Fair Trade school or Fair Trade university emerged from the United Kingdom, where the Fairtrade Foundation now maintains a list of colleges and schools that comply with the needed requirements to be labeled such a university.
Fair trade textiles are primarily made from fair trade cotton.
As coffee becomes one of the most important export crops in certain regions such as northern Latin America, nature and agriculture are transformed.
North American countries are not yet among the top importers of fair trade coffee.
It has been argued that the approach of the FairTrade system is too rooted in a Northern consumerist view of justice which Southern producers do not participate in setting.
The Fairtrade Foundation does not monitor how much extra retailers charge for Fairtrade goods, so it is rarely possible to determine how much extra is charged or how much reaches the producers, in spite of the Unfair Trading legislation.
Fair trade seeks to establish a system of direct trade from developing countries to counteract this unfair system.
This would account for a quarter of the fair trade coffee purchases in the United States and 3% of Starbucks' total coffee purchases.
The Dutch province of Groningen was sued in 2007 by coffee supplier Douwe Egberts for explicitly requiring its coffee suppliers to meet fair trade criteria, most notably the payment of a minimum price and a development premium to producer cooperatives.
One 2015 study in a journal published by the MIT Press concluded that producer benefits were close to zero because there was an oversupply of certification, and only a fraction of produce classified as Fair Trade was actually sold on Fair Trade markets, just enough to recoup the costs of certification.
These farms have little market access and thus rely on middlemen to bring their products to market.
Fair trade certified commodities must adhere to sustainable agro-ecological practices, including reduction of chemical fertilizer use, prevention of erosion, and protection of forests.
In Nepal, textiles were originally made for household and local use.
The World Trade Organization publishes annual figures on the world trade of goods and services.
Douwe Egberts, which sells a number of coffee brands under self-developed ethical criteria, believed the requirements were discriminatory.
Throughout the 1960s and 1970s, important segments of the fair trade movement worked to find markets for products from countries that were excluded from the mainstream trading channels for political reasons.
Farmers in cooperatives are frequently their own bosses and get bonuses per bag of cocoa beans.
Furthermore, that year, the Cotonou Agreement made specific reference to the promotion of Fair Trade in article 23(g) and in the Compendium.
Cooperatives typically average prices over the year, so they pay less than traders at some times, more at others.
Some people argue that these practices are justifiable: that strategic use of labeling may help embarrass (or encourage) major suppliers into changing their practices.
in 2014 the  Fairtrade Program Mark was introduced  to create new sales opportunities,  initially for cocoa, sugar and cotton producers.
Burkina Faso and Mali export the largest amount of cotton in Africa.
Ten Thousand Villages, an NGO within the Mennonite Central Committee (MCC) and SERRV International were the first, in 1946 and 1949 respectively, to develop fair trade supply chains in developing countries.
Africa’s exports come from the places such as South Africa, Ghana, Uganda, Tanzania and Kenya.
They used data from Central America, to establish that the producer benefits were close to zero.
In terms of education, the social premium can be used to build and furnish schools too.
Examples of such organisations are Ten Thousand Villages, Greenheart Shop Equal Exchange and SERRV International in the US and Equal Exchange Trading, Traidcraft, Oxfam Trading, Twin Trading and Alter Eco in Europe as well as Siem Fair Trade Fashion in Australia.
West African countries without strong fair trade industries are subject to deterioration in cocoa quality as they compete with other countries for a profit.
The rest is stated to be spent on social projects, rather than being passed on to farmers.
The decline of segments of the handicrafts market forced fair trade supporters to rethink their business model and their goals.
They often cut out any intermediaries in the import chain.
The process of securing certification is excessively burdensome and expensive.
FLO-CERT, the for-profit side, handles producer certification, inspecting and certifying producer organizations in more than 50 countries in Africa, Asia, and Latin America.
Coffee is one of the most highly traded commodities in the world, yet the farmers who grow it typically earn less than $2 a day.
Safeway Inc. began carrying fair trade coffee after individual consumers dropped off postcards asking for it.
Bassett (2009) is able to compare prices only where Fairtrade and non-Fairtrade farmers have to sell cotton to the same monopsonistic ginneries which pay low prices.
Nevertheless, cooperatives such as fair trade-endorsed Kuapa Kokoo in Ghana are often the only Licensed Buying Companies that will give farmers a fair price and not cheat them or rig sales.
In the 1990s, women began joining cooperatives and exporting their crafts for profit.
Adherence to fair trade standards by producers has been poor, and enforcement of standards by Fairtrade is weak.
rather than establishing a new fairer, fully autonomous (i.e.
Public statement of the need for and terms of an action plan—The cocoa industry acknowledged the problem of forced child labor and will commit "significant resources" to address the problem.
Coffee is the fastest expanding fairly traded commodity, and an increasing number of producers are small farmers that own their own land and work in cooperatives.
In 1996, the Economic and Social Committee adopted an "Opinion on the European 'Fair Trade' marking movement".
), created in 1994, is the umbrella network of 15 national worldshop associations in 13 different countries all over Europe.
The 165 FLO associations in Latin America and Caribbean are located in 14 countries and together export over 85% of the world’s Fair Trade coffee.
The concept caught on: in the ensuing years, similar non-profit Fairtrade labelling organizations were set up in other European countries and North America.
We need to develop a coherent policy framework and this resolution will help us."
These goods are marketed locally in Chile and internationally.
In 1994, the European Commission prepared the "Memo on alternative trade" in which it declared its support for strengthening Fair Trade in the South and North and its intention to establish an EC Working Group on Fair Trade.
One suggestion for the reason that laborers in Africa are marginalized in world trade is because the colonial division of labor kept Africa from developing its own industries.
The movement seeks to promote greater equity in international trading partnerships through dialogue, transparency, and respect.
Labour is different for textile production than for agricultural commodities because textile production takes place in a factory, not on a farm.
Establish a joint foundation—By 1 July 2002, industry will form a foundation to oversee efforts to eliminate the worst forms of child labor.
Small growers dominate the production of coffee, especially in Latin American countries such as Peru.
Producers and producer-groups spend this social premium to support socioeconomic development in a variety of ways.
It will perform field projects and be a clearinghouse on best practices.
Fair Trade Organizations
Fair trade handicraft and jewellery production has also shown a significant uplift over recent years, aided by North American and European online retailers developing direct relationships to import and sell the products online.
The problem was to find a way to expand distribution without compromising consumer trust in fair trade products and in their origins.
The first fair trade agricultural products were tea and coffee, quickly followed by: dried fruits, cocoa, sugar, fruit juices, rice, spices and nuts.
This protects the biodiversity of the ecosystem and ensures that the land will be usable for farming in the future and not just for short-term planting.
In Africa in particular, governments tax cocoa as their main source of revenue.
The three growers who had a deeper knowledge of the social implications of Fair Trade all have responsibilities within their cooperatives.
* Additional certifiers include IMO (Fair for Life, Social and Fair Trade labels), Eco-Social and Fair Trade USA.
Critics point out that this inevitably means that resources are being removed from other, poorer, farmers.
The part of the standards referring to cultivation, environment, pesticides and child labour has the farmer as "producer".
A 2015 study concluded that the low barriers to entry in a competitive market such as coffee undermines any effort to give higher benefits to producers through Fair Trade.
In 2004 WFTO launched the FTO Mark which identifies registered fair trade organizations (as opposed to the FLO system, which labels products).
Producers in the Dominican Republic have set up associations rather than cooperatives so that individual farmers can each own their own land but meet regularly.
While this appears to be agreed by proponents and critics of Fairtrade, there is a dearth of economic studies setting out the actual revenues and what the money was spent on.
The Fairtrade minimum price means that when the world market price collapses, it is the non-Fairtrade farmers, particularly the poorest, who have to cut down their coffee trees.
Thousands of volunteers sold coffee from Angolaaa and Nicaragua in worldshops, in the back of churches, from their homes, and from stands in public places, using the products as an an and vehicle to deliver their message: give disadvantaged producers in developing countries a fair chance on the world’s market.
Furthermore, the same year, the European Parliament adopted the "Resolution on promoting fairness and solidarity in North South trade" (OJ C 44, 14 February 1994), a resolution voicing its support for fair trade.
Now handicrafts are Nepal's largest export.
Every year the sales of Fair Trade products grow close to 30% and in 2004 were worth over $500 million USD.
Cocoa is farmed in the tropical regions of West Africa, Southeast Asia, and Latin America.
Garment factories in Asian countries including China, Burma, and Bangladesh consistently receive charges of human rights violations, including the use of child labour.
* The Network of European Worldshops (NEWS!
Northern consumers are able to just make a simple choice without these burdens and expenses.
The goals of the launch were to improve the visibility of the Mark on supermarket shelves, facilitate cross border trade, and simplify procedures for both producers and importers.
