Historically one of the first planned cities within British India, it has long since developed into a cosmopolitan metropolis.
Young designed the city centre to replicate the design in the Union Jack with eight roads extending from a large clock tower at its epicentre; a design geometrically symbolic of the Cross of Saint Andrew counterchanged with the Cross of Saint Patrick, and Saint George's Cross over all.
Faisalabad International Airport is located on the outskirts of the city, and operates flights to the Middle East.
An express parcel service runs from Karachi to Lahore via Faisalabad.
Cargo Express services are operated by Pakistan Railways which runs from Karachi to Faisalabad via Multan.
The FDA acts as a policy-making body for the development of the city and is in charge of arranging and supervising major developments within the city.
The topography is marked by valleys, local depression and high ground.
The Pahari Grounds near D Ground is another renovated park that has a Pakistan Air Force F-86 Sabre on display.
Historically, Faisalabad, (Lyallpur until 1979), became one of the first planned cities within British India.
Faisalabad was restructured into city district status; a devolution promulgated by the 2001 local government ordinance (LGO).
In October 2002, the Government College University established a Directorate of Sports to promote university and national level sports for male and female players.
Some of the more conservative establishments and universities follow strict dress codes, such as the National Textile University in Faisalabad where a notice was issued on 27 April 2016 by university professor Muhammad Ashfaq.
Key ingredients include rice or roti (flatbread) served with a vegetable or non-vegetable curry, a salad consisting of spiced tomatoes and onions, and yogurt.
By the mid-18th century, the economic and administrative collapse of provinces within the Mughal Empire, from Punjab to Bengal, led to its dissolution.
It was further noted that situations may be worse in villages because "whenever a girl is born, nobody celebrates her birth, whereas when a boy is born, it means great joy and celebration."
The Water and Sanitation Agency (WASA), is a subsidiary of Faisalabad Development Authority (FDA), established 23 April 1978 under the Development of Cities Act 1976.
Primary level education is only compulsory.
Internal unrest resulted in multiple battles for independence and further deterioration of the region, which then led to formal colonialisation as established by the Government of India Act 1858, with direct control under the British Raj from 1858 to 1947.
Observations from the Meteorological Observatory at the University of Agriculture indicate that overall rainfall levels in the city have increased by  over the course of thirty years.
During winter, a common breakfast is roghni naan bread served with paya curry.
They consolidate ward neighbourhood development needs and prioritise these into union-wide development proposals.
The government of Pakistan installed the first radio transmitters in the city on 15 September 1982.
On 16 April 2003, the stadium was inaugurated by Khalid Maqbool, governor of Punjab.
Social change in the region has been a slow process but there are indications that change has occurred as more villages are exposed to various forms of media and modernized urban communities.
The University of Agriculture organises a similar event at their main campus which is known as the "Kissan Mela".
In 2008, Faisalabad District ranked 51.9% which placed the district 9th in literacy out of the 34 Punjab districts.
The railway line forms part of the Khanewal–Wazirabad railway line.
The Faisalabad Arts Council building, designed by architect Nayyer Ali Dada, was completed in 2006.
The council identifies any deficiencies in the delivery of these services and makes recommendations for improvement to the TMA.
The government began licensing private broadcasters in 2002.
The intent of the notice was to "promote a positive image of the NTU and to maintain good moral, religious and cultural values among the faculty, staff and students."
Each of the seven departments has its own Executive District Officer who is charged with co-ordinating and overseeing the activities of their respective departments.
The FDA works with the Water and Sanitation Agency (WASA) to control and maintain the water supply, sewerage and drainage.
FlyDubai became the first international carrier to launch operations from the city followed by Qatar Airways, Air Arabia and Gulf Air.
The festival of Basant which involves kite flying is an annual tradition in the city despite the ban.
Faisalabad has received substantial funding from the government of Punjab and the city district government to improve infrastructure and roads to rural areas.
In the rainy season, the currents are very strong.
The Faisalabad railway station is the central railway station in the city.
Our actions will be driven by the concerns of local people."
Faisalabad lies in the rolling flat plains of northeast Punjab, at  above sea level.
The Rakh and Gogera canals have encouraged the water levels in the district however the belt on the Ravi River has remained narrow.
'''Faisalabad''' (; '''Lyallpur''' until 1979), is the third-most-populous city in Pakistan, and the second-largest in the eastern province of Punjab.
The celebration of the Prophet Muhammad birthday is observed in the city which is often referred to as "Eid Milād-un-Nabī".
Commissioner Naseem Nawaz advised that efforts were under way to maintain the stadium.
There are American-style fast food franchises that cater to the local community such as McDonald's, Fried Chicken (KFC), and Pizza Hut.
The station has a special cargo facility operated by the Ministry of Railways (Pakistan) for handling various goods from the city to other regions of the country.
Traditional attire in Faisalabad is Punjabi clothing such as the dhoti, kurta and pagri.
* Gol Bazaar contains dry fruit, as well as wholesale soap, oil, and ghee shops.
People live in tight-knit joint families, although a nuclear family system is emerging due to changing socio-economic conditions.
The district of Faisalabad is part of the alluvial plains between the Himalayan foothills and the central core of the Indian subcontinent.
During summer, drinks such as sugar cane rusk, limo pani (iced lemon water), skanjvi (iced orange and black pepper) and lassi are common.
The Punjabi people celebrate a variety of cultural and religious festivals throughout the Punjab region, such as arts and craft, music, local events, and religious celebrations.
* Chiniot Bazaar is known for allopathic and homoeopathic medicinal stores, cloth, blankets, sofa cloth, and curtains.
Faisalabad's average annual GDP is $20.55 billion (USD), of which 21% comes from agriculture.
The partitioning led to a mass migration of an estimated 10 million people which made it the largest mass migration in human history.
The existing production capacity of WASA is , almost all of which is drawn from wells located in the old beds of the Chenab River.
Cricket is a popular sport in Faisalabad.
A 2014 demographic profile shows the population count at 3.038&nbsp;million.
Pakistan Television Corporation, is the state-owned regulated television broadcasting network.
The lower Chenab canal provides water to 80% of cultivated lands making it the main source of irrigation.
Infrastructure and facilities are available for university players in track, hockey, tennis, basketball, table tennis, badminton and cricket pitch.
Faisalabad is recognised as the centre of the textile industry in Pakistan, contributing to half of Pakistans total textile shipments.
In 1896, Gujranwala, Jhang and Sahiwal comprising the Tehsils of Lyallpur were under the administrative control of the Jhang District.
It is governed by the city district's seven departments: Agriculture, Community Development, Education, Finance and Planning, Health, Municipal Services, and Works and Services.
There are a number of darbar and shrines which attract a number of devotees during the annual Urs.
The arrival of spring brings the annual "Rang-e-Bahar" festival where the Parks & Horticulture Authority of the city district government organise a flower show and exhibition at Jinnah Gardens.
Public transportation in Faisalabad includes auto-rickshaws, buses and railways.
The course of the rivers within Faisalabad are winding and often subject to frequent alternations.
* Kharkhana Bazaar is known for herbal medicines.
In 1977, Pakistani authorities changed the name of the city to "Faisalabad" to honour the close relationship of King Faisal of Saudi Arabia with Pakistan.
With the deregulation of the telecommunication sector by the Ministry of Information Technology, a range of companies now offer mobile and broadband services in the city.
Water is normally supplied for a total of about 8 hours per day to the majority of the city.
A 1972 census ranked Faisalabad as the 3rd largest city of Pakistan with a population of 864,000.
The weather in the city is monitored by the Pakistan Meteorological Department.
As of 2016, monogamous and polygamous unions remain an acceptable marriage practice.
The industrial revolution of the 1960s contributed to population growth.
Combinations of Pakistani and Western attire are worn by women, such as an embroidered kurta worn with jeans or trousers, and half sleeve or sleeveless shirts with Capri pants.
Faisalabad has been classified as a hot desert climate (BWh) by the Köppen-Geiger climate classification system.
The city of Faisalabad customarily celebrates its independence day on 14 August every year by raising the Pakistan flag at the clock tower in the Commissioner Office compound.
Specialty drinks vary depending on climate.
Faisalabad set a record in the demographic history of Pakistan by registering an overall population increase of 508.1% between 1941 and 1961.
Riots and local fighting followed the expeditious withdrawal of the British, resulting in an estimated one million civilians deaths, particularly in the western region of Punjab.
The University of Agriculture, originally the Punjab Agricultural College and Research Institute, Lyallpur, was established in 1906.
The eight roads developed into eight separate bazaars (markets) leading to different regions of the Punjab.
It was launched in 1994, and operates a number of large CNG buses and smaller Toyota hiace vans connecting the majority of the city.
* Montgomery Bazaar (also known as Sutar Mandi) is known for yarn and raw cloth trading.
In 1892, the newly constructed town with its growing agricultural surplus was added to the British rail network.
It was initially designed to accommodate 20,000 people.
* Aminpur Bazaar supplies stationery and interior décor.
Islamic influences are evident in the fundamental values of various inhabitants including cultural traditions, marriage, education, diet, ceremonies and policies with may reflect stark differences in rural villages as compared to urban areas.
The Pakistan Meteorological Department regularly provides forecasts, public warnings and rainfall information to farmers with the assistance of the National Agromet Centre.
His proposal was supported by Sir James Broadwood Lyall and the city of Lyall was developed.
The Faisalabad Development Authority (FDA) was validly established in October 1976 under The Punjab Development of Cities Act (1976) to regulate, supervise and implement development activities in its jurisdiction area.
The city has carved a niche as an industrial centre with its highways, railways, railway repair yards, processing mills, and engineering works.
It is usually at its highest in July and August during monsoon season.
The Town Committee was upgraded to a Municipal Committee in 1909.
The Chenab River flows about , and the Ravi River meanders  to the southeast.
The British agreed to partition colonial India into two sovereign states – Pakistan with a Muslim majority, and India with a Hindu majority; however, more Muslims remained in India than what governing authorities believed would assimilate into Pakistan.
The new motorway will help reduce congestion, boost trade, and reduce travel times and transportation costs from Faisalabad, a major textile hub to the major trade centre of Multan.
The education system is monitored by the District Education Officer of the City District Government of Faisalabad.
It is responsible for the administration of building regulations, management of parks and gardens and subsoil water management.
The Gatwala Wildlife Park is a botanical natural reserve located at Gatwala that was renovated by the city district government.
The Pakistan Electronic Media Regulatory Authority (PEMRA) is responsible for the regulation and monitoring of electronic media entertainment in the country.
CAE, a German-based renewable energy company, has disclosed plans to establish the first solar panel manufacturing facility in Faisalabad, second of its kind in Asia, with intentions of investing upwards of €100&nbsp;million (Rs 12.9&nbsp;billion) for its development.
There are 118 union councils in Faisalabad.
* Rail Bazar is a gold and cloth market.
The Faisalabad clock tower and its eight bazaars (markets) remain a major trading zone in the city.
Each of the eight bazaars has a special name and is known for selling certain goods as follows:
Street foods are a key element to Faislabadi cuisine.
Protestors appealed to the government to adopt new laws "to protect women who are discriminated against in the family and workplace."
Men have adopted some of the modern Western styles for both casual and formal business dress such as dress pants, trousers, T-shirts and jeans.
His surname Lyall was joined with "pur" which in old Sanskrit language means city.
There were also respective divisions of the British Indian Army, the Indian Civil Service, various administrative services, the central treasury, and the railways.
The city is an industrial centre with major railway repair yards, engineering works, and mills that process sugar, flour, and oil seed.
Their role is to collect and maintain statistical information for socio-economic surveys.
Tandoori barbecue specialties consist of a variety of naan bread served with tandoori chicken, chicken tikka or lamb shishkebab served with a mint chutney.
This is usually accompanied by a variety of South Asian sweets such as jaggery, gajar ka halwa, gulab jamun, and jalebi.
There are a number of schools for the assistance of children with special needs.
Faisalabad has grown to become a major industrial and distribution centre because of its central location in the region and connecting roads, rails, and air transportation.
In 1961, the population rose to 425,248, an increase of 137.4%.
The total area of Faisalabad District is  while the area controlled by the Faisalabad Development Authority (FDA) is .
The more conservative women wear burqas that may or may not cover the face.
One section of the M4 was inaugurated on 16 March 2015 which links Faisalabad to Gojra.
There is even a square dedicated to them in the old city.
Faisalabad International Airport is approximately  from the city centre and is a major airport for domestic and international travel.
It is believed these early settlements belonged to the ancient districts of Jhang and Sandalbar, which included the area between Shahdara to Shorekot and Sangla Hill to Toba Tek Singh.
The city is situated at an elevation of about .
Faisalabadi men wear white shalwar kameez as do women but also with a dupatta (scarf).
2015 estimates indicate that WASA provides about 72% of the city's sewerage services and about 60% of their water services.
Women are also prohibited from wearing heavy make-up and expensive jewellery.
In some instances, the husband must buy his wife from her parents.
Faisalabad was restructured into city district status; a devolution promulgated by the 2001 local government ordinance (LGO).
Twenty-seven bogies comprise the goods train, and are handled respectively by private contractors at the station.
Biryani and murgh pilao rice are a speciality in Faisalabad.
The surrounding countryside, irrigated by the lower Chenab River, produces cotton, wheat, sugarcane, vegetables and fruits.
Record-breaking rainfall of  was recorded on 5 September 1961 by the Pakistan Meteorological Department.
In 2014, the University of Agriculture ranked 1st in agriculture and 4th overall for universities in Pakistan according to the Higher Education Commission of Pakistan (HEC), and was ranked 142nd in the 2013 Top 200 World Universities for agriculture and forestry by Quacquarelli Symonds (QS).
Two literary groups were established, the Faisalabad Union of Column Writers and Faisalabad Union of Journalists, to bring together printed media personalities for the purpose of providing training to budding writers from the city.
The river bed does include the river channels which have shifted the sand bars and low sandy levees leading to river erosion.
Law enforcement in Faisalabad is carried out by the city police, under the command of the city police officer (CPO), an appointment by the provincial government.
India's Bengal province was divided into East Pakistan and West Bengal (India), and the Punjab Province was divided into Punjab (West Pakistan) and Punjab, India.
"Radio Pakistan" broadcasts three government regulated FM stations: "Radio Pakistan FM101, Radio Pakistan FM93 and Radio Pakistan Sautul Qur'an Channel FM93.4.
In August 1947, following three decades of nationalist struggles, India and Pakistan achieved independence.
It is a producer of industrial goods and textile manufacturing including cotton and silk textiles, super phosphates, hosiery, dyes, industrial chemicals, clothing, pulp and paper, printing, agricultural equipment, ghee (clarified butter), and beverages.
It also has poultry feed wholesale shops.
It has been referred to as the "Manchester of Pakistan" because it contributes over 20% toward Pakistan's annual GDP.
Other street foods include, dahi bhale (deep fried vadas in creamy yoghurt), gol gappay (fried round puri filled with vegetables and topped with tamarind chutney) and vegetable or chicken pakoras.
The district coordination officer of Faisalabad (DCO) is head of the city district government and responsible for co-ordinating and supervising the administrative units.
* Bhawana Bazaar supplies electrical and electronic goods.
Faisalabad is bound on the north by Chiniot and Sheikhupura, on the east by Sheikhupura and Sahiwal, on the south by Sahiwal and Toba Tek Singh and on the west by Jhang.
The alluvial deposits are typically over a thousand feet thick.
Lyallpur, which was located in the region of the Punjab Province that became West Pakistan, was populated by a number of Hindus and Sikhs who migrated to India, while Muslim refugees from India settled in the district.
In 1961, the population was 425,248.
In 1998, Faisalabad progressed to a higher literacy rate with the most improvement realised at the primary school level.
Faisalabad was established as one of the first planned towns of British India covering an area of .
The festivals of Chaand Raat, Eid al-Fitr and Eid al-Adha are celebrated and are national holidays.
The Faisalabad Chamber of Commerce and Industry monitors industrial activity in the city and reports their findings to the Federation of Pakistan Chamber of Commerce and Industry and provincial government.
Funding is provided by the Government of Punjab, Pakistan, City District Government and the fees collected from schools.
In 2015, significant upgrades and renovations to the airport were initiated by the Pakistan Civil Aviation Authority, including updates to aviation technology, construction of additional areas and services for travellers, and the expansion of air traffic capabilities to accommodate wide-body aircraft such as the Boeing 777.
Marriage ceremonies, which can be more or less formal, include rituals which are universal in nature and hold sociological importance.
The dress code bans certain styles of Western attire including shorts, sleeveless shirts and shawls for men.
There are four levels of the education system in the city: Primary, Elementary, High and Higher Secondary Level.
In 1904, the new district of Lyallpur was formed to include the tehsils of Samundri and Toba Tek Singh with a sub-tehsil at Jaranwala, which later became a full tehsil in itself.
Women are prohibited from wearing jeans, tights or leggings, sleeveless or half-sleeved shirts for women.
The district government has worked with the National Highway Authority to connect Multan and Faisalabad.
It is customarily accompanied by a sweet or salty yoghurt based drink called lassi.
During the eighties, the city realised an increase in foreign investment.
Being a Muslim majority the city religious observances include Ramadan and Muharram.
The Faisalabad Urban Transport System Service (FUTS) is the main bus operator within the city.
Pakistan Telecommunication Company Limited is the main provider of fixed line, mobile and broadband services.
The surrounding countryside, irrigated by the lower Chenab River, produces agricultural commodities such as cotton, rice, sugarcane, wheat, fruit and vegetables.
Regional headquarters is located at the Central Telecom House in Chinot Bazaar.
As of January 2016, passenger flights are run by the national flag carrier, Pakistan International Airlines, and a number of middle eastern carriers.
The old floodplains consist of Holocene deposits from the Ravi and Chenab rivers.
Various police formations include district police, elite police, traffic police, Punjab highway patrolling, investigation branch, and special branch.
At the end of June 2012, textile mills employed 20% of the nation's workforce, and generated 1.3&nbsp;trillion rupees ($13.8&nbsp;billion) in textile products, most of which were exported to the US and Europe.
The stadium has hosted field hockey matches for both national and international competition but by the beginning of 2016 was reported to be in "pathetic condition as its astroturf has completed its life span about eight years ago."
The construction of the M4 is scheduled for completion by 2019.
In 1982, the Government of Punjab established the Faisalabad Arts Council, a division of the Punjab Arts Council which is overseen administratively by the Information, Culture and Youth Affairs Department.
Faisalabadi cuisine is very much Punjabi cuisine, with influences from the realms of the Mughal and Colonial empires.
In following ancient culture, marriages are customarily arranged by the parents or matchmakers.
The interfluves are believed to have been formed during the Late Pleistocene and feature river terraces.
In 1880, Poham Young CIE, a British colonial officer, proposed construction of a new strategic town within the area.
Faisalabad is well-connected by rail, road and air.
Lyallpur grew into an established agricultural tool and grain centre.
The city has a major dry port and international airport.
There are a number of private hospitals, clinics and laboratories in the city, notably Al-Rahmat labs, Mujahid Hospital lab, National Hospital lab & Agha Khan lab.
The office of the CPO is located in the District Courts, Faisalabad.
Samosas (deep fried pastry filled with vegetables or meat) topped with an onion salad and two types of chutney.
A typical breakfast in Faislabadi is halwa poori comprising a deep fried flatbread served with a spicy chickpea curry and sweet orange coloured halwa.
The airport includes a cargo facility.
The 1930s brought industrial growth and market expansion to the textile industry as well as to food processing, grain crushing and chemicals.
The city's population increased from 69,930 in 1941 to 179,000 in 1951 (152.2% increase).
In an effort to deal with the energy crisis, the FCCI has been working with private companies to develop renewable energy resources such as solar energy and the construction of dams within the district.
There is a mild slope from the northeast to the southwest with an average fall of .
It is further noted that there has been a "conscious and persistent effort" to educate rural and urban societies about gender bias and equality.
The Faisalabad Chamber of Commerce and Industry monitors industrial activity in the city and reports their findings to the Federation of Pakistan Chamber of Commerce and Industry and provincial government.
FM101 became operational in 2002, FM93 went live in 2010 and FM93.4 Sautul Qur'an Channel went live in 2016; PBC all three stations are standard power KW 2.5.
Other parks include Canal Park, a family park located on the west bank of the Rakh Branch Canal.
The FDA works to improve conditions in the slums.
