In October 1984, television reports describing the Ethiopian famine as "biblical", prompted the Live Aid concerts in London and Philadelphia, which raised large sums to alleviate the suffering.
The famine situation worsened during 1846 and the repeal of the Corn Laws in that year did little to help the starving Irish; the measure split the Conservative Party, leading to the fall of Peel's ministry.
The aim is to give as much nutrient rich food as the child will accept.
In forming this state, Leopold used mass labor camps to finance his empire.
The total absence of agriculture in an economically strong area does not cause famine; Arizona and other wealthy regions import the vast majority of their food, since such regions produce sufficient economic goods for trade.
But with a population expanding by 4 million a year, it will also soon turn to the world market for grain.
Communist Party cadres across China insisted that peasants abandon their farms for collective farms, and begin to produce steel in small foundries, often melting down their farm instruments in the process.
Since 2003, many of the most important organizations in famine relief, such as the World Food Programme and the U.S. Agency for International Development, have adopted a five-level scale measuring intensity and magnitude.
The blockade was caused by  uprisings in the Syrian region of the Empire including one which occurred in the 1860s which lead to the massacre of thousands of Lebanese and Syrian by Ottoman Turks and local Druze
be able to feed just 25% of its population by 2025, according to United Nations University (UNU)'s Ghana-based Institute for Natural Resources in Africa.
Thus the 1867–68 famine under the Tongzhi Restoration was successfully relieved but the Great North China Famine of 1877–78, caused by drought across northern China, was a catastrophe.
An example of famines due to FEE is the inability of an agricultural laborer to exchange his primary entitlement, i.e., labor for rice when his employment became erratic or was completely eliminated.
The Famine Commission issued a series of government guidelines and regulations on how to respond to famines and food shortages called the Famine Code.
Famine was first eliminated in Holland and England during the 17th century, due to the commercialization of agriculture and the implementation of improved techniques to increase crop yields.
Compounding this problem was the intermittent fighting due to civil war, the government's lack of organization in providing relief, and hoarding of supplies to control the population.
Various methods of categorizing the gradations of food security have thus been used in order to most efficiently allocate food relief.
Breastfeeding should ''always'' be continued."
They would eat their seed corn, sacrificing next year's crop in the hope that more seed could be found.
In order to comprehensively address the issue of famine, the British created an Indian Famine commission to recommend steps that the government would be required to take in the event of a famine.
Individuals and groups in food stressful situations will attempt to cope by rationing consumption, finding alternative means to supplement income, etc., before taking desperate measures, such as selling off plots of agricultural land.
By the 1590s, these trends were sufficiently developed in the rich and commercialized province of Holland to allow its population to withstand a general outbreak of famine in Western Europe at that time.
In India alone, the Ganges provides water for drinking and farming for more than 500 million people.
While Pol Pot was in power, between one and three million people died out of a total population of eight million.
During the Little Ice Age from the 15th century to the 18th century, famines in Europe became more frequent.
The assumption was that the central cause of all famines was a decline in food availability.
Hence, understanding how climate change may cause famines in the future requires combining both an assessment of local socio-economic and environmental factors along with climate models that predict where bad weather may occur in the future
This was possible because of existing infrastructure and institutions that are in short supply in Africa, such as a system of roads or public seed companies that made seeds available.
Alex de Waal has developed this theory to focus on the "political contract" between rulers and people that ensures famine prevention, noting the rarity of such political contracts in Africa, and the danger that international relief agencies will undermine such contracts through removing the locus of accountability for famines from national governments.
In the 1980s, large scale multilayer drought occurred in the Sudan and Sahelian regions of Africa.
21% of the population died, including 60% of the infants.
Famines have also been caused by volcanism.
The economy and population had grown steadily as subsistence populations tend to when there is an extended period of relative peace (most of the time).
The 1590s saw the worst famines in centuries across all of Europe.
The government hoped that they would not "stifle private enterprise" and that their actions would not act as a disincentive to local relief efforts.
Bhatia believes that the earlier famines were localised, and it was only after 1860, during the British rule, that famine came to signify general shortage of foodgrains in the country.
The number of deaths determines the magnitude designation, with under 1000 fatalities defining a "minor famine" and a "catastrophic famine" resulting in over 1,000,000 deaths.
However, FAD could not explain why only a certain section of the population such as the agricultural laborer was affected by famines while others were insulated from famines.
They observed that each province in British India, including Burma, had a surplus of foodgrains, and the annual surplus was 5.16 million tons (Bhatia, 1970).
Famine recurred in the early 1970s, when Ethiopia and the west African Sahel suffered drought and famine.
Some colonial "pacification" efforts often caused severe famine, notably with the repression of the Maji Maji revolt in Tanganyika in 1906.
The price of grain, all over Europe was high, as was the population.
One of the earliest were the Indian Famine Codes devised by the British in the 1880s.
Today, famine is most widespread in Sub-Saharan Africa, but with exhaustion of food resources, overdrafting of groundwater, wars, internal struggles, and economic failure, famine continues to be a worldwide problem with hundreds of millions of people suffering.
Millions in northern Europe died over an extended number of years, marking a clear end to the earlier period of growth and prosperity during the 11th and 12th centuries.
Three years of drought in India resulted in an estimated 1.5 million deaths from starvation and disease.
Records compiled for the Himba recall two droughts from 1910-1917.
It was a period marked by extreme levels of criminal activity, disease and mass death, infanticide, and cannibalism.
The 1980 famine in Karamoja, Uganda was, in terms of mortality rates, one of the worst in history.
CABDA proceeds through specific areas of intervention such as the introduction of drought-resistant crops and new methods of food production such as agro-forestry.
(Dutt, 1900 and 1902; Srivastava, 1968; Sen, 1982; Bhatia, 1985.)
According to Stephen L. Dyson and Robert J. Rowland, "The Jesuits of Cagliari in Sardinia recorded years during the late 1500s "of such hunger and so sterile that the majority of the people could sustain life only with wild ferns and other weeds" ... During the terrible famine of 1680, some 80,000 persons, out of a total population of 250,000, are said to have died, and entire villages were devastated..."
Estimates based on the North Korean census suggest that 240,000 to 420,000 people died as a result of the famine and that there were 600,000 to 850,000 unnatural deaths in North Korea from 1993 to 2008.
David Pimentel, professor of ecology and agriculture at Cornell University, and Mario Giampietro, senior researcher at the National Research Institute on Food and Nutrition (INRAN), place in their study ''Food, Land, Population and the U.S. Economy'' the maximum U.S. population for a sustainable economy at 200 million.
Owing to its almost entire dependence upon the monsoon rains, India is vulnerable to crop failures, which upon occasion deepen into famine.
Exportation of grain continued despite the famine and the government attempted to conceal it.
Reasons for this may include greater female resilience under the pressure of malnutrition, and possibly female's naturally higher percentage of body fat.
According to Scott and Duncan (2002), "Eastern Europe experienced more than 150 recorded famines between AD 1500 and 1700 and there were 100 hunger years and 121 famine years in Russia between AD 971 and 1974."
Amsterdam's grain trade with the Baltic, guaranteed a food supply.
It remains to be the most affected area in the world.
The prospect of starvation led people to take desperate measures.
Deficient micronutrients can be provided through fortifying foods.
The four famines of 1810, 1811, 1846, and 1849 are said to have killed no fewer than 45 million people.
Supporting farmers in areas of food insecurity, through such measures as free or subsidized fertilizers and seeds, increases food harvest and reduces food prices.
This enables farmers to influence and drive their own development through community-run institutions, bringing food security to their household and region.
Various famines have occurred in Vietnam.
An epidemic of stem rust, which is destructive to wheat and is caused by race Ug99, has in 2007 spread across Africa and into Asia.
This often led to a rise in conspiracy theories concerning the causes behind these famines, such as the Pacte de Famine in France.
They migrated to the cities where merchants from other areas would be more likely to sell their food, as cities had a stronger purchasing power than did rural areas.
Famines continued in the Soviet era, the most notorious being the ''Holodomor'' in various parts of the country, especially the Volga, and the Ukrainian and northern Kazakh SSR's during the winter of 1932–1933.
The lava caused little direct damage, but ash and sulphur dioxide spewed out over most of the country, causing three-quarters of the island's livestock to perish.
The Great Famine of 1315–1317 (or to 1322) was the first major food crisis to strike Europe in the 14th century.
The most serious famines have been caused by a combination of drought, misguided economic policies, and conflict.
Most died from malnourishment and exhaustion as a result of the famine caused by inept and negligent government officials.
Based on the studies of some recent famines, the decisive role of FAD has been questioned and it has been suggested that the causal mechanism for precipitating starvation includes many variables other than just decline of food availability.
WHO and other sources recommend that malnourished children - and adults who also have diarrhea - drink rehydration solution, and continue to eat, in addition to antibiotics, and zinc supplements.World Health Organization, 2005.
Zinc supplements often can help reduce the duration and severity of diarrhea, and Vitamin A can also be helpful.
;Cambodian killing fields
However, for people in a drought living a long way from and with limited access to markets, delivering food may be the most appropriate way to help.
As late as the 1690s, Scotland experienced famine which reduced the population of parts of Scotland by at least 15%.
In 1966, there was a close call in Bihar, when the United States allocated 900,000 tons of grain to fight the famine.
Famine even struck in Western Europe during the Second World War.
Despite this promising start, the measures undertaken by Peel's successor, Lord John Russell, proved comparatively "inadequate" as the crisis deepened.
According to geologist Dale Allen Pfeiffer, coming decades could see rising food prices without relief and massive starvation on a global level.
Numerous factors make the food security situation in Africa tenuous, including political instability, armed conflict and civil war, corruption and mismanagement in handling food supplies, and trade policies that harm African agriculture.
Famine still occurred in other parts of Europe, however.
Predicting the seasons, as well as when to expect rain to help plant more crops seems to be a challenge.
Taxes that had to be paid to central governments in money forced the peasants to produce crops to sell.
The increasing number of wage labourers in the countryside were vulnerable because they had no food of their own, and their meager living was not enough to purchase the expensive grain of a bad-crop year.
Developed nations have shared these technologies with developing nations with a famine problem.
The same mechanism is theorized to be caused by very large meteorite impacts to the extent of causing mass extinctions.
The great famine of the 1590s began the period of famine and decline in the 17th century.
With the confusion and desperation of the migrants, crime would often follow them.
When scarcity of food became apparent to peasants, they would sacrifice long-term prosperity for short-term survival.
The Ethiopian Great famine that afflicted Ethiopia from 1888 to 1892 cost it roughly one-third of its population.
These were finally passed into law in 1883 under Lord Ripon.
But if these shocks overwhelm the ecosystem's line of defense, it is necessary for the household to adapt using its skills and savings.
An example of a famine created by human rights abuses is the 1998 Sudan famine.
The maize corn was then re-sold for a penny a pound.
Some other areas of Europe also experienced famine at the same time.
In modern times, local and political governments and non-governmental organizations that deliver famine relief have limited resources with which to address the multiple situations of food insecurity that are occurring simultaneously.
An estimated 50,000 to 150,000 people are reported to have died during the period.
Death rates rose in Scandinavia between 1740 and 1800 as the result of a series of crop failures.
Russell's ministry introduced public works projects, which by December 1846 employed some half million Irish and proved impossible to administer.
When a stressed monarchy shifted from state management and direct shipments of grain to monetary charity in the mid-19th century, the system broke down.
Brazil's 1877–78 ''Grande Seca'' (Great Drought), the worst in Brazil's history, caused approximately half a million deaths.
The vulnerable agricultural sector experienced a massive failure in 1995–96, expanding to full-fledged famine by 1996–99.
Famine struck North Korea in the mid-1990s, set off by unprecedented floods.
Per this proposed view, famines are precipitated due to a breakdown in the ability of the person to exchange his entitlements.
According to this view, famines are a result of entitlements,  the theory being proposed is called the "failure of exchange entitlements" or FEE.
Although the drought was brief the main cause of death in Rwanda was due to Belgian prerogatives to acquisition grain from their colony (Rwanda).
Frances Moore Lappé, later co-founder of the Institute for Food and Development Policy (Food First) argued in ''Diet for a Small Planet'' (1971) that vegetarian diets can provide food for larger populations, with the same resources, compared to omnivorous diets.
Famine personified as an allegory is found in some cultures, e.g.
In 2012, the Sahel drought put more than 10 million people in the western Sahel at risk of famine (according to a Methodist Relief & Development Fund (MRDF) aid expert), due to a month-long heat wave.
Some countries, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa, continue to have extreme cases of famine.
The 872 days of the Siege of Leningrad (1941–1944) caused unparalleled famine in the Leningrad region through disruption of utilities, water, energy and food supplies.
These include poverty, population growth, an inappropriate social infrastructure, a suppressive political regime, and a weak or under-prepared government.
The first line of defense is the agro-ecosystem on which food is produced: diverse ecosystems with well managed soils high in organic matter tend to be more resilient.
In 2006, the most serious humanitarian crisis in Africa was in Sudan's region Darfur.
Between 20 and 45 million people perished in this famine, making it one of the deadliest famines to date.
They would kill their draught animals, leading to lowered production in subsequent years.
Economist Amartya Sen states that the liberal institutions that exist in India, including competitive elections and a free press, have played a major role in preventing famine in that country since independence.
Agriculture became increasingly specialized and efficient.
Nearly every continent in the world has experienced a period of famine throughout history.
The Great Famine in Ireland, 1846–1851, caused by the failure of the potato crop over a few years, resulted in 1,000,000 dead and another 2,000,000 refugees fleeing to Britain, Australia and the United States.
They produced guaranteed surpluses of their crop every year if they could.
The Famine Code applied a strategy of generating employment for these sections of the population and relied on open-ended public works to do so.
Noting that modern famines are sometimes aggravated by misguided economic policies, political design to impoverish or marginalize certain populations, or acts of war, political economists have investigated the political conditions under which famine is prevented.
Many famines are caused by imbalance of food production compared to the large populations of countries whose population exceeds the regional carrying capacity .
Once those means had been exhausted, they would take to the road in search of food.
The Maghreb experienced famine and plague in the late 18th century and early 19th century.
The government was influenced by a laissez-faire belief that the market would provide the food needed.
Subsistence peasant populations will almost always increase when possible since the peasants will try to spread the work to as many hands as possible.
In 1932, under the rule of the USSR, Ukraine experienced one of its largest famines when between 2.4 and 7.5 million peasants died as a result of a state sponsored famine.
Japan experienced more than 130 famines between 1603 and 1868.
If current trends of soil degradation continue in Africa, the continent might be able to feed just 25% of its population by 2025, according to UNU's Ghana-based Institute for Natural Resources in Africa.
In Ethiopia it was estimated that as much as 90 percent of the national herd died, rendering rich farmers and herders destitute overnight.
The Russian Academy of Sciences in 1995 reported civilian victims in the USSR at German hands, including Jews, totalled 13.7 million dead, 20% of the 68 million persons in the occupied USSR.
The only records obtained are of violence between Portuguese and Africans during the Battle of Mbilwa in 1665.
The 1815 eruption of the Mount Tambora volcano in Indonesia caused crop failures and famines worldwide and caused the worst famine of the 19th century.
In 1846, Peel moved to repeal the Corn Laws, tariffs on grain which kept the price of bread artificially high.
By that time, the Netherlands had one of the most commercialized agricultural systems in Europe.
The Soviet government continued to deny the problem and it did not provide aid to the victims nor did it accept foreign aid.
Other notable famines include the Great Famine of 1876–78, in which 6.1 million to 10.3 million people died and the Indian famine of 1899–1900, in which 1.25 to 10 million people died.
The effort to bring modern agricultural techniques found in the Western world, such as nitrogen fertilizers and pesticides, to Asia, called the Green Revolution, resulted in decreases in malnutrition similar to those seen earlier in Western nations.
The Great Famine, which lasted from 1770 until 1771, killed about one tenth of Czech lands' population, or 250,000 inhabitants, and radicalised countrysides leading to peasant uprisings.
The last major famine in the USSR happened in 1947 due to the severe drought and the mismanagement of grain reserves by the Soviet government.
Additionally, instances of cannibalism by the African Jaga were also more prevalent during this time frame, indicating an extreme deprivation of a primary food source.
The Code introduced the first famine scale: three levels of food insecurity were defined: near-scarcity, scarcity, and famine.
The World Health Organization underlines the importance of a person with diarrhea continuing to eat, with a 2005 publication for physicians stating: "Food should ''never'' be withheld and the child's usual foods should ''not'' be diluted.
A systematic attempt at creating the necessary regulatory framework for dealing with famine was developed by the British Raj in the 1880s.
Of greater long-term demographic impact is emigration: Ireland was chiefly depopulated after the 1840s famines by waves of emigration.
Some criticize the process, stating that these new high-yielding crops require more chemical fertilizers and pesticides, which can harm the environment.
Famine had been relatively rare during the 16th century.
The exchange can happen via trading or production or through a combination of the two.
There were sixteen good harvests and 111 famine years in northern Italy from 1451 to 1767.
In Somalia, famine occurred because of a failed state.
These events are comparable, though somewhat smaller in scale, to the ecological trigger events of China's vast 19th-century famines.
There were approximately 25 major famines spread through states such as Tamil Nadu in the south, and Bihar and Bengal in the east during the latter half of the 19th century.
Governments, churches, or NGOs must be willing and able to mount effective relief efforts.
Modern African famines are characterized by widespread destitution and malnutrition, with heightened mortality confined to young children.
Despite repeated stated intentions by the world's leaders to end hunger and famine, famine remains a chronic threat in much of Africa and Asia.
In January 2006, the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization warned that 11 million people in Somalia, Kenya, Djibouti and Ethiopia were in danger of starvation due to the combination of severe drought and military conflicts.
On the other hand, in the modern history of Africa on quite a few occasions famines acted as a major source of acute political instability.
Malawi ended its famine by subsidizing farmers despite the strictures imposed by the World Bank.
The demographic impacts of famine are sharp.
"Famine" further included a rise in food prices above 140% of "normal", the movement of people in search of food, and widespread mortality.
Since the start of the 21st century, more effective early warning and humanitarian response actions have reduced the number of deaths by famine markedly.
A '''famine''' is a widespread scarcity of food, caused by several factors including crop failure, population imbalance, or government policies.
There were serious famines in the late-1640s and less severe ones in the 1670s throughout northern Italy.
Food shortages in a population are caused either by a lack of food or by difficulties in food distribution; it may be worsened by natural climate fluctuations and by extreme political conditions related to oppressive government or warfare.
The one from 1915 was devastating too.
The final line of defense is created by the formal institutions present in a society.
This coincided with a massive drought, causing over 300,000 Somalians to perish.
By 1650, English agriculture had also become commercialized on a much wider scale.
This will eventually lead to water scarcity and cutbacks in grain harvest.
However, if the diarrhea is severe, the standard solution is preferable as the person needs the extra sodium.
Through the country's main food assistance program, the Productive Safety Net Program, Ethiopia has been giving rural residents who are chronically short of food, a chance to work for food or cash.
This period resulted in the death of up to 10 million Congolese from brutality, disease and famine.
At that time, annual export of rice and other grains from India was approximately one million tons.
The largest famine of the 20th century, and almost certainly of all time, was the 1958–61 Great Leap Forward famine in China.
The mortality in China in 1958–61, Bengal in 1943, and Ethiopia in 1983–85 was all made up by a growing population over just a few years.
Estimated mortality is 9.5 to 13 million people.
In July 2005, the Famine Early Warning Systems Network labelled Niger with emergency status, as well as Chad, Ethiopia, South Sudan, Somalia and Zimbabwe.
These capitalist landowners paid their labourers with money, thereby increasing the commercialization of rural society.
The Soviet famine of 1932–1933 is nowadays reckoned to have cost an estimated 6 million lives.
The current consensus of the scientific community is that the aerosols and dust released into the upper atmosphere causes cooler temperatures by preventing the sun's energy from reaching the ground.
Ultimately, over 1 million Ethiopians died and over 22 million people suffered due to the prolonged drought, which lasted roughly 2 years.
The province of Shanxi was substantially depopulated as grains ran out, and desperately starving people stripped forests, fields, and their very houses for food.
one of the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse in Christian tradition,  the fear gorta of Irish folklore, or the Wendigo of Algonquian tradition.
Such was the centralized control of information and the intense pressure on party cadres to report only good news—such as production quotas met or exceeded—that information about the escalating disaster was effectively suppressed.
In the following famine, around ten thousand people died, one-fifth of the population of Iceland.
Between 1950 and 1984, hybrid strains of high-yielding crops transformed agriculture around the globe and world grain production increased by 250%.
Pulling this together, Evan Fraser argues that if an ecosystem is resilient enough, it may be able to withstand weather-related shocks.
Against a backdrop of conventional interventions through the state or markets, alternative initiatives have been pioneered to address the problem of food security.
;Great Leap Forward
The Commission identified that the loss of wages from lack of employment of agricultural labourers and artisans were the cause of famines.
India, China, Pakistan, Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Nepal and Myanmar could experience floods followed by severe droughts in coming decades.
Even with the overpumping of its aquifers, China has developed a grain deficit, contributing to the upward pressure on grain prices.
The water tables are falling in many countries (including Northern China, the US, and India) due to widespread overconsumption.
A notable period of famine occurred around the turn of the 20th century in the Congo Free State.
