According to the ICBL Landmine and Cluster Munitions Monitor, "FARC is probably the most prolific current user of antipersonnel mines among rebel groups anywhere in the world."
In Colombian history and culture, the killings are known as ''La Violencia'' (The Violence, 1948–58); most of the people killed were peasants and laborers in rural Colombia.
The NGO has stated that while most of these incidents remain defensive in nature and are not like the large offensives from years past, FARC actions have been growing since 2005, and the rebel group is currently carrying out intense operations against small and medium-sized Colombian military units in vulnerable areas.
Larsson suffered a stroke while in captivity.
On 22 March 2006 the Attorney General Alberto Gonzales announced the indictment of fifty leaders of FARC for exporting more than $25&nbsp;billion worth of cocaine to the United States and other countries.
However, they vanished in December 2004 while on bail and returned to Ireland.
However, this move was rejected by organizer Carlos Andrés Santiago, who stated that such an endorsement was harmful and criticized the AUC's actions.
They join for a variety of reasons including poverty, lack of educational opportunities, avoiding dangerous work in coca processing, escaping from domestic violence, offers of money (mostly from paramilitaries, who pay their soldiers).
The Colombian Constitutional Court has warned that 35 of those groups are in danger of dying out.
In a statement published on a pro-rebel Web site, the FARC-EP said the unilateral release demonstrated the group's willingness to engage the Colombian government in talks over the release of as many as 800 people who are still being held.
In 1987, the President of the UP, Jaime Pardo, was murdered.
The commander, Cesar and one other rebel were taken into custody by agents without incident after boarding the helicopter.
Immediately after the captive rescue, Colombian military forces cornered the rest of FARC-EP's 1st Front, the unit which had held the captives.
Tulio Lizcano was a hostage for over 8 years, and escaped with a FARC-EP rebel he convinced to travel with him.
The Colombian government stated that government forces had not made any rescue attempts and that the FARC-EP executed the hostages.
The "international spokesman" of the organization was represented by "Raul Reyes", who was killed in a Colombian army raid against a guerrilla camp in Ecuador on 1 March 2008.
In 2002, Amnesty International sent a letter to FARC-EP Commander Manuel Marulanda condemning kidnapping and hostage-taking as well as rejecting the threats directed at municipal or judicial officials and their families, arguing that they are civilians who are protected by international humanitarian law as long as they do not participate in hostilities.
On 17 December 2004, the Colombian government authorized Trinidad's extradition to the United States, but stated that the measure could be revoked if the FARC-EP released all political hostages and military captives in its possession before 30 December.
According to Santos, he was "the impersonation of terror and a symbol of violence".
Under the accord, the Colombian government will support massive investment for rural development and facilitate the FARC's reincarnation as a legal political party.
In June 2000, FARC-EP Commander Carlos Antonio Lozada told Human Rights Watch that the minimum recruitment age of fifteen years was set in 1996 but admitted that "this norm was not enforced" until recently.
During the period she was held kidnapped in the jungle in 2004, Clara Rojas gave birth to her son by Caesarean.
FARC receives most of its funding—which has been estimated to average some $300&nbsp;million per year—from taxation of the illegal drug trade and other activities, ransom kidnappings, bank robberies, and extortion of large landholders, multinational corporations, and agribusiness.
The FARC-EP says it will continue its armed struggle because it perceives the current Colombian government as an enemy because of historical politically motivated violence against its members and supporters including members of the Patriotic Union, a FARC-EP-created political party.
Within each Front, there are combat, support, and infrastructure elements.
The rescued included Íngrid Betancourt (former presidential Candidate), U.S. military contractors Marc Gonsalves, Thomas Howes, and Keith Stansell, as well as eleven Colombian police officers and soldiers.
The greatest concentrations of FARC forces are in the southeastern, northern and southwestern regions of Colombia's  of jungle, in the plains at the base of the Andean mountain chain and in northwestern Colombia.
The Colombian military had information indicating that there could be captives in the area and initiated Operation Jupiter in October 2011, using a 56 men Special Forces unit to carry out surveillance for preparing a future rescue mission that would involve additional troops and air support.
In 1961, a guerrilla leader and long-time PCC organizer named Manuel Marulanda Vélez declared an independent "Republic of Marquetalia".
Uribe's own father had been killed by FARC-EP in an attempted kidnapping in 1983.
In 2000, the FARC-EP issued a directive called "Law 002" which demanded a "tax" from all individuals and corporations with assets worth at least $1&nbsp;million USD, warning that those who failed to pay would be detained by the group.
Kiraz Janicke of leftist "Venezuela News, Views and Analysis" website criticized the rallies, claiming that "right-wing paramilitary leaders featured prominently" in their organization and arguing that workers were also pressured to attend the gatherings.
It was also at this conference that FARC added the initials "EP", for "''Ejército del Pueblo''" or "People's Army", to the organization's name.
The missing witness, a former police inspector, said he had seen Mr McCauley with FARC-EP members in 1998.
Colombian authorities announced the death of Víctor Julio Suárez Rojas, also known as ''Mono Jojoy'', on 23 September 2010.
With the military tightening the noose, a FARC-EP rebel turned himself in and provided Colombian authorities with Lizcano's exact location in the northwest state of Choco.
The PCC began establishing "peasant leagues" in rural areas and "popular fronts" in urban areas, calling for improved living and working conditions, education, and rights for the working class.
From 1994 to 1997 the region of Urabá in Antioquia department was the site of FARC attacks against civilians.
The IRA/FARC-EP connection was first made public on 11 August 2001, following the arrest in Bogotá of two IRA explosives and urban warfare experts and of a representative of Sinn Féin who was known to be stationed in Cuba.
In 2001, FARC Commander Simón Trinidad claimed that the FARC-EP does not engage in kidnapping but instead "retains individuals in order to obtain resources needed for our struggle".
According to social anthropologist María Clemencia Ramírez, the relationship between the guerrillas and the marches was ambivalent: FARC-EP promoted the 1996 protests as part of their participatory democracy policies yet also exercised authoritarianism, which led to tensions and negotiations with peasant leaders, but the ''cocalero'' movement brought proposals on behalf of the coca growers and defended its own interests.
However, on 13 January 2008, Chavez retracted his previous statement and stated his disapproval of the FARC-EP strategy of armed struggle and kidnapping, saying "I don't agree with kidnapping and I don't agree with armed struggle".
As police and army troops prepared to launch a rescue operation, Lizcano escaped alongside one of his guerrilla guards who had decided to desert.
Land reform and compensation was tackled with promises to compensate those who had lost land.
According to a report from Human Rights Watch, approximately 20–30% of the recruits are minors, most of whom are forced to join the FARC.
After many discussions, the FARC finally agreed to embrace the Gandhian principle of non-violence.
Asked about her opinion of the FARC-EP as group, Rojas called it "a criminal organization", condemning its kidnappings as "a total violation of human dignity" and saying some captive police and soldiers are constantly chained.
Political analyst and former guerrilla León Valencia has estimated that FARC's numbers have been reduced to around 11,000 from their 18,000 peak but cautions against considering the group a defeated force.
In February 2009, Sigifredo López, the only deputy who survived and was later released by FARC, accused the group of killing the 11 captives and denied that any military rescue attempt had taken place.
In Monday, 18 March 2002 the Attorney General of the United States John Ashcroft indicted leaders of the FARC after an 18-month investigation into their narcotics trafficking.
During Santos' presidency, private security and proclaimed self-defense movements have also lost their legitimacy.
He was considered to be FARC-EP's second-in-command.
An unnamed Colombian intelligence source said Santos has assured FARC that no one would be extradited to stand trial in another country.
The Colombian authorities had received satellite footage, probably supplied by the CIA, of the men with FARC-EP in an isolated jungle area, where they are thought to have spent the last five weeks.
On 8 July 2015, FARC announced a unilateral ceasefire, which began on 20 July 2015.
As of 2014, the FARC are not seeking to engage in outright combat with the army, instead concentrating on small-scale ambushes against isolated army units.
In a Venezuela-brokered deal, a helicopter flew deep into Colombia to pick up both hostages.
On 1 July 2013, FARC and the second-largest guerrilla group in Colombia, ELN, announced that they would be working together to find a "political solution to the social and armed conflict."
In June 2016, the FARC signed a ceasefire accord with the President of Colombia, Juan Manuel Santos in Havana.
In a 5 July communique, FARC itself blamed rebels Cesar and Enrique for the escape of the captives and acknowledged the event as a setback but reiterated their willingness to reach future humanitarian agreements.
During the 1984 peace negotiations, FARC pledged to stop kidnapping and condemned the practice.
He survived after previously being punished for insubordination and was held in chains nearby but separated from the rest of the group.
After the 21 April 2001 capture of Brazilian drug lord Luiz Fernando da Costa (aka Fernandinho Beira-Mar) in Colombia, Colombian and Brazilian authorities accused him of cooperating with FARC-EP through the exchange of weapons for cocaine.
Among other policy recommendations the US team advised that "in order to shield the interests of both Colombian and US authorities against 'interventionist' charges any special aid given for internal security was to be sterile and covert in nature."
The group said that they kidnapped him in order to "put him on trial for corruption" and blamed his death on an attempt to rescue him by force.
A February 2005 report from the United Nations' High Commissioner for Human Rights mentioned that, during 2004, "FARC-EP continued to commit grave breaches of human rights such as murders of protected persons, torture and hostage-taking, which affected many civilians, including men, women, returnees, boys and girls, and ethnic groups."
On 27 May 2013, it was announced that one of the most contentious issues had been resolved.
During the 1990s, FARC expanded its operations, in some areas, to include trafficking and production, which has provided a significant portion of its funding.
In November 2004, the FARC-EP had rejected a proposal to hand over 59 of its captives in exchange for 50 guerrillas imprisoned by the government.
Tánaiste Mary Harney said no deal had been done with Sinn Féin or the IRA over the three's return to Ireland adding that the Irish government would consider any request from the Colombian authorities for their extradition.
According to Amnesty International, the number of kidnappings has decreased in recent years but the human rights organization estimates that FARC and ELN guerrillas continue to be behind hundreds of cases.
FARC had historically been doing most of its fighting in rural areas, and was limited to small-scale confrontations with Colombian military forces.
In February 1962, three years after the 1959 "US Special Survey Team", a Fort Bragg top-level U.S. Special Warfare team headed by Special Warfare Center commander General William P. Yarborough, visited Colombia for a second survey.
In 2009, the state's anti-kidnapping agency ''Fondelibertad'' reviewed 3,307 officially unsettled cases and removed those that had already been resolved or for which there was insufficient information.
16,000 Colombian troops attacked the community, which only had 48 armed fighters.
The government's revised figures were considered "absurdly low" by ''Fundación País Libre'', which has argued that its own archives suggest an estimated 1,617 people taken hostage between 2000 and 2008 remain in the hands of their captors, including hundreds seized by FARC.
He said Colombia was still in a fight "against terrorist actions" but was open to reconciliation.
In April 2011 the Colombian congress issued a statement saying that FARC has a 'strong presence' in roughly one third of the municipalities in Colombia, while their attacks have increased.
Shortly before the rallies took place thirteen demobilized AUC paramilitary leaders, including Salvatore Mancuso, had expressed their support of the protest through a communique.
These groups began networking together to present a defensive front against the state-supported violence of large landholders.
Many of the PCC's attempts at organizing peasants were met with violent repression by the Colombian government and the landowning class.
FARC did not report any other casualties on either side and delayed months before permitting the Red Cross to recover the remains.
The women were escorted out of the jungle by armed guerrillas to a clearing where they were picked up by Venezuelan helicopters that bore International Red Cross insignias.
Their report alleged a longstanding connection between the IRA and FARC-EP, mentioned at least 15 IRA members who had been traveling in and out of Colombia since 1998, and estimated that the IRA had received at least $2&nbsp;million in drug proceeds for training FARC-EP members.
Lozada said, however, that it had become an obligatory standard after Commander Jorge Briceño's statements on the matter in April 2000.
On 13 July 2004, the office of the United Nations' High Commissioner for Human Rights publicly condemned the group, proving that FARC-EP violated article 17 of the additional Protocol II of the Geneva Convention and international humanitarian law, as a result of the 10 July massacre of seven peasants and the subsequent displacement of eighty individuals in San Carlos, Antioquia.
They state that this area would lie outside the "area of influence" of both their Southern and Eastern Blocks (the FARC-EP's strongest) and that of the military operations being carried out by the Uribe administration.
The army says it has 'identified' at least 1,400 such militia members in the FARC strongholds of Valle del Cauca and Cauca in 2011.
From 1996 to 1998 they inflicted a series of strikes on the Colombian Army, including a three-day offensive in Mitú (Vaupés department), taking a large number of soldiers prisoner.
FARC-EP, the ELN and right-wing paramilitaries all train teens as soldiers and informants.
The strength of the FARC–EP forces is indeterminate; in 2007, the FARC said they were an armed force of 18,000 men and women; in 2010, the Colombian military calculated that FARC forces consisted of approximately 13,800 members, 50 percent of whom were armed guerrilla combatants; and, in 2011, the President of Colombia, Juan Manuel Santos, said that FARC–EP forces comprised fewer than 10,000 members.
The protests were originally organized through the popular social networking site Facebook and were also supported by local Colombian media outlets as well as the Colombian government.
ELN leader Nicolás Rodríguez Bautista, otherwise known as Gabino, added that his group was interested in joining the talks too: "Well we are open, it's exactly our proposal, to seek room for open dialogue without conditions and start to discuss the nation's biggest problems.
The first round of the talks will take place in Oslo on 5 October and then return to Havana for approximately six months of talks before culminating in Colombia.
Right-wing paramilitary groups also receive a large portion of their income from drug trafficking and production operations.
He was reunited with his family on 5 January 2007.
FARC has consistently carried out attacks against civilians specifically targeting suspected supporters of paramilitary groups, political adversaries, journalists, local leaders, and members of certain indigenous groups since at least as early as 1994.
Colombia's Program for Humanitarian Attention for the Demobilized announced in August 2008 that 339 members of Colombia's rebel groups surrendered and handed in their weapons in July, including 282 guerrillas from the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia.
They also planned to move closer to middle-sized cities, as opposed to only remote rural areas, and closer to areas rich in natural resources, in order to create a strong economic infrastructure.
After this event, the FARC-EP released a statement saying that defeating the group would not bring peace to Colombia and called for a negotiated solution, not surrender, to the social and political conflict.
They evaded pursuit for three days as they trekked through mountains and jungles, encountering the military in the western coastal region of Colombia.
The killings were questioned by many and condemned by many others, and led the United States to increase pressure on the Pastrana administration to crack down on FARC guerrillas.
The indigenous organization also demanded the immediate end of all violence and conflict within indigenous territories and called for a negotiated solution to the war.
According to Amnesty International it has been reported that young female recruits have been sexually abused by veteran guerrilla soldiers and in several cases pregnancies were aborted against their will by FARC doctors.
The Red Cross also reported that the deputies had been killed by multiple close-range shots, many of them in the back of the victims, and even two by shots to the head.
President Chávez also asked the Colombian government and their allies to recognize the FARC as a belligerent force, arguing that such political recognition would oblige the FARC to forgo kidnapping and terrorism as methods of civil war and to abide by the Geneva Convention.
Within remote locations under FARC control and where the national government is generally absent, the group can function as a revolutionary vanguard and institutes its ''de facto'' rule of law by carrying out activities that aim to combat corruption and reduce small-scale crime.
By early 2011 Colombian authorities and news media reported that the FARC and the clandestine sister groups have partly shifted strategy from guerrilla warfare to 'a war of militias', meaning that they are increasingly operating in civilian clothes while hiding amongst sympathizers in the civilian population.
On 23 January 2014 Juan Fernando Cristo, the President of the Senate of Colombia, proposed a second Plan Colombia during a conference on the Colombian peace process in Washington, D.C. Cristo stated that this new plan should be "for the victims" and should redirect the resources from the original Plan Colombia towards supporting a post-conflict Colombia.
Santos says he has the keys to peace in his pocket, but I think he has lost them because there seems to be no possibility of a serious dialogue, we remain holding out for that."
* ''Squad'' – +/- 12 combatants
DNA tests later confirmed the boy, who had been living in a Bogotá foster home for more than two years under a different name, was hers.
This incident led to a breakdown in diplomatic relations between Ecuador and Colombia, and between Venezuela and Colombia.
Another prisoner, Jhon Frank Pinchao, a police officer, escaped his captors on 28 April 2007 after nine years in captivity.
During the first two years of the Uribe administration, several FARC-EP fronts, most notably in Cundinamarca and Antioquia, were broken by the government's military operations.
In June 2011 Colombian chief of staff Edgar Cely claimed that the FARC wants to 'urbanize their actions', which could partly explain the increased guerrilla activity in Medellín and particularly Cali.
On 3 June 1991, dialogue resumed between the Simón Bolívar Guerrilla Coordinating Board and the government on neutral territory in Caracas, Venezuela and Tlaxcala, Mexico.
Araújo had to walk through the jungle for five days before being found by troops in the hamlet of San Agustin,  north of Bogotá.
FARC has called for crop substitution programs that would allow coca farmers to find alternative means of income and subsistence.
At 8 months old, the baby was removed from the area and Rojas didn't hear of the boy again until 31 December, when she heard Colombian President Álvaro Uribe say on the radio that the child was no longer with her captors.
''Al Jazeera'' reported that the initiative began after Santos met with Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez and asked him to mediate.
* ''Block'' – 5+ Fronts, with each block corresponding to one of Colombia's geographical regions: south, central, east, west, Middle Magdalena, Caribbean, and Cesar.
The '''Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia—People's Army''' (, '''FARC–EP''' and '''FARC''') is a guerrilla movement involved in the continuing Colombian armed conflict since 1964.
Juan Manuel Santos, the current President of Colombia, has followed a middle path by recognizing in 2011 that there is an "armed conflict" in Colombia although his predecessor, Alvaro Uribe, strongly disagreed.
First, that any connections between drug trafficking organizations and Colombian insurgents were ''"ad hoc 'alliances of convenience'"''.
During this period, most rural workers lacked basic medical care and malnutrition was almost universal, which increased the rates of preventable disease and infant mortality.
Luis Evelis, an indigenous leader and ONIC representative, has stated that "the armed conflict is still in force, causing damages to the indigenous.
Meanwhile, since 2008, the FARC have opted to attack police patrols with home-made mortars, sniper rifles, and explosives, as they are not considered strong enough to engage police units directly.
Argote was kidnapped on 3 August 1998.
One prisoner, Julian Ernesto Guevara Castro, a police officer, died of tuberculosis on 28 January 2006.
Before the break off of dialogue, a letter written by a group of Colombian intellectuals (among whom were Nobel laureate Gabriel García Márquez) to the Simón Bolívar Guerrilla Coordinating Board was released denouncing the approach taken by the FARC-EP and the dire consequences that it was having for the country.
On 30 September 2015, Ravi Shankar alleged that Vatican-backed Norway headed by Pope Francis, which was also part of a four nation pack (including Cuba, Chile and Venezuela) acting as guarantors in the talks is sidetracking his effort at brokering seminal peace deal between Colombian government and FARC guerillas.
They requested security guarantees both for the displacement of their negotiators and that of the guerrillas that would be freed, which are specifically stated to number as many as 500 or more, and ask the Catholic Church to coordinate the participation of the United Nations and other countries in the process.
The FARC agreed that hatred had derailed the peace process.
Military operations in the area and bad weather had prevented the release from occurring one week earlier.
The 6th Front of the FARC, which was in charge of Cano's security at the time of his death, retaliated by killing two policemen in Suarez and Jambaló some 24 hours after the death of Cano.
Furthermore it is doubtful that either insurgent group could develop the international transportation and logistics infrastructure necessary to establish independent drug distribution in the United States or Europe… DEA believes that the insurgents never will be major players in Colombia's drug trade."''
It has been known to employ a variety of military tactics in addition to more unconventional methods, including terrorism.
In 2003, Human Rights Watch reported that FARC-EP shows no leniency to children because of their age, assigning minors the same duties as adults and sometimes requiring them to participate in executions or witness torture.
The Coordinating Board disappeared not long after that time, and guerrilla groups continued their activities independently.
In the early 1990s, the FARC-EP had between 7,000 and 10,000 fighters, organized into 70 fronts spread throughout the country.
Santos later told ''Al Jazeera'' that peace was possible if there was "goodwill" on both sides.
These areas have traditionally been located in the departments of Caquetá, Meta, Guaviare and Putumayo, and - to a lesser extent - portions of Huila, Tolima and Nariño.
When growers in a FARC-controlled area are caught selling coca to non-FARC brokers, they are generally forced to leave the region, but when growers are caught selling to FARC in paramilitary-controlled areas, they are generally killed.
Although a final peace agreement will require a referendum, this accord has been seen as a historic step to ending the war that has gone on for fifty years.
In 1982, FARC-EP held its Seventh Guerrilla Conference, which called for a major shift in FARC's strategy.
During the year 2011, fifty-six indigenous people have been killed."
Tomas Molina Caracas, the commander of the FARC's 16th Front, led the 16th Front's drug-trafficking activities together with Carlos Bolas and a rebel known as Oscar El Negro.
Jeremy McDermott, co-director of Insight Crime, estimates that FARC may have some 30,000 'part-time fighters' in 2011, consisting of both armed and unarmed civilian supporters making up the rebel militia network, instead of full-time fighters wearing uniforms.
Furthermore, FARC use child soldiers to carry and deploy antipersonnel mines.
FARC has also executed civilians for failing to pay "war taxes" to their group.
According to López, the unexpected arrival of another guerrilla unit resulted in confusion and paranoia, leading the rebels to kill the rest of the Valle deputies.
FARC has requested Ravi Shankar to actively participate in the peace process.
In 2007, FARC-EP Commander Raúl Reyes claimed that their force consisted of 18,000 guerrillas.
In late 2012, FARC declared a two-month unilateral cease-fire and said that they would be open to extending it as a bilateral truce afterwards during the rest of the negotiations.
* ''Company'' – 2+ Guerrillas
The FARC-EP secretariat was led by Alfonso Cano and six others after the death of Manuel Marulanda (Pedro Antonio Marín), also known as "Tirofijo", or Sureshot in 2008.
In 1986, UP candidates won 350 local council seats, 23 deputy positions in departmental assemblies, 9 seats in the House, and 6 seats in the Senate.
The guerrillas also attempt to keep the peace between peasants and drug traffickers in addition to regulating other aspects of daily life and economics.
The FARC-EP, which formed during the Cold War period as a Marxist-Leninist peasant force, promotes a political line of agrarianism and anti-imperialism.
Several of the FARC leaders appeared on the Justice Department's Consolidated Priority Organization target list, which identifies the most dangerous international drug trafficking organizations.
On 20 July 2008, a subsequent set of rallies against FARC included thousands of Colombians in Bogotá and hundreds of thousands throughout the rest of the country.
The attack killed over 20 people, about 17 of whom were members of the FARC-EP.
* ''Front'' – 1+ Columns.
Relatives of the captives, former victims and civil society groups blamed both the government and FARC for the outcome, questioning the operation as well as criticizing military rescues.
On 16 April 2009, The FARC-EP announced that they would release Army Corporal Pablo Emilio Moncayo Cabrera to Piedad Córdoba as a humanitarian gesture.
In 1985, members of the FARC-EP, along with a large number of other leftist and communist groups, formed a political party known as the ''Union Patriótica'' ("Patriotic Union", UP).
The Colombian human rights organization CINEP reported that FARC-EP killed an estimated total of 496 civilians during 2000.
According to a December report by the Corporación Nuevo Arco Iris NGO, 473 FARC-EP guerrillas and 357 members of the Colombian security forces died in combat between January and September 2010.
After a series of high-profile guerrilla actions, including the hijacking of an aircraft, the attack on several small towns and cities, the arrest of the Irish Colombia Three (see below) and the alleged training of FARC-EP militants in bomb making by them, and the kidnapping of several political figures, Pastrana ended the peace talks on 21 February 2002 and ordered the armed forces to start retaking the FARC-EP controlled zone, beginning at midnight.
The hostages were released on 2 April 2012.
By 1970, the ''latifundio'' type of industrial farm (more than 50 hectares in area) occupied more than 77 per cent of arable land in the country.
In 2008, press reports estimated that about 700 hostages continued to be held captive by FARC.
Researcher Claudia López considered that the Colombian government is winning the strategic and aerial side of the war but not the infantry front, where both the FARC-EP and ELN continue to maintain an offensive capacity.
In a communique dated 28 November but released publicly on 3 December, the FARC-EP declared that they were no longer insisting on the demilitarization of San Vicente del Caguán and Cartagena del Chairá as a precondition for the negotiation of the prisoner exchange, but instead that of Florida and Pradera in the Valle department.
Third, operations and military presence will be maintained across the entire national territory
He has also been decisive in combatting the New Illegal Armed Groups that emerged as a result of the paramilitary process, especially in fighting threats and violence against human rights defenders and social leaders.
Nuevo Arco Iris head León Valencia considered that FARC guerrillas have reacted to a series of successful military blows against them by splitting up their forces into smaller groups and intensifying the offensive use of anti-personnel land mines, leading to what he called a further "degradation" of the conflict.
On June 23, 2016 a ceasefire accord was signed between the FARC Guerilla Army and the Colombian Government, in Havana, Cuba.
Leaders of several Latin American countries which contributed to the deal, including Cuba and Venezuela, were present.
On 24 April 2002, the U.S. House of Representatives Committee on International Relations published the findings of its investigation into IRA activities in Colombia.
Communists were active throughout rural and urban Colombia in the period immediately following World War I.
The peace process then moved on to the issue of "political participation", during which FARC insisted on its demand for an elected Constituent Assembly to rewrite Colombia's constitution.
On 8 June Chavez repeated his call for a political solution and an end to the war, "The guerrilla war is history...At this moment in Latin America, an armed guerrilla movement is out of place".
FARC's organized hierarchically into military units as follows:
Jim Monaghan, Martin McCauley and Niall Connolly (known as the Colombia Three), were arrested in Colombia in August 2001 and were accused of teaching bomb-making methods to FARC-EP.
During his final days in captivity, Lizcano told Santos, they had nothing to eat but wild palm hearts and sugar cane.
Government officials said that FARC-EP had forced the protesters to participate.
In 1948, in the aftermath of the assassination of the populist politician Jorge Eliécer Gaitán, there occurred a decade of large-scale political violence throughout Colombia, which was a Conservative – Liberal civil war that killed more than 200,000 people.
FARC-EP was not initially involved in direct drug cultivation, trafficking, or trans-shipment prior to or during the 1980s.
Hintze had been kidnapped for extortion purposes, and his wife had paid three ransom payments without any result.
This demand has been forcefully rejected by Colombia's lead government negotiator, Humberto de la Calle.
For most of the period between 2002 and 2005, the FARC-EP was believed to be in a strategic withdrawal due to the increasing military and police actions of new president Álvaro Uribe, which led to the capture or desertion of many fighters and medium-level commanders.
Colombian troops killed FARC leader Alfonso Cano in a firefight on 4 November 2011.
The AED policy increased the concentration of land ownership among cattle ranchers and urban industrialists, whose businesses expanded their profits as a result of reductions in the cost of labor wages after the influx of thousands of displaced peasants into the cities.
The plan promoted industrial farming that would produce great yields of agricultural and animal products for world-wide exportation, while the Colombian government would provide subsidies to large-scale private farms.
Based on a legalistic interpretation of what constituted "efficient use" of the land, thousands of peasants were forcefully evicted from their farms and migrated to the cities, where they became part of the industrial labor pool.
On 2 December 2004, the government announced the pardon of 23 FARC-EP prisoners, to encourage a reciprocal move.
Official Colombian government statistics show that murders of indigenous people between January and May 2011 have increased 38% compared to the same timeframe in 2010.
The guerrillas claimed that the deputies had been killed by crossfire during an attack by an "unidentified military group."
