The Faroese prime minister Kaj Leo Holm Johannesen had a meeting with the IOC president Thomas Bach in Lausanne on 21 May 2015 to discuss Faroese membership in the IOC.
There are records of drive hunts in the islands dating from 1584.
Modern educational institutions started operating in the last quarter of the nineteenth century and developed throughout the twentieth century.
Best known are the long-finned pilot whales (''Globicephala melaena''), which are still hunted by the islanders in accordance with longstanding local tradition.
Nevertheless, the government was unable to press through the structural reform of merging small rural municipalities to create sustainable, decentralised entities that could drive forward regional development.
By road, the main islands are connected by bridges and tunnels.
There are two breweries in the Faroe Islands.
However, as they are not part of the same customs area as Denmark, the Faroe Islands have an independent trade policy and can establish trade agreements with other states.
Both men's and women's national dress are extremely costly and can take many years to assemble.
Control of the islands reverted to Denmark following the war, but in 1948 home-rule was introduced, with a high degree of local autonomy.
There are no railways.
In earlier times, each ''sýsla'' had its own assembly, the so-called ''várting'' ("spring assembly").
According to the 2011 Census, there were 33,018 Christians (95.44%), 23 Muslims (0.07%), 7 Hindus (0.02%), 66 Buddhists (0.19%), 12 Jews (0.03%), 13 Baha'i (0.04%), 3 Sikhs (0.01%), 149 others (0.43%), 85 with more than one belief (0.25%) and 1,397 with no religion (4.04%).
Atlantic Airways and other airlines have scheduled international flights to Vágar Airport, the islands' only airport.
The Faroe Islands make their own agreements with other countries regarding trade and commerce.
Fresh fish also features strongly in the traditional local diet, as do seabirds, such as Faroese puffins, and their eggs.
Children under 15 were not asked about their nationality.
This means that shops and services are now relocating en masse from the villages into the centres, and slowly but steadily the Faroese population is concentrating in and around the centres.
If the first inhabitants of the Faroe Islands were Irish monks, then they must have lived as a very small group of settlers.
Pilot whale liver and kidneys should not be eaten at all."
The Faroes are not covered by the Schengen open borders agreement, but there are no border checks when travelling between the Faroes and any Schengen country (the Faroes have been part of the Nordic Passport Union since 1966, and since 2001 there have been no permanent border checks between the Nordic countries and the rest of the Schengen area as part of the Schengen agreement).
* St.Olav's Eve, 28 July (half-day holiday for selected workers unions).
The first Faroese novel, ''Bábelstornið'' by Regin í Líð, was published in 1909; the second novel was published 18 years later.
Helgi Ziska won his third GM norm and thus, won the title of chess grandmaster.
Tróndur led the battle against Sigmund Brestursson, the Norwegian monarchy and the Norwegian church.
Compulsory education consists of seven years of primary education, and two years of lower secondary education; it is public, free of charge, provided by the respective municipalities, and is called the Fólkaskúli in Faroese.
However, it never exceeded 5,000 until the 19th century.
Women wear embroidered silk, cotton, or wool shawls and pinafores that can take months to weave or embroider with local flora and fauna.
Today, elections are held at municipal, national (''Løgting'') and Danish (''Folketing'') levels.
After this, a row of Faroese made solid silver buttons are sewn on the outfit.
Annual records of whale drives and strandings of pilot whales and other small cetaceans in the Faroes date back to 1584 and provide over 400 years of documentation, including statistics, and represents one of the most comprehensive historical records of wildlife utilization anywhere in the world.
The islands have one of the lowest unemployment rates in Europe, but this should not necessarily be taken as a sign of a recovering economy, as many young students move to Denmark and other countries after leaving high school.
The term "region" referred to the large islands of the Faroes.
At the end of World War II, some of the population favoured independence from Denmark, and on 14 September 1946 an independence referendum was held on the question of secession.
The Ministry of Education, Research and Culture has the jurisdiction of educational responsibility in the Faroe Islands.
Faroese people are very active in sports, they have domestic competitions in football, handball, volleyball, badminton, swimming, outdoor rowing (Faroese kappróður) and indoor rowing in rowing machines, horse riding, shooting, table tennis, judo, golf, tennis, archery, gymnastics, cycling, triathlon, running, and other competitions in athletics.
A few small plantations consisting of plants collected from similar climates such as Tierra del Fuego in South America and Alaska thrive on the islands.
The islands cover an area of 1,399 square kilometres (540&nbsp;sq.&nbsp;mi) and have small lakes and rivers, but no major ones.
The official celebration starts on the 29th, with the opening of the Faroese Parliament, a custom that dates back 900 years.
This was the first time that the Faroese people had been asked whether they favoured independence or wanted to continue within the Danish kingdom.
The huge investments in roads, bridges and sub-sea tunnels (see also Transport in the Faroe Islands) have bound the islands together, creating a coherent economic and cultural sphere that covers almost 90% of the population.
Apart from these, there once was a local domestic sheep breed called Faroes (depicted on the coat of arms), a variety of feral sheep survived on Little Dímun until the mid-19th century.
At the ''2016 Baku Chess Olympiad'', the Faroe Islands got their first chess grandmaster.
13% of the Faroe Islands' national income comes as economic aid from Denmark.
In 1865, a member of this movement, William Gibson Sloan, travelled to the Faroes from Shetland.
The Faroe Islands compete in the Paralympics and have won several gold, silver and bronze medals there.
Other small islands—Mykines in the west, Kalsoy, Svínoy and Fugloy in the north, Hestur west of Streymoy, and Nólsoy east of Tórshavn—have smaller ferries and some of these islands even have helicopter service.
The country is also a full member of FIFA and therefore the Faroe Islands football team also competes in the FIFA World Cup qualifiers.
Another common sight often snapped in pictures is fog obscuring an area with clouds at a very close distance to a certain area, leaving elevations above and below it unobscured.
A regulation spinal lance is used to sever the spinal cord, which also severs the major blood supply to the brain, ensuring both loss of consciousness and death within seconds.
By air, the government owned Atlantic Airways provides helicopter service to each of the islands.
The Reformation reached the Faroes in 1538.
At present, the islanders are about evenly split between those favouring independence and those who prefer to continue as a part of the Kingdom of Denmark.
There are an estimated 128,000 pilot whales in the Northeast Atlantic, and Faroese whaling is therefore widely recognized as a sustainable catch.
This association, however, is far from conclusive in its description.
Erlendur Patursson (1913–86), Faroese member of the Nordic Council, raised the idea of a Nordic cultural house in the Faroe Islands.
The team climbed 82 places to 105 on the FIFA ranking after the 1–0 win against Greece.
He was sent back to take possession of the islands for Olaf Tryggvason, King of Norway from 995 to 1000.
This situation has now changed, and the infrastructure has been developed extensively.
Killer whales (''Orcinus orca'') are regular visitors around the islands.
The bird fauna of the Faroe Islands is dominated by seabirds and birds attracted to open land like heather, probably because of the lack of woodland and other suitable habitats.
In the late 1820s, the Christian Evangelical religious movement, the Plymouth Brethren, was established in England.
Some 80 percent of the population of the islands is connected by tunnels through the mountains and between the islands, bridges and causeways that link the three largest islands and three other larger and smaller islands to the northeast together.
The Faroe Islands have people from 77 different nationalities.
The first Faroese opera was by Sunleif Rasmussen.
According to Icelandic sagas such as ''Færeyjar Saga'', one of the best known men in the island was Tróndur í Gøtu, a descendant of Scandinavian chiefs who had settled in Dublin, Ireland.
The work to make the Eysturoy-tunnel started on 1 March 2016 above the village Hvítanes near Tórshavn.
Snow is also seen at a much higher frequency than on outlying islands nearby.
Meat and blubber from a pilot whale means food for a long time.
The festival of contemporary and classical music, ''Summartónar'', is held each summer.
Written Faroese (grammar and vocabulary) is most similar to Icelandic and to their ancestor Old Norse, though the spoken language is closer to Norwegian dialects of the west coast of Norway.
The best-known local Faroese composers are Sunleif Rasmussen and Kristian Blak, who is also head of the record company Tutl.
People were also asked about their nationality, including Faroese.
Children are confirmed at age 14, and normally start to collect the pieces to make an adult outfit, which is considered as a rite of passage.
The hunts, called "grindadráp" in Faroese, are non-commercial and are organized on a community level; anyone can participate.
97% said that they were ethnic Faroese, which means that many of those who were born in either Denmark or Greenland consider themselves as ethnic Faroese.
The Danish language was also encouraged at the expense of Faroese.
Beginning in the 19th century, the population increased tenfold in 200 years.
This means that all poems and stories were handed down orally.
The pied raven was endemic to the Faroe Islands, but has now become extinct.
The mean wind speed m/s that year was 6.8&nbsp;m/s
In 2011 there were 2,155 more men than women between the age of 0 to 59 in the Faroe Islands.
Initially education was administered and regulated by Denmark.
Since the Faroe Islands is a constituent country of the Danish Realm, education in the Faroe Islands is influenced and has similarities with the Danish educational system; there is an agreement on educational cooperation between the Faroe Islands and Denmark.
The fertility rate of the Faroe Islands is currently one of the highest in Europe.
All civil aviation matters are controlled from the Civil Aviation Administration Denmark.
In the unionist camp there are also many who foresee and welcome a gradual increase in autonomy even while strong ties with Denmark are maintained.
The climate varies greatly over small distances, due to the altitude, ocean currents, topography, and winds.
Grey seals (''Halichoerus grypus'') are common around the shorelines.
The introduction of Burger King in Tórshavn was widely publicized as a sign of the globalization of Faroese culture.
Bárður Oskarsson (born 1972) is a children's book writer and illustrator; his books won prizes in the Faroes, Germany and the West Nordic Council's Children and Youth Literature Prize (2006).
It is regulated by Faroese authorities but not by the International Whaling Commission as there are disagreements about the Commission's legal authority to regulate cetacean hunts.
However, a study has found whale meat and blubber to currently be contaminated with mercury and not recommended for human consumption, as too much may cause such adverse health effects as birth defects of the nervous system, high blood pressure, damaged immune system, increased risk for developing Parkinson's Disease, hypertension, arteriosclerosis, and Type II Diabetes:
Only a few species of wild land mammals are found in the Faroe Islands today, all introduced by humans.
This corresponds to roughly 5% of GDP.
Dicuil, an Irish monk of the early 9th century, wrote a more definite account.
On 12 April 1940 British troops invaded the Faroes.
Since the fishing industry is an important part of country's economy, maritime schools are an important part of Faroese education.
Approximately 3% belong to the charismatic movement, which started somewhere  around the late 1920s, but had its zenith in the 1970s–1980s.
The plan is that both tunnels should open in 2021 and they will not be private.
The second brewery is called Okkara and was founded in 2010.
Unemployment decreased in the later 1990s, down to about 6% at the end of 1998.
The land is rugged and has a subpolar oceanic climate (Cfc): windy, wet, cloudy and cool.
However, archaeology at a site in Toftanes, Leirvík named Bønhústoftin (English: prayer-house ruin) and over a dozen slabs from Ólansgarður in the small island of Skúvoy which in the main display encircled linear and outline crosses, suggest that Celtic Christianity may have arrived at least 150 years earlier.
These were eventually written down in the 19th century.
Production of hard alcohol such as snaps is forbidden in the Faroe Islands, hence the Faroese aqua vit, ''Aqua Vita'', is produced abroad.
This "grindadráp" is legal and provides food for many people in the Faroe Islands.
The Faroe Islands also compete with an individual team in certain sports.
It is entitled ''Í Óðamansgarði'' (The Madman's Garden) and was premiered on 12 October 2006 at the Nordic House.
Only with the rise of the deep-sea fishery (and thus independence from agriculture in the islands' harsh terrain) and with general progress in the health service was rapid population growth possible in the Faroes.
Between 1035 and 1814, the Faroe Islands were part of the Hereditary Kingdom of Norway.
There has recently been a strong revival and interest in Faroese knitting with young people knitting and wearing updated versions of old patterns emphasized by strong colours and bold patterns.
The islands are windy, cloudy and cool throughout the year with over 260 annual rainy days.
Faroese written literature has only really developed in the past 100–200 years.
The status of the Faroese language in education was a significant issue for decades, until it was accepted as a language of instruction in 1938.
Faroese members of the clergy who have had historical importance include V. U. Hammershaimb (1819–1909), Frederik Petersen (1853–1917) and, perhaps most significantly, Jákup Dahl (1878–1944), who had a great influence in ensuring that the Faroese language was spoken in the church instead of Danish.
The opera is based on a short story by the writer William Heinesen.
The nation's biggest success in football came in 2014 after defeating Greece 1–0, a result that was considered "the biggest shock of all time" in football thanks to a 169-place distance between the teams in the FIFA World Rankings when the match was played.
Some of these writers have been nominated for the Nordic Council's Literature Prize two to six times, but have never won it.
Ten football teams contest the Faroe Islands Premier League, currently ranked 51st by UEFA's League coefficient.
Among the herbaceous flora that occur in the Faroe Islands is the cosmopolitan marsh thistle, ''Cirsium palustre''.
Faroese domestic breed include Faroe pony, Faroe cow, Faroese sheep, Faroese Goose and Faroese duck.
Each piece is intricately hand-knitted, dyed, woven, or embroidered to the specifications of the wearer.
represents the plural of '''', older Faroese for "island".
Two Faroese athletes have competed at the Olympics, but under the Danish flag, since the Olympic Committee does not allow the Faroe Islands to compete under its own flag.
* Boxing Day, 26 December.
''Ólavsøka'', is on 29 July, and commemorates the death of Saint Olaf.
Tórshavn receives frosts more often than other areas just a short distance to the south.
Although Faroese is the main language on the islands, both Faroese and Danish are official languages.
Jens Pauli Heinesen (1932–2011), a school teacher from Sandavágur, was the most productive Faroese novelist, he published 17 novels.
By staying true to folklore, the architects built the Nordic House to resemble an enchanted hill of elves.
He also suggested that the people living there might have been from Ireland, Scotland or Scandinavia, with possibly groups from all three areas settling there.
By sea, the Faroese Smyril Line operates a regular international passenger, car and freight service linking the Faroe Islands with Seyðisfjörður, Iceland and Hirtshals, Denmark.
Since the friendly British occupation, the Faroese have been fond of British food, in particular fish and chips and British-style chocolate such as Cadbury Dairy Milk, which is found in many of the island's shops, whereas in Denmark this is scarce.
The municipalities are responsible for the school buildings for children's education in Fólkaskúlin from age 1st grade to 9th or 10th grade (age 7 to 16).
The Norse and Norse-Gael settlers probably did not come directly from Scandinavia, but rather from Norse communities surrounding the Irish Sea, Northern Isles and Western Isles of Scotland, including the Shetland and Orkney islands.
The culture of the Faroe Islands has its roots in the Nordic culture.
In 2012 the capital of the Faroe Islands, Tórshavn, had 195 days with precipitation and received a total of  that year.
Faroese handicrafts are mainly based on materials available to local villages—mainly wool.
The cultural significance of the garment should not be under-estimated both as an expression of local and national identity and a passing on and re-enforcing of traditional skills that bind local communities together.
The modern Faroese word for island is ''oyggj''.
It is one of ten exsiccatae sets.
Upon completion of the tenth year of Fólkaskúli, students can continue to upper secondary education which consists of several different types of schools.
In 1979 responsibilities on educational issues started transferring to the Faroese authorities, a procedure which was completed in 2002.
A Latin account of a voyage made by Saint Brendan, an Irish monastic saint who lived around 484–578, includes a description of "insulae" (islands) resembling the Faroe Islands.
The domestic animals of the Faroe Islands are a result of 1,200 years of isolated breeding.
She won the Nordic Children's Book Prize (2011) for this book, White Raven Deutsche Jugendbibliothek (2011) and nominated the West Nordic Council's Children and Youth Literature Prize and the Children and Youth Literature Prize of the Nordic Council (2013).
The front is then intricately embroidered with colourful silk threads, often by a female relative.
Sunny days are rare and overcast days are common.
Participation in churches is more prevalent among the Faroese population than among most other Scandinavians.
It remains to be seen whether these projects will succeed in broadening the islands' economic base.
* General/Great Prayer Day (Dýri biðidagur), 4th Friday after Easter.
At the turn of the 20th century, the Faroese Plymouth Brethren numbered thirty.
Although today ''sýsla'' technically means "police district", the term is still commonly used to indicate a geographical region.
The two Faroese who have competed are the swimmer Pál Joensen in 2012 and the rower Katrin Olsen.
The national awakening from 1888 initially arose from a struggle to maintain the Faroese language and was thus culturally oriented, but after 1906 it became more political with the foundation of political parties of the Faroe Islands.
The Roman Catholic congregation has about 170 members and falls under the jurisdiction of Denmark's exempt Roman Catholic Diocese of Copenhagen.
Norsemen settled the islands c. 800, bringing the Old Norse language that evolved into the modern Faroese language.
The Fólkakirkjan became an independent church in 2007; previously it had been a diocese within the Church of Denmark.
A rich centuries-old oral tradition of folk tales and Faroese folk songs accompanied the Faroese chain dance.
There are  of coastline.
He has also competed at the 2015 World Rowing Championships making it to the semifinal; he competed at the 2015 World Rowing Championship under-23 and made it to the final where his final result was number four.
All of the parish ministers take turns giving the sermon.
This has greatly increased the profile of the Faroe Islands, particularly within the fashion industry, as sweaters are now sold in places such as Harrods.
The Nordic House is run by a steering committee of eight, of whom three are Faroese and five from other Nordic countries.
The Islands have their own symphony orchestra (the classical ensemble ''Aldubáran'') and many different choirs; the best-known of these is ''Havnarkórið''.
The area receives on average 49 frosts a year.
Later, when the Vikings colonised the islands, there was a considerable increase in the population.
Its aim is to support and promote Scandinavian and Faroese culture, locally and in the Nordic region.
Unlike Denmark, Sweden and Iceland with Forn Siðr, the Faroes have no organised Ásatrú community.
These are worn by all generations of women, particularly in relation to the traditional Faroese costume as an overgarment.
5 players, all of Faroese nationality, faced Slovenia in the first round, eventually getting knocked out with a 0-2 score.
The drying shed, known as a ''hjallur'', is a standard feature in many Faroese homes, particularly in the small towns and villages.
Most institutions are funded by the state; there are few private schools in the country.
The islands are home to a notable independence movement that has seen an increase in popularity within recent decades.
The best-known church buildings in the Faroe Islands include Tórshavn Cathedral, St. Olaf's Church, and the Magnus Cathedral in Kirkjubøur; the Vesturkirkjan and the Maria Church, both of which are situated in Tórshavn; the church of Fámjin; the octagonal church in Haldarsvík; Christianskirkjan in Klaksvík; and also the two pictured here.
There has also been a great interest in Faroese sweaters from the TV series ''The Killing'', where the popular main actress (Detective Inspector Sarah Lund, played by Sofie Gråbøl) wears a different Faroese sweater for each series (two so far).
Hence, Danish people living in the Faroes are not citizens of the European Union (though other EU nationals living there remain EU citizens).
* Flag day, 25 April.
The '''Faroe Islands''' (;  ; , ; Irish: ''Na Scigirí'') are an archipelago between the Norwegian Sea and the North Atlantic approximately halfway between Norway and Iceland,  north-northwest of mainland Scotland.
According to the ''Færeyinga saga'', Sigmundur Brestisson brought Christianity to the islands in 999.
Festival in Gøta in July and Summarfestivalurin in Klaksvík in August are both large, open-air music festivals for popular music with both local and international musicians participating.
Steinbjørn B. Jacobsen (1937–2012), a schoolteacher from Sandvík, wrote short stories, plays, children's books and even novels.
Women were not so visible in the early Faroese literature except for Helena Patursson (1864–1916), but in the last decades of the 20th century and in the beginning of the 21st century female writers like Ebba Hentze (born 1933) wrote children's books, short stories, etc.
The first brewery is called Föroya Bjór and has produced beer since 1888 with exports mainly to Iceland and Denmark.
The islands are an autonomous country within the Kingdom of Denmark.
Since there is no medical school in the Faroe Islands, all medical students have to study abroad; , out of a total of 96 medical students, 76 studied in Denmark, 19 in Poland and 1 in Hungary.
In the twelfth century education in the Faroe Islands was provided by the Catholic Church.
The area is approximately  with a 2016 population of 49,188.
The Faroese population is spread across most of the area; it was not until recent decades that significant urbanisation occurred.
The Faroese have control of most domestic matters; areas that remain the responsibility of Denmark include military defence, police, justice, currency and foreign affairs.
He is the current Danish record holder in the men's indoor rowing, heavy weight, he broke a nine-year-old record in January 2015 and improved it in January 2016.
She competed at the 2008 Summer Olympics in double sculler light weight together with Juliane Rasmussen.
In English, the name is sometimes spelled "Faeroe".
The Faroese language is one of the smallest of the Germanic languages.
The structure of the Faroese educational system bears resemblances with its Danish counterpart.
Nevertheless, villages with poor harbour facilities have been the losers in the development from agriculture to fishing, and in the most peripheral agricultural areas, also known as the outer islands, there are few young people.
: "Therefore we recommend that adults eat no more than one to two meals a month.
The highest point is Slættaratindur,  above sea level.
Nevertheless, the Faroes have produced several authors and poets.
