Fibrous adhesions of the gall bladder to adjacent organs are common.
hepatica'' infection is well known in adult cattle.
Recent reports based on mitochondrial genes analysis has shown that Japanese ''Fasciola'' spp.
While other animals can be infected, they are usually not very important for human disease transmission.
**Hepatomegaly and splenomegaly
These immunological tests are based on detection of species-specific antibodies from sera.
* Americas:United States, Mexico, Cuba, Peru, Chile, Uruguay, Argentina, Jamaica, Brazil
Similarly to humans, faeces examinations are not reliable.
Resistance to fasciolosis was also documented in rats.
After the penetration of the intestine, flukes migrate within the abdominal cavity and penetrate the liver or other organs.
Veterinary vaccines are in development, and their use is being considered by a number of countries on account of the risk to human health and economic losses resulting from livestock infection.
Fecal examination is generally not helpful because the worm eggs can seldom be detected in the chronic phase of the infection.
*'''Acute Type I Fasciolosis''': infectious dose is more than 5000 ingested metacercariae.
hepatica'' has never been detected in humans.
The second phase (the biliary phase) begins when parasites enter the biliary ducts of the liver.
Occasionally, ectopic locations of flukes such as the lungs, diaphragm, intestinal wall, kidneys, and subcutaneous tissue can occur.
Adult flukes of both species are localized in the bile ducts of the liver or gallbladder.
Most immunodiagnostic tests will detect infection and have a sensitivity above 90% during all stages of the diseases.
They must be treated forthwith to prevent complications with surra and hemorrhagic septicemia diseases.
This phase may develop months or years after initial infection.
In India, a species called ''F.
Among wild animals, it has been demonstrated that the peridomestic rat (''Rattus rattus'') may play an important role in the spread as well as in the transmission of the parasite in Corsica.
The methods of detection are through fecal examination, parasite-specific antibody detection, or radiological diagnosis, as well as laparotomy.
novyi'' is common in the environment, black disease is found wherever populations of liver flukes and sheep overlap.
hepatica'' cercariae also encyst on water surface, humans can be infected by drinking of fresh untreated water containing cercariae.
Sheep suddenly die without any previous clinical signs.
On the other hand, some authors have observed that donkeys and pigs contribute to disease transmission in Bolivia.
While chronic inflammation is connected to increased cancer rates, it is unclear whether fasciolosis is associated with increased cancer risk.
During the migration of flukes, tissues are mechanically destroyed and inflammation appears around migratory tracks of flukes.
*Benzimidazoles: triclabendazole (Fasinex), albendazole (Vermitan, Valbazen), mebendazol (Telmin), luxabendazole (Fluxacur)
Human infection is rare, even if the infection rate is high among animals.
Fasciolosis is caused by two digenetic trematodes ''F.
Fasciolosis occurs only in areas where suitable conditions for intermediate hosts exist.
Recently, purified native and recombinant antigens have been used, e.g.
Fasciolosis is now recognized as an emerging human disease: the World Health Organization (WHO) has estimated that 2.4 million people are infected with ''Fasciola'', and a further 180 million are at risk of infection.
In North America, the disease is very sporadic.
Mechanisms of resistance have been studied by several authors in different animal species.
Clinically it is not possible to differentiate from other liver and bile diseases.
Recently, a new fasciolicide was successfully tested in naturally and experimentally infected cattle in Mexico.
Humans are infected by eating watergrown plants, primarily wild-grown watercress in Europe or morning glory in Asia.
The disease later progresses to a latent phase with less symptoms and ultimately into a chronic or obstructive phase months to years later.
The development of infection in definitive host is divided into two phases: the parenchymal (migratory) phase and the biliary phase.
While coprological diagnosis of fasciolosis is possible from 8-12 week post-infection (WPI), ''F.
In this case the disease is similar to sheep and is characterized by weight loss, anemia, hypoalbuminemia and (after infection with 10,000 metacercariae) death.
Countries where fasciolosis in livestock was repeatedly reported:
There are case reports of nitazoxanide being successfully used in human fasciolosis treatment in Mexico.
Human fasciolosis has been reported from countries in Europe, America, Asia, Africa and Oceania.
In biliary ducts, flukes mature, feed on blood, and produce eggs.
gigantica'' when they have been sensitized with primary patent or drug-abbreviated infection.
Praziquantel is not effective, and older drugs such as bithionol are moderately effective but also cause more side effects.
This phase is a result of mechanical destruction of the hepatic tissue and the peritoneum by migrating juvenile flukes causing localized and or generalized toxic and allergic reactions.
On September 8, 2007, Veterinary officials in South Cotabato, Philippines said that laboratory tests on samples from cows, carabaos, and horses in the province's 10 towns and lone city showed the level of infection at 89.5%, a sudden increase of positive cases among large livestock due to the erratic weather condition in the area.
In case of a suspected outbreak it may be useful to keep track of dietary history, which is also useful for exclusion of differential diagnoses.
In the chronic state the disease causes inflammation of the bile ducts, gall bladder and may cause gall stones as well as fibrosis.
Lithiasis of the bile duct or gall bladder is frequent and the stones are usually small and multiple.
In addition, biochemical and haematological examinations of human sera support the exact diagnosis (eosinophilia, elevation of liver enzymes).
Nitazoxanide has been found effective in trails, but is currently not recommended.
*Halogenated phenols: bithionol (Bitin), hexachlorophene (Bilevon), nitroxynil (Trodax)
This situation (with its potential for misdiagnosis) can be avoided by having the patient follow a liver-free diet several days before a repeat stool examination.
It was mentioned that more than 10,000 human cases were detected in Iran.
hepatica'' and ''F.
There are also reports of bithionol being used successfully.
Elevation of liver enzyme activities, such a glutamate dehydrogenase (GLDH), gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT), and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), is detected in subacute or chronic fasciolosis from 12-15 week after ingestion of metacercariae.
In Mexico, 53 cases have been reported.
Strict control of the growth and sale of watercress and other edible water plants is important.
France is considered an important human endemic area.
Praziquantel treatment is ineffective.
hepatica'' in humans occurs throughout the country.
hepatica'' infection is determined by the presence of the intermediate snail hosts, domestic herbivorous animals, climatic conditions and the dietary habits of man.
Recently, worldwide losses in animal productivity due to fasciolosis were conservatively estimated at over US$3.2 billion per annum.
Considering this fact, scientists have started to work on the development of new drug.
Educational methods to decrease consumption of wild watercress and other waterplants has been shown to work in areas with a high disease burden.
In Australia, human fasciolosis is very rare (only 12 cases documented).
Intermediate hosts of ''F.
On the other hand, sheep and goats are not resistant to re-infection with ''F.
In other European countries, fasciolosis is sporadic and the occurrence of the disease is usually combined with travelling to endemic areas.
hepatica'' cathepsin L-like protease.
Hypertrophy of biliar ducts associated with obstruction of the lumen occurs as a result of tissue damage.
Travelers to areas with poor sanitation should avoid food and water that might be contaminated (tainted).
gigantica'' than to ''F.
Human and animal fasciolosis occurs worldwide.
While animal fasciolosis is distributed in countries with high cattle and sheep production, human fasciolosis occurs, excepting Western Europe, in developing countries.
*'''Invasive or acute phase''': fluke migration up to the bile ducts.
In Europe, human fasciolosis occur mainly in France, Spain, Portugal, and the former USSR.
hepatica'' very occasionally.
Coprological examinations of stool alone are generally not adequate because infected humans have important clinical presentations long before eggs are found in the stools.
Several drugs are effective for fascioliasis, both in humans and in domestic animals.
Sheep are lethargic, anemic and may die.
It affects humans, but its main host is ruminants such as cattle and sheep.
Hepatic enlargement may be associated with an enlarged spleen or ascites.
No vaccine is available to protect people against ''Fasciola'' infection.
In this phase, biliary colic, epigastric pain, fatty food intolerance, nausea, jaundice, pruritus, right upper-quadrant abdominal tenderness, etc., are clinical manifestations indistinguishable from cholangitis, cholecystitis and cholelithiasis of other origins.
The incidence of human cases has been increasing in 51 countries of the five continents.
In Central America, fasciolosis is a human health problem in the Caribbean islands, especially in zones of Puerto Rico and Cuba.
A number of drugs have been used in control fasciolosis in animals.
In domestic livestock in Japan, diploid (2n = 20), triploid (3n = 30) and chimeric flukes (2n/3n) have been described, many of which reproduce parthenogenetically.
hepatica'' specific-antibodies are recognized using ELISA or Western blot after 2-4 week post-infection.
Asymptomatic or gradual development of bottle jaw and ascites (ventral edema), emaciation, weight loss.
Nevertheless, long-term veterinary use of triclabendazole has caused appearance of resistance in ''F.
In sheep and sometimes cattle, the damaged liver tissue may become infected by the ''Clostridium'' bacteria ''C.
Preventative measures are primarily treating and immunization of the livestock, which are required to host the live cycle of the worms.
hepatica'' are freshwater snails from family Lymnaeidae.
Cultivated plants do not spread the disease in the same capacity.
A global analysis shows that the expected correlation between animal and human fasciolosis only appears at a basic level.
The drug of choice in the treatment of fasciolosis is triclabendazole, a member of the benzimidazole family of anthelmintics.
*Phenoxyalkanes: diamphenetide (Coriban)
In addition antibody concentration quickly drops post treatment and no antibodies are present one year after treatment, which makes it a very good diagnostic method.
Moreover, in many human infections, the fluke eggs are often not found in the faeces, even after multiple faecal examinations.
These Andean countries are considered to be the area with the highest prevalence of human fasciolosis in the world.
Eggs appear in the feces first between 9–11 weeks post-infection.
The parenchymal phase begins when excysted juvenile flukes penetrate the intestinal wall.
The proportion of asymptomatic subjects in this phase is unknown.
jacksoni'' was described in elephants.
The cause of this is unknown, and it is also difficult to distinguish between the different species of fasciola as well distinguishing them from Echinostomes and Fasciolopsis.
Recently, serological survey of human fasciolosis was performed in some parts of Turkey.
*'''Subacute Fasciolosis''': infectious dose is 800-1000 ingested metacercariae.
Especially high rates of human infection have been found in Bolivia, Peru and Egypt, and this may be due to consumption of certain foods.
hepatica'' and ''F.
Most immunodiagnostic tests detect infection with very high sensitivity, and as concentration drops after treatment, it is a very good diagnostic method.
Triclabendazole is used in control of fasciolosis of livestock in many countries.
In New Zealand, ''F.
is more closely related to ''F.
*'''Chronic Fasciolosis''': infectious dose is 200-800 ingested metacercariae.
Well-known human hyperendemic areas are localized predominately in the high plain called altiplano.
In Africa, human cases of fasciolosis, except in northern parts, have not been frequently reported.
In addition, an experimental study suggested that humans consuming raw liver dishes from fresh livers infected with juvenile flukes could become infected.
Infection may also occur by drinking contaminated water with floating young fasciola or when using utensils washed with contaminated water.
In Asia, the most human cases were reported in Iran, especially in Gīlān Province, on the Caspian Sea.
Ultrasonography and xray of the abdominal cavity, biopsy of liver, and gallbladder punctuate can also be used.
Concerning the former Soviet Union, almost all reported cases were from the Tajik Republic.
The major symptoms of this phase are:
Therefore, these methods provide early detection of the infection.
Several species of aquatic vegetables are known as a vehicle of human infection.
*'''Acute Type II Fasciolosis''': infectious dose is 1000-5,000 ingested metacercariae.
Snails from family Planorbidae act as an intermediate host of ''F.
In France, nutria (''Myocastor coypus'') was confirmed as a wild reservoir host of ''F.
* Africa: Kenya, Zimbabwe, Nigeria, Egypt, Gambia, Morocco
hepatica'' infection.
Vegetables grown in fields, that might have been irrigated with polluted water, should be thoroughly cooked, as should viscera from potentially infected animals.
However, there is evidence that two sheep breeds, in particular Indonesian thin tail sheep and Red maasai sheep, are resistant to ''F.
*Sulphonamides: clorsulon (Ivomec Plus)
They are often discovered during family screening after a patient is diagnosed.
Up to half of those infected display no symptoms, and diagnosis is difficult because the worm eggs are often missed in fecal examination.
Individual people can protect themselves by not eating raw watercress and other water plants, especially from endemic grazing areas.
Treatment with triclabendazole has been highly effective against the adult worms as well as various developing stages.
Fasciolicides (drugs against Fasciola spp.)
Weight loss is dominant feature.
It has been established that cattle acquire resistance to challenge infection with ''F.
The highest prevalences were reported in Arequipa, Mantaro Valley, Cajamarca Valley, and Puno Region.
In the Northern Bolivian Altiplano, some authors suggested that several aquatic plants such as bero-bero (watercress), algas (algae), kjosco and tortora could act as a source of infection for humans.
Ascites, abdominal haemorrhage, icterus, pallor of membranes, weakness may be observed in sheep.
Because of the size of the parasite, as adult ''F.
The antigenic preparations used have been primarily derived from extracts of excretory/secretory products from adult worms, or with partially purified fractions.
In humans, diagnosis of fasciolosis is usually achieved parasitologically by findings the fluke eggs in stool, and immunologically by ELISA and Western blot.
However, acquired resistance to ''F.
Humans are infected by ingestion of aquatic plants that contain the infectious cercariae.
Studies carried out in recent years have shown human fasciolosis to be an important public health problem.
Drugs differ in their efficacy, mode of action, price, and viability.
A total of 5863 cases of human fasciolosis were recorded from nine French hospitals from 1970 to 1982.
Importance of cattle fasciolosis consist in economic losses caused by condemnation of livers at slaughter and production losses especially due to reduced weight gain.
Methods based on antigen detection (circulating in serum or in faeces) are less frequent.
hepatica'' in host and are necessary in development of vaccine against the parasite.
In South America, human fasciolosis is a serious problem in Bolivia, Peru, and Ecuador.
In some areas of the world where fascioliasis has been found (endemic), special control programs are in place or have been planned.
The amount of symptoms depend on how many worms and what stage the infection is in.
The bacteria will release toxins into the bloodstream resulting in what is known as black disease.
False fasciolosis (pseudofasciolosis) refers to the presence of eggs in the stool resulting not from an actual infection but from recent ingestion of infected livers containing eggs.
Adult flukes in the bile ducts cause inflammation and hyperplasia of the epithelium.
gigantica'' and ''Fasciolopsis buski'' are morphologically indistinguishable.
However, clinical signs, biochemical and haematological profile, season, climate conditions, epidemiology situation, and examinations of snails must be considered.
hepatica'':  or adult ''F.
For instance, in South America, hyperendemics and mesoendemics are found in Bolivia and Peru where the veterinary problem is less important, while in countries such as Uruguay, Argentina and Chile, human fasciolosis is only sporadic or hypoendemic.
In the Northern Bolivian Altiplano, prevalences detected in some communities were up to 72% and 100% in coprological and serological surveys, respectively.
**Gastrointestinal disturbances: loss of appetite, flatulence, nausea, diarrhoea
Economical effect of fasciolosis in sheep consists in sudden deaths of animals as well as in reduction of weight gain and wool production.
Furthermore, eggs of ''F.
hepatica'' has a strong predilection for the tissues of the liver.
These studies may help to better understand the immune response to ''F.
No reports concerning the resistance in humans are available.
The disease is a plant-borne trematode zoonosis, and is classified as a Neglected Tropical Disease (NTD).
*'''Latent phase''': This phase can last for months or years.
In animals, triclabendazole resistance was first described in Australia, later in Ireland and Scotland and more recently in the Netherlands.
The types of control measures depend on the setting (such as epidemiologic, ecologic, and cultural factors).
* Europe: UK, Ireland, France, Portugal, Spain, Switzerland, Italy, Netherlands, Germany, Poland
The resulting cholangitis and cholecystitis, combined with the large body of the flukes, are sufficient to cause mechanical obstruction of the biliary duct.
Therefore, immunonological methods such ELISA and enzyme-linked immunoelectrotransfer blot, also called Western blot, are the most important methods in diagnosis of ''F.
As a result of this unclear classification, flukes in Japan are normally referred to as ''Fasciola'' spp.
gigantica'' measures 4 to 10&nbsp;cm in length and the distribution of the species is limited to the tropics and has been recorded in Africa, the Middle East, Eastern Europe and south and eastern Asia.
In Europe, ''Nasturtium officinale'' (common watercress), ''Nasturtium silvestris'', ''Rorippa amphibia'' (wild watercress), ''Taraxacum dens leonis'' (dandelion leaves), ''Valerianella olitoria'' (lamb's lettuce), and ''Mentha viridis'' (spearmint) were reported as a source of human infections.
The disease progresses through four distinct phases; an initial incubation phase of between a few days up to three months with little or no symptoms; an invasive or acute phase which may manifest with: fever, malaise, abdominal pain, gastrointestinal symptoms, urticaria, anemia, jaundice, and respiratory symptoms.
This new drug is called 'Compound Alpha' and is chemically very similar to triclabendazole.
**Fever: usually the first symptom of the disease;
Calves are susceptible to disease but in excess of 1000 metacercariae are usually required to cause clinical fasciolosis.
'''Fasciolosis''' (also known as '''fascioliasis''', '''fasciolasis''', '''distomatosis''' and '''liver rot''') is a parasitic worm infection caused by the common liver fluke ''Fasciola hepatica'' as well as by ''Fasciola gigantica''.
Secondary bacterial infection causing cholangitis  has also been a concern and can be treated with antibiotics, and toxaemia may be treated with prednisolone.
Sheep, goats and cattle are considered the predominant animal reservoirs.
* Asia: Turkey, Russia, Thailand, Iraq, Iran, China, Vietnam, India, Nepal, Japan, Korea, Philippines
In animals, intravital diagnosis is based predominantly on faeces examinations and immunological methods.
The highest prevalence was recorded in Egypt where the disease is distributed in communities living in the Nile Delta.
hepatica'' to triclabendazole has been recorded in Australia in 1995 and Ireland in 1998.
