Observe such a fast as this, O Pandit, O religious scholar; of what use are all the other teachings?
* Certain days of the week are also set aside for fasting depending on personal belief and favorite deity.
The church had prescribed that Roman Catholics observe fasting and/or abstinence on a number of days throughout the year.
The bishop sought help through the Scriptures and came upon the story of Jonah in the Old Testament.
* Eid Al Adha (10th of Dhu al-Hijjah in the Hijri (Islamic calendar)).
Yom Kippur is considered to be the most important day of the Jewish year and fasting as a means of repentance is expected of every Jewish man or woman above the age of bar mitzvah and bat mitzvah respectively.
During fast periods, Holy Liturgy (Mass) is held at noon (except on Saturdays and Sundays), and because no food can be consumed before communion, it is traditional for people to abstain from food until mass is over (around 2 to 3 in the afternoon).
The other allowed food items include milk products, peanuts and fruits.
* A mentally ill person.
(Bhai Gurdas Ji, Vaar 7)
Although it is not recorded in the Talmud, an ancient tradition advises bride and groom to fast on the day of their wedding.
Common occasions for fasting during this month include Mondays (for Lord Shiva), the full-moon day of Karthika and the occasion of Naagula Chaviti.
In the time of the Talmud, drought seems to have been a particularly frequent inspiration for fasts.
But she must count the day she missed in Ramadan and they should donate the amount of a normal person's diet for each day missed to the poor or needy.
Also, extended fasting has been recommended as therapy for various conditions by health professionals of many cultures, throughout history, from ancient to modern.
At the end of the three days, the plague had miraculously stopped, so on the fourth day the people rejoiced.
His funeral was attended by 100,000 people and the strike ended only after 9 other men died.
With the exception of the fifty days following Easter in the Coptic Orthodox Church, fish is not allowed during Lent, or on Wednesdays, Fridays, and Paramon days.
Certain modern Lutheran communities also advocate fasting during designated times such as Lent.
In the fifth month (Shravan Maas) of the Hindu calendar many celebrate Shraavana.
* Every other day, also known as the fast of the prophet David
Water can be taken any time as needed.
The second major day of fasting is Tisha B'Av, the day approximately 2500 years ago on which the Babylonians destroyed the first Holy Temple in Jerusalem, as well as on which the Romans destroyed the second Holy Temple in Jerusalem about 2000 years ago, and later after the Bar Kokhba revolt when the Jews were banished from Jerusalem, the day of Tisha B'Av was the one allowed exception.
Saint Augustine's Prayer Book defines "Fasting, usually meaning not more than a light breakfast, one full meal, and one half meal, on the forty days of Lent."
Another is called Tivihar Upwas, in which no food may be consumed, but boiled water is allowed.
It is obligatory for a Jewish community to fast for 40 days within the year if someone in the community accidentally drops a Torah scroll or tefillin.
Indeed, most communal fast days that are set permanently in the Jewish calendar fulfil this purpose.
To repent of one's sins and to reach out in love to others is part and parcel of true fasting.
Chávez regarded a spiritual fast as "a personal spiritual transformation".
Exceptions to fasting include individuals younger than 15 or older than 70; those suffering illness; women who are pregnant, nursing, or menstruating; travellers who meet specific criteria; and individuals whose profession involves heavy labor and those who are very sick where fasting would be considered dangerous.
Food items are made with yellow-coloured ghee.
During this time some will fast on the day of the week that is reserved for worship of their chosen god(s), while others will fast during the entire month.
The opening chapter of the Book of Daniel, vv.
The goal of Santhara is to purify the body and, with this, the individual strives to abandon desire.
(but ..) it is not through the merits of these acts that I have attained this region."
The fast of Nineveh, commemorating the preaching of Jonah.
The Siyam (fast) is intended to teach Muslims patience and self-control, and to remind them of the less fortunate in the world.
Some denominations do not practice it, considering it an external observance, but many individual believers choose to observe fasts at various times at their own behest.
This makes the sincerity of their faith and their devotion to God (Arabic: Allah) all the more evident.
The Eritrean Orthodox Church generally follows the fasting practices of the Coptic Church however in some cases it follows the Ethiopian Church.
To Muslims, fasting acts as a shield with which the Muslim protects him/herself from ''jahannam'' (hell).
Although Pentecostalism has not classified different types of fasting, certain writers within the movement have done so.
The four other public but minor fast days are:
This tradition has been widespread for many hundreds of years.
The practice is not regulated by ecclesiastic authority.
In a Daniel Fast, meat is almost always avoided, in following the example of Daniel and his friends' refusal to eat the meat of Gentiles, which had been offered to idols and not slaughtered in a kosher manner.
For example fasting for one meal every day during Margashirsha, "acquires great wealth and corn".
It begins after Pentecost (known as Tsome Hwariat).
The Church of the East strictly observes the Nineveh Fast (Som Baoutha).
A hunger strike is a method of non-violent resistance in which participants fast as an act of political protest, or to provoke feelings of guilt, or to achieve a goal such as a policy change.
and the glory of the Lord will be your rear guard.
Classical Pentecostalism does not have set days of  abstinence and lent, but individuals in the movement may feel they are being directed by the Holy Spirit to undertake either short or extended fasts.
* "Bahab," (literally an acronym for "Monday, Thursday, Monday") the first two Mondays and first Thursday of the months Marcheshvan and Iyar (postponed by a week if Monday is the first of the month)
On Thursdays devotees listen to a story before opening their fast.
(Guru Granth Sahib Ji, Ang 873)
It is so important to fast on this day, that only those who would be put in mortal danger by fasting are exempt, such as the ill or frail (endangering a life is against a core principle of Judaism).
All Oriental Orthodox Churches practice fasting however the rules of each Church differ.
They are also encouraged to temper negative emotions such as anger and addiction.
All Wednesdays and Fridays of the year except the ones that fall between Easter Sunday and Pentecost Sunday.
It is essential on the spiritual fasting day, not only to abstain from meals, but also to spend the whole day with a positive, spiritual attitude.
Christ, by taking a human body at the Incarnation, has made the flesh an inexhaustible source of sanctification.
In essence, Muslims are trying to improve what they believe to be good moral character and habits.
For Roman Catholics, fasting, taken as a technical term, is the reduction of one's intake of food to one full meal (which may not contain meat on Ash Wednesday and Fridays throughout Lent) and two small meals (known liturgically as collations, taken in the morning and the evening), both of which together should not equal the large meal.
At that time, a plague afflicted the region of Nineveh, modern-day northern Iraq.
In the first half of the 20th century, Shoghi Effendi, explains: "It is essentially a period of meditation and prayer, of spiritual recuperation, during which the believer must strive to make the necessary readjustments in his inner life, and to refresh and reinvigorate the spiritual forces latent in his soul.
In addition to these, there is the fast of repentance which a person keeps after committing sin, it being imposed as a penance by the priest for seven days, forty days or one year.
Wesley himself also fasted before receiving Holy Communion "for the purpose of focusing his attention on God," and asked other Methodist Christians to do the same.
(This applies both to those who are marrying for the first time and to those who are remarrying.)
Fasting also includes abstaining from any falsehood in speech and action, abstaining from any ignorant and indecent speech, and from arguing, fighting, and having lustful thoughts.
She is neither a happy soul-bride, nor a widow.
Advent, 40 days (Known as Tsome Gena that begin with "Sibket" on 15th Hedar and ends on Christmas Eve).
Fasting is a practice in several Christian denominations or other churches.
In Methodism, fasting is considered one of the Works of Piety.
Activists have also used fasting to bring attention to a cause and to pressure authority or government to act.
Typically, this form of fasting was only used by monks and other religious individuals who practice mortifications and asceticism, but all Catholics are invited to take part in it with the advice and consent of their Spiritual Director.
Without this grain, time does not pass in peace.
Traditionally, one also fasted upon awakening from an unexpected bad dream although this tradition is rarely kept nowadays.
A fast may also be intermittent in nature.
This is a way how you make yourself free of five thieves:
Lent including Holy Week and the 10-day Fast of the Cross proclaimed by Byzantine Emperor Hereaclus (known as Hudadi, Abiye Tsom or Tsome Eyesus), 56 days.
An '''absolute fast''' (dry fasting) is normally defined as abstinence from all food and liquid for a defined period, usually a period of 24 hours, or a number of days.
Leviticus 23:27, 32 (CEV) says "Everyone must go without eating from the evening of the ninth to the evening of the tenth on the seventh month which is the Day of Atonement."
Complete abstinence, required of those 14 and older, is the avoidance of meat for the entire day.
Similarly, another fast, called '''Beasana''', allows for two meals a day.
In the case of a lipid panel, failure to fast for a full 12 hours (including vitamins) will guarantee an elevated triglyceride measurement.
Muslims believe that fasting is more than abstaining from food and drink.
If you keep fast, then do it a way so that you adopt the compassion, well being and ask for good will of everyone.
In Islam, fasting for a month is an obligatory practice during the holy month of Ramadan, from ''fajr'' (dawn), until ''maghrib'' (sunset).
In a number of monasteries, and in the homes of more devout laypeople, xerophagy is observed on every weekday (Monday through Friday) of Great Lent, except when wine and oil are allowed.
But she must count the day she missed in Ramadan and they should donate the amount of a normal person's diet for each day missed to the poor or needy.
He recommended that fasting be appropriate to the local economic situation, and that all Catholics voluntarily fast and abstain.
Without the Guru’s word in the company of Saints one does not get refuge no matter how good one looks."''
This self-discipline may be helpful at other times, as an act of solidarity with those who are in need or as a bodily expression of prayer."
8–16, describes a partial Daniel Fast and its effects on the health of its observers.
Mondays and Thursdays are considered especially auspicious days for fasting.
In modern times as well the Israeli Chief Rabbinate has occasionally declared fasts in periods of drought.
(Guru Granth Sahib Ji, Ang 905)
Its significance and purpose are, therefore, fundamentally spiritual in character.
''"Fasting on Ekadashi, adoration of Thakurs (stones) one remains away from Hari engaged in the Maya and omens.
Often the Ember Days or Rogation Days are also specified, and the eves (vigils) of certain feasts.
Fasting is not considered the primary means of acquiring atonement; rather, sincere regret for and rectification of a wrongdoing is key (see Isaiah, 58:1–13, which appropriately is read as the haftarah on Yom Kippur).
Muslims aim to improve their body by reducing food intake and maintaining a healthier lifestyle.
(Guru Granth Sahib Ji, Ang 299)
While many observe the Coptic Church's allowance for fish during the longer fasts, it has increasingly become practice in the Ethiopian Church to abstain from fish during all fasts according to the canons of the Ethiopian Church.
One is called Chauvihar Upwas, in which no food or water may be consumed until sunrise the next day.
All persons above the age of 13 are expected to observe the church fasts.
A diagnostic fast refers to prolonged fasting (from 8–72 hours depending on age) conducted under observation for investigation of a problem, usually hypoglycemia.
Fasting is done in order to seek a closer intimacy with God, as well as an act of petition.
The same strict abstention is observed during Holy Week, except that a vegan meal with wine and oil is allowed on Great Thursday.
Fasting is usually done during Paryushana but can be done during other times.
In addition to the Normal Fast and the Black Fast, some undertake what is referred to as the Daniel Fast (or Partial Fast) in which only one type of food (e.g., fruit or fruit and non-starchy vegetables) is consumed.
This is similar to the partial fasting within the Ethiopian Orthodox Church (abstaining from meat and milk) which takes place during certain times of the year and lasts for weeks.
This is why the Bible requires fasting (literally self affliction) on Yom Kippur (see Leviticus, 23:27, 29,32; Numbers, 29:7; Tractate Yoma, 8:1; ibid.
For Eastern Orthodox Christians, fasting is an important spiritual discipline, found in both the Old Testament and the New, and is tied to the principle in Orthodox theology of the synergy between the body (Greek: ''soma'') and the soul (''pnevma'').
"'' (Guru Granth Sahib Ji, Ang 1245)
Water fasting allows drinking water but nothing else.
The Middle Path refers to avoiding extremes of indulgence on the one hand and self-mortification on the other.
Indeed, Jewish philosophy considers this appreciation one of the fundamental reasons for which God endowed mankind with such basic physical needs as food and drink.
The Armenian Church (with the exception of the Armenian Patriarchate of Jerusalem) has followed the Gregorian Calendar since 1923, making it and the Finnish Orthodox Church the only Orthodox Churches to primarily celebrate Easter on the same date as Western Christianity.
Most Pentecostal writers on fasting concur with Dr. Mark Mattson who says that sensible intermittent fasting with a sensible water intake can strengthen the organism and assist thwarting degenerative diseases.
Members of holiness movements, such as those started by John Wesley and George Whitefield, often practice such regular fasts as part of their regimen.
The regulations concerning such activities do not apply when the ability to work or the health of a person would be negatively affected.
Self-starvation by fasting is known as Santhara and is supposed to help shed karma according to Jain religion.
(On the Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday of the third week before Lent.
:''You, Eternal One, are the Source of all blessing, our God, King of the universe, Creator of many souls, who gave needs for to all who You created, to give life through fulfilling those needs to every living soul.
* Fasting during religious festivals is also very common.
Fasting is a very integral part of the Hindu religion.
They wear yellow clothes, and meals with yellow colour are preferred.
Aside from these official days of fasting, Jews may take upon themselves personal or communal fasts, often to seek repentance in the face of tragedy or some impending calamity.
Christmas Eve (Gahad ze Lidet) and The Eve of Epiphany, (Gahad ze Timket).
For example, a person is assumed to be fasting after 8–12 hours from their last meal.
* Tuesday fasting is common in southern India as well as northwestern India.
* The Fast of the 10th of Tevet
Traditionally observant Jews fast six days of the year.
Amongst Hindus during fasting, starchy items such as Potatoes, Sago and Sweet potatoes are allowed.
Fasting is believed to help promote chastity and humility and prevent sin, the outburst of uncontrolled lusts and desires and far-fetched hopes.
Other fasts may be partially restrictive, limiting only particular foods or substances.
Bheeshma replies that he had asked Angiras "the very same question that thou has asked me today."
Forsaking this grain, one does not meet the Lord of the World."''
All Churches practice fasting on most Wednesday and Fridays throughout the year as well as observing many other days.
This position was upheld by Lutheran churches, in that collective fasting was not officially enforced, whereas individual voluntary fasting was encouraged.
Abstinence, according to Saint Augustine's Prayer Book, "means to refrain from some particular type of food or drink.
In British India, Jatin Das (who fasted to death) and Bhagat Singh who were on 116th day of their fast, on October 5, 1929 that Bhagat Singh and Dutt gave up their strike (surpassing the 97-day world record for hunger strikes which was set by an Irish revolutionary).
Henceforth, prince Siddhartha practiced moderation in eating which he later advocated for his disciples.
The illustrious Angiras says Brhmans and kshatriya should fast for three nights at a stretch is the maximum.
Other progressive campaigns have adopted the tactic.
For members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, fasting is total abstinence from food and drink accompanied by prayer.
The plague devastated the city and the villages surrounding it, and out of desperation the people ran to their bishop to find a solution.
The discipline of fasting entails that, apart from Saturdays, Sundays, and holy feasts, one should keep a total fast from all food and drink from midnight the night before to a certain time in the day usually three o'clock in the afternoon (the hour Jesus died on the Cross).
Those who are already poor and hungry are often considered exempt from fasting, as their condition renders them effectively fasting all the time; however, they still must refrain from eating during the day if they can.
Moreover, Ramadan is a month of giving charity and sharing meals to break the fast together.
Fasting is forbidden on these days:
With the exception of Yom Kippur, fasting is never permitted on Shabbat, for the commandment of keeping Shabbat is biblically ordained and overrides the later rabbinically instituted fast days.
For charismatic Christians fasting is undertaken at what is described as the leading of God.
John Calvin argued that instead of relying on designated fasting periods, the entire life of the religious should be "tempered with frugality and sobriety" in such a way as to produce "a sort of perpetual fasting".
Bhagiratha observed the vow of fasting and reached "the region of Brahman"
* In the state of Andhra Pradesh, the month of Kaarthika, which begins with the day after Deepavali is often a period of frequent (though not necessarily continuous) fasting for some people, especially women.
For example, a fast is sometimes observed if a sefer torah is dropped.
Upon reading the story, the bishop ordered a  three-day fast to ask God for forgiveness.
* An ill person or old person who is not physically able to fast.
However, on Uposatha days (roughly once a week) lay Buddhists are instructed to observe the eight precepts which includes refraining from eating after noon till the following morning.
While fasting in the month of Ramadan is considered ''Fard'' (obligatory), Islam also prescribes certain days for non-obligatory, voluntary fasting, such as:
Fasting is also practiced when a Jewish couple is about to get married.
The political and religious leader Mohandas K. Gandhi undertook several long fasts as political and social protests.
This dedication is considered appropriate gratitude to God for providing salvation.
During the sacred month of Ramadan, believers strive to purify body and soul and increase their ''taqwa'' (good deeds and God-consciousness).
(Guru Granth Sahib Ang 216).
To engage in fasting without them is considered useless or even spiritually harmful.
Supporters of the practice believe that santhara cannot be considered suicide, but rather something one does with full knowledge and intent, while suicide is viewed as emotional and hasty.
Therefore, fasting strengthens control of impulses and helps develop good behavior.
The observation of Lent within the Syriac Orthodox Church was once very strict but now is comparatively lenient compared with how it is observed in other Orthodox Churches.
The Sikh Gurus discourage the devotee from engaging in this ritual as it "brings no spiritual benefit to the person".
Individuals observe different kinds of fasts based on personal beliefs and local customs.
Bheeshma says " the illustrious Vishnu, that ancient being, has himself said that there is no fast that possesses merit superior to what attach to fast of this kind."
The third purpose in fasting is commemorative gratitude.
''"On the ninth day(naomi) of the month, make a vow to speak the Truth, and your sexual desire, anger and desire shall be eaten up.
Other self-inflicted harm is discouraged.
Those that do eat on this day are encouraged to eat as little as possible at a time and to avoid a full meal.
On weekdays of the first week of Great Lent, fasting is particularly severe, and many observe it by abstaining from all food for some period of time.
In more recent years, many churches affected by liturgical renewal movements have begun to encourage fasting as part of Lent and sometimes Advent, two penitential seasons of the liturgical year.
They should donate the amount of a normal person's diet for each day missed if they are financially capable.
In Protestantism, the continental reformers criticized fasting as a purely external observance that can never gain a person salvation.
In addition to the fasts mentioned above, Roman Catholics must also observe the Eucharistic Fast, which involves taking nothing but water and medicines into the body for one hour before receiving the Eucharist.
Human mind requires the wisdom, which can be achieve by contemplate on word's and evaluating it, torturing body is of no use:
* "Yom Kippur Katan," (literally "Little Yom Kippur") the day before every Rosh Chodesh, moved back to Thursday if that day is Saturday
The Catholic Church has also promoted a Black Fast, in which in addition to water, bread is consumed.
For vaishyas and sudras, " the duration of fast prescribed for them is one night."
It is said that Chenrezig appeared to an Indian nun who had contracted leprosy and was on the verge of death.
Fasting  for one meal every day during a lunar month gets various boons according t the month in which he fasts.
Similarly, the Swiss Reformation of the "Third Reformer" Huldrych Zwingli began with an ostentatious public sausage-eating during Lent—though Zwingli himself did not partake of the sausage.
The Sikh holy Scripture, Sri Guru Granth Sahib tell us: ''"Fasting, daily rituals, and austere self-discipline – those who keep the practice of these, are rewarded with less than a shell."''
Current law requires merely one hour of eucharistic fast, although some Roman Catholics still abide by the older rules.
If followed strictly, the person fasting does not partake any food or water from the previous day's sunset until 48 minutes after the following day's sunrise.
These austerities with five other ascetics did not lead to progress in meditation, liberation (moksha), or the ultimate goal of nirvana.
He believed that collective public fasting could only be appropriate in times of calamity and grief for the community.
In general, fasting remains optional in most Protestant groups and is less popular than among other Christian denominations.
Colloquially, fasting, abstinence, the Eucharistic Fast, and personal sacrificial disciplines (such as abnegation of sweets for Lent or the like) are altogether referred to as fasting.
For those involved in heavy labor, they are advised to eat in private and generally to have simpler and/or smaller meals than are normal.
* The 13th, 14th, and 15th of every lunar month
Prior to attaining Buddhahood, prince Siddhartha practiced a short regime of strict austerity—following years of serenity meditation under two teachers—during which he consumed very little food.
