Banks refused to go to the discount window because it is usually associated with the stigma of bank failure.
It is briefly described in ''The Federal Reserve SystemPurposes and Functions'' as follows:
Its duties have expanded over the years, and  also include supervising and regulating banks, maintaining the stability of the financial system and providing financial services to depository institutions, the U.S. government, and foreign official institutions.
Another instrument of monetary policy adjustment employed by the Federal Reserve System is the fractional reserve requirement, also known as the required reserve ratio.
The payment of interest on excess reserves gives the central bank greater opportunity to address credit market conditions while maintaining the federal funds rate close to the target rate set by the FOMC.
Surprisingly the most famous website for debunking conspiracy theories and urban legends, Snopes.com, has no articles on these conspiracy theories.
The charter and organization of each Federal Reserve Bank is established by law and cannot be altered by the member banks.
The Federal Reserve System also directly sets the "discount rate", which is the interest rate for "discount window lending", overnight loans that member banks borrow directly from the Fed.
The Federal Reserve Banks have an intermediate legal status, with some features of private corporations and some features of public federal agencies.
From 1837 to 1862, in the Free Banking Era there was no formal central bank.
The Fed incurred no losses from the CPFF.
In the Depository Institutions Deregulation and Monetary Control Act of 1980, Congress reaffirmed that the Federal Reserve should promote an efficient nationwide payments system.
During the Fiscal Year 2013, the Bureau of Engraving and Printing delivered 6.6 billion notes at an average cost of 5.0 cents per note.
It took over this role from the private sector "clearing houses" which operated during the Free Banking Era; whether public or private, the availability of liquidity was intended to prevent bank runs.
The required reserve ratio is set by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
In contrast, progressive Democrats favored a reserve system owned and operated by the government; they believed that public ownership of the central bank would end Wall Street's control of the American currency supply.
Class A members are chosen by the regional Bank's shareholders, and are intended to represent member banks' interests.
Funds placed in term deposits are removed from the accounts of participating institutions for the life of the term deposit and thus drain reserve balances from the banking system.
There has been debate among policy makers as to whether the Federal Reserve should have a specific inflation targeting policy.
Critics charged Aldrich of being biased due to his close ties to wealthy bankers such as J. P. Morgan and John D. Rockefeller, Jr., Aldrich's son-in-law.
** stable prices, including prevention of either inflation or deflation
Retail payments are generally for relatively small-dollar amounts and often involve a depository institution's retail clientsindividuals and smaller businesses.
The Federal Reserve System implements monetary policy largely by targeting the federal funds rate.
In 2015, the Federal Reserve Banks made a profit of $100.2 billion and distributed $2.5 billion in dividends to member banks as well as returning $97.7 billion to the U.S. Treasury.
The Federal Reserve regulates private banks.
Formal meetings typically are held eight times each year in Washington, D.C. Nonvoting Reserve Bank presidents also participate in Committee deliberations and discussion.
+ Reserve Requirements in the U.S. Federal Reserve System
Open market operations are done through the sale and purchase of United States Treasury security, sometimes called "Treasury bills" or more informally "T-bills" or "Treasuries".
By contrast, wholesale payments are generally for large-dollar amounts and often involve a depository institution's large corporate customers or counterparties, including other financial institutions.
The Federal Reserve summarized its monetary policy in 2005:
The balance between private interests and government can also be seen in the structure of the system.
As part of this service relationship, the Fed sells and redeems U.S. government securities such as savings bonds and Treasury bills, notes and bonds.
Although the Fed is not required to maintain inflation within a specific range, their long run target for the growth of the PCE price index is between 1.5 and 2 percent.
One of the vacancies was created in 2011 with the resignation of Kevin Warsh, who took office in 2006 to fill the unexpired term ending January 31, 2018, and resigned his position effective March 31, 2011.
At the end of the third quarter of fiscal year 2012, this value was $64.8 trillion.
The Chair and Vice Chair of the Board of Governors are appointed by the President from among the sitting Governors.
The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) examines many economic indicators prior to determining monetary policy.
Federal funds are the reserve balances (also called Federal Reserve Deposits) that private banks keep at their local Federal Reserve Bank.
The Federal Reserve has stated that:
On October 7, 2008, the Federal Reserve further expanded the collateral it will loan against to include commercial paper using the new Commercial Paper Funding Facility (CPFF).
The main motivation for the third central banking system came from the Panic of 1907, which caused renewed demands  for banking and currency reform.
Federal reserve accounts contain federal reserve credit, which can be converted into federal reserve notes.
Policy actions that add reserves to the banking system encourage lending at lower interest rates thus stimulating growth in money, credit, and the economy.
As stated in Bloomberg News:
The Federal Reserve stopped publishing M3 statistics in March 2006, saying that the data cost a lot to collect but did not provide significantly useful information.
It also includes data about employment throughout the system.
The Continentals were backed only by future tax revenue, and were used to help finance the Revolutionary War.
The four main components of the Federal Reserve System are (1) the Board of Governors, (2) the Federal Open Market Committee, (3) the twelve regional Federal Reserve Banks, and (4) the member banks throughout the country.
This experience with paper money led the United States to strip the power to issue Bills of Credit (paper money) from a draft of the new Constitution on August 16, 1787, as well as banning such issuance by the various states, and limiting the states' ability to make anything but gold or silver coin legal tender on August 28.
'''Effective date'''
The Senate had not yet acted on Landon's confirmation by the time of the second nomination.
The Federal Reserve plays a role in the nation's retail and wholesale payments systems by providing financial services to depository institutions.
The '''Federal Reserve System'''also known as the '''Federal Reserve''' or simply '''the Fed'''is the central banking system of the United States.
At the end of the first quarter of fiscal year 2014, this value was $95.5 trillion.
The remainder of the regional Federal Reserve Banks' profits is given over to the United States Treasury Department.
Term deposits are intended to facilitate the implementation of monetary policy by providing a tool by which the Federal Reserve can manage the aggregate quantity of reserve balances held by depository institutions.
It also supervises and regulates the U.S. banking system in general.
The bill passed Congress on December 23, 1913, on a mostly partisan basis, with most Democrats voting "yea" and most Republicans voting "nay".
This program lent out a total $738 billion before it was closed.
Creation of the third tool, called the Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF), was announced on March 16, 2008.
After Jackson, who was opposed to the central bank, was reelected, he pulled the government's funds out of the bank.
It is a United States-wide indicator of the average increase in prices for all domestic personal consumption.
Fed officials said they'll buy as much of the debt as necessary to get the market functioning again.
Foreign exchange swap lines with the European Central Bank and Swiss National Bank were opened so the banks in Europe could have access to U.S. dollars.
Senator David Vitter (R, LA) said he would oppose Obama's Stein and Powell nominations, dampening near-term hopes for approval.
The differences between these three new facilities is described by the Federal Reserve:
The structure is considered unique among central banks.
Private banks maintain their bank reserves in federal reserve accounts.
Critique of the organization and system has come from sources such as writers, journalists, economists, and financial institutions as well as politicians and various government employees.
Since the summer of 2007, the market has shrunk from more than $2.2 trillion.
Over six weeks, a total of $1.25 trillion were purchased in order to stabilize the housing market, about one-fifth of all U.S. government-backed mortgages.
The compromise involved representation of the public sector on the Board of Directors.
The term of the repo (the time between settlement and maturity) can vary from 1 day (called an overnight repo) to 65 days.
, the Federal Reserve banks will pay interest on reserve balances (required and excess) held by depository institutions.
** maximum employment
Longer term liquidity may also be provided in exceptional circumstances.
Allan R. Landon, former president and CEO of the Bank of Hawaii, was nominated in early 2015 by President Obama to the board.
The federal funds rate is a short-term interest rate that the FOMC focuses on, which affects the longer-term interest rates throughout the economy.
The purpose of keeping funds at a Federal Reserve Bank is to have a mechanism for private banks to lend funds to one another.
From 1846 to 1921, an Independent Treasury System ruled.
The president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York is a permanent member of the FOMC; the presidents of the other banks rotate membership at two- and three-year intervals.
It is anticipated by Federal Reserve officials that the primary dealers, which include Goldman Sachs Group.
The net worth of households and nonprofit organizations in the United States is published by the Federal Reserve in a report titled ''Flow of Funds''.
The currency swap lines with the European Central Bank and Swiss National Bank were increased.
Governors are appointed by the President of the United States and confirmed by the Senate for staggered 14-year terms.
The charter was for twenty years and expired in 1811 under President Madison, because Congress refused to renew it.
section 714(b), audits of the Federal Reserve Board and Federal Reserve banks do not include (1) transactions for or with a foreign central bank or government, or non-private international financing organization; (2) deliberations, decisions, or actions on monetary policy matters; (3) transactions made under the direction of the Federal Open Market Committee; or (4) a part of a discussion or communication among or between members of the Board of Governors and officers and employees of the Federal Reserve System related to items (1), (2), or (3).
In 1816, however, Madison revived it in the form of the Second Bank of the United States.
Member banks, do however, elect six of the nine members of the Federal Reserve Banks' boards of directors.
The twelve Federal Reserve Banks provide banking services to depository institutions and to the federal government.
The System does not require public funding, and derives its authority and purpose from the Federal Reserve Act, which was passed by Congress in 1913 and is subject to Congressional modification or repeal.
Reserve requirements
The first new tool, called the Term Auction Facility, was added on December 12, 2007.
All nationally chartered banks hold stock in one of the Federal Reserve Banks.
The original Aldrich Plan was dealt a fatal blow in 1912, when Democrats won the White House and Congress.
Jackson was the only President to completely pay off the debt.
Forty-five out of 81 of the companies participating in this program were foreign firms.
The Federal Reserve plays an important role in the U.S. payments system.
From the profits of the Regional Bank of which it is a member, a member bank receives a dividend equal to 6% of their purchased stock.
A revision crafted during a secret meeting on Jekyll Island by Senator Aldrich and representatives of the nation's top finance and industrial groups later became the basis of the Federal Reserve Act.
As a result, banks usually invest the majority of the funds received from depositors.
The interest rate charged to commercial banks and other depository institutions on loans they receive from their regional Federal Reserve Bank's lending facilitythe discount window.
It was first announced as a temporary tool but there have been suggestions that this new tool may remain in place for a prolonged period of time.
The plan became the basis for the Federal Reserve Act, which was proposed by Senator Robert Owen in May 1913.
A particularly severe crisis in 1907 led Congress to enact the Federal Reserve Act in 1913.
The U.S. Treasury, through its Bureau of the Mint and Bureau of Engraving and Printing, actually produces the nation's cash supply and, in effect, sells the paper currency to the Federal Reserve Banks at manufacturing cost, and the coins at face value.
Later, on January 6, 2014, the United States Senate confirmed Yellen's nomination to be Chair of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors; she is slated to be the first woman to hold the position and will become Chair on February 1, 2014.
The Term Deposit Facility is a program through which the Federal Reserve Banks will offer interest-bearing term deposits to eligible institutions.
One of the stated goals of monetary policy is maximum employment.
Some criticism involves economic data compiled by the Fed.
Each regional Bank's board consists of nine members.
Other purposes are stated in the Federal Reserve Act, such as "to furnish an elastic currency, to afford means of rediscounting commercial paper, to establish a more effective supervision of banking in the United States, and for other purposes".
It is also unusual in that the United States Department of the Treasury, an entity outside of the central bank, prints the currency used.
This contributes to the effective functioning of the banking system, alleviates pressure in the reserves market and reduces the extent of unexpected movements in the interest rates.
The Fed conducts research into the economy and releases numerous publications, such as the Beige Book.
The board is required to make an annual report of operations to the Speaker of the U.S. House of Representatives.
The two other Obama nominees in 2011, Yellen and Raskin, were confirmed in September.
Creation of the second new tool, called the Term Securities Lending Facility, was announced on March 11, 2008.
* To manage the nation's money supply through monetary policy to achieve the sometimes-conflicting goals of
In its role as the central bank of the United States, the Fed serves as a banker's bank and as the government's bank.
The GAO has authority to audit check-processing, currency storage and shipments, and some regulatory and bank examination functions, however there are restrictions to what the GAO may audit.
The FOMC also directs operations undertaken by the Federal Reserve in foreign exchange markets.
The seven-member Board of Governors is a federal agency.
The Federal Reserve is self-funded.
Aldrich set up two commissions – one to study the American monetary system in depth and the other, headed by Aldrich himself, to study the European central banking systems and report on them.
Another relevant decision is ''Scott v. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City'', in which the distinction is made between Federal Reserve Banks, which are federally created instrumentalities, and the Board of Governors, which is a federal agency.
One of the Fed's main roles is to maintain price stability, which means that the Fed's ability to keep a low inflation rate is a long-term measure of their success.
More than $71 million
Each regional Bank has a president, who is the chief executive officer of their Bank.
As the government's bank, or fiscal agent, the Fed processes a variety of financial transactions involving trillions of dollars.
During the last quarter of the 19th century and the beginning of the 20th century the United States economy went through a series of financial panics.
The Term Auction Facility is a program in which the Federal Reserve auctions term funds to depository institutions.
The Federal Reserve System has a "unique structure that is both public and private" and is described as "independent within the government" rather than "independent of government".
Because some banks refused to clear checks from certain others during times of economic uncertainty, a check-clearing system was created in the Federal Reserve System.
In July 2015, President Obama nominated University of Michigan economist Kathryn M. Dominguez to fill the second vacancy on the board.
The main difference between these two facilities is that the Term Auction Facility is used to inject cash into the banking system whereas the Term Securities Lending Facility is used to inject treasury securities into the banking system.
Eurocurrency liabilities
The FOMC sets monetary policy and consists of all seven members of the Board of Governors and the twelve regional bank presidents, though only five bank presidents vote at any given time: the president of the New York Fed and four others who rotate through one-year terms.
The law provides for the removal of a member of the board by the President "for cause".
The reserve requirements have changed over time and some history of these changes is published by the Federal Reserve.
That was down from $1.70 trillion in the previous week.
Through its discount window and credit operations, Reserve Banks provide liquidity to banks to meet short-term needs stemming from seasonal fluctuations in deposits or unexpected withdrawals.
About 38% of U.S. banks are members of their regional Federal Reserve Bank.
The Federal Reserve sets monetary policy by influencing the federal funds rate, which is the rate of interbank lending of excess reserves.
** To supervise and regulate banking institutions
The Reserve Banks' wholesale services include electronically transferring funds through the Fedwire Funds Service and transferring securities issued by the U.S. government, its agencies, and certain other entities through the Fedwire Securities Service.
Criticisms include doubt of efficacy due to what is seen by some as poor historical performance and populist concerns about the debasement of the value of the dollar.
... Powell is still serving as he awaits his confirmation for a second term."
The U.S. Congress established three key objectives for monetary policy in the Federal Reserve Act: maximizing employment, stabilizing prices, and moderating long-term interest rates.
According to many economists, the previous national banking system had two main weaknesses: an inelastic currency and a lack of liquidity.
The First Bank of the United States came to an end under President Madison because Congress refused to renew its charter.
The amount of stock a member bank must own is equal to 3% of its combined capital and surplus.
They refused to say how much that might be, but they noted that around $1.3 trillion worth of commercial paper would qualify.
The Term Deposit Facility is essentially a tool available to reverse the efforts that have been employed to provide liquidity to the financial markets and to reduce the amount of capital available to the economy.
The Federal Reserve Board used this policy in the early 1990s when the U.S. economy experienced the savings and loan crisis.
The opinion went on to say, however, that: "The Reserve Banks have properly been held to be federal instrumentalities for some purposes."
After ten days of deliberation, the bill, which would later be referred to as the "Aldrich Plan", was agreed upon.
"Upon the expiration of their terms of office, members of the Board shall continue to serve until their successors are appointed and have qualified."
They both serve a four-year term and they can be renominated as many times as the President chooses, until their terms on the Board of Governors expire.
This practice is called fractional-reserve banking.
This policy is described in United States Code:
Nationally chartered commercial banks are required to hold stock in the Federal Reserve Bank of their region, which entitles them to elect some of their board members.
Regarding the structural relationship between the twelve Federal Reserve banks and the various commercial (member) banks, political science professor Michael D. Reagan has written that:
The Federal Reserve gives a brief summary of these new facilities:
The Federal Reserve Act of 1913 gave the Federal Reserve authority to set monetary policy in the United States.
For depository institutions, they maintain accounts and provide various payment services, including collecting checks, electronically transferring funds, and distributing and receiving currency and coin.
The balance of revenues come from sales of financial services (check and electronic payment processing) and discount window loans.
From the beginning, the Federal Reserve has been the subject of many popular conspiracy theories, many of which are examples of antisemitism or nativism.
The Federal Reserve's objective for open market operations has varied over the years.
By removing "excess deposits" from participating banks, the overall level of reserves available for lending is reduced, which should result in increased market interest rates, acting as a brake on economic activity and inflation.
Subsequently, President Obama nominated Stanley Fischer to replace Yellen as the Vice Chair.
In 1775 the Continental Congress, as well as the states, began issuing paper currency, calling the bills "Continentals".
"Obama administration officials had regrouped to identify Fed candidates after Peter Diamond, a Nobel Prize-winning economist, withdrew his nomination to the board in June 2011 in the face of Republican opposition.
On rare occasions, too many of the bank's customers will withdraw their savings and the bank will need help from another institution to continue operating; this is called a bank run.
A little-used tool of the Federal Reserve is the ''quantitative policy''.
Most Republicans favored the Aldrich Plan, but it lacked enough support in Congress to pass because rural and western states viewed it as favoring the "eastern establishment".
When the transaction matures, the process unwinds: the Fed returns the collateral and charges the primary dealer's reserve account for the principal and accrued interest.
The rate the Fed charges banks for these loans is called the discount rate (officially the primary credit rate).
The primary motivation for creating the Federal Reserve System was to address banking panics.
The Federal Reserve System has faced various criticisms since its inception in 1913.
Each regional Reserve Bank's president is nominated by their Bank's board of directors, but the nomination is contingent upon approval by the Board of Governors.
The Federal Reserve initially authorized up to five "small-value offerings are designed to ensure the effectiveness of TDF operations and to provide eligible institutions with an opportunity to gain familiarity with term deposit procedures."
There are 12 Federal Reserve Banks and they are located in Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, Minneapolis, Kansas City, Dallas, and San Francisco.
That will help the dealers finance their balance sheets.
There was $1.61 trillion in outstanding commercial paper, seasonally adjusted, on the market as of October 1, 2008, according to the most recent data from the Fed.
What happens to money and credit affects interest rates (the cost of credit) and the performance of an economy.
Research shows that Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) recipients were twice as likely to participate in the program than other commercial paper issuers who did not take advantage of the TARP bailout.
Effects on the quantity of reserves that banks used to make loans influence the economy.
At the time of the announcement, the FOMC "already is down three members as it awaits the Senate confirmation of ... Fischer and Lael Brainard, and as President Obama has yet to name a replacement for ... Duke.
It is charged with the overseeing of the 12 District Reserve Banks and setting national monetary policy.
** To protect the credit rights of consumers
* To serve as the central bank for the United States
Because of the large amounts of funds that move through the Reserve Banks every day, the System has policies and procedures to limit the risk to the Reserve Banks from a depository institution's failure to make or settle its payments.
Chairman Ben S. Bernanke, testifying before House Committee on Financial Services, described the Term Deposit Facility and other facilities to Congress in the following terms:
The Term Deposit Facility allows Reserve Banks to offer term deposits to institutions that are eligible to receive earnings on their balances at Reserve Banks.
The FOMC must reach consensus on all decisions.
Before the founding of the Federal Reserve System, the United States underwent several financial crises.
Presidents serve five-year terms and may be reappointed.
Bloomberg, L.P. won at the trial court and the Fed's appeals were rejected at both the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit and the U.S. Supreme Court.
The Federal Reserve records and publishes large amounts of data.
