The complex is the length of three football fields.
In 2002, Special Agent John J Connolly was convicted of federal racketeering charges for helping Bulger avoid arrest.
He made countering every federal crime a top priority, including the prevention of terrorism, countering foreign intelligence operations, addressing cyber security threats, other high-tech crimes, protecting civil rights, combating public corruption, organized crime, white-collar crime, and major acts of violent crime.
The office is managed by the FBI associate director, who also oversees the operations of both the Information and Technology and Human Resources Branches.
At present, the Model 23 "FG&R" (finger groove and rail) is the issue sidearm.
Howard, a civil rights leader, surgeon, and wealthy entrepreneur in Mississippi who had criticized FBI inaction in solving recent murders of George W. Lee, Emmett Till, and other blacks in the South.
* FBI Intelligence Branch
The national office directed field offices to gather information on mobsters in their territories and to report it regularly to Washington for a centralized collection of intelligence on racketeers.
The FBI often works in conjunction with other Federal agencies, including the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) and U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) in seaport and airport security, and the National Transportation Safety Board in investigating airplane crashes and other critical incidents.
FBI Director Hoover opposed the subsequent mass removal and confinement of Japanese Americans authorized under Executive Order 9066, but Roosevelt prevailed.
With these developments, the FBI increased its electronic surveillance in public safety and national security investigations, adapting to the telecommunications advancements that changed the nature of such problems.
One year later, the FBI decided to stop doing bullet lead analysis.
Specific facts about these offenses are gathered and reported in the NIBRS system.
In July 2007, U.S. District Judge Nancy Gertner in Boston found the bureau helped convict the four men using false witness account by mobster Joseph Barboza.
Often serious crimes have been either poorly investigated or prosecution has been declined.
Beginning in 1997, the New England media exposed criminal actions by federal, state, and local law enforcement officials tied to Bulger.
This one stores the profiles of tens of thousands of Americans and legal residents who are not accused of any crime.
The functions branches of the FBI are:
For example, FBI personnel practices continue to treat all staff other than special agents as support staff, classifying intelligence analysts alongside the FBI's auto mechanics and janitors.
Applicants who fail polygraphs may not gain employment with the FBI.
The FBI has maintained files on numerous people, including celebrities such as Elvis Presley, Frank Sinatra, John Denver, John Lennon, Jane Fonda, Groucho Marx, Charlie Chaplin, the band MC5, Lou Costello, Sonny Bono, Bob Dylan, Michael Jackson, and Mickey Mantle.
** Office of Integrity and Compliance
The Uniform Crime Reports (UCR) compile data from over 17,000 law enforcement agencies across the country.
** Office of the General Counsel
At least three years of professional work experience prior to application is also required.
In the same time period, the FBI wounded 150 people, 70 of whom died; the FBI found all 150 shootings to be justified.
Additionally, through the work of Edwin Atherton, the FBI claimed success in apprehending an entire army of Mexican neo-revolutionaries along the California border in the 1920s.
Named Hostage Rescue Team (HRT), it acts as the FBI lead for a national SWAT team in related procedures and all counter-terrorism cases.
The services of the FBI Laboratory are used by many state, local, and international agencies free of charge.
The FBI headquarters is the J. Edgar Hoover Building, located in Washington, D.C.
With reduced cuts to other well-established departments, and because terrorism was no longer considered a threat after the end of the Cold War, the FBI assisted local and state police forces in tracking fugitives who had crossed state lines, which is a federal offense.
The USA PATRIOT Act increased the powers allotted to the FBI, especially in wiretapping and monitoring of Internet activity.
In 2008, Special Agent Connolly completed his term on the federal charges and was transferred to Florida where he was convicted of helping plan the murder of John B Callahan, a Bulger rival.
** Office of the Associate Director
The FBI can and does at times carry out secret activities overseas, just as the CIA has a limited domestic function; these activities generally require coordination across government agencies.
The tool was designed to detect conflict of interest edits.
According to ''The Washington Post'', the FBI "is building a vast repository controlled by people who work in a top-secret vault on the fourth floor of the J. Edgar Hoover Building in Washington.
The Group A offenses are 46 specific crimes grouped in 22 offense categories.
The vast majority went along with the subsequent exclusion orders, but in a handful of cases where Japanese Americans refused to obey the new military regulations, FBI agents handled their arrests.
In the aftermath of his death, the United Nations Special Committee on Decolonization approved a draft resolution urging a "probe of the pro-independence killing, human rights abuses", after "Petitioner after petitioner condemned the assassination of Mr. Ojeda Rios by agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)".
In March 2005, the FBI announced it was beginning a new, more ambitious software project, code-named Sentinel, which they expected to complete by 2009.
The FBI operation was covert and did not become known until U.S.
The book blamed the FBI's decentralized structure, which prevented effective communication and cooperation among different FBI offices.
The case was dismissed by the U.S Supreme Court.
During the "War on Crime" of the 1930s, FBI agents apprehended or killed a number of notorious criminals who carried out kidnappings, robberies, and murders throughout the nation, including John Dillinger, "Baby Face" Nelson, Kate "Ma" Barker, Alvin "Creepy" Karpis, and George "Machine Gun" Kelly.
Attorney General Bonaparte, using Department of Justice expense funds, hired thirty-four people, including some veterans of the Secret Service, to work for a new investigative agency.
During the September 11, 2001, attacks on the World Trade Center, FBI agent Leonard W. Hatton Jr. was killed during the rescue effort while helping the rescue personnel evacuate the occupants of the South Tower and stayed when it collapsed.
Unlike the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), which has no law enforcement authority and is focused on intelligence collection overseas, the FBI is primarily a domestic agency, maintaining 56 field offices in major cities throughout the United States, and more than 400 resident agencies in lesser cities and areas across the nation.
The following year it was linked to the Bureau of Prohibition and rechristened the Division of Investigation (DOI) before finally becoming an independent service within the Department of Justice in 1935.
* FBI Human Resources Branch
The Department of Justice and the Department of Labor had been keeping records on anarchists for years, but President Theodore Roosevelt wanted more power to monitor them.
Beginning in 1975, Bulger served as an informant for the FBI.
During the period from 1993 to 2011, FBI agents fired their weapons on 289 occasions; FBI internal reviews found the shots justified in all but 5 cases, in none of the 5 cases were people wounded.
Ojeda Rios' funeral was attended by a long list of dignitaries, including the highest authority of the Roman Catholic Church in Puerto Rico, Archbishop Roberto Octavio González Nieves, ex-Governor Rafael Hernández Colón, and numerous other personalities.
Numerous files were taken and distributed to a range of newspapers, including ''The Harvard Crimson''.
It was to investigate and disrupt the activities of dissident political organizations within the United States, including both militant and non-violent organizations.
Each branch is then divided into offices and divisions, each headed by an assistant director.
* FBI Science and Technology Branch
Carnivore was an electronic eavesdropping software system implemented by the FBI during the Clinton administration; it was designed to monitor email and electronic communications.
The Academy trains state and local law enforcement agencies, which are invited to the law enforcement training center.
# Upgrade technology to successfully perform the FBI's mission
The remaining 15% of COINTELPRO resources were expended to marginalize and subvert white hate groups, including the Ku Klux Klan and the National States' Rights Party.
Gradually the agency dismantled many of the groups.
Other activities of its early decades included a decisive role in reducing the scope and influence of the Ku Klux Klan.
Tribal courts can impose sentences of up to three years, under certain restrictions.
The FBI does not specifically list crimes in Native American land as one of its priorities.
In March 1971, the residential office of an FBI agent in Media, Pennsylvania was burglarized by a group calling itself the Citizens' Commission to Investigate the FBI.
The FBI carried out controversial domestic surveillance in an operation it called the COINTELPRO, a portmanteau derived from '''"CO'''unter-'''INTEL'''ligence '''PRO'''gram."
** Office of the Ombudsman
During the 1950s and 1960s, FBI officials became increasingly concerned about the influence of civil rights leaders, whom they believed had communist ties or were unduly influenced by them.
FBI Directors are appointed by the President of the United States.
A few of the notable portrayals of the FBI on television are the 1993–2002 series ''The X-Files'', which concerned investigations into paranormal phenomena by five fictional Special Agents, and the fictional Counter Terrorist Unit (CTU) agency in the TV drama ''24'', which is patterned after the FBI Counterterrorism Division.
Hoover was substantially involved in most major cases and projects that the FBI handled during his tenure.
In December 1994, after being tipped off by his former FBI handler about a pending indictment under the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act, Bulger fled Boston and went into hiding.
At an FBI field office, a senior-level FBI officer concurrently serves as the representative of the Director of National Intelligence.
In 1982, the FBI formed an elite unit to help with problems that might arise at the 1984 Summer Olympics to be held in Los Angeles, particularly terrorism and major-crime.
They must be confirmed by the United States Senate and serve a term of office of five years, with a maximum of ten years, if reappointed, unless they resign or are fired by the President before their term ends.
The services the lab conducts include ''Chemistry'', ''Combined DNA Index System'' (CODIS), ''Computer Analysis and Response'', ''DNA Analysis'', ''Evidence Response'', ''Explosives'', ''Firearms and Tool marks'', ''Forensic Audio'', ''Forensic Video'', ''Image Analysis'', ''Forensic Science Research'', ''Forensic Science Training'', ''Hazardous Materials Response'', ''Investigative and Prospective Graphics'', ''Latent Prints'', ''Materials Analysis'', ''Questioned Documents'', ''Racketeering Records'', ''Special Photographic Analysis'', ''Structural Design'', and ''Trace Evidence''.
Created in the 1920s, the UCR system has not proven to be as ''uniform'' as its name implies.
Mass arrests and searches of homes (in most cases conducted without warrants) began a few hours after the attack, and over the next several weeks more than 5,500 Issei men were taken into FBI custody.
Hoover responded by publicly calling King the most "notorious liar" in the United States.
Preliminary Annual ''Uniform Crime Report'' for 2006 was released on June 4, 2006.
The FBI also shares concurrent jurisdiction with the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) in the enforcement of the Controlled Substances Act of 1970.
Immigration and Customs Enforcement Homeland Security Investigations (ICE-HSI) has nearly the same amount of investigative manpower as the FBI, and investigates the largest range of crimes.
In 2003 a congressional committee called the FBI's organized crime informant program "one of the greatest failures in the history of federal law enforcement."
The Associated Press reported in mid-January 2005 that the FBI essentially abandoned the use of Carnivore in 2001, in favor of commercially available software, such as NarusInsight.
The FBI is headquartered at the J. Edgar Hoover Building in Washington, D.C., with 56 field offices in major cities across the United States.
The FBI refused to release information beyond the official press release, citing security and agent privacy issues.
In 1968, Congress passed legislation as part of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act , June 19, 1968,  that specified a 10-year limit, a maximum of two 5-year terms, for future FBI Directors, as well as requiring Senate confirmation of appointees.
After Hoover's death, Congress passed legislation that limited the tenure of future FBI Directors to ten years.
* FBI National Security Branch
For 16 years, he remained at large.
The RICO Act is still used today for all organized crime and any individuals who might fall under the Act.
After Prohibition's repeal, Congress passed the Communications Act of 1934, which outlawed non-consensual phone tapping, but allowed bugging.
Hanssen was arrested on February 18, 2001, at Foxstone Park near his home in Vienna, Virginia, and was charged with selling US secrets to the USSR and subsequently Russia for more than US$1.4 million in cash and diamonds over a 22-year period.
In the 1920s, the FBI began issuing crime reports by gathering numbers from local police departments.
The '''Office of the Director''' serves as the central administrative organ of the FBI.
In 2014, that conviction was overturned on a technicality.
Its name was changed to the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) in 1935.
In 2003, its National Research Council published a report whose conclusions called into question 30 years of FBI testimony.
Griffith was motivated by the edits from the United States Congress, and wanted to see if others were similarly promoting themselves.
An executive assistant director manages each branch.
After the 1967 case ''Katz v. United States'' overturned the 1927 case that had allowed bugging, Congress passed the Omnibus Crime Control Act, allowing public authorities to tap telephones during investigations as long as they obtain a warrant beforehand.
One of the most controversial provisions of the act is the so-called ''sneak and peek'' provision, granting the FBI powers to search a house while the residents are away, and not requiring them to notify the residents for several weeks afterwards.
The UCR data only reflect the most serious offense in the case of connected crimes and has a very restrictive definition of rape.
The Bureau continued surveillance on Japanese Americans throughout the war, conducting background checks on applicants for resettlement outside camp, and entering the camps (usually without the permission of War Relocation Authority officials) and grooming informants in order to monitor dissidents and "troublemakers."
The NIBRS system is in greater detail than the summary-based UCR system.
Special agents of the FBI HRT (Hostage Rescue Team), and regional SWAT teams are issued the Springfield Professional Model 1911A1 .45 ACP pistol (''see FBI Special Weapons and Tactics Teams'').
While the FBI has acceded to most of the recommendations, including oversight by the new Director of National Intelligence, some former members of the 9/11 Commission publicly criticized the FBI in October 2005, claiming it was resisting any meaningful changes.
For over 40 years, the FBI crime lab in Quantico believed lead in bullets had unique chemical signatures.
The '''Federal Bureau of Investigation''' ('''FBI''') is the domestic intelligence and security service of the United States, which simultaneously serves as the nation's prime federal law enforcement agency.
This was a result of the 1972 Summer Olympics at Munich, Germany, when terrorists murdered the Israeli athletes.
The majority of the names on the list belonged to Issei community leaders, as the FBI investigation built on an existing Naval Intelligence index that had focused on Japanese Americans in Hawaii and the West Coast, but many German and Italian nationals also found their way onto the secret list.
In June 2011, the 81-year-old Bulger was arrested in Santa Monica, California.
The 1991 movie ''Point Break'' is based on the true story of an undercover FBI agent who infiltrated a gang of bank robbers.
Its first chief (the title is now known as director) was Stanley Finch.
The FBI Academy, located in Quantico, Virginia, is home to the communications and computer laboratory the FBI utilizes.
The report shows violent crime offenses rose 1.3%, but the number of property crime offenses decreased 2.9% compared to 2005.
In 1939, the Bureau began compiling a custodial detention list with the names of those who would be taken into custody in the event of war with Axis nations.
* FBI Information and Technology Branch
Special Agents candidates also have to pass a Physical Fitness Test (PFT), which includes a 300-meter run, one-minute sit-ups, maximum push-ups, and a  run.
Although the edits correlated with known FBI IP addresses, there was no proof that the changes actually came from a member or employee of the FBI, only that someone who had access to their network had edited the FBI article in Wikipedia.
In 2005, fugitive Puerto Rican Nationalist leader Filiberto Ojeda Ríos died in a gun battle with FBI agents in 2005 in what some charged was an assassination.
The office provide staff support functions (such as finance and facilities management) to the five function branches and the various field divisions.
Many specialized FBI functions are located at facilities in Quantico, Virginia, as well as a "data campus" in Clarksburg, West Virginia, where 96 million sets of fingerprints "from across the United States are stored, along with others collected by American authorities from prisoners in Saudi Arabia and Yemen, Iraq and Afghanistan."
All of the FBI work was done undercover and from within these organizations, using the provisions provided in the RICO Act.
From the end of the 1980s to the early 1990s, the FBI reassigned more than 300 agents from foreign counter-intelligence duties to violent crime, and made violent crime the sixth national priority.
Public tours of FBI headquarters ran through the FBI laboratory workspace before the move to the J. Edgar Hoover Building.
For 12 of those years, Bulger was prominently listed on the FBI Ten Most Wanted Fugitives list.
In the same year, its name was officially changed from the Division of Investigation to the present-day Federal Bureau of Investigation, or FBI.
Technological innovation and the skills of FBI Laboratory analysts helped ensure that the three cases were successfully prosecuted.
In August 2007 Virgil Griffith, a Caltech computation and neural-systems graduate student, created a searchable database that linked changes made by anonymous Wikipedia editors to companies and organizations from which the changes were made.
The files were collected for various reasons.
Under the PATRIOT Act's provisions, the FBI also resumed inquiring into the library records of those who are suspected of terrorism (something it had supposedly not done since the 1970s).
Many state and local agencies use these data systems as a source for their own investigations and contribute to the database using secure communications.
Hoover was administering this project but failed to notify the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) until 1952.
The FBI is in process of moving its Records Management Division, which processes Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests, to Winchester, Virginia.
Also during this time, a joint US/UK code-breaking effort (the Venona project)—with which the FBI was heavily involved—broke Soviet diplomatic and intelligence communications codes, allowing the US and British governments to read Soviet communications.
As the incumbent, this legislation did not apply to Hoover, only to his successors.
The revelation caused great embarrassment to the FBI.
The FBI is near-impenetrable, with applicants intensely scrutinized and assessed over an extended period.
In the early 1980s, Senate hearings were held to examine FBI undercover operations in the wake of the Abscam controversy, which had allegations of entrapment of elected officials.
The documents available are as recent as 1965.
The FBI director is responsible for the day-to-day operations at the FBI.
Bulger was tried on 32 counts of racketeering, money laundering, extortion, and weapons charges; including complicity in 19 murders.
From the 1950s to the 1980s, the governments of many Latin American and Caribbean countries were infiltrated by the FBI.
The 1901 assassination of President McKinley created an urgent perception that America was under threat from anarchists.
The National Academy of Sciences conducted an 18-month independent review of comparative bullet-lead analysis.
The Officer Down Memorial Page provides the biographies of 58 FBI agents killed in the line of duty from 1925 to 2011.
Computer Investigations and Infrastructure Threat Assessment Center (CITAC) and the National Infrastructure Protection Center (NIPC) were created to deal with the increase in Internet-related problems, such as computer viruses, worms, and other malicious programs that threatened US operations.
To apply to become an FBI agent, one must be between the ages of 23 and 37.
The FBI units that reside at Quantico are the ''Field and Police Training Unit'', ''Firearms Training Unit'', ''Forensic Science Research and Training Center'', ''Technology Services Unit'' (TSU), ''Investigative Training Unit'', ''Law Enforcement Communication Unit'', ''Leadership and Management Science Units'' (LSMU), ''Physical Training Unit'', ''New Agents' Training Unit'' (NATU), ''Practical Applications Unit'' (PAU), the ''Investigative Computer Training Unit'' and the "College of Analytical Studies."
** Records Management Division
It analyzed the bullets with the goal of matching them chemically, not only to a single batch of ammunition coming out of a factory, but also to a single box of bullets.
These overseas offices exist primarily for the purpose of coordination with foreign security services and do not usually conduct unilateral operations in the host countries.
The FBI is organized into functional branches and the Office of the Director, which contains most administrative offices.
The discovery of Soviet spies operating in the US allowed Hoover to pursue his longstanding obsession with the threat he perceived from the American Left, ranging from Communist Party of the United States of America (CPUSA) union organizers to American liberals.
Personnel must pass a polygraph test with questions including possible drug use.
The National Incident Based Reporting System (NIBRS) crime statistics system aims to address limitations inherent in UCR data.
When President John F. Kennedy was shot and killed, the jurisdiction fell to the local police departments until President Lyndon B. Johnson directed the FBI to take over the investigation.
New agents are issued firearms, on which they must qualify, on successful completion of their training at the FBI Academy.
The FBI also publishes some reports for both law enforcement personnel as well as regular citizens covering topics including law enforcement, terrorism, cybercrime, white-collar crime, violent crime, and statistics.
To obtain a security clearance, all potential FBI personnel must pass a series of Single Scope Background Investigations (SSBI), which are conducted by the Office of Personnel Management.
It had made little effort to relieve its staff shortage until the Oregon land fraud scandal erupted around the start of the 20th century.
In the wake of the September 11 attacks, then-Attorney General Ashcroft assigned the FBI as the designated lead organization in terrorism investigations after the creation of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security.
Congressman Luis Gutierrez had it made public via the Freedom of Information Act in the 1980s.
** Office of the Deputy Director
In the mid-1960s, King began publicly criticizing the Bureau for giving insufficient attention to the use of terrorism by white supremacists.
After prolonged negative coverage in the press, the FBI changed the name of its system from "Carnivore" to "DCS1000."
This new law was passed in 1965.
After a ''60 Minutes''/''Washington Post'' investigation in November 2007 (two years later), the bureau agreed to identify, review, and release all pertinent cases, and notify prosecutors about cases in which faulty testimony was given.
In addition to the Group A offenses, eleven Group B offenses are reported with only the arrest information.
Four of the branches report to the deputy director while two report to the associate director.
It provides a main repository for information in various data systems.
The database cross-referenced logs of Wikipedia edits with publicly available records pertaining to the Internet IP addresses edits were made from.
On May 27, 1908, Congress forbade this use of Treasury employees by the Justice Department, citing fears that the new agency would serve as a secret police.
In the 1927 case ''Olmstead v. United States'', in which a bootlegger was caught through telephone tapping, the United States Supreme Court ruled that FBI wiretaps did not violate the Fourth Amendment as unlawful search and seizure, as long as the FBI did not break into a person's home to complete the tapping.
In response to organized crime, on August 25, 1953, the FBI created the Top Hoodlum Program.
Justice Department investigations into the FBI's roles in the Ruby Ridge and Waco incidents were found to be obstructed by agents within the Bureau.
In August 2013, the jury found him guilty on 31 counts, and having been involved in 11 murders.
The FBI also spied upon and collected information on Puerto Rican independence leader Pedro Albizu Campos and his Nationalist political party in the 1930s.
Connolly was the agent leading the investigation of Bulger.
Since then, the director now reports to the Director of National Intelligence (DNI), who in turn reports to the President.
Within these sub-branches there are various sections headed by section chiefs.
In his 1991 memoir, ''Washington Post'' journalist Carl Rowan asserted that the FBI had sent at least one anonymous letter to King encouraging him to commit suicide.
The FBI allowed four innocent men to be convicted of the March 1965 gangland murder of Edward "Teddy" Deegan in order to protect Vincent Flemmi, an FBI informant.
Between 1993 and 1996, the FBI increased its counter-terrorism role in the wake of the first 1993 World Trade Center bombing in New York City, New York; the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; and the arrest of the Unabomber in 1996.
It was later learned that Hanssen, who had reached a high position within the FBI, had been selling intelligence since as early as 1979.
The FBI was established in 1908 as the Bureau of Investigation (BOI).
** Security Division
On February 19, 1942, President Franklin Roosevelt issued Executive Order 9066, authorizing the removal of Japanese Americans from the West Coast.
FBI provides these tools of sophisticated identification and information services to local, state, federal, and international law enforcement agencies.
On July&nbsp;6, 2001, he pleaded guilty to 15 counts of espionage in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia.
The Glock 26 in 9×19mm Parabellum, and Glock Models 23 and 27 in .40 S&W caliber are authorized as secondary weapons.
To ensure clarity about responsibility for investigation of homicides of federal officials, Congress passed a law that put investigations of deaths of federal officials within FBI jurisdiction.
In 1932, the bureau was renamed the United States Bureau of Investigation.
Three of the men were sentenced to death (which was later reduced to life in prison), and the fourth defendant was sentenced to life in prison.
If they fail their first qualification, they are issued either a Glock 17 or Glock 19, to aid in their next qualification.
The current FBI Director is James B. Comey, who was appointed in 2013 by Barack Obama.
** Immediate Office of the Director
