Described as the "Maestro's spiritual testament” by his biographer Tullio Kezich, excerpts culled from the conversations later served as the basis of their feature documentary, ''Fellini: I'm a Born Liar'' (2002) and the book, ''I'm a Born Liar: A Fellini Lexicon''.
In 1993, he was awarded an honorary Oscar for Lifetime Achievement at the 65th Annual Academy Awards in Los Angeles.
After the Allied liberation of Rome on 4 June 1944, Fellini and Enrico De Seta opened the Funny Face Shop where they survived the postwar recession drawing caricatures of American soldiers.
To help promote ''Satyricon'' in the United States, Fellini flew to Los Angeles in January 1970 for interviews with Dick Cavett and David Frost.
It should be more like a poem with metre and cadence."
In February 1950, ''Paisà'' received an Oscar nomination for the screenplay by Rossellini, Sergio Amidei, and Fellini.
On 16 June, he entered the Cantonal Hospital in Zurich for an angioplasty on his femoral artery but suffered a stroke at the Grand Hotel in Rimini two months later.
That same year, he became the first non-American to receive the Film Society of Lincoln Center’s annual award for cinematic achievement.
Four months after publishing his first article in ''Marc’Aurelio'', the highly influential biweekly humour magazine, he joined the editorial board, achieving success with a regular column titled ''But Are You Listening?''
His first colour film, it was the sole project green-lighted at Federiz.
Winning the Silver Lion Award in Venice, it secured Fellini’s first international distributor.
Fellini was raised in a Catholic family, and considered himself a Catholic, although, as an adult, he avoided formal activity in the Catholic Church.
Shooting began on 16 March 1959 with Anita Ekberg climbing the stairs to the cupola of Saint Peter’s in a mammoth décor constructed at Cinecittà.
Pierluigi Praturlon’s photos of Anita Ekberg wading fully dressed in the Trevi Fountain provided further inspiration for Fellini and his scriptwriters.
Establishing a close working relationship with Alberto Lattuada, Fellini co-wrote the director’s ''Senza pietà'' (''Without Pity'') and ''Il mulino del Po'' (''The Mill on the Po'').
In 1964, Fellini took LSD under the supervision of Emilio Servadio, his psychoanalyst during the 1954 production of ''La Strada''.
It also influenced two American TV shows, ''Northern Exposure'' and ''Third Rock from the Sun''.
In 1941 he published ''Il mio amico Pasqualino'', a 74-page booklet in ten chapters describing the absurd adventures of Pasqualino, an alter ego.
Pier Paolo Pasolini was hired to translate Flaiano and Pinelli’s dialogue into Roman dialect and to supervise researches in the vice-afflicted suburbs of Rome.
Other key influences on his work include Luis Buñuel, Charlie Chaplin, Sergei Eisenstein, Buster Keaton, Laurel and Hardy, the Marx Brothers, and Roberto Rossellini.
As a consequence, Jung's seminal ideas on the ''anima'' and the ''animus'', the role of archetypes and the collective unconscious directly influenced such films as ''8½'' (1963), ''Juliet of the Spirits'' (1965), ''Fellini Satyricon'' (1969), ''Casanova'' (1976), and ''City of Women'' (1980).
In an October 1960 letter to his colleague Brunello Rondi, Fellini first outlined his film ideas about a man suffering creative block: "Well then - a guy (a writer?
Wes Anderson's short film ''Castello Cavalcanti'' (2013) is in many places a direct homage to Fellini's work.
Ivan’s prissy mask of respectability is soon demolished by his wife’s obsession with the White Sheik.
Producer Carlo Ponti commissioned Fellini and Tullio Pinelli to write the script but Antonioni rejected the story they developed.
He also directed two electoral television spots during the 1990s: one for DC and another for the Italian Republican Party or PRI.
Long fascinated by Carlos Castaneda’s ''The Teachings of Don Juan: A Yaqui Way of Knowledge'', Fellini accompanied the Peruvian author on a journey to the Yucatán to assess the feasibility of a film.
Despite its modest critical and commercial success in Italy, and its warm reception by French critics, it failed to interest North American distributors.
The Federico Fellini Airport in Rimini is named in his honour.
Well-paid as the voice of Pallina in Fellini's radio serial, ''Cico and Pallina'', Masina was also well known for her musical-comedy broadcasts which cheered an audience depressed by the war.
An attentive student, he spent his leisure time drawing, staging puppet shows, and reading ''Il corriere dei piccoli'', the popular children’s magazine that reproduced traditional American cartoons by Winsor McCay, George McManus and Frederick Burr Opper.
Perplexed by the seemingly chaotic, incessant improvisation on the set, Deena Boyer, the director’s American press officer at the time, asked for a rationale.
While preparing ''Nights of Cabiria'' in spring 1956, Fellini learned of his father’s death by cardiac arrest at the age of sixty-two.
Based partly on stories told to him by a petty thief during production of ''La Strada'', Fellini developed the script into a con man’s slow descent towards a solitary death.
Fellini cast American actor Broderick Crawford to interpret the role of an aging swindler in ''Il Bidone''.
Fellini died in Rome on 31 October at the age of 73, a day after his fiftieth wedding anniversary.
The film shoot was wrought with difficulties stemming from Crawford’s alcoholism.
Apart from satirizing Silvio Berlusconi and mainstream television in ''Ginger and Fred'', Fellini rarely expressed his political views in public and never directed a political film.
''La Dolce Vita'' broke all box office records.
Starring Alberto Sordi in the title role, the film is a revised version of a treatment first written by Michelangelo Antonioni in 1949 and based on the ''fotoromanzi'', the photographed cartoon strip romances popular in Italy at the time.
Guido Brignone’s ''Maciste all’Inferno'' (1926), the first film he saw, would mark him in ways linked to Dante and the cinema throughout his entire career.
Loosely based on the director’s 1968 autobiographical essay ''My Rimini'', the film depicts the adolescent Titta and his friends working out their sexual frustrations against the religious and Fascist backdrop of a provincial town in Italy during the 1930s.
The "diverse sequences," writes Fellini scholar Peter Bondanella, "are held together only by the fact that they all ultimately originate from the director’s fertile imagination."
Unclear about the script, its title, and his protagonist’s profession, he scouted locations throughout Italy “looking for the film” in the hope of resolving his confusion.
His mother, Ida Barbiani (1896–1984), came from a bourgeiois Catholic family of Roman merchants.
Produced by Dino De Laurentiis and starring Giulietta Masina, the film took its inspiration from  news reports of a woman’s severed head retrieved in a lake and stories by Wanda, a shantytown prostitute Fellini met on the set of ''Il Bidone''.
(Opper’s ''Happy Hooligan'' would provide the visual inspiration for Gelsomina in Fellini's 1954 film ''La Strada''; McCay’s ''Little Nemo'' would directly influence his 1980 film ''City of Women''.)
Her sexually voracious next door neighbor Suzy (Sandra Milo) introduces Juliet to a world of uninhibited sensuality but Juliet is haunted by childhood memories of her Catholic guilt and a teenaged friend who committed suicide.
In July 1991 and April 1992, Fellini worked in close collaboration with Canadian filmmaker Damian Pettigrew to establish "the longest and most detailed conversations ever recorded on film".
Shooting began on 9 May 1962.
With Ennio Flaiano, they re-worked the material into a light-hearted satire about newlywed couple Ivan and Wanda Cavalli (Leopoldo Trieste, Brunella Bovo) in Rome to visit the Pope.
Reaching an impasse, De Laurentiis sold the rights to publishing mogul Angelo Rizzoli.
The Vatican's official press organ, ''l'Osservatore Romano'', lobbied for censorship while the Board of Roman Parish Priests and the Genealogical Board of Italian Nobility attacked the film.
Over a period of six months between January and June 1973, Fellini shot the Oscar-winning ''Amarcord''.
Finding it increasingly difficult to secure financing for feature films, Fellini developed a suite of television projects whose titles reflect their subjects: ''Attore'', ''Napoli'', ''L’Inferno'', ''L’opera lirica'', and ''L’America''.
The Belgian writer was promptly “hissed at” by the disapproving festival crowd.
The sea creature found on the beach at the end of ''La Dolce Vita'' (1960) has its basis in a giant fish marooned on a Rimini beach during a storm in 1934.
Fellini directed ''La Strada'' based on a script completed in 1952 with Pinelli and Flaiano.
In early 1989 Fellini began production on ''The Voice of the Moon'', based on Ermanno Cavazzoni’s novel, ''Il poema dei lunatici'' (''The Lunatics' Poem'').
The film wrapped August 15 on a deserted beach at Passo Oscuro with a bloated mutant fish designed by Piero Gherardi.
His slogan, "Non si interrompe un'emozione" (''Don't interrupt an emotion''), was directed against the excessive use of advertisements in TV.
That same year, the weekly entertainment-trade magazine ''Variety'' announced that French director Sylvain Chomet was moving forward with the project, ''The Thousand Miles'', based on various works of Fellini including his unpublished drawings and writings.
A small town was built at Empire Studios on the via Pontina outside Rome.
In October 2009, the Jeu de Paume in Paris opened an exhibit devoted to Fellini that included ephemera, television interviews, behind-the-scenes photographs, ''Book of Dreams'' (based on 30 years of the director's illustrated dreams and notes), along with excerpts from ''La dolce vita'' and ''8½''.
Interrupted by the chief machinist requesting he celebrate the launch of ''8½'', Fellini put aside the letter and went on the set.
An "invention born out of intimate truth", the script was based on Fellini's return to Rimini with a mistress to attend his father's funeral.
And since the appearance of things was no longer definitive but limitless, this paradisiacal awareness freed me from the reality external to my self.
The production company went bankrupt, leaving both Fellini and Lattuada with debts to pay for over a decade.
The tragedy had enduring emotional and artistic repercussions.
Giving the order to start production in spring 1962, Fellini signed deals with his producer Rizzoli, fixed dates, had sets constructed, cast Mastroianni, Anouk Aimée, and Sandra Milo in lead roles, and did screen tests at the Scalera Studios in Rome.
Partially paralyzed, he was first transferred to Ferrara for rehabilitation and then to the Policlinico Umberto I in Rome to be near his wife, also hospitalized.
''8½'' inspired among others: ''Mickey One'' (Arthur Penn, 1965), ''Alex in Wonderland'' (Paul Mazursky, 1970), ''Beware of a Holy Whore'' (Rainer Werner Fassbinder, 1971), ''Day for Night'' (François Truffaut, 1973), ''All That Jazz'' (Bob Fosse, 1979), ''Stardust Memories'' (Woody Allen, 1980), ''Sogni d'oro'' (Nanni Moretti, 1981), ''Parad Planet'' (Vadim Abdrashitov, 1984), ''La Pelicula del rey'' (Carlos Sorin, 1986), ''Living in Oblivion'' (Tom DiCillo, 1995), ''8½ Women'' (Peter Greenaway, 1999), ''Falling Down'' (Joel Schumacher, 1993), along with the successful Broadway musical, ''Nine'' (Maury Yeston and Arthur Kopit, 1982).
'''Federico Fellini''' (; 20 January 1920 – 31 October 1993) was an Italian film director and screenwriter.
Fellini's hallucinatory insights were given full flower in his first colour feature ''Juliet of the Spirits'' (1965), depicting Giulietta Masina as Juliet, a housewife who rightly suspects her husband's infidelity and succumbs to the voices of spirits summoned during a séance at her home.
Raising a toast to the crew, he "felt overwhelmed by shame… I was in a no exit situation.
Among his collaborators on the magazine’s editorial board were the future director Ettore Scola, Marxist theorist and scriptwriter Cesare Zavattini, and Bernardino Zapponi, a future Fellini screenwriter.
At an exclusive Milan screening on 5 February 1960, one outraged patron spat on Fellini while others hurled insults.
The couple settled in Rimini where Urbano became a traveling salesman and wholesale vendor.
Despite the best intentions, their overcautious editorial and business skills forced the company to close down soon after cancelling Pasolini’s project, ''Accattone'' (1961).
Personal and highly idiosyncratic visions of society, Fellini's films are a unique combination of memory, dreams, fantasy and desire.
In 1953, ''I Vitelloni'' found favour with the critics and public.
But apart from naming his hero Guido Anselmi, he still couldn't decide what his character did for a living.
He visited Rome with his parents for the first time in 1933, the year of the maiden voyage of the transatlantic ocean liner ''SS Rex'' (which is shown in ''Amarcord'').
In February, Fellini scouted locations in Paris for ''The Clowns'', a docufiction both for cinema and television, based on his childhood memories of the circus and a "coherent theory of clowning."
To incarnate the role’s "intense, tragic face", Fellini’s first choice had been Humphrey Bogart but after learning of the actor’s lung cancer, chose Crawford after seeing his face on the theatrical poster of ''All the King’s Men'' (1949).
After travelling to Paris for a script conference with Rossellini on ''Europa '51'', Fellini began production on ''The White Sheik'' in September 1951, his first solo-directed feature.
Screened at the 13th Venice International Film Festival, it was razzed by critics in "the atmosphere of a soccer match”.
After dating for nine months, the couple were married on 30 October 1943.
All I perceived was perception itself, the hell of forms and figures devoid of human emotion and detached from the reality of my unreal environment.
Exploiting ''La Dolce Vita''’s success, financier Angelo Rizzoli set up Federiz in 1960, an independent film company, for Fellini and production manager Clemente Fracassi to discover and produce new talent.
I would make a film telling the story of a director who no longer knows what film he wanted to make".
During the autumn, Fellini researched and developed a treatment based on a film adaptation of Mario Tobino’s novel, ''The Free Women of Magliano''.
has to interrupt the usual rhythm of his life for two weeks because of a not-too-serious disease.
The adjectives "Fellinian" and "Felliniesque" are "synonymous with any kind of extravagant, fanciful, even baroque image in the cinema and in art in general".
(1998), a Spanish novel by Puerto Rican writer Giannina Braschi, features a dream sequence with Fellini that was inspired by ''8½''.
Fellini told her that he hoped to convey the three levels "on which our minds live: the past, the present, and the conditional - the realm of fantasy".
In 1926, he discovered the world of Grand Guignol, the circus with Pierino the Clown, and the movies.
When the American magazine ''Cinema'' asked Stanley Kubrick in 1963 to name his favorite films, the film director listed ''I Vitelloni'' as number one in his Top 10 list.
A meditation on the nature of memory and film production, it won the special 40th Anniversary Prize at Cannes and the 15th Moscow International Film Festival Golden Prize.
In 2014, the Blue Devils Drum and Bugle Corps of Concord, California performed a show themed around Fellini's works, entitled "Felliniesque", with which the Blue Devils won a record 16th Drum Corps International World Class championship with a record score of 99.650.
Failing his military culture exam, he graduated from high school in July 1938 after doubling the exam.
For years reserved about what actually occurred that Sunday afternoon, he admitted in 1992 that
Desperately poor, they unsuccessfully joined forces to draw sketches of restaurant and café patrons.
A major discovery for Fellini after his Italian neorealism period (1950–1959) was the work of Carl Jung.
Described as “the determining moment in Fellini’s life”, the magazine gave him steady employment between 1939 and 1942, when he interacted with writers, gagmen, and scriptwriters.
Fellini had two siblings: Riccardo (1921–1991), a documentary director for RAI Television, and Maria Maddalena (m. Fabbri; 1929–2002).
His African adventure, later published in ''Marc’Aurelio'' as "The First Flight", marked “the emergence of a new Fellini, no longer just a screenwriter, working and sketching at his desk, but a filmmaker out in the field”.
After shooting wrapped on 14 October, Nino Rota composed various circus marches and fanfares that would later become signature tunes of the maestro’s cinema.
He suffered a second stroke and fell into an irreversible coma.
In Mussolini’s Italy, Fellini and Riccardo became members of the ''Avanguardista'', the compulsory Fascist youth group for males.
Bernhard’s focus on Jungian depth psychology proved to be the single greatest influence on Fellini’s mature style and marked the turning point in his work from neorealism to filmmaking that was "primarily oneiric".
Bernhard also recommended that Fellini consult the ''I Ching'' and keep a record of his dreams.
One reviewer declared that Fellini had “not the slightest aptitude for cinema direction".
Fellini’s work is referenced on the albums ''Fellini Days'' (2001) by Fish, ''Another Side of Bob Dylan'' (1964) by ''Bob Dylan'' with ''Motorpsycho Nitemare'', ''Funplex'' (2008) by the B-52's with the song ''Juliet of the Spirits'', and in the opening traffic jam of the music video ''Everybody Hurts'' by R.E.M.
In February 1948, he was introduced to Marcello Mastroianni, then a young theatre actor appearing in a play with Giulietta Masina.
The movie won the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film at the 30th Academy Awards and brought Masina the Best Actress Award at Cannes for her performance.
Biographer Hollis Alpert reports that "there is no record of his ever having attended a class".
Increasingly attracted to parapsychology, Fellini met the Turin magician Gustavo Rol in 1963.
The slogan was also used by the Democratic Party of the Left in the referendums of 1995.
But today all is temporary, disordered, grotesque.
The apolitical Fellini was finally freed of the draft when an Allied air raid over Bologna destroyed his medical records.
Known for his distinct style that blends fantasy and baroque images with earthiness, he is recognized as one of the most influential filmmakers of all time.
As he saw it, the clown "was always the caricature of a well-established, ordered, peaceful society.
To play the role of a vagabond rogue mistaken by Magnani for a saint, Fellini had to bleach his black hair blond.
Not yet twenty and with Fabrizi’s help, Fellini obtained his first screen credit as a comedy writer on Mario Mattoli’s ''Il pirata sono io'' (''The Pirate's Dream'').
Enrolled at the Ginnasio Giulio Cesare in 1929, he made friends with Luigi ‘Titta’ Benzi, later a prominent Rimini lawyer (and the model for young Titta in ''Amarcord'' (1973)).
Under pressure from his producers, Fellini finally settled on ''8½'', a self-referential title referring principally (but not exclusively) to the number of films he had directed up to that time.
Savaged by critics at the 16th Venice International Film Festival, the film did miserable box office and did not receive international distribution until 1964.
And lo and behold, at that very moment everything fell into place.
In one documented instance involving favourable reviews written by the Jesuits of San Fedele, defending ''La Dolce Vita'' had severe consequences.
any kind of professional man?
A civil marriage followed in 1918 with the religious ceremony held at Santa Maria Maggiore in Rome a year later.
It’s a warning bell: something is blocking up his system."
In March 1971, Fellini began production on ''Roma'', a seemingly random collection of episodes informed by the director's memories and impressions of Rome.
Working as both screenwriter and assistant director on Rossellini’s ''Paisà'' (''Paisan'') in 1946, Fellini was entrusted to film the Sicilian scenes in Maiori.
Designed as a ship's prow, the tomb is located at the main entrance to the Cemetery of Rimini.
Fellini, Masina and their son Pierfederico are buried in a bronze sepulchre sculpted by Arnaldo Pomodoro.
Denounced in parliament by right-wing conservatives, undersecretary Domenico Magrì of the Christian Democrats demanded tolerance for the film’s controversial themes.
The Hollywood on the Tiber phenomenon of 1958 in which American studios profited from the cheap studio labour available in Rome provided the backdrop for photojournalists to steal shots of celebrities on the via Veneto.
Flaiano suggested ''La bella confusione'' (literally ''The Beautiful Confusion'') as the movie’s title.
These encounters eventually led to opportunities in show business and cinema.
Elmo's Fire'' (1985), and Barry Levinson's ''Diner'' (1987), among many others.
Deciding on a career as a caricaturist and gag writer, Fellini travelled to Florence in 1938, where he published his first cartoon in the weekly ''420''.
Fellini also worked with Rossellini on the anthology film ''L'Amore'' (1948), co-writing the screenplay and in one segment titled, "The Miracle", acting opposite Anna Magnani.
a theatrical producer?)
Nominated for four Oscars, ''8½'' won awards for best foreign language film and best costume design in black-and-white.
In competition at Cannes alongside Antonioni’s ''L’Avventura'', the film won the Palme d'Or awarded by presiding juror Georges Simenon.
Under the title, ''I disegni di Fellini'' (Fellini’s Designs), he published 350 drawings executed in pencil, watercolours, and felt pens.
Films by Fellini included Catholic themes: some celebrated Catholic teachings; whereas others clearly ridiculed such teachings.
Although Fellini adapted key events from his childhood and adolescence in films such as ''I Vitelloni'' (1953), ''8½'' (1963), and ''Amarcord'' (1973), he insisted that such autobiographical memories were inventions:
The scandal provoked by Turkish dancer Haish Nana’s improvised striptease at a nightclub captured Fellini’s imagination: he decided to end his latest script-in-progress, ''Moraldo in the City'', with an all-night "orgy" at a seaside villa.
I got straight to the heart of the film.
At the request of Giulietta Masina, trumpeter Mauro Maur played the "Improvviso dell'Angelo" by Nino Rota during the funeral ceremony.
The crisis came to a head in April when, sitting in his Cinecittà office, he began a letter to Rizzoli confessing he had "lost his film" and had to abandon the project.
Rol, a former banker, introduced him to the world of Spiritism and séances.
In April 1993 Fellini received his fifth Oscar, for lifetime achievement, "in recognition of his cinematic accomplishments that have thrilled and entertained audiences worldwide".
For Eduardo De Filippo, he co-wrote the script of ''Fortunella'', tailoring the lead role to accommodate Masina’s particular sensibility.
Fellini won the ''Praemium Imperiale'', the equivalent of the Nobel Prize in the visual arts, awarded by the Japan Art Association in 1990.
Responsible for emergency re-writing, he also directed the film's first scenes.
Circular in form, ''Amarcord'' avoids plot and linear narrative in a way similar to ''The Clowns'' and ''Roma''.
I was a director who wanted to make a film he no longer remembers.
objects and their functions no longer had any significance.
In 1937, Fellini opened Febo, a portrait shop in Rimini.
Five months later on 23 March 1994, Giulietta Masina died of lung cancer.
Located in a mental institution for women, financial backers considered the subject had no potential and the project was abandoned.
Fellini welcomed the assignment as it allowed him "to secure another extension on his draft order".
A gifted caricaturist, much of the inspiration for his sketches was derived from his own dreams while the films-in-progress both originated from and stimulated drawings for characters, decor, costumes and set designs.
The film’s opening scene anticipates ''Amarcord'' while its most surreal sequence involves an ecclesiastical fashion show in which nuns and priests roller skate past shipwrecks of cobwebbed skeletons.
His first humorous article appeared in the "Postcards to Our Readers" section of Milan’s ''Domenica del Corriere''.
Produced by Franco Cristaldi, the seriocomic movie became Fellini’s second biggest commercial success after ''La Dolce Vita''.
After meeting Jungian psychoanalyst Dr. Ernst Bernhard in early 1960, he read Jung's autobiography, ''Memories, Dreams, Reflections'' (1963).
In California for the ceremony, Fellini toured Disneyland with Walt Disney the day after.
The director's overriding concern with developing a poetic form of cinema was first outlined in a 1965 interview he gave to ''The New Yorker'' journalist Lillian Ross: "I am trying to free my work from certain constrictions – a story with a beginning, a development, an ending.
Several months later, Masina fell down the stairs and suffered a miscarriage.
Installed in a family pensione, he met another lifelong friend, the painter Rinaldo Geleng.
Despite various famous Italian actors favouring the Communists, Fellini, who was not left-wing, supported Christian Democracy (DC), opposed the '68 Movement, and befriended Giulio Andreotti.
Condemned as a "public sinner" for ''La Dolce Vita'', Fellini responded with ''The Temptations of Doctor Antonio'', a segment in the omnibus ''Boccaccio '70''.
His father, Urbano Fellini (1894–1956), born to a family of Romagnol peasants and small landholders from Gambettola, moved to Rome in 1915 as a baker apprenticed to the Pantanella pasta factory.
Fellini was born on 20 January 1920, to middle-class parents in Rimini, then a small town on the Adriatic Sea.
The fire and the rose, as it were, became one.
In 1924, Fellini started primary school in an institute run by the nuns of San Vincenzo in Rimini, attending the Carlo Tonni public school two years later.
In Brussels later that year, a panel of thirty professionals from eighteen European countries named Fellini the world’s best director and ''8½'' the best European film of all time.
Various film related material and personal papers of Fellini are contained in the Wesleyan University Cinema Archives to which scholars and media experts from around the world may have full access.
Due to Loren’s unavailability, the project was shelved and resurrected twenty-five years later as ''Lovers and Liars'' (1981), a comedy directed by Mario Monicelli with Goldie Hawn and Giancarlo Giannini.
''Nights of Cabiria'' was adapted as the Broadway musical ''Sweet Charity'' and the movie ''Sweet Charity'' (1969) by Bob Fosse starring Shirley MacLaine.
Writing for radio while attempting to avoid the draft, Fellini met his future wife Giulietta Masina in a studio office at the Italian public radio broadcaster EIAR in the autumn of 1942.
Organized by his publisher Diogenes Verlag in 1982, the first major exhibition of 63 drawings by Fellini was held in Paris, Brussels, and the Pierre Matisse Gallery in New York.
The memorial service was held in Studio 5 at Cinecittà attended by an estimated 70,000 people.
Despite scalpers selling tickets at 1000 lire, crowds queued in line for hours to see an “immoral movie” before the censors banned it.
In a career spanning almost fifty years, Fellini won the Palme d'Or for ''La Dolce Vita'', was nominated for twelve Academy Awards, and directed four motion pictures that won Oscars in the category of Best Foreign Language Film.
A backstage comedy set among the world of small-time travelling performers, it featured Giulietta Masina and Lattuada’s wife, Carla del Poggio.
Conducting interviews for ''CineMagazzino'' also proved congenial: when asked to interview Aldo Fabrizi, Italy’s most popular variety performer, he established such immediate personal rapport with the man that they collaborated professionally.
He hired cinematographer Gianni Di Venanzo, among key personnel.
Highlighting the music of Nino Rota, the film was selected at Cannes (among the films in competition was Orson Welles’s ''Othello'') and then retracted.
Infused with the surrealistic satire that characterized the young Fellini’s work at ''Marc’Aurelio'', the film ridiculed a crusader against vice, interpreted by Peppino De Filippo, who goes insane trying to censor a billboard of Anita Ekberg espousing the virtues of milk.
In 1947, Fellini and Sergio Amidei received an Oscar nomination for the screenplay of ''Rome, Open City''.
Fellini improvised as he filmed, using as a guide a rough treatment written with Pinelli.
American singer Lana Del Rey has cited Fellini as an influence.
He became involved with Italian Neorealism when Roberto Rossellini, at work on ''Stories of Yesteryear'' (later ''Rome, Open City''), met Fellini in his shop proposing he contribute gags and dialogue for the script .
Specializing in humorous monologues, Fabrizi commissioned material from his young protégé.
