Some also today characterize the European Union as the pioneering example of federalism in a multi-state setting, in a concept termed the federal union of states.
Although the drafts of both the Maastricht treaty and the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe mentioned federalism, the reference never made it to the text of the treaties adopted by consensus.
Some Christians argue that the earliest source of political federalism (or federalism in human institutions; in contrast to theological federalism) is the ecclesiastical federalism found in the Bible.
It can thus be defined as a form of government in which there is a division of powers between two levels of government of equal status.
Because the states were preexisting political entities, the U.S. Constitution did not need to define or explain federalism in any one section but it often mentions the rights and responsibilities of state governments and state officials in relation to  the federal government.
39 that the US Constitution "is in strictness neither a national nor a federal constitution; but a composition of both.
For example, James Madison (author of the US Constitution) wrote in Federalist Paper No.
From 1938 until 1995, the U.S. Supreme Court did not invalidate any federal statute as exceeding Congress' power under the Commerce Clause.
Each municipality has a "little constitution", called "organic law" (''lei orgânica'').
The strongest advocates of European federalism have been Germany, Italy, Belgium and Luxembourg while those historically most strongly opposed have been the United Kingdom, Denmark and France (with conservative heads of state and governments).
In the current arrangement, The Seventh Schedule of the Indian Constitution delimits the subjects of each level of governmental jurisdiction, dividing them into three lists:
An amendment to the constitution of the United States must be ratified by three-quarters of either the state legislatures, or of constitutional conventions specially elected in each of the states, before it can come into effect.
* Due to its relatively small size (approximately one percent) the German-speaking Community of Belgium does not have much influence on national politics.
In modern times, a process of devolution in the United Kingdom has decentralised power once again.
In the United States, federalism originally referred to belief in a stronger central government.
Government has been devolved to the Scottish Parliament, the National Assembly for Wales and the Northern Ireland Assembly.
It was in this sense that James Madison in ''Federalist 39'' had referred to the new United States as 'neither a national nor a federal Constitution, but a composition of both' (i.e.
In Canada, where Quebec separatism has been a political force for several decades, the "federalist" impulse aims to keep Quebec inside Canada.
The Democratic-Republicans mainly believed that: the Legislature had too much power (mainly because of the Necessary and Proper Clause) and that they were unchecked; the Executive had too much power, and that there was no check on the executive; a dictator would arise; and that a bill of rights should be coupled with the constitution to prevent a dictator (then believed to eventually be the president) from exploiting or tyrannizing citizens.
On the other hand, Belgian federalism is federated with three components.
59%), and to a much lesser extent German (ca.
The chairman of the Walloon Parliament stated on July 17, 2008 that, "''Brussels would take an  attitude''".
The Federalist Party of the United States was opposed by the Democratic-Republicans, including powerful figures such as Thomas Jefferson.
Decisions in a federal system are made at the base of the organisation and flow upwards so ensuring that power remains decentralized in the hands of all.
In Presbyterian denominations, the local church is ruled by elected elders, some of which are ministerial.
As well as reflecting the federal structure of the state this may guarantee that the self-governing status of the component states cannot be abolished without their consent.
After the American Civil War, the federal government increased greatly in influence on everyday life and in size relative to the state governments.
In a federal system, power is not delegated into the hands of a few (obviously a "federal" government or state is a centralized system).
The federal government acquired no substantial new powers until the acceptance by the Supreme Court of the Sherman Anti-Trust Act.
The term ''federalist'' describes several political beliefs around the world depending on context.
It is often perceived as an optimal solution for states comprising different cultural or ethnic communities.
They point to the structure of the early Christian Church as described (and prescribed, as believed by many) in the New Testament.
Brussels' parliament passed the resolution on July 18, 2008:
England does not have its own parliament and English affairs continue to be decided by the Westminster Parliament.
Some scholars have suggested, however, that federalism can divide countries and result in state collapse because it creates proto-states.
Federalism may encompass as few as two or three internal divisions, as is the case in Belgium or Bosnia and Herzegovina.
the Dutch and French Communities of Belgium).
American government has evolved from a system of dual federalism to one of associative federalism.
However, municipalities do not have an elected legislative assembly.
The Brazilian Constitution of 1988 introduced a new component to the ideas of federalism, including municipalities as federal entities.
Later, a third tier was added in the form of Panchayats and Municipalities.
Over the years various modifications have been proposed to the Constitution of the Philippines, including possible transition to a federal system as part of a shift to a parliamentary system.
Usually, a federation is formed at two levels: the central government and the regions (states, provinces, territories), and little to nothing is said about second or third level administrative political entities.
The acquisition of new powers by a federal government may occur through formal constitutional amendment or simply through a broadening of the interpretation of a government's existing constitutional powers given by the courts.
Almost every country allows some degree of regional self-government, in federations the right to self-government of the component states is constitutionally entrenched.
'''Federalism''' refers to the mixed or compound mode of government, combining a general government (the central or 'federal' government) with regional governments (provincial, state, ''Land'', cantonal, territorial or other sub-unit governments) in a single political system.
To exercise your autonomy by joining self-managing organisations and, therefore, agreeing to abide by the decisions you help make is not a denial of that autonomy (unlike joining a hierarchical structure, where you forsake autonomy within the organisation).
Spain is a unitary state with a high level of decentralisation, often regarded as a federal system in all but name or a "federation without federalism".
However, more than 140 years later, the original system has gradually evolved into a quasi-centralist form of government.
In 1998 a set of eight unelected Regional assemblies, or chambers, was created to support the English Regional Development Agencies, but these were abolished between 2008 and 2010.
The federalists, on the other hand, argued that it was impossible to list all the rights, and those that were not listed could be easily overlooked because they were not in the official bill of rights.
28," suggested that both levels of government would exercise authority to the citizens' benefit: "If their the peoples' rights are invaded by either, they can make use of the other as the instrument of redress."
In referendums to amend the constitutions of Australia and Switzerland it is required that a proposal be endorsed not just by an overall majority of the electorate in the nation as a whole, but also by separate majorities in each of a majority of the states or cantons.
The power delegated to the federal government was significantly expanded by the Supreme Court decision in McCulloch v. Maryland (1819), amendments to the Constitution following the Civil War, and by some later amendments—as well as the overall claim of the Civil War, that the states were legally subject to the final dictates of the federal government.
The constitutions of Germany and the United States provide that all powers not specifically granted to the federal government are retained by the states.
This specific dual form of federalism, with the special position of Brussels, consequently has a number of political issues—even minor ones—that are being fought out over the Dutch/French-language political division.
The country has been quoted as being "an extraordinarily decentralized country", with the central government accounting for just 18% of public spending, 38% for the regional governments, 13% for the local councils, and the remaining 31% for the social security system.
The United States of Venezuela were subsequently incorporated under a "Federation of Sovereign States" upon principles borrowed from the Articles of Confederation of the United States of America.
India has a multi-party system,with political allegiances frequently based on linguistic, regional and caste identities, necessitating coalition politics, especially at the Union level.
European federalism originated in post-war Europe; one of the more important initiatives was Winston Churchill's  speech in Zürich in 1946.
:''The Parliament of the Brussels-Capital Region  approves with great majority a resolution claiming the presence of Brussels itself at the negotiations  of the reformation of the Belgian State.''
In 2004, Philippine President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo established the Consultative Commission which suggested such a Charter Change but no action was taken by the Philippine Congress to amend the 1987 Constitution.
In 1999, the Government of Canada established the Forum of Federations as an international network for exchange of best practices among federal and federalizing countries.
neither a single large unitary state nor a league/confederation among several small states, but a hybrid of the two).
The structures are termed, respectively, the federal state (or federation) and the federal union of states (or federal union).
During the French Revolution, especially in 1793, "federalism" had an entirely different meaning.
Leveraged off the successful development of laser fusion energy, the United States and The People's Republic of China join forces to change the world.
The Union Government alone can make laws relating to the  subjects mentioned in the Union List.
This difference is one of the elements which makes the Belgian issue so complicated.
Their common meaning until the late eighteenth century was a simple league or inter-governmental relationship among sovereign states based upon a treaty.
The Constitution originally provided for a two-tier system of government, the Union Government (also known as the Central Government), representing the Union of India, and the State governments.
An affirmative resolution concerning Brussels' place in the federal system passed in the parliaments of  Wallonia and Brussels.
Since the presidency of François Mitterrand (1981-1995), the French authorities have adopted a much more pro-European Unification position, as they consider that a strong EU is presenting the best "insurance"  against a unified Germany which might become too strong and thus a threat for its neighbours.
Federations often employ the paradox of being a union of states, while still being states (or having aspects of statehood) in themselves.
It is common that during the historical evolution of a federation there is a gradual movement of power from the component states to the centre, as the federal government acquires additional powers, sometimes to deal with unforeseen circumstances.
This is determined by the absence or presence of a right of secession for the parts.
Most European federalists want this development to continue within the European Union.
All of Russia's subdivisional entities are known as subjects, with some smaller entities, such as the republics enjoying more autonomy than other subjects on account of having an extant presence of a culturally non-Russian ethnic minority or, in some cases, majority.
In the 1890s the governments of these colonies all held referendums on becoming a unified, self-governing "Commonwealth" within the British Empire.
In the futurist story  On Deception Watch: A World Federation Novel by David H. Spielberg, a plausible high-tech path is created to an economic-based new paradigm for the legitimacy of governance.
Movements associated with the establishment or development of federations can exhibit either centralising or decentralising trends.
A distinguishing aspect of Indian federalism is that unlike many other forms of federalism, it is asymmetric.
Dual federalism holds that the federal government and the state governments are co-equals, each sovereign.
In the course of the nineteenth century the meaning of federalism would come to shift, strengthening to refer uniquely to the novel compound political form, while the meaning of confederalism would remain at a league of states.
* Flanders is the region associated with Belgium's Dutch-speaking majority, i.e.
Where every component state of a federation possesses the same powers, we are said to find 'symmetric federalism'.
The lower house of a federal legislature is usually directly elected, with apportionment in proportion to population, although states may sometimes still be guaranteed a certain minimum number of seats.
Federalism also finds expression in ecclesiology (the doctrine of the church).
Notably, the states of Germany retain the right to act on their own behalf at an international level, a condition originally granted in exchange for the Kingdom of Bavaria's agreement to join the German Empire in 1871.
This author identifies two distinct federal forms, where before only one was known, based upon whether sovereignty (conceived in its core meaning of ultimate authority) resides in the whole (in one people) or in the parts (in many peoples).
Mexico is an intermediate case, in that municipalities are granted full-autonomy by the federal constitution and their existence as autonomous entities (''municipio libre'', "free municipality") is established by the federal government and cannot be revoked by the states' constitutions.
A federal upper house may be based on a special scheme of apportionment, as is the case in the senates of the United States and Australia, where each state is represented by an equal number of senators irrespective of the size of its population.
In 1995 the Supreme Court rejected the Gun-Free School Zones Act in the Lopez decision, and also rejected the civil remedy portion of the Violence Against Women Act of 1994 in the ''United States v. Morrison'' decision.
East Germany) from 1952 to 1990.
It represents the central form in the pathway of regional integration or separation, bounded on the less integrated side by confederalism and on the more integrated side by devolution within a unitary state.
Modern Germany abandoned federalism only during Nazism (1933–1945) and in the DDR (''German Democratic Republic'' a.k.a.
Within the French-speaking Community of Belgium, there is a geographical and political distinction between Wallonia and Brussels for historical and sociological reasons.Historically, the Walloons were for a federalism with three components and the Flemings for two.
Moreover, the federal constitution determines which powers and competencies belong exclusively to the municipalities and not to the constituent states.
It was a political movement to weaken the central government in Paris by devolving power to the provinces.
There is also one autonomous region, the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao.
the Flemish Community.
The structures of most federal governments incorporate mechanisms to protect the rights of component states.
Under the division of powers of the European Union in the Lisbon Treaty, powers which are not either exclusively of European competence or shared between EU and state as concurrent powers are retained by the constituent states.
The post-Imperial nature of Russian subdivision of government changed towards a generally autonomous model which began with the establishment of the USSR (of which Russia was governed as part).
To this day, elements of federalism can be found in almost every Christian denomination, some more than others.
Section 91 of the constitution gives rise to federal authority for legislation, whereas section 92 gives rise to provincial powers.
Federalism is distinguished from confederalism, in which the general level of government is subordinate to the regional level, and from devolution within a unitary state, in which the regional level of government is subordinate to the general level.
Brazil is one of the biggest federal governments.
As in ''political federalism'', in presbyterian ecclesiology there is shared sovereignty.
However, since the Civil War Era, the national courts often interpret the federal government as the final judge of its own powers under dual federalism.
Each greater level of assembly has ruling authority over its constituent members.
Areas of contest include legislation with respect to regulation of the economy, taxation, and natural resources.
The Federal War ended in 1863 with the signing of the Treaty of Coche by both the centralist government of the time and the Federal Forces.
They have more powers than the later expanded arrangement for other Spanish regions, or the Spain of the autonomous communities (called also the "coffee for everyone" arrangement), partly to deal with their separate identity and to appease peripheral nationalist leanings, partly out of respect to specific rights they had held earlier in history.
In Brazil, the fall of the monarchy in 1889 by a military ''coup d'état'' led to the rise of the presidential system, headed by Deodoro da Fonseca.
A First Ministers conference of the prime minister and the provincial premiers is the de facto highest political forum in the land, although it is not mentioned in the constitution.
If their laws conflict with each other, the law made by the Union Government will prevail.
Working together to solve common problems and organize common efforts to reach common goals is not centralization and those who confuse the two make a serious error -- they fail to understand the different relations of authority each generates and confuse obedience with co-operation."
Besides, unlike in the federal system, the main taxes are taken centrally from Madrid (except for the Basque Country and Navarre, which were recognized in the Spanish democratic constitution as charter territories drawing from historical reasons) and then distributed to the Autonomous Communities.
Each church then sends representatives or commissioners to presbyteries and further to a general assembly.
The terms 'federalism' and 'confederalism' both have a root in the Latin word ''foedus'', meaning "treaty, pact or covenant."
Devolution in the UK began with the Government of Ireland Act 1914 which granted home rule to Ireland as a constituent country of the former United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland.
A group calling itself the Cyrenaican Transitional Council issued a declaration of autonomy on 6 March 2012; this move was rejected by the National Transitional Council in Tripoli.
For example, presbyterian church governance resembles parliamentary republicanism (a form of ''political federalism'') to a large extent.
UK federal government was proposed as early as 1912 by the Member of Parliament for Dundee, Winston Churchill, in the context of the legislation for Irish Home Rule.
In addition, the ''Necessary and Proper Clause'' gives the federal government the ''implied power'' to pass any law "necessary and proper" for the execution of its express powers.
*geographically defined Regions (federated States: Brussels-Capital (de facto Greater Brussels), Flanders and Wallonia).
* Wallonia is a French-speaking area, except for the German-speaking so-called East Cantons (''Cantons de l'est'').
However, the Flemish representatives in the Parliament of the Brussels Capital-Region voted in favour of the Brussels resolution, with the exception of one party.
Since the 1997 referendums in Scotland and Wales and the Good Friday Agreement in Northern Ireland, three of the four constituent countries of the UK now have some level of autonomy.
*linguistic ''communities'' of the country, French (ca.
As he wrote in ''Mein Kampf'', "National Socialism must claim the right to impose its principles on the whole German nation, without regard to what were hitherto the confines of federal states."
This situation, however, does not erase the traits of a confederation in the Belgian system.
*Union List includes subjects of national importance such as defence of the country, foreign affairs, banking, communications and currency.
This was reaffirmed by the Tenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, which reserves all powers and rights that are not delegated to the Federal Government as left to the States and to the people.
*State List contains subjects of State and local importance such as police, trade, commerce, agriculture and irrigation.
:This need for co-operation does not imply a centralized body.
In Canada the system of federalism is described by the division of powers between the federal parliament and the country's provincial governments.
China is the largest unitary state in the world by both population and land area.
Most actions by the federal government can find some legal support among the express powers, such as the Commerce Clause, whose applicability has been narrowed by the Supreme Court in recent years.
In Australia, this latter requirement is known as a ''double majority''.
Instead of adopting a federal model, the UK has relied on gradual devolution to decentralise political power.
In Australia, if a proposed amendment will specifically impact one or more states, then it must be endorsed in the referendum held in each of those states.
In Canada, the provincial governments represent regional interests and negotiate directly with the central government.
However, tensions between territories can be found in federalist countries such as Canada and federation as a way to appease and quell military conflict has failed recently in places like Libya or Iraq, while the formula is simultaneously proposed and dismissed in countries such as Ukraine or Syria.
In general, two extremes of federalism can be distinguished: at one extreme, the strong federal state is almost completely unitary, with few powers reserved for local governments; while at the other extreme, the national government may be a federal state in name only, being a confederation in actuality.
Where a federation has a bicameral legislature the upper house is often used to represent the component states while the lower house represents the people of the nation as a whole.
This is often done in recognition of the existence of a distinct culture in a particular region or regions.
By the definition of most political scientists, South Africa counts as a federal state in practice.
The current Spanish constitution has been implemented in such a way that, in many respects, Spain can be compared to countries which are undeniably federal.
In Britain, an Imperial Federation was once seen as (''inter alia'') a method of solving the Home Rule problem in Ireland; federalism has long been proposed as a solution to the "Irish Problem", and more lately, to the "West Lothian question".
It was liberalized in the aftermath of the Soviet Union, with the reforms under Boris Yeltsin preserving much of the Soviet structure while applying increasingly liberal reforms to the governance of the constituent republics and subjects (while also coming into conflict with Chechen secessionist rebels during the Chechen War).
The Constitution of some countries like Canada and India, on the other hand, state that powers not explicitly granted to the provincial governments are retained by the federal government.
*Concurrent List includes subjects of common interest to both the Union Government as well as the State Governments, such as education, forest, trade unions, marriage, adoption and succession.
For matters not directly dealt with in the constitution, the federal government retains residual powers; however, conflict between the two levels of government, relating to which level has legislative jurisdiction over various matters, has been a longstanding and evolving issue.
In Canada, federalism typically implies opposition to sovereigntist movements (most commonly Quebec separatism).
The Philippines is a unitary state with some powers devolved to Local Government Units (LGUs) under the terms of the Local Government Code.
However, in order to manage the tensions present in the Spanish transition to democracy, the drafters of the current Spanish constitution avoided giving labels such as 'federal' to the territorial arrangements.
In Spain, the Basques and Catalans, as well as the Galicians, spearheaded a historic movement to have their national specificity recognized, crystallizing in the "historical communities" such as Navarre, Galicia, Catalonia, and the Basque Country.
80% of the population speaks French and ca.
On one hand, this means that the Belgian political landscape, generally speaking, consists of only two components: the Dutch-speaking population represented by Dutch-language political parties, and the majority populations of Wallonia and Brussels, represented by their French-speaking parties.
Article 370 makes special provisions for the state of Jammu and Kashmir as per its Instrument of Accession.
The government of India is based on a 3 tiered system, in which the Constitution of India delineates the subjects on which each tier of government has executive powers.
The model of Australian federalism adheres closely to the original model of the United States of America, although it does so through a parliamentary Westminster system rather than a presidential system.
In contrast, Europe has a greater history of unitary states than North America, thus European "federalism" argues for a weaker central government, relative to a unitary state.
In a speech in Dundee on 12 September, he proposed that England should also be governed by regional parliaments, with power devolved to areas such as Lancashire, Yorkshire, the Midlands and London as part of a federal system of government.
The distinction stems from the fact that "federalism" is situated in the middle of the political spectrum between a confederacy and a unitary state.
In a centralized system, we must stress, power rests at the top and the role of those below is simply to obey (it matters not if those with the power are elected or not, the principle is the same).
Headquartered in Ottawa, the Forum of Federations partner governments include Australia, Brazil, Canada, Ethiopia, Germany, India, Mexico, Nigeria, and Switzerland.
Although the Constitution does not say so, India is now a multilingual federation.
The federal government has certain ''express powers'' (also called ''enumerated powers'') which are powers spelled out in the Constitution, including the right to levy taxes, declare war, and regulate interstate and foreign commerce.
Similarly, in European Union politics, federalists mostly seek greater EU integration.
Were this not the case a federation would not be a single sovereign state, per the UN definition.
This aspect of Belgian federalism helps to explain the difficulties of partition; Brussels, with its importance, is linked to both Wallonia and Flanders and vice versa.
Asymmetric federalism exists where states are granted different powers, or some possess greater autonomy than others do.
Currently, there are 85 federal subjects of Russia.
Its distinctive feature, exemplified in the founding example of modern federalism of the United States of America under the Constitution of 1787, is a relationship of parity between the two levels of government established.
The modern American usage of the word is much closer to the European sense.
Thus the assemblies will confederate at several levels in order to develop and co-ordinate common policies to deal with common problems.
However, the anarchist definition of federalism tends to differ from the definition of federalism assumed by pro-state political scientists.
An explicit and legal recognition of federalism as such is promoted by parties such as Podemos, United Left and, more recently, the Spanish Socialist Workers' Party.
The Spanish Socialist party has recently considered the idea of enshrining a federal Spain, in part, due to the increase of the Spanish peripheral nationalisms and the Catalan proposal of self-determination referenda for creating a Catalan State in Catalonia, either independent or within Spain.
The following is a brief description of federalism from section I.5 of ''An Anarchist FAQ'':
They were therefore initially synonyms.
Anarchists are against the State but are not against political organization or "governance"—so long as it is self-governance utilizing direct democracy.
Rather, rights in specific cases were to be decided by the judicial system of courts.
The Regions of England continue to be used in certain governmental administrative functions.
Scottish and Welsh nationalism have been increasing in popularity, and since the Scottish independence referendum, 2014 there has been a wider debate about the UK adopting a federal system with each of the four home nations having its own, equal devolved legislatures and law-making powers.
Critics of devolution often cite the West Lothian Question, which refers to the voting power of non-English MPs on matters affecting only England in the UK Parliament.
The U.S. Constitution was written as a reaction to the Articles of Confederation, under which the United States was a loose confederation with a weak central government.
Following the partition of Ireland in 1921 which saw the creation of the sovereign Irish Free State (which eventually evolved into the modern day Republic of Ireland), Northern Ireland retained its devolved government through the Parliament of Northern Ireland, the only part of the UK to have such a body at this time.
In Europe, "Federalist" is sometimes used to describe those who favor a common federal government, with distributed power at regional, national and supranational levels.
In a federation, the division of power between federal and regional governments is usually outlined in the constitution.
In this Federation, each State had a "President" of its own that controlled almost every issue, even the creation of "State Armies," while the Federal Army was required to obtain presidential permission to enter any given state.
20% Dutch with the city being an enclave of the Flemish region and officially a bilingual area.
The Brussels region emerges as a third component.
One method, known as 'intrastate federalism', is to directly represent the governments of component states in federal political institutions.
Accordingly, the idea of a strong, centralized government has very negative associations in German politics, although the Progressive political movements in Germany (Liberals, Social Democrats) were advocating at the time of the Second German Empire (1871-1918) to abolish (or to reshape) the majority of German federated states of that era, as they were considered to be mostly monarchist remnances of the feudal structures of the Middle Ages.
In their arguments, this is particularly demonstrated in the Council of Jerusalem, described in Acts chapter 15, where the Apostles and elders gathered together to govern the Church; the Apostles being representatives of the universal Church, and elders being such for the local church.
Some federal constitutions also provide that certain constitutional amendments cannot occur without the unanimous consent of all states or of a particular state.
