Members of the Republican party planned to vote evenly for Jefferson and Burr because they did not want for it to seem as if their party was divided.
The term "Federalist" was considered by some to be misleading.
The party was closely linked to the modernizing, urbanizing, financial policies of Alexander Hamilton.
The rebels dispersed and there was no fighting.
Benjamin Franklin once quipped that Adams was a man always honest, often brilliant, and sometimes mad.
To strengthen their coalitions and hammer away constantly at the opposition, both parties sponsored newspapers in the capital (Philadelphia) and other major cities.
Foreign affairs continued to be the central concern of American politics, for the war raging in Europe threatened to drag in the United States.
It existed from the early 1790s to 1816; its remnants lasted into the 1820s.
After the collapse of the Federalist Party in the course of the 1824 presidential election, most surviving Federalists (including Daniel Webster) joined former Republicans like Henry Clay to form the National Republican Party, which was soon combined with other anti-Jackson groups to form the Whig Party in 1833.
Hamilton proposed the ambitious Hamiltonian economic program that involved assumption of the state debts incurred during the American Revolution, creating a national debt and the means to pay it off, and setting up a national bank, along with creating tariffs.
The idea was that the British were so dependent on American supplies that they would come to terms.
International affairs&nbsp;— the French Revolution and the subsequent war between royalist Britain and republican France&nbsp;— decisively shaped American politics in 1793–1800, and threatened to entangle the nation in wars that "mortally threatened its very existence."
Shortly before Hamilton's death, some Federalist leaders (see Essex Junto) began courting Jefferson's Vice-President and Hamilton's nemesis Aaron Burr in an attempt to swing New York into an independent confederation with the New England states, which along with New York were supposed to secede from the United States after Burr's election to Governor.
Just as importantly, American politics by the 1820s accepted the two-party system whereby rival parties stake their claims before the electorate, and the winner takes control of majorities in state legislatures and the Congress, and gains governorships and the presidency.
The Federalists favored Britain in the war, and by far most of America's foreign trade was with Britain; hence a new treaty was called for.
John Fries was sentenced to death for treason, but received a pardon from Adams.
Acting aggressively, Genêt outfitted privateers that sailed with American crews under a French flag and attacked British shipping.
For economic and philosophical reasons, the Federalists tended to be pro-British&nbsp;– the United States engaged in more trade with Great Britain than with any other country&nbsp;– and vociferously opposed Jefferson's Embargo Act of 1807 and the seemingly deliberate provocation of war with Britain by the Madison Administration.
The War of 1812 went poorly for the Americans for two years.
The Republicans crusaded against the Alien and Sedition laws, and the new taxes, and proved highly effective in mobilizing popular discontent.
The membership was aging rapidly, but a few young men from New England did join the cause, most notably Daniel Webster.
The mission eventually succeeded, the "Quasi-War" ended, and the new army was largely disbanded.
As a neutral party, the United States argued, it had the right to carry goods anywhere it wanted.
Parties were considered to be divisive and harmful to republicanism.
Hamilton and Adams intensely disliked one another, and the Federalists split between supporters of Hamilton ("High Federalists") and supporters of Adams.
If either France or Britain agreed to stop their violations of American neutrality, the U.S. would cut off trade with the other country.
During the proceedings of the Hartford Convention, secession from the Union was discussed, though the resulting report listed a set of grievances against the Democratic-Republican federal government and proposed a set of Constitutional amendments to address these grievances.
If the Three-Fifths Compromise had not been enacted, he most likely would have won reelection since many Federalist legislatures removed the right to select electors from their constituents in fear of a Democratic victory.
Insurgents in western Pennsylvania shut the courts and hounded federal officials, but Jeffersonian leader Albert Gallatin mobilized the western moderates, and thus forestalled a serious outbreak.
:Thanks to the framers, American conservatism began on a genuinely lofty plane.
As time went on, the Federalists lost appeal with the average voter and were generally not equal to the tasks of party organization; hence, they grew steadily weaker as the political triumphs of the Republican Party grew.
The Tammany Society in New York City highly favored Madison; the Federalists finally adopted the club idea in 1808.
Clinton, denouncing Madison's weak leadership and incompetent preparations for war, could count on New England and New York.
Therefore, they denounced the Jay Treaty as an insult to American prestige, a repudiation of the French alliance of 1777, and a severe shock to Southern planters who owed those old debts, and who were never to collect for the lost slaves the British captured.
Their political opponents, the Democratic-Republicans led by Thomas Jefferson, denounced most of the Federalist policies, especially the bank and implied powers, and vehemently attacked the Jay Treaty as a sell-out of republican values to the British monarchy.
Thus Adams was the winner by a margin of three electoral votes, and Jefferson, as the runner-up, became Vice President under the system set out in the Constitution prior to the ratification of the 12th Amendment.
The Republicans wanted to pressure Britain to the brink of war (and assumed that America could defeat a weak Britain).
He hoped for a favorable new treaty and for repayment of the debts owed to France.
The Jay Treaty passed, and the Federalists won most of the major legislative battles in the 1790s.
Massachusetts and Connecticut were the party strongholds.
After the dissolution of the final Federalist congressional caucus in 1825, the last traces of Federalist activity came in Delaware and Massachusetts state politics in the late 1820s, where in 1829 Harrison Gray Otis was elected Mayor of Boston, the last significant Federalist office holder in the United States.
Some former Federalists like James Buchanan, Louis McLane and Roger B. Taney became Jacksonian Democrats.
Many believed that if Jefferson won the election it would be the end of the newly formed United States.
In New England and in some districts in the middle states the Federalists clung to power, but the tendency from 1800 to 1812 was steady slippage almost everywhere, as the Republicans perfected their organization and the Federalists tried to play catch-up.
They demanded financial assistance from Washington to compensate for lost trade and proposed constitutional amendments requiring a two-thirds vote in Congress before an embargo could be imposed, new states admitted, or war declared.
Patronage now became a factor.
The '''Federalist Party''' or '''First Hamiltonian Party''', was the first American political party.
By the early 1790s newspapers started calling Hamilton supporters "Federalists" and their opponents "Democrats," "Republicans," "Jeffersonians" (people who supported Thomas Jefferson, the 3rd president), or "Democratic-Republicans."
Though his reputation waned considerably following his death, Joseph Dennie ran three of the most popular and influential newspapers of the period, ''The Farmer's Weekly Museum'', the ''Gazette of the United States'' and ''Port Folio''.
Madison ran for reelection promising a relentless war against Britain and an honorable peace.
The Federalists called for a strong national government that promoted economic growth and fostered friendly relationships with Great Britain, as well as opposition to revolutionary France.
One possible alternative was war with Britain, a war that America was ill-prepared to fight.
Paris in 1793 sent a new minister, Edmond Charles Genêt (known as ''Citizen Genêt''), who systematically mobilized pro-French sentiment and encouraged Americans to support France's war against Britain and Spain.
James Madison greatly disagreed with Hamilton, not just on this issue but on many others as well; he and John J. Beckley created the Anti-Federalist faction.
By a few hundred votes he carried the city—and thus the state legislature—and guaranteed the election of a Democratic-Republican President.
The parties were slowly coalescing groups; at first there were many independents.
Republicans distrusted Britain, bankers, merchants and did not want a powerful national government.
The affiliation of many Congressmen in the earliest years is an assignment by later historians.
Political parties had not been anticipated when the Constitution was drafted in 1787 and ratified in 1788, even though both Hamilton and Madison played major roles.
His attempts to manage politics in the national capital to get his plans through Congress, then, "brought strong" responses across the country.
Led by the last great Federalist, John Marshall as Chief Justice from 1801 to 1835, the Supreme Court carved out a unique and powerful role as the protector of the Constitution and promoter of nationalism.
The majority of the Founding Fathers were originally Federalists.
The Federalist Massachusetts Governor had already secretly sent word to England to broker a separate peace accord.
James Madison, Alexander Hamilton, John Marshall, John Jay, James Wilson,, and, above all, John Adams aspired to create a republic in which the values so precious to conservatives  might flourish: harmony, stability, virtue, reverence, veneration, loyalty, self-discipline, and moderation.
Washington warned in his Farewell Address against involvement in European wars, and lamented the rising North-South sectionalism and party spirit in politics that threatened national unity.
Washington, seeing the need to assert federal supremacy, called out 13,000 state militia, and marched toward Washington, Pennsylvania, to suppress this Whiskey Rebellion.
Aaron Burr brilliantly organized his forces in New York City in the spring elections for the state legislature.
All of the state, county, and town judges were potential and generally active workers.
Hamilton became embittered over his loss of political influence and wrote a scathing criticism of Adams' performance as President of the United States in an effort to throw Federalist support to Charles Cotesworth Pinckney; inadvertently this split the Federalists and helped give the victory to Jefferson.
Merrill Jensen, in his book "The American Revolution Within America", writes:
Alexander Hamilton, knowing the election was lost anyway, went public with a sharp attack on Adams that further divided and weakened the Federalists.
Hamilton's thwarting of Aaron Burr's ambitions for the second time was too much for Burr to bear.
Those Federalists such as John Quincy Adams (John Adams' own son) and Rufus King willing to work with him were rewarded with senior diplomatic posts, but there was no punishment of the opposition.
By 1790 Hamilton started building a nationwide coalition.
The Federalists, notably Hamilton, were distrustful of "the people," the French, and the Republicans.
Washington never considered himself a member of any party, but broadly supported most Federalist policies.
Washington attacked the societies as illegitimate; many disbanded.
Federalist policies called for a national bank, tariffs, and good relations with Great Britain as expressed in the Jay Treaty negotiated in 1794.
In the elections of 1798 the Federalists did very well, but this issue started hurting the Federalists in 1799.
Thus the policy and the will of one country are subjected to the policy and will of another.
Intellectually, Federalists were profoundly devoted to liberty.
Jefferson left office, ending the coalition cabinet and allowing the Federalists to dominate.
Cash poor, they were outraged that they had been singled out to pay off the "financiers and speculators" back East, and to salary the federal revenue officers who began to swarm the hills looking for illegal stills.
After 1816 the Federalists had no national power base apart from John Marshall's Supreme Court.
The only Federalist president was John Adams; although George Washington was broadly sympathetic to the Federalist program, he remained officially non-partisan during his entire presidency.
Adams' peace moves proved popular with the Federalist rank and file, and he seemed to stand a good chance of re-election in 1800.
However, Hamilton's influence cost Burr the governorship of New York, a key in the Essex Junto's plan, just as Hamilton's influence had cost Burr the Presidency nearly 4 years before.
Jefferson remained at Monticello to oversee the laying of bricks to a section of his home.
Jefferson had a very successful first term, typified by the Louisiana Purchase, which was ironically supported by Hamilton but opposed by most Federalists at the time as unconstitutional.
They fielded their last presidential candidate (Rufus King) in 1816, and their last serious vice-presidential candidate (Richard Stockton) in 1820.
He was re-elected without opposition in 1792.
There were the state officers, the assistants, and a large majority of the Assembly.
The Republicans nominated Madison for the presidency in 1808.
These supporters developed into the organized Federalist Party, which was committed to a fiscally sound and nationalistic government.
They had some local support in New England, New York, eastern Pennsylvania, Maryland and Delaware.
The Federalists continued for several years to be a major political party in New England and the Northeast, but never regained control of the Presidency or the Congress.
Hamilton developed the concept of implied powers and successfully argued the adoption of that interpretation of the United States Constitution.
To what physical, moral, or political energy shall this flourishing state of things be ascribed?
Hamilton distrusted Vice President Adams&nbsp;— who felt the same way about Hamilton&nbsp;— but was unable to block his claims to the succession.
The Sedition Act made it a crime to print false, scandalous, and malicious criticisms of the federal government, but it conspicuously failed to criminalize criticism of Vice President Thomas Jefferson.
(Lafayette had already fled into exile, and Thomas Paine went to prison in France.)
Several Democratic-Republican newspaper editors were convicted under the Act and fined or jailed, and three Democratic-Republican newspapers were shut down.
In terms of "classical conservatism", the Federalists had no truck with European-style aristocracy, monarchy, or established religion.
By the time the Federalist "ambassadors" got to Washington, the war was over and news of Andrew Jackson's stunning victory in the Battle of New Orleans had raised American morale immensely.
Federalist policies favored factories, banking, and trade over agriculture, and thus became unpopular in the growing Western states.
Catholics in Maryland were generally Federalists.
Bache in particular targeted Washington himself as the front man for monarchy who must be exposed.
Republicans protested against the treaty, but the Federalists controlled the Senate and they ratified it by exactly the necessary ⅔ vote, 20–10, in 1795.
The Federalists were dominated by businessmen and merchants in the major cities who supported a strong national government.
This opposition by Hamilton would lead to his fatal duel with Burr in July 1804.
In the South, the Federalists steadily lost ground everywhere.
In the process, what began as a capital faction soon assumed status as a national faction and then, finally, as the new Federalist party."
To Bache, Washington was a cowardly general and a money-hungry baron who saw the Revolution as a means to advance his fortune and fame, Adams was a failed diplomat who never forgave the French their love of Benjamin Franklin and who craved a crown for himself and his descendants, and Alexander Hamilton was the most inveterate monarchist of them all.
Thus the nation was at war during the 1812 presidential election, and war was the burning issue.
Now he was dead and many of the pro-American aristocrats in France were exiled or executed.
His patronage policy was to let the Federalists disappear through attrition.
Many of those executed had been friends of the United States, such as the Comte D'Estaing, whose fleet had fought alongside the Americans in the Revolution.
This sent the election to the House of Representatives to break the tie.
With its passing partisan hatreds and newspaper feuds on the decline, the nation entered the "Era of Good Feelings", marked by the absence of all but one political party.
Angry petitions flowed in from three dozen Democratic-Republican Societies created by Citizen Genêt.
Though there had been strong words and disagreements, contrary to the Federalists fears, there was no war and no ending of one government system to let in a new one.
As a reward he was selected by the Republican caucus in Congress as their vice presidential candidate.
Adams was popular among the Federalist rank and file, but had neglected to build state or local political bases of his own, and neglected to take control of his own cabinet.
It was called "quasi" because there was no declaration of war, but escalation was a serious threat.
In the South the party had lingering support in Maryland, but elsewhere was crippled by 1800 and faded away by 1808.
Federalists warned that American republicans threatened to replicate the horrors of the French Revolution, and successfully mobilized most conservatives and many clergymen.
In their second national convention, in 1812, the Federalists, now the peace party, nominated DeWitt Clinton, the dissident Republican mayor of New York City, and an articulate opponent of the war.
Tricked by Napoleon into believing France had acceded to his demands, Madison turned his wrath on Britain, and the War of 1812 began.
Even though Britain was concentrating its military efforts on its war with Napoleon, the United States still failed to make any headway on land, and was effectively blockaded at sea by the Royal Navy.
Some of these issues dated to the Revolution, such as boundaries, debts owed in each direction, and the continued presence of British forts in the Northwest Territory.
There is but one answer to these inquiries: Public credit is restored and established.
It opens the door to foreign influence and corruption, which find a facilitated access to the government itself through the channels of party passions.
Recalled to Paris for execution, Genêt kept his head and instead went to New York, where he became a citizen and married the daughter of Governor Clinton.
The "ambassadors" hastened back to Massachusetts, but not before they had done fatal damage to the Federalist Party.
An undeclared "Quasi-War" with France from 1798 to 1800, saw each side attacking and capturing the other's shipping.
Washington refused to run for a third term, establishing a two-term precedent that was to stand until 1940 and eventually to be enshrined in the Constitution as the 22nd Amendment.
To pay for it all they raised taxes on land, houses and slaves, leading to serious unrest.
The British raided and burned Washington, D.C. in 1814 and sent a force to capture New Orleans.
The war was especially unpopular in New England: the New England economy was highly dependent on trade, and the British blockade threatened to destroy it entirely.
It also indicated that if these proposals were ignored, then another convention should be called and given "such powers and instructions as the exigency of a crisis may require".
Their Washington Benevolent Societies were semi-secret membership organizations which played a critical role in every northern state; they held meetings and rallies and mobilized Federalist votes.
The election hinged on New York: its electors were selected by the legislature, and given the balance of north and south, they would decide the presidential election.
In all, about a thousand or eleven hundred dependent officer-holders were described as the inner ring which could always be depended upon for their own and enough more votes within their control to decide an election.
However the Federalists gained 14 seats in Congress.
Hamilton had known of the Essex Junto (whom Hamilton now regarded as apostate Federalists), and Burr's plans and opposed them vehemently.
James Madison, Hamilton's ally in the fight to ratify the United States Constitution, who would later be joined by Thomas Jefferson, opposed Hamilton's program.
In every county there was a sheriff with his deputies.
It was aided by the supreme court, whose influence as a nationalizing factor now first became apparent.
The British agreed to evacuate the western forts, open their West Indies ports to American ships, allow small vessels to trade with the French West Indies, and set up a commission that would adjudicate American claims against Britain for seized ships, and British claims against Americans for debts incurred before 1775.
The Federalists, at the peak of their popularity, took advantage by preparing for an invasion by the French Army.
It agitates the Community with ill-founded jealousies and false alarms; kindles the animosity of one part against another, foments occasionally riot and insurrection.
The Federalists had enough weight in the House to swing the election in either direction.
Oxford-trained British historian Patrick Allitt concludes that Federalists promoted many positions that would form the baseline for later American conservatism, including the rule of law under the Constitution, republican government, peaceful change through elections, judicial supremacy, stable national finances, credible and active diplomacy, and protection of wealth.
Many Federalists held to the belief that this was the end of the United States and that the experiment they had begun had ended in failure.
Jefferson's supporters usually called themselves "Republicans" and their party the "Republican Party."
serves always to distract the Public Councils, and enfeeble the Public Administration.
Three Massachusetts "ambassadors" were sent to Washington to negotiate on the basis of this report.
For 15 months the Embargo wrecked American export businesses, largely based in the Boston-New York region, causing a sharp depression in the Northeast.
As a result, his cabinet answered more to Hamilton than to himself.
The Federalists, with twice as many newspapers at their command, slashed back with equal vituperation; John Fenno and "Peter Porcupine" (William Cobbett) were their nastiest pensmen, and Noah Webster their most learned; Hamilton subsidized the Federalist editors, wrote for their papers, and in 1801 established his own paper, the ''New York Evening Post.''
The "Old Republicans," led by John Randolph of Roanoke, refused to form a coalition with the Federalists and instead set up a separate opposition since Jefferson, Madison, Gallatin, Monroe, John C. Calhoun and Clay had in effect adopted Federalist principles of implied powers to purchase the Louisiana Territory, and after the failures and lessons of the War of 1812, raised tariffs to protect factories, chartered the Second national bank, promoted a strong army and navy and promoted internal improvements.
The party controlled the federal government until 1801, when it was overwhelmed by the Republican opposition led by Thomas Jefferson.
This was the Federalist machine.
They were increasingly seen as aristocratic and unsympathetic to democracy.
Cities were usually Federalist; frontier regions were heavily Republican.
Federalists now ridiculed Republicans as "democrats" (meaning in favor of mob rule) or "Jacobins" (a reference to The Terror in France).
Alexander Hamilton, James Madison, and many others can all be considered Federalists.
Genêt's extremism seriously embarrassed the Jeffersonians and cooled popular support for promoting the French Revolution and getting involved in its wars.
Although Jefferson managed to repeal the Judiciary Act of 1801 and thus dismiss many Federalist judges, their effort to impeach Supreme Court Justice Samuel Chase in 1804 failed.
The French revolutionaries guillotined King Louis XVI in January 1793, leading the British to declare war to restore the monarchy.
Militia officers, state's attorneys, lawyers, professors and schoolteachers were in the van of this "conscript army."
In addition America hoped to open markets in the British Caribbean and end disputes stemming from the naval war between Britain and France.
This was classical conservatism in its most authentic expression.
In one part of Pennsylvania the Fries' Rebellion broke out, with people refusing to pay the new taxes.
The Federalist Party came into being between 1792 and 1794 as a national coalition of bankers and businessmen in support of Alexander Hamilton's fiscal policies.
(This unintended complication led directly to the proposal and ratification of the 12th Amendment.)
After an American delegation was insulted in Paris in the XYZ affair (1797), public opinion ran strongly against the French.
The whole change reconciled the federalists to their absorption into the republican party.
Some younger leaders tried to emulate the Democratic-Republican tactics, but their overall disdain of democracy along with the upper class bias of the party leadership eroded public support.
Jefferson wrote on February 12, 1798:
Hamilton had over 2,000 Treasury jobs to dispense, while Jefferson had one part-time job in the State Department, which he gave to journalist Philip Freneau to attack the Federalists.
The Republicans denounced Hamilton, Adams, and even Washington as friends of Britain, as secret monarchists, and as enemies of the republican values.
After 1800 the major Federalist role came in the judiciary.
Genêt funded local Democratic-Republican Societies that attacked Federalists.
The Republicans, some of whom had been strong Francophiles, responded with support, even through the Reign of Terror, when thousands were guillotined, though it was at this point that many began backing away from their pro-France leanings.
Ideologically the controversy between Republicans and Federalists stemmed from a difference of principle and style.
These men would eventually become the Republicans under Thomas Jefferson.
The rebellion evaporated in late 1794 as Washington approached, personally leading the army (only two sitting Presidents have directly led American military forces, Washington during the Whiskey Rebellion and Madison in an attempt to save the White House during the War of 1812).
The Democratic-Republicans nominated New York's Governor Clinton to replace Federalist John Adams as vice president, but Adams won.
In early 1793, Jefferson secretly prepared resolutions introduced by William Branch Giles, Congressman from Virginia, designed to repudiate Hamilton and weaken the Washington Administration.
"We are all republicans—we are all federalists," proclaimed Jefferson in his inaugural address.
A few younger leaders did appear, notably Daniel Webster.
The King had been decisive in helping America achieve independence.
Historian John P. Diggins says that:
The election of 1796 was the first partisan affair in the nation's history, and one of the more scurrilous in terms of newspaper attacks.
After the Democratic-Republicans, whose base was in the rural South, won the hard-fought election of 1800, the Federalists never returned to power.
The Jay Treaty in 1794–95 was the effort by Washington and Hamilton to resolve numerous difficulties with Britain.
Hamilton defended his administration of the nation's complicated financial affairs, which none of his critics could decipher until the arrival in Congress of the Republican Albert Gallatin in 1793.
In foreign affairs, they supported neutrality in the war between France and Great Britain.
These policies included the funding of the national debt and also assumption of state debts incurred during the Revolutionary War, the incorporation of a national Bank of the United States, the support of manufactures and industrial development, and the use of a tariff to fund the Treasury.
