Its quite dark but uplifting too.
The tour promoter however suggested that Renegades should play slightly bigger venues for the second tour than of those seen on their debut.
The album received mostly favourable reviews, although some critics as Will Dean of BBC Online did not praise the album giving it a mixed response
Feeder's first official release was a two-track EP entitled ''Two Colours'', released in 1995 which was only available at the band's early gigs.
Shortly before the release of ''Swim'', a cassette tape titled ''Two Tracker'' was given away free with the magazines ''Kerrang!''
During the band's first U.S. tour, Grant broke his ankle and picked up other injuries, while finding it hard to sleep at nights.
The album saw the band take on much more of a commercially influenced sound, and also the appearance of Moog synthesizers, while being lyrically focused on a comedic approach, as with "Seven Days in the Sun", but also dark emotions, such as those shown on "Turn", "Oxygen", and "Satellite News".
Feeder garnered media attention in 2001 for their third album, ''Echo Park'', and its lead single, "Buck Rogers", which later become a UK Top 5 single.
Shortly before the single's release, the band's rise up to the mainstream was recognised by the now defunct Scottish Television live music show ''Boxed Set'', where a half-hour-long live-set with a studio audience was played.
Dean Deavall then departed from Casino to concentrate more on his time with Feeder, including his own band The High Hurts.
A third single, "Turn" reached #27 in July before festival season.
That's just the way the music business is.
Their show at the Birmingham National Indoor Arena was reviewed by ''Kerrang!
As of August 2003, the album has shipped 300,000 units in the UK going platinum, with counter sales standing at 293,000 as of February 2005.
After a tour of Japan which saw Luna Sea guitarist Inoran join them on stage at the Daikanyama Unit for a performance of "Breed" (originally recorded by Nirvana), Feeder returned to the UK for a sell-out tour in late October which started at the Leeds Metropolitan University, before ending at Southampton University.
I have a lot of respect for Coldplay and we have toured with them, but we are two totally different bands, both dynamically and musically.
In a 2008 interview with ''Kerrang!''
The Cardiff branch later closed in late 2010, one day shy of its seventh anniversary of opening.
In August 26, the band released the single "Eskimo", along with its music video.
It was during this time that lead-singer Grant Nicholas wrote a series of songs relating to their emotions and reactions to Jon's death, which formed their fourth album ''Comfort in Sound''.
The album charted at number six in the UK.
While playing in different bands on the Newport gig circuit, Grant and Jon became friends.
The album helped them win their only major headline slot to date, being at 2005's Download Festival, shortly before supporting U2 for a brief period on their ''Vertigo Tour'', which was followed by an appearance at the ''Live 8'' concert in Edinburgh (the second charity event the band played that year after ''Tsunami Relief Cardiff'').
Feeder would end the year seeing their then latest album appear at #39 on ''Q'''s end of year list, with "Feeling a Moment" voted the 98th best song of the year by its readers.
Its about pulling yourself out of a big hole".
The band were invited to the Reading and Leeds festivals that year, headlining the second stage at Reading on the first day which took place on 23 August, before heading off to Leeds the next.
Feeder's music has been inspired by a wide variety of artists and styles, including The Police, Nirvana, and The Smashing Pumpkins.
alongside the heavy rock magazine ''Metal Hammer'' giving the album their respective ''Album of the Week'' accolades.
'', that he was considering bringing in another guitarist for their live gigs.
It was then later announced that they would be appearing at the Hevy Music Festival in Folkestone.
It was during the campaign for ''Echo Park'' that the band played another slot on the main stage at the Reading and Leeds festival, including T in the Park.
At this time Japanese bassist Taka Hirose and drummer Jon Lee were playing in different covers bands, but did not know each other.
The single charted at number five, becoming the band's first top 10 entry in the singles chart before appearing on Top of the Pops again.
Four singles were released commercially, with those being "Come Back Around" (#14), "Just the Way I'm Feeling" (#10), "Forget About Tomorrow" (#12), and "Find the Colour" (#24), which was released following their V2003 appearance and ''Kerrang!''
gave the album 4/5 (KKKK) which indicates "blinding", while citing that the band "hit their stride" on the album, alongside suggesting that the album is "fat free and stripped to the bone".
Karl's first live appearances with the band, after a series of university events were at the UK leg of the Sonisphere Festival, stating that this would be their only UK festival appearance of 2009, as they would be working on their seventh studio album.
Later on that month the website announced a six date tour and the release of a tour-only EP which was released on "Big Teeth Music", also their own record label.
later included the album in their ''200 Albums For the Year 2000'' list in the "Essential Britrock" category.
In Japan, Feeder have also gained a cult following, in which their last five studio albums have all charted in the top 100 between 2002 and 2012.
Radio'' that he was "pissed off" with the review their magazine counterpart gave them, while citing "It was a very unfair review and reviewed by the wrong person".
The title track was due to be a single, but was later pulled despite promotional CDs already being pressed and sent to radio.
A week before the album's release, the band played the main stage of the Reading and Leeds festivals, while the title track from the album was at #20 in the singles chart.
In September 2011, the band revealed on their Facebook page that the recording of their yet-untitled eighth studio album is complete with only mixing on the final song to be finalised, before mastering then began on 30 September in New York.
In February 2015, "Buck Rogers" gained a silver certification for 200,000 physical sales, digital downloads and streaming points combined.
Here they previewed a new track titled "Sentimental", with the announcement that they have been in a recording studio in South Wales.
The album itself made the Irish top 20 artist album chart at #16, one week before its UK release.
It included a collection of B-sides from the ''Silent Cry'' album, plus two new songs.
Feeder are also one of Wales' most popular rock bands, highlighted in October 2003, by the display of Taka's bass guitar from the "Seven Days in the Sun" video at the Hard Rock Cafe in Cardiff and Grant's attendance at the branch's opening the same year.
Press response to the album was mixed.
With Karl playing drums for Robbie Williams, Natalie Imbruglia and Ben's Brother, Tim once again took over drum duties in the studio.
During this time in 1994 they recruited Taka Hirose via an advert in ''Loot'', which Taka placed himself.
The venue was later torn down in early 2009 and was also their last ever show as an Echo Label artist.
In Japan, ''Generation Freakshow'' improved upon the relatively disappointing chart position of ''Renegades'', when it entered at #57 and became their most successful studio album in almost four years.
Feeder hosted a trailer on YouTube titled "Coming Soon" on 2 December 2011 and had a message written in Morse code as "-... --- .-.
Grant later added "Each album is a journey and a reflection of the past, there is some stuff that touches on what has happened, but there are songs about love, songs of loss and songs about the future.
Although 2013 was their first full year on hiatus, they played one show that year at Reading University as a private event, while no other shows were played.
After a sell-out tour of two legs ending at the London Astoria, the album ''Echo Park'' entered at number five in the UK album charts, shortly after "Seven Days in the Sun", the album's second single charted at #14.
Despite having completely dropped out of mainstream radio play since 2008, while being relegated almost solely to alternative rock stations in the United Kingdom, ''Silent Cry'' reached #8 on the albums chart in its first week of release in 2008 with 16,000 units sold.
In July the band played at T in the Park, with an appearance at the Isle of Wight Festival the month previous.
In December of the same year they took on their only arena tour, after the album's first nationwide tour was a sell out with 50,000 tickets sold, and visited 21 different towns and cities in the United Kingdom over 23 different dates.
On its release week the album charted at number eight with sales of 16,029.
After ending their tour at the Portsmouth Pyramids Centre, a six track EP titled ''Seven Sleepers'' was released in Japan, the same time they toured there in March.
Some people thought it was a name change, Grant recording a solo album, while others got the idea from the start.
The resulting album ''Silent Cry'' was released on 16 June 2008.
The band have also had two chart appearances as featured or guest performers, with their appearance on the Band Aid 20 single in 2004 being their only number one single if regarded.
Overall unit sales for ''Swim'' stand at 40,000 as of February 2005.
Their back catalog which was initially issued on The Echo Label, was later re-issued by Sony Music Entertainment, thus allowing the distribution of this material to continue.
The album which was released to coincide with a week-long tour, however improved upon the respectable commercial response of ''Renegades'' by charting at #13, which increased the band's UK album charts span to fifteen years, while selling 7,338 units in the same week.
Shortly thereafter, they formed a band called Raindancer.
After the recording sessions were completed, the album's first single "Tangerine" was released and charted at #60 in the UK singles chart.
The band played at Hyde Park in August as part of a series of concerts to celebrate the 2012 Summer Olympics, which was preceded by an appearance at Lusty Glaze in Newquay, alongside performances in Wales and Ireland, with the video shoot for "Idaho" in between.
During their 2011 touring, Feeder introduced drummer Damon Wilson as a live regular and session musician.
The album is currently Feeder's best-seller with an estimated 503,706 units sold as of April 2012.
In an April 2010 interview with South Yorkshire newspaper ''The Star'', Grant expressed his disappointment with the side-project band's sudden increase in success and awareness, in which he claimed that he wanted the band to continue playing in clubs with a slower ascendency to the bigger venues.
The band then went on to play at the iTunes festival in July, which saw a live six-track EP release of their performance, before playing the 2008 Reading and Leeds festivals in August, on the main stage.
The result ''Polythene'', was one of the most critically acclaimed albums of 1997 with ''Metal Hammer'' and ''Kerrang!
This was followed by "Cement", charting at #53 and then the release of the album which charted at #65.
The subsequent ''Silent Cry'' tour was Feeder's longest playing up to 29 different dates, with many selling out.
In June 15, the band announced that the album would be titled ''All Bright Electric'' and it's scheduled to be released on September 30, 2016.
These were in aid of War Child who the band are patrons of, having earlier in the year visited The Congo as part of their work for the charity.
This marked their 6th studio album to appear in the Top 20 and the band's 9th album to appear on the chart regardless of position over the course of their career.
Most of the year was spent on the recording, and in 2006 the band announced in an interview with ''XFM'' that the album would be reminiscent of their earlier material.
Also included as an enhanced element was the video for "High".
In Japan it peaked at #53 which is currently higher than all their studio albums, but lower than the peak of ''The Singles''.
After completing their second and final tour as Renegades, the band then announced their new single "Call Out" under the name of Feeder before shortly revealing the name of their seventh album as ''Renegades''.
However, the album did not keep up this momentum while also not going platinum.
The album caused many critics to label the band "The UK's answer to the Smashing Pumpkins", and also draw comparisons to The Pixies and Talk Talk.
On 19 January 2012 the official music video for "Borders" was uploaded on YouTube.
They have spent a total of 180 weeks on the singles and albums charts combined with their own releases as of 2012, and have accumulated 25 top 75 singles between 1997 and 2012.
The album was after ten weeks on sales of 111,214 units, 22 percent ahead of ''Comfort in Sound'' at that stage.
On 6 December 2011 another trailer was released, announcing "Borders" as the first single from the new album, including a four-date tour.
In February 2012 after Feeder had completed a mini-tour, which ended in Inverness and started in Exeter, "Borders" charted at #52 giving the band their 25th top 75 single and their first official chart visit since 2008's "We Are the People".
On the 25th of February 2016, the band posted on their Facebook page, a CDR bearing their name in marker pen.
Grant told ''Kerrang!''
Grant later said in a documentary with ''Kerrang!
The album as of February 2005, has sold 89,000 copies.
I'm just being realistic.
In a 2011 interview with Cambridge-based webzine ''The Tab'', he elaborated on his position regarding these comparisons, saying, "Feeder have a much broader music dynamic musically, and we are a much heavier band, both live and on record.
The album focused mainly on themes such as loss, depression, grief and positivity, while dedicating "Quickfade" to Jon.
The album campaign helped the band in August 2001 win the "Best British Live Act" accolade at the ''Kerrang!
Feeder employed Australian Damon Wilson and former Mexicolas drummer Tim Trotter for sessions and touring commitments for ''Renegades'' (2010), and they have since employed drummer Karl Brazil.
In January 2002, Jon Lee committed suicide in his Miami home, resulting in the band keeping out of the public eye for most of the year.
The album was their first release to be certified platinum, (with ''Echo Park'' going platinum later on).
Alongside only making one chart appearance in 2004, Feeder also only made one live appearance during the year as part of the ''Carling Live 24'' event, playing their show at the Hammersmith Apollo on 1 May.
After signing with The Echo Label in 1994, the group toured with Scarborough band B.l.o.w.
"Dry" was re-recorded as a full band version after the original acoustic version appeared on "Suffocate" as a b-side.
Only one single was lifted from the album after its release, in which a re-recorded version of "Paperfaces" charted at #41.
Richardson was ultimately made an official member, remaining so until May 2009 when he returned to a reformed Skunk Anansie.
In January 2016, the band posted photos of themselves recording in Grant's home studio, 'The Treehouse'.
The album's final single, being the title track, was only available to buy as a limited edition of 3,000 CDs on their 2003 arena tour.
However, on 3 December 2005, they were forced to postpone a winter tour, after Grant picked up bleeds on his vocal cords the night before during a gig in Brighton, causing the show to be abandoned and later rescheduled along with the rest of the outstanding dates.
He described problems with promoters printing "Feeder" on the tickets, leading to a misunderstanding that a more mainstream set was expected.
It was then announced on 29 January 2016 that Feeder would headline the Big Top stage at the Isle of Wight Festival in June, with the band stating that it would be one of their only UK festival appearances that year.
"Borders" was released on CD, cassette and 7" on 30 January 2012, with the parent album ''Generation Freakshow'' originally scheduled with a release date of 26 March 2012 but later delayed until 23 April 2012.
That single's b-sides featured tracks from the sessions for that album, therefore revealing what sort of direction it would take on.
The only track from the sessions of the ''Renegades'' album to end up on ''Generation Freakshow'', was that of "Tiny Minds".
During the same year, on 25 October at 06:00 GMT after playing the Glasgow Barrowlands as part of their 29 date UK tour, the band's crew bus caught fire on the M62 motorway whilst travelling between Glasgow and Lincoln, destroying it and the crew's personal items.
We've been around for seven or eight years and I am not planning on giving up, but we're putting everything into this record and I'm just hoping that people like it".
Because of this, the single failed to chart while not attracting the same radio attention as "Borders".
Other singles included "Tumble and Fall" (top five), "Feeling A Moment" (#13), and "Pushing the Senses" (#30).
There is only a certain amount of money a label will put into a band.
In Japan, it would be the first time Feeder ever charted there.
The response the album received on a critical level was mixed, with Dan Genroe of ''Q'' magazine claiming that the listener will still be "feeling hungry half an hour later", alongside suggesting that the album is "hard to love".
"Just a Day", a b-side from "Seven Days in the Sun", later reached #12 in December.
After their return to the UK, they played their own headline tour with Everclear this time in the supporting position.
The latter was described on the inlay card, as one of the tracks that would be on their forthcoming debut album proper, with the working title ''Here in the Bubble'' (whose name was soon changed to ''Polythene'').
The release of the single on 8 January 2001 was coupled with a signing session at London's now defunct Tower Records store and then a TV appearance on ''Top of The Pops'' before the single charted.
In its second week the album then fell to number 30, with a third week drop to number 60 before leaving the top 75 albums listing.
in May 2004, "I've done some recording on my own in a little studio up by where I live in North London.
BBC Music praised the album, while ''Drowned in Sound'', despite negative reviews in the past, credited Feeder for creating another strong addition to their back catalogue.
The album reached number two on the UK albums chart with first week sales of 50,003 entering at number three, and was certified platinum in under three months, with a total of 497,700 units sold as of April 2012, including a gold certification in Ireland after charting at #13.
The working title for the album was originally ''A Life Through Headphones'', and was originally set to be a double album.
This was the first time Feeder released a cassette single since 2001's "Just a Day".
All of the new songs performed live as Renegades were listed on the album with the free download track "Fallen" being a b-side on "Call Out" and was released as a download and vinyl single, with the album released on 5 July.
Although the band have not had a top 10 release since 2008, they have still charted two more Top 20 albums, with the latest being 2012's ''Generation Freakshow''.
Their early material showcased a heavy rock sound reminiscent of grunge, but the band would later introduce more acoustic aspects into their music, including elements of pianos and string orchestras.
The band then changed their name to Feeder, named after Grant's pet goldfish.
I demo the album in its full form before the rest of the band play on it.
...", which translates to "Borders".
The album also made the top ten in Europe with a debut top 40 peak in Japan at #37, while "Save Us" was its second and final single in the UK, charting at #34 in late July.
Two more singles were released before and after their main stage debut at the Reading festival, with "Crash" making number #48, while "High" charted at number #24.
A track called "Don't Bring Me Down", which featured on the demo appeared as a b-side on the "Day In Day Out" single, albeit a different version to the demo recording.
"Miss You" from the album was given away by the band's official website as a free download in April, and gained over 8,000 downloads on its first day of release.
2002's ''Comfort in Sound'' is the band's best selling release, shifting over 503,706 units in the United Kingdom alone with ''The Singles'' taking second spot with 497,700 units.
Later on in 2012, Feeder took on one last tour for the year.
I just think it's lazy journalism."
Their top 75 singles tally, ties with artists such as Coldplay.
The lead single from album, "Universe of Life" was released on the same day.
Grant said in a ''Melody Maker'' interview that if the album did not sell well enough the band would probably split up; he said at the time that "It's the same with any band.
They stayed in the U.S. for the majority of the year, with a trip back to the UK for their V98 appearance.
In 2010, during the ''Renegades'' sessions, a number of tracks were left off the album before then being considered for inclusion for the follow-up to that album.
A version of the album included a DVD of all their videos filmed up to that point, along with extensive sleevenotes by Ben Johncock.
It has sold less than 50,000 units to date according to Chrysalis, the owners of the now defunct Echo Label.
The album was seen by Grant as more of an extension to ''Comfort in Sound'', as it focused on the same lyrical themes and musical styles, and also said that it had more of an organic sound, with more upbeat tracks added into the mix.
This was followed by a one-off gig on 12 June at the Proud Galleries in Camden, which sold out in six minutes.
They also re-issued the album in October 1997, with "High" included and the "Stereo World" b-side "Change" replacing "Waterfall" from the original track list.
In January 2002, Jon Lee committed suicide in his Miami home, after which the remaining members began to record and play with former Skunk Anansie drummer Mark Richardson.
Earlier on before the tour began, Nicholas was interviewed by website ''Mancunian Matters'' in which he told them that the band would take a break next year with no shows planned, although a follow-up album was mentioned alongside possible side-projects.
Shortly after the download release of "Soul Mates", Grant later posted a handwritten note on Facebook announcing the release date of his solo album, while also revealing "Feeder's heart still beats strong" and  has been working on new material.
The single was the Christmas number one, and became the year's biggest-selling UK single.
Alongside this, Feeder also headlined a major festival for the first (and currently only) time in their career, which was at the 2005 Download festival.
As of March 2003, the album has been certified gold shipping 100,000 units in the UK, with total counter sales standing at 110,000 as of February 2005.
Mark was replaced by session drummer Karl Brazil who had just come off tour with James Blunt, and had also played drums for British band Ben's Brother.
"Side By Side", which was a chart-eligible paid download in aid of the victims of the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami in Japan, charted at #91, before it ultimately did not appear on the UK version of the album, although did appear on the Japanese release.
When the album was released, the band's reputation was on the rise and it entered the UK albums chart at number eight, which was at the time an unexpected chart position for the band.
After the tour was completed, another six date tour was shortly announced with the band this time playing bigger venues.
Their 2008 UK tour, seen their first ever gig in Loughbrough, and their last ever show at the London Astoria on 18 November 2008.
The 2010 follow-up ''Renegades'', was less successful only spending two weeks in the chart after entering at #16, while also being their first since the aforementioned ''Polythene'' not to chart within the Top 10.
The album was released in October of the same year to widespread critical acclaim in the British music press, with ''Kerrang!''
The album was then released on 30 August 1999.
Sales of ''The Singles'', alongside a series of changes at Echo making them into an "Incubator label", enabled the company to report a "modest profit" for 2006.
The year ended with the band providing support for the Red Hot Chili Peppers at Wembley Arena and Manic Street Preachers at the Millennium Stadium.
The photography for the inlay of ''Swim'' was produced by Grant himself, while Chris Sheldon produced the recordings.
This inspired him to write "Insomnia", which later appeared on their second album.
The band released "Stereo World" as a single after appearing at the Reading festival.
Still, ''Renegades'' has yet to accumulate sales that approach or eclipse any of their other studio albums before this.
As there were not enough to fit on the album, more were recorded during the closing stages of the year, with the band taking a break from recording on 19 December, before resuming recording on 10 January 2011.
It was limited to 1,500 CDs and 1,000 7" vinyls.
This was followed by a small tour of Europe, South Africa and Australia, before a brief return to the UK ended their year.
During their U.S. tour, the band released a re-worked version of "Suffocate" for UK release, which charted at #37.
"Lost and Found" (which Grant described as "an urban love song") became the first single to promote the collection, and would reach #12 in the UK singles chart in May 2006, after completing their delayed winter tour, which ended at the LG Arena in Birmingham in front of 8,000 fans.
Feeder returned to the Reading and Leeds festivals after a four-year break, having a late slot on the main stage, before ending the year with a small tour of London, playing The Roundhouse, and The Coronet.
The album became only their second to appear on the end of year top 75 this time at #48, while becoming their first album to spend more than one week on the top 10.
It is however the band's most successful record based on peak chart positions in each country of release, while also being their only album so far to spawn a charting single outside of the UK and Ireland when "Feeling a Moment" peaked at #32 in Australia.
The side-project was used as a method to promote the seventh Feeder studio album titled ''Renegades'' at live shows where they would mainly play the new songs, thus avoiding having to play any of their hits if they played as Feeder.
"Down to the River / This Town" also became the final single from the album, released only as a download and vinyl on 6 December.
They formed an electronic duo called 'Temper Temper' after Jon left Newport band The Darling Buds.
award win for "Best British Band", beating competition from Muse and the Stereophonics, which Grant dedicated to Jon saying it was the award he had always wanted the band to win.
others like ''Rock Louder'' were more positive.
Musically, the album employed an indie rock feel to it, which also featured extended appearances of an acoustic guitar on some of its tracks.
In an interview with ''Heineken Music'', on 27 January 2011 Grant revealed that 19 or 20 songs are so far in the recording stages, while the album is planned to be released after their tour of the United Kingdom and Europe ends in March, and like ''Renegades'', looks likely to be released domestically on their own Big Teeth Music imprint.
"Idaho" became the third single from the album, released on 27 August 2012.
Looking back on this version of the band, Grant Nicholas explained in an interview with Culture Deluxe, that the project was not a big marketing plan, but announced it without saying exactly what was happening.
'', placing the album at first and sixth in their respective end of year lists.
I don't want to give too much away but there's one track called "Bitter Glass".
They released their fourth album, ''Comfort in Sound'' later that year, which touched on themes such as loss and coming to terms with death, while also exploring themes of positivity.
The side-project would cease in 2010 after playing their final gig as Renegades at that year's Sonisphere Festival.
This was then followed by a first appearance in four years at the Reading Festival, although in their lowest position since their 1996 debut, headlining the fourth stage.
''Renegades'' peaked at #16 in the UK album charts, giving them their seventh top 20 album with sales of 8,729, before being followed-up by the single release of the title track, also only on vinyl and download.
"Frequency" was produced by Coldplay producer Ken Nelson, while for the rest of the album, Gil Norton was on production duties.
