In this way he differed substantially from contemporaries such as Wagner and Berlioz, and even from Schumann and Chopin.
The piece is written for full choir, organ, and a treble or soprano soloist who has many challenging and extended solo passages.
In 1829, his sister Fanny wrote to him of "Bartholdy&nbsp;... this name that we all dislike".
Mendelssohn married Cécile Charlotte Sophie Jeanrenaud (10 October 1817&nbsp;– 25 September 1853), the daughter of a French Reformed Church clergyman, on 28 March 1837.
* the String Octet (1825)
The placement of No.
The ''Scottish Symphony'' (Symphony No.
Besides music, Mendelssohn's education included art, literature, languages, and philosophy.
He also wrote two concertinos (''Konzertstücke''), Opp.
He was deluged by offers of music from rising composers and would-be composers; amongst these was Richard Wagner, who submitted his early Symphony, which to Wagner's disgust Mendelssohn lost or mislaid.
The Leipzig Conservatoire (now the University of Music and Theatre Leipzig), which he founded, became a bastion of this anti-radical outlook.
Such opinions are evidence of how a more nuanced appreciation of Mendelssohn's work has developed over the last 50 years, together with the publication of a number of modern biographies placing his achievements in context.
For the Piano Trio No.
* the Overture ''A Midsummer Night's Dream'' (1826), which in its finished form also owes much to the influence of Adolf Bernhard Marx, at the time a close friend of Mendelssohn.
61), including the well-known ''Wedding March'', was written in 1843, seventeen years after the overture.
His enormous correspondence shows that he could also be a witty writer in German and English&nbsp;– sometimes accompanied by humorous sketches and cartoons in the text.
Scotland inspired two of his most famous works: the overture ''The Hebrides'' (also known as ''Fingal's Cave''); and the ''Scottish Symphony'' (Symphony No.
In 1824, the 15-year-old wrote his first symphony for full orchestra (in C minor, Op.&nbsp;11).
The orchestra and choir for the performance were provided by the Berlin Singakademie.
This Octet and his ''Overture'' to Shakespeare's ''A Midsummer Night's Dream'', which he wrote a year later in 1826, are the best-known of his early works.
But his novelty also extended to taking great care over tempo, dynamics and the orchestral players themselves&nbsp;– both rebuking them when they were recalcitrant and praising them when they satisfied him.
During 1829 and 1830 Mendelssohn wrote his Symphony No.
In 1869 Lind erected a plaque in Mendelssohn's memory at his birthplace in Hamburg.
When Friedrich Wilhelm IV came to the Prussian throne in 1840 with ambitions to develop Berlin as a cultural centre (including the establishment of a music school, and reform of music for the church), the obvious choice to head these reforms was Mendelssohn.
This includes a modern and fully researched catalogue of his works, the Mendelssohn-Werkverzeichnis (MWV).
Mendelssohn also edited a number of Bach's works for organ, and apparently discussed with Robert Schumann the possibility of producing a complete Bach edition.
At his London debut in 1829, he was noted for his innovatory use of a baton (then a great novelty).
The success of this performance, one of the very few since Bach's death and the first ever outside of Leipzig, was the central event in the revival of J. S. Bach's music in Germany and, eventually, throughout Europe.
It was his success at conducting at the Lower Rhine music festival of 1836 that led to him taking his first paid professional position as director at Düsseldorf.
Thus for example in a letter to his sister Rebecka, Mendelssohn rebukes her complaint about an unpleasant relative: "What do you mean by saying you are not hostile to Jews?
He was however reluctant to undertake the task, especially in the light of his existing strong position in Leipzig.
The book features as its leading character Mendelssohn, as the "Chevalier Seraphael", and remained in print for nearly 80 years.
His grave however remained unmolested during the National Socialist years.
In 1843 Mendelssohn founded a major music school&nbsp;– the Leipzig Conservatory, now the ''Hochschule für Musik und Theater "Felix Mendelssohn Bartholdy"'' or (in its own English self-designation) the ''Felix Mendelssohn Bartholdy University of Music and Theatre''&nbsp;– where he persuaded Ignaz Moscheles and Robert Schumann to join him.
5, known as the ''Reformation''.
His ''Songs Without Words'' are his most famous solo piano compositions.
Other prominent musicians, including string players Ferdinand David and Joseph Joachim and music theorist Moritz Hauptmann, also became staff members.
On his eighth visit in the summer of 1844, he conducted five of the Philharmonic concerts in London, and wrote:
All of Mendelssohn's oeuvre&nbsp;– including the most popular works such as the E minor Violin Concerto and the ''Italian Symphony''&nbsp;– has been explored more deeply, and prior concepts about the Victorian conventionality of the oratorio ''Elijah'' have been shed.
It was produced in Berlin in 1827, but coolly received.
His essentially conservative musical tastes, however, set him apart from many of his more adventurous musical contemporaries such as Franz Liszt, Richard Wagner and Hector Berlioz.
In Mendelssohn's last years the opera manager Benjamin Lumley tried to contract him to write an opera from Shakespeare's ''The Tempest'' on a libretto by Eugène Scribe, and even announced it as forthcoming in 1847, the year of Mendelssohn's death.
At another recital in 1837, where Mendelssohn played the piano for a singer, Robert Schumann ignored the soprano and wrote 'Mendelssohn accompanied like a God'.
13 (1827), which both show a remarkable grasp of the techniques and ideas of Beethoven's last quartets that Mendelssohn had been closely studying
The death of his sister Fanny on 14 May 1847 caused him great distress.
Upon Mendelssohn's death Lind wrote, "He was the only person who brought fulfillment to my spirit, and almost as soon as I found him I lost him again".
In the summer he visited Edinburgh, where he met among others the composer John Thomson, whom he later recommended to be Professor of Music at Edinburgh University.
Paul'', given at the Lower Rhenish Festival in Düsseldorf in 1836, shortly after the death of the composer's father, which much affected him; Felix wrote that he would "never cease to endeavour to gain his approval&nbsp;... although I can no longer enjoy it".
Lind's genius as a singer was unbounded, as was his desire for her success".
Mendelssohn's biographer Todd comments "The very popularity of the anthem in England&nbsp;... later exposed it to charges of superficiality from those contemptuous of Victorian mores".
At any rate, the whole music of romanticism e.g.
In general Mendelssohn's personal life seems to have been fairly conventional compared to those of his contemporaries Wagner, Berlioz, and Schumann&nbsp;– except for his relationship with Swedish soprano Jenny Lind, whom he met in October 1844, and with whom, it was rumoured, he became emotionally involved.
After a long period of relative denigration due to changing musical tastes and antisemitism in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, his creative originality has now been recognised and re-evaluated.
He is now among the most popular composers of the Romantic era.
A scholarly edition of Mendelssohn's complete works and correspondence is in preparation but is expected to take many years to complete, and will be in excess of 150 volumes.
In 1824 Mendelssohn studied under the composer and piano virtuoso Ignaz Moscheles, who however confessed in his diaries that he had little to teach him.
In 1829 Mendelssohn paid his first visit to Britain, where his former teacher Ignaz Moscheles, already settled in London, introduced him to influential musical circles.
A landmark event during Mendelssohn's Leipzig years was the premiere of his oratorio ''St.
Mendelssohn's reputation in England remained high throughout the 19th century.
4 and conducted his own ''Scottish Symphony'' with the Philharmonic Orchestra before the Queen and Prince Albert.
Fanny became a well-known pianist and amateur composer; originally Abraham had thought that she, rather than Felix, would be the more musical.
He was therefore not displeased to have the excuse to return to Leipzig.
In this form the piece was a success, and laid the foundations of his British reputation.
He is said to have tailored the aria "Hear Ye Israel" in his oratorio ''Elijah'' to Lind's voice, although she did not sing this part until after his death, at a concert in December 1848.
On Zelter's death in 1832, Mendelssohn had hopes of succeeding him as conductor of the Sing-Akademie zu Berlin.
1 in C minor for full-scale orchestra was written in 1824, when Mendelssohn was aged 15.
Between the ages of 12 and 14, Mendelssohn wrote 12 string symphonies for such concerts.
In the spring of that year Mendelssohn directed the Lower Rhenish Music Festival in Düsseldorf, beginning with a performance of Handel's oratorio ''Israel in Egypt'' prepared from the original score which he had found in London.
Zelter had almost certainly been recommended as a teacher by his aunt Sarah Levy, who had been a pupil of W. F. Bach and a patron of C. P. E. Bach.
25, 1831; 2 in D&nbsp;minor, Op.
A final tour of England left him exhausted and ill from a hectic schedule.
He remained stylistically conservative&nbsp;... feeling no need to attract attention with a display of 'revolutionary' novelty.
113 and 114, originally for clarinet, basset horn and piano; Op.
2 in F minor and Op.
Mendelssohn's travels in Italy inspired him to write the Symphony No.
His works show his study of Baroque and early classical music.
Mendelssohn wrote symphonies, concerti, oratorios, piano music and chamber music.
Mendelssohn's first published works were his three piano quartets, (1822–1825; Op.
Under the Nazis, "Mendelssohn was presented as a dangerous 'accident' of music history, who played a decisive role in rendering German music in the 19th century 'degenerate'."
In 1829, with the backing of Zelter and the assistance of actor Eduard Devrient, Mendelssohn arranged and conducted a performance in Berlin of Bach's ''St Matthew Passion''.
Prince Albert inscribed (in German), a libretto for the oratorio ''Elijah'' in 1847: To the noble artist who, surrounded by the Baal-worship of false art, has been able, like a second Elijah, through genius and study, to remain true to the service of true art.
He was brought up without religion until the age of seven, when he was baptised as a Reformed Christian.
Mendelssohn wrote the symphony-cantata ''Lobgesang'' (''Hymn of Praise'') in B-flat major, posthumously named Symphony No.
These works were ignored for over a century, but are now recorded and occasionally played in concerts.
3 in A minor) was written and revised intermittently between 1829 (when Mendelssohn noted down the opening theme during a visit to Holyrood Palace) and 1842, when it was given its premiere in Leipzig, the last of his symphonies to be performed in public.
Although the image was cultivated, especially after his death in the detailed family memoirs by his nephew Sebastian Hensel, of a man always equable, happy and placid in temperament, this was misleading.
35 (written between 1832 and 1837), and the ''Seven Characteristic Pieces'', Op.
In 1847 Mendelssohn attended a London performance of Meyerbeer's ''Robert le diable''&nbsp;– an opera which musically he despised&nbsp;– in order to hear Lind's British debut, in the role of Alice.
0" in A minor, 1822; 1 in G minor, Op.
On one occasion in the 1830s, when his wishes had been crossed, "his excitement was increased so fearfully&nbsp;... that when the family was assembled&nbsp;... he began to talk incoherently, and in English, to the great terror of them all.
Mendelssohn also wrote many smaller-scale sacred works for unaccompanied choir and for choir with organ.
Lili married Adolph Wach, later Professor of Law at Leipzig University.
Mendelssohn was a fine and enthusiastic artist in pencil and watercolour, a skill which he used throughout his life for his own amusement and that of his friends.
Such criticism of Mendelssohn for his very ability&nbsp;– which could be characterised negatively as facility&nbsp;– was taken to further lengths by Richard Wagner.
Throughout his short career he remained comfortably faithful to the musical status quo&nbsp;– that is, the "classical" forms, as they were already thought of by his time.
Paul Mendelssohn Bartholdy (1841–1880) was a noted chemist and pioneered the manufacture of aniline dye.
From at least May 1819 Felix (and his sister Fanny) studied counterpoint and composition with Carl Friedrich Zelter in Berlin.
The family moved to Berlin in 1811, leaving Hamburg in disguise fearing French revenge for the Mendelssohn bank's role in breaking Napoleon's Continental System blockade.
He wrote his first published work, a piano quartet, by the time he was 13.
Schumann and Wagner&nbsp;... was second-rate music from the very start, and real musicians took little notice of it.
Paul'' that his work was "characterized by a great, strict, very serious seriousness, a determined, almost importunate tendency to follow classical models, the finest, cleverest calculation, sharp intelligence and, finally, complete lack of naïveté.
His best-known works include his Overture and incidental music for ''A Midsummer Night's Dream'', the ''Italian Symphony'', the ''Scottish Symphony'', the overture ''The Hebrides'', his mature Violin Concerto, and his String Octet.
Mendelssohn's father was the banker Abraham Mendelssohn, the son of the German Jewish philosopher Moses Mendelssohn.
Mendelssohn was a noted conductor, both of his own works and of other composers.
Abraham Mendelssohn renounced the Jewish religion; he and his wife deliberately decided not to have Felix circumcised, in contravention of the Jewish tradition.
Cécile Mendelssohn Bartholdy died less than six years after her husband, on 25 September 1853.
In addition, there are several single-movement works for soloist and orchestra.
Other composers who were inspired to produce similar pieces of their own, included Charles-Valentin Alkan (his five sets of ''Chants'', each ending with a barcarole), Anton Rubinstein, Ignaz Moscheles, and Edvard Grieg.
However, the conservative strain in Mendelssohn, which set him apart from some of his more flamboyant contemporaries, bred a corollary condescension amongst some of them toward his music.
At Leipzig, Mendelssohn led the Gewandhaus orchestra to great heights; although concentrating on the great composers of the past (already becoming canonised as the 'classics') he also included new music by Schumann, Berlioz, Gade and many others (including of course his own music).
Things were different with Felix Mendelssohn, that halcyon master who, thanks to his easier, purer, happier soul, was quickly honored and just as quickly forgotten, as a lovely ''incident'' in German music.
4 in A major, known as the ''Italian Symphony''.
His frustration at his everyday duties in Düsseldorf, and the city's provincialism, led him to resign his position at the end of 1834.
However many critics, including Bernard Shaw, began to condemn Mendelssohn's music for its association with Victorian cultural insularity; Shaw in particular complained of the composer's "kid-glove gentility, his conventional sentimentality, and his despicable oratorio-mongering".
In 1835 Mendelssohn was named conductor of the Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra.
His attachment to Mlle.
Robert Schumann discovered the manuscript of Schubert's 9th Symphony and sent it to Mendelssohn, who promptly premiered it in Leipzig on 21 March 1839, more than a decade after Schubert's death.
The order of actual composition is: 1, 5, 4, 2, 3.
The couple had five children: Carl, Marie, Paul, Lili and Felix.
Felix and his siblings were first brought up without religious education, and were baptised by a Reformed Church minister in 1816, at which time Felix was given the additional names Jakob Ludwig.
Throughout his life Mendelssohn was wary of the more radical musical developments undertaken by some of his contemporaries.
In the course of ten visits to Britain during his life, totalling about 20 months, Mendelssohn won a strong following, sufficient for him to make a deep impression on British musical life.
Amongst those who appreciated Mendelssohn's conducting was Hector Berlioz, who in 1843, invited to Leipzig, exchanged batons with Mendelssohn, writing "When the Great Spirit sends us to hunt in the land of souls, may our warriors hang our tomahawks side by side at the door of the council chamber".
The pallbearers included Moscheles, Schumann and Niels Gade.
This was the start of a movement to downgrade Mendelssohn's status as a composer which lasted almost a century, the echoes of which still survive today in critiques of Mendelssohn's supposed mediocrity.
He was particularly well received in Britain as a composer, conductor and soloist, and his ten visits there&nbsp;– during which many of his major works were premiered&nbsp;– form an important part of his adult career.
An English Heritage blue plaque commemorating Mendelssohn was placed at 4 Hobart Place in Belgravia, London, in 2013.
posth., a fragment from 1844); two concertos for two pianos and orchestra, E major (MWV O5), which he wrote at 15, and A-flat major (MWV O6), at 17; and another double concerto, for violin and piano (1823).
Mendelssohn's mature symphonies are numbered approximately in the order that they were published, rather than the order in which they were composed.
Those for piano are the ''Rondo Brillante'', Op.&nbsp;29, of 1834; the ''Capriccio Brillante'', Op.
On his last visit to Britain in 1847, Mendelssohn was the soloist in Beethoven's Piano Concerto No.
It was probably Abraham Mendelssohn who procured the publication of Mendelssohn's early piano quartet by the house of Schlesinger.
Mendelssohn was invited to meet Goethe on several later occasions, and set a number of Goethe's poems to music.
This work is experimental, showing the influences of Beethoven and Carl Maria von Weber.
Mendelssohn was notably reluctant, either in his letters or conversation, to comment on his innermost beliefs; his friend Devrient wrote that "his deep convictions were never uttered in intercourse with the world; only in rare and intimate moments did they ever appear, and then only in the slightest and most humorous allusions".
Abraham was also disinclined to allow Felix to follow a musical career until it became clear that he seriously intended to dedicate himself to it.
Although Rosen feels that in his later years, without losing his craft or genius, the composer "renounced&nbsp;... his daring", he calls Mendelssohn's relatively late Violin Concerto in E minor "the most successful synthesis of the Classical concerto tradition and the Romantic virtuoso form".
22, of 1832; and the ''Serenade and Allegro Giocoso'' Op.
Mendelssohn had once described death, in a letter to a stranger, as a place "where it is to be hoped there is still music, but no more sorrow or partings".
Most are written in or translated into English, and remain highly popular.
Mendelssohn's relations with Berlioz, Liszt and others had been uneasy and equivocal.
In particular, his String Quartet No.
It is significant that the only musician with whom he remained a close personal friend, Ignaz Moscheles, was of an older generation and equally conservative in outlook.
His version of romanticism, already evident in his earliest works, consisted in musical "pictorialism" of a fairly conventional, objective nature (though exquisitely wrought).
35 for piano) a "masterpiece"; but in the same paragraph calls Mendelssohn "the inventor of religious kitsch in music".
54 (1841), the ''Rondo Capriccioso'', the set of six ''Preludes and Fugues'', Op.
He had a particular interest in classical literature and translated Terence's ''Andria'' for his tutor Heyse in 1825; Heyse was impressed and had it published in 1826 as a work of "his pupil, F****" i.e.
This extract from an originally secular 1840s composition, which Mendelssohn felt unsuited to sacred music, is ubiquitous at Christmas.
Following this rebuff, Mendelssohn divided most of his professional time over the next few years between Britain and Düsseldorf, where he was appointed musical director (his first paid post as a musician) in 1833.
Some, including ''Auf Flügeln des Gesanges'' (''On Wings of Song''), became popular.
The stern voice of his father at last checked the wild torrent of words; they took him to bed, and a profound sleep of twelve hours restored him to his normal state".
5, but completing it after both Nos.
Sarah Levy was a talented keyboard player in her own right, often playing with Zelter's orchestra at the Sing-Akademie zu Berlin, of which she and the Mendelssohn family were leading patrons.
Marie married Victor Benecke and lived in London.
The libretto was eventually set by Fromental Halévy.
This may have been because of Mendelssohn's youth, and fear of possible innovations; it was also suspected by some to be attributable to his Jewish ancestry.
However, at a vote in January 1833 he was defeated for the post by the less distinguished Carl Friedrich Rungenhagen.
Mendelssohn was the second of four children; his older sister Fanny also displayed exceptional and precocious musical talent.
In particular, Mendelssohn seems to have regarded Paris and its music with the greatest of suspicion and an almost puritanical distaste.
His primary organ works are the ''Three Preludes and Fugues'', Op.
As the critic H. L. Mencken concluded, if Mendelssohn indeed missed true greatness, he missed it "by a hair".
This could lead him into conflict with publishers; for instance, his edition of Handel's oratorio ''Israel in Egypt'' for the London Handel Society (1845) evoked an often contentious correspondence, with Mendelssohn refusing for example to add dynamics where not given by Handel, or to add parts for trombones.
Felix Mendelssohn was born on 3 February 1809, in Hamburg, at the time an independent city-state, in the same house where, a year later, the dedicatee and first performer of his Violin Concerto, Ferdinand David, was to be born.
Mercer-Taylor comments on the irony that "this broad-based reevaluation of Mendelssohn's music is made possible, in part, by a general disintegration of the idea of a musical canon", an idea which Mendelssohn "as a conductor, pianist and scholar" had done so much to establish.
His opera ''Die beiden Neffen'' (''The Two Nephews'') was rehearsed for him on his 15th birthday.
113 was orchestrated by the composer.
Mendelssohn was recognised early as a musical prodigy, but his parents were cautious and did not seek to capitalise on his talent.
He chose this position although he had also been offered direction of the opera house in Munich and the editorship of the prestigious music journal, the ''Allgemeine musikalische Zeitung''.
He was also a prolific composer from an early age.
This was an important influence on his future career.
The failure of this production left him disinclined to venture into the genre again.
Papers confirming this were alleged to exist, although their contents had not been made public.
Amongst the most famous is ''Hear My Prayer'', whose second half contains "O for the Wings of a Dove," which became extremely popular as a separate item.
As an adolescent, his works were often performed at home with a private orchestra for the associates of his wealthy parents amongst the intellectual elite of Berlin.
Moscheles preserved this outlook at the Leipzig Conservatory until his own death in 1870.
It is really sweet of you that you do not despise your family, isn't it?"
Mendelssohn's mature output contains numerous chamber works, many of which display an emotional intensity lacking in some of his larger works.
On embarking on his musical career, Felix did not entirely drop the name Mendelssohn as Abraham requested, but in deference to his father signed his letters and had his visiting cards printed using the form 'Mendelssohn Bartholdy'.
The first winner of the scholarship was Arthur Sullivan, then aged 14, in 1856.
In an 1829 letter to Felix, Abraham explained that adopting the Bartholdy name was meant to demonstrate a decisive break with the traditions of his father Moses: "There can no more be a Christian Mendelssohn than there can be a Jewish Confucius".
In the 1950s the scholar Wilfrid Mellers complained of Mendelssohn's "spurious religiosity which reflected the element of unconscious humbug in our morality".
But is there in art any originality of genius without naïveté?"
At the Leipzig Conservatoire Mendelssohn taught classes in composition and ensemble playing.
Some modern scholars have devoted considerable energy to demonstrate either that Mendelssohn was deeply sympathetic to his ancestors' Jewish beliefs, or that he was hostile to this and sincere in his Christian beliefs.
The music publisher Victor Novello who was present remarked 'He has done some things that seem to me impossible, even after I have heard them done.'
At his death Mendelssohn left some sketches for an opera on the story of the Lorelei.
A large portion of Mendelssohn's 750 works still remained unpublished in the 1960s, but most of them have now been made available.
Felix's funeral was held at the Paulinerkirche, Leipzig, and he was buried at the Dreifaltigkeitsfriedhof I in Berlin-Kreuzberg.
On subsequent visits he met Queen Victoria and her musical husband Prince Albert, who both greatly admired his music.
Charles Rosen in a chapter on Mendelssohn in his 1995 book ''The Romantic Generation'' both praises and criticizes the composer, calling him a "genius" with a "profound" comprehension of Beethoven and "the greatest child prodigy the history of Western music has ever known".
A contrasting opinion came from the pianist and composer Ferruccio Busoni, who considered Mendelssohn "a master of undisputed greatness" and "an heir of Mozart".
The family papers inherited by Marie and Lili's children form the basis of the extensive collection of Mendelssohn manuscripts, including the so-called 'Green Books' of his correspondence, now in the Bodleian Library at Oxford University.
A number of songs written by Mendelssohn's sister Fanny originally appeared under her brother's name; this may have been partly due to the prejudice of the family, and partly to her own retiring nature.
The music critic Henry Chorley, who was with him, wrote "I see as I write the smile with which Mendelssohn, whose enjoyment of Mdlle.
A replacement was erected in 2008.
65 (1845), of which Eric Werner wrote "next to Bach's works, Mendelssohn's Organ Sonatas belong to the required repertory of all organists".
Mendelssohn conducted this symphony on his first visit to London in 1829, with the orchestra of the Royal Philharmonic Society.
Paul'' seemed to many of Mendelssohn's contemporaries to be his finest work, and sealed his European reputation.
Frequent visitors to the salon organised by his parents at the family's home in Berlin included artists, musicians and scientists, amongst them Wilhelm and Alexander von Humboldt, and the mathematician Peter Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet (whom Mendelssohn's sister Rebecka would later marry).
The German Mendelssohn Scholarship for students at the Leipzig Conservatoire was discontinued in 1934 (and not revived until 1963).
