Third-wave feminism also seeks to challenge or avoid what it deems the second wave's essentialist definitions of femininity, which, they argue, over-emphasize the experiences of upper middle-class white women.
Some forms of feminism have been criticized for taking into account only white, middle class, and educated perspectives.
In Latin America, revolutions brought changes in women's status in countries such as Nicaragua, where feminist ideology during the Sandinista Revolution aided women's quality of life but fell short of achieving a social and ideological change.
Over the course of the 1970s, a large number of influential women accepted lesbian and bisexual women as part of feminism.
In international law, the ''Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women'' (CEDAW) is an international convention adopted by the United Nations General Assembly and described as an international bill of rights for women.
Emmeline Pankhurst was the most notable activist in England, with ''Time'' naming her one of the 100 Most Important People of the 20th Century stating: "she shaped an idea of women for our time; she shook society into a new pattern from which there could be no going back."
Later, the Chinese Communist Party created projects aimed at integrating women into the workforce, and claimed that the revolution had successfully achieved women's liberation.
In Liechtenstein, women were given the right to vote by the women's suffrage referendum of 1984.
Dianic Wicca is a feminist-centred thealogy.
Second-wave feminism is largely concerned with issues of equality beyond suffrage, such as ending gender discrimination.
These women were influenced by the Quaker theology of spiritual equality, which asserts that men and women are equal under God.
Thus, they seek to obtain knowledge through the examination of the experiences of women, and to "uncover the consequences of omitting, misdescribing, or devaluing them" to account for a range of human experience.
During the 1930s-1950s heyday of the big Hollywood studios, the status of women in the industry was abysmal and, while much has improved, many would argue that there is still much to be done.
They were followed by women in Italy (31%) and Argentina (29%).
Prior to this, in the 1970s, musicologists were beginning to discover women composers and performers, and had begun to review concepts of canon, genius, genre and periodization from a feminist perspective.
Feminist legal scholars claim that this fails to acknowledge women's values or legal interests or the harms that they may anticipate or experience.
Third-wave feminism distinguished itself from the second wave around issues of sexuality, challenging female heterosexuality and celebrating sexuality as a means of female empowerment.
While not being "anti-feminist", post-feminists believe that women have achieved second wave goals while being critical of third wave feminist goals.
Islamic feminists advocate women's rights, gender equality, and social justice grounded within an Islamic framework.
Riot grrls took an anti-corporate stance of self-sufficiency and self-reliance.
These anti-feminists argue, for example, that social acceptance of divorce and non-married women is wrong and harmful, and that men and women are fundamentally different and thus their different traditional roles in society should be maintained.
The first wave comprised women's suffrage movements of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, promoting women's right to vote.
The division of labour within households was affected by the increased entry of women into workplaces in the 20th century.
The social construct of masculinity is seen by feminism as problematic because it associates males with aggression and competition, and reinforces patriarchal and unequal gender relations.
Most western feminist historians assert that all movements working to obtain women's rights should be considered feminist movements, even when they did not (or do not) apply the term to themselves.
Lisa Lucile Owens argues that certain rights extended exclusively to women are patriarchal because they relieve women from exercising a crucial aspect of their moral agency.
Feminist leaders rooted in the second wave, such as Gloria Anzaldúa, bell hooks, Chela Sandoval, Cherríe Moraga, Audre Lorde, Maxine Hong Kingston, and many other non-white feminists, sought to negotiate a space within feminist thought for consideration of race-related subjectivities.
During the Spanish Civil War, Dolores Ibárruri (''La Pasionaria'') led the Communist Party of Spain.
In the early 1990s in the USA, third-wave feminism began as a response to perceived failures of the second wave and to the backlash against initiatives and movements created by the second wave.
In 1928 this was extended to all women over 21.
The Christian Bible refers to women in positions of authority in Judges 4:4 and Kings 22:14.
Women's suffrage began in Britain's Australasian colonies at the close of the 19th century, with the self-governing colonies of New Zealand granting women the right to vote in 1893 and South Australia granting female suffrage (the right to vote and stand for parliamentary office) in 1895.
However, as recent research has demonstrated, as people are exposed to self-identified feminists and to discussions relating to various forms of feminism, their own self-identification with feminism increases.
Patriarchy is a social system in which society is organized around male authority figures.
More recently, Broadview Press continues to issue 18th- and 19th-century novels, many hitherto out of print, and the University of Kentucky has a series of republications of early women's novels.
In 1956, President Gamal Abdel Nasser of Egypt initiated "state feminism", which outlawed discrimination based on gender and granted women's suffrage, but also blocked political activism by feminist leaders.
Many Jewish women have become leaders of feminist movements throughout their history.
Womanism emerged after early feminist movements were largely white and middle-class.
In South Korea, there was no difference between men and women (7%) on this measure.
The term ''first wave'' was coined retroactively to categorize these western movements after the term ''second-wave feminism'' began to be used to describe a newer feminist movement that focused on fighting social and cultural inequalities, as well political inequalities.
Some feminists are engaged with men's issues activism, such as bringing attention to male rape and spousal battery and addressing negative social expectations for men.
Other anti-feminists oppose women's entry into the workforce, political office, and the voting process, as well as the lessening of male authority in families.
Many Western feminists adapted the language and theories of black equality activism and drew parallels between women's rights and the rights of non-white people.
However, Hitler and Mussolini declared themselves as opposed to feminism, and after the rise of Nazism in Germany in 1933, there was a rapid dissolution of the political rights and economic opportunities that feminists had fought for during the pre-war period and to some extent during the 1920s.
The second Showalter calls "gynocriticism", in which the "woman is producer of textual meaning".
The movement was started by lesbians such as Cris Williamson, Meg Christian, and Margie Adam, African-American women activists such as Bernice Johnson Reagon and her group Sweet Honey in the Rock, and peace activist Holly Near.
Feminist views of pornography range from condemnation of pornography as a form of violence against women, to an embracing of some forms of pornography as a medium of feminist expression.
Feminists such as Catharine MacKinnon argue that women have very little control over their own bodies, with female sexuality being largely controlled and defined by men in patriarchal societies.
Roy Baumeister has criticized feminists who "look only at the top of society and draw conclusions about society as a whole.
Depending on the historical moment, culture and country, feminists around the world have had different causes and goals.
The feminist activist and author Carol Hanisch coined the slogan "The Personal is Political", which became synonymous with the second wave.
Numerous feminist movements and ideologies have developed over the years and represent different viewpoints and aims.
This work is sometimes in collaboration with feminists and women's services, such as domestic violence and rape crisis centres.
However, as the scholar Elizabeth Wright points out, "none of these French feminists align themselves with the feminist movement as it appeared in the Anglophone world".
Pro-feminist men also may be involved in men's health, activism against pornography including anti-pornography legislation, men's studies, and the development of gender equity curricula in schools.
Most genres and subgenres have undergone a similar analysis, so that one now sees work on the "female gothic" or women's science fiction.
Proponents of gender-neutral language argue that the use of gender-specific language often implies male superiority or reflects an unequal state of society.
The second wave campaigned for legal and social equality for women.
These ideas also correspond with ideas in African feminism, motherism, Stiwanism, negofeminism, femalism, transnational feminism, and Africana womanism.
It encompasses work in a variety of disciplines, including anthropology, sociology, economics, women's studies, literary criticism, art history, psychoanalysis and philosophy.
Riot grrrl's emphasis on universal female identity and separatism often appears more closely allied with second-wave feminism than with the third wave.
This demand was particularly championed by special Fascist women's auxiliary groups such as the ''fasci femminilli'' and only partly realized in 1925, under pressure from Prime Minister Benito Mussolini's more conservative coalition partners.
More recent feminist theory, such as that of  Lisa Lucile Owens, has concentrated on characterizing feminism as a universal emancipatory movement.
Although by the 20th century coverture had been abolished in the UK and the US, in many continental European countries married women still had very few rights.
Since the 1980s, standpoint feminists have argued that the feminist movement should address global issues (such as rape, incest, and prostitution) and culturally specific issues (such as female genital mutilation in some parts of Africa and the Middle East, as well as glass ceiling practices that impede women's advancement in developed economies) in order to understand how gender inequality interacts with racism, homophobia, classism and colonization in a "matrix of domination".
Since the late nineteenth century some feminists have allied with socialism, whereas others have criticized socialist ideology for being insufficiently concerned about women's rights.
One criticism of feminist epistemology is that it allows social and political values to influence its findings.
Western women gained more reliable birth control, allowing family planning and careers.
Through the 1980s and 1990s, this trend continued as musicologists like Susan McClary, Marcia Citron and Ruth Solie began to consider the cultural reasons for the marginalizing of women from the received body of work.
Third-world feminism and Indigenous feminism are closely related to postcolonial feminism.
The movement encouraged and made "adolescent girls' standpoints central", allowing them to express themselves fully.
In France, women obtained the right to vote only with the Provisional Government of the French Republic of 21 April 1944.
Liberal feminism seeks individualistic equality of men and women through political and legal reform without altering the structure of society.
The second approach, a feminist counterculture, embodies feminine writing to investigate a specifically feminine cinematic language.
The widespread interest in women's writing is related to a general reassessment and expansion of the literary canon.
Daphne Patai and Noretta Koertge argue that the term "anti-feminist" is used to silence academic debate about feminism.
Claiming that "architectural planning has an inextricable link with the defining and regulation of gender roles, responsibilities, rights, and limitations", Mathur came up with that term "to explore&nbsp;... the meaning of 'architecture' in terms of gender" and "to explore the meaning of 'gender' in terms of architecture".
Postcolonial feminists argue that colonial oppression and Western feminism marginalized postcolonial women but did not turn them passive or voiceless.
In the U.S., notable leaders of this movement included Lucretia Mott, Elizabeth Cady Stanton, and Susan B. Anthony, who each campaigned for the abolition of slavery prior to championing women's right to vote.
In the U.S., Betty Friedan emerged from a radical background to take leadership.
Christian feminism is a branch of feminist theology which seeks to interpret and understand Christianity in light of the equality of women and men, and that this interpretation is necessary for a complete understanding of Christianity.
The 'feminization of employment' refers to a conceptual characterization of deteriorated and devalorized labour conditions that are less desirable, meaningful, safe and secure.
Women were more likely to self-identify as being feminists than men in every country except Poland, where men (21%) were four points more likely than women (17%) to agree very much with the statement.
The term is most often used in reference to men who are actively supportive of feminism.
Patriarchal cultures are criticized for "limiting forms of masculinity" available to men and thus narrowing their life choices.
Jewish feminism is a movement that seeks to improve the religious, legal, and social status of women within Judaism and to open up new opportunities for religious experience and leadership for Jewish women.
Second-wave feminists see women's cultural and political inequalities as inextricably linked and encourage women to understand aspects of their personal lives as deeply politicized and as reflecting sexist power structures.
Cyprian Blamires states that although feminists were among those who opposed the rise of Adolf Hitler, feminism has a complicated relationship with the Nazi movement as well.
It is an aspect of feminist theology which seeks to advance and understand the equality of men and women morally, socially, spiritually, and in leadership from a Buddhist perspective.
By the end of the 19th century, activism focused primarily on gaining political power, particularly the right of women's suffrage, though some feminists were active in campaigning for women's sexual, reproductive, and economic rights as well.
Separatist feminism does not support heterosexual relationships.
Trailblazers from this period included Claire Johnston and Laura Mulvey, who also organized the Women's Event at the Edinburgh Film Festival.
Libertarian feminism conceives of people as self-owners and therefore as entitled to freedom from coercive interference.
Three prior referendums held in 1968, 1971 and 1973 had failed to secure women's right to vote.
Feminist theory has explored the social construction of masculinity and its implications for the goal of gender equality.
Feminism had complex interactions with the major political movements of the twentieth century.
Virago Press began to publish its large list of 19th and early-20th-century novels in 1975 and became one of the first commercial presses to join in the project of reclamation.
In the United States, first-wave feminism is considered to have ended with the passage of the Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution (1919), granting women the right to vote in all states.
Most forms of feminism characterize patriarchy as an unjust social system that is oppressive to women.
Riot grrrl is an underground feminist hardcore punk movement described in the cultural movements section of this article.
In other words, the question of how women musicians fit into traditional music history was now being asked.
Some branches of feminism closely track the political leanings of the larger society, such as liberalism and conservatism, or focus on the environment.
Each wave dealt with different aspects of the same feminist issues.
Feminist cinema, advocating or illustrating feminist perspectives, arose largely with the development of feminist film theory in the late '60s and early '70s.
Feminists argue that sexual violence committed by men is often rooted in ideologies of male sexual entitlement, and that these systems grant women very few legitimate options to refuse sexual advances.
Piyush Mathur coined the term "archigenderic".
Feminists in these countries continued to fight for voting rights.
Judith K. Brown writes, "Women are most likely to make a substantial contribution when subsistence activities have the following characteristics: the participant is not obliged to be far from home; the tasks are relatively monotonous and do not require rapt concentration; and the work is not dangerous, can be performed in spite of interruptions, and is easily resumed once interrupted."
It came into force in those nations ratifying it.
Women who were radicalized during the 1960s by political debate and sexual liberation; but the failure of radicalism to produce substantive change for women galvanized them to form consciousness-raising groups and set about analysing, from different perspectives, dominant cinema's construction of women.
We are trying to change the future: to get girls and boys to realize that women's art is not an exception—it's a normal part of art history."
They were followed by those from Sweden (17%), Spain (16%), the United States (16%), Canada (15%), Great Britain (14%), Hungary (12%), Belgium (11%) and Australia (10%).
Another part of the feminist research agenda is the uncovering of ways in which power inequities are created or reinforced in society and in scientific and academic institutions.
Pro-feminism is the support of feminism without implying that the supporter is a member of the feminist movement.
Third-wave feminists often focus on "micro-politics" and challenge the second wave's paradigm as to what is, or is not, good for women, and tend to use a post-structuralist interpretation of gender and sexuality.
Proponents of neoliberalism have theorized that by increasing women's participation in the workforce, there will be heightened economic progress, but feminist critics have noted that this participation alone does not further equality in gender relations.Neoliberalism has failed to address significant problems such as the devaluation of feminized labour, the structural privileging of men and masculinity, and the politicization of women's subordination in the family and the workplace.
It has been argued that there are two distinct approaches to independent, theoretically inspired feminist filmmaking.
While the music industry has long been open to having women in performance or entertainment roles, women are much less likely to have positions of authority, such as being the leader of an orchestra.
It also prompted a general reevaluation of women's historical and academic contributions in response to the belief that women's lives and contributions have been underrepresented as areas of scholarly interest.
Feminist attitudes to female sexuality have taken a few different directions.
He drew links between women's position in Egyptian society and nationalism, leading to the development of Cairo University and the National Movement.
Furthermore, despite calls for greater attention to be paid to structures of gender inequity in the academic literature, structural analyses of gender bias rarely appear in highly cited psychological journals, especially in the commonly studied areas of psychology and personality.
For example, Anne Fausto-Sterling's book, ''Myths of Gender'', explores the assumptions embodied in scientific research that support a biologically essentialist view of gender.
The work of Julia Kristeva, a feminist psychoanalyst and philosopher, and Bracha Ettinger, artist and psychoanalyst, has influenced feminist theory in general and feminist literary criticism in particular.
The Buddhist feminist Rita Gross describes Buddhist feminism as "the radical practice of the co-humanity of women and men."
Some people have opposed feminism on the grounds that they believe it is contrary to traditional values or religious beliefs.
According to ''The Handbook of English Linguistics'', generic masculine pronouns and gender-specific job titles are instances "where English linguistic convention has historically treated men as prototypical of the human species."
Different groups of people have responded to feminism, and both men and women have been among its supporters and critics.
Although rooted in Islam, the movement's pioneers have also utilized secular and Western feminist discourses and recognize the role of Islamic feminism as part of an integrated global feminist movement.
Feminist views on sexuality vary, and have differed by historical period and by cultural context.
Later, opponents of women's entry into institutions of higher learning argued that education was too great a physical burden on women.
Carole Pateman argues that the patriarchal distinction "between masculinity and femininity is the political difference between freedom and subjection."
Although she supported equal rights for women, she opposed women fighting on the front and clashed with the anarcha-feminist Mujeres Libres.
First-wave feminism was a period of activity during the 19th century and early twentieth century.
From art films by Sally Potter, Catherine Breillat, Claire Denis and Jane Campion to action movies by Kathryn Bigelow, women now have a stronger voice, but are only too aware of the still lingering gender gap.
Similarly, some women argued that the civil rights movement had sexist elements and did not adequately address minority women's concerns.
Some radical feminists have proposed that because patriarchy is too deeply rooted in society, separatism is the only viable solution.
Feminists continued to campaign for the reform of family laws which gave husbands control over their wives.
In Switzerland, women gained the right to vote in federal elections in 1971; but in the canton of Appenzell Innerrhoden women obtained the right to vote on local issues only in 1991, when the canton was forced to do so by the Federal Supreme Court of Switzerland.
The third wave is a continuation of, and a reaction to, the perceived failures of second-wave feminism, beginning in the 1990s.
Much of the early period of feminist literary scholarship was given over to the rediscovery and reclamation of texts written by women.
In May 1947, following the November 1946 elections, the sociologist Robert Verdier minimized the "gender gap", stating in ''Le Populaire'' that women had not voted in a consistent way, dividing themselves, as men, according to social classes.
Women least likely to agree very much were from Japan (8%), Germany (7%) and South Korea (7%).
French philosopher Simone de Beauvoir provided a Marxist solution and an existentialist view on many of the questions of feminism with the publication of ''Le Deuxième Sexe'' (''The Second Sex'') in 1949.
This was paralleled in the 1970s by French feminists, who developed the concept of ''écriture féminine'' (which translates as 'female or feminine writing').
Rosemary Hennessy and Chrys Ingraham say that materialist forms of feminism grew out of Western Marxist thought and have inspired a number of different (but overlapping) movements, all of which are involved in a critique of capitalism and are focused on ideology's relationship to women.
Many overlapping feminist movements and ideologies have developed over the years.
The term post-feminism is used to describe a range of viewpoints reacting to feminism since the 1980s.
Other post-feminists say that feminism is no longer relevant to today's society.
The Iranian Constitutional Revolution in 1905 triggered the Iranian women's movement, which aimed to achieve women's equality in education, marriage, careers, and legal rights.
According to Nawar al-Hassan Golley, Arab feminism was closely connected with Arab nationalism.
Standpoint theory is a feminist theoretical point of view that believes a persons' social position influences their knowledge.
In 1899, Qasim Amin, considered the "father" of Arab feminism, wrote ''The Liberation of Women'', which argued for legal and social reforms for women.
The first she calls "feminist critique", in which the feminist reader examines the ideologies behind literary phenomena.
Approaches in philosophy and psychoanalysis fuelled Feminist Film Criticism, Feminist Independent Film and Feminist Distribution.
The words "féminisme" ("feminism") and "féminist" ("feminist") first appeared in France and the Netherlands in 1872, Great Britain in the 1890s, and the United States in 1910, and the ''Oxford English Dictionary'' lists 1852 as the year of the first appearance of "feminist" and 1895 for "feminism".
Second-wave feminism is a feminist movement beginning in the early 1960s and continuing to the present; as such, it coexists with third-wave feminism.
Feminists critical of the sex industry generally see it as the exploitative result of patriarchal social structures which reinforce sexual and cultural attitudes complicit in rape and sexual harassment.
Lesbian feminism is thus closely related.
Secular or atheist feminists have engaged in feminist criticism of religion, arguing that many religions have oppressive rules towards women and misogynistic themes and elements in religious texts.
In more liberal cultures, this entitlement takes the form of a general  sexualization of the whole culture.
In 1907 there was an International Conference of Socialist Women in Stuttgart where suffrage was described as a tool of class struggle.
According to Elyce Rae Helford, "Science fiction and fantasy serve as important vehicles for feminist thought, particularly as bridges between theory and practice."
Physicist Lisa Randall, appointed to a task force at Harvard by then-president Lawrence Summers after his controversial discussion of why women may be underrepresented in science and engineering, said, "I just want to see a whole bunch more women enter the field so these issues don't have to come up anymore."
Second- and third-wave feminism in China has been characterized by a reexamination of women's roles during the communist revolution and other reform movements, and new discussions about whether women's equality has actually been fully achieved.
Other anti-feminists opposed women's entry into the labour force, or their right to join unions, to sit on juries, or to obtain birth control and control of their sexuality.
Lynn Hankinson Nelson notes that feminist empiricists find fundamental differences between the experiences of men and women.
During the late Qing period and reform movements such as the Hundred Days' Reform, Chinese feminists called for women's liberation from traditional roles and Neo-Confucian gender segregation.
Commensurate with this growth in scholarly interest, various presses began the task of reissuing long-out-of-print texts.
Grenier's proposition was adopted 51 to 16.
In Britain, the women's movement was allied with the Labour party.
The last phase she calls "gender theory", in which the "ideological inscription and the literary effects of the sex/gender system are explored".
note that in practice fascist society was hierarchical and emphasized male virility, with women maintaining a largely subordinate position.
Neoliberalism has been criticized by feminist theory for having a negative effect on the female workforce population across the globe -especially in the global south.
Some recent criticism of 'feminist film' approaches has centred around a Swedish rating system called the Bechdel test.
According to Chunn, "many feminists have voiced disquiet about the ways in which rights and equality discourses are now used against them."
Due to this she argues that Liberal Feminism cannot offer any sustained analysis of the structures of male dominance, power, or privilege.
Writers such as Camille Paglia, Christina Hoff Sommers, Jean Bethke Elshtain, Elizabeth Fox-Genovese, Lisa Lucile Owens and Daphne Patai oppose some forms of feminism, though they identify as feminists.
Georges Duby et al.
In the U.S., the National Organization for Women (NOW) began in 1966 to seek women's equality, including through the Equal Rights Amendment (ERA), which did not pass, although some states enacted their own.
Catherine Rottenberg has argued that the neoliberal shirt in Liberal feminism has led to that form of feminism being individualized rather than collectivized and becoming detached from social inequality.
This entitlement can take different forms, depending on the culture.
Dorothy Chunn notes a "blaming narrative" under the post-feminist moniker, where feminists are undermined for continuing to make demands for gender equality in a "post-feminist" society, where "gender equality has (already) been achieved."
In the 1980s Pandora Press, responsible for publishing Spender's study, issued a companion line of 18th-century novels written by women.
During the baby boom period, feminism waned in importance.
Socialist feminism distinguishes itself from Marxist feminism by arguing that women's liberation can only be achieved by working to end both the economic and cultural sources of women's oppression.
In the UK and US, it focused on the promotion of equal contract, marriage, parenting, and property rights for women.
Sandra Harding says that the "moral and political insights of the women's movement have inspired social scientists and biologists to raise critical questions about the ways traditional researchers have explained gender, sex and relations within and between the social and natural worlds."
The US media tends to portray feminism negatively and feminists "are less often associated with day-to-day work/leisure activities of regular women."
1972 saw the first feminist film festivals in the U.S. and U.K. as well as the first feminist film journal, ''Women and Film''.
In many parts of the world, especially in conservative and religious cultures, marriage is regarded as an institution which requires a wife to be sexually available at all times, virtually without limit; thus, forcing or coercing sex on a wife is not considered a crime or even an abusive behaviour.
Yes, there are mostly men at the top.
Radical Women is the oldest socialist feminist organization in the U.S. and is still active.
Among American university students, for both men and women, support for feminist ideas is more common than self-identification as a feminist.
Other historians assert that the term should be limited to the modern feminist movement and its descendants.
Buddhist feminism is a movement that seeks to improve the religious, legal, and social status of women within Buddhism.
During Sadat's presidency, his wife, Jehan Sadat, publicly advocated further women's rights, though Egyptian policy and society began to move away from women's equality with the new Islamist movement and growing conservatism.
The movement started in the 1910s in the U.S. under Margaret Sanger and elsewhere under Marie Stopes.
Ecofeminists see men's control of land as responsible for the oppression of women and destruction of the natural environment; ecofeminism has been criticized for focusing too much on a mystical connection between women and nature.
This trend accelerated in the 1960s with the civil rights movement in the United States and the collapse of European colonialism in Africa, the Caribbean, parts of Latin America, and Southeast Asia.
