His wife died in Seville around 1521.
Juan Sebastián Elcano, a Spanish merchant ship captain settled at Seville, embarked seeking the king's pardon for previous misdeeds.
The Spanish soon realized that the lands of the Americas were not a part of Asia, but a new continent.
This expedition included the most notable Spanish navigators: Juan Sebastián Elcano, who, along with many other sailors, died of malnutrition during the voyage, and the young Andrés de Urdaneta.
Magellan did not complete the entire voyage, as he was killed during the Battle of Mactan in the Philippines in 1521.
Heading northwest, the crew reached the equator on 13 February 1521.
By 6 May 1522 the ''Victoria'' rounded the Cape of Good Hope, with only rice for rations.
Magellan relied on Enrique, his Malay servant and interpreter, to communicate with the native tribes.
Francisco Albo, from Rodas (in Tui, Galicia)
The fleet reached Río de la Plata in early February, 1520.
Antonio Pigafetta's journal is the main source for much of what is known about Magellan and Elcano's voyage.
On 22 March 1518 the king named Magellan and Faleiro captains so that they could travel in search of the Spice Islands in July.
A replica of the ''Victoria'', the only ship of Magellan's to survive the entire voyage, can be visited in Puerto San Julian.
Juan de Zubileta, from Barakaldo
The idea was in tune with the times and had already been discussed after Balboa's discovery of the Pacific.
Finally they set sail on 20 September 1519 and left Spain.
Juan de Arratia, from Bilbao
They traded with the Sultan of Tidore, a rival of the Sultan of Ternate, who was the ally of the Portuguese.
When ''Victoria'', the one surviving ship and the smallest carrack in the fleet, returned to the harbor of departure after completing the first circumnavigation of the Earth, only 18 men out of the original 237 men were on board.
Magellan's expedition was the first to circumnavigate the globe and the first to navigate the strait in South America connecting the Atlantic and the Pacific oceans.
The only other sailor to report the voyage would be Francisco Albo, who kept a formal logbook.
As Brazil was Portuguese territory, Magellan avoided it and on 13 December anchored near present-day Rio de Janeiro.
This was the Italian transcription by Carlo Amoretti of what is now called the "Ambrosiana codex."
He participated in several battles, including the battle of Cannanore in 1506, where he was wounded.
Reportedly those killed were drawn and quartered and impaled on the coast; years later, their bones were found by Sir Francis Drake.
They traded gifts with Rajah Siaiu of Mazaua who guided them to Cebu on 7 April.
In addition, Brunei boasted tame elephants and an armament of 62 cannons, more than five times the armament of Magellan's ships.
* A fifth of the gains of the travel.
Castile (''Spain'') urgently needed to find a new commercial route to Asia.
Magellan and his crew were the first Europeans to reach Tierra del Fuego just east of the Pacific side of the strait.
As a result, ''Victoria'' with some of the crew sailed west for Spain.
Antonio Lombardo (Pigafetta), from Vicenza
Upon returning the expedition found its date was a day behind, although they had faithfully maintained the ship's log.
Several problems arose during the preparation of the trip, including lack of money, the king of Portugal trying to stop them, Magellan and other Portuguese incurring suspicion from the Spanish, and the difficult nature of Faleiro.
In total, approximately 232 sailors of assorted nationalities died on the expedition around the world with Magellan.
The llama, vicuña and alpaca natural ranges were in the Andes mountains.
Magellan's navigational skills have also been acknowledged in the naming of objects associated with the stars, including the Magellanic Clouds, now known to be two nearby dwarf galaxies; the twin lunar craters of Magelhaens and Magelhaens A; and the Martian crater of Magelhaens.
An agreement was reached only with the Treaty of Zaragoza, signed on 1529 between Spain and Portugal.
Antonio Pigafetta reported that Gaspar Quesada, the captain of ''Concepción'', and other mutineers were executed, while Juan de Cartagena, the captain of ''San Antonio'', and a priest named Padre Sanchez de la Reina were marooned on the coast.
Two of them returned overland to inform Magellan of what had happened, and to bring rescue to their comrades.
Juan Sebastián Elcano, from Getaria (Spain)
* Monopoly of the discovered route for a period of ten years.
On the morning of 27 April 1521, Magellan sailed to Mactan with a small attack force.
"Those people are poor, but ingenious and very thievish, on account of which we called those three islands the islands of Ladroni."
Magellan wanted to convert Lapu-Lapu to Christianity, as he had Humabon, but Lapu-Lapu rejected that.
They concluded that ''Trinidad'' would need to spend considerable time being overhauled, but the small ''Victoria'' was not large enough to accommodate all the surviving crew.
In Seville he befriended his countryman Diogo Barbosa and soon married his daughter by his second wife María Caldera Beatriz Barbosa.
(occupied by indigenous peoples.)
A board met several times without reaching an agreement: the knowledge at that time was insufficient for an accurate calculation of longitude, and each gave the islands to their sovereign.
Juan de Santandrés, from Cueto (Cantabria)
Pigafetta and Ginés de Mafra provided written documents of the events culminating in Magellan's death:
On 6 September 1522, Elcano and the remaining crew of Magellan's voyage arrived in Spain aboard the ''Victoria'', almost exactly three years after the fleet of five ships had departed.
On 16 March Magellan reached the island of Homonhon in the Philippines, with 150 crew left.
The full extent of the globe was realized, since their voyage was 14,460 Spanish leagues (60,440&nbsp;km or 37,560&nbsp;mi).
In 1525, soon after the return of Magellan's expedition, Charles V sent an expedition led by García Jofre de Loaísa to occupy the Moluccas, claiming that they were in his zone of the Treaty of Tordesillas.
Despite a series of storms and mutinies, the expedition reached the Spice Islands in 1521 and returned home via the Indian Ocean to complete the first circuit of the globe.
The family name is referred to with the exact Latin patronymic, "de Judicibus".
The expedition was funded largely by the Spanish Crown, which provided ships carrying supplies for two years of travel.
They had difficulty reaching the Moluccas, docking at Tidore.
When reaching the Maluku Islands (the Spice Islands) on 6 November, the total crew numbered 115.
Enrique escaped his indenture on 1 May with the aid of Rajah Humabon, amid the deaths of almost 30 crewmen.
Juan de Cartagena was named Inspector General of the expedition, responsible for its financial and trading operations.
Juan de Cartagena, the head of the mutineers on the ''San Antonio,'' subsequently gave up.
Diego Carmena, from Baiona (Galicia)
On 6 March they reached the Marianas and Guam.
Pigafetta had been jotting down words in both Butuanon and Cebuano languages – which he started at Mazaua on 29 March and his list grew to a total of 145 words.
Magellan named the waters the ''Mar Pacifico'' (Pacific Ocean) because of its apparent stillness.
Nicholas the Greek, from Nafplion
He married a woman from Amboina and became a military advisor to the Sultan of Ternate, Bayan Sirrullah.
Serrão departed in the first expedition sent to find the "Spice Islands" in the Moluccas, where he remained.
He continued communications with indigenous peoples during the rest of the voyage.
Reduced to ''Trinidad'' and ''Victoria'', the expedition fled westward to Palawan.
The other direct report of the voyage was that of Francisco Albo, the last ''Victoria'''s pilot, who kept a formal logbook.
The Ferdinand Magellan train rail car (also known as U.S.
After ''Concepción's'' anchor cable had been secretly cut by his forces, the ship drifted towards the well-armed ''Trinidad'', and ''Concepcion's'' captain de Quesada and his inner circle surrendered.
Expert cartographer Jorge Reinel and Diogo Ribeiro, a Portuguese who had started working for Charles V in 1518 as a cartographer at the ''Casa de Contratación'', took part in the development of the maps to be used in the travel.
All of its crew survived and made it safely to shore.
It included about 40 Portuguese, among them Magellan's brother-in-law Duarte Barbosa, João Serrão, a relative of Francisco Serrão, Estêvão Gomes and Magellan's indentured servant Enrique of Malacca.
In 1511, under the new governor Afonso de Albuquerque, Magellan and Serrão participated in the conquest of Malacca.
King Manuel I ordered a Portuguese naval detachment to pursue Magellan, but the explorer evaded them.
Pigafetta's account was not published until 1525, and was not published in its entirety until 1800.
After the conquest their ways parted: Magellan was promoted, with a rich plunder and, in the company of a Malay he had indentured and baptized Enrique of Malacca, he returned to Portugal in 1512.
He intended to keep the body as a war trophy.
A black "goose" that had to be skinned instead of plucked was a penguin.
In 1517 after a quarrel with King Manuel I, who denied his persistent demands to lead an expedition to reach the spice islands from the east (i.e., while sailing westwards, seeking to avoid the need to sail around the tip of Africa), he left for Spain.
Francisco Rodrigues, Portuguese from Seville
For overwintering, Magellan established a temporary settlement called Puerto San Julian on March 30, 1520.
The crew tried to discover and repair the leak, but failed.
Born into a Portuguese noble family in around 1480, Magellan became a skilled sailor and naval officer and was eventually selected by King Charles I of Spain to search for a westward route to the Maluku Islands (the "Spice Islands").
Twenty crewmen died of starvation before Elcano put into Cape Verde, a Portuguese holding, where he abandoned 13 more crew on 9 July in fear of losing his cargo of 26 tons of spices (cloves and cinnamon).
Meanwhile, Magellan devoted himself to studying the most recent charts, investigating, in partnership with cosmographer Rui Faleiro, a gateway from the Atlantic to the South Pacific and the possibility of the Moluccas being Spanish according to the demarcation of the Treaty of Tordesillas.
There the crew was resupplied, but bad conditions caused them to delay.
In 1565, Andrés de Urdaneta discovered the Manila-Acapulco route.
Juan Rodríguez, from Huelva
Brunei people were not interested in the Spanish cargo of cloves, but these proved more valuable than gold upon the return to Spain.
After taking a leave without permission, Magellan fell out of favour.
The crew of about 270 included men from several nations, including Portugal, Spain, Italy, Germany, Belgium, Greece, England and France.
They left that island on 21 June and were guided to Brunei, Borneo, by Moro pilots, who could navigate the shallow seas.
His history is preserved in the nominative registers at the ''Archivo General de Indias'' in Seville, Spain.
They anchored off the Brunei breakwater for 35 days, where Pigafetta, an Italian from Vicenza, recorded the splendour of Rajah Siripada's court (gold, two pearls the size of hens' eggs, porcelain from China, eyeglasses from Europe etc.).
Europeans first learned of the circumnavigation through an account written by Maximilianus Transylvanus, a relative of sponsor Christopher de Haro, who interviewed survivors in 1522 and published his account in 1523.
Consequently, on 2 May they abandoned and burned ''Concepción.''
* Their appointment as governors of the lands and islands found, with 5% of the resulting net gains.
During the resulting battle against Lapu-Lapu's troops, Magellan was struck by a bamboo spear, and later surrounded and finished off with other weapons.
On Easter (April 1 and 2), a mutiny broke out involving three of the five ship captains.
The names were adopted by the International Astronomical Union in 1935 (Magelhaens on the Moon), 1976 (Magelhaens on Mars), and 2006 (Magelhaens A on the Moon).
In March 1505 at the age of 25, Magellan enlisted in the fleet of 22 ships sent to host D. Francisco de Almeida as the first viceroy of Portuguese India.
Three craters, two located on the Moon and one on Mars, have been named after Magellan using the spelling "Magelhaens".
Christopher Columbus's voyages to the West (1492–1503) had the goal of reaching the Indies and to establish direct commercial relations between Spain and the Asian kingdoms.
'''Martino de Judicibus''' () was a Genoese or Savonese Chief Steward.
However, as they left the Spice Islands, the ''Trinidad'' began to take on water.
Also a starship of the TV series ''Andromeda'' was named Pax Magellanic, in reference of the Magellanic Clouds.
They lost one day because they traveled west during their circumnavigation of the globe, opposite to Earth's daily rotation.
Pigafetta described the "lateen sail" used by the inhabitants of Guam, hence the name "Island of Sails", but he also writes the inhabitants "entered the ships and stole whatever they could lay their hands on", including "the small boat that was fastened to the poop of the flagship."
After Magellan's death, Elcano decided to push westward, thereby completing the first known voyage around the entire Earth.
Afterward, Rajah Humabon and his ally Datu Zula convinced Magellan to kill their enemy, Datu Lapu-Lapu, on Mactan.
Spanish explorer Vasco Núñez de Balboa reached the Pacific Ocean in 1513 after crossing the Isthmus of Panama, and Juan Díaz de Solís died in Río de la Plata in 1516 while exploring South America in the service of Spain.
After stopping at the Canary Islands, Magellan arrived at Cape Verde, where he set course for Cape St. Augustine in Brazil.
The accusations were proved false, but he received no further offers of employment after 15 May 1514.
The course that Magellan charted was followed by other navigators, such as Sir Francis Drake.
* Granting of an island for each one, apart from the six richest, from which they would receive a fifteenth.
Rajah Humabon of Cebu was friendly towards Magellan and the Spaniards; both he and his queen Hara Amihan were baptized as Christians and were given the image of the Holy Child (later known as Santo Niño de Cebu) which along with a cross (Magellan's Cross) symbolizes the Christianization of the Philippines.
The two remaining ships, laden with valuable spices, tried to return to Spain by sailing westwards.
Martín de Judicibus, from Genoa
The casualties suffered in the Philippines left the expedition with too few men to sail all three of the remaining ships.
Two of the closest galaxies, the Magellanic Clouds in the southern celestial hemisphere, were named for Magellan sometime after 1800.
''Victoria'' set sail via the Indian Ocean route home on 21 December, commanded by Juan Sebastián Elcano.
Vasco Gómez Gallego, from Baiona (Galicia)
Serving in Morocco, he was wounded, resulting in a permanent limp.
The king granted them:
They had two children: Rodrigo de Magalhães and Carlos de Magalhães, both of whom died at a young age.
In October 1517 in Seville, Magellan contacted Juan de Aranda, Factor of the ''Casa de Contratación''.
+ 18 men returned to Seville aboard ''Victoria'' in 1522:
"Nothing of Magellan's body survived, that afternoon the grieving rajah-king, hoping to recover his remains, offered Mactan's victorious chief a handsome ransom of copper and iron for them but Datu Lapulapu refused.
Among the survivors were two Italians, Antonio Pigafetta and Martino de Judicibus.
* The right to levy one thousand ducats on upcoming trips, paying only 5% on the remainder.
Since his wife and child died in Seville before any member of the expedition could return to Spain, it seemed that every evidence of Ferdinand Magellan's existence had vanished from the earth."
The five hundredth anniversary of Magellan's expedition and circumnavigation will be commemorated in a series of events organised by the municipal council of Sanlucar de Barrameda in Spain, and supported by philanthropic organisations.
In September, after arriving at Malacca, the expedition fell victim to a conspiracy ending in retreat.
In 1509 he fought in the battle of Diu.
Hans of Aachen, (Holy Roman Empire)
He wrote the first account of the voyage, which was published in 1523.
The global expedition showed the need for an International Date Line to be established.
Commanding a fleet of five vessels, he headed south through the Atlantic Ocean to Patagonia, passing through the Strait of Magellan into a body of water he named the "peaceful sea" (the modern Pacific Ocean).
He had been indentured by Magellan in 1511 after the colonization of Malacca, and had accompanied him through later adventures.
Following the arrival of his partner Rui Faleiro, and with the support of Aranda, they presented their project to the Spanish king, Charles I, future Holy Roman Emperor Charles V. Magellan's project, if successful, would  realize Columbus' plan of a spice route by sailing west without damaging relations with the Portuguese.
Martino de Judicibus, initially assigned to the caravel ''Concepción'', one of five ships of the Spanish fleet of Magellan, had embarked on the expedition with the rank of captain.
Later on in 1515, he got an employment offer as a crew member on a Portuguese ship, but rejected this.
Although his name does not appear in the chronicles, it is known that he remained there eight years, in Goa, Cochin and Quilon.
Through the bishop Juan Rodríguez de Fonseca they obtained the participation of merchant Christopher de Haro, who provided a quarter of the funds and goods to barter.
''Trinidad'' was captured by the Portuguese and was eventually wrecked in a storm while at anchor under Portuguese control.
Luis de Mendoza, the captain of ''Victoria'', was killed by a party sent by Magellan, and the ship was recovered.
This caused great excitement at the time, and a special delegation was sent to the Pope to explain the oddity to him.
The journey resumed.
He later sailed under Diogo Lopes de Sequeira in the first Portuguese embassy to Malacca, with Francisco Serrão, his friend and possibly cousin.
He was  accused of trading illegally with the Moors.
The help of Duarte Barbosa was crucial in facing the riot in Puerto San Julian; Magellan appointed him as captain of the ''Victoria''.
Magellan took quick and decisive action.
He first assigned ''Concepcion'' and ''San Antonio'' to explore the strait, but the latter, commanded by Gómez, deserted and headed back to Spain on 20 November.
Antonio Hernández Colmenero, from Huelva
Four crewmen of the original 55 on ''Trinidad'' finally returned to Spain in 1522; 51 had died in war or from disease.
Antonio Pigafetta, a Venetian scholar and traveller, asked to be on the voyage, accepting the title of "supernumerary" and a modest salary.
Miguel Sánchez, from Rodas (in Tui, Galicia)
Since there was not a set limit to the east, in 1524 both kingdoms had tried to find the exact location of the antimeridian of Tordesillas, which would divide the world into two equal hemispheres and to resolve the "Moluccas issue".
Magellan's name for the Pacific was adopted by other Europeans.
The strait is now named the Strait of Magellan.
Magellan provided in his will that Enrique, his interpreter, was to be freed upon his death.
The Portuguese were already established in nearby Ternate and the two nations had nearly a decade of skirmishing over the "possession."
Magellan had a crucial role, warning Sequeira and saving Francisco Serrão, who had landed.
Magellan's crew observed several animals that were entirely new to European science, including a "camel without humps", which was probably a guanaco, whose range extends to Tierra del Fuego.
It assigned the Moluccas to Portugal and the Philippines to Spain.
The ''Santiago'' was sent down the coast on a scouting expedition and was wrecked in a sudden storm.
This attempt failed.
After the Junta de Toro conference of 1505, the Spanish Crown commissioned expeditions to discover a route to the west.
Faleiro, who had planned to accompany the voyage, withdrew prior to boarding.
Juan de Acurio, from Bermeo
Magellan had not intended to circumnavigate the world, but rather had intended only to find a secure route through which the Spanish ships could navigate to the Spice Islands.
After this experience, Magellan decided to wait for a few weeks more before resuming the voyage with the four remaining ships.
On 27 November the expedition crossed the equator; on 6 December the crew sighted South America.
Finally, thanks to the tenacity of Magellan, the expedition was ready.
Members of his expedition became the first Europeans to reach the Philippine archipelago.
He became a strict assistant of Magellan and kept an accurate journal.
Maximilianus Transylvanus interviewed some of the surviving members of the expedition when they presented themselves to the Spanish court at Valladolid in the autumn of 1522.
There they remained more than five weeks.
But after the battle, the remaining ships' masters refused to free the Malay.
He raised them to the rank of Commander of the Order of Santiago.
Most of the men, including Juan Sebastián Elcano, were needed and forgiven.
Four ships began an arduous trip through the  long passage that Magellan called the ''Estrecho (Canal) de Todos los Santos'', ("All Saints' Channel"), because the fleet travelled through it on 1 November or All Saints' Day.
Spanish authorities were wary of Magellan, so that they almost prevented him from sailing, switching his mostly Portuguese crew to mostly men of Spain.
The Magellanic penguin is named after him, as he was the first European to note it.
Several weeks later, ''Trinidad'' departed and tried to return to Spain via the Pacific route.
Afterwards, they continued to sail south along South America's east coast, looking for the strait that Magellan believed would lead to the Spice Islands.
The expedition eked out a small profit, but the crew was not paid full wages.
On 28 November, the three remaining ships entered the South Pacific.
Hernándo de Bustamante, from Alcántara
1) is a former Pullman Company observation car that was re-built by the U.S. Government for presidential use from 1943 until 1958.
The Magellan probe, which mapped the planet Venus from 1990 to 1994, was named after Magellan.
His letters to Magellan would prove decisive, giving information about the spice-producing territories.
On 10 August 1519, the five ships under Magellan's command left Seville and descended the Guadalquivir River to Sanlúcar de Barrameda, at the mouth of the river.
Miguel de Rodas (in Tui, Galicia)
