Conversely, critics view him as a totalitarian dictator whose administration oversaw multiple human-rights abuses, an exodus of more than one million Cubans, and the impoverishment of the country's economy.
He preferred to meet foreign diplomats in these early hours, believing that they would be tired and he could gain the upper hand in negotiations.
Batista responded with an all-out-attack, ''Operation Verano'', in which the army aerially bombarded forested areas and villages suspected of aiding the militants, while 10,000 soldiers commanded by General Eulogio Cantillo surrounded the Sierra Maestra, driving north to the rebel encampments.
Castro gathered 165 revolutionaries for the mission, ordering his troops not to cause bloodshed unless they met armed resistance.
Castro continued to put himself at risk, staying active in the city’s politics and joining the September 30 Movement, which contained within it both communists and members of the ''Partido Ortodoxo''.
Castro's government was also nationalistic, with Castro declaring that "We are not only Marxist-Leninists, but also nationalists and patriots".
Setting about strengthening the MR-26-7, he established an 11-person National Directorate but retained autocratic control, with some dissenters labeling him a ''caudillo'' (dictator);  he argued that a successful revolution could not be run by committee and required a strong leader.
In 2002, former U.S. President Jimmy Carter visited Cuba, where he highlighted the lack of civil liberties in the country and urged the government to pay attention to the Varela Project of Oswaldo Payá.
In 1998, Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chrétien arrived in Cuba to meet Castro and highlight their close ties.
In July 2010, he made his first public appearance since falling ill, greeting science center workers and giving a television interview to ''Mesa Redonda'' in which he discussed U.S. tensions with Iran and North Korea.
Bourne described Castro as "an influential world leader" who commanded "great respect" from individuals of all political ideologies across the developing world.
In 1977 the Ethio-Somali War broke out over the disputed Ogaden region as Somalia invaded Ethiopia; although a former ally of Somali President Siad Barre, Castro had warned him against such action, and Cuba sided with Mengistu Haile Mariam's Marxist government of Ethiopia.
In the early 1990s Castro embraced environmentalism, campaigning against global warming and the waste of natural resources, and accusing the U.S. of being the world's primary polluter.
Responding to the attack, Batista's government proclaimed martial law, ordering a violent crackdown on dissent, and imposing strict media censorship.
His speech was greeted with much applause from other world leaders, though his standing in NAM was damaged by Cuba's abstinence from the U.N.'s General Assembly condemnation of the Soviet war in Afghanistan.
Increasing numbers of Cubans fled to Florida, but were labelled "scum" and "lumpen" by Castro and his CDR supporters.
Imprisoned with 25 comrades, Castro renamed his group the "26th of July Movement" (MR-26-7) in memory of the Moncada attack's date, and formed a school for prisoners.
The relationship was a love match, disapproved of by both families, but Mirta's father gave them tens of thousands of dollars to spend on a three-month New York City honeymoon.
After forcing back the Somalis, Mengistu then ordered the Ethiopians to suppress the Eritrean People's Liberation Front, a measure Castro refused to support.
Castro's improving relations across Latin America were accompanied by continuing animosity towards the U.S.
Certain restrictions on emigration were eased, allowing more discontented Cuban citizens to move to the United States.
The protests, accompanied by a crackdown on those considered communists, led to violent clashes between activists and police in February 1948, in which Castro was badly beaten.
Castro considered Africa to be "the weakest link in the imperialist chain", and at the request of Angolan President Agostinho Neto he ordered 230 military advisers into Southern Africa in November 1975 to aid Neto's Marxist MPLA in the Angolan Civil War.
Later that month, Fidel called into Hugo Chávez's radio show ''Aló Presidente''.
Castro extended support to Latin American revolutionary movements, namely the Sandinista National Liberation Front in its overthrow of the Nicaraguan rightist government of Anastasio Somoza Debayle in July 1979.
Castro conceded that those who wanted to leave could do so from Mariel port.
Entering Havana, Castro proclaimed himself Representative of the Rebel Armed Forces of the Presidency, setting up home and office in the penthouse of the Havana Hilton Hotel.
He read widely, enjoying the works of Marx, Lenin, and Martí but also reading books by Freud, Kant, Shakespeare, Munthe, Maugham and Dostoyevsky, analyzing them within a Marxist framework.
Cantillo secretly agreed to a ceasefire with Castro, promising that Batista would be tried as a war criminal, however Batista was warned, and fled into exile with over US$300,000,000 on December 31, 1958.
Many older members of government were to be retired and replaced by their younger counterparts.
The arrival of thousands of Mexican and Spanish tourists led to increasing numbers of Cubans turning to prostitution; officially illegal, Castro refrained from cracking down on prostitution, fearing a political backlash.
He welcomed Western politicians and investors to Cuba, befriended Manuel Fraga and took a particular interest in Margaret Thatcher's policies in the UK, believing that Cuban socialism could learn from her emphasis on low taxation and personal initiative.
By November, Castro's forces controlled most of Oriente and Las Villas, and divided Cuba in two by closing major roads and rail lines, severely disadvantaging Batista.
In suppressing the revolution, Batista's government had killed thousands of Cubans; at the time, Castro and influential sectors of the press put the death toll at 20,000, although more recent estimates place it between 1000 and 4000.
The government broadcast misinformation about the event, claiming that the rebels were communists who had killed hospital patients, although news and photographs of the army's use of torture and summary executions in Oriente soon spread, causing widespread public and some governmental disapproval.
Although Guevara and Raúl were well known for their Marxist-Leninist views, Castro hid his, hoping to gain the support of less radical revolutionaries.
Although most were freed within a few days, many fled to the U.S., establishing themselves in Florida.
Bolivian President Evo Morales described him as "the grandfather of all Latin American revolutionaries", while biographer Volka Skierka stated that "he will go down in history as one of the few revolutionaries who remained true to his principles."
Nevertheless, critics claim that Castro wielded significant unofficial influence aside from his official duties.
Mandela praised Cuba's involvement in battling South Africa in Angola and thanked Castro personally.
At Castro's command, the politically moderate lawyer Manuel Urrutia Lleó was proclaimed provisional president, with Castro erroneously announcing he had been selected by "popular election"; most of Urrutia's cabinet were MR-26-7 members.
Increasingly isolated, Cuba improved relations with Manuel Noriega's right-wing government in Panama – despite Castro's personal hatred of Noriega – but it was overthrown in a U.S. invasion in December 1989.
After Batista's overthrow in 1959, Castro assumed military and political power as Cuba's Prime Minister.
On a personal level, Castro was increasingly lonely, and his relations with Guevara became strained as the latter became increasingly anti-Soviet and pro-Chinese.
He also allied with Alphonse Massemba-Débat's socialist government in Congo-Brazzaville, and in 1965 Castro authorized Guevara to travel to Congo-Kinshasa to train revolutionaries against the Western-backed government.
He considered Western-dominated Africa ripe for revolution, and sent troops and medics to aid Ahmed Ben Bella's socialist regime in Algeria during the Sand war.
Castro was known for his busy working hours, often only going to bed at 3 or 4 a.m.
In January 1964, Castro returned to Moscow, officially to sign a new five-year sugar trade agreement, but also to discuss the ramifications of the assassination of John F. Kennedy; Castro had been deeply concerned by the assassination, believing that a far right conspiracy was behind it but that the Cubans would be blamed.
Through his actions and his writings he has significantly influenced the politics of various individuals and groups across the world.
The group’s purpose was to oppose the influence of the violent gangs within the university; despite his promises, Prío had failed to control the situation, instead offering many of their senior members jobs in government ministries.
He took part in a high-school protest in Cienfuegos in November 1950, fighting with police in protest at the Education Ministry's ban on student associations; arrested and charged for violent conduct, the magistrate dismissed the charges.
U.S. Secretary of State Christian Herter announced that Cuba was adopting the Soviet model of rule, with a one-party state, government control of trade unions, suppression of civil liberties, and the absence of freedom of speech and press.
Castro took a relatively socially conservative stance on many issues, opposing drug use, gambling, and prostitution, which he viewed as moral evils.
'''Fidel Alejandro Castro Ruz''' ( ; born August 13, 1926), commonly known as '''Fidel Castro''', is a Cuban politician and revolutionary who governed the Republic of Cuba as Prime Minister from 1959 to 1976 and then as President from 1976 to 2008.
Throughout much of Africa he was hailed as a friend to national liberation from foreign dominance.
Castro sent Fidelito for a Moscow schooling, Soviet technicians arrived on the island, and Castro was awarded the Lenin Peace Prize.
He described Ernest Hemingway as his favorite writer, and enjoyed reading but was uninterested in music.
Other militant anti-Batista groups had sprung up, primarily from the student movement; most notable was the Directorio Revolucionario Estudantil (DRE), founded by José Antonio Echevarría.
Castro's plan emulated those of the 19th century Cuban independence fighters who had raided Spanish barracks; Castro saw himself as the heir to independence leader José Martí.
In 1994 a ministry dedicated to the environment was established, and new laws established in 1997 that promoted awareness of environmental issues throughout Cuba and stressed the sustainable use of natural resources.
Although long thinking religious belief to be backward, Castro softened his approach to religious institutions and religious people were permitted for the first time to join the Communist Party.
Cuba's government ordered the country's refineries – then controlled by the U.S. corporations Shell, Esso and Standard Oil – to process Soviet oil, but under U.S. pressure, they refused.
This development makes Cuba the only country to have embassies in all independent countries of the Caribbean Community.
Further democratization was to be brought in by having the National Assembly's members elected directly by the people, rather than through municipal and provincial assemblies.
In January 2015, he publicly commented on the "Cuban Thaw", an increased normalization between Cuba-U.S. relations, by stating that while it was a positive move for establishing peace in the region, he mistrusted the U.S. government.
Visiting Havana's poorest neighborhoods, he became active in the student anti-racist campaign.
Castro had also been calling for greater Caribbean integration since the late 1990s, saying that only strengthened cooperation between Caribbean countries would prevent their domination by rich nations in a global economy.
During his campaign, Castro met with General Fulgencio Batista, the former president who had returned to politics with the Unitary Action Party; although both opposing Prío's administration, their meeting never got beyond polite generalities.
Castro is a controversial and divisive world figure.
During speeches Castro regularly cited reports and books he had read on a wide variety of subjects, including military matters, plant cultivation, filmmaking, and chess strategies.
From there he proceeded to Somalia, Tanzania, Mozambique and Angola where he was greeted by crowds as a hero for Cuba's role in opposing apartheid South Africa.
Although conflicted, Castro agreed, believing it would guarantee Cuba's safety and enhance the cause of socialism.
Returning home, an argument between Castro and senior government figures broke out.
Quirk stated that Castro wielded "absolute power" in Cuba, albeit not in a legal or constitutional manner, while Bourne claimed that power in Cuba was "completely invested" in Castro, adding that it was very rare for "a country and a people" to have been so completely dominated by "the personality of one man".
On February 24, 2008, the National Assembly of People's Power unanimously voted Raúl as president.
Major emphasis was placed on education, and during the first 30 months of Castro's government, more classrooms were opened than in the previous 30 years.
Beginning on April 9, it received strong support in central and eastern Cuba, but little elsewhere.
Diplomatic ties were reinstalled in 2005 following the election of leftist President Martín Torrijos.
Castro formed a group called "The Movement" which operated along a clandestine cell system, publishing underground newspaper ''El Acusador'' (''The Accuser''), while arming and training anti-Batista recruits.
In the summer, the MR-26-7 went on the offensive, pushing the army out of the mountains, with Castro using his columns in a pincer movement to surround the main army concentration in Santiago.
In October 1965, the Integrated Revolutionary Organizations was officially renamed the "Cuban Communist Party" and published the membership of its Central Committee.
In July 1972, Cuba joined the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (Comecon), an economic organization of socialist states, although this further limited Cuba's economy to agricultural production.
Castro describes Karl Marx and Cuban nationalist José Martí as his main political influences, although Gott believed that ultimately Martí remained more important than Marx in Castro's politics.
Fearing Castro was a socialist, the U.S. instructed Cantillo to oust Batista.
The ship carried weapons purchased from Belgium, the cause of the explosion was never determined, but Castro publicly insinuated that the U.S. government were guilty of sabotage.
The rebels suffered 6 fatalities and 15 other casualties, whilst the army suffered 19 dead and 27 wounded.
Cuba's relations across North America improved under Mexican President Luis Echeverría, Canadian Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau, and U.S. President Jimmy Carter.
In 2010, Castro took responsibility for this persecution, regretting it as a "great injustice".
Castro responded that "revolutionary justice is not based on legal precepts, but on moral conviction".
The U.S. responded by ending diplomatic relations, and increasing CIA funding for exiled dissidents; these militants began attacking ships trading with Cuba, and bombed factories, shops, and sugar mills.
In January 2009 Castro asked Cubans not to worry about his lack of recent news columns and failing health, and not to be disturbed by his future death.
Militant anti-Castro groups, funded by exiles, the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), and the Dominican government, undertook armed attacks and set up guerrilla bases in Cuba's mountains, leading to the six-year War against the Bandits.
Castro was angered by Gorbachev's approach, believing that he was abandoning the plight of the world's poor in favor of détente.
Militarily weaker than NATO, Khrushchev wanted to install Soviet R-12 MRBM nuclear missiles on Cuba to even the power balance.
Aged six, Castro was sent to live with his teacher in Santiago de Cuba, before being baptized into the Roman Catholic Church aged eight.
Judges and politicians had their pay reduced while low-level civil servants saw theirs raised, and in March 1959, Castro declared rents for those who paid less than $100 a month halved.
These actions, coupled with Castro's leadership of the Non-Aligned Movement from 1979&ndash;83 and Cuba's medical internationalism, increased Cuba's profile on the world stage and earned its leader great respect in the developing world.
He ensured that the government implemented policies to cut corruption and fight illiteracy and that it attempted to remove Batistanos from positions of power by dismissing Congress and barring all those elected in the rigged elections of 1954 and 1958 from future office.
In April 1971, Castro was internationally condemned for ordering the arrest of dissident poet Heberto Padilla; Padilla was freed, but the government established the National Cultural Council to ensure that intellectuals and artists supported the administration.
A larger pro-Castro crowd confronted them, who were joined by Castro; he informed media that the men were anti-socials misled by the U.S.
He had become financially successful by growing sugar cane at Las Manacas farm in Birán, Oriente Province, and after the collapse of his first marriage, he took his household servant, Lina Ruz González - also of Spanish origin, as his mistress and later on second wife; together they had seven children, among them Fidel.
He has been very careful about that.
Like many orthodox Marxist critics, Castro feared that the reforms would weaken the socialist state and allow capitalist elements to regain control.
In March 1952, Batista seized power in a military coup, with Prío fleeing to Mexico.
Castro was personally devastated when Guevara was subsequently killed by CIA-backed troops in Bolivia in October 1967 and publicly attributed it to Che's disregard for his own safety.
They began launching raids on small army posts to obtain weaponry, and in January 1957 they overran the outpost at La Plata, treating any soldiers that they wounded but executing Chicho Osorio, the local ''mayoral'' (land company overseer), who was despised by the local peasants and who boasted of killing one of Castro's rebels.
Batista moved to the right, solidifying ties with both the wealthy elite and the United States, severing diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union, suppressing trade unions and persecuting Cuban socialist groups.
In 1963 Castro's mother died.
Castro's government emphasised social projects to improve Cuba's standard of living, often to the detriment of economic development.
Seeing himself as Chibás' heir, Castro wanted to run for Congress in the June 1952 elections, though senior ''Ortodoxo'' members feared his radical reputation and refused to nominate him.
After participating in rebellions against right-wing governments in the Dominican Republic and Colombia, he planned the overthrow of Cuban President Fulgencio Batista, launching a failed attack on the Moncada Barracks in 1953.
Passionate about anti-imperialism and opposing U.S. intervention in the Caribbean, he unsuccessfully campaigned for the presidency of the Federation of University Students on a platform of "honesty, decency and justice".
Desperate for money, Cuba's government secretly sold off paintings from national collections and illicitly traded for U.S. electronic goods through Panama.
Although a revolutionary socialist, Castro avoided an alliance with the communist PSP, fearing it would frighten away political moderates, but kept in contact with PSP members like his brother Raúl.
Fearing counter-revolutionary elements in the army, the government created a People's Militia to arm citizens favorable to the revolution, training at least 50,000 civilians in combat techniques.
After conservative press expressed hostility towards the government, the pro-Castro printers' trade union disrupted editorial staff, and in January 1960 the government ordered them to publish a "clarification" written by the printers' union at the end of articles critical of the government.
At some points, they had to bail water caused by a leak, and at another, a man fell overboard, delaying their journey.
Although despising Argentina's right wing military junta, Castro supported them in the 1982 Falklands War against Britain and offered military aid to the Argentinians.
Asserting Cuba's independence, Castro refused to sign the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, declaring it a Soviet-U.S. attempt to dominate the Third World.
In 2001 he attended the Conference Against Racism in South Africa at which he lectured on the global spread of racial stereotypes through U.S. film.
Castro described Martí's political ideas as "a philosophy of independence and an exceptional humanistic philosophy", and his supporters and apologists have repeatedly claimed great similarity between the two figures.
When U.S. state critics claimed that Castro had no right to interfere in these nations, he highlighted that Cuba had been invited into them, pointing out the U.S.' own involvement in various foreign nations.
Frank País was also killed, leaving Castro the MR-26-7's unchallenged leader.
Returning to Cuba, Castro became a prominent figure in protests against government attempts to raise bus fares.
While Fidel was married to Mirta, he had an affair with Natalia "Naty" Revuelta Clews, who gave birth to his daughter, Alina Fernández Revuelta.
Castro proclaimed the new administration a direct democracy, in which Cubans could assemble at demonstrations to express their democratic will.
Back in Cuba, Castro feared a U.S.-backed coup; in 1959 his regime spent $120 million on Soviet, French, and Belgian weaponry and by early 1960 had doubled the size of Cuba's armed forces.
He sent troops under the command of General Arnaldo Ochoa to aid the overwhelmed Ethiopian army.
In 1985, Mikhail Gorbachev became Secretary-General of the Soviet Communist Party.
In Eastern Europe, socialist governments fell to capitalist reformers between 1989 and 1991 and many Western observers expected the same in Cuba.
Caring little for money or material goods, Castro failed to pay his bills; his furniture was repossessed and electricity cut off, distressing his wife.
Around 200,000 peasants received title deeds as large land holdings were broken up; popular among the working class, it alienated the richer landowners.
Various NAM members were critical of Castro's attendance, claiming that Cuba was aligned to the Warsaw Pact and therefore should not be at the conference.
Being baptized enabled Castro to attend the La Salle boarding school in Santiago, where he regularly misbehaved, and so was sent to the privately funded, Jesuit-run Dolores School in Santiago.
Furious, Castro ended the ceasefire, and ordered Cantillo's arrest by sympathetic figures in the army.
In later years anti-Castro dissidents accused him of committing gang-related assassinations at the time, but these remain unproven.
He was infuriated that the government had left thousands unemployed by closing down casinos and brothels.
By 1970, a third of the population would be involved in the CDR, and this would come to rise to 80%.
Castro also had a deep friendship with fellow revolutionary Celia Sanchez, who accompanied him almost everywhere during the 1960s, and controlled almost all access to the leader.
Requiring funding, Castro toured the U.S. in search of wealthy sympathizers, there being monitored by Batista's agents, who allegedly orchestrated a failed assassination attempt against him.
The invasion force consisted of around 1,200 troops, mostly Cubans and exiled Dominicans, and they intended to sail from Cuba in July 1947.
Born in Birán as the son of a wealthy farmer, Castro adopted leftist anti-imperialist politics while studying law at the University of Havana.
Castro's increasing role on the world stage strained his relationship with the USSR, now under the leadership of Leonid Brezhnev.
In 1945, Castro began studying law at the University of Havana.
He ended this speech with "''¡Patria o Muerte!''"
After a year's imprisonment, he traveled to Mexico where he formed a revolutionary group, the 26th of July Movement, with his brother Raúl Castro and Che Guevara.
He later attended Mandela's inauguration as President of South Africa in 1994.
Castro sent a letter to the press, declaring that he was "leaving Cuba because all doors of peaceful struggle have been closed to me... As a follower of Martí, I believe the hour has come to take our rights and not beg for them, to fight instead of pleading for them."
Raúl was selected as his successor.
Instead he advocated hard work, family values, integrity, and self-discipline.
The Cuban primary education system offered a work-study program, with half of the time spent in the classroom, and the other half in a productive activity.
Castro welcomed debate between proponents and opponents of the reforms, although over time he began to increasingly sympathise with the opponent's positions, arguing that such reforms must be delayed.
Reaching the barracks, the alarm was raised, with most of the rebels pinned down by machine gun fire.
Historian Richard Gott remarked that one of the keys to Castro's success was in his ability to utilize the "twin themes of socialism and nationalism" and keep them "endlessly in play."
For the first time, unemployment became a serious problem in Castro's Cuba, with the government sending unemployed youth to other countries, primarily East Germany, to work there.
Inspired by their earlier success with the 1954 Guatemalan coup d'état, in March 1960, U.S. President Eisenhower authorized the CIA to overthrow Castro's government.
Unlike a number of other Soviet-era communist leaders, Castro's government did not intentionally construct a cult of personality around him, although his popularity among segments of the Cuban populace nevertheless led to one developing in the early years of his administration.
The quote would subsequently be picked up on by the world's media.
In his capacity as both President of the NAM and of Cuba he appeared at the United Nations General Assembly in October 1979 and gave a speech on the disparity between the world's rich and poor.
Acclaimed by many across Latin America, he traveled to Venezuela where he met with President-elect Rómulo Betancourt, unsuccessfully requesting a loan and a new deal for Venezuelan oil.
Traveling to Angola, Castro celebrated with Neto, Sékou Touré and Guinea-Bissaun President Luís Cabral, where they agreed to support Mozambique's Marxist-Leninist government against RENAMO in the Mozambique Civil War.
While in power, Castro's two closest male friends were the former Mayor of Havana Pepin Naranjo and his own personal physician, René Vallejo.
He then pushed Urrutia to issue a temporary ban on political parties; he repeatedly said that they would eventually hold multiparty elections.
Within Cuba, Castro is often nicknamed "''El Caballo''" ("The Horse"), a label attributed to Cuban entertainer Benny Moré which alludes to Castro's well known womanizing during the 1950s and early 1960s, and during this period Castro himself was widely recognized as a sex symbol in Cuba.
Castro hoped for a restoration of Marxism-Leninism in the USSR, but refrained from backing the 1991 coup in that country.
Economic hardship led many Cubans toward religion, both in the form of Roman Catholicism and Santeria.
When Gorbachev visited Cuba in April 1989, he informed Castro that ''perestroika'' meant an end to subsidies for Cuba.
His regime remained popular with workers, peasants, and students, who constituted the majority of the country's population, while opposition came primarily from the middle class; thousands of doctors, engineers and other professionals emigrated to Florida in the U.S., causing an economic brain drain.
In 1971, Castro visited Chile, where Marxist President Salvador Allende had been elected as the head of a left-wing coalition.
He then went on a seven-week tour visiting leftist allies: Algeria, Bulgaria, Hungary, Poland, East Germany, Czechoslovakia and the Soviet Union, where he was given further awards.
Castro was sentenced on October 16, during which he delivered a speech that would be printed under the title of ''History Will Absolve Me''.
Though Chibás lost the election, Castro remained committed to working on his behalf.
In April 1948, Castro traveled to Bogotá, Colombia, with a Cuban student group sponsored by President Juan Perón's Argentine government.
The ''Granma'' ran aground in a mangrove swamp at Playa Las Coloradas, close to Los Cayuelos, on December 2, 1956.
Acting as his own defense counsel, Castro cited Martí as the intellectual author of the attack and convinced the 3 judges to overrule the army's decision to keep all defendants handcuffed in court, proceeding to argue that the charge with which they were accused – of "organizing an uprising of armed persons against the Constitutional Powers of the State" – was incorrect, for they had risen up against Batista, who had seized power in an unconstitutional manner.
Castro had a lifelong love of guns, and a preference for life in the countryside over the city.
As a result, Prime Minister José Miró Cardona resigned, going into exile in the U.S. and joining the anti-Castro movement.
Castro exercised a great deal of influence over Urrutia's regime, which was now ruling by decree.
On October 13, 1960, the U.S. prohibited the majority of exports to Cuba, initiating an economic embargo.
Accompanying celebrations at news of Batista's downfall on January 1, 1959, Castro ordered the MR-26-7 to prevent widespread looting and vandalism.
By November 1987, Castro began spending more time on the Angolan Civil War, in which the Marxists had fallen into retreat.
Initially permitted a relative amount of freedom within the prison, he was locked up in solitary confinement after inmates sang anti-Batista songs on a visit by the President in February 1954.
Meeting with Soviet First Deputy Premier Anastas Mikoyan, Castro agreed to provide the USSR with sugar, fruit, fibers, and hides, in return for crude oil, fertilizers, industrial goods, and a $100 million loan.
He came to interpret Cuba's problems as an integral part of capitalist society, or the "dictatorship of the bourgeoisie", rather than the failings of corrupt politicians, and adopted the Marxist view that meaningful political change could only be brought about by proletariat revolution.
Both Fidel and Mirta initiated divorce proceedings, with Mirta taking custody of their son Fidelito; this angered Castro, who did not want his son growing up in a bourgeois environment.
However, under U.S. pressure, Grau's government stopped the invasion, although Castro and many of his comrades evaded arrest.
While there Castro was permitted to sign a Soviet R-16 intercontinental ballistic missile.
A sports fan, he also spent much of his time trying to keep fit, undertaking regular exercise.
ALBA's origins lay in a December 2004 agreement signed between the two countries, and was formalized through a People's Trade Agreement also signed by Evo Morales' Bolivia in April 2006.
ALBA sought to redistribute wealth evenly throughout member countries, to protect the region's agriculture, and to oppose economic liberalization and privatization.
Corresponding with supporters, he maintained control over the Movement and organized the publication of ''History Will Absolve Me''.
After purchasing the decrepit yacht ''Granma'', on November 25, 1956 Castro set sail from Tuxpan, Veracruz, with 81 armed revolutionaries.
However, the ''Granma'''s journey ultimately lasted 7 days, and with Castro and his men unable to provide reinforcements, Pais and his militants dispersed after two days of intermittent attacks.
His sister Juanita Castro has been living in the United States since the early 1960s, and is an opponent of her brother's regime.
Castro's militants intended to dress in army uniforms and arrive at the base on July 25, seizing control and raiding the armory before reinforcements arrived.
A charismatic figure, Chibás advocated social justice, honest government, and political freedom, while his party exposed corruption and demanded reform.
Influenced by Guevara, he suggested that Cuba could evade most stages of socialism and progress straight to communism.
Student violence escalated after Grau employed gang leaders as police officers, and Castro soon received a death threat urging him to leave the university; refusing, he began carrying a gun and surrounding himself with armed friends.
Gorbachev called for a negotiated end to the conflict and in 1988 organized a quadripartite talks between the USSR, U.S., Cuba and South Africa; they agreed that all foreign troops would pull out of Angola.
Under his administration Cuba became a one-party communist state; industry and business were nationalized, and state socialist reforms implemented throughout society.
