Water-based synthetic turfs enable the ball to be transferred more quickly than on sand-based surfaces.
Only one end of the stick is allowed to be used.
When an attacking free hit is awarded within 5&nbsp;m of the circle everyone including the person taking the penalty must be five metres from the circle and everyone apart from the person taking the free hit must be five metres away from the ball.
In Inner Mongolia, China, the Daur people have for about 1,000 years been playing ''beikou'', a game with some similarities to field hockey.
Additionally, no free hits to the attack are permitted within 5m of the circle, so if a free hit is awarded inside this area it must be dragged back outside this zone.
Standard field hockey balls are hard spherical balls, made of plastic (sometimes over a cork core), and are usually white, although they can be any colour as long as they contrast with the playing surface.
Traditionally each umpire generally controls half of the field, divided roughly diagonally.
This is a list of the major '''International field hockey tournaments''', in chronological order.
Throughout the Middle Ages to the Early Modern era, such games often involved the local clergy or secular aristocracy, and in some periods were limited to them by various anti-gaming edicts, or even banned altogether.
Prior to the start of the game, a coin is tossed and the winning captain can choose a starting end or whether to start with the ball.
Apart from this, there is the Champions Trophy held each year for the six top-ranked teams.
The grip may be made of a variety of materials, including chamois leather, which many players think improves grip in the wet.
Synthetic pitches are now mandatory for all international tournaments and for most national competitions.
A goalkeeper must wear protective headgear at all times, except when taking a penalty stroke.
Field hockey has also been played at the Commonwealth Games since 1998.
The ball may not travel directly into the circle from a free hit to the attack within the 23 m area without first being touched by another player or being dribbled at least 5 m by a player making a "self-pass".
Researchers disagree over how to interpret this image.
If a player is dribbling the ball and either loses control and kicks the ball or another player interferes that player is not permitted to gain control and continue dribbling.
In its 2008 census, Hockey Australia reported 40,534 male club players and 41,542 female.
Water-based surfaces are also less abrasive than sand-based surfaces and reduce the level of injury to players when they come into contact with the surface.
If the first shot at goal in a short corner situation is a push, flick or scoop, in particular the ''drag flick'' (which has become popular at international and national league standards), the shot is permitted to rise above the height of the backboard, as long as the shot is not deemed dangerous to any opponent.
The ball may be hit, pushed or lifted in any direction by the team offended against.
However, if the ball is deemed to be below backboard height, the ball can be subsequently deflected above this height by another player (defender or attacker), providing that this deflection does not lead to danger.
The term "field hockey" is used primarily in Canada and the United States where ice hockey is more popular.
Synthetic pitches changed most aspects of field hockey, gaining speed.
However, in the United States of America, there are few field hockey clubs, most play taking place between high school or college sides, almost entirely of females.
When the ball is outside the circle they are defending, goalkeepers or players with goalkeeping privileges are only permitted to play the ball with their stick.
Free hits are awarded when offences are committed outside the scoring circles (the term 'free hit' is standard usage but the ball need not be hit).
It is generally only considered an offence to encroach on an opponent receiving a lifted ball that has been lifted to above head height (although the height is not specified in rule) and is falling.
A swing, as in a hit, at a high shot at the goal (or even wide of the goal) will probably be considered dangerous play if at opponents within 5&nbsp;m and such a stroke would be contrary to rule in these circumstances anyway.
This may be used to offer a tactical advantage, or to allow for play to commence if no goalkeeper or kit is available.
However, in recent years there has been a massive increase in the number of "water-based" artificial turfs.
There are three main types of artificial hockey surface:
The ball is often covered with indentations to reduce aquaplaning that can cause an inconsistent ball speed on wet surfaces.
The handle makes up about the top third of the stick.
The current rule book is effective from 1 January 2015.
A ball that hits a player above the knee may on some occasions not be penalized, this is at the umpire's discretion.
The game can be played on a grass field or a turf field as well as an indoor board surface.
The first club was in 1849 at Blackheath in south-east London, but the modern rules grew out of a version played by Middlesex cricket clubs for winter sport.
The penalty stroke is taken by a single attacker in the circle, against the goalkeeper, from a spot 6.4&nbsp;m from goal.
The rules do not allow the person who kicked the ball to gain advantage from the kick, so the ball will automatically be passed on to the opposing team.
Other notable men's nations include Argentina, England (who combine with other British "Home Nations" to form the Great Britain side at Olympic events) and South Korea.
The second is specific to the rule concerning a shot at goal at a penalty corner but is generally, if somewhat inconsistently, applied throughout the game and in all parts of the pitch: it is that a ball lifted above knee height and at an opponent who is within 5m of the ball is certainly dangerous.
In many competitions (such as regular club competition, or in pool games in FIH international tournaments such as the Olympics or the World Cup), a tied result stands and the overall competition standings are adjusted accordingly.
There was traditionally a slight curve (called the bow, or rake) from the top to bottom of the face side of the stick and another on the 'heel' edge to the top of the handle (usually made according to the angle at which the handle part was inserted into the splice of the head part of the stick), which assisted in the positioning of the stick head in relation to the ball and made striking the ball easier and more accurate.
The ball must be placed on the sideline, with the hit taken from as near the place the ball went out of play as possible.
In India, the Beighton Cup and the Aga Khan tournament commenced within ten years.
*Olympic Games - held every four years.
In the United States, the NCAA has its own rules for inter-collegiate competitions; high school associations similarly play to different rules, usually using the rules published by the National Federation of State High School Associations (NFHS).
When a goal is scored, play is restarted in the normal way.
According to the current Rules of Hockey 2015 issued by the FIH there are only two criteria for a dangerously played ball.
Despite their recent drop in international rankings, Pakistan still holds the record of four World Cup wins.
The older 'English' sticks had a longer bend, making it very hard to use the stick on the reverse.
The remaining players may be substituted in any combination.
The new Euro Hockey League has made major alterations to the rules to aid television viewers, such as splitting the game into four quarters, and to try to improve player behavior, such as a two-minute suspension for green cards—the latter was also used in the 2010 World Cup.
on the level of the game, in order to maintain game flow, which umpires are in general in both Rules and Briefing instructed to do, by not penalising when it is unnecessary to do so; this is also a matter at the umpire's discretion.
The FIH has adopted a policy of including major changes to the rules as "Mandatory Experiments", showing that they must be played at international level, but are treated as experimental and will be reviewed before the next rulebook is published and either changed, approved as permanent rules, or deleted.
There are no set plays unless your team has them.
Netherlands, Australia and Argentina are the most successful national teams among women.
They are not allowed to use their feet and legs to propel the ball, stop the ball or deflect it in any direction including over the back line.
Players are required to wear mouth guards and shin guards in order to play the game.
If the back side of the stick is used, it is a penalty and the other team will get the ball back.
The FIH are now proposing that new surfaces being laid should be of a hybrid variety which require less watering.
*World Cup - held every four years, in between the Olympics.
By the 12th century, a team ball game called '''' or '''', akin to a chaotic and sometimes long-distance version of hockey or rugby football (depending on whether sticks were used in a particular local variant), was regularly played in France and southern Britain between villages or parishes.
Teddington Hockey Club formed the modern game by introducing the striking circle and changing the ball to a sphere from a rubber cube.
The play ends after a goal is scored, the ball goes out of bounds, a foul is committed (ending in either a penalty stroke or flick or the end of the one on one) or time expires.
However, local playing conditions may mandate that cards are awarded only progressively, and not allow any second awards.
This last restriction has been removed but the stick should still not be used in a way that endangers an opponent) or attempting to tackle, (fouls relating to tripping, impeding and obstruction).
Nevertheless, metric measurements are now the official dimensions as laid down by the International Hockey Federation (FIH) in the "Rules of Hockey".
While goaltenders are allowed to use their feet and hands to clear the ball, they too are only allowed to use one side of their stick.
Within the English National League it is now a legal action to take a ball above shoulder height if completed using a controlled action.
Outside North America, participation is now fairly evenly balanced between men and women.
*A '''red card''', just like in association football, is a permanent exclusion from the rest of the game, without substitution, and usually results in the player being banned for a certain period of time or number of matches (this is governed by local playing conditions, rather than the rules of field hockey).
The uniform consists of shin guards, shoes, shorts, a mouth guard and a jersey.
The basic tactic in field hockey, as in association football and many other team games, is to outnumber the opponent in a particular area of the field at a moment in time.
This fluid approach to hockey and player movement has made it easy for teams to transition between formations such as; ''"3 at the back"'', ''"2 centre halves"'', ''"5 at the back",'' and more.
it gets stuck in their protective equipment), a penalty corner is awarded.
Dangerous play rules also apply to the usage of the stick when approaching the ball, making a stroke at it (replacing what was at one time referred to as the "sticks" rule, which once forbade the raising of any part of the stick above the shoulder during any play.
A 15&nbsp;m hit is also awarded for offences committed by the attacking side within 15&nbsp;m of the end of the pitch they are attacking.
Argentina improved its play on the 2000s, heading IFH rankings in 2003, 2010 and 2013.
This led to the International Federation of Women's Hockey Association (IFWHA) in 1927, though this did not include many continental European countries where women played as sections of men's associations and were affiliated to the FIH.
Whoever scores the most goals by the end of the match wins.
It has also been stated that the decision to make artificial surfaces mandatory greatly favoured more affluent countries who could afford these new pitches.
These free hits are taken in-line with where the foul was committed (taking a line parallel with the sideline between where the offence was committed, or the ball went out of play).
A personal penalty, that is a caution or a suspension, rather than a team penalty, such as a free ball or a penalty corner, may be (many would say should be or even must be, but again this is at the umpire's discretion) issued to the guilty party after an advantage allowed by the umpire has been played out in any situation where an offence has occurred, including dangerous play (but once advantage has been allowed the umpire cannot then call play back and award a team penalty).
In the United States, the games at the junior high level consist of two 25-minute halves, while the high-school level consists of two 30-minute halves.
Tackles are made by placing the stick into the path of the ball or playing the stick head or shaft directly at the ball.
A jab tackle, for example, might accidentally lift the ball above knee height into an opponent from close range but at such low velocity as not to be, in the opinion of the umpire, dangerous play.
*Champions Challenge - held every year for teams ranked 9th-16th in the world.
The strength of college field hockey reflects the impact of Title IX which mandated that colleges should fund men's and women's sports programmes comparably.
Today, the game is played globally, with particular popularity throughout western Europe, the Indian subcontinent, Southern Africa, Australia, New Zealand, Argentina, southern and northeastern United States (such as Mississippi, Alabama, Florida, Kentucky, Massachusetts, and Pennsylvania).
*Dressed or sand dressed - artificial fibres can be less densely packed and sand supports the fibres for part of the pile depth
The length of the stick depends on the player's individual height.
Metal is forbidden from use in field hockey sticks, due to the risk of injury from sharp edges if the stick were to break.
Goal keepers also cannot play the ball with the back of their stick.
A penalty stroke is awarded when a defender commits a foul in the circle (accidental or otherwise) that prevents a probable goal or commits a deliberate foul in the circle or if defenders repeatedly run from the back line too early at a penalty corner.
Each team may also play with:
A lifted ball that is falling to a player in clear space may be made potentially dangerous by the actions of an opponent closing to within 5m of the receiver before the ball has been controlled to ground&nbsp;– a rule which is often only loosely applied; the distance allowed is often only what might be described as playing distance, 2–3&nbsp;m, and opponents tend to be permitted to close on the ball as soon as the receiver plays it: these unofficial variations are often based on the umpire's perception of the skill of the players i.e.
*Commonwealth Games – held every four years between members of the Commonwealth of Nations
Women's field hockey was first played at British universities and schools.
The rules are simpler and it is intended that the game is faster, creating more shots on goal with less play in midfield, and more attractive to spectators.
However, if the goalkeeper elects to wear only a helmet (and a different colored shirt), they may cross the 23&nbsp;m line if they have removed their helmet (and placed it safely off the field of play).
As mentioned above, a 15&nbsp;m hit is awarded if an attacking player commits a foul forward of that line, or if the ball passes over the back line off an attacker.
The FIH felt it was a dangerous practice that could easily lead to raised deflections and injuries in the circle, which is often crowded at a free-hit situation, and outlawed it.
*Champions Challenge II - held every year for teams ranked 17th-24th in the world.
Short corners begin with five defenders (usually including the keeper) positioned behind the back line and the ball placed at least 10 yards from the nearest goal post.
Sticks were traditionally made of wood, but are now often made also with fibreglass, kevlar or carbon fibre composites.
The FIH implemented a two-year rules cycle with the 2007–08 edition of the rules, with the intention that the rules be reviewed on a biennial basis.
(In some modes, including indoor, shorter periods of suspension are applied, dependent on local rules.)
The ball is played only once at goal by the attacker using a push, flick or scoop stroke.
It is this characteristic that has made them the surface of choice for international and national league competitions.
However, many associations follow the previous procedure consisting of two periods of 7.5 minutes of "golden goal" extra time during which the game ends as soon as one team scores.
For example, in ''Nineteen Eighty-Four'', George Orwell's novel set in a totalitarian London, main character Winston Smith initially dislikes Julia, the woman he comes to love, because of "the atmosphere of hockey-fields and cold baths and community hikes and general clean-mindedness which she managed to carry about with her."
Edge hitting of the ball underwent a two-year "experimental period", twice the usual length of an "experimental trial" and is still a matter of some controversy within the sport.
*A '''yellow card''' is an official suspension similar to the penalty box in ice hockey.
In the early 1990s, Australia emerged as the strongest women's country although retirement of a number of players weakened the team.
The biggest two field hockey tournaments are the Olympic Games tournament, and the Hockey World Cup, which is also held every 4 years.
In order to produce a powerful hit, usually for travel over long distances or shooting at the goal, the stick is raised higher and swung with maximum power at the ball, a stroke sometimes known as a "drive".
Field players may not play the ball with their feet, but if the ball accidentally hits the feet, and the player gains no benefit from the contact, then the contact is not penalized.
Although there has been a change in the wording of this rule from 1 January 2007, the current FIH umpires' briefing instructs umpires not to change the way they interpret this rule.
Hockey 5s was also used for the Youth Olympic hockey tournament, and at the Pacific Games in 2015.
It is not an offence to lift the ball over an opponent's stick (or body on the ground), provided that it is done with consideration for the safety of the opponent and not dangerously.
No player may wear a helmet or other goalkeeping equipment, neither will any player be able to play the ball with any other part of the body than with their stick.
This article assumes FIH rules unless otherwise stated.
At first, after this feature was introduced, the Hockey Rules Board placed a limit of 50&nbsp;mm on the maximum depth of bow over the length of the stick but experience quickly demonstrated this to be excessive.
*Filled or sand filled - artificial fibres can be longer and less densely packed and sand supports the fibres for 100% of the pile depth
Depending on national rules, if a coach is sent off a player may have to leave the field too for the time the coach is sent off.
USA Field Hockey produces an annual summary of the differences.
Note that the "Slap" stroke (a sweeping motion towards the ball, where the stick is kept on or close to the ground when striking the ball) is classed as a hit, and so the first shot at goal must be below backboard height for this type of shot also.
The velocity of the ball is not mentioned in the rules concerning a dangerously played ball.
They may raise an aerial or overhead immediately as the second action, or any other stroke permitted by the rules of field hockey.
Other prominent women's teams are China, South Korea, Germany and South Africa.
If a coach is sent off, depending on local rules, a player may have to leave the field for the remaining length of the match.
It is now also even possible for teams to have a full eleven outfield players and no goalkeeper at all.
For this reason players now use the tight curved sticks.
The field of play is 55&nbsp;m long and 41.70&nbsp;m wide&mdash; this is approximately half the size of a regular pitch.
The changes allows a player taking a free hit to pass the ball to themselves.
A fully equipped goalkeeper must wear a helmet, leg guards and kickers.
For example, two players trying to play at the ball in the air at the same time, would probably be considered a dangerous situation and it is likely that the player who first put the ball up or who was so 'carrying' it would be penalised.
The IFWHA held conferences every three years, and tournaments associated with these were the primary IFWHA competitions.
The coach may have plays that sends the ball between two defenders and lets the player attack the opposing team's goal.
Teams trade sides at halftime.
'''Field hockey''' is a team sport of the hockey family.
The playing time may be shortened, particularly when younger players are involved, or for some tournament play.
The Netherlands was the predominant women's team before field hockey was added to Olympic events.
When not in possession of the ball numerical superiority is used to isolate and channel an opponent in possession and 'mark out' any passing options so that an interception or a tackle may be made to gain possession.
To avoid the tackle, the ball carrier will either pass the ball to a teammate using any of the push, flick, or hit strokes, or attempt to maneuver or "drag" the ball around the tackle, trying to deceive the tackler.
The use of the stick to strike an opponent will usually be much more severely dealt with by the umpires than offences such as barging, impeding and obstruction with the body, although these are also dealt with firmly, especially when these fouls are intentional: field hockey is a non-contact sport.
When the ball is inside the circle they are defending and they have their stick in their hand, goalkeepers wearing full protective equipment are permitted to use their stick, feet, kickers or leg guards to propel the ball and to use their stick, feet, kickers, leg guards or any other part of their body to stop the ball or deﬂect it in any direction including over the back line.
All other players in the defending team must be beyond the centre line, that is not in their 'own' half of the pitch, until the ball is in play.
Entering the Olympics in 1928, India won all five games without conceding a goal, and won from 1932 until 1956 and then in 1964 and 1980.
There is a depiction of a hockey-like game in Ancient Greece, dating to c.&nbsp;510&nbsp;BC, when the game may have been called  (''kerētízein'') because it was played with a horn (, ''kéras'', in Ancient Greek) and a ball.
When the ball passes completely over the sidelines (on the sideline is still in), it is returned to play with a sideline hit, taken by a member of the team whose players were not the last to touch the ball before crossing the sideline.
Australia's men's team and the Netherlands' women's teams lead the FIH world rankings.
Ric Charlesworth, the former Australian coach, has been a strong critic of the unrestricted use of the reverse edge hit.
Obstruction typically occurs in three circumstances&nbsp;– when a defender comes between the player with possession and the ball in order to prevent them tackling; when a defender's stick comes between the attacker's stick and the ball or makes contact with the attacker's stick or body; and also when blocking the opposition's attempt to tackle a teammate with the ball (called ''third party obstruction'').
By the early 1970s, there were 22 associations with women's sections in the FIH and 36 associations in the IFWHA.
Since the 1970s, Australia, the Netherlands, and Germany have dominated at the Olympics.
If it crosses the back line after last touched by an attacker, a  hit is awarded.
If a tie still remains, the game enters a one-on-one competition where each team chooses 5 players to dribble from the 25 yard line down to the circle against the opposing goalie.
At the highest level, field hockey is a fast moving, highly skilled sport, with players using fast moves with the stick, quick accurate passing, and hard hits, in attempts to keep possession and move the ball towards the goal.
At each end is a goal  high and  wide, as well as lines across the field  from each end-line (generally referred to as the 23-metre lines or the 25-yard lines) and in the center of the field.
The English historian and biographer John Strype did not use the word "hockey" when he translated the proclamation in 1720.
In the early 1970s, "synthetic grass" fields began to be used for hockey, with the first Olympic Games on this surface being held at the 1976 Montreal edition.
The word ''hockey'' itself  has no clear origin.
A ball that has been lifted high so that it will fall among close opponents may be deemed to be potentially dangerous and play may be stopped for that reason.
In general even potentially dangerous play is not penalised if an opponent is not disadvantaged by it or, obviously, not injured by it so that he cannot continue.
Players are permitted to play the ball with the flat of the 'face side' and with the edges of the head and handle of the field hockey stick with the exception that, for reasons of safety, the ball may not be struck 'hard' with a forehand edge stroke, because of the difficulty of controlling the height and direction of the ball from that stroke.
To make a pass the ball may be propelled with a pushing stroke, where the player uses their wrists to push the stick head through the ball while the stick head is in contact with it; the "flick" or "scoop", similar to the push but with an additional arm and leg and rotational actions to lift the ball off the ground; and the "hit", where a swing at ball is taken and contact with it is often made very forcefully, causing the ball to be propelled at velocities in excess of .
When hockey positions are discussed, notions of fluidity are very common.
The duration is decided by the umpire issuing the card and the player must go to a pre-defined area of the pitch as chosen by the umpires, or by the local/state/national association of that country; in this case generally it will be in the rule book where that player must go to, at the beginning of the match.
It was recently discovered that increasing the depth of the face bow made it easier to get high speeds from the dragflick and made the stroke easier to execute.
The game's roots in the English public girls' school mean that the game is associated in the UK with active or overachieving middle class and upper class women.
The stick has a rounded handle, has a J-shaped hook at the bottom, and is flattened on the left side (when looking down the handle with the hook facing upwards).
If the shot is saved, play is restarted with a 15 m hit to the defenders.
It took until 1982 for the two bodies to merge, but this allowed the introduction of women's field hockey to the Olympic games from 1980 where, as in the men's game, The Netherlands, Germany, and Australia have been consistently strong.
Tactics at penalty corners to set up time for a shot with a drag flick or a hit shot at the goal involve various complex plays, including multiple passes before a deflections towards the goal is made but the most common method of shooting is the direct flick or hit at the goal.
by turning the handle through approximately 180° (while a reverse edge hit would turn the stick head through approximately 90° from the position of an upright forehand stroke with the 'face' of the stick head).
While a player is taking a free hit or starting a corner the back swing of their hit cannot be too high for this is considered dangerous.
At the start of each period, as well as after goals are scored, play is started with a pass from the centre of the field.
The main methods by which the ball is moved around the field by players are a) passing b) pushing the ball and running with it controlled to the front or right of the body and c) "dribbling"; where the player controls the ball with the stick and moves in various directions with it to elude opponents.
Since the 1970s, sand-based pitches have been favoured as they dramatically speed up the game.
Argentina has emerged as a team to be reckoned with since 2000, winning the world championship in 2002 and 2010 and medals at the last three Olympics.
Historically the game developed on natural grass turf.
This is due to the negative ecological effects of the high water requirements of water-based synthetic fields.
However, neither goalkeepers, or players with goalkeeping privileges are permitted to conduct themselves in a manner which is dangerous to other players by taking advantage of the protective equipment they wear.
In the early 1970s, artificial turf began to be used.
During play, goal keepers are the only players who are allowed to touch the ball with any part of their body (the player's hand is considered 'part of the stick' if on the stick), while field players play the ball with the flat side of their stick.
The first national association was the Irish Ladies Hockey Union in 1894, and though rebuffed by the Hockey Association, women's field hockey grew rapidly around the world.
In 2006 the Irish Hockey Association reported that the gender split among its players was approximately 65% female and 35% male.
This player puts the ball into play by pushing or hitting the ball to the other attackers outside the circle; the ball must pass outside the circle and then put back into the circle before the attackers may make a shot at the goal from which a goal can be scored.
A free hit must be taken from within playing distance of the place of the offence for which it was awarded and the ball must be stationary when the free hit is taken.
If play returns to the circle without them having opportunity to replace the helmet, this player still has "goalkeeping privileges", that is, they are not limited to using their stick to play the ball whilst it is in the circle, and the helmet must be worn whilst defending penalty corners and penalty strokes but the best thing to do would be to wear it at all times.
Highly skillful players can sometimes get the better of more than one opponent and retain the ball and successfully pass or shoot but this tends to use more energy than quick early passing.
Some of the tactics used resemble football (soccer), but with greater ball speed.
Unlike football, a player may receive more than one green or yellow card.
These experimental rules apply to all free-hit situations, including sideline and corner hits.
Umpires, if the free hit would have been in the attacking 23&nbsp;m area, may upgrade the free hit to a penalty corner for dissent or other misconduct after the free hit has been awarded.
In college play, a seven-aside overtime period consists of a 10-minute golden goal period with seven players for each team.
